 The Battle of Kranji was the second stage of the Empire of Japan 's plan for the invasion of Singapore during the Second World War . On 9 February 1942 the Imperial Japanese Army assaulted the north @-@ western front of the British colony of Singapore . Their primary objective was to secure a second beachhead after their successful assault at Sarimbun Beach on 8 February , in order to breach the Jurong @-@ Kranji defence line as part of their southward thrust towards the heart of Singapore City . Defending the shoreline between the Kranji River and the Johor – Singapore Causeway was the Australian 27th Brigade , led by Brigadier Duncan Maxwell , and one irregular company . On 10 February the Japanese forces suffered their heaviest losses while moving up the Kranji River , which caused them to panic and nearly aborted the operation . However , a series of miscommunications and withdrawals by Allied forces in the ensuing battles allowed the Japanese to swiftly gain strategic footholds , which eventually led to the fall of Singapore on 15 February 1942 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The terrain around Kranji was primarily mangrove swamps and tropical forest intersected by streams and inlets . The shoreline between the Kranji River and the Johor – Singapore Causeway , nearly four kilometers long , was defended by the Australian 27th Brigade , led by Australian Brigadier Duncan Maxwell . The 27th Infantry Brigade consisted of three battalions — the 2 / 30th , 2 / 29th , and 2 / 26th and was supported by the 2 / 10th Field Artillery Regiment , as well as one platoon from the 2 / 4th Machine Gun Battalion . 
 They were supported by one company from Dalforce ( named after its commander , Lieutenant @-@ Colonel John Dalley of the Malayan Police Special Branch ) , a local Chinese militia consisting of Communists , Nationalist supporters , and other volunteers . As the war intensified , the Dalforce volunteers were given only three to four days of training and sent to the war front with elementary weapons . Lacking uniforms , the volunteers improvised by wearing a red triangle on their blue shirts to avoid being mistaken for Japanese by the Australians . 
 The Allied forces at Kranji were to be assaulted by the Imperial Guards Division led by Major General Takuma Nishimura . 400 Imperial Guards had landed and taken Pulau <unk> , an island in the north @-@ east of Singapore , in a feint attack on 7 February , where they encountered minimal resistance . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = 9 February 1942 : Japanese landings = = = 
 On 9 February , two divisions of the Japanese Twenty Fifth Army , led by Lieutenant General Tomoyuki Yamashita , landed on the northwestern coast of Singapore , in the Sarimbun area . Yamashita 's headquarters ( HQ ) was in the Sultan of Johor 's palace on Istana Bukit Serene , which offered him and his officers a bird 's eye view of virtually every key target in the northern sector of Singapore Island , only 1 @.@ 6 kilometres ( one mile ) across the Straits of Johor . Sultan Ibrahim 's palace was not fired upon by the British because any damage caused would have extensive repercussions for British @-@ Johor ties . 
 The primary objective of the Japanese at Kranji was to capture Kranji village ; this would let them repair the demolished Causeway in order to facilitate easy flow of reinforcements and supplies down the roads of Woodlands and <unk> , and to the rest of the island for their vanguard force . Once the leading wave of Japanese was safely ashore , the massed Japanese artillery switched their fire to the defensive positions at Kranji . Telegraph and telephone communications were destroyed in the bombardment and communications between the front line and command HQ were broken . At 8 : 30pm that night , the men of the Imperial Guards Division began the crossing from Johor in special armoured landing @-@ crafts , collapsible boats and by swimming . 
 = = = 10 February 1942 : Heavy losses = = = 
 In the early hours of 10 February , Japanese forces suffered their heaviest losses during the Battle of Singapore . While moving up the Kranji River , advance landing parties from the 4th Regiment of the Imperial Guard Division found themselves under heavy fire from Australian machine gunners and mortar teams . They also found themselves surrounded by oil slicks , which had been created by Allied personnel emptying the nearby Woodlands oil depot , to prevent its capture . A scenario feared by Yamashita came to pass by accident ; the oil was set alight by Allied small arms fire , causing many Japanese soldiers to be burnt alive . Sustaining heavy losses , Nishimura requested permission to abandon the operation . However , Yamashita denied the request . 
 Maxwell , who had limited communications with his division headquarters , was concerned that his force would be cut off by fierce and chaotic fighting at Sarimbun and Jurong to the south west , involving the Australian 22nd Brigade . Maxwell 's force consequently withdrew from the seafront . This allowed the Japanese to land in increasing strength and take control of Kranji village . They also captured Woodlands , and began repairing the causeway , without encountering any Allied attacks . 
 Japanese light tanks , which had good buoyancy , were towed across the straits to Lim Chu Kang Road where they joined the battle at dusk . With reinforced troops and tanks advancing down Choa Chua Kang Road , the Australian troops were no match for the tanks and fled to the hills of Bukit Panjang . The 5th Division ( Imperial Japanese Army ) captured Bukit Timah village by the evening of 11 February . 
 = = = = Jurong @-@ Kranji defence line = = = = 
 Lieutenant @-@ General Arthur Percival , General Officer Commanding of HQ Malaya Command , drew a defence perimeter covering Kallang Airfield , the MacRitchie and Peirce reservoirs and the Bukit Timah supply depot area to ensure the integrity of the city 's defence . One line of the north @-@ western defence perimeter was the Jurong @-@ Kranji defence line , a narrow ridge connecting the sources of Sungei Jurong and the Kranji River , forming a natural defence line protecting the north @-@ west approach to the Singapore Town . ( Its counterpart was the Serangoon Line , which was sited between Kallang Airfield and Paya Lebar village in the eastern part of Singapore ) . The troops were to defend this Line strongly against the invading Japanese force . The Line was defended by the 44th Indian Infantry Brigade which covered milestone 12 on Jurong Road , the 12th Indian Infantry Brigade and the reinforced 22nd Australian Brigade which guarded the northern part of the Line and maintained contact with the 44th Indian Brigade . The 15th Indian Infantry Brigade was re @-@ positioned near Bukit Timah Road to guard the island 's vital food and petrol supplies . A secret instruction to protect this area was issued to Percival 's generals . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 Percival 's secret orders to withdraw to the last defence line around the city only if necessary were misunderstood by Maxwell , who took this to be an order for an immediate withdrawal to the Line . As a result , the 44th Indian Infantry Brigade , the 12th Indian Infantry Brigade and the 22nd Australian Brigade , reinforced after their withdrawal from Sarimbun beach in the north @-@ west , abandoned the Line on 10 February . Fearing that the large supplies depot would fall into Japanese hands should they make a rush for Bukit Timah too soon , General Archibald Wavell , Allied commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Far East sent an urgent message to Percival : 
 It is certain that our troops in Singapore Island heavily outnumber any Japanese who have crossed the Straits . We must destroy them . Our whole fighting reputation is at stake and the honour of the British Empire . The Americans have held out in the Bataan Peninsula against a far heavier odds , the Russians are turning back the picked strength of the Germans . The Chinese with an almost lack of modern equipment have held the Japanese for four and a half years . It will be disgraceful if we yield our boasted fortress of Singapore to inferior enemy forces . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 By 11 February , the Jurong @-@ Kranji Defence Line was left undefended which allowed the Japanese forces to sweep through the Line to attack Bukit Timah . On the same day , Percival finally moved his Combined Operations Headquarters in Sime Road to the underground bunker , The Battle Box at Fort Canning . 
 Despite their fighting spirit , the Dalforce fighters suffered from poor training and the lack of equipment . A further blow was delivered when the 27th Australian Brigade withdrew southwards . As a result , the Japanese established a stronghold in the northern Woodlands area and secured a relatively easy passage into the island . General Wavell left Singapore for Java early on 11 February and sent a cable to British Prime Minister Winston Churchill in London on his assessment of the war front in Singapore : 
 Battle for Singapore is not going well ... I ordered Percival to stage counter @-@ attack with all troops possible ... Morale of some troops is not good and none is as high as I should like to see ... The chief troubles are lack of sufficient training in some reinforcing troops and an inferior complex which bold Japanese tactics and their command of the air have caused . Everything possible is being done to produce more offensive spirit and optimistic outlook . But I cannot pretend that these efforts have been entirely successful up to date . I have given the most categorical orders that there is to be no thought of surrender and that all troops are to continue fighting to the end ... 
 By 12 February , the Imperial Guards had captured the reservoirs and Nee Soon village . The defending troops , by this time , were badly shaken . Thousands of exhausted and frightened stragglers left the fighting to seek shelter in large buildings . On the same night , British forces in the east of the island had begun to withdraw towards the city . 
 On 13 February , the Japanese 5th Division continued its advance and reached Adam and Farrer Roads to capture the Sime Road Camp . Yamashita moved his HQ forward to the bomb @-@ damaged Ford Factory in Bukit Timah . Heading southwards , the Japanese 18th Division advanced into Pasir Panjang , where the last major battle of Singapore would be fought with the Malay Regiments at Bukit Chandu . 
 = = = Commemoration = = = 
 In 1995 , the former battle sites of Kranji and the defence line were gazetted by the National Heritage Board as two of the eleven World War II sites of Singapore . 
 = M @-@ 96 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 96 is a state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan that runs between Kalamazoo and Marshall . Its termini are both on business loops of Interstate 94 ( I @-@ 94 ) ; the eastern one coincides with an intersection with I @-@ 69 . Between Kalamazoo and Marshall it passes through Comstock , Galesburg , Augusta , and Battle Creek intersecting I @-@ 194 / M @-@ 66 in Battle Creek and I @-@ 94 in Emmett Township . 
 The highway now known as M @-@ 96 was originally part of M @-@ 17 . Parts of M @-@ 17 that were not used for US Highway 12 ( US 12 ) in 1926 were given the M @-@ 96 number . Additional segments of trunkline were added to M @-@ 96 , one of which was an Alternate US 12 in the years afterwards . Later , US 12 was moved after the completion of I @-@ 94 in southern Michigan . Additional US 12 segments were added to M @-@ 96 at that time . The last major changes to M @-@ 96 rerouted the highway through the Battle Creek area in late 1998 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 96 starts at an intersection between King Highway and Business Loop I @-@ 94 ( BL I @-@ 94 ) east of downtown Kalamazoo . From this point , it follows King Highway over and then along the Kalamazoo River through a suburban residential area . The highway then follows Michigan Avenue east through Comstock and north of Morrow Lake . At Galesburg , M @-@ 96 turns northeast along Augusta Drive to Augusta , running through rural farmland . It turns eastward again , skirting the Fort Custer State Recreation Area and the Fort Custer National Cemetery . In Augusta , M @-@ 96 turns to follow Dickman Road to Battle Creek , passing north and east of the W. K. Kellogg Airport on Dickman and Helmer roads . 
 On the north side of the airport , M @-@ 96 runs concurrently with both BL I @-@ 94 and M @-@ 37 . M @-@ 96 turns south on Helmer Road , separating from the other two trunklines , and then turns east crossing along Columbia Avenue . Here the highway runs along the edge of the city of Battle Creek through more residential areas and crosses the I @-@ 194 / M @-@ 66 freeway next to the Riverside County Club . Near Brownlee Park , M @-@ 96 ( Columbia Avenue ) merges with BL I @-@ 94 ( Michigan Avenue ) . Together BL I @-@ 94 / M @-@ 96 continues along Michigan Avenue to I @-@ 94 where BL I @-@ 94 ends . M @-@ 96 passes the <unk> Casino , which is located just east of the ending of BL I @-@ 94 , between 11 and 12 Mile Roads . M @-@ 96 continues along Michigan Avenue through farmland from Emmett to Marshall ending at an interchange with I @-@ 69 / BL I @-@ 94 . 
 M @-@ 96 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) like other state highways in Michigan . As a part of these maintenance responsibilities , the department tracks the volume of traffic that uses the roadways under its jurisdiction . These volumes are expressed using a metric called annual average daily traffic , which is a statistical calculation of the average daily number of vehicles on a segment of roadway . MDOT 's surveys in 2010 showed that the highest traffic levels along M @-@ 96 were the 22 @,@ 953 vehicles daily between Capitol Avenue and I @-@ 194 in Battle Creek ; the lowest counts were the 5 @,@ 167 vehicles per day at the western terminus in Kalamazoo . The only section of M @-@ 96 that has been listed on the National Highway System ( NHS ) , is in the Battle Creek area between the western BL I @-@ 94 / M @-@ 37 junction and the I @-@ 94 interchange . The NHS is a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 96 was formed as a state trunkline in late 1926 from parts of M @-@ 17 . The section of M @-@ 17 between <unk> and Battle Creek was not utilized for US 12 and became M @-@ 96 . In 1936 , the Alternate US 12 trunkline was designated through the Battle Creek area along a section of highway that had previously been part of US 12 . This highway was added to M @-@ 96 three years later in 1939 . 
 A rerouting of trunklines in 1941 lead to the creation of a Business US 12 ( BUS US 12 ) . M @-@ 96 ran concurrently with BUS US 12 and M @-@ 37 was truncated to end at M @-@ 96 . US 12 was rerouted between Galesburg and Kalamazoo in 1954 , and M @-@ 96 was extended along the former US 12 routing to end in Kalamazoo . M @-@ 96 was rerouted in downtown Battle Creek to one @-@ way streets in 1958 , and BUS US 12 / M @-@ 96 was extended by the end of the decade when the I @-@ 94 / US 12 freeway was completed in the area . BUS US 12 was redesignated as Business Loop I @-@ 94 ( BL I @-@ 94 ) in 1960 and M @-@ 96 was shortened to end at BL I @-@ 94 / M @-@ 78 running on Capital Avenue . M @-@ 37 was reextended in 1961 in Battle Creek to a concurrent routing with M @-@ 96 in 1961 . 
 M @-@ 89 was extended along the roadway used by M @-@ 96 west of Battle Creek to M @-@ 37 in 1965 , truncating M @-@ 96 in the process . M @-@ 96 was reextended back to Battle Creek along Dickman Road and Fort Custer Highway from Augusta east in 1971 . Several changes in Battle Creek were made to the area trunklines in 1998 . M @-@ 96 was extended along BL I @-@ 94 ( Dickman Road ) to M @-@ 37 ( Helmer Road ) and along M @-@ 37 to Columbia Avenue . At Columbia , M @-@ 96 then turned west and M @-@ 37 turned east . M @-@ 96 rejoined BL I @-@ 94 along Michigan Avenue to I @-@ 94 and on to Marshall . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Andrew Cunningham , 1st Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope = 
 Admiral of the Fleet Andrew Browne Cunningham , 1st Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope , KT , GCB , OM , DSO & Two Bars ( 7 January 1883 – 12 June 1963 ) was a British admiral of the Second World War . He was widely known by his nickname , " ABC " . 
 Cunningham was born in Rathmines in the south side of Dublin on 7 January 1883 . After starting his schooling in Dublin and Edinburgh , he enrolled at Stubbington House School , at the age of ten , beginning his association with the Royal Navy . After passing out of Britannia Royal Naval College , Dartmouth , in 1898 , he progressed rapidly in rank . He commanded a destroyer during the First World War and through most of the interwar period . He was awarded the Distinguished Service Order and two Bars , for his performance during this time , specifically for his actions in the Dardanelles and in the Baltics . 
 In the Second World War , as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Mediterranean Fleet , Cunningham led British naval forces to victory in several critical Mediterranean naval battles . These included the attack on Taranto in 1940 , the first completely all @-@ aircraft naval attack in history , and the Battle of Cape Matapan in 1941 . Cunningham controlled the defence of the Mediterranean supply lines through Alexandria , Gibraltar , and the key <unk> of Malta . He also directed naval support for the various major Allied landings in the Western Mediterranean littoral . In 1943 , Cunningham was promoted to First Sea Lord , a position he held until his retirement in 1946 . He was ennobled as Baron Cunningham of Hyndhope in 1945 and made Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope the following year . After his retirement , Cunningham enjoyed several ceremonial positions including Lord High Steward at the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II in 1953 . He died on 12 June 1963 , aged 80 . 
 = = Childhood = = 
 Cunningham was born at Rathmines , County Dublin , on 7 January 1883 , the third of five children born to Professor Daniel John Cunningham and his wife Elizabeth Cumming Browne , both of Scottish ancestry . General Sir Alan Cunningham was his younger brother . His parents were described as having a " strong intellectual and clerical tradition , " both grandfathers having been in the clergy . His father was a Professor of Anatomy at Trinity College , Dublin , whilst his mother stayed at home . Elizabeth Browne , with the aid of servants and governesses , oversaw much of his upbringing ; as a result he reportedly had a " warm and close " relationship with her . After a short introduction to schooling in Dublin he was sent to Edinburgh Academy , where he stayed with his aunts Doodles and Connie May . At the age of ten he received a telegram from his father asking " would you like to go into the Navy ? " At the time , the family had no maritime connections , and Cunningham only had a vague interest in the sea . Nevertheless , he replied " Yes , I should like to be an Admiral " . He was then sent to a Naval Preparatory School , Stubbington House , which specialised in sending pupils through the Dartmouth entrance examinations . Cunningham passed the exams , showing particular strength in mathematics . 
 = = Early naval career = = 
 Along with 64 other boys Cunningham joined the Royal Navy as a cadet aboard the training ship HMS Britannia in 1897 following preparatory education at Stubbington House School . One of his classmates was future Admiral of the Fleet James Fownes Somerville . Cunningham was known for his lack of enthusiasm for field sports , although he did enjoy golf and spent most of his spare time " messing around in boats " . He said in his memoirs that by the end of his course he was " anxious to seek adventure at sea " . Although he committed numerous minor misdemeanours , he still obtained a very good for conduct . He passed out tenth in April 1898 , with first class marks for mathematics and seamanship . 
 His first service was as a midshipman on HMS Doris in 1899 , serving at the Cape of Good Hope Station when the Second Boer War began . By February 1900 , he had transferred into the Naval Brigade as he believed " this promised opportunities for bravery and distinction in action . " Cunningham then saw action at Pretoria and Diamond Hill as part of the Naval Brigade . He then went back to sea , as midshipman in HMS Hannibal in December 1901 . The following November he joined the protected cruiser HMS Diadem . Beginning in 1902 , Cunningham took sub @-@ lieutenant courses at Portsmouth and Greenwich ; he served as sub @-@ lieutenant on the battleship HMS Implacable , in the Mediterranean , for six months in 1903 . In September 1903 , he was transferred to HMS Locust to serve as second @-@ in @-@ command . He was promoted to lieutenant in 1904 , and served on several vessels during the next four years . In 1908 , he was awarded his first command , HM Torpedo Boat No. 14 . 
 = = First World War = = 
 Cunningham was a highly decorated officer during the First World War , receiving the Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) and two bars . In 1911 he was given command of the destroyer HMS Scorpion , which he commanded throughout the war . In 1914 , Scorpion was involved in the shadowing of the German battlecruiser and cruiser SMS Goeben and SMS Breslau . This operation was intended to find and destroy the Goeben and the Breslau but the German warships evaded the British fleet , and passed through the Dardanelles to reach Constantinople . Their arrival contributed to the Ottoman Empire joining the Central Powers in November 1914 . Though a bloodless " battle " , the failure of the British pursuit had enormous political and military ramifications — in the words of Winston Churchill , they brought " more slaughter , more misery and more ruin than has ever before been borne within the compass of a ship . " 
 Cunningham stayed on in the Mediterranean and in 1915 Scorpion was involved in the attack on the Dardanelles . For his performance Cunningham was rewarded with promotion to commander and the award of the Distinguished Service Order . Cunningham spent much of 1916 on routine patrols . In late 1916 , he was engaged in convoy protection , a duty he regarded as mundane . He had no contact with German U @-@ boats during this time , on which he commented ; " The immunity of my convoys was probably due to sheer luck " . Convinced that the Mediterranean held few offensive possibilities he requested to sail for home . Scorpion paid off on 21 January 1918 . In his seven years as captain of the Scorpion , Cunningham had developed a reputation for first class seamanship . He was transferred by Vice @-@ Admiral Roger Keyes to HMS Termagant , part of Keyes ' Dover Patrol , in April 1918 @.@ and for his actions with the Dover Patrol , he was awarded a bar to his DSO the following year . 
 = = Interwar years = = 
 = = = Association with Cowan = = = 
 Cunningham saw much action in the interwar years . In 1919 , he commanded the S @-@ class destroyer Seafire , on duty in the Baltic . The Communists , the White Russians , several varieties of Latvian nationalists , Germans , and the Poles were trying to control Latvia ; the British Government had recognised Latvia 's independence after the Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk . It was on this voyage that Cunningham first met Admiral Walter Cowan . Cunningham was impressed by Cowan 's methods , specifically his navigation of the potentially dangerous seas , with thick fog and minefields threatening the fleet . Throughout several potentially problematic encounters with German forces trying to undermine the Latvian independence movement , Cunningham exhibited " good self control and judgement " . Cowan was quoted as saying " Commander Cunningham has on one occasion after another acted with unfailing promptitude and decision , and has proved himself an Officer of exceptional valour and unerring resolution . " 
 For his actions in the Baltic , Cunningham was awarded a second bar to his DSO , and promoted to captain in 1920 . On his return from the Baltic in 1922 , he was appointed captain of the British 6th Destroyer Flotilla . Further commands were to follow ; the British 1st Destroyer Flotilla in 1923 , and the destroyer base , HMS Lochinvar , at Port Edgar in the Firth of Forth , from 1927 – 1926 . Cunningham renewed his association with Vice Admiral Cowan between 1926 and 1928 , when Cunningham was flag captain and chief staff officer to Cowan while serving on the North America and West Indies Squadron . In his memoirs Cunningham made clear the " high regard " in which he held Cowan , and the many lessons he learned from him during their two periods of service together . The late 1920s found Cunningham back in the UK participating in courses at the Army 's Senior Officers ' School at Sheerness , as well as at the Imperial Defence College . While Cunningham was at the Imperial Defence College , in 1929 , he married Nona Byatt ( daughter of Horace Byatt , MA ; the couple had no children ) . After a year at the College , Cunningham was given command of his first big ship ; the battleship Rodney . Eighteen months later , he was appointed commodore of HMS Pembroke , the Royal Naval barracks at Chatham . 
 = = = Promoted to flag rank = = = 
 In September 1932 , Cunningham was promoted to flag rank , and aide @-@ de @-@ camp to the King . He was appointed Rear Admiral ( Destroyers ) in the Mediterranean in December 1933 and was made a Companion of the Bath in 1934 . Having hoisted his flag in the light cruiser HMS Coventry , Cunningham used his time to practice fleet handling for which he was to receive much praise in the Second World War . There were also fleet exercises in the Atlantic Ocean in which he learnt the skills and values of night actions that he would also use to great effect in years to come . 
 On his promotion to vice admiral in July 1936 , due to the interwar naval policy , further active employment seemed remote . However , a year later due to the illness of Sir Geoffrey Blake , Cunningham assumed the combined appointment of commander of the Battlecruiser Squadron and second @-@ in @-@ command of the Mediterranean Fleet , with HMS Hood as his flagship . After his long service in small ships , Cunningham considered his accommodation aboard Hood to be almost palatial , even surpassing his previous big ship experience on Rodney . 
 He retained command until September 1938 , when he was appointed to the Admiralty as Deputy Chief of the Naval Staff , although he did not actually take up this post until December 1939 . He accepted this shore job with reluctance since he loathed administration , but the Board of Admiralty 's high regard of him was evident . For six months during an illness of Admiral Sir Roger Backhouse , the then First Sea Lord , he deputised for Backhouse on the Committee of Imperial Defence and on the Admiralty Board . In 1939 he was made a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath ( KCB ) , becoming known as Sir Andrew Cunningham . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 Cunningham described the command of the Mediterranean Fleet as " The finest command the Royal Navy has to offer " and he remarked in his memoirs that " I probably knew the Mediterranean as well as any Naval Officer of my generation " . Cunningham was made Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Mediterranean , hoisting his flag in HMS Warspite on 6 June 1939 , one day after arriving in Alexandria on 5 June 1939 . As Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Cunningham 's main concern was for the safety of convoys heading for Egypt and Malta . These convoys were highly significant in that they were desperately needed to keep Malta , a small British colony and naval base , in the war . Malta was a strategic strongpoint and Cunningham fully appreciated this . Cunningham believed that the main threat to British Sea Power in the Mediterranean would come from the Italian Fleet . As such Cunningham had his fleet at a heightened state of readiness , so that when Italy did choose to enter into hostilities , then the British Fleet would be ready . 
 = = = French Surrender ( June 1940 ) = = = 
 In his role as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Mediterranean , Cunningham had to negotiate with the French Admiral Rene @-@ Emile Godfroy for the demilitarisation and internment of a French squadron at Alexandria , in June 1940 , following the Fall of France . Churchill had ordered Cunningham to prevent the French warships from leaving port , and to ensure that French warships did not pass into enemy hands . Stationed at the time at Alexandria , Cunningham entered into delicate negotiations with Godfroy to ensure his fleet , which consisted of the battleship Lorraine , four cruisers , three destroyers and a submarine , posed no threat . The Admiralty ordered Cunningham to complete the negotiations on 3 July . Just as an agreement seemed imminent Godfroy heard of the British action against the French at Mers el Kebir and , for a while , Cunningham feared a battle between French and British warships in the confines of Alexandria harbour . The deadline was overrun but negotiations ended well , after Cunningham put them on a more personal level and had the British ships appeal to their French opposite numbers . Cunningham 's negotiations succeeded and the French emptied their fuel bunkers and removed the firing mechanisms from their guns . Cunningham in turn promised to repatriate the ships ' crews . 
 = = = Battle of Taranto ( November 1940 ) = = = 
 Although the threat from the French Fleet had been neutralised , Cunningham was still aware of the threat posed by the Italian Fleet to British North African operations , based in Egypt . Although the Royal Navy had won in several actions in the Mediterranean , considerably upsetting the balance of power , the Italians who were following the theory of a fleet in being had left their ships in harbour . This made the threat of a sortie against the British Fleet a serious problem . At the time the harbour at Taranto contained six battleships ( five of them battle @-@ worthy ) , seven heavy cruisers , two light cruisers , and eight destroyers . The Admiralty , concerned with the potential for an attack , had drawn up Operation Judgement ; a surprise attack on Taranto Harbour . To carry out the attack , the Admiralty sent the new aircraft carrier HMS Illustrious , commanded by Lumley Lyster , to join HMS Eagle in Cunningham 's fleet . 
 The attack started at 21 : 00 , 11 November 1940 , when the first of two waves of Fairey Swordfish torpedo bombers took off from Illustrious , followed by the second wave an hour later . The attack was a great success : the Italian fleet lost half its strength in one night . The " fleet @-@ in @-@ being " diminished in importance and the threat to the Royal Navy 's control of the Mediterranean had been considerably reduced . Cunningham said of the victory : " Taranto , and the night of 11 – 12 November 1940 , should be remembered for ever as having shown once and for all that in the Fleet Air Arm the Navy has its most devastating weapon . " The Royal Navy had launched the first all @-@ aircraft naval attack in history , flying a small number of aircraft from an aircraft carrier . This , and other aspects of the raid , were important facts in the planning of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941 : the Japanese planning staff were thought to have studied it intensively . 
 Cunningham 's official reaction at the time was memorably terse . After landing the last of the attacking aircraft , Illustrious signalled " Operation Judgement executed " . After seeing aerial reconnaissance photographs the next day which showed several Italian ships sunk or out of action , Cunningham replied with the two @-@ letter code group which signified , " Manoeuvre well executed " . 
 = = = Battle of Cape Matapan ( March 1941 ) = = = 
 At the end of March 1941 , Hitler wanted the convoys supplying the British Expeditionary force in Greece stopped , and the Italian Navy was the only force able to attempt this . Cunningham stated in his biography : " I myself was inclined to think that the Italians would not try anything . I bet Commander Power , the Staff Officer , Operations , the sum of ten shillings that we would see nothing of the enemy . " Under pressure from Germany , the Italian Fleet planned to launch an attack on the British Fleet on 28 March 1941 . 
 The Italian commander , Admiral Angelo Iachino , intended to carry out a surprise attack on the British Cruiser Squadron in the area ( commanded by Vice @-@ Admiral Sir Henry Pridham @-@ Wippell ) , executing a pincer movement with the battleship Vittorio Veneto . Cunningham though , was aware of Italian naval activity through intercepts of Italian Enigma messages . Although Italian intentions were unclear , Cunningham 's staff believed an attack upon British troop convoys was likely and orders were issued to spoil the enemy plan and , if possible , intercept their fleet . Cunningham wished , however , to disguise his own activity and arranged for a game of golf and a fictitious evening gathering to mislead enemy agents ( he was , in fact , overheard by the local Japanese Consul ) . After sunset , he boarded HMS Warspite and left Alexandria . 
 Cunningham , realising that an air attack could weaken the Italians , ordered an attack by the Formidable 's Albacore torpedo @-@ bombers . A hit on the Vittorio Veneto slowed her temporarily and Iachino , realising his fleet was vulnerable without air cover , ordered his forces to retire . Cunningham gave the order to pursue the Italian Fleet . 
 An air attack from the Formidable had disabled the cruiser Pola and Iachino , unaware of Cunningham 's pursuing battlefleet , ordered a squadron of cruisers and destroyers to return and protect the Pola . Cunningham , meanwhile , was joining up with Pridham @-@ Wippell 's cruiser squadron . Throughout the day several chases and sorties occurred with no overall victor . None of the Italian ships were equipped for night fighting , and when night fell , they made to return to Taranto . The British battlefleet equipped with radar detected the Italians shortly after 22 : 00 . In a pivotal moment in naval warfare during the Second World War , the battleships Barham , Valiant and Warspite opened fire on two Italian cruisers at only 3 @,@ 800 yards ( 3 @.@ 5 km ) , destroying them in only five minutes . 
 Although the Vittorio Veneto escaped from the battle by returning to Taranto , there were many accolades given to Cunningham for continuing the pursuit at night , against the advice of his staff . After the previous defeat at Taranto , the defeat at Cape Matapan dealt another strategic blow to the Italian Navy . Five ships – three heavy cruisers and two destroyers – were sunk , and around 2 @,@ 400 Italian sailors were killed , missing or captured . The British lost only three aircrew when one torpedo bomber was shot down . Cunningham had lost his bet with Commander Power but he had won a strategic victory in the war in the Mediterranean . The defeats at Taranto and Cape Matapan meant that the Italian Navy did not intervene in the heavily contested evacuations of Greece and Crete , later in 1941 . It also ensured that , for the remainder of the war , the Regia Marina conceded the Eastern Mediterranean to the Allied Fleet , and did not leave port for the remainder of the war . 
 = = = Battle of Crete ( May 1941 ) = = = 
 On the morning of 20 May 1941 , Nazi Germany launched an airborne invasion of Crete , under the code @-@ name Unternehmen Merkur ( Operation Mercury ) . Despite initial heavy casualties , Maleme airfield in western Crete fell to the Germans and enabled them to fly in heavy reinforcements and overwhelm the Allied forces . 
 After a week of heavy fighting , British commanders decided that the situation was hopeless and ordered a withdrawal from Sfakia . During the next four nights , 16 @,@ 000 troops were evacuated to Egypt by ships ( including HMS Ajax of Battle of the River Plate fame ) . A smaller number of ships were to withdraw troops on a separate mission from Heraklion , but these ships were attacked en route by Luftwaffe dive bombers . Without air cover , Cunningham 's ships suffered serious losses . Cunningham was determined , though , that the " navy must not let the army down " , and when army generals feared he would lose too many ships , Cunningham famously said , 
 The " never say die " attitude of Cunningham and the men under his command meant that of 22 @,@ 000 men on Crete , 16 @,@ 500 were rescued but at the loss of three cruisers and six destroyers . Fifteen other major warships were damaged . 
 = = = Allied Expeditionary Force ( 1943 – 46 ) = = = 
 Cunningham became a Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath ( GCB ) , " in recognition of the recent successful combined operations in the Middle East " , in March 1941 and was created a baronet , of Bishop 's Waltham in the County of Southampton , in July 1942 . From late 1942 to early 1943 , he served under General Dwight D. Eisenhower , who made him the Supreme Commander , Allied Expeditionary Force . In this role Cunningham commanded the large fleet that covered the Anglo @-@ American landings in North Africa ( Operation Torch ) . General Eisenhower said of him in his diary : 
 On 21 January 1943 , Cunningham was promoted to Admiral of the Fleet . February 1943 saw him return to his post as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Mediterranean Fleet . Three months later , when Axis forces in North Africa were on the verge of surrender , he ordered that none should be allowed to escape . Entirely in keeping with his fiery character he signalled the fleet " Sink , burn and destroy : Let nothing pass " . He oversaw the naval forces used in the joint Anglo @-@ American amphibious invasions of Sicily , during Operation Husky , Operation Baytown and Operation Avalanche . On the morning of 11 September 1943 , Cunningham was present at Malta when the Italian Fleet surrendered . Cunningham informed the Admiralty with a telegram ; " Be pleased to inform their Lordships that the Italian battle fleet now lies at anchor under the guns of the fortress of Malta . " 
 In October 1943 , Cunningham became First Sea Lord of the Admiralty and Chief of the Naval Staff , after the death of Dudley Pound . This promotion meant that he had to relinquish his coveted post of Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Mediterranean , recommending his namesake Admiral John H. D. Cunningham as his successor . In the position of First Sea Lord , and as a member of the Chiefs of Staff committee , Cunningham was responsible for the overall strategic direction of the navy for the remainder of the war . He attended the major conferences at Cairo , Tehran , Yalta and Potsdam , at which the Allies discussed future strategy , including the invasion of Normandy and the deployment of a British fleet to the Pacific Ocean . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 In 1945 Cunningham was appointed a Knight of the Thistle and raised to the peerage as " Baron Cunningham of Hyndhope " , of Kirkhope in the County of Selkirk . He was entitled to retire at the end of the war in 1945 but he resolved to pilot the Navy through the transition to peace before retiring . With the election of Clement Attlee as British Prime Minister in 1945 , and the implementation of his Post @-@ war consensus , there was a large reduction in the Defence Budget . The extensive reorganisation was a challenge for Cunningham . " We very soon came to realise how much easier it was to make war than to reorganise for peace . " Due to pressures on the budget from all three services , the Navy embarked on a reduction programme that was larger than Cunningham had envisaged . 
 He was made " Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope " , of Kirkhope in the County of Selkirk , in the 1946 New Year Honours , and appointed to the Order of Merit in June of that year . At the end of May 1946 , after overseeing the transition through to peacetime , Cunningham retired from his post as First Sea Lord . Cunningham retreated to the " little house in the country " , ' Palace House ' , at Bishop 's Waltham in Hampshire , which he and Lady Cunningham had acquired before the war . They both had a busy retirement . He attended the House of Lords irregularly and occasionally lent his name to press statements about the Royal Navy , particularly those relating to Admiral Dudley North , who had been relieved of his command of Gibraltar in 1940 . Cunningham , and several of the surviving admirals of the fleet , set about securing justice for North , and they succeeded with a partial vindication in 1957 . He also busied himself with various appointments ; he was Lord High Commissioner to the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland in 1950 and 1952 , and in 1953 he acted as Lord High Steward – the most recent one to date – at the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II . Throughout this time Cunningham and his wife entertained family and friends , including his own great nephew , Jock Slater , in their extensive gardens . Cunningham died in London on 12 June 1963 , and was buried at sea off Portsmouth . There were no children from his marriage and his titles consequently became extinct on his death . 
 A bust of Cunningham by <unk> Belsky was unveiled in Trafalgar Square in London on 2 April 1967 by Prince Philip , Duke of Edinburgh . The April 2010 UK naval operation to ship British military personnel and air passengers stranded in continental Europe by the air travel disruption after the 2010 Eyjafjallajökull eruption back to the UK was named Operation Cunningham after him . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Below is a list of Awards and titles awarded to Andrew Browne Cunningham during his lifetime . 
 = = = United Kingdom = = = 
 = = = Awards from other countries = = = 
 = 38th ( Welsh ) Infantry Division = 
 The 38th ( Welsh ) Division ( initially the 43rd Division , later the 38th ( Welsh ) Infantry Division and then the 38th Infantry ( Reserve ) Division ) of the British Army was active during both the First and Second World Wars . In 1914 , the division was raised as the 43rd Division of Herbert Kitchener 's New Army , and was originally meant to form part of a 50 @,@ 000 @-@ strong Welsh Army Corps that had been championed by David Lloyd George . However , the assignment of Welsh recruits to other formations meant that this concept was never realised . On 29 April 1915 , the formation was renamed the 38th ( Welsh ) Division and shipped to France later that year . The division arrived in France with a poor reputation , seen as a political formation that was ill trained and led . The division 's baptism by fire came during the opening days of the Battle of the Somme where it had to capture Mametz Wood . Despite securing the wood , needed as a jumping @-@ off point for the Battle of Bazentin Ridge , the reputation of the division was further effected by miscommunication among its senior officers and by the loss of nearly 4 @,@ 000 men during the next phase of the Somme offensive . 
 The division 's next large @-@ scale operation came a year later when it made a highly successful attack in the Battle of Pilckem Ridge , the first attack of the Third Battle of Ypres . This redeemed the division in the eyes of the upper hierarchy of the British military and it came to be considered one of the elite . During the German Spring Offensive in 1918 and the Allied Hundred Days Offensive , the division attacked several fortified German positions . It crossed the Ancre river , smashed through the Hindenburg Line , broke through German positions on the River Selle and ended the war on the Belgian frontier . Not chosen to be part of the Occupation of the Rhineland following the war , the division was demobilised over several months , ceasing to exist by March 1919 . 
 In March 1939 , following the rise of Nazi Germany and the German occupation of Czechoslovakia , the British army increased the number of divisions within the Territorial Army by duplicating existing units . On paper , the division was recreated as the 38th ( Welsh ) Infantry Division , a duplicate of the 53rd ( Welsh ) Infantry Division , although it did not form until September . Transferred around the United Kingdom and assigned home defence duties , it was never deployed overseas as a division . In 1944 , it was disbanded and its units were either dispatched or broken up to reinforce the 21st Army Group fighting in Normandy during Operation Overlord . The 38th Division was recreated on 1 September 1944 as the 38th Infantry ( Reserve ) Division , a training formation that took over the role previously occupied by the 80th Infantry ( Reserve ) Division . In this form , the division completed the training of recruits , who were then dispatched overseas as reinforcements . At the end of the war , the division was again stood down . 
 = = First World War = = 
 = = = Formation and training = = = 
 On 28 July 1914 , the First World War began and on 4 August , following the German invasion of Belgium , the United Kingdom entered the war to uphold the Treaty of London ( 1839 ) . Britain found itself facing a continental war it was not prepared to fight ; the Expeditionary Force ( EF ) was dispatched but the country lacked the forces required for the protracted war envisioned by the military leadership ( the Expeditionary Force was prefaced with British when the Indian Expeditionary Force arrived in France ) . 
 On 5 August , Herbert Kitchener was appointed Secretary of State for War . This vital position , allowed Kitchener a largely independent role within the war cabinet . His first act , the following day , was to request parliamentary approval to increase the strength of the British Army by 500 @,@ 000 men . Over the coming days , following approval , the Army Council laid out plans for Kitchener 's proposed expansion : traditional recruiting would be used to expand the regular army , bypassing the county associations and thus avoiding expanding the Territorial Force . The first wave , originally termed the New Expeditionary Force , became the First New Army . In 2007 , Simkins wrote that Kitchener held the Territorial Force in disdain , calling it an ill @-@ trained " Town Clerk 's Army " and this was partially why he set up a parallel recruitment system . Simkins noted that it would be a " gross oversimplification to ascribe Kitchener 's decision merely to prejudice and ignorance " . Had the Territorial Force been used as the basis for expansion it would have been " swamped " and " rendered temporarily incapable of carrying out any function at all " , when a " viable home defence force " was needed due to the threat of a German invasion . 
 On 19 September 1914 , Chancellor of the Exchequer David Lloyd George stated publicly that he " should like to see a Welsh Army in the field " . This thought quickly picked up support from politicians and from Kitchener ; a Welsh Army Corps of two divisions totalling 50 @,@ 000 men was approved on 10 October . The recruits were to be drawn not just from Wales but from Monmouthshire and from Welshmen living in Liverpool , London and Manchester . The creation of the corps soon became a source of heated dispute between Lloyd George and Kitchener and was never realised . In addition to the disagreements , there was a shortage of recruits ; by the end of 1914 only 10 @,@ 000 men had joined the Welsh Corps . During December , having scaled back the ambitious plan for a whole corps , the recruited men were formed into the 43rd Division of Kitchener 's Fifth New Army . Despite steady recruitment , by June 1915 , 20 per cent of recruits had been removed , having been discharged primarily for medical reasons or transferred to other units . 
 On Saint David 's Day ( 1 March 1915 ) , the new division was inspected by Lloyd George . During April , the Fourth New Army was broken up to provide reinforcements for deployed combat units . The Fifth New Army , in turn , was renamed the Fourth New Army . As part of this re @-@ organisation , the 38th Division became the 31st Division . On 29 April , the 43rd was renamed the 38th ( Welsh ) Division . The division spent most of 1915 dispersed , with the majority located across North Wales with units training at Pwllheli , Colwyn Bay , Llandudno and Rhyl , although some units were based in the south at Abergavenny . At these locations , the men undertook basic training , were drilled and trained for open warfare . On 19 August , the division moved to Winchester , England , where it assembled for the first time as a division . Final training took place and limited instruction was given on tactics to employ during trench warfare ( the assumption being that practical experience would be easier to gain in France ) . Despite the training , it was not until November that the division had been fully equipped with rifles . To be declared fit for overseas service , the division 's soldiers had to fire 24 rounds on a rifle range . On 29 November , the division was inspected for the final time before being deployed ; Queen Mary and Princess Mary reviewed the troops at Crawley Down . 
 The division , comprising the 113th , 114th and 115th Brigades made up of battalions from the Royal Welsh Fusiliers ( RWF ) , the South Wales Borderers ( SWB ) and the Welsh Regiment ( Welsh ) , was roughly 18 @,@ 500 men strong when it was deployed to France . During November , the division departed from Southampton and by 5 December it arrived in France at Le Havre . Although the division 's artillery initially remained behind to conduct live fire exercises at Larkhill , they had re @-@ joined the division by the end of December . 
 The initial reaction by the regular army to the division was one of hostility . The division was seen as lacking experience and training , the latter being a criticism levelled at all New Army divisions . Questions were also raised about the divisional leadership and about securing officer commissions through influence peddling . Clive Hughes wrote " regulars professed disgust at the blatantly political character " of the division . While the division was made up predominately of Welshmen , the rest of the United Kingdom was also represented within its ranks as well as several other nations . 
 = = = Initial actions and the Battle of the Somme = = = 
 Once in France , the division joined XI Corps and was placed in reserve , relieving the 46th ( North Midland ) Division . The first casualties were soon suffered due to training accidents with grenades . The division was then temporarily split up and spent time attached to the Guards Division and 19th ( Western ) Division , to gain experience in trench warfare . It relieved the 19th ( Western ) Division and until the summer manned the front in the Nord @-@ Pas @-@ de @-@ Calais region . It was rotated along the XI Corps sector , spending time in Festubert , Givenchy , La <unk> , Laventie and Neuve Chapelle . Units of the division took turns on the front line , maintained positions , conducted trench raids and were subjected to German bombardments , all of which allowed the men to gain experience of active service conditions . The most notable action during this period was a trench raid carried out by Captain Goronwy Owen of the 15th RWF . Owen led a raid into no man 's land , where he located a party of German soldiers who had just finished laying barbed wire . Owen followed the Germans back to their trench and ambushed them . The divisional history comments that " the greater portion [ of the German party ] were killed " and the raid was considered by the Army to be " the third best ... carried out so far " in the war . For his actions , Owen was mentioned in dispatches . 
 During 10 – 11 June 1916 , the division was relieved by the 61st ( 2nd South Midland ) Division and moved into reserve . It then moved south and joined XVII Corps of the Third Army to train for the Battle of the Somme . New trenches were dug and the division made practice attacks on them using novel tactics : attacking in waves in conjunction with artillery and machine gun fire . Towards the end of the month , the division moved further south to the Somme valley . They then joined II Corps and were placed in reserve . The role of the division was as a second wave to exploit the expected success . Following the breach of the German lines , the Reserve Army cavalry divisions would capture Bapaume . The 38th ( Welsh ) Division would then move forward to relieve the cavalry and secure the town , to allow the cavalry to advance north towards Arras . 
 1 July was the first day on the Somme and despite being behind the lines in reserve , the division suffered its first casualty of the battle due to German artillery fire . The 1 July attack was a disaster on the Fourth Army front and 57 @,@ 470 casualties were suffered , most north of the Albert – Bapaume road . In particular , XV Corps attacked the villages of Fricourt and Mametz . Throughout the day , the 7th Division assaulted and captured Mametz . The 21st Division pushed into the German lines and flanked Fricourt to the north . Due to this move and the capture of Mametz , the Germans abandoned Fricourt ; the two divisions advanced up to 2 @,@ 500 yards ( 2 @,@ 300 m ) and suffered 7 @,@ 500 casualties . Between these two villages were the entrenched German positions in Mametz Wood . These needed to be captured to allow XV Corps to advance further into German territory . While additional ground was gained in subsequent attacks , German defences and rain hindered moves to clear Mametz Wood . Following additional casualties within the 7th Division , the 38th ( Welsh ) Division was attached to XV Corps to relieve the division and clear the wood . 
 Mametz Wood was defended by elements of the German Lehr Infantry Regiment and 163rd Infantry Regiment . While these units were entrenched within the wood , the German second line was only 300 yards ( 270 m ) behind , allowing the position to be reinforced easily . From 6 – 9 July , the 38th Division conducted reconnaissance and probing attacks , to determine the strength of the German position . 
 On 7 July , the division launched two battalions upon the wood following a brief preliminary bombardment . At 08 : 00 , the 16th Welsh and 10th SWB attacked . As soon as the advance began it became obvious that the preliminary bombardment had failed to silence the German machine gun positions and German shells started to fall upon the attacking troops and the trenches they had left , resulting in a temporary communication breakdown . Caught between machine gun fire from their front and their flanks , the attack bogged down within 200 yards ( 180 m ) of the wood . Unable to move further , the troops were ordered to dig in to await a renewed British bombardment . At 11 : 00 a second attempt was made but the troops were unable to push further forward . A proposed third attack in the afternoon was eventually called off . The 16th Welsh Battalion historian wrote that " ' [ c ] ut to Ribbons ' would be an apt description " as casualties amounted to 276 men . The 10th SWB suffered 180 casualties . 
 During the evening , the 14th RWF launched a minor trench raid . On 8 July , this was supposed to develop into an attack on the southern tip of the wood . While the division prepared to launch a battalion @-@ sized attack , XV Corps commander Lieutenant @-@ General Henry Horne ordered a smaller attack by a platoon . The day was spent in confusion , with conflicting orders issued and Horne travelling to the division to clarify his intentions . In the end , no attack was launched . 
 When Horne found out that the 14th RWF had not moved and that their attack had been pushed back to 8 July , he summoned the commanding officer , Major @-@ General Ivor Philipps , to Corps headquarters and sacked him . General Douglas Haig , commander of the BEF , noted this event in his diary . He wrote : " visited HQ XV Corps and saw General Horne . He was very disappointed with the work of the ... 38th Welsh Div " . Haig further commented that Philipps was relieved of his command as the majority of the division had " never entered " the woods despite the " most adequate [ ] ... bombard [ ment ] " , had suffered " under 150 casualties " during their attack and that : " a few bold men [ who had ] entered the Wood found little opposition " . Don Farr wrote that Haig 's entries are at odds with the facts and that he relied heavily on what Horne had told him . Farr states Horne 's account to Haig was self @-@ serving and did no justice " to the difficulties confronting the troops on the ground " and did not acknowledge the failure of the bombardment . He also suggests that the sacking of Philipps may have been political , by a distrusting officer corps towards a perceived political appointee . 
 Hughes quoted a regular officer who was attached to the division who described Philipps as " an excellent administrator " who was " valued [ for ] his service with the division " . Travers wrote that " perhaps Philipps was a poor commander " but the opening attacks on Mametz Wood demonstrated the faults of the entire command structure , not just of Philipps , as there was pressure from the top down to get results . Farr wrote that " there is evidence that ... Philipps ... balked at sending waves of [ his ] men unprotected against machine guns " and Travers wrote that Philipps had shown moral courage in cancelling unprepared attacks and for giving his troops " instructions not to press the attack if machine @-@ gun fire was met " . Horne had intended to replace Philipps with Major @-@ General Charles Blackader but was overruled by Haig who ordered that Herbert Watts , commander of the 7th Division , was to take temporary command . During 9 July , the decision was made that the division would launch a full @-@ scale attack the following day . At 03 : 30 on 10 July , the preliminary bombardment began . 
 The initial bombardment lasted for 45 minutes , striking the German front line positions , with the shelling halted temporarily to attempt to lure the German defenders back into the front line , when the barrage resumed . At 04 : 15 , the division launched its attack . Advancing behind a creeping barrage were the 13th Welsh ( on the right flank ) , the 14th Welsh ( in the centre ) and the 16th RWF ( on the left flank ) . A smoke screen had been laid down on either flank , which succeeded in drawing German fire away from the assault . The divisional history called this attack " one of the most magnificent sights of the war ... wave after wave of men were seen advancing without hesitation and without a break over a distance which in some places was nearly 500 yards " . 
 The 14th Welsh rapidly entered the wood and cleared the German positions with bayonets and rifle fire . In the face of determined German resistance and flanking machine gun fire , the 13th Welsh suffered many casualties and their attack stalled . The division reinforced the right flank by committing the 15th Welsh who were able to push through into the wood . Before they could link up and aid the 13th , German troops infiltrated the gap between the two battalions , got behind the 15th Welsh and almost wiped out a company . These troops had to fight their way out " cut their way back out " and returned with just seven men . Despite the losses , the three battalions of the Welsh regiment were able to form a cohesive line defending the edge of the wood and repulsed strong German counter @-@ attacks . The 16th RWF , which had fallen behind the creeping barrage , were met with determined German resistance who repulsed two assaults . The 15th RWF was sent to reinforce and both battalions were then able to push their way into the wood , although German resistance and a machine gun prevented a further advance . 
 The 10th Welsh moved up to cover the gap between the five battalions already engaged and the 13th RWF were deployed to clear the German position in front of their sister battalions ; divisional engineers arrived to dig trenches and lay wire . During the afternoon , the 10th SWB and 17th RWF were committed to the wood . At 16 : 00 , another attack began and met with little resistance . The 10th SWB captured the eastern stretches of the wood and inflicted many casualties on the Germans . The 15th Welsh , along with the 15th and 17th RWF , fought north through the wood and made it to within 40 yards ( 37 m ) of the northern edge when they were thrown back by German fire . A further attack during the evening was called off and the troops were pulled back up to 300 yards ( 270 m ) and ordered to dig in for the night . 
 During the night , the 113th and 114th Infantry Brigades were ordered out of the wood and the 115th Brigade assembled in their place . The next day , the 115th Brigade prepared a final assault to clear out the Germans . The 115th Brigade 's commanding officer , Brigadier @-@ General H. J. Evans , wanted to launch a surprise attack but was overruled . The subsequent bombardment to support the attack fell short in places , hitting the British troops and provoking German artillery fire . Despite the friendly fire , the barrage also caught German troops in the open as they fled from the wood . The remaining Germans offered determined resistance and the 16th Welsh were held up by machine gun fire and the use of a flamethrower . Despite this , the brigade was able to clear Mametz Wood by the end of the day . The German second line position was on higher ground , which dominated the edge of wood and , coupled with artillery fire , resulted in the brigade pulling back to its start line to avoid further casualties . 
 That evening , the 21st Division relieved the 38th Division who moved near <unk> and relieved the 48th ( South Midland ) Division . On 12 July , Watts returned to the 7th Division and Blackader assumed command of the 38th . The division had suffered 3 @,@ 993 casualties during the six days it had fought on the Somme , with over 600 men killed . Despite capturing 400 prisoners as well as Mametz Wood ( the largest wood on the Somme ) , which paved the way for the assault on Bazentin Ridge , the reputation of the division had been sullied by inaccuracies . The failure of the first attack did much harm to the division 's reputation , as the comparably few casualties were seen as evidence of a lack of determination by the men . The 113th Brigade 's commander , Brigadier @-@ General Price @-@ Davies , made things worse by reporting panic among the men and refusals of orders . Price @-@ Davies later wrote : " I may not have given my brigade full credit for what they did " but the damage had been done . The difficulty of wood fighting was not appreciated at the time and Farr wrote that the reputation of the division suffered due to the repeated interference by Horne in matters best left to the divisional or brigade staff and his " inexperience of battlefield command at this level " . 
 = = = Ypres Salient = = = 
 At the end of August 1916 , the division was deployed to the Ypres Salient where it remained for the following ten months seeing no major action . The division spent its time engaging in the vital effort of rebuilding and consolidating washed out trenches and raiding German positions . For the former , the division was commended by their Corps commander Rudolph <unk> ( XIV Corps ) . The most notable raid conducted during this period occurred in November by the 14th Welsh . Elements of the battalion launched a large raid on a German position known as High Command Redoubt , a fortified position on a slight rise that overlooked the British lines . From this redoubt , the Germans had been able to direct artillery fire and snipe the British positions . The 14th Welsh raided the position , killing 50 defenders in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat and taking 20 more as prisoners . 
 In June , the division was withdrawn into reserve to conduct training exercises for the Ypres offensive . Replicas of the German positions on Pilckem Ridge were built and attacks rehearsed . On 20 July , the division returned to the front taking over from the 29th Division . Until the end of the month , the division was subjected to German artillery fire . These shells , a mixture of high explosive and mustard gas , inflicted serious losses . At the same time , aerial reconnaissance and infantry patrols by the division confirmed that the preliminary barrage had forced the Germans back to their second line positions . 
 At 03 : 50 on 31 July , the Battle of Pilckem Ridge began . The division was ordered to capture the German front line , the second line positions based on Pilckem Ridge , a low ridge that also contained the heavily shelled village of Pilckem , followed by Iron Cross Ridge which lay to the east , before storming down the other side and across a small stream known as the Steenbeck . The division would be opposed primarily by the German 3rd Guards Infantry Division , along with elements of the 3rd Reserve Division and 111th Division , dug @-@ in among trench lines and 280 concrete pillboxes and bunkers . To secure these various objectives , the division planned to attack in waves , with fresh troops constantly moving forward to tackle the next objective . 
 Due to the Royal Artillery gas bombardments , the German artillery had been largely silenced and played little part in the initial fighting . The 10th and 13th Welsh ( advancing on the right ) and half the 13th and 16th RWF ( on the left ) , were able to take the German forward positions rapidly , capturing several Germans who had remained behind . The 13th and 14th Welsh then pushed beyond their sister battalions up the ridge , along with the remaining half of the 13th and 16th RWF . Based in the village and <unk> and Stray Farms , the German resistance was more determined , resulting in increasing British losses . Arthur Conan Doyle , in his history of the war , described the scene : 
 [ The German 's ] ( sic ) poured bullets upon the advancing infantry , who slipped from shell @-@ hole to shell @-@ hole , taking such cover as they could but resolutely pushing onwards . 
 Where concrete bunkers were encountered , the troops worked their way around them , cutting the German troops off and forcing them to surrender . Despite their resistance , the German second line was captured without delay . Half of the 13th and 14th Welsh , along with the 15th RWF , then pushed towards Iron Cross Ridge . German troops holding <unk> Farm , in the area allocated to the 51st ( Highland ) Division which had not yet advanced as far , were able to fire into the flanks of the advancing troops . A platoon from 15th Welsh was diverted and assaulted the farm , capturing 15 men and either killing or scattering the rest , securing the flank of the advance . The 14th Welsh then rushed Iron Cross Ridge and engaged in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat to seize the position , before pushing on to capture a dressing station . Their charge had resulted in heavy losses but yielded 78 prisoners and three machine guns . The 15th RWF had fallen behind the protective creeping barrage to their front and came under fire from a German position known as Battery Copse . Despite many losses , they pushed forward and were able to secure their portion of Iron Cross Ridge . 
 With Iron Cross Ridge in British hands , the 11th SWB and 17th RWF pushed forward for the Steenbeck . Despite German resistance , based in more concrete defences , these positions were cleared and the river reached , and the two battalions dug @-@ in on the opposite side . Due to the casualties taken in doing so , elements of the 16th Welsh and 10th SWB were moved forward to reinforce the newly gained position . At 15 : 10 , the German infantry launched a counter @-@ attack . Fighting continued throughout the day , with the forward British battalions forced to pull back beyond the Steenbeck , although German attempts to retake further territory were thwarted . During the course of the afternoon , heavy rain began to fall and did so for the following three days hindering future operations . The fighting broke the 3rd Guards Division , which the Welsh divisional history notes " had to be withdrawn immediately after the battle " . During the day , the division took close to 700 prisoners . Conan Doyle places the division 's losses at 1 @,@ 300 men . Other than an exchange of artillery fire , no further fighting took place and the division was pulled off the line on 6 August . 
 Toby Thacker wrote in 2014 that " the attack on the Pilckem Ridge was considered a great success by Haig and has been similarly viewed by historians " . He continues : " in Haig 's eyes the Welsh Division had redeemed its reputation after what he had perceived as its poor showing at Mametz Wood " . Haig went on to write that the division had " achieved the highest level of soldierly achievement " . John wrote that the division " regained the honour which it had unjustly lost after their supposed tardiness in the capture of Mametz " . The division returned to the front line on 20 August . On 27 August , elements of the division attacked . Throughout the day , heavy rain had fallen saturating the ground and " the men who had been lying in shell @-@ holes which were gradually filling with water found great difficulty in getting out and advancing and keeping up with the barrage " . As the infantry waded through mud , they lost the creeping barrage . Elements of the division reached the German line ; " it had been a gallant but hopeless endeavour " . The division remained on the line , subjected to German artillery bombardments , until it was withdrawn on 13 September , to take up new positions at Armentières . 
 = = = Raiding and reorganisation = = = 
 Until spring 1918 , the division manned various sections of the front line , at times occupying as much as ten miles of the front . During this period , the division worked to improve the trenches they inherited and conducted raids on the German lines . On the night of 7 / 8 November , the 10th SWB conducted a 300 @-@ strong raid on the German lines . Having penetrated 200 yd ( 180 m ) into German territory , the battalion destroyed three concrete dugouts , inflicted at least 50 casualties and took 15 prisoners , for a loss of 50 casualties . In addition to raiding , the division helped train the newly arrived 1st Portuguese Division , assigning a battalion at a time for tutoring . During the winter , the British realised that the Germans intended to begin an offensive in 1918 ( the Spring Offensive ) and the division spent the following months improving the front line positions , as well as constructing rear @-@ line defences from the Armentières region to the northern bank of River Lys , laying what the divisional history described as an : " inconceivable amount of concrete and barbed wire " . 
 By 1918 , the number of front line infantry within the British Army in France had decreased , leading to a manpower crisis . In an attempt to consolidate manpower and to increase the number of machine guns and artillery support available to the infantry , the decision was made to reduce the number of battalions in a division from twelve to nine . This had the effect of reducing the establishment of a division from 18 @,@ 825 men to 16 @,@ 035 . In addition , to ease reinforcement , an attempt was made to consolidate as many battalions from the same regiment within the same brigade . These changes impacted the division , resulting in the 15th RWF , 11th SWB and 10th and 16th Welsh being disbanded and the 2nd RWF joining from the 33rd Division . These changes to the division also saw the machine gun companies consolidated into a single battalion , one medium mortar battery broken up and absorbed by the remaining two batteries and the heavy mortar battery leaving the division to become a Corps asset . 
 Following a short break to train and rest , the division returned to the front line in mid @-@ February and recommenced raiding the German lines . On 15 March , the 16 RWF conducted a raid on a similar scale , and with similar success , to the one conducted by the 10 SWB in November . During the same period , the Germans raided the British lines but not with the same level of success and managed to capture only two men . In addition , the division 's snipers were able to gain the upper hand over their German rivals . The divisional history notes that its patrols had gained " control of No Man 's Land " . Using what had been learned " thorough previous reconnaissance " , in addition to sniping , it was " possible to move about unmolested in exposed trenches or even in the open " in front of the German lines . 
 = = = German Spring Offensive = = = 
 On 21 March , Germany launched Operation Michael . This attack , which became the opening salvo of their Spring Offensive , aimed to deliver a single , decisive , war winning blow . The Germans intended to strike the southern British flank , to separate the British and French armies and then move north to engage the bulk of the British forces in France in a <unk> ( battle of annihilation ) . The aim was to inflict such a defeat upon the British armies that the country would abandon the war , which in turn would force the French to sue for peace . After the first ten days of the German offensive , the casualties suffered by the 2nd and the 47th ( London ) Divisions were such that the 38th was ordered south to take up positions near Albert to relieve the two formations . While the infantry moved south , the divisional artillery remained at Armentières to support the 34th Division and subsequently took part in the Battle of the Lys . During this battle , the artillery went on to aid French forces before being transferred temporarily to the British 25th Division and conducting a fighting withdrawal . Its actions with both divisions earned the men of the divisional artillery plaudits from both divisional commanders . 
 Near Albert , the division had been kept in reserve until the night 11 / 12 April , when the division relieved the 12th ( Eastern ) Division . The Germans had captured high ground near <unk> and <unk> , overlooking the British lines . The division was ordered to retake this to deny the Germans the ability to observe the British positions and to gain observation positions overlooking the German lines in the Ancre valley . At 19 : 30 on 22 April , elements of the 113th and 115th Brigades attacked with support from Australian artillery . The German infantry , supported by a large number of machine guns and much artillery support , resisted the attack . Unable to drive the German infantry off all of the high ground , the division gained 250 yards ( 230 m ) on a 1 @,@ 000 @-@ yard ( 910 m ) front , which achieved the objective . The 13th RWF managed to push further ahead and secured a section of high ground overlooking the German lines , fought off several German counter @-@ attacks and took 85 Germans and six machine guns . Despite these successes , the attack was costly , with the 13th RWF suffering over 400 wounded . The Germans made repeated attempts to push back the British and a big attack was repulsed on 9 May . Over the following days , the division attempted an abortive attack on another German @-@ held ridge and conducted several raids on the German lines , before being withdrawn for a short break on 20 May . 
 At this point , Major @-@ General Charles Blackader left the division on medical grounds and was replaced by Major @-@ General Thomas Cubitt . The division received replacements for casualties , disbanded the sniper company and engaged in rifle training . Once back on the line , the division return to its previous routine of static warfare : conducting patrols and raids , as well as being subjected to raids and artillery bombardments . 
 = = = Final battles = = = 
 On 5 August , the division returned to the front and took up position at <unk> Wood . Shortly after , the Allied armies launched the Battle of Amiens , which led to the start of the Hundred Days Offensive , the culminating offensive of the war . In the 38th Division sector , the Fourth Army pushed the Germans back from their gains and onto the eastern bank of the Ancre . The 38th Division was assigned to cross the river and clear the German @-@ held Thiepval ridge north of Albert . 
 On 21 / 22 August , elements of the 114th Brigade crossed the Ancre near Beaumont @-@ Hamel , established a bridgehead , constructed a bridge and fought off German counter @-@ attacks . The following day , additional elements of the brigade crossed , securing a further bridgehead and repulsed more German attacks . The 113th Brigade crossed the river via bridges in Albert and assaulted <unk> Hill 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to the north @-@ east , taking 194 prisoners , three artillery pieces and seven machine guns . On 23 August , the 115th Brigade crossed the river and cleared several German positions facing them , took at least 30 prisoners and captured 15 machine guns . The rest of the division crossed the following day , either wading or using the new bridges . During the early hours , the 114th Brigade launched an attack on Thiepval ridge while the other two brigades attacked <unk> @-@ la @-@ Boisselle . By the end of the day , despite heavy fighting , the division had seized the ridge , pushed the Germans back around <unk> and taken 634 prisoners . The division history also records the capture of " 143 machine guns " . 
 On 25 August , the division advanced across the old Somme battlefield in the Second Battle of the Somme ( 1918 ) . The 113th Brigade cleared Mametz Wood , while the 115th seized Bazentin le Petit . The following day , the 113th Brigade reached the outskirts of Longueval and fought off numerous counter @-@ attacks , while the 115th Brigade surrounded and cleared High Wood ( near Bazentin le Petit ) . Casualties amounted to around 800 and at least 100 prisoners were taken and 15 machine guns captured . The next day saw heavy fighting outside Longueval as the 113th and 114th Brigades attempted to advance , but they were halted by determined German resistance and repeated counter @-@ attacks . The following days saw an exchange of artillery fire and further German counter @-@ attacks repulsed . Longueval was seized late on 28 August following a partial German withdrawal . The division continued its advance , overcame German resistance and counter @-@ attacks to capture Ginchy , Deville Wood and <unk> but were held up by determined resistance at Morval . Following a day @-@ long barrage , Morval was captured on 1 September after heavy fighting and the division pushed on to take Sailly @-@ <unk> and <unk> @-@ <unk> . In an effort to halt the British advance , the Germans had dug in on the far side of the Canal du Nord and , in the words of the divisional history , " smothered the Canal valley with gas shells " . On 3 September , having noticed a weakness in the German positions , elements of the 13th and 14th Welsh stormed across the canal and cleared the eastern bank allowing the rest of the 114th Brigade to cross . On 5 September , the division was relieved and placed in reserve . During August and the beginning of September , the artillery had fired over 300 @,@ 000 rounds in support of the fighting , 3 @,@ 614 casualties had been suffered and 1 @,@ 915 German prisoners taken . 
 On 11 September , the division returned to the line near <unk> ; the Germans had dug in along a ridge line from Épehy to <unk> intending to delay the British from reaching the <unk> Line . The Fourth Army was tasked with clearing these positions . On 18 September , the Battle of Épehy was fought . The division attacked at 05 : 40 with the 113th and 114th Brigades . Both brigades were able to reach their objectives despite flanking fire , and fought off numerous counter @-@ attacks . Despite this success , the Germans were able to cling on to <unk> . The battle cleared the German outposts in front of the Hindenburg Line preparing the way for future operations . On 20 September , the division was pulled off the line for a period of rest . 
 Eight days later , the division returned in preparation for assaulting the Hindenburg Line . The division advanced , along with the Fourth Army , pressing the retreating Germans before halting at the Hindenburg support line , also known as the Le <unk> @-@ Nauroy Line , due to determined German resistance . On 5 October the line was breached by the division after the Germans evacuated it for their main position ( Siegfried II Stellung , otherwise known as the <unk> @-@ Beaurevoir line ) near Villers @-@ Outréaux . The German positions lay behind dense lines of barbed wire , supported by concrete pillboxes and machine gun positions hidden in small woods providing excellent fields of fire over otherwise open countryside . Faced with this level of defence , the division was halted and spent the following days reconnoitring the German positions preparing for an assault . 
 The division 's plan of attack was for the 115th Brigade to envelop Villers @-@ Outréaux during dark and assault the village during daylight with tank support , while the 113th Brigade would clear the nearby Mortho Wood . The 114th Brigade would be held in reserve initially but brought up to exploit the success and push deeper into the German defensive belt . At 01 : 00 on 8 October , the attack began . The initial attack by the 115th Brigade failed , in turn impeding the 113th Brigade who were unable to approach Mortho Wood due to concentrated German machine gun fire . The 115th rallied and achieved their initial objective while the 113th were able to gain a foothold near theirs . At 05 : 00 , the 2nd RWF – following a friendly fire incident – assaulted Villers @-@ Outréaux and cleared the village with tank support . At 08 : 00 , the 114th Brigade was committed to the battle as orders to delay the advance arrived late . The troops were held up by undetected barbed wire and heavy German fire until 11 : 30 , when they disengaged and pressed forward exploiting the success of the 115th Brigade . The divisional history comments that the attack " progressed rapidly and resulted in a complete rout of the enemy " and that the brigade was able to achieve its final objective on the <unk> – <unk> road . Meanwhile , the 113th Brigade engaged in heavy fighting to clear the German trenches around Mortho Wood . During this action , the division suffered 1 @,@ 290 casualties and took 380 prisoners . The divisional history noted that 8 October was " perhaps ... the stiffest fighting of the whole advance " . 
 Following the assault , the 33rd Division pursued the retreating German forces , while the 38th stayed close behind ready to take over the advance or assault strongly @-@ held German positions as needed . On 9 October , Clary was liberated and the following day the divisional artillery was firing in support of the 33rd which had made contact with German forces . Over the next few days , the 33rd Division pursued the Germans to the River Selle and launched a bloody assault on the defended eastern bank during the opening stages of the Battle of the Selle . While a bridgehead was secured , it was abandoned due to losses and the decision was made to move the division forward . On the night of 13 / 14 October , the division took over the line near Troisvilles and <unk> . Over the next six days , the division prepared itself : conducting reconnaissance , constructing bridges and moving up heavy artillery . During these preparations , the Germans bombarded elements of the division 's artillery with gas shells . 
 On the night of 19 / 20 October , the division attacked . The footbridges were brought forward and the river crossed with ease . However , the divisional history comments , the " railway embankment on the far side was a much greater natural obstacle " due to heavy rain and was " heavily wired " and defended . The 113th and 114th Brigades crossed the river , each supported by a tank , while the 115th was held in reserve to deal with German counter @-@ attacks . Despite heavy German resistance and the tanks becoming bogged down in mud , the troops were able to seize the rail line by 02 : 30 . The divisional history commended the 14th Welsh for their efforts during this action , being the first to secure a bridgehead and then rolling up the German line to secure the right flank of the attack . In commending the efforts of his men , Major @-@ General Cubitt described the attack : having " formed up in boggy ground , [ the men ] crossed a difficult river ( for the fourth time since 21st August ) , attacked up a glacis swept by machine gun fire , stormed a precipitous railway embankment 40 to 50 feet high and in pouring rain , very slippery and deep going , in the hours of darkness , established [ themselves ] on the final objective " . Elements of the division 's pioneers joined in the final assault on the heights beyond the river and aided in the capture of the position . Despite several counter @-@ attacks , the division held the high ground . The attack inflicted at least 225 casualties and resulted in the capture of 212 prisoners , a battery of artillery pieces and mortars . 
 With a bridgehead across the Selle secured , the 33rd Division ( again supported by the 38th 's artillery ) continued the advance with the 38th following close behind . During this time , elements of the division supply train were stricken by an outbreak of Spanish flu . Following the 33rd , the division passed through the village of Forest , Croix @-@ <unk> and <unk> , before halting in front of the Forêt de Mormal . Here the division paused until 4 November and was subjected to artillery and aerial bombardments as well as minor skirmishes with German infantry . At 06 : 15 on 4 November , over a 2 @,@ 000 @-@ yard ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) front , the 115th Brigade pushed forward subjected to a heavy German artillery bombardment . The brigade cleared fenced @-@ off orchards before pushing 500 yards ( 460 m ) into the forest against stiff resistance . They were followed by the 113th Brigade , who then leapfrogged ahead to achieve the division 's second objective inside the forest . A lull in the fighting followed as the artillery was moved forward . Afterwards , the 114th Brigade attacked reaching the division 's final objective , a road running through the forest , before nightfall . In heavy rain and complete darkness , the 13th Welsh carried on the advance . They surrounded the hamlets of <unk> and Tete Noir , capturing a garrison of 65 men , before pushing on towards <unk> and taking an additional 60 prisoners . The division had breached the forest , allowing the 33rd Division to continue again advancing eastwards – this time to cross the Sambre . During this 24 @-@ hour period , the division had advanced 11 @.@ 5 miles ( 18 @.@ 5 km ) , 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) further than the flanking divisions , taken 522 prisoners , captured 23 artillery pieces and suffered at least 411 casualties . 
 On 7 November , the division relieved the 33rd in the pursuit of the Germans . Taking over the line near <unk> , the division pushed east . By 11 : 00 on 11 November , the leading brigade was east of <unk> with advanced patrols in contact with German forces at <unk> on the Belgian border . From the start of the Hundred Day Offensive until the signing of the armistice on 11 November , the division had advanced 60 miles ( 97 km ) , taken 3 @,@ 102 prisoners , seized 520 machine guns and captured fifty mortars and 43 artillery pieces . The division 's own losses during this period amounted to 8 @,@ 681 men . 
 Historian Gary Sheffield commented that , since the division was " employed on trench @-@ holding duties from September 1917 to July 1918 " , it likely " was not regarded by GHQ as an elite ' storm ' formation " . However , he noted , " judged by the results of their attacks during the Hundred Days " the division " was in a select band of elite divisions " akin to the Australian , Canadian and a limited number of other British formations . Sheffield credited Cubitt , " a hard @-@ bitten , ruthless ' fire @-@ eater ' " , for the improved performance of the division during this period , along with the various breaks the division had away from the line when they were able to train and assimilate new knowledge that resulted in " devolution of command " which allowed command flexibility among lower ranks . In addition , Sheffield cited improved staff work and tactical doctrine and high morale , which had led to the ability of the division to carry out effective combined arms operations . 
 = = = Epilogue = = = 
 Following the conclusion of fighting , the division was based around <unk> @-@ <unk> in France . The division was not chosen to be part of the British Army of the Rhine , the British occupation force to be based in the Rhineland . Instead , it was demobilised over a period of months . The first 3 @,@ 000 soldiers were sent home during December and the division ceased to exist by March 1919 . Prior to the division 's disbandment the remaining men were visited by Edward Prince of Wales ( later Edward VIII ) . 
 During the course of the war 4 @,@ 419 of the division 's men were killed , 23 @,@ 268 were wounded and 1 @,@ 693 reported missing . For acts of valour , five soldiers were ( in some instances posthumously ) awarded the Victoria Cross : James Llewellyn Davies , Ivor Rees , Henry Weale , William Allison White and Jack Williams . In addition , the following awards ( in several cases , multiple times ) were bestowed : 86 Distinguished Service Orders , 447 Military Crosses , 254 Distinguished Conduct Medals , and 1 @,@ 150 Military Medals ; 453 men were mentioned in dispatches . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Throughout the 1930s tensions built between Nazi Germany and the United Kingdom as well as its allies . During late 1937 and throughout 1938 , German demands for the annexation of Czechoslovakia 's Sudetenland led to an international crisis . In an attempt to avoid war , British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain met with German Chancellor Adolf Hitler in September and brokered the Munich Agreement . The agreement averted immediate war and allowed Germany to annex the Sudetenland . While Chamberlain had intended the agreement to lead to further peaceful resolution of issues , relations between both countries soon deteriorated . On 15 March 1939 , Germany breached the terms of the agreement by invading and occupying the remnants of the Czech state . 
 In response , on 29 March , the British Secretary of State for War Leslie Hore @-@ Belisha announced plans to increase the Territorial Army from 130 @,@ 000 men to 340 @,@ 000 and in so doing double the number of territorial divisions . The intended plan of action was for the existing units to recruit over their allowed establishments ( aided by an increase in pay for territorials , the removal of restrictions on promotion that had been a major hindrance to recruiting during the preceding years , the construction of better quality barracks and an increase in supper @-@ time rations ) and then form Second Line divisions from small cadres that could be built upon . As a result , the 38th ( Welsh ) Infantry Division was to be created as a Second Line unit , a duplicate of the First Line 53rd ( Welsh ) Infantry Division . In April , limited conscription was introduced . At that time 34 @,@ 500 militiamen , all of the age of 20 , were conscripted into the regular army , initially to be trained for six months before being deployed to the forming second line units . However , despite the intention for the army to grow in size , the programme was complicated by a lack of central guidance on the expansion and duplication process and issues regarding the lack of facilities , equipment and instructors . 
 = = = Formation and home defence = = = 
 Despite the ongoing efforts and some regiments being able to recruit the required numbers to form new battalions , the whole process had – in the words of historian James P. Levy – " not progressed beyond the paper stage when [ the Second World War ] began in September " . The 38th ( Welsh ) Infantry Division finally became active on 18 September 1939 , although its constituent units had already formed and had been administered by the 53rd ( Welsh ) Infantry Division . The 38th was again composed of the 113th , 114th and 115th Infantry Brigades . 
 The division was initially assigned to Western Command and by early 1940 was spread out along the River Severn in England and Wales . By summer , the division was under the command of III Corps and was based in the North West , around Liverpool , to conduct manoeuvres and training . The war @-@ time deployment of the Territorial Army envisioned it being deployed piecemeal , to reinforce the regular army that had already been deployed to the European mainland , as equipment became available . The plan envisioned the deployment of the whole force in waves , as divisions completed their training , with the final divisions not being deployed until a year had elapsed from the outbreak of war . As a result , the division did not leave the United Kingdom as the British Expeditionary Force was evacuated from France during May and June 1940 . 
 In April 1941 , the division was assigned to IV Corps and had moved to Sussex , the 18th Infantry Division having replaced them around Liverpool . In Sussex , the division was held in reserve and placed behind the 47th ( London ) Infantry Division and the 55th ( West Lancashire ) Infantry Division which were defending the coast between Bognor Regis – in the west – to Beachy Head in the east . Despite being in reserve , historians Michael Glover and Jonathan Riley note that the Royal Welch Fusiliers battalions of the 115th Brigade all took part in coastal defence duties . 
 On 1 December 1941 , the division was placed on the Lower Establishment , having been earmarked for a static home defence role . During 1942 , the division was assigned to V Corps and had shifted west to defend the Dorset coastline . Notably , on 27 and 28 February , the anti @-@ aircraft platoon of the 4th Battalion , Monmouthshire Regiment , supported Operation Biting , the commando raid on Bruneval , France . In July , the division lost the 10th Royal Welch Fusiliers to the Parachute Regiment . The division spent 1943 and early 1944 moving around the country spending time in Kent , Hertfordshire and Northumberland , as well being assigned to II and XII Corps . By March , the 115th Infantry Brigade had formed " ' B ' <unk> Area " and was aiding the movement of troops in preparation for Operation Overlord . 
 By 1944 , there were five Lower Establishment divisions allocated to home defence duties : the 38th , the 45th , the 47th ( London ) , the 55th ( West Lancashire ) and the 61st Infantry divisions . These five divisions had a combined total of 17 @,@ 845 men . Of this number , around 13 @,@ 000 were available as replacements for the 21st Army Group fighting in France . The remaining 4 @,@ 800 men were considered ineligible for service abroad at that time for a variety of reasons , including a lack of training , or being medically unfit . Over the following six months , up to 75 per cent of these men would be deployed to reinforce 21st Army Group following the completion of their training and certification of fitness . Specifically , the vast majority of the 1st Brecknockshire Battalion , South Wales Borderers were deployed to Normandy at the end of June as replacements to reinforce 21st Army Group , and by mid @-@ July so had the 2nd Battalion , Herefordshire Light Infantry , resulting in that battalion being disbanded . Stephen Hart comments that , by September , the 21st Army Group " had bled Home Forces dry of draftable riflemen " after the losses suffered during the Battle of Normandy , leaving the army in Britain , with the exception of the 52nd ( Lowland ) Infantry Division , with just " young lads , old men and the unfit " . 
 Compounding the loss of men to reinforce 21st Army Group , on 3 July the 115th Infantry Brigade was withdrawn from the division . The brigade was earmarked for an operation to liberate the Channel Islands and was re @-@ designated Force 135 . Ultimately such an operation did not take place and the brigade was deployed to Europe . During August , the 38th ( Welsh ) Infantry Division began to disperse . On 15 August , the divisional headquarters ceased commanding any subordinate units and by the end of the month the division was disbanded . 
 = = = Training = = = 
 During 1944 , the British Army was suffering from a severe shortage of manpower . In an effort to downsize the army and consolidate as many men within as few formations as possible to maintain fighting strength and efficiency , the War Office began disbanding divisions , including the 80th Infantry ( Reserve ) Division . As part of this restructure , the decision was made to retain division numbers familiar to the British public . On 1 September 1944 , the 38th Division was recreated as the 38th Infantry ( Reserve ) Division to replace the 80th as Western Command 's training formation . The new 38th Division was commanded by Major @-@ General Lionel Howard Cox , who had previously commanded the 80th Division . At this point , the divisional insignia was worn only by the permanent members of the division . 
 The 38th , along with the 45th Holding , the 47th Infantry ( Reserve ) and the 48th Infantry ( Reserve ) Division , were used to complete the training of new army recruits . At the division , the soldiers were given five weeks of additional training at the section , platoon and company level , before undertaking a final three @-@ day exercise . Troops would then be ready to be sent overseas to join other formations . 
 Undertaking this role , for example , the 5th Battalion , King 's Shropshire Light Infantry – between 1944 and 1945 – trained over 4 @,@ 000 replacements for other battalions within the regiment as well as the North Staffordshire Regiment . Having fulfilled its purpose , the division was disbanded at the end of the war . 
 = = General officer commanding = = 
 The division had the following commanders during the First World War : 
 The division had the following commanders during the Second World War : 
 = = Orders of Battle = = 
 = Henry Gardner = 
 Henry Joseph Gardner ( June 14 , 1819 – July 21 , 1892 ) was the 23rd Governor of Massachusetts , serving from 1855 to 1858 . Gardner , a Know Nothing , and was elected governor as part of the sweeping victory of Know Nothing candidates in the Massachusetts elections of 1854 . 
 Born in Dorchester , Gardner was a dry goods merchant from Boston active in the local Whig Party in the early 1850s . With the sudden and secretive rise of the nativist Know Nothings in 1854 , Gardner opportunistically repudiated previously @-@ held positions , and joined the movement , winning a landslide victory over Whig Emory Washburn . During his three terms in office the Know Nothing legislatures enacted legislation on a wide @-@ ranging reform agenda , and made several significant changes to the state constitution , including important electoral reforms such as the replacement of majority voting with plurality voting . 
 The Know Nothing movement began to disintegrate not long after its 1854 victory , dividing over slavery . Gardner won reelection in 1856 only with Republican support , given in exchange for Know Nothing support for the Republican presidential candidate , John Frémont . Republican Nathaniel Prentice Banks easily defeated Gardner in 1857 , and the Know Nothing movement effectively dissolved . By 1860 Gardner had left politics and returned to his business interests ; he died in relative obscurity . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Henry Joseph Gardner was born in Dorchester , Massachusetts ( then a community separate from Boston ) on June 14 , 1819 , to Henry Gardner and Clarissa Holbrook Gardner . His grandfather , also named Henry Gardner , was a well @-@ respected Harvard graduate , was politically active during the American Revolution and served as the state 's treasurer 1774 – 82 . The younger Henry was first educated in private schools in the Boston area , and then attended Phillips Exeter Academy , from which he graduated in 1831 . He then attended Bowdoin College , and embarked on a career as a dry goods merchant in Boston , a business in which he remained until 1876 . In 1844 he married Helen Cobb of Portland , Maine ; they had seven children . 
 = = Entry into politics = = 
 In 1850 Gardner , politically a Whig , was elected to the Boston City Council , serving until 1853 . He was a moderately conservative <unk> Whig who was involved in the state party organization , serving on its central organizing committee . In 1854 he broke with the Whigs over their support of the pro @-@ slavery Kansas @-@ Nebraska Act , and became involved in the nativist Know Nothing movement . This shift in position was fairly radical on Gardner 's part , and was viewed by contemporaries and recent historians as politically opportunist . Prior to joining the Know Nothings he had not displayed any nativist sentiments , and had even supported an Irish American in a bid to become justice of the peace . He also switched from a moderate <unk> position on slavery to an abolitionist stance , and supported positions on prohibition of alcohol that he had previously opposed . The Whig statesman Edward Everett described Gardner as " a man of some cleverness , but no solidity of character . " 
 The Know Nothing convention in October 1854 chose Gardner as its gubernatorial candidate , in part because his stand on slavery was not as radical as that of Republican candidate Henry Wilson , who was also seeking Know Nothing support . Wilson eventually made a deal with the Know Nothings , withdrawing from the race at the last moment in exchange for Know Nothing support in a United States Senate bid . The campaign was relatively sedate , because both the Whigs and Democrats did not organize large @-@ scale events . The larger parties may have been concerned that rallies would be poorly attended due to defections to the Know Nothings . The aristocratic Whigs fielded incumbent governor Emory Washburn to stand for reelection . They were particularly dismissive of the Know Nothings : one commentator described the Know Nothing ticket as " <unk> ministers , lying <unk> , and buggering priests " who were led by " that rickety vermin of a Henry J. Gardner . " Gardner was , however , optimistic , warning one journalist that he would win by a large majority . The election was a landslide : Gardner won 79 % of the vote , and the state legislature and Congressional delegation were almost entirely populated by Know Nothings . 
 = = Governor of Massachusetts = = 
 The legislature elected in the Know Nothing sweep was unlike any that preceded it : almost all of its members were new to elected office . The 1855 session was one of the most productive in the state 's history , with about 600 bills and resolutions passed . In his inaugural address , Gardner set what he hoped was a tone that would solidify his position has the party leader . The speech focused almost to exclusion on nativist issues , and included hyperbolic claims that the level of immigration was reaching crisis proportions . Gardner notably omitted popular substantive reform issues such as the ten @-@ hour workday , and also avoided the contentious subject of slavery . 
 = = = Reforms = = = 
 The 1855 legislature passed a wide variety of reform legislation , most of which Gardner signed . A board of insurance with broad powers of inspection was created ; bankruptcy laws were changed to benefit lower @-@ class individuals ; imprisonment for debt was abolished . Vaccinations were mandated for all school children , women were given the right to own property on their own , and exempted from responsibility for their husbands ' debts ; and restrictions were placed on child labor . Schools were desegregated , a reform school for girls was established , and state funding was withdrawn from parochial schools . Cities and towns were authorized to engage in a wide variety of civic improvements , including the building of highways , gas , water , and sewer lines , and public transport facilities such as docks and wharves . One of the major reforms that was not enacted , despite vigorous debate , was legislation calling for a ten @-@ hour workday . 
 Several amendments to the state constitution were enacted during Gardner 's term . All of them originated in the 1853 constitutional convention , whose proposals , although popular , were poorly organized and defeated in a popular referendum . Plurality voting , which had previously been enacted legislatively to apply to federal elections , was extended to state elections . More state executive offices were made elective , including the Governor 's Council , Attorney General , Secretary of State , Auditor , and Treasurer . The state 's rules for districting were reformed so that they were based on districts drawn by population instead of by towns . 
 One reform that was immediately a subject of controversy was a harsh prohibition law , which criminalized the service of a glass of grog with a six @-@ month jail sentence . The bill , signed into law by Gardner , was immediately protested , and legislators who passed it were later criticized for charging bar tabs to the state when they traveled . 
 = = = Nativist issues = = = 
 Some legislation and executive action was squarely aimed at addressing nativist concerns . So @-@ called " foreign " militia , composed of Irish immigrants , were disbanded , and foreigners were not allowed in police forces or state government jobs . The state deported more than 1 @,@ 000 allegedly indigent aliens , inciting protest over abuses . One notable case involved the deportation to Liverpool of a woman with an American @-@ born infant without any means of support . Gardner reported that the state saved $ 100 @,@ 000 by this process . 
 The most scandalous aspect of the nativist agenda was the legislature 's investigation of alleged abuses in Roman Catholic boarding houses . Joseph Hiss , one of the principal investigators , was reported to have made lewd remarks to nuns in these establishments , and was later found to engage in drinking and the hiring of prostitutes . The scandal received a great deal of press and badly tarnished the Know Nothings . 
 = = = Slavery = = = 
 Before Gardner 's election , on May 24 , 1854 , Anthony Burns was arrested in Boston as a fugitive under the Fugitive Slave Law of 1850 . Edward G. Loring , a Suffolk County probate judge who also served as U.S. commissioner of the Circuit Court in Massachusetts , ordered that Burns be forced back into slavery in Virginia , outraging abolitionists and the increasingly antislavery public in Massachusetts . Under the pressure of a public petition campaign spearheaded by William Lloyd Garrison , the legislature passed two Bills of Address , in 1855 and 1856 , calling for Judge Loring to be removed from his state office , but in both cases Gardner declined to remove Loring . A third Bill of Address to remove Loring from office was later approved by Gardner 's Republican successor , Nathaniel Prentice Banks . 
 The Know @-@ Nothing legislature also passed , over Gardner 's veto , one of the most stringent personal liberty laws , designed to make enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 as difficult for slave claimants as possible . Gardner said that the law would exacerbate relations between North and South , and called for its repeal . Minority parties in the legislature sought to weaken the bill , but its major provisions , including rights of habeas corpus , jury trial , and state @-@ funded defense , survived . 
 = = = Later elections = = = 
 In 1855 the national Know Nothing convention split on the subject of slavery . Prominent antislavery Know Nothing supporters in Massachusetts , including Henry Wilson , began another attempt ( after having failed in 1854 ) to form a party with abolition as a major focus . This effort resulted in the formation of the Republican Party , which sought to negotiate with the Know Nothings for a fusion of the two parties . However , Massachusetts Know Nothing leadership refused fusion and Republican leadership refused coalition , with many Republicans skeptical of Gardner 's fidelity to the antislavery cause despite his support for fusion . The parties ended up fielding separate slates of candidates , and many Know Nothing politicians and supporters switched allegiance . In the fall election Gardner , running on a strictly nativist platform , garnered 38 % of the vote , to the 27 % of Republican Julius Rockwell . With the new plurality voting rule in effect , Gardner won the election , but the split ( and disaffection in some circles with the Know Nothing agenda ) cost him support from former Free Soilers and Democrats . In the 1856 election Gardner benefited from a deal with the Republicans , who refused to run a candidate for governor in exchange for Know Nothing support for their presidential candidate , John C. Frémont . He easily won reelection , although many Republicans voted for a protest candidate instead of supporting him . He attempted to parlay the Republican support into an election to the United States Senate ( a matter then decided by the state senate early in its session ) replacing Charles Sumner . However , Republican operatives maneuvered the Senate into voting before Gardner 's speech opening the 1857 session , and Sumner was easily reelected . 
 Although the nation was wracked by the Panic of 1857 and Bleeding Kansas , the election in Massachusetts that year hinged on other factors . Gardner was opposed by Republican ( and former Know Nothing ) Nathaniel Prentice Banks and Democrat Erasmus Beach . Gardner was accused of having become little more than a tool of the formerly Whig industrial interests , and Banks was adept at bringing many former Know Nothings into his camp , most importantly John Z. Goodrich who attested to Banks ' strong antislavery credentials . Gardner sought to focus the contests on local issues , but slavery predominated as an issue , and Banks won a comfortable victory . 
 In 1858 Gardner sought to bring what remained of the Know Nothings into a coalition with the Democrats , but his attempts to find a suitable candidate were unsuccessful . That year 's Know Nothing candidate , Amos A. Lawrence , trailed well behind Banks . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Gardner continued in his dry goods business until 1876 , and became an agent for the Massachusetts Life Insurance Company in 1887 . He died in Milton , Massachusetts on July 21 , 1892 . In the 1850s he was recognized by Harvard University with honorary degrees , and he was made a member of the Ancient and Honorable Artillery Company in 1855 . 
 = EastEnders : E20 = 
 EastEnders : E20 ( sometimes just E20 ) is a British Internet soap opera , which began airing on 8 January 2010 . A spin @-@ off from the established BBC soap EastEnders , it is set in EastEnders ' regular setting of Albert Square , a Victorian square in the fictional borough of Walford , in the East End of London . Each series follows a group of teenage characters : Zsa Zsa Carter ( Emer Kenny ) , Leon Small ( Sam Attwater ) , Fatboy ( Ricky Norwood ) and Mercy Olubunmi ( Bunmi Mojekwu ) in series 1 ; Asher Levi ( Heshima Thompson ) and his brother Sol ( Tosin Cole ) , Naz Mehmet ( Emaa Hussen ) , and Stevie Dickinson ( Amanda Fairbank @-@ Hynes ) in series 2 ; and Ava Bourne ( Sophie Colquhoun ) , Donnie Lester ( Samuell Benta ) and Faith Olubunmi ( Modupe Adeyeye ) in series 3 . The show 's title comes from Walford 's fictional London postcode district , E20 . The four characters from series 1 also appear in EastEnders , as well as Faith from series 3 . 
 EastEnders : E20 originally aired as part of the main show 's 25th anniversary celebrations . It was devised in a bid to develop and nurture new talent , including writers , actors , composers and remixers , and target a younger audience , as well as to attempt to drive more people onto the Internet . The series was the idea of executive producers Diederick Santer , who wanted a show where regular EastEnders characters would be in the background , and John Yorke , who wanted to improve the portrayal of teenagers in EastEnders and to get younger people writing for it . 
 The show 's writers , all newcomers aged between 17 and 22 , were selected through a writing competition , and created the series at a BBC summer school . The theme tune was also selected through a competition , promoted on BBC Radio 1 . The show primarily operates as a standalone series but also cross @-@ references storylines of the main soap , and features cameo appearances from several of the regular characters from EastEnders . The episodes are between three and 16 minutes each in length and are available via EastEnders ' official website . Omnibus editions were also available on BBC iPlayer , BBC Red Button and , from April 2010 , BBC Three . 
 = = Conception and development = = 
 EastEnders : E20 was conceived by executive producer Diederick Santer as part of EastEnders ' 25th anniversary celebrations . Described as the " naughty little brother or sister to the main show " , it was devised in a bid to target younger viewers and to develop and nurture new talent . Executive producer John Yorke , who oversaw the show , and is also controller of BBC drama production and new talent , said " Fundamentally the whole idea of the show is it 's a training ground for new talent , be that acting , writing , composing , remixing , everything . The fact is because it 's online , we can take risks . " Nevertheless , the makers said they knew they had to get it right because " the eyes of the World Wide Web would be watching . " 
 Santer conceived the idea of a " parallel universe show " with new characters , where the regular characters are in the background . Yorke sought to improve the portrayal of teenagers in EastEnders and to get younger people writing for it . The ideas came together and EastEnders : E20 was created in what Yorke described as " one of the quickest periods from idea to screen I 've ever known . " Regarding the decision to create an online drama , Yorke said , " People don 't watch television at fixed times anymore , they use iPlayer [ to ] get it at their convenience and so it made sense to make a programme that [ viewers ] can specifically get at their convenience . " The show 's producer , Deborah Sathe , added , " Technology is changing and it 's changing really quickly and I think it 's really appropriate that the BBC is leading the way in offering online content . " The first series was commissioned by multi @-@ platform commissioning executive Rosie <unk> . 
 Another incentive for the show was to get more people to use the Internet . Sathe stated that it was an opportunity for younger people to bring the older members of their families onto the internet , and Yorke hoped that it would bring people onto the internet who had not used it before . Simon Nelson , BBC Vision controller of multiplatform and portfolio , said that this was an opportunity for the BBC to develop its expertise in drama production by exploiting the creative potential of the Internet to create a new online drama where few have succeeded . EastEnders : E20 primarily operates as a standalone series but also cross @-@ references storylines of the main soap . According to Santer , the series also explores the stories of the soap 's anonymous bystanders . He said , " There are always other people [ in EastEnders ] milling round the market and houses that we never go into . There are four or five parallels you could do . It will be nice to see well @-@ known characters through strangers ' eyes . Ian Beale may show up and he is just a strange , irritating man . Or they might ask : ' Who is that moody girl in the market ? ' And it will be Stacey Slater . " 
 = = = Series 2 = = = 
 The second series was announced on 8 April 2010 , brought back by Santer 's successor , Bryan Kirkwood and commissioned by Sarah Clay . Nelson explained " We had no hesitation in commissioning another series , something which will delight the 17 @,@ 000 fans who 've been calling for more episodes on the E20 Facebook page . " Script producer Peter <unk> promised that the second series would take the characters to darker , scarier and more unattractive parts of their personalities , writer <unk> Ahmet said it would be sexier , and Sathe stated there would be big secrets , while writer Alex Oates said that the show and the writers had grown up a lot since the first series . The Daily Star newspaper reported that the second series would be more controversial than the first , including scenes of drug dealing and violence . 
 With the return of the series , Sathe explained that some of the show 's writers had already worked with the EastEnders team on storylines for the characters they had created , and hoped this would continue as the E20 brand develops , and that the show would become a " junior version " of the BBC Writers Academy . Series 2 sees the introduction of street dance to the series to give it an " authentic East End flavour of youth " . The episodes were made all the same length following complaints about the length of episodes in the first series and the decision to show the series on BBC Three . Social networking site Twitter was also used to introduce teasers , with four of the characters having their own profiles . 
 = = = Series 3 = = = 
 A third series was announced on 27 September 2010 , commissioned by BBC Learning , as part of a new BBC strategy to provide learning opportunities for all audiences . Saul <unk> , Controller of Learning , said , " I want to use BBC programmes that are known and loved by audiences that can serve as springboards for learning . [ ... ] We 'll be enlisting the help of the BBC 's best talent to maximise the reach of our output , " and Sathe commented , " We are thrilled with the success of the first two series and have already started to storyline the third . Be prepared for a few familiar faces , a couple of new ones and a lot of fireworks . " It was confirmed that Learning would fund the third series and work with young people to develop storylines " that bring to life subjects in the Personal , Social , Health Education ( PSHE ) curriculum such as bullying or peer pressure . " A regional schools tour was organised to tie in with the launch of the series , with pupils writing short scenes based on scenarios tying in with the PSHE curriculum , which were performed , filmed and edited . Sarah Miller , BBC Learning commissioner and executive producer of series 3 , explained : " The schools tour was a terrific opportunity to deliver powerful face @-@ to @-@ face workshops , giving students and teachers the opportunity to develop key media production skills and to get behind the scenes of a top BBC drama . " 
 = = Production = = 
 The show is produced by television newcomer Deborah Sathe . The production process for series 1 took about six months , from commissioning to the final cut . Yorke stated that , " Television takes a notoriously long time to make and one of the joys of doing this online is that it 's been incredibly quick , about a quarter of the time it would take a normal show to get off the ground . It 's smaller , it 's easier to do and also there 's a collective will for it to succeed . " 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The first series was written by a team of 13 writers from London aged between 17 and 22 who responded to a writing competition and attended a summer school in August 2009 as part of the BBC 's new talent initiative , where they created the entire series . The summer school took place over four weeks , with the first two weeks in Theatre Royal Stratford East and the last two at the BBC centre at Elstree Studios . The writers did not know they would be writing a spin @-@ off to EastEnders until they arrived . The writers , including Florence Vincent , Alex Oates , <unk> Harris and Emer Kenny , also wrote the ten episodes of series 2 . They are from various parts of London , which Sathe said was " brilliant " as they represent different parts of life in London , and they have grown up with the Internet as a native medium . Santer stated that the writers created a new Walford , calling it a " fresh perspective on a British classic . " The writers were given a day to travel around East London to listen to people talking to get ideas . Sathe commented : " We created some brilliant scenes from the eavesdropping stuff . " After the summer school , the writers were commissioned to write the 12 episodes of series 1 . Some of the scripts were allowed by be changed by the actors if they thought lines were not authentic , such as the use of London street slang . Sathe considered the use of slang to be a highlight of the series , calling it her proudest moment . <unk> and character creation for series 2 started in January 2010 . The third series used mostly different writers to the first two . Each potential writer had to send in a monologue for a character they would like to see on television and the production team chose their favourites . The writers were then asked to write a scene between their character and one of the established EastEnders characters . Following this , the writers were interviewed and the most promising fifteen were selected . Kenny returned as a writer for series 3 and was joined by several of the young EastEnders cast members : <unk> <unk> ( Connor Stanley ) , Himesh Patel ( Tamwar Masood ) and Charlie G Hawkins ( Darren Miller ) . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 EastEnders : E20 is filmed on the same set as EastEnders , using three handheld cameras to give it a more " edgy " feel compared to EastEnders , which is filmed with cameras on tripods . Director Michael Keillor stated that although using handheld cameras is normally easier , the fact it was shot with a multiple @-@ camera setup made it more challenging and created problems for the lighting and props teams as nobody knew exactly where the camera would be . Keillor said it was a " particularly tough day " when filming a party scene in a flat , as normally walls of the set would be removed but all the walls were left in to make it look more realistic , meaning the crew overheated . Series 1 was filmed over ten days with approximately 120 minutes of television being shot . Each of the first series ' 12 episodes are between three and 16 minutes in length . The second series features 10 episodes averaging 14 minutes each , which was due to complaints from viewers about the length of some of the episodes in series 1 . Series 3 was scheduled to begin filming on 8 May 2011 , lasting for four weeks . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Unlike EastEnders , E20 uses incidental music , which Scott Matthewman of The Stage said makes it feel like an episode of Hollyoaks , a Channel 4 soap opera targeted at a teen audience . A remix of the EastEnders theme tune was created for the series , with members of the public submitting remixes in a competition held on the BBC website . The competition opened on 11 November 2009 and was officially launched on 13 November by Annie Mac on her BBC Radio 1 show . More than 250 entries were submitted . They were reduced to four and judged by Sathe , Santer , Keillor , original theme tune composer Simon May , and BBC Radio 1Xtra 's DJ Ace . The winner , 21 @-@ year @-@ old Carl Darling , was announced on 4 December 2009 . He said " I was very excited to hear that my track was chosen by such an eclectic judging panel . And to spend time in the BBC studios and walking around the Square was phenomenal . I have grown up hearing Simon May 's original theme tune and watching Albert Square and the iconic Queen Vic , so I feel very privileged to be a part of EastEnders : E20 history ! " Darling explained that he wanted to keep all the " essential features " of the original theme , but to make a grimy drum and bass version . 
 Additionally producers worked with BBC Introducing to give unsigned bands and musicians the chance to have their music used on the series 2 soundtrack , and grime music producer Aiden " <unk> Beatz " Hogarth was appointed music director and composer , having been unable to take the role for series 1 . He said " For E20 I will be providing all the best and what 's current from the underground and mainstream music scene and instead of having the music playing out of stereos and stalls , we 've taken the step to compose and source music as a soundtrack . Something seasoned EastEnders fans may not be familiar with . I honestly think that the viewers are ready for a refreshing and brand new take on how music direction for this show and others like it should be done . " 
 = = Casting = = 
 Casting of the new characters for series 1 was announced on 25 November 2009 . Open auditions were held at Theatre Royal Stratford East , followed by recalls until the possible actors were reduced to eight and then four . Yorke described it as a " painful process " and they had difficulty finding someone to play Zsa Zsa Carter . Emer Kenny was cast in the role whilst writing the second episode . Yorke said " She was so good that we suddenly went , ' It 's her ! ' " Kenny said , " I 'm really thrilled to have been given the opportunity to both write for and act in a show connected with such an iconic drama as EastEnders . Kids these days use their laptops more than their televisions , so it 's really exciting to be a part of a project that 's taking drama online and connecting with these viewers . " To prepare for the role , Kenny had to disguise her " posh " accent , saying that when the director asked her what she would do about her voice , she travelled around the East End to listen to the way people spoke . 
 On his casting in the role of Fatboy , television newcomer Ricky Norwood said , " It 's an honour to now be a part of [ the ] show . I am born and bred in the East End [ so ] it feels like a homecoming . " Norwood adapted his own use of slang into the character to " try and bring it and from a true place . " Bunmi Mojekwu , who plays Mercy Olubunmi , commented " I feel so blessed to be part of EastEnders : E20 . My first day on set was just crazy . I was on Albert Square – a dream come true – I 'm enjoying every second . " Sam Attwater , who previously appeared in five episodes of Hollyoaks , was cast as boxer Leon Small . On his casting , he commented , " It 's a great privilege to be working with such great actors and on such an established show . It 's an amazing opportunity and I 'm really enjoying tackling a character like Leon who has so much going on , " He prepared for the role by attending a gym , as the character has a lot of topless scenes . He said : " As soon as I heard that I was straight down the gym . Lots of crunches . Everyone said don 't worry about it , but every time I did one of those scenes I had to watch it back and see how it looked because there will be 10 million people watching it . I want to be on the best form . " 
 The cast for series 2 were announced on 29 July 2010 . Heshima Thompson and Tosin Cole were cast as brothers Asher and Sol Levi . Cole , who has previously starred in a modern adaptation of Shakespeare 's Julius Caesar , said , " It 's a privilege to work on something so big but so different . Everyone is fantastic to work with . I 'm really excited . " Thompson , who has appeared in The Bill and Spooks , stated " It 's a great project to be a part of and I get to dance so this is going to be fun . " Emaa Hussen was cast as Naz Mehmet , her first professional acting role , on which she commented : " it 's a really exciting place to start my career . I 'm from East London and a big fan of EastEnders , which is one of the reasons I wanted to do the show . " Finally , Amanda Fairbank @-@ Hynes , who appeared in An Education , said of her casting as Stevie Dickinson , " It all happened so quickly but I 'm really excited to be working on EastEnders . It 's an amazing group of people and they are great to work with . " Additionally , Hollyoaks actress Roxanne McKee , and dance acts Flawless and Avant Garde also make appearances . Flawless were asked to appear in the show by Sathe , who has previously worked with Marlon Wallen from the troupe . 
 = = Broadcasting = = 
 Each of the first series ' episodes were made available on varying days of the week at <unk> via EastEnders ' official website , starting on 8 January 2010 and ending on 25 January 2010 . The series was also available in three omnibus shows on BBC iPlayer and via BBC Red Button after the EastEnders omnibus aired on BBC One . The first omnibus , comprising episodes 1 – 4 , was available for one week from 17 January . The second omnibus was available for one week from 24 January , containing episodes 5 – 8 . Episodes 9 – 12 were available as an omnibus from 31 January 2010 . Additionally , the series was re @-@ edited into three 30 @-@ minute editions and shown weekly on BBC Three from 23 April 2010 . 
 The second series began on 7 September 2010 , with two episodes being made available weekly on Tuesdays and Thursdays , excluding episode 2 , which was available on a Wednesday . The series comprises 10 episodes in total of around 14 minutes each , and was also screened in five omnibus editions on BBC Three on Monday nights . Series 3 comprises 15 episodes of around 10 minutes each . Extra footage , such as video blogs and behind @-@ the @-@ scenes clips , is also available online . All episodes from all three series remain available to view on the BBC website . 
 = = Characters = = 
 Each series features new teenage characters who move to Walford , as well as cameos from existing characters from the main show . The characters are described as sixth form students trying to escape from " family problems and crises of their own making " . Series 1 follows Zsa Zsa , Fatboy , Mercy and Leon , who move into <unk> George Street in Walford . Leon , Fatboy and Zsa Zsa also appeared briefly in EastEnders in January 2010 before EastEnders : E20 started , and returned as regular characters when EastEnders : E20 ended . It was later announced that due to positive reaction to the character , Mercy would also join EastEnders later in 2010 . Series 2 follows brothers Sol and Asher , plus Naz and Stevie . Sathe said there was a " good chance " that they would also appear in EastEnders at some point . Zsa Zsa , Mercy and Leon also have cameo appearances in series 2 , and Fatboy has a recurring role . Series 3 follows newcomers Ava , Donnie and Faith , Mercy 's sister . Donnie 's younger sister , Riley , also appears along with Richard , a care worker . Naz and Sol also make a cameo appearance . Fatboy continues his recurring role , along with Mercy and Faith 's grandmother Grace Olubunmi , and regular EastEnders character Zainab Masood . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Viewership and critical reception = = = 
 Between 8 and 21 January 2010 , EastEnders : E20 material available via the EastEnders website and BBC iPlayer , including episodes , behind the scenes videos and extra content , received 1 @.@ 7 million views . By 19 February 2010 , the episodes had 2 @.@ 8 million views with additional content pushing the total to 3 @.@ 3 million . Santer was reported to be " knocked out " by the figures , saying : " For our little side project , something that started life as an experiment , to go so big is very exciting . I 'm delighted in particular that the 13 young London writers who wrote the series have reached such an audience with their first professional work . " EastEnders : E20 's official Facebook fan page grew in membership from 100 to 5000 in a matter of hours after the spin @-@ off started , and as of 19 February 2010 , had over 16 @,@ 000 fans . Yorke said that due to the popularity of the first series , they hoped to make further spin @-@ offs . The first BBC Three omnibus edition on 23 April 2010 received 302 @,@ 000 viewers and a 1 @.@ 4 % audience share according to overnight <unk> by 13 October 2011 , series 3 had gained viewing figures across both BBC Online and BBC Three of 1 @.@ 2 million viewers , and a 50 % increase in its online audience since it launched on 20 September 2011 . Sathe commented : " I am thrilled to see E20 has sustained its position as a front @-@ runner in online drama . " Grace Dent of The Guardian described the series as " rather brilliant " , while Patrick Smith of The Daily Telegraph called it " vibrant " and Tony Stewart of the Daily Mirror called Zsa Zsa an " impressive " character . However , website Watch With Mothers gave a negative review of the show , saying " there ’ s no need for it . " After the first episode of series 2 was available , Scott Matthewman from The Stage said " while it 's good to have more black and minority ethnic characters in the Square , by concentrating on a very narrow age range of characters it 'll make it all the harder for any new blood to effectively mesh into the full show . " 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 In 2010 , EastEnders : E20 was <unk> for a Banff World Television Festival award in the Original Online Programs category . In April 2011 , the show was nominated for a Webby Award in the Drama category . Sathe commented on this : " I am so proud of what we have achieved with EastEnders : E20 , and to be nominated for a Webby proves how far the series has come . " The show went on to win the award , on which Yorke stated , " To win such a prestigious award is a huge honour for all the team — and proof that the EastEnders brand is as brave and innovatory as it was when it first started , a quarter of a century ago . " In December 2011 , Sathe won the Creative Innovation Award at the Women in TV & Film Awards for her work on E20 . 
 In 2012 , Benta received a Screen Nation Awards nomination in the Emerging Talent category for his role as Donnie , while Adeyeye received a special mention for her role as Faith . The same year , the series was nominated in the Best Soap category at the Virgin Media TV Awards . 
 = Jim Henson = 
 James Maury " Jim " Henson ( September 24 , 1936 – May 16 , 1990 ) was an American puppeteer , artist , cartoonist , inventor , screenwriter , songwriter , musician , actor , film director , and producer who achieved international fame as the creator of the Muppets . Born in Greenville , Mississippi , and raised in Leland , Mississippi , and Hyattsville , Maryland , Henson began developing puppets while attending high school . While he was a freshman at the University of Maryland , College Park , he created Sam and Friends , a five @-@ minute sketch @-@ comedy puppet show that appeared on television . After graduating from the University of Maryland with a degree in home economics , he produced coffee advertisements and developed some experimental films . Feeling the need for more creative output , Henson founded Muppets Inc. in 1958 ( which would later become the Jim Henson Company ) . 
 Henson became famous in the 1960s when he joined the children 's educational television program Sesame Street , and there helped develop characters for the series . He also appeared in the sketch comedy show Saturday Night Live . In 1976 , after scrapping plans for a Broadway show , he produced The Muppet Show . He won fame for his creations , particularly Kermit the Frog , Rowlf the Dog , and Ernie , and he was involved with Sesame Street for over 20 years . He also had frequent roles in Muppets films such as The Muppet Movie , The Great Muppet Caper and The Muppets Take Manhattan , and created advanced puppets for projects like Fraggle Rock , The Dark Crystal , and Labyrinth . During the later years of his life , he also founded the Jim Henson Foundation , and Jim Henson 's Creature Shop . His involvement in two television programs — The Storyteller and The Jim Henson Hour — led to Emmy Awards wins . 
 Henson died suddenly in May 1990 , aged 53 , from streptococcal toxic shock syndromes – an unexpected event that was widely lamented in the film and television industries . In the weeks after his death , he was celebrated in a wave of tributes . He was posthumously inducted into Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1991 , and as a Disney Legend in 2011 . 
 = = Early life : 1936 – 61 = = 
 Born in Greenville , Mississippi on September 24 , 1936 , Henson was the younger of two children of Paul Ransom Henson ( 1904 – 1994 ) , an agronomist for the U.S. Department of Agriculture , and his wife , Betty Marcella ( née Brown ; 1904 – 1972 ) . He was raised as a Christian Scientist and spent his early childhood in Leland , Mississippi , before moving with his family to Hyattsville , Maryland , near Washington , D.C. , in the late 1940s . He later remembered the arrival of the family 's first television as " the biggest event of his adolescence , " having been heavily influenced by radio ventriloquist Edgar Bergen and the early television puppets of Burr <unk> ( on <unk> , Fran , and Ollie ) and Bil and Cora Baird . 
 He remained a Christian Scientist at least into his twenties when he would teach Sunday School but fifteen years before he died he wrote to a Christian Science church to inform them he was no longer a practicing member . 
 In 1954 , while attending Northwestern High School , he began working for <unk> @-@ TV ( now WUSA @-@ TV ) , creating puppets for a Saturday morning children 's show called The Junior Morning Show . After graduating from high school , Henson enrolled at the University of Maryland , College Park , as a studio arts major , thinking he might become a commercial artist . A puppetry class offered in the applied arts department introduced him to the craft and textiles courses in the College of Home Economics , and he graduated in 1960 with a BS in home economics . As a freshman , he had been asked to create Sam and Friends , a five @-@ minute puppet show for WRC @-@ TV . The characters on Sam and Friends were forerunners of Muppets , and the show included a prototype of Henson 's most famous character : Kermit the Frog . Henson would remain at WRC for seven years from 1954 to 1961 . Among the first of his assignments at WRC was Afternoon , a magazine show aimed at housewives . This marked his first collaboration with Jane Nebel — the woman who later became his wife . 
 In the show , he began experimenting with techniques that would change the way puppetry had been used on television , including using the frame defined by the camera shot to allow the puppet performer to work from off @-@ camera . Believing that television puppets needed to have " life and sensitivity , " Henson began making characters from flexible , fabric @-@ covered foam rubber , allowing them to express a wider array of emotions at a time when many puppets were made of carved wood . A marionette 's arms are manipulated by strings , but Henson used rods to move his Muppets ' arms , allowing greater control of expression . Additionally , Henson wanted the Muppet characters to " speak " more creatively than was possible for previous puppets — which had seemed to have random mouth movements — so he used precise mouth movements to match the dialogue . 
 When Henson began work on Sam and Friends , he asked fellow University of Maryland sophomore Jane Nebel to assist him . The show was a financial success , but after graduating from college , Henson began to have doubts about going into a career performing with puppets . He wandered off to Europe for several months , where he was inspired by European puppet performances which look on their work as an art form . Upon Henson 's return to the United States , he and Jane began dating . They were married in 1959 and had five children , Lisa ( b . 1960 ) , Cheryl ( b . 1961 ) , Brian ( b . 1963 ) , John ( b . 1965 , d . 2014 ) , and Heather ( b . 1970 ) . 
 = = Television and Muppets : 1961 – 69 = = 
 Despite the success of Sam and Friends , Henson spent much of the next two decades working in commercials , talk shows , and children 's projects before being able to realize his dream of the Muppets as " entertainment for everybody " . The popularity of his work on Sam and Friends in the late fifties led to a series of guest appearances on network talk and variety shows . Henson himself appeared as a guest on many shows , including The Steve Allen Show , The Jack Paar Program and The Ed Sullivan Show ( although on his appearance on the Sept 11 , 1966 , episode of the show — released to DVD on 2011 as part of a collection of episodes featuring the Rolling Stones — Sullivan mis @-@ introduced Henson as " Jim Newsom and his Puppets " ) . This first national television broadcast greatly increased exposure , which led to hundreds of commercial appearances by Henson characters throughout the sixties . During some downtime during a 1964 appearance on the Jack Paar Program , Henson , Frank Oz , Jerry Juhl , and Don <unk> found a closet door in their dressing room , behind which there were some exposed pipes . They decided to decorate the pipes , adding paint and fake fur to the pipes to give them goofy and monstrous faces . Everyone in the studio was highly entertained by the pipes , but the door was closed and the pipes were largely forgotten . They were rediscovered in 1980 , when some construction workers were knocking down walls for a remodel and found the pipes . The pipes were left alone , but when Jimmy Fallon took over as Late Night host in 2009 , he encouraged NBC to add the pipes to the studio tour . In 2010 , the pipes were placed in a permanent display as a stop on the tour . 
 Among the most popular of Henson 's commercials was a series for the local Wilkins Coffee company in Washington , D.C. , in which his Muppets were able to get away with a greater level of slapstick violence than might have been acceptable with human actors and would later find its way into many acts on The Muppet Show . In the first Wilkins ad , a Muppet named Wilkins is poised behind a cannon seen in profile . Another Muppet named Wontkins ( with Rowlf 's voice ) is in front of its barrel . Wilkins asks , " What do you think of Wilkins Coffee ? " and Wontkins responds gruffly , " Never tasted it ! " Wilkins fires the cannon and blows Wontkins away , then turns the cannon directly toward the viewer and ends the ad with , " Now , what do you think of Wilkins ? " Henson later explained , " Till then , advertising agencies believed that the hard sell was the only way to get their message over on television . We took a very different approach . We tried to sell things by making people laugh . " The first seven @-@ second commercial for Wilkins was an immediate hit and was syndicated and re @-@ shot by Henson for local coffee companies across the United States ; he ultimately produced more than 300 coffee ads . The same setup was used to pitch <unk> Milk in the Chicago area , Red Diamond coffee , several bread products , and even Faygo . 
 In 1963 , Henson and his wife moved to New York City , where the newly formed Muppets , Inc . , would reside for some time . Jane quit performing to raise their children . Henson hired writer Jerry Juhl in 1961 and puppet performer Frank Oz in 1963 to replace her . Henson later credited both with developing much of the humor and character of his Muppets . Henson and Oz developed a close friendship and a performing partnership that lasted 27 years ; their teamwork is particularly evident in their portrayals of the characters of Bert and Ernie , Kermit and Miss Piggy , and Kermit and Fozzie Bear . 
 Henson 's 1960s talk show appearances culminated when he devised Rowlf , a piano @-@ playing anthropomorphic dog . Rowlf became the first Muppet to make regular appearances on a network show , The Jimmy Dean Show . Henson was so grateful for this break that he offered Jimmy Dean a 40 % interest in his production company , but Dean declined stating that Henson deserved all the rewards for his own work , a decision of conscience Dean never regretted . From 1963 to 1966 , Henson began exploring film @-@ making and produced a series of experimental films . His nine @-@ minute experimental film , Time Piece , was nominated for an Academy Award for Live Action Short Film in 1966 . The year 1969 saw the production of The Cube — another Henson @-@ produced experimental movie . 
 Also around this time , the first drafts of a live @-@ action experimental movie script were written with Jerry Juhl , which would eventually become Henson 's last unproduced full @-@ length screenplay , Tale of Sand . The script remained in the Henson Company archives until the screenplay was adapted in the 2012 graphic novel , Jim Henson 's Tale of Sand . 
 = = Sesame Street : 1969 = = 
 In 1969 , television producer Joan Ganz Cooney and her staff at the Children 's Television Workshop , impressed by the quality and creativity of the Henson @-@ led team , asked Henson and staff to work full @-@ time on Sesame Street , a visionary children 's program for public television . This union of talents would become legendary in television entertainment . 
 Part of the show was set aside for a series of funny , colorful , puppet characters living on the titular street . These included Grover , Oscar the Grouch , Bert and Ernie , Cookie Monster , Elmo , and Big Bird . Henson performed the characters of Ernie , game @-@ show host Guy Smiley , and Kermit , who appeared as a roving television news reporter . It was around this time that a frill was added around Kermit 's neck to make him more frog @-@ like . The collar was functional as well : it covered the joint where the Muppet 's neck and body met . 
 At first , Henson 's Muppets appeared separately from the realistic segments on the Street , but after a poor test @-@ screening in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , the show was revamped to integrate the two , placing much greater emphasis on Henson 's work . Though Henson would often downplay his role in Sesame Street 's success , Cooney frequently praised Jim 's work and , in 1990 , the Public Broadcasting Service called him " the spark that ignited our fledgling broadcast service . " The success of Sesame Street also allowed Henson to stop producing commercials . He later remembered that " it was a pleasure to get out of that world " . 
 In addition to creating and performing Muppet characters , Henson was involved in producing various shows and animation insets during the first two seasons . During the first , Henson produced a series of counting films for the numbers 1 through 10 , which always ended with a baker ( voiced by Henson ) falling down the stairs while carrying the featured number of desserts . For seasons two to seven , Henson worked on a variety of inserts for the numbers 2 through 12 , in a number of different styles — including film ( " Dollhouse " , " Number Three Ball Film " ) , stop @-@ motion ( " King of Eight " , " Queen of Six " ) , cut @-@ out animation ( " Eleven Cheer " ) , and computer animation ( " Nobody Counts To 10 " ) . Jim Henson also directed the original C Is For Cookie . 
 Concurrently with the first years of Sesame Street , Henson directed Tales from <unk> , a short series of TV movie specials — in the form of comedic telling of classic fairy tales — aimed at a young audience and hosted by Kermit the Frog . The series included Hey , Cinderella ! , The Frog Prince , and The Muppet Musicians of Bremen . 
 = = Expansion of audience : 1970 – 77 = = 
 Concerned that the company was becoming typecast solely as a purveyor of children 's entertainment , Henson , Frank Oz , and his team targeted an adult audience with a series of sketches on the first season of the groundbreaking comedy series Saturday Night Live ( SNL ) . Eleven " Dregs and Vestiges " sketches , set mostly in the Land of Gorch , aired between October 1975 and January 1976 [ inclusive ] , with four additional appearances in March , April , May , and September [ of 1976 ] . Henson recalled that " I saw what [ creator Lorne Michaels ] was going for and I really liked it and wanted to be a part of it , but somehow what we were trying to do and what his writers could write for it never gelled . " The SNL writers never got comfortable writing for the characters , and frequently disparaged Henson 's creations ; one , Michael O 'Donoghue , quipped , " I won 't write for felt . " 
 Around the time of Henson 's characters ' final appearances on SNL , he began developing two projects featuring the Muppets : a Broadway show and a weekly television series . In 1976 , the series was initially rejected by the American networks who believed that Muppets would appeal to only a child audience . Then Henson pitched the show to British impresario Lew Grade to finance the show . The show would be shot in the United Kingdom and syndicated worldwide . That same year , he scrapped plans for his Broadway show and moved his creative team to England , where The Muppet Show began taping . The Muppet Show featured Kermit as host , and a variety of other memorable characters , notably Miss Piggy , Gonzo the Great , and Fozzie Bear , along with other characters such as Animal . Kermit 's role on The Muppet Show was often compared by his co @-@ workers to Henson 's role in Muppet Productions : a shy , gentle boss with " A whim of steel " who " [ ran ] things as firmly as it is possible to run an explosion in a mattress factory . " Caroll Spinney , the puppet performer of Big Bird and Oscar the Grouch , remembered that Henson " would never say he didn 't like something . He would just go ' Hmm . ' That was famous . And if he liked it , he would say , ' Lovely ! ' " Henson himself recognized Kermit as an alter @-@ ego , though he thought that Kermit was bolder than he ; he once said of the character , " He can say things I hold back . " 
 Jim Henson was the performer for several well @-@ known characters , including Kermit the Frog , Rowlf the Dog , Dr. Teeth , the Swedish Chef , Waldorf , and Link Hogthrob . 
 In 1977 , Henson produced a one @-@ hour television adaptation of the Russell Hoban story Emmet Otter 's Jug @-@ Band Christmas . 
 = = Transition to the big screen : 1979 – 82 = = 
 Three years after the start of The Muppet Show , the Muppets appeared in their first theatrical feature film The Muppet Movie . The movie was both a critical and financial success ; it made US $ 65 @.@ 2 million domestically and was at the time the 61st highest @-@ grossing film ever made . 
 A song from the film , " The Rainbow Connection " , sung by Henson as Kermit , hit number 25 on the Billboard Hot 100 and was nominated for a Best Song Academy Award . In 1981 , a Henson @-@ directed sequel , The Great Muppet Caper , followed , and Henson decided to end the still @-@ popular Muppet Show to concentrate on making films . From time to time , the Muppet characters continued to appear in made @-@ for @-@ TV @-@ movies and television specials . 
 In addition to his own puppetry projects , Henson aided others in their work . In 1979 , he was asked by the producers of the Star Wars sequel The Empire Strikes Back to aid make @-@ up artist Stuart Freeborn in the creation and articulation of enigmatic Jedi Master Yoda . Henson suggested to Star Wars creator George Lucas , himself a Muppets fan , that he use Frank Oz as the puppeteer and voice of Yoda . Oz voiced Yoda in The Empire Strikes Back and each of the four subsequent Star Wars films . The naturalistic , lifelike Yoda became one of the most popular characters of the Star Wars franchise . Lucas even lobbied unsuccessfully to have Oz nominated for a Best Supporting Actor Academy Award . 
 In 1982 , Henson founded the Jim Henson Foundation to promote and develop the art of puppetry in the United States . Around that time , he began creating darker and more realistic fantasy films that did not feature the Muppets and displayed " a growing , brooding interest in mortality . " With 1982 's The Dark Crystal , which he co @-@ directed with Frank Oz and co @-@ wrote , Henson said he was " trying to go toward a sense of realism — toward a reality of creatures that are actually alive [ where ] it 's not so much a symbol of the thing , but you 're trying to [ present ] the thing itself . " To provide a visual style distinct from the Muppets , the puppets in The Dark Crystal were based on conceptual artwork by Brian Froud . 
 The Dark Crystal was a financial and critical success and , a year later , the Muppet @-@ starring The Muppets Take Manhattan ( directed by Frank Oz ) did fair box @-@ office business , grossing $ 25 @.@ 5 million domestically and ranking as one of the top 40 films of 1984 . However , 1986 's Labyrinth , a Crystal @-@ like fantasy that Henson directed by himself , was considered ( in part due to its cost ) a commercial disappointment . Despite some positive reviews ( The New York Times called it " a fabulous film " ) , the commercial failure of Labyrinth demoralized Henson to the point that son Brian Henson remembered the time of its release as being " the closest I 've seen him to turning in on himself and getting quite depressed . " The film later became a cult classic . 
 Henson and his wife separated the same year , although they remained close for the rest of his life . Jane later said that Jim was so involved with his work that he had very little time to spend with her or their children . All five of his children began working with Muppets at an early age , partly because , as Cheryl Henson remembered , " one of the best ways of being around him was to work with him . " 
 = = Later life and death : 1983 – 90 = = 
 Though he was still engaged in creating children 's television , such as the successful eighties shows Fraggle Rock and the animated Muppet Babies , Henson continued to explore darker , mature themes with the folk tale and mythology @-@ oriented show The Storyteller ( 1988 ) , which won an Emmy for Outstanding Children 's Program . The next year , Henson returned to television with The Jim Henson Hour , which mixed lighthearted Muppet fare with riskier material . The show was critically well received and won Henson another Emmy for Outstanding Directing in a Variety or Music Program , but was canceled after 13 episodes due to low ratings . Henson blamed its failure on NBC 's constant rescheduling . 
 In late 1989 , Henson entered into negotiations to sell his company to The Walt Disney Company for almost $ 150 million , hoping that , with Disney handling business matters , he would " be able to spend a lot more of my time on the creative side of things . " By 1990 , he had completed production on a television special , The Muppets at Walt Disney World , and a Disney World ( later Disney California Adventure Park as well ) attraction , Jim Henson 's Muppet * Vision 3D , and was developing film ideas and a television series titled Muppet High . He also made a Disney show called Little Mermaid 's Island . 
 In the late 1980s , Henson worked with illustrator / designer William Stout on a feature film starring animatronic dinosaurs with the working title of The Natural History Project . In 1991 , news stories written around the premiere of The Jim Henson Company @-@ produced Dinosaurs sitcom highlighted the show 's connection to Henson . " Jim Henson dreamed up the show 's basic concept about three years ago , " said a New York Times article in April 1991 . 
 <unk> wanted it to be a sitcom with a pretty standard structure , with the biggest differences being that it 's a family of dinosaurs and their society has this strange toxic life style , ' said [ his son ] Brian Henson . But until The Simpsons took off , said Alex Rockwell , a vice president of the Henson organization , ' people thought it was a crazy <unk> 
 A New Yorker article said that Henson continued to work on a dinosaur project ( presumably the Dinosaurs concept ) until the " last months of his life . " 
 During production of his 1990 projects Henson traveled continuously . By late Spring , Henson began to experience recurring flu @-@ like symptoms . On May 4 , 1990 , Henson appeared with Kermit on The Arsenio Hall Show , one of his last television appearances . At the time , he mentioned to his publicist that he was tired and had a sore throat , but felt that it would go away . 
 On May 12 , 1990 , Henson traveled to <unk> , North Carolina , with his daughter Cheryl , to visit his father and stepmother . They both returned to New York on May 13 , and Henson cancelled a Muppet recording session scheduled for May 14 . That night , Henson 's wife Jane , from whom he was separated , came to visit for the last time . Hours later , on May 15 , Henson was having trouble breathing and began coughing up blood . He suggested to his wife that he might be dying , but did not want to take time from his schedule to visit a hospital . Jane later stated that while Henson 's Christian Science upbringing " affect [ ed ] his general thinking " , it did not have any influence on his postponement of medical treatment , and still later told People magazine that his avoidance was likely due to his desire not to be a bother to anyone . His stepmother and others also denied rumors that Henson 's Christian Science beliefs might have contributed to his death , as Henson had ceased practicing in his early 20s . 
 Two hours later , Henson finally agreed to go to New York Hospital in New York City . By the time he was admitted shortly after 4 : 00 am , he could no longer breathe on his own , and an X @-@ ray revealed he had abscesses in his lungs . He was placed on a mechanical ventilator to help him breathe , but his condition deteriorated rapidly despite aggressive treatment with multiple antibiotics . Less than 24 hours later on May 16 , 1990 , Henson died at the age of 53 . 
 The official cause of death was first reported as Streptococcus pneumoniae , a bacterial infection that causes bacterial pneumonia . It was later classified as organ failure resulting from streptococcal toxic shock syndrome ( caused by Streptococcus pyogenes ) . S. pyogenes is the bacterial species that causes strep throat , scarlet fever , and rheumatic fever . It can also cause other infections . 
 On May 21 , Henson 's public memorial service was conducted in New York City at the Cathedral of St. John the Divine . Another was conducted on July 2 at St. Paul 's Cathedral in London . In accordance with Henson 's will , no one in attendance wore black , and The Dirty Dozen Brass Band finished the service by performing " When the Saints Go Marching In " . Harry Belafonte sang " Turn the World Around , " a song he had debuted on The Muppet Show , as each member of the congregation waved , with a puppet performer 's rod , an individual , brightly colored foam butterfly . Later , Big Bird , performed by Caroll Spinney , walked out onto the stage and sang Kermit the Frog 's signature song , " Bein ' Green " . 
 In the final minutes of the two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ hour service , six of the core Muppet performers — Dave Goelz , Frank Oz , Kevin Clash , Steve Whitmire , Jerry Nelson , and Richard Hunt — sang , in their characters ' voices , a medley of Jim Henson 's favorite songs , eventually ending with a performance of " Just One Person " that began with Richard Hunt singing alone , as Scooter . Henson employee Chris Barry writes that during each verse , " each <unk> joined in with their own Muppets until the stage was filled with all the Muppet performers and their beloved characters . " The funeral was later described by Life as " an epic and almost unbearably moving event . " The image of a growing number of performers singing " Just One Person " was recreated for the 1990 television special The Muppets Celebrate Jim Henson and inspired screenwriter Richard Curtis , who attended the London service , to write the growing @-@ orchestra wedding scene of his 2003 film Love Actually . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Jim Henson Company and the Jim Henson Foundation continued after his death , producing new series and specials . Jim Henson 's Creature Shop , founded by Henson , also continues to build creatures for a large number of other films and series ( e.g. the science @-@ fiction production Farscape , the film adaptation of The Hitchhiker 's Guide to the Galaxy , and the movie <unk> ) and is considered one of the most advanced and well @-@ respected creators of film creatures . His son Brian and daughter Lisa are currently the co @-@ chairs and co @-@ CEOs of the company ; his daughter Cheryl is the president of the foundation . Steve Whitmire , a veteran member of the Muppet puppeteering crew , has assumed the roles of Kermit the Frog and Ernie , the most famous characters formerly played by Jim Henson . Whitmire also assumed the roles of Link Hogthrob , from the " Pigs in Space " " Muppet Show " sketch , starting with the video game " Muppets <unk> " from 2000 , as well as The Muppet Newsman , starting in 2008 , with <unk> viral online videos . <unk> veteran Bill Barretta has taken over for Henson 's fairly deeper voiced roles , such as the Swedish Chef , Mahna Mahna , Rowlf the Dog , and Dr. Teeth . Guy Smiley , in recent years , has been taken over by Eric Jacobson , and the role of Waldorf , in 1992 , was assumed by Muppet performer veteran Dave Goelz . 
 On February 17 , 2004 , it was announced that the non @-@ Sesame Street / Fraggle Rock Muppets ( the Sesame Street characters are separately owned by Sesame Workshop , and the Fraggle Rock characters are still owned by The Jim Henson Company ) and the Bear in the Big Blue House properties had been sold by Henson 's heirs to The Walt Disney Company . However , as a result , Sesame Workshop ( formerly the Children 's Television Workshop ) , also lost the rights to Kermit the Frog , and thus he would not appear on new material on Sesame Street for some time . However , Sesame Workshop has since obtained permission from Disney to use Kermit , allowing him to make an appearance on the premiere of the show 's 40th season on November 10 , 2009 . In addition , Sesame Workshop has made many of Kermit 's previous segments on the show available for viewing on their YouTube account . 
 One of Henson 's last projects is a show attraction in Walt Disney World and Disneyland featuring the Muppets , called Muppet * Vision 3D , which opened in 1991 , shortly after his death . 
 The Jim Henson Company retains the Creature Shop , as well as the rest of its film and television library including Fraggle Rock ( one of the few Muppet @-@ related properties still owned by The Jim Henson Company ) , Farscape , The Dark Crystal , and Labyrinth . 
 In 2010 , it was announced that the first major biography of Henson , sanctioned by the family and the Jim Henson Legacy , was underway . The biography by Brian Jay Jones was published on September 24 , 2013 , Henson 's 77th birthday . 
 On February 14 , 2014 , Henson 's son , John Henson , died of a heart attack after playing in the snow with his daughter . He was 48 . 
 = = = Tributes = = = 
 Henson is honored both as himself and as Kermit the Frog on the Hollywood Walk of Fame . Only three other people have received this honor : Walt Disney as both himself and Mickey Mouse ; Mel Blanc as both himself and Bugs Bunny ; and Mike Myers as both himself and Shrek . Henson was posthumously inducted into the Walk of Fame in 1991 . 
 Henson has also earned induction into the Television Hall of Fame . He achieved this honor in 1987 . 
 The theater at his alma mater , Northwestern High School , in Hyattsville , MD , is named in his honor . 
 Basil Hears A Noise a CBC special opening with a dedication to him . 
 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles II : The Secret of the <unk> and The Muppet Christmas Carol are both dedicated to him . 
 Stephen Lynch produced a song titled " Jim Henson 's Dead " , in which he pays homage to many of the characters from The Muppet Show and Sesame Street . 
 Henson featured in The American Adventure in Epcot at the Walt Disney World Resort . 
 Philip Roth often quotes Jim Henson in his Sabbath 's Theater as the " great regret " for Mickey Sabbath . 
 The Jim Henson Museum , located in Leland , Mississippi , features an assortment of original Muppet characters , official certificates from the Mississippi Legislature honoring Henson and his characters , and a statue of Kermit in the middle of the stream behind the museum . 
 The 1990 television special The Muppets Celebrate Jim Henson allowed the Muppets themselves to pay tribute to Henson . The special featured interviews with Steven Spielberg and others . 
 Celtic singer , musician , and songwriter Heather Alexander wrote a song titled " Storyteller " in 1990 as a tribute to Jim Henson , which harkens to his " Storyteller " series as well as his role as a modern storyteller . 
 Tom Smith 's Henson tribute song , " A Boy and His Frog " , won the Pegasus Award for Best <unk> Song in 1991 . 
 Henson was featured in Boyz II Men 's 1991 video , " It 's So Hard to Say Goodbye to Yesterday " . 
 Episode 2880 of Sesame Street ( which aired on November 15 , 1991 ) was dedicated in his memory , with a memorial card following the closing credits . 
 The classes of 1994 , 1998 , and 1999 at the University of Maryland , College Park , Henson 's alma mater , commissioned a life @-@ size statue of Henson and Kermit the Frog , which was dedicated on September 24 , 2003 , [ which would have been ] Henson 's 67th birthday . The statue cost $ 217 @,@ 000 , and is displayed outside Maryland 's student union . In 2006 , Maryland introduced 50 statues of their school mascot , Testudo the Terrapin , with various designs chosen by different sponsoring groups . Among them was <unk> , a statue by Washington , DC , artist Elizabeth Baldwin , designed to look like Kermit the Frog . 
 Kermit the Frog was named grand marshal of the 1996 Tournament of Roses Parade in Pasadena , California . 
 On the evening of October 25 , 2000 , Comedy Central had a banner sign that said : Jim Henson [ 1936 – 1990 ] . 
 In 2003 , Jim Henson was honored at the annual Norsk <unk> in Minot , North Dakota . 
 Oury <unk> , Thibaut Berland , and Damien Ferri wrote , directed , and animated a 3D tribute to Henson entitled Over Time that was shown as part of the 2005 Electronic Theater at SIGGRAPH . 
 On September 28 , 2005 , the U.S. Postal Service issued a sheet of commemorative stamps honoring Henson and the Muppets . 
 The Center for Puppetry Arts in Atlanta , Georgia , has acquired more than 700 puppets created by Henson and his studio , including some of the earliest Muppets . Many of these are displayed in the museum exhibit Jim Henson : Puppeteer . In September 2008 , the Center opened Jim Henson : Wonders From His Workshop , highlighting creations from Fraggle Rock , Labyrinth , and other later works . 
 On August 9 , 2011 , Jim Henson posthumously received the Disney Legends Award . Two of his characters , Kermit the Frog and Rowlf the Dog , performed " Rainbow Connection " in his honor . 
 On September 24 , 2011 , Leland renamed one of their bridges " The Rainbow Connection " to honor Henson and his work . He was also honored with a Google doodle on his 75th birthday ; the Google logo had six Muppets that were clickable using the " hand " buttons . 
 = = Muppet performance credits = = 
 Sam and Friends as Sam , Harry the Hipster , Kermit the Frog , Professor <unk> , Omar , Yorick , Pierre the French Rat , and others 
 Sesame Street as Ernie , Kermit the Frog , Guy Smiley , Dan , Henry , Lance , Captain Vegetable , Mr. Nose , The King , Stan , Harold Happy , Sammy the Snake , and others 
 Hey Cinderella ! as Kermit the Frog , and others 
 The Frog Prince as Kermit the Frog , and others 
 The Muppets Valentine Show as Wally , Kermit the Frog , Rowlf the Dog , Ernie , and others 
 The Muppet Show : Sex and Violence as Nigel , George Washington , The Swedish Chef , Dr. Teeth , Waldorf , Kermit the Frog , and others 
 The Muppet Show as Kermit the Frog , Rowlf the Dog , Dr. Teeth , Waldorf , The Swedish Chef , Link Hogthrob , The Newsman , and others 
 The Muppet Movie as Kermit the Frog , Rowlf the Dog , Dr. Teeth , Waldorf , Swedish Chef , and others 
 The Great Muppet Caper as Kermit the Frog , Rowlf the Dog , Dr. Teeth , Waldorf , Swedish Chef , The Newsman , and others 
 The Muppets Take Manhattan as Kermit the Frog , Rowlf the Dog , Dr. Teeth , Waldorf , Swedish Chef , The Newsman , Ernie , and others 
 Christmas Eve on Sesame Street as Kermit the Frog and Ernie 
 Emmet Otter 's Jug @-@ Band Christmas as Kermit the Frog , Harvey Beaver , Howard Snake , and Mayor Harrison Fox 
 Sesame Street Presents Follow That Bird as Ernie and Kermit the Frog 
 Fraggle Rock as Cantus the Minstrel and Convincing John 
 Big Bird in China as Ernie 
 Little Muppet Monsters as Kermit the Frog ( live @-@ action puppet only ) , Dr. Teeth 
 The Tale of the Bunny Picnic as the Dog 
 The Muppets : A Celebration of 30 Years as Kermit the Frog , Rowlf the Dog , Dr. Teeth , Waldorf , The Swedish Chef , Link Hogthrob , Ernie , Harry the Hipster , and others 
 The Christmas Toy as Jack @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Box and Kermit the Frog 
 A Muppet Family Christmas as Kermit the Frog , Rowlf the Dog , Dr. Teeth , Waldorf , Swedish Chef , The Newsman , Ernie , Guy Smiley , Baby Kermit , Baby Rowlf , and others 
 Sing @-@ Along , Dance @-@ Along , Do @-@ Along as Rowlf the Dog , Penguins , and Kermit the Frog 
 Sesame Street : 20 and Still Counting as Ernie , Kermit the Frog , and others 
 The Muppets at Walt Disney World as Kermit the Frog , Rowlf the Dog , Dr. Teeth , Waldorf , Link Hogthrob , and The Swedish Chef 
 Muppet * Vision 3D as Kermit the Frog , Waldorf , The Swedish Chef , Link Hogthrob , Rowlf the Dog , and others 
 = = Archive = = 
 The moving image collection of Jim Henson is held at the Academy Film Archive . The collection contains the film work of Jim Henson and the Jim Henson Company . 
 = Glacier Peak = 
 Glacier Peak or <unk> ( known in the Sauk Indian dialect of Lushootseed as " <unk> @-@ ko @-@ <unk> @-@ ba " or " <unk> " ) is the most isolated of the five major stratovolcanoes ( composite volcanoes ) of the Cascade Volcanic Arc in the U.S state of Washington . Located in the Glacier Peak Wilderness , the volcano is visible from the west in Seattle , and from the north in the higher areas of eastern suburbs of Vancouver such as Coquitlam and Port Coquitlam . The volcano is the fourth tallest peak in Washington state , and not as much is known about it compared to other volcanoes in the area . Local Native Americans have recognized Glacier Peak and other Washington volcanoes in their histories and stories . When foreign explorers reached the region , they learned basic information about surrounding landforms , but did not initially understand that Glacier Peak was a volcano . Positioned in Snohomish County , the volcano is only 70 miles ( 110 km ) northeast of Seattle . The only volcano closer to Seattle is Mount Rainier , but as Glacier Peak is set farther into the Cascades and almost 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) shorter , it is less noticeable than Mount Rainier . 
 Glacier Peak is one of the most active of Washington 's volcanoes . The volcano formed during the Pleistocene epoch , about one million years ago , and since the most recent ice age , it has produced some of largest and most explosive eruptions in the state . When continental ice sheets retreated from the region , Glacier Peak began to erupt regularly , erupting explosively five times in the past 3 @,@ 000 years . It has erupted repeatedly during at least six periods ; two of these eruptions have been among the largest in Washington . 
 = = Geology = = 
 Remnants of past , prehistoric lava domes are main components of the summit of the volcano , in addition to its false summit , Disappointment Peak . Past pyroclastic flow deposits are easily visible in river valleys near the volcano , likely caused by lava dome collapse , along with ridges found east of the summit consisting of ash cloud remains . On its western flank , the volcano also has a lahar , or mudflow deposit , which runs for about 35 kilometres ( 22 mi ) into the White Chuck River Valley around 14 @,@ 000 years ago . 10 other pyroclastic flow deposits are visible , all identified as relatively 10 @,@ 000 years old . There is also a considerably newer mudflow , about 5 @,@ 500 years old , which covers an area of 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) between the same river valley , along with two small incidents both under 3 @,@ 000 years old . Another lahar , of unidentified age , was rich in <unk> dacite ; and continued for 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) into the Sauk River . 
 There are also ash cloud deposits on the opposite eastern flank of the volcano . Studies of the mountain have to date been unable to find any correspondence with pyroclastic flows , but several past mudflows have been identified . In the Dusty Creek , located by the mountain , there is a lahar at least 6 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) thick , containing pyroclastic flow deposits and other mudflows . However , this large mudflow is part of a 300 metres ( 980 ft ) thick concentration of past incidents at the volcano that spans the Dusty and Chocolate Creek . In the area at least ten cubic kilometers of lithic debris are contained . Tephra deposits are for the most part constrained to the left flank of the volcano , and at least nine past incidents have been identified . These form several layers of tephra constructing the mountain . Smaller eruptions involving tephra occurred between 6 @,@ 900 @-@ 5 @,@ 500 years ago , 3 @,@ 450 – 200 years ago , and as recent as 316 – 90 years ago . 
 On the mountain , three additional cinder cones , <unk> Gap , Indian Pass , and White Chuck , are located about 1 @,@ 800 m ( 5 @,@ 900 ft ) up . The volcano has also caused such thermal events such as hot springs . There were three hot springs on the mountain : Gamma , Kennedy , and Sulphur , but Kennedy Hot Springs was destroyed and buried in a slide . 
 = = = Tectonic setting = = = 
 The volcano is located in Washington , and is one of the five major stratovolcanoes there . Situated in the Cascade Volcanic Arc , the volcano was created by subduction of the oceanic Juan de Fuca Plate under the North American Plate . Convergence between the two continues at a rate of 4 centimetres ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) per year . This range has been volcanically active for about 36 million years , and the rocks that make up its volcanoes are between 55 and 42 million years old . Eruptions within the range are irregular and do not occur all at once . In an attempt to organize the volcanoes by age , scientists typically divide them into the High Cascades , younger volcanoes , and the Western Cascades , consisting of the older volcanoes . However , the vents in Washington are all of different ages so none of its volcanoes are included in either of the sections . 
 = = History = = 
 Around the area , there were many Native Americans , and along with other Washington volcanoes , the mountain was recognized by them as a spirit . When European @-@ American explorers reached the area , they learned about the mountain , though only partially , through local legends . Although the local people described Glacier Peak as a vital part of their storytelling and beliefs ; when other volcanoes in the area were mapped , Glacier Peak was left out . In 1850 natives mentioned the volcano to naturalist George Gibbs saying that the volcano had once " smoked " . In 1898 the volcano was finally documented on a map . 
 Native Americans also used the area around the Cascades for their agriculture , leading them to often congregate in the region . As a result , gold miners eventually reached the area in the 1870s @-@ 1890s , searching for resources and rich land . The first white man recorded to observe the mountain — Daniel Lindsley — was an employee of the Northern Pacific Railroad Company searching for possible railroad routes when he saw it in 1870 . 
 = = Eruptive history = = 
 Despite its elevation of 10 @,@ 541 feet ( 3 @,@ 213 m ) , Glacier Peak is a small stratovolcano . Its relatively high summit is a consequence of its location atop a high ridge , but its volcanic portion extends only 1 @,@ 600 – 3 @,@ 200 feet ( 500 – 1 @,@ 000 m ) above the underlying ridge . Another Cascade Arc volcano with similar geomorphology is the Mount Meager massif in southwestern British Columbia , Canada , which is situated on a 1 @,@ 300 ft ( 400 m ) ridge of <unk> , crystalline and metamorphic rock . 
 Of the five major volcanoes in Washington , only Glacier Peak and Mount St. Helens have had large eruptions in the past 15 @,@ 000 years . Since both volcanoes generate magma of dacitic origin , the viscous magma builds up since it cannot flow through the eruptive vent . Gradually , the pressure grows , culminating in an explosion that ejects materials such as tephra , which in its simplest form , is ash . 
 <unk> and radiocarbon dating indicate that Glacier Peak eruptions occurred in 1700 AD ± 100 years , 1300 AD ± 300 years , 900 AD ± 50 years , 200 AD ± 50 years , 850 BC , 3150 BC , and in <unk> BC . The Volcanic Explosivity Index ( VEI ) for three of these was 2 to 4 , small compared to the 5 of the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens . They were characterized mainly by a central vent eruption , followed by an explosive eruption . These eruptions varied in outcome ; some produced lahars , some pyroclastic flows , and others lava domes . 
 A little more than 13 @,@ 000 years ago , a sequence of nine tephra eruptions occurred within a period of less than a few hundred years . Associated with these eruptions were pyroclastic flows . Mixed with snow , ice and water , these formed lahars that raced into three nearby rivers , filling their valleys with deep deposits . Subsequently the mudflows drained into both the North Fork of the Stillaguamish River ( at that time an outlet of the Sauk River ) and Skagit Rivers . In Arlington , 60 miles ( 97 km ) downstream , lahars deposited seven feet of sediment . Subsequent erosion of lahar deposits near Darrington led to the current river system with the Stillaguamish River separated from the Sauk / Skagit Rivers . Lahar debris was deposited along both the Skagit and Stillaguamish Rivers all the way to Puget Sound . A small portion of the erupted tephra was deposited locally . However , most of the tephra reached higher levels of the atmosphere , and was transported by the wind hundreds of miles . Deposits from this congregation were as thick as 1 foot ( 0 @.@ 30 m ) near Chelan and 0 @.@ 3 inches ( 7 @.@ 6 mm ) near Missoula , Montana . 
 Since these events , Glacier Peak has produced several lahars . The largest events were 5 @,@ 900 and 1 @,@ 800 years ago and were associated with dome @-@ building eruptions . In both cases , the lahars traveled down the Skagit River to Puget Sound . 
 = = = Hazards = = = 
 When lahars reach populated areas , they can bury structures and people . An example was the Armero tragedy at Nevado del Ruiz where 23 @,@ 000 died from an enormous mudflow . Lahars from Glacier Peak pose a similar threat to the small communities of Darrington and Concrete and a lesser threat to the larger and rapidly growing towns of Mount Vernon and Burlington , as well as other communities along the lower Skagit and Stillaguamish Rivers . A 2005 study conducted by the United States Geological Survey identified nine Cascade volcanoes , including Glacier Peak , as " very @-@ high @-@ threat volcanoes with inadequate monitoring " . At the time of the study , only one seismometer was installed on Glacier Peak that had not " worked in two years " . 
 = = Glaciers = = 
 Eleven significant glaciers cover Glacier Peak . When C.E. Rusk first saw these glaciers in 1906 they were beginning to retreat , but were still very advanced . The average retreat of Glacier Peak glaciers from the Little Ice Age to the 1958 positions was 5 @,@ 381 feet ( 1 @,@ 640 m ) . Richard Hubley noted that North Cascade glaciers began to advance in the early 1950s , after 30 years of rapid retreat . The advance was in response to a sharp rise in winter precipitation and a decline in summer temperature beginning in 1944 . Ten of the fifteen glaciers around Glacier Peak advanced , including all of the glaciers directly on the mountain 's slopes . Advances of Glacier Peak glaciers ranged from 50 to 1 @,@ 575 feet ( 15 to 480 m ) and culminated in 1978 . All eleven Glacier Peak glaciers that advanced during the 1950 – 79 period emplaced identifiable maximum advance terminal moraines . From 1984 to 2005 , the average retreat of eight Glacier Peak glaciers from their recent maximum positions was 1 @,@ 017 feet ( 310 m ) . Milk Lake Glacier , on the north flank of the mountain , melted away altogether in the 1990s . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 The Pacific Crest Trail passes near Glacier Peak . The Suiattle River crossing is a well known feature on the Pacific Crest Trail ( PCT ) as it passes through the area . The Suiattle PCT crossing used to have a bridge crossing until it was flooded out by storms in late 2003 . 
 The first person to climb the mountain was Thomas <unk> , along with a group of United States Geological Survey scientists , in 1897 . The volcano is also available to skiers . To reach the mountain itself , it takes 5 miles of walking along the White Chuck River Trail ( Forest Service Trail No. 643 ) and up the <unk> Glacier . The trail is reached via Forest Service Road No. 23 . Mainly , the slopes consist of black diamonds for both the ascent and descent . 
 = Henry Nock = 
 Henry Nock ( 1741 – 1804 ) was a British inventor and engineer of the Napoleonic period , best known as a gunsmith . Nock produced many innovative weapons including the <unk> lock and the seven @-@ barrelled volley gun , although he did not invent the latter despite it commonly being known as the Nock gun . He was a major supplier to the military during the Napoleonic wars . His high quality duelling pistols and double @-@ barrelled shotguns were much sought after and it is largely through Nock that the latter became the weapon of choice for hunters . 
 As well as supplying the military and civilian markets , Nock made expensive pieces for the aristocracy and royalty and was an appointed gunmaker to the king . Nock 's business eventually became Wilkinson Sword , a company which today makes razor blades and other shaving equipment , and , until very recently , made ceremonial officer 's swords for the British Army . 
 = = Guns = = 
 Nock produced many innovative weapons . In 1793 he made a double @-@ barrelled pistol with a removable stock for the Royal Horse Artillery . However , this weapon was impractical with the stock removed and was usually used as a carbine . In 1797 Nock put into production a 9 @-@ inch pistol ( pattern 1796 ) for heavy dragoons with a calibre matching their carbines . Some of these pistols had a novel lock designed by Nock , originally intended for an abandoned musket design requested by the Duke of Richmond in 1786 while serving as Master @-@ General of the Ordnance . The new lock could be dismantled by removable pins rather than the previous more cumbersome and time @-@ consuming screws . The pattern 1796 had no butt @-@ plate and the ramrod was stored in the holster rather than attached to the barrel . This feature made it unpopular with users and many guns were modified to take a conventional swivel ramrod . 
 The name of Nock is perhaps best known today for the multi @-@ barrelled Nock gun due to it being featured in several films . These include uses of this volley gun by the characters Patrick Harper in Sharpe and Jim Bowie in The Alamo . Nock was the manufacturer , but not the inventor , of this weapon . Despite its portrayal in film , this weapon was not very practical as a hand weapon due its very severe recoil , often causing injuries , and the time needed to reload the seven barrels . It was necessary to abandon the rifling of the early prototypes and reduce the charge to keep this problem manageable . Intended as a naval weapon fired from the rigging to repel boarders on the deck , it was retired by the Royal Navy in 1804 . Nock also produced some experimental rotating multi @-@ barrelled guns to fire one barrel at a time . 
 In his own day , Nock was most well known for his double @-@ barrelled shotguns . He was not the first to make weapons in such a format , but their high quality and Nock 's many innovations led to shotguns becoming highly popular as a hunting gun , especially after Nock became gun maker to the king . Nock was also well known for his duelling pistols . 
 Nock made weapons covering the whole field from pistols to muskets . The great variety is perhaps illustrated by his coach blunderbuss which , like naval pistols , had a more corrosion resistant brass barrel . Such weapons were intended to be used at short range and did not take a large enough charge to require iron barrels . Nock continued to innovate until his death – late in life he was making breech loading muskets . 
 = = Career = = 
 Nock started out as a locksmith , but he took out a patent for a gun lock in 1775 . Nock was not yet enrolled in the Worshipful Company of Gunmakers and could not trade under his own name . He formed Nock , Jover & Co. with William Jover , a Master of the Gunmakers Company and the patent bore Jover 's name as well as Nock 's along with one John Green . War with the American colonies provided a strong market for Nock 's products . 
 James Wilson came to Nock in 1779 to make the prototypes for his volley gun design . Nock won the subsequent competitive bid for the production of the gun . The weapon is consequently commonly referred to as the Nock gun . Nock also produced some volley guns and volley pistols for the civilian market but in very small numbers . This included a set of these weapons for the Royal Household which is still in the Queen 's collection today . This set is not standard production . It has , for instance , silver mounts by Mark Bock , a London silversmith . 
 Following the conclusion of the American Revolutionary War , there was a fall in the demand for military small arms . In this period Nock turned to the civilian market , but also had profitable orders for locks for light to medium calibre ( 3 – 12 pounder ) naval guns . 
 In 1784 Nock finally became a Freeman of the Gunmakers Company . A few years later the French Revolution and the subsequent Napoleonic Wars ensured that Nock was not short of government business . The Duke of Richmond preferred Nock over his competitors for his innovations , particularly the <unk> lock . Nock began delivering muskets in 1792 but orders for the regular army dried up because Nock 's non @-@ standard design took too long to make and used a different calibre ammunition . Thereafter Nock concentrated on supplying muskets to local militia preparing for an expected invasion . In 1804 the government placed a contract with Nock to replace all the Nock locks on their stock of Duke of Richmond pattern muskets with standard ones . Although the Nock locks were recognised as being superior , the need for standardisation took precedence . 
 In 1789 Nock was appointed gunmaker @-@ in @-@ ordinary to King George III , largely as a result of his patented breech for hunting guns and other inventions . In 1802 Nock became Master of the Gunmakers Company . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Nock 's will was generous to his employees , he specified that his business was to be continued for six months for their benefit . He also left as much as £ 100 ( inflation adjusted £ 7 @,@ 900 ) to some employees . 
 A nephew of Henry , Samuel Nock , was an apprentice under him . Samuel also proved to be inventive , holding a patent himself . Samuel became <unk> @-@ in @-@ Ordinary in succession to George III , George IV , William IV and Victoria and in 1836 became a Master of the Gunmakers Company . However , Henry Nock 's own business was continued by his foreman and son @-@ in @-@ law James Wilkinson . Wilkinson became <unk> @-@ in @-@ Ordinary to the king in 1805 . Contracts with the East India Company ensured the success of the business . The name became James Wilkinson & Son around 1818 when James ' son Henry joined . Henry died in 1864 but the company continued making firearms and bladed weapons and became known as Wilkinson Sword . A series of new laws in the UK , starting with the Pistols Act 1903 , restricted the sale of firearms to the public . This pushed the company into changing direction and they henceforth concentrated on razor blades and other domestic products . They continued to produce swords for the British Army and for royal ceremonial purposes until 2005 when the sword manufacturing plant in Acton , West London , was closed . The company continues to make shaving and gardening products . 
 = Eddie Bayers = 
 Eddie Bayers ( born January 28 , 1949 ) is an American session drummer who has played on 150 gold and platinum albums . He received the Academy of Country Music ' Drummer of the Year Award ' for eight straight years , and has three times won the Nashville Music Awards ' Drummer of the Year ' . He is also a member of two bands : The Players , and The Notorious Cherry Bombs . 
 = = Early life = = 
 The son of a career military man , Bayers moved around as a child , originally from Maryland then spending time in Nashville , North Africa , Oakland , and Philadelphia . His early musical training was as a classical pianist studying Bach , Beethoven , and Mozart . During his college years in Oakland , California he jammed with future stars Jerry Garcia , and Tom and John Fogerty and developed an appreciation for the creative aspects of music . After a short stint in a New Jersey show band he decided to move to Nashville . 
 = = Session work = = 
 Arriving in Nashville in 1973 , Bayers became the house keyboard player at the Carousel Club where he met drummer Larrie Londin who inspired him to take up drumming . His drumming was influenced by soul drummers such as Al Jackson , Jr. and Clyde Stubblefield . He became the staff drummer at Audio Media Studios along with guitarist Paul Worley , keyboardist Dennis Burnside , and bassist Jack Clement playing on records by Tanya Tucker , John Denver , Ricky Skaggs and George Strait . He has since worked with the likes of The Beach Boys , Garth Brooks , Glen Campbell , Kenny Chesney , Peter Frampton , Vince Gill , Rebecca Lynn Howard , Julio Iglesias , Alan Jackson , Elton John , Mark Knopfler , Uncle <unk> , Bob Seger , Sting , Steve Winwood , and Trisha Yearwood . He has also produced Rosanne Cash 's album Interiors , A Glen Campbell Christmas , and the soundtrack for A Thing Called Love . 
 = = Bands = = 
 = = = The Players = = = 
 In 2002 Bayers formed a band , The Players , with fellow studio musicians Brent Mason , Paul Franklin , John Hobbs , Michael Rhodes . The group released a live DVD , Live in Nashville , featuring their own performances along with guest appearances by Peter Frampton , Shawn Colvin , Travis Tritt , Vince Gill , and Jim Horn . 
 = = = The Notorious Cherry Bombs = = = 
 Bayers replaced his former mentor , drummer Larrie Londin , in a reunited Notorious Cherry Bombs for a 2003 ASCAP Country Awards dinner . The band decided to stay together and has released The Notorious Cherry Bombs which was nominated for <unk> in both the ' Best Country Performance By A Duo Or Group With Vocal ' and ' Best Country Song ' categories . Along with Bayers the band consists of Vince Gill , Rodney Crowell , Hank DeVito , Richard Bennett , and Michael Rhodes . 
 = = = The Medallion Band = = = 
 An all @-@ star lineup was assembled to be the backing band at the 2010 Country Music Hall of Fame induction ceremony dubbed the Medallion Band . Bayers served as drummer and was accompanied by keyboardist and music director John Hobbs , pedal steel player Paul Franklin , electric guitarist Steve Gibson , bassist Michael Rhodes , fiddler Deanie Richardson , tuba player Larry Paxton , background vocalists Dawn Sears and Jeff White , and acoustic guitarist Biff Watson . Later that year Bayers and a slightly revamped Medallion Band accompanied Shawn Camp in honoring Hall of Fame inductee Jimmy Dean . Bayers played the same role for the 2011 Country Music Hall of Fame induction ceremony with the band now dubbed the Medallion All @-@ Stars . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 Bayers received the ' Academy of Country Music Drummer of the Year Award ' 13 times , ' Nashville Music Awards Drummer of the Year ' three times , and one of the 10 greatest session drummers of all time by Drum ! magazine . He has been nominated for the ' CMA Musician of the Year ' ten times but has yet to bring home the prize . 
 = = Music industry = = 
 In addition to his work as a musician , Bayers has contributed to the recording industry as a 12 @-@ year member of the Board of Governors for NARAS . He is also the part @-@ owner of the Money Pit recording studio . The number one singles " What I Really Meant to Say " by Cyndi Thomson and " Blessed " by Martina McBride were both recorded at his studio . 
 = = Selected discography = = 
 = Edwin Donayre = 
 General Edwin Donayre ( born January 8 , 1952 ) is a retired Peruvian military officer and former Commanding General of the Peruvian Army ( 2006 – 2008 ) . General Donayre previously served as commander of the Center Military Region , the Southern Military Region and the 2nd Infantry Brigade . He assumed the role of commanding general on December 5 , 2006 , replacing General César <unk> , who resigned amid accusations of corruption . During his tenure , Donayre was accused of corruption and obstructing inquiries into human rights violations . He was also at the center of an international controversy when a video surfaced in the media showing him making anti @-@ Chilean remarks at a private party . He retired on December 5 , 2008 and was replaced by General Otto <unk> . 
 = = Military career = = 
 Edwin Donayre was born on January 8 , 1952 in the city of Ayacucho in the highlands of Peru . He attended San Juan Bosco school , a Salesian institution in his hometown , and studied at a seminary for two years before studying two years of Chemical Engineering at the San Cristóbal of <unk> University . Donayre 's military career started at the Chorrillos Military School , where his first year grades earned him a scholarship to continue his formation in Argentina . At the National Military College in Buenos Aires he graduated with honors as a military engineer . In active duty Donayre has served four times in regions under state of emergency due to Shining Path guerrilla activity and five times in frontier regions . He has held several command posts , among them commander of the 20th Combat Engineer Battalion , director of the Army Engineer School , commander of the 2nd Infantry Brigade , commander of the Southern Military Region , and commander of the Central Military Region . 
 = = Commanding General = = 
 Donayre 's tenure as Commanding General of the army was controversial from the start due to corruption allegations and an international incident with Chile . Opposition leader <unk> <unk> criticized Donayre 's designation as irregular because at that time he was not serving as general of any of the three major army divisions as stipulated by Peruvian law . As commander of the Army , Donayre was also accused of acquiring 50 @,@ 000 American @-@ made MREs — military rations — to supply troops deployed against Shining Path guerrillas in the <unk> and <unk> river valleys , instead of acquiring cheaper , locally @-@ made alternatives . An attempt to buy 50 @,@ 000 more rations led to an inquiry by the Ministry of Defense . 
 According to a report by the army inspector general , Francisco Vargas , Donayre requested 80 @,@ 000 gallons of fuel without clear justification when he was commander of the Southern Military Region , between January and September 2006 , and diverted part of it to army headquarters in Lima . This led to an investigation by the anti @-@ corruption prosecutor , Marlene <unk> , but , despite being summoned six times , Donayre did not show up at her office . He finally attended her request on November 25 , 2008 ; in his testimony he denied any wrongdoing and claimed that the Southern Military Region actually received less fuel under his command than in the previous year . 
 The general 's stance on human rights issues has also been quite controversial . It has been reported that he was behind the Army 's refusal to provide any information on the 1984 massacre at the village of <unk> . Requests issued on June 2008 by prosecutor Rubén López for a detailed report on the military personnel deployed there at that time were answered the following month by the Defense Ministry stating that the Army did not have any information on the subject in its archives . Donayre also joined a campaign to raise funds to defend armed forces personnel accused of committing human rights abuses during the internal conflict in Peru . 
 = = International controversy = = 
 Donayre became the center of an international controversy on November 24 , 2008 , when Peruvian media showed a YouTube video in which the general said " We are not going to let Chileans pass by ( ... ) [ A ] Chilean who enters will not leave . Or will leave in a coffin . And if there aren 't sufficient coffins , there will be plastic bags " . The video , dated to 2006 or 2007 , was recorded during a party at a friend 's house attended by army officials and civilians . These comments caused widespread indignation in Chile , making headlines in the El Mercurio newspaper . The Peruvian president , Alan García , called his Chilean counterpart , Michelle Bachelet , to explain that these remarks did not reflect official Peruvian policy . Bachelet declared herself satisfied with the explanations . 
 On November 28 , in response to this incident , a Chilean government spokesman stated that a scheduled visit to Chile by the Peruvian defense minister , Antero Flores Aráoz , might be inopportune given the circumstances . The following day , Flores Aráoz announced his decision to postpone his trip after conferring with the Foreign Affairs Minister , José García Belaúnde . Several members of the Peruvian government commented on the spokesman 's remarks including president García who said the country " did not accept pressure or orders from anybody outside of Peru " . Donayre defended the video , declaring that Peruvian citizens have a right to say whatever they want at private gatherings and that even though he is scheduled to retire on December 5 he will not be forced to resign early under external pressure . As a consequence of these exchanges , tensions between Peru and Chile rose again ; president Bachelet met with top aides on December 1 to discuss the matter and possible courses of action . Meanwhile , in Lima , Congressman Gustavo Espinoza became the center of attention as the main suspect of leaking the video to Chilean press and politicians . Donayre ended his tenure as Commanding General of the Army on December 5 , 2008 , as expected ; president Alan García appointed General Otto <unk> as his replacement . 
 = Super Mario Kart = 
 Super Mario Kart ( <unk> , Sūpā Mario Kāto ) is a 1992 go @-@ kart racing video game developed and published by Nintendo for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System video game console . The first game of the Mario Kart series , it was launched in Japan on August 27 , 1992 , in North America on September 1 , 1992 , and in Europe on January 21 , 1993 . Selling nine million copies worldwide , the game went on to become the third best selling SNES game of all time . Super Mario Kart was re @-@ released on the Wii 's Virtual Console in Japan on June 9 , 2009 , North America on November 23 , 2009 , and in Europe on April 2 , 2010 . Super Mario Kart was re @-@ released again on the Wii U 's Virtual Console in Japan on June 19 , 2013 , Europe on March 27 , 2014 , and in North America on August 6 , 2014 . Super Mario Kart was released once more on the 3DS 's Virtual Console . 
 In Super Mario Kart , the player takes control of one of eight Mario series characters , each with differing capabilities . In single player mode players can race against computer controlled characters in multi @-@ race cups over three difficulty levels . During the races , offensive and speed boosting power @-@ ups can be used to gain an advantage . Alternatively players can race against the clock in a Time Trial mode . In multi @-@ player mode two players can simultaneously take part in the cups or can race against each other one @-@ on @-@ one in Match Race mode . In a third multiplayer mode – Battle Mode – the aim is to defeat the other players by attacking them with power @-@ ups , destroying balloons which surround each kart . 
 Super Mario Kart received positive reviews and was praised for its presentation , innovation and use of Mode 7 graphics . It has been ranked among the best games of all time by several organizations including Edge , IGN , The Age and GameSpot , while Guinness World Records has named it as the top console game ever . It is often credited with creating the kart @-@ racing subgenre of video games , leading other developers to try to duplicate its success . The game is also seen as having been key to expanding the Mario series into non @-@ platforming games . This diversity has led to it becoming the best @-@ selling game franchise of all time . Several sequels to Super Mario Kart have been released , for consoles , handhelds and in arcades , each enjoying critical and commercial success . While some elements have developed throughout the series , the core experience from Super Mario Kart has remained intact . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Super Mario Kart is a kart racing game featuring several single and multiplayer modes . During the game , players take control of one of eight Mario franchise characters and drive karts around tracks with a Mario franchise theme . In order for them to begin driving , Lakitu will come in with the traffic light hanging on a fishing pole , which starts the countdown . When the light turns green , the race or battle officially begins . During a race , the player 's viewpoint is from behind his or her kart . The goal of the game is to either finish a race ahead of other racers , who are controlled by the computer and other players , or complete a circuit in the fastest time . There is also a battle mode in which the aim is to attack the karts of the other human players . 
 Tiles marked with question marks are arrayed on the race tracks ; they give special abilities ( power @-@ ups ) to a player 's kart if the vehicle passes over them . Power @-@ ups , such as the ability to throw shells and bananas , allow racers to hit others with the objects , causing them to spin and lose control . A kart that obtains the star power @-@ up is temporary invulnerable to attack . Computer players have specific special powers associated with each character , that they are able to use throughout the race . Lines of coins are found on the tracks in competitive race modes . By running over these coins , a kart collects them and increases its top speed . Having coins also helps players when their kart is hit by another : instead of spinning and losing control , they lose a coin . Coins are also lost when karts are struck by power @-@ ups or fall off the tracks . 
 The game features advanced maneuvers such as power sliding and hopping . Power sliding allows a kart to maintain its speed while turning , although executing the maneuver for too long causes the kart to spin . Hopping helps a kart execute tighter turns : the kart makes a short hop and turns in the air , speeding off in the new direction when it lands . Reviewers praised Super Mario Kart 's gameplay , describing the battle mode as " addictive " and the single player gameplay as " incredible " . IGN stated that the gameplay mechanics defined the genre . 
 = = = Modes = = = 
 Super Mario Kart has two single @-@ player modes , Mario Kart GP ( which stands for Grand Prix ) and Time Trial . In Mario Kart GP , one player is required to race against seven computer @-@ controlled characters in a series of five races which are called cups . Initially there are three cups available – the Mushroom Cup , Flower Cup and Star Cup – at two difficulty levels , <unk> and 100cc . By winning all three of the cups at the 100cc level , a fourth cup – the Special Cup – is unlocked . Winning all four cups at 100cc unlocks a new difficulty level , <unk> . Each cup consists of five five @-@ lap races , each taking place on a distinct track . In order to continue through a cup , a position of fourth or higher must be achieved in each race . If a player finishes in fifth to eighth position , they are " ranked out " and the race must be replayed – at the cost of one of a limited number of lives – until a placing of fourth or above is achieved . If the player has no lives when they rank out , the game is over . Points are accrued by finishing in the top four positions in a race ; first to fourth place receive nine , six , three and one points . If a player finished in the same position three times in a row , then an extra life is awarded . The racer with the highest number of points after all five races have been completed wins the cup . In time trial mode , players race against the clock through the same tracks that are present in Mario Kart GP mode , attempting to set the fastest time possible . 
 Super Mario Kart also has three multiplayer modes ; Mario Kart GP , Match Race and Battle Mode . The multiplayer modes support two players and the second player uses the bottom half of the screen which is used as a map in the single player modes . Mario Kart GP is the same as in single player , the only difference being that there are now two human controlled and six computer controlled drivers . Match Race involves the two players going head to head on a track of their choice without any opponents . In Battle Mode , the two players again go head to head , but this time in one of four dedicated Battle Mode courses . Each player starts with three balloons around their kart which can be popped by power @-@ ups fired by the other player . The first player to have all three of their balloons popped loses . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Super Mario Kart features eight playable characters from the Mario series – Mario , Luigi , Princess Peach , Yoshi , Bowser , Donkey Kong Jr . , Koopa Troopa and Toad . Each character 's kart has different capabilities with differing levels of top speed , acceleration and handling . Mario , Luigi , Peach , Yoshi , Bowser and Toad returned in all of the subsequent Mario Kart games starting with Mario Kart 64 . During races , computer @-@ controlled characters have special items , or superpowers , which they are able to use . These powers are specific to each character ; for example , Yoshi drops eggs which cause players who hit them to lose coins and spin , while Donkey Kong Jr. throws bananas . 
 The characters are rendered as sprites portrayed from sixteen different angles . The sprites were described as " detailed " by Nintendo Magazine System when the game was first reviewed and were thought to contribute to the " spectacular " graphics of the game as a whole . More recently , Nintendojo called the sprites " not @-@ so @-@ pretty " when they are rendered at a distance , and IGN has commented on the dated look of the game . Super Mario Kart was the first game to feature playable characters from the Mario series other than Mario or Luigi in a non @-@ platforming game and the selection and different attributes of the characters is regarded as one of the game 's strengths , IGN describing a well @-@ balanced " all @-@ star cast " . All of the characters present in Super Mario Kart have gone on to appear in all of the later games in the series , except for Koopa Troopa , who has only appeared intermittently after being replaced by Wario in Mario Kart 64 . Donkey Kong Jr. was replaced by Donkey Kong , who has appeared in every Mario Kart game since . This was Donkey Kong Jr . ' s last appearance as a playable character , except for the Mario Tennis sub @-@ series , including installments on the Nintendo 64 and Virtual Boy . 
 = = = Tracks = = = 
 The tracks in Super Mario Kart are based on locations in Super Mario World such as Donut Plains . Each of the four cups contains five different tracks for a total of twenty unique tracks , additionally there are four unique Battle Mode courses . The course outlines are marked out by impassable barriers and feature a variety of bends ranging from sharp hairpins to wide curves which players can power slide around . Numerous obstacles themed from the Mario series appear , such as <unk> in the Bowser 's Castle tracks , the Cheep @-@ <unk> from Super Mario World in Koopa Beach and pipe barriers which are found in the Mario Circuit tracks . Other features include off @-@ road sections which slow down the karts such as the mud bogs in the <unk> Island tracks . Each single player track is littered with coins and power up tiles , as well as turbo tiles which give the karts a boost of speed and jumps which launch the karts into the air . 
 The tracks have received positive commentary with GameSpy describing them as wonderfully designed and IGN calling them perfect . When naming its top five Mario Kart tracks of all time in 2008 , 1UP.com named Battle Mode Course 4 at number three and Rainbow Road – along with its subsequent versions in the series – at number one . The track themes in Super Mario Kart influenced later games in the series ; recurring themes that first appeared in Super Mario Kart include haunted tracks , Bowser 's castle and Rainbow Road . Some of the tracks from Super Mario Kart have been duplicated in later games . All twenty of the original tracks are unlockable as an extra feature in the Game Boy Advance sequel Mario Kart : Super Circuit . Remakes of Mario Circuit 1 , Donut Plains 1 , Koopa Beach 2 and <unk> Island 2 appear as part of the Retro Grand Prix series in Mario Kart DS , remakes of Ghost Valley 2 , Mario Circuit 3 , and Battle Course 4 appear as part of the Retro Grand Prix and battles in Mario Kart Wii , remakes of Mario Circuit 2 and Rainbow Road appear as part of the Retro Grand Prix in Mario Kart 7 , and remake of Donut Plains 3 and once again , Rainbow Road appear as part of the Retro Grand Prix and battles in Mario Kart 8 . 
 = = Development = = 
 Super Mario Kart was produced by Shigeru Miyamoto and directed by Tadashi Sugiyama and Hideki Konno . In an interview Miyamoto has said that the development team originally set out to produce a game capable of displaying two players on the same game screen simultaneously . In the same interview Konno stated that development started with a desire to create a two player racing game in contrast to the single player gameplay of SNES launch title F @-@ Zero . The team found that due to limitations of the SNES hardware , the strong focus on multiplayer prevented the inclusions of tracks as elaborate as those found in F @-@ Zero . Computer and Video Games suggest that this initial emphasis on creating a two player experience is the reason for the game 's horizontal split @-@ screen during single player modes . 
 The intention to create the racing modes of the game had been present from the start of the project and Battle Mode was developed from the desire to create a one @-@ on @-@ one mode where victory was not determined simply by competing for rank . The game did not start out as a Mario series game and the first prototype featured a generic man in overalls in the kart ; the team decided that characters three heads tall would best suit the design of the karts . They did not decide on incorporating Mario series characters into the game until two or three months after the start of development . The choice was made after the development team , when observing how one kart looked to another driving past it , decided to see what it would look like with Mario in the kart . Thinking that having Mario in the kart looked better than previous designs , the idea of a Mario themed racing game was born . 
 Notable in the development of Super Mario Kart was its use of Mode 7 graphics . First seen in F @-@ Zero , Mode 7 is a form of texture mapping available on the SNES which allows a plane to be rotated and scaled freely , achieving a pseudo @-@ three @-@ dimensional appearance . 1UP.com have credited the use of Mode 7 with giving the game graphics which at the time of release were considered to be " breathtaking " . Retrospective reflection on the Mode 7 visuals was mixed , with IGN stating that the once revolutionary technology now looks " crude and <unk> " while the Video Game Bible describes them as " beautiful " and adding to the game . Super Mario Kart featured a DSP ( Digital Signal Processor ) chip ; <unk> were used in SNES games as they provided a better handling of floating point calculations to assist with three @-@ dimensional maths . The DSP @-@ 1 chip that was used in Super Mario Kart went on to be the most popular DSP chip to be used in SNES games . The music for the title was created by composer Soyo Oka . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Super Mario Kart received critical acclaim and proved to be a commercial success ; it received a Player 's Choice release after selling one million copies and eventually went on to sell nine million copies to become the third best selling game ever for the SNES . Aggregate scoring sites GameRankings and MobyGames both give an average of more than 90 percent . Critics praised the game 's Mode 7 graphics ; in 1992 Nintendo Magazine System described them as superb and the graphics have since been described as among the best ever seen on the SNES . Another aspect of the game to have been praised is its gameplay , which Thunderbolt has described as the " deepest [ and ] most addictive ... to be found on the SNES console " . Nintendo Magazine System showed a preference for the multiplayer modes of the game and stated that while the " single player mode becomes dull quickly " the " two @-@ player mode won 't lose appeal " . Retrospective reviews of the game have been positive with perfect scores given by review sites including Thunderbolt and <unk> . The use of the style and characters from the Mario franchise was also praised as well as the individual characteristics of each racer . Mean Machines describes the game as having " struck gold " in a way that no other – not even its sequels – has matched and GameSpot named the game as one of the greatest games of all time for its innovation , gameplay and visual style . 
 Since being released Super Mario Kart has been listed among the best games ever made several times . IGN ranked it as the 15th best game ever in 2005 , describing it as " the original karting masterpiece " and as the 23rd best game ever in 2007 , discussing its originality at time of release . The Age placed it at number 19 on their list of the 50 best games in 2005 and in 2007 Edge ranked Super Mario Kart at number 14 on a list of their 100 best games , noting its continued influence on video game design . The game is also included in Yahoo ! Games UK 's list of the hundred greatest games of all time which praises the appealing characters and power ups and 1UP.com 's " Essential 50 " , a list of the fifty most important games ever made . The game placed 13th in Official Nintendo Magazine 's 100 greatest Nintendo games of all time . Guinness World Records ranked it at number 1 on a list of the top 50 console games of all time based on initial impact and lasting legacy . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Super Mario Kart has been credited with inventing the " kart racing " subgenre of video gaming and soon after its release several other developers attempted to duplicate its success . In 1994 , less than two years after the release of Super Mario Kart , Sega released Sonic Drift ; a kart racing game featuring characters from the Sonic the Hedgehog series . Also in 1994 Ubisoft released Street Racer , a kart racing game for the SNES and Mega Drive / Genesis which included a four player mode not present in Super Mario Kart . Apogee Software released Wacky Wheels for PC . Future games that followed in the mould of Super Mario Kart include South Park Rally , Konami Krazy Racers , Diddy Kong Racing , Sonic & Sega All @-@ Stars Racing and several racing games in the Crash Bandicoot series . Response to the karting games released since Super Mario Kart has been mixed , with GameSpot describing them as tending to be bad while 1UP.com notes that countless developers have tried to improve upon the Mario Kart formula without success . 
 Super Mario Kart is also credited as being the first non @-@ platforming game to feature multiple playable characters from the Mario franchise . As well as several sequels Nintendo has released numerous other sporting and non @-@ sporting Mario spin @-@ offs since Super Mario Kart ; a trend in part accredited to the commercial and critical success of the game . The Mario characters have appeared in many sports games including those relating to basketball , baseball , golf , tennis and soccer . Non @-@ sporting franchises using the Mario characters have also been created , including the Super Smash Bros. series of fighting games and the Mario Party series of board game based , party games . Mario series characters have also made cameos in games from other series such as SSX on Tour and NBA Street V3 , both published by EA Sports . The genre spanning nature of the Mario series that was sparked off by the success of Super Mario Kart has been described as key to the success and longevity of the franchise ; keeping fans interested despite the infrequency of traditional Mario platforming games . Following this model the Mario series has gone on to become the best selling video game franchise of all time with 193 million units sold as of January 2007 , almost 40 million units ahead of second ranked franchise ( Pokémon , also by Nintendo ) . 
 Super Mario Kart was re @-@ released on the Japanese Virtual Console on June 9 , 2009 , and later in North America on November 23 , 2009 . Previously , when naming it as one of the most wanted games for the platform in November 2008 , Eurogamer stated that problems emulating the Mode 7 graphics were responsible for its absence . 
 The game was also released for the Wii U virtual console in Japan during June 2013 , and in Europe on March 27 , 2014 . In addition , North America users was able to get the game starting from August 6 , 2014 to celebrate the 22nd anniversary of the game , which also includes the new game update of Mario Kart 8 on August 27 , 2014 . 
 Super Mario 3D World has a stage with a look based on the Mario Circuit racetracks from Super Mario Kart . A remixed version of the music can also be heard . 
 = = = Sequels = = = 
 Several sequels to Super Mario Kart have been brought out for successive generations of Nintendo consoles , each receiving commercial success and critical acclaim . The first of these , Mario Kart 64 was released in 1996 for the Nintendo 64 and was the first Mario Kart game to feature fully 3D graphics . Although reviewers including IGN and GameSpot felt that the single player gameplay was lacking compared to its predecessor , the simultaneous four @-@ person multiplayer modes – a first for the Nintendo 64 – were praised . The second sequel , Mario Kart : Super Circuit , was released for the Game Boy Advance in 2001 . It was described by GameSpot as more of a remake of Super Mario Kart than a sequel to Mario Kart 64 and featured a return to the graphical style of the original . As well as featuring all new tracks , players are able to unlock the original SNES tracks if certain achievements are completed . Mario Kart : Double Dash ‼ was released for the Nintendo GameCube in 2003 . Unlike any other Mario Kart game before or since , it features two riders in each kart , allowing for a new form of cooperative multiplayer where one player controls the kart 's movement and the other fires weapons . Mario Kart DS , released for the Nintendo DS in 2005 , was the first Mario Kart game to include online play via the Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection . It went on to become the best selling hand @-@ held racing game of all time , selling 7 @.@ 83 million units . The game also marks the debut of tracks appearing in previous games . Mario Kart Wii was released for the Wii in 2008 and incorporates motion controls and 12 @-@ player racing . Like Mario Kart DS , it includes on @-@ line play ; it also allows racers to play as user @-@ created Miis ( after unlocking the Mii character ) as well as Mario series characters and comes packaged with the Wii Wheel peripheral , which can act as the game 's primary control mechanism when coupled with a Wii Remote . Mario Kart Wii went on to be the worldwide best @-@ selling game of 2008 ahead of another Nintendo game – Wii Fit – and the critically acclaimed Grand Theft Auto IV . Mario Kart 7 for the Nintendo 3DS was released in 2011 , which features racing on land , sea , and air . Also in Mario Kart 7 is the ability to customize your kart and to race in first @-@ person mode . Three Mario Kart arcade games have also been released , Mario Kart Arcade GP in 2005 , Mario Kart Arcade GP 2 in 2007 , and Mario Kart Arcade GP DX in 2013 . All of them were developed jointly by Nintendo and Namco and feature classic Namco characters including Pac @-@ Man and Blinky . The most recent entry in the series is Mario Kart 8 for the Wii U , which was released at the end of May 2014 , which brings back gliders and propellers from Mario Kart 7 as well as 12 @-@ player racing in Mario Kart Wii . Mario Kart 8 also includes a new feature called Mario Kart TV , where players can watch highlights of previous races and uploading them to YouTube . Another new feature is anti @-@ gravity racing , where players can race on walls and ceilings . 
 As the series has progressed , many aspects included in Super Mario Kart have been developed and altered . The power up boxes which are flat against the track in Super Mario Kart due to the technical limitations of the SNES became floating boxes in later games . The roster of racers has expanded in recent games to include a greater selection of Nintendo characters including some which had not been created at the time of Super Mario Kart 's release – such as Petey Piranha from Super Mario Sunshine who appeared in Mario Kart : Double Dash ! ! . Multiplayer has remained a key feature of the series and has expanded from the two @-@ player modes available in Super Mario Kart ; first to allow up to four simultaneous players in Mario Kart 64 and eventually up to twelve simultaneous online players in Mario Kart Wii . Many of the track themes have been retained throughout the series , including Rainbow Road – the final track of the Special Cup – which has appeared in every Mario Kart console game . Other features present in Super Mario Kart have disappeared from the series . These include the " super @-@ powers " of the computer characters , the feather power up which allows players to jump high into the air and having a restricted number of lives . The only other Mario Kart games to feature the coin collecting of the original are Mario Kart : Super Circuit , Mario Kart 7 , and Mario Kart 8 . The aspects of style and gameplay from Super Mario Kart that have been retained throughout the series have led Nintendo to face criticism for a lack of originality but the franchise is still considered to be a beloved household name by many , known for its familiar core gameplay . 
 = Dyer Lum = 
 Dyer Daniel Lum ( 1839 – April 6 , 1893 ) was a 19th @-@ century American anarchist , labor activist and poet . A leading anarcho @-@ syndicalist and a prominent left @-@ wing intellectual of the 1880s , Lum is best remembered as the lover and mentor of early anarcha @-@ feminist Voltairine de Cleyre . 
 Lum was a prolific writer who wrote a number of key anarchist texts , and contributed to publications including Mother Earth , Twentieth Century , Liberty ( Benjamin Tucker 's individualist anarchist journal ) , The Alarm ( the journal of the International Working People 's Association ) and The Open Court among others . Following the arrest of Albert Parsons , Lum edited The Alarm from 1892 – 1893 . 
 Traditionally portrayed as a " genteel , theoretical anarchist " , Lum has recently been recast by the scholarship of Paul Avrich as an " uncompromising rebel thirsty for violence and martyrdom " in the light of his involvement in the Haymarket affair in 1886 . 
 = = Life = = 
 In disposition , Mr. Lum was most amiable ; in the character of his mind he was philosophical ; in mental capacity , he was at once keen and broad . His friends , who were many , mourn his passing away . 
 Lum was a descendant of the prominent New England Tappan family ; his grandfather was an American revolutionary . In hopes of bringing about the end of slavery , he volunteered to fight for the Union Army in the American Civil War . He served as an adjutant in the Fourteenth New York Cavalry , and later as a brevet captain , seeing combat in the Red River Campaign . A bookbinder by trade , Lum became active in the American labor movement in the aftermath of the war . He served as a secretary to Samuel Gompers and ran for lieutenant governor of Massachusetts on the Labor Reform ticket of abolitionist Wendell Phillips in 1870 . 
 He became widely known in 1877 after a period traveling across the country as secretary to a congressional committee appointed to " inquire into the depression of labor . " Between 1880 and 1892 , he was an advocate of direct action and trade unionism , and in later years was " the moving spirit of the American group " which worked for the commutation of Alexander Berkman 's sentence for the latter 's attempted assassination of Henry Clay Frick . Lum committed suicide in 1893 after suffering from severe depression , although at the time the cause of death was reported in the anarchist press as " fatty degeneration of the heart . " 
 = = = Relationship with de Cleyre = = = 
 When Lum met Voltairine de Cleyre in 1888 , he was twenty @-@ seven years her elder and had lived a life rich in experience . They forged an " unshakable " friendship , and Lum had a profound influence on Voltairine de Cleyre 's political development , which evolved in an opposite direction to his ; she started out as an orthodox <unk> individualist , but became increasingly involved with the radical labor movement and ultimately called for a <unk> " anarchism without adjectives " movement . Their relationship ended after five years of intense involvement , leaving their planned collaborative project — a lengthy social and philosophical anarchist novel — ultimately unpublished . 
 = = = Involvement in the Haymarket Riot = = = 
 Lum was closely associated with , and worked alongside the martyrs of the Haymarket affair in Chicago in 1886 . In an 1891 essay , he wrote that on the afternoon of May 4 , August Spies sent word to the militants that they were not to bring arms to the Haymarket . This order was not respected , Lum noted – " one man disobeyed that order ; always self @-@ determined , he acted upon his own responsibility , preferring to be prepared for resistance to onslaught rather than to quietly imitate the spiritual " lamb led to slaughter . " Lum asserted that the eight defendants were initially unaware of the bomb @-@ thrower 's identity , although it became known to two of them ( " but neither Spies nor Parsons … " ) , believed by Paul Avrich to be George Engel and Adolph Fischer . 
 In Lum 's account , the bomb @-@ thrower 's name " was never mentioned in the trial and is today unknown to the public . " Paul Avrich attests that Lum urged Albert Parsons to refuse clemency , and plotted to rescue the anarchists from Cook County Jail by attacking it with explosives . According to de Cleyre , he then assisted the suicide of one of the eight defendants , Louis Lingg , by smuggling into Lingg 's prison cell a dynamite cap concealed in a cigar , which Lingg subsequently lit , thereby blowing off half his face and leaving himself lingering for several hours in torturous pain before dying . 
 = = Thought = = 
 … rent , interest , profit are the triple heads of the monster against which modern civilization is waging war . 
 Lum 's political philosophy was a fusion of individualist anarchist economics – " a radicalized form of laissez @-@ faire economics " inspired by the Boston anarchists – with radical labor organization similar to that of the Chicago anarchists of the time . Lum 's ideas have variously been described as individualist anarchist , syndicalist , mutualist , and anarcho @-@ communist , as well as anarchist without adjectives . Herbert Spencer and Pierre @-@ Joseph Proudhon influenced Lum strongly in his individualist tendency . He developed a " mutualist " theory of unions and as such was active within the Knights of Labor and later promoted anti @-@ political strategies in the American Federation of Labor . Frustration with abolitionism , spiritualism , and labor reform caused Lum to embrace anarchism and <unk> workers , as he came to believe that revolution would inevitably involve a violent struggle between the working class and the employing class . Convinced of the necessity of violence to enact social change he volunteered to fight in the American Civil War , hoping thereby to bring about the end of slavery . Kevin Carson has praised Lum 's fusion of individualist laissez @-@ faire economics with radical labor activism as " creative " and described him as " more significant than any in the Boston group " . 
 Lum argued in The Economics of Anarchy that the " labor problem " was a result of intervention by the state in creating monopolies , with particular reference to the land and money monopolies . Lum advocated the destruction of the land monopoly , which he saw as a government @-@ granted monopoly , by abolishing land titles and to allow free access to land , thus making the extraction of rent impossible . Similarly , mutual banks set up to issue their own currencies would end the state monopoly and undercut the ability of banks and lenders to charge interest . 
 In anarchy labor and capital would be merged into one , for capital would be without prerogatives and dependent upon labor , and owned by it . The laborer would find that to produce was to enjoy and the nightmare of destitution banished . The artisan would find in co @-@ operation that nature alone remained to be exploited . The tradesman would find that production offered greater inducement than exchange , unless he accepted a position of competence and ease in the labor exchange which would supplant isolated stores . The clerk , no longer with his horizon bounded by a ribbon counter , would have full scope to display his talents in any direction . The farmer , above all , free from irksome care to meet interest , to dread foreclosure from enforced taxation , with his family growing up around him , and rendered secure by a common title and mutual inter @-@ dependence , or seeking in insurance indemnity for <unk> would find in anarchy release from useless drudgery and his labor crowned with <unk> and peace . 
 = = = Selected articles = = = 
 " Dyer D. Lum on Anarchy , " published in The Alarm and in Parsons ' Anarchism : Its Philosophy and Scientific Basis . 
 " Eighteen Christian Centuries or the Evolution of the Gospel of Anarchy " syndicated in Liberty 
 " The Status of the <unk> , " published in Rights of Labor , and later heavily critiqued by Victor Yarros in Liberty . 
 = Thomas C. Kinkaid = 
 Thomas Cassin Kinkaid ( 3 April 1888 – 17 November 1972 ) served as an admiral in the United States Navy during World War II . He built a reputation as a " fighting admiral " in the aircraft carrier battles of 1942 and commanded the Allied forces in the Aleutian Islands Campaign . He was Commander Allied Naval Forces and the Seventh Fleet under General of the Army Douglas MacArthur in the Southwest Pacific Area , where he conducted numerous amphibious operations , and commanded an Allied fleet during the Battle of Leyte Gulf , largest naval battle of World War II and the last naval battle between battleships in history . 
 Born into a naval family , Kinkaid was ranked in the lower half of his class on his graduation from the United States Naval Academy in June 1908 . His early commissioned service was spent aboard battleships . In 1913 , he began instruction in ordnance engineering and served in that field for many years . He saw action during the 1916 United States occupation of the Dominican Republic . During World War I , he was attached to the Royal Navy before serving as Gunnery Officer aboard the battleship USS Arizona . After the war , he was Assistant Chief of Staff to the Commander U.S. Naval Detachment in Turkey . Kinkaid received his first command , the destroyer USS Isherwood , in 1924 . He was Executive Officer of the battleship USS Colorado when the 1933 Long Beach earthquake struck , and participated in relief efforts . He received his second command in 1937 , the heavy cruiser USS Indianapolis . 
 From 1938 to 1941 , Kinkaid was a naval attaché in Italy and Yugoslavia . In the months prior to U.S. entry into World War II , he commanded a destroyer squadron . Promoted to rear admiral in 1941 , he assumed command of a U.S. Pacific Fleet cruiser division . His cruisers defended the aircraft carrier USS Lexington during the Battle of the Coral Sea and USS Hornet during the Battle of Midway . After that battle he took command of Task Force 16 , a task force built around the carrier USS Enterprise , which he led during the long and difficult Solomon Islands campaign , participating in the Battles of the Eastern Solomons and the Santa Cruz Islands . Kinkaid was placed in charge of the North Pacific Force in January 1943 and commanded the operations that regained control of the Aleutian Islands . He was promoted to vice admiral in June 1943 . 
 In November 1943 , Kinkaid became Commander Allied Naval Forces South West Pacific Area , and Commander of the Seventh Fleet , directing U.S. and Royal Australian Navy forces supporting the New Guinea campaign . During the Battle of the Surigao Strait he commanded the Allied ships in the last naval battle between battleships in history . Following the demise of Japanese naval power in the region , the Allied navies supported the campaigns in the Philippines and Borneo . Kinkaid was promoted to admiral on 3 April 1945 . After the Pacific War ended in August 1945 , the Seventh Fleet assisted in operations on the Korean and China coasts . Admiral Kinkaid was Commander Eastern Sea Frontier and the Sixteenth Fleet from 1946 until his retirement in May 1950 . He was a member of the National Security Training Commission for much of the rest of the decade . He also served with the American Battle Monuments Commission for 15 years . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Thomas Cassin Kinkaid was born in Hanover , New Hampshire , on 3 April 1888 , the second child and only son of Thomas Wright Kinkaid , a naval officer , and his wife Virginia Lee née Cassin . At the time , Thomas Wright Kinkaid was on leave from the U.S. Navy and employed at the New Hampshire College of Agriculture and the Mechanic Arts . When Thomas was only a year old , his father was posted to the USS Pinta , and the family moved to Sitka , Alaska , where a third child , Dorothy , was born in 1890 . Over the next few years the family successively moved to Philadelphia , Pennsylvania ; Norfolk , Virginia ; Annapolis , Maryland and Georgetown , Washington , D.C. 
 Thomas attended Western High School for three years before entering a U.S. Naval Academy preparatory school . He sought and secured an appointment to Annapolis from President Theodore Roosevelt , and was asked to take the admission examination . The Navy was undergoing a period of expansion , and the intake of midshipmen was double that of two years earlier . Of the 350 who took the examination , 283 were admitted . The class was the largest since the Academy had opened in 1845 . 
 Kinkaid was admitted to Annapolis as a midshipman in July 1904 . His instructors included four future Chiefs of Naval Operations : William S. Benson , William V. Pratt , William D. Leahy and Ernest J. King . In 1905 he took an instructional cruise on USS Nevada . He also spent six weeks on USS Hartford , his only experience of a warship under sail . In subsequent years , his training cruises were on the USS Newark and USS Arkansas which , while much newer , were by this time also obsolete . He participated in sports , particularly in rowing , earning a seat in the Academy 's eight @-@ oar racing shell . He graduated on 5 June 1908 , ranked 136th in his class of 201 . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Kinkaid 's first posting was to San Francisco where he joined the crew of the battleship USS Nebraska , part of the Great White Fleet . During the next year , he circumnavigated the globe with the fleet , visiting New Zealand and Australia . The fleet returned to its home port of Norfolk , Virginia in February 1909 . In 1910 , Kinkaid took his examinations for the rank of ensign but failed navigation . While his classmates were promoted in June 1910 , Kinkaid remained a midshipman , pending the result of a makeup examination in December 1910 . In July , he developed pleurisy and was hospitalized in New York , New York before being sent to Annapolis to recuperate . At the time his father was in charge of the Naval Engineering Experiment Station there , which allowed Kinkaid to stay with his parents while studying for his navigation examination . In October , he was posted to the battleship USS Minnesota whose skipper , Commander William Sims , an Annapolis classmate of his father 's , encouraged Kinkaid 's early interest in gunnery . Kinkaid passed his navigation examination on 7 December and was promoted to ensign on 14 February 1911 , backdated to 6 June 1910 . While still at Annapolis , Kinkaid met Helen Sherburne Ross , the daughter of a Philadelphia businessman . The two were married on 24 April 1911 in the Silver Chapel of St. Mark 's Episcopal Church in Philadelphia in a ceremony attended by a small number of guests . Their marriage produced no children . They enjoyed playing contract bridge and golf , and Helen was the women 's golf champion for the District of Columbia in 1921 and 1922 . 
 In 1913 , Kinkaid , now a lieutenant ( junior grade ) , commenced a course in ordnance at the Naval Academy Postgraduate School . This consisted of four months of classroom instruction followed by tours with the leading naval ordnance manufacturers , and concluded with a tour of duty at the Indian Head Naval Proving Ground . Students had to commit to remain in the Navy for at least eight years . After completing the four months in the classroom at Annapolis , Kinkaid commenced a three @-@ month assignment at Midvale Steel , but this was interrupted after two months by the United States occupation of Veracruz . Kinkaid was ordered to report to the gunboat USS Machias for duty in the Caribbean , during which the ship participated in the 1916 United States occupation of the Dominican Republic . Kinkaid came under fire for the first time when the ship was fired upon from ashore . Machias replied with its machine guns . When one jammed , Kinkaid exposed himself to fire to assist in clearing the weapon . He fired it in response to gunfire against the ship . Machias returned home in December , and in February Kinkaid resumed his ordnance studies and went to Bausch & Lomb in Rochester , New York , where he studied the manufacture of spotting and fire control systems . In March he reported to the Washington Navy Yard , where he wrote a pamphlet on fire control . He also created a design for a human torpedo , but the Bureau of Ordnance decided that his concept was unsound . He completed his ordnance studies with tours at Bethlehem Steel , the Indian Head Naval Proving Ground and the Sperry Gyroscope Company in Brooklyn . 
 In July 1916 , Kinkaid reported to USS Pennsylvania , the navy 's newest battleship , as a gunfire spotter . He was promoted to lieutenant in January 1917 . In November 1917 , he was ordered to supervise the delivery of a newly developed 20 ft ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) rangefinder from the Norfolk Navy Yard to the Grand Fleet . On reaching London , Kinkaid reported to Sims , now a vice admiral , who then ordered Kinkaid to deliver secret documents to Admiral William S. Benson at a meeting with Allied naval leaders in Paris . Afterwards , Kinkaid returned to the United Kingdom and tested the rangefinder at HMS Excellent on Whale Island , Hampshire . He visited optical works in London , York and Glasgow to study the British Royal Navy 's rangefinders , and the Grand Fleet at its anchorages . On returning to the United States in January 1918 , he visited Sperry Gyroscope and Ford Instruments to consult with them on fire control systems . Promoted to lieutenant commander in February 1918 , he was posted to Pennsylvania 's sister ship , USS Arizona . In May 1919 , Arizona was sent to cover the Greek occupation of Smyrna . For his services from September 1918 to July 1919 , Kinkaid was recommended for the Navy Distinguished Service Medal , but it was not awarded . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 Following the normal pattern of alternating assignments afloat and ashore , Kinkaid was posted to a shore billet as the Chief of the Supply Section of the Bureau of Ordnance in Washington D.C. During this time he published two articles in the United States Naval Institute magazine Proceedings . The first , on the " Probability and Accuracy of Gun Fire " , was a technical article arguing for more rather than bigger guns on battleships and cruisers . The Washington Naval Conference would prevent these ideas from being put into practice , by restricting the number and size of warships and their guns . The second , entitled " Naval Corps , Specialization and Efficiency " , argued for increasing the specializations of line officers rather than creating separate corps of specialists , a more controversial topic at a time when naval aviators were agitating for the creation of a new specialist branch of their own . 
 In 1922 , Kinkaid became Assistant Chief of Staff to the Commander U.S. Naval Detachment in Turkish Waters , Rear Admiral Mark L. Bristol . This tour saw the end of the Greek occupation of Smyrna . The ratification of the Treaty of Lausanne by Turkey resulted in a draw @-@ down of U.S. naval forces in the region , reducing Bristol 's post to a primarily diplomatic one . In 1924 , Kinkaid , whose father had died in August 1920 , requested a posting back to the United States owing to his mother 's ill @-@ health . The ship taking him back , the light cruiser USS Trenton , had to sail by way of Iran in order to collect the body of Vice Consul Robert Imbrie , who had been killed by an angry mob in Tehran . 
 Kinkaid received his first command , the destroyer USS Isherwood , on 11 November 1924 . Since its home port was the Philadelphia Navy Yard and ships ' captains did not have to spend their nights on board , Kinkaid was able to live with Helen at her parents ' residence in Philadelphia . In July 1925 , he was assigned to the Naval Gun Factory . He was promoted to commander in June 1926 . For the next two years , he served as Fleet Gunnery Officer and Aide to the Commander in Chief , U.S. Fleet , Admiral Henry A. Wiley . In 1929 and 1930 , Kinkaid attended the Naval War College . This was followed by duty on the Navy General Board . He was then seconded to the State Department as a Naval Advisor at the Geneva Disarmament Conference . 
 Kinkaid next became Executive Officer of the USS Colorado , one of the navy 's newest battleships , in February 1933 . By coincidence the ship was at anchor in Long Beach , California when the 1933 Long Beach earthquake struck . Over the next few days thousands of sailors and marines participated in relief activities . Kinkaid convinced the captain to allow homeless families of crew members to stay on the ship , and erected tarpaulins on the quayside to create family areas . He sent medical and relief supplies ashore from Colorado . 
 In 1934 , he returned to Washington for a tour of duty with the Bureau of Navigation , in charge of the Officers ' Detail Section . During this time , Kinkaid came up for promotion to captain . Classmates including Richmond K. Turner and Willis A. Lee were selected in January 1935 , but Kinkaid was passed over for promotion . However , with the help of strong fitness reports from his superiors , Rear Admirals William D. Leahy and Adolphus Andrews , he was selected in January 1936 and , after passing the required physical and professional examinations , was promoted on 11 January 1937 . Kinkaid was then given his second seagoing command , the heavy cruiser USS Indianapolis . He assumed command from Captain Henry K. Hewitt on 7 June 1937 . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Attaché = = = 
 Kinkaid hoped his next assignment would be that of naval attaché to London , but that job went to Captain Alan G. Kirk . Kinkaid was offered and accepted the post in Rome instead . He took up his posting there in November 1938 . In 1939 , he was also accredited with the American embassy in Belgrade . Kinkaid reported that Italy was unprepared for war . Only in May 1940 did he warn that Italy was mobilizing . Soon after , he learned from Count Galeazzo Ciano that Italy would declare war on France and Britain between 10 and 15 June 1940 . He provided accurate reports on the damage inflicted by the British in the Battle of Taranto . He returned to the U.S. in March 1941 . 
 Kinkaid now faced the prospect of selection to rear admiral . He knew that captains normally required a certain amount of seagoing command experience to be considered , but because his tour of duty on Indianapolis had been cut short in order to take up the post in Rome , he did not have enough months , and it was unlikely that a billet as captain of a battleship or cruiser would come up in sufficient time before the next round of selections . He discussed the matter with head of the Officers ' Detail Section at the Bureau of Navigation , Captain Arthur S. Carpender , an Annapolis classmate who had himself recently been selected for flag rank . Carpender came up with a solution : he recommended Kinkaid for command of a destroyer squadron . This was a seagoing command , although Kinkaid was somewhat senior for it . Good fitness reports as commander of Destroyer Squadron 8 , based in Philadelphia , resulted in Kinkaid 's promotion to rear admiral in August 1941 , despite having no more than two years ' worth of total command experience . He became the last of his class to be promoted to flag rank before the United States entered the war . No one ranking lower in the class was promoted to flag rank before retirement . 
 = = = Coral Sea and Midway = = = 
 Kinkaid was ordered to relieve Rear Admiral Frank J. Fletcher as commander of Cruiser Division 6 , consisting of the heavy cruisers USS Astoria , Minneapolis and San Francisco . This was part of the U.S. Pacific Fleet , based at Pearl Harbor . He did not reach his new command until after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor , which brought the U.S. into the war . When he reached Hawaii , Kinkaid stayed with his brother @-@ in @-@ law , the Commander in Chief , U.S. Fleet , Admiral Husband E. Kimmel , who was married to Kinkaid 's sister Dorothy . Kinkaid accompanied Fletcher as an observer during the attempt to relieve Wake Island , and did not formally assume command of the division until 29 December 1941 . 
 The traditional job of cruisers was scouting and screening , but with the loss of most of the battleships at Pearl Harbor these roles largely passed to the aircraft carriers , while the cruisers ' main mission became defending the carriers against air attack . Kinkaid 's cruisers formed part of Rear Admiral Aubrey W. Fitch 's Task Force 11 , which was built around the carrier USS Lexington . Task Force 11 rendezvoused with Fletcher 's Task Force 17 , built around the carrier USS Yorktown , on 1 May 1942 . Kinkaid then became commander of the Task Group 17 @.@ 2 , the screening cruisers and destroyers of both carriers . Carrier warfare was in its infancy , and at this stage American carriers neither embarked adequate numbers of fighters , nor skillfully employed what they had . When Task Force 17 was attacked three days later in the Battle of the Coral Sea , the burden of defending the Task Force fell on Kinkaid 's gunners . Their task was complicated by the radical maneuvering of the carriers under attack , which made it impossible for the screen to keep station . Despite the gunners ' best efforts , both carriers were hit , and Lexington caught fire and sank . For his part in the battle , Kinkaid was awarded the Navy Distinguished Service Medal . 
 Kinkaid was detached with the cruisers Astoria , Minneapolis and New Orleans , and four destroyers on 11 May 1942 and sailed for Nouméa , while Fletcher took the rest of Task Force 17 to Tongatapu . Kinkaid then headed north to join the Vice Admiral William F. Halsey 's Task Force 16 . Kinkaid 's force became part of its screen which was under the command of Rear Admiral Raymond A. Spruance . Shortly after Task Force 16 returned to Pearl Harbor , Halsey was hospitalized with a severe case of dermatitis and , on his recommendation , was replaced as commander of Task Force 16 by Spruance . Kinkaid then became commander of the screen , also known as Task Group 16 @.@ 2 . He was one of only four American flag officers present during the subsequent Battle of Midway . However , he saw little action , as Task Force 16 did not come under attack . 
 = = = Solomon Islands = = = 
 After the battle , Spruance became chief of staff to Admiral Chester W. Nimitz , the Commander in Chief , U.S. Pacific Fleet ( CINCPAC ) and Pacific Ocean Areas ( <unk> ) . In Halsey 's continued absence , Kinkaid became commander of Task Force 16 , built around the carrier USS Enterprise , although he was not an aviator , and his experience with carriers had been restricted to commanding their screens at the Battle of the Coral Sea and the Battle of Midway . In early July Kinkaid was briefed by Nimitz about plans for a landing in the Solomon Islands , codenamed Operation Watchtower . For this operation , Kinkaid 's Task Force 16 would be one of three carrier task forces under Fletcher 's overall command . To protect his flagship , the Enterprise , Kinkaid had the battleship USS North Carolina , heavy cruiser USS Portland , antiaircraft cruiser USS Atlanta , and five destroyers . The addition of the new battleship and its twenty 5 in ( 130 mm ) / 38 caliber dual @-@ purpose guns greatly strengthened Task Force 16 's antiaircraft defenses . 
 The American landing on Guadalcanal evoked a furious reaction from the Japanese , who sent their fleet to reinforce the Japanese garrison on Guadalcanal . Fletcher 's carriers had the mission of protecting the sea lanes to the <unk> two carrier forces clashed in the Battle of the Eastern Solomons . Kinkaid disposed his carrier task force in a circular formation , with Enterprise at the center , the cruisers at 10 and 2 o 'clock and the battleship aft at 6 o 'clock . This proved to be a mistake . With a top speed of 27 kn ( 31 mph ; 50 km / h ) , the battleship fell behind the carrier when the latter accelerated to 30 kn ( 35 mph ; 56 km / h ) while under attack , depriving itself of the protection of the battleship 's <unk> came under direct attack by Japanese fighters , taking three bomb hits that killed 74 of its crew . Extraordinary efforts permitted the carrier to continue operating aircraft , but it was forced to return to Pearl Harbor for repairs . In his report after the battle , Kinkaid recommended that the number of fighters carried by each carrier be further increased . For his part in the battle , he was awarded his second Distinguished Service Medal . 
 Task Force 16 returned to the South Pacific in October 1942 , just in time to take part in the decisive action of the campaign , the Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands , when the Japanese Army and Navy made an all @-@ out effort to recapture the airfield of Guadalcanal . In addition to Enterprise , Kinkaid 's force included the battleship South Dakota , heavy cruiser Portland , anti @-@ aircraft cruiser San Juan , and eight destroyers . Fortunately , both Enterprise and South Dakota had been fitted with the new Bofors 40 mm anti @-@ aircraft guns . In the three early carrier battles , Kinkaid had been a subordinate commander . This time he was in overall command , in charge of Task Force 61 , which included both his own Task Force 16 and Rear Admiral George D. Murray 's Task Force 17 , built around the aircraft carrier USS Hornet . The battle unfolded badly . Hornet was sunk , and Enterprise , South Dakota and San Juan were severely damaged . Aviators like Murray and John H. Towers blamed Kinkaid , as a non @-@ aviator , for the loss of the Hornet . It became a black mark on Kinkaid 's record . The Japanese had won another tactical victory , but Kinkaid 's carriers had gained the Americans precious time to prepare and reinforce . 
 = = = Aleutian Islands = = = 
 On 4 January 1943 , Kinkaid became Commander of the North Pacific Force ( <unk> ) following the failure of his predecessor , Rear Admiral Robert A. Theobald , to work harmoniously with the U.S. Army . Command relationships in the North Pacific were complicated . Naval forces came under Fletcher 's Northwestern Sea Frontier . The troops in Alaska , including Brigadier General William O. Butler 's Eleventh Air Force , were commanded by Major General Simon B. Buckner , Jr . , who was answerable to the head of the Western Defense Command , Lieutenant General John L. DeWitt . Kinkaid 's command was responsible for coordinating these forces and retaking the Aleutian Islands captured by the Japanese . He found the Army eager to cooperate , but encountered more difficulty with Rear Admiral Francis W. Rockwell , the commander of the Amphibious Force , Pacific Fleet , and later the IX Amphibious Force . Rockwell was an Academy classmate of Kinkaid 's , who was senior to him in rank , and convinced that he would both plan and command the amphibious phase of the operation rather than Kinkaid . 
 Kinkaid 's first major decision was to bypass Kiska in favor of an assault on the less heavily defended Attu Island . He moved his headquarters to Adak to be with those of Buckner and Butler , and at Buckner 's suggestion established a joint mess where their two staffs ate meals together . However , the amphibious planning was done in San Diego by Rockwell and his U.S. Marine Corps advisor , Brigadier General Holland M. Smith . The Battle of Attu was only the third American amphibious operation of the war , and was carried through to a costly success under difficult conditions . The slow rate of progress ashore caused Kinkaid to relieve the Army commander , Major General Albert E. Brown and replace him with Major General Eugene M. Landrum . In June 1943 Kinkaid was promoted to vice admiral , thereby removing any lingering doubts about who was in charge , and awarded his third Distinguished Service Medal . He now prepared Operation Cottage , the much larger invasion of Kiska . This was carried out as planned , but the invaders found that the Japanese had already evacuated the islands . In September 1943 , Kinkaid was replaced by Vice Admiral Frank Fletcher . 
 = = = Southwest Pacific = = = 
 In November 1943 , Kinkaid replaced Carpender as Commander Allied Naval Forces , Southwest Pacific Area , and the Seventh Fleet , known as " MacArthur 's Navy " . General Douglas MacArthur had twice requested Carpender 's relief , and Kinkaid 's record working with the Army in Alaska made him a logical choice . Australian newspapers hailed the appointment of a " fighting admiral " , but neither MacArthur nor the Australian government had been consulted about the appointment , which was made by the Commander in Chief , United States Fleet , Admiral Ernest King . This was a violation of the international agreement that had established the Southwest Pacific Area . The Navy Department then announced that the replacement of Carpender with Kinkaid was merely a proposal , and MacArthur and the Prime Minister of Australia , John Curtin , were asked if Kinkaid was acceptable . They agreed that he was . In his new role , Kinkaid had two masters . As commander of the Seventh Fleet , he was answerable to King , but as Commander Allied Naval Forces , Kinkaid was answerable to MacArthur . Operations were conducted on the basis of " mutual cooperation " rather than " unity of command " , and relations between the Army and Navy were not good . Kinkaid was not the most senior naval officer in the theater , for the Royal Australian Navy 's Admiral Sir Guy Royle and the Royal Netherlands Navy 's Admiral Conrad Helfrich were both senior to him . 
 Despite the unpromising relationship with the army , Kinkaid 's most troublesome subordinate was a U.S. Navy officer , as had been the case with Rockwell in the Aleutians . This time , the subordinate was Rear Admiral Ralph W. Christie , the commander of Task Force 71 , the Seventh Fleet 's submarines . Christie commonly greeted a returning submarine at the pier and awarded decorations on the spot . This practice bypassed military and naval award boards , and annoyed Kinkaid because confirmation of sinkings was accomplished by Ultra , and news of awards given so quickly could constitute a security breach . Kinkaid gave Christie and his other subordinates orders forbidding <unk> awards , and the award of army medals to navy personnel . In June 1944 , Christie accompanied a war patrol on Commander Samuel D. Dealey 's submarine USS Harder . Afterward , Christie met with MacArthur and related the events of the war patrol to the general , who decided to award Dealey the Distinguished Service Cross and Christie the Silver Star . When Harder was lost with Dealey and all hands on its next patrol , Christie recommended Dealey for the Medal of Honor . Kinkaid turned down the recommendation on the grounds that Dealey had already received the Distinguished Service Cross for the same patrol . Angered , Christie sent a dispatch to Kinkaid in an easily decipherable low @-@ order code that criticized him and urged him to reconsider . Upset by both Christie 's attitude and his losses , which included Dealey and Kinkaid 's nephew , Lieutenant Commander Manning Kimmel on USS <unk> in July 1944 , Kinkaid requested Christie 's relief . On 30 December 1944 , Christie was replaced by Captain James Fife . 
 Other forces under Kinkaid 's command included the cruisers of Task Force 74 under Rear Admiral Victor Crutchley , Task Force 75 under Russell S. <unk> , and Task Force 76 , the VII Amphibious Force , under Rear Admiral Daniel E. Barbey . The main role of the Seventh Fleet was supporting MacArthur 's drive along the northern coast of New Guinea with a series of 38 amphibious operations , usually directed by Barbey . Kinkaid accompanied MacArthur for the landing in the Admiralty Islands , where the two men came ashore a few hours after the assault troops . With 215 vessels involved , Operations Reckless and Persecution in April 1944 together constituted the largest operation in New Guinea waters . It was followed in quick succession by four more operations , at Wakde , Biak , <unk> and Sansapor . 
 For MacArthur 's long @-@ awaited return to the Philippines in October 1944 , the Seventh Fleet was massively reinforced by Nimitz 's Pacific Fleet . Kinkaid commanded the assault personally , with Barbey 's VII Amphibious Force as Task Force 78 , joined by Vice Admiral Theodore S. Wilkinson 's III Amphibious Force from the Pacific Fleet as Task Force 79 . Kinkaid was also given Rear Admiral Jesse B. Oldendorf 's Task Force 77 @.@ 2 , a bombardment force built around six old battleships that had survived the attack on Pearl Harbor , and Rear Admiral Thomas L. Sprague 's Task Force 77 @.@ 4 , a force of escort carriers . However , Vice Admiral Marc Mitscher 's Task Force 38 , the covering force of the fast carriers and battleships , remained part of Admiral Halsey 's Third Fleet , which was not under MacArthur or Kinkaid 's command . 
 Halsey 's orders , which gave priority to the destruction of the Japanese fleet , led to the most controversial episode of the Battle of Leyte Gulf . Four Japanese task forces converged on Kinkaid 's forces in Leyte Gulf : a carrier task force under Vice Admiral Jisaburō Ozawa , from the north ; a force under Vice Admiral Takeo Kurita through the Sibuyan Sea ; and two task forces commanded by Vice Admirals Shōji Nishimura and Kiyohide Shima , which approached via the Surigao Strait . Carrier aircraft from Task Force 38 engaged Kurita in the Battle of the Sibuyan Sea , and forced him to withdraw . In a controversial decision , Halsey concluded that Kurita was no longer a threat and headed north after Ozawa 's force but , due to a misunderstanding , Kinkaid believed that Halsey was still guarding the San Bernardino Strait . Kinkaid deployed all available Seventh Fleet vessels in the Surigao Strait under Oldendorf facing Nishimura and Shima . 
 In the Battle of the Surigao Strait that night , Kinkaid engaged the Japanese with his PT boats and Oldendorf 's destroyers , cruisers and battleships . Oldendorf was able to " cross the T " of the enemy fleet . It was the last occasion in history where battleships fought each other . Of Nishimura 's two battleships and five lesser ships , only the destroyer Shigure survived ; Kinkaid 's PT force lost only PT @-@ 493 , with 3 killed and 20 wounded . In Oldendorf 's task force , only the destroyer Albert W. Grant was hit , mostly by friendly fire . Total Allied casualties were 39 men killed and 114 wounded . 
 However , the victory was marred when Kurita 's force doubled back and engaged Sprague 's escort carriers in the Battle off Samar the next day . Oldendorf 's force headed back but Kurita withdrew after sinking an escort carrier , two destroyers and a destroyer escort . After the war , Halsey defended his actions in his memoirs . Kinkaid 's position was that : 
 Of course it would have been sound practice and better to have an overall commander of naval forces .... However , the Third Fleet and the Seventh Fleet each had an assigned mission which , if fulfilled , would have resulted in the destruction of the Japanese fleet then and there . The question of an overall commander at the scene of action would have been purely academic . Most surely Nimitz 's orders to Halsey did not contemplate the withdrawal of covering forces at the height of battle . " Divided Command " is not the key to what happened at Leyte . " Mission " is the key . 
 Following the demise of Japanese naval power in the region , Kinkaid 's Seventh Fleet supported the land campaigns in the Philippines and the Borneo . Kinkaid was promoted to admiral on 3 April 1945 . After the Pacific War ended in August 1945 , the Seventh Fleet assisted in landing troops in Korea and northern China to occupy these areas and repatriate Allied prisoners of war . Kinkaid elected not to land troops at Chefoo as originally instructed because the city was in the hands of the Communist Eighth Route Army ; Tsingtao was substituted instead . He was awarded the Legion of Merit by the theater commander in China , Lieutenant General Albert C. Wedemeyer , and the Grand Cordon of the Order of Precious Tripod by the Chinese government . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Kinkaid returned to the United States to replace Vice Admiral Herbert F. Leary as Commander Eastern Sea Frontier and Commander Sixteenth Fleet , making his home in the historic Quarters A , Brooklyn Navy Yard . He served on a board chaired by Fleet Admiral Halsey which also included Admirals Spruance , Towers and Vice Admiral Marc Mitscher , whose task was to nominate 50 of the 215 serving rear admirals for early retirement . Kinkaid was soon facing this fate himself , when the House Armed Services Committee sought to reduce the number of four @-@ star rank officers in 1947 . Kinkaid was one of three admirals , the others being Spruance and Hewitt , who would have to retire or be reduced in rank to rear admiral . After some lobbying , this was averted , and they were permitted to remain in the grade until 1 July 1950 , past Kinkaid 's retirement age . Retirement ceremonies , including a parade through New York City , were held on 28 April 1950 and Kinkaid formally retired two days later . 
 In December 1946 , it was announced that Halsey , Spruance and Turner had been awarded the Army Distinguished Service Medal . A message soon arrived from MacArthur stating that he could not see why Kinkaid should not merit the same award , which had been recommended by Krueger during the war . The medal was duly presented by General Courtney Hodges in a ceremony on Governors Island on 10 April 1947 . The Australian government chose to honor Kinkaid with an honorary Companion of the Order of the Bath , which was presented by the ambassador at a ceremony at the embassy in Washington on Australia Day , 26 January 1948 . Kinkaid had already been created Grand Officer of the Order of Orange @-@ Nassau by Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands in 1944 . In March 1948 , he was made a Grand Officer of the Order of Leopold and presented with the Croix de guerre with Palm in a ceremony at the Belgian embassy in Washington , D.C. 
 He served as the naval representative with the National Security Training Commission from 1951 until it was abolished in 1957 , and with the American Battle Monuments Commission for fifteen years , beginning in 1953 . In this capacity , he attended the dedication of the Cambridge American Cemetery and Memorial , Brittany American Cemetery and Memorial , Rhone American Cemetery and Memorial , Manila American Cemetery and Memorial and the East Coast Memorial . He also paid a visit to Australia and New Zealand in 1951 . Until 1961 , he attended the annual reunions held to celebrate General MacArthur 's birthday , 26 January , joining MacArthur and his old colleagues , including Krueger and Kenney . Kinkaid died at Bethesda Naval Hospital on 17 November 1972 and was buried with military honors at Arlington National Cemetery on 21 November . The Navy named a Spruance @-@ class destroyer after him . The USS Kinkaid was launched by his widow Helen at the Ingalls Shipbuilding Division of Litton Industries at Pascagoula , Mississippi on 1 June 1974 . 
 = Palau at the 2008 Summer Olympics = 
 Palau competed at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing , China . Palau 's Olympic delegation was led by Frank <unk> , the President of the Palau National Olympic Committee , and consisted of five athletes , three team officials and four coaches . This was an increase from the nation 's two previous appearances at the Summer Olympic Games ; four athletes had been sent to both the Sydney and Athens Games . Palau 's Olympic team was one of the 117 that won no medals at the Games . 
 = = Opening & closing ceremonies = = 
 Palau was the 119th national team to enter the Beijing National Stadium in the parade of nations during the Opening Ceremony . The country 's flag bearer was freestyle wrestler Elgin Loren <unk> , the first Palauan athlete to have qualified for a Games based on his own performances . 
 At the Closing Ceremony athletes entered in a less formal style , led by the flag bearers of all the competing nations . The Palauan flag was carried by swimmer Amber <unk> . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 Palau had two competitors in the sport of athletics , one in each of the men 's and women 's 100 m sprints . Jesse <unk> finished seventh out of eight competitors in a heat which included eventual bronze medallist Walter Dix . Despite setting a new personal best time of 11 @.@ 38 seconds he did not advance to the quarterfinals of the competition . In the women 's event Peoria <unk> finished eighth out of nine athletes in the first heat and did not advance to the next round . 
 Key 
 Note – Ranks given for track events are within the athlete 's heat only 
 Q 
 = Qualified for the next round 
 q = 
 Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or , in field events , by position without achieving the qualifying target 
 NR 
 = National record 
 N / A = 
 Round not applicable for the event 
 Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round 
 Men 
 Women 
 = = Swimming = = 
 Amber <unk> , the youngest member of the team at age 17 , was the sole Palauan representative in the swimming events . She finished 3rd in her heat and 71st out of the 92 competitors overall . 
 Women 
 Qualifiers for the latter rounds of all swimming events at the Games were decided on a time only basis between competitors from all heats , therefore the rank shown is an overall position against every swimmer in the round . 
 = = Wrestling = = 
 Two wrestlers represented Palau in Beijing . Both athletes received byes in the first round but were defeated in their respective round of 16 matches . Elgin Loren <unk> , the reigning Oceanic champion , was beaten on points by three times world champion Hamid <unk> in the Greco @-@ Roman 55 kg . After the bout he announced his hope of competing at the 2012 Olympics in London , saying , " It is my first Olympics and I am looking forward to my next because I 'm young . " The other wrestler Florian <unk> <unk> was beaten by Hungarian Ottó <unk> in the Freestyle 120 kg . 
 Key : 
 VT - Victory by Fall . 
 PP - Decision by Points - the loser with technical points . 
 PO - Decision by Points - the loser without technical points . 
 Men 's freestyle 
 Men 's Greco @-@ Roman 
 = = Media coverage = = 
 The 2008 Summer Olympics marked the first time that Palauans were able to watch complete Olympic television coverage of all events in their own country . Palau 's in @-@ depth television coverage was due to a special agreement between TV New Zealand and the Palau National Communications Corporation . 
 = Operation Aquatint = 
 Operation Aquatint was the codename for a failed raid by British Commandos on the coast of occupied France during the Second World War . The raid was undertaken in September 1942 on part of what later became Omaha Beach by No. 62 Commando , also known as the Small Scale Raiding Force . 
 Prior to the operation , a raid on the French coastal town of Dieppe had placed the German occupying forces on a high state of alert , and this ultimately contributed to Aquatint 's failure . The commandos were also unable to identify their correct landing place due to the darkness . Within minutes of landing , the raiding party was ambushed by a German patrol and forced to try to reach their Motor Torpedo Boat ( MTB ) transport . The MTB was located and engaged by the German shore batteries , which damaged one of its engines . It was forced to withdraw , leaving the commandos behind . At the end of the raid those commandos who had not been killed all became prisoners of war . Only five of the raiding force would survive the war ; one was killed in captivity and the fate of the other two is uncertain . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following a request from the Chief of Combined Operations Admiral Louis Mountbatten for probes of German coastal defences , No. 62 Commando , also known as the Small Scale Raiding Force ( SSRF ) , mounted a number of operations in 1942 . The first three missions were complete successes : Operation Barricade ( 14 / 15 August 1942 ) , Operation Dryad , ( 2 / 3 September 1942 ) , and Operation Pound ( 7 / 8 September 1942 ) . Aquatint was planned for a night in mid September 1942 as a reconnaissance mission near Sainte @-@ Honorine @-@ des @-@ <unk> , a small coastal town near Port en Bessin in Normandy . The mission was to collect information about the surrounding area , and take a German guard prisoner . Aerial reconnaissance had identified a small group of houses on the seafront thought to be occupied by Germans . 
 The size of the SSRF landing party was limited to how many could be carried aboard a Motor Torpedo Boat ( MTB ) , and comprised five officers , one warrant officer , one senior non @-@ commissioned officer , three other ranks , and a member of the Free French forces . The commander of the SSRF , Major ' Gus ' March @-@ Phillipps , would lead the raid . His second in command , Captain Geoffrey Appleyard , would remain on board the MTB due to an injury acquired on a previous mission . The other men on the raid were Captain Graham Hayes , Captain John Burton , Captain Lord Francis Howard , Lieutenant Anthony Hall , Company Sergeant Major Thomas Winter , Sergeant Allen Michael Williams , Private Jan Hollings ( Jan Helling ) from the Netherlands , Private Adam Orr ( Abraham <unk> ) from Poland , Private Richard Leonard ( Richard <unk> ) a Jewish Sudeten German from Czechoslovakia , and Maître Andre Desgranges of the Free French Forces . 
 The Dieppe raid in August 1942 had changed the German fortification plans ; the success of the German defences in repelling the raid reinforced the importance of the Atlantic wall . The Organization Todt had now started to reinforce gun emplacements with infantry strong points along the French coastline . The older gun emplacements based on First World War designs were being replaced by stronger designs with overhead cover to offer protection from air attack . The area of Normandy targeted by Operation Aquatint had yet to receive any concrete gun emplacements but there was a network of coastal artillery batteries able to provide interlocking arcs of fire . German infantry carried out foot patrols in the areas between the batteries . 
 = = Battle = = 
 The mission had previously been attempted over the night of 11 / 12 September 1942 , but had to be cancelled after the MTB arrived off the coast of France . The raiding party had been unable to locate their target because of the dark and foggy conditions . On 12 September 1942 , their MTB left Portsmouth at 20 : 12 and reached the coast off Barfleur at about 22 : 00 . Moving at a reduced speed to avoid detection and avoid the offshore mine fields , they reached their intended position offshore just after midnight on 13 September 1942 . Observing the coastline , in the dark they incorrectly identified a valley which they believed was St Honorine , but was actually Saint @-@ Laurent @-@ sur @-@ Mer , about one mile to the right of their intended target . At around 00 : 20 hours the landing party headed toward the beach in a small collapsible flat bottomed boat known as a Goatley boat . After reaching the shore they realised they were too close to some houses to leave their boat where it was . They dragged the boat 200 yards ( 180 m ) east away from the houses and above the high water mark . Captain Lord Howard guarded the boat while the rest of the SSRF checked to area to ensure it was safe and they had not been observed landing . 
 On their way back to the beach they sighted a German patrol of about seven or eight men coming from the direction of the houses so they took cover . They were discovered by the patrol 's guard dog at about 00 : 50 . The patrol opened fire on them with machine guns and hand grenades . The SSRF managed to disperse the German patrol with return fire and reach the Goatley boat . Captain Lord Howard , who had been left to guard the boat , was wounded trying to re @-@ float the boat , and the others managed to get him aboard . The fight lasted for about 30 minutes . When the German patrol moved forward onto the beach , Lieutenant Hall tried to capture one of the Germans but was himself hit over the head and captured . The SSRF left him behind , presuming he was dead . The men in the Goatley boat had managed to get about 100 yards ( 91 m ) out to sea when it was located and engaged by three machine gun posts above the beach . A gun emplacement to the west also starting firing towards them with heavier calibre guns . The combined fire from four positions damaged the boat , which began to sink . The commandos attempted to swim out to the MTB , which by now had also been discovered and was under fire . Unable to locate it in the darkness , they were forced to swim back to the beach . Winter was fired on again when he reached the beach and was captured . He was taken to the German headquarters where he was put into a room with Captain Lord Howard and Desgranges , who had also been captured . 
 The MTB had withdrawn out of range at about 01 : 30 , but not before it had suffered engine damage ; a bullet had disabled the starboard engine . After 10 minutes it moved back inshore hoping to pick up any survivors . It was again located by the Germans at about 02 : 30 . The MTB was forced to withdraw once again under increasingly heavy mortar and machine gun fire . Unable to locate any survivors , it recrossed the German minefield and arrived back in Portsmouth at 10 : 00 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Later on the morning of 13 September 1942 Winter and <unk> were ordered to collect the bodies of the men who had been killed on the beach . Of the 11 men who went ashore , three were killed : Major March @-@ Phillips , Sergeant Williams , and Private Leonard ; four were captured ( the seriously wounded pair Captain Lord Howard and Lieutenant Hall , with Winter and Desgranges ) ; and four others had escaped . 
 Later on 13 September 1942 Captain Lord Howard and Lieutenant Hall were hospitalised because of their injuries , while Winter and Desgranges were taken to Caen for interrogation . At the time , the Germans were unaware that four commandos — Captain Burton , Privates Hollings and Orr , and Captain Hayes — had managed to evade capture and made it off the beach . 
 On 14 September 1942 , the Germans issued a communiqué : 
 A second communiqué on 15 September 1942 read : 
 The bodies of the dead were buried in the St @-@ Laurent @-@ sur @-@ Mer cemetery on 15 September 1942 . The funeral was only attended by the local German and the French <unk> commanders . To prevent anyone else from attending , the Germans had a machine gun set up covering the cemetery . 
 After 10 days of questioning Winter was taken to Rennes , where he was joined three days later by Captain Burton , Hollings , and Orr . These three had managed to stay together when the boat was sunk , and were captured by a German parachute unit carrying out manoeuvres . Burton was sent to a prisoner of war camp in Germany , Winter , Hollings and Orr were taken to Frankfurt and handed over to the Gestapo for further questioning , after which Winter was sent to a prisoner of war camp at Memmingen . The fate of Hollings and Orr has never been established . Winter and a Special Air Service officer escaped from the camp in April 1945 , disguised as French soldiers . Desgranges was also able to escape from captivity , travelling via Spain to Britain , where he joined the Special Operations Executive ( SOE ) . 
 Captain Hayes , unable to reach the MTB , had started swimming away from the shooting , and came ashore beside <unk> @-@ en @-@ Bessin . He managed to evade capture and made contact with a local French family who provided him with civilian clothing and contacted the French resistance . Hayes was taken by train to Lisieux and after several weeks reached Paris . Hayes was moved along an escape line to the Spanish border , arriving in October 1942 . After crossing into Spain he was stopped by Spanish border guards who handed him over to the Germans . Hayes was returned to Paris and imprisoned in Fresnes prison . He was kept in solitary confinement for nine months before being executed by firing squad on 13 July 1943 . Hayes had landed in uniform and should have been considered a prisoner of war , but he was executed following the issue of the commando order which called for the execution of all commandos upon capture . It was discovered after the war that Hayes had been betrayed to the Germans , who were aware of all his movements from Normandy to the Spanish border . The persons believed responsible for Hayes ' betrayal were never punished , as they convinced the authorities they were acting as double agents . 
 Despite the results of the operation , the SOE and Combined Operations Headquarters believed that the SSRF could still be of use , and ensured that it was not dissolved . Command of the unit was given to the newly promoted Major Appleyard . At the end of 1942 , most of SSRF were moved to Algeria and absorbed into the 2nd Special Air Service Regiment . Appleyard did not survive the war . He was returning from a Special Air Service mission when his plane was reported missing . It was the same day that Captain Hayes was executed in Paris . 
 = M @-@ 55 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 55 is a state trunkline highway in the northern part of the US state of Michigan . M @-@ 55 is one of only three state highways that extend across the Lower Peninsula from Lake Huron to Lake Michigan ; the others are M @-@ 46 and M @-@ 72 . The highway crosses through rural forest and farmlands to connect Manistee with Tawas City . M @-@ 55 crosses two of the major rivers in the state . Two sections of the highway follow along freeways near Cadillac and West Branch . Running for 150 @.@ 944 miles ( 242 @.@ 921 km ) through the state , M @-@ 55 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) . 
 The highway was first designated by July 1 , 1919 along a portion of the current roadway . In a series of extensions , M @-@ 55 was lengthened to connect its current endpoints by the early 1930s . The trunkline has been rerouted in sections since that time resulting in the modern roadway alignment . One set of changes produced a business loop in the Houghton Lake area . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 55 starts at a three @-@ way intersection with US 31 north of Manistee . The trunkline runs southeast on Caberfae Highway over the Manistee River and through the Peters and <unk> bayous . The highway passes near the community of Eastlake before turning eastward through forest land . In eastern Manistee County , the roadway crosses the Pine River south of the Tippy Dam Pond in <unk> . M @-@ 55 intersects M @-@ 37 in western Wexford County southwest of the Caberfae Peaks Ski & Golf Resort . The roadway turns northeasterly along the south shore of Lake Mitchell where it then curves southeasterly to run concurrently along M @-@ 115 along the south shore of Lake Cadillac and through the south side of Cadillac . At the interchange with the US 131 freeway , M @-@ 55 merges north along the freeway , bypassing downtown Cadillac . 
 On the east side of town , M @-@ 55 leaves the freeway and turns east again running through the Pere Marquette State Forest along Watergate Road . When the highway meets M @-@ 66 , M @-@ 55 joins M @-@ 66 and runs north through farmland . As the two highways approach Lake City , they run along the shore of Lake Missaukee and through downtown . M @-@ 55 turns east again along Houghton Lake Road , separating from M @-@ 66 north of the central business district . This section of trunkline passes through mixed farm and wood lands that transitions to mostly forests near Merritt . The road crosses the Muskegon River and follows Lake City Road into the outskirts of Houghton Lake . M @-@ 55 passes over the US 127 freeway and enters Houghton Lake Heights . There the highway runs southeasterly along the shores of Houghton Lake into downtown Houghton Lake . M @-@ 18 briefly joins M @-@ 55 through Prudenville on the east side of the lake , and M @-@ 55 follows West Branch Road as it continues east toward Interstate 75 ( I @-@ 75 ) . 
 M @-@ 55 follows I @-@ 75 between exits 227 and 215 , a distance of about 12 miles ( 19 km ) . This section is the only part of M @-@ 55 that has been listed on the National Highway System , a system of roads important to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility . From the end of the freeway concurrency , M @-@ 55 follows Business Loop I @-@ 75 ( BL I @-@ 75 ) into downtown West Branch . After leaving town , the highway runs through farm lands in rural Ogemaw and Iosco counties . The highway curves southeast into Tawas City . The eastern end of M @-@ 55 is at an intersection with US 23 along the shores of the Tawas Bay of Lake Huron . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 55 had its beginning by July 1 , 1919 when it was designated from Cadillac to Merritt . In 1926 , M @-@ 55 was extended eastward to Houghton Lake over a section of the former M @-@ 14 that was not used for the then @-@ new US 27 . At the same time , another segment of the highway was designated between M @-@ 76 at West Branch and US 23 at Whittemore . The next year , M @-@ 55 was routed along sections of US 27 and M @-@ 76 between the two communities . A western extension was added from Cadillac to US 31 near Manistee in 1932 while the eastern end was shifted from Whittemore to Tawas City when US 23 was rerouted through the area . 
 Segments of M @-@ 55 have been relocated in the years since the basic routing was completed in the early 1930s . A more direct route from West Branch eastward was created in 1938 . Prior to the construction of present @-@ day Hemlock Road through Tawas City , M @-@ 55 entered Tawas City via present @-@ day Plank Road , Second Street , Fifth Avenue , and Mathews Street , ending at the present @-@ day intersection of US 23 and Mathews Street . In 1949 , US 27 was moved to run to the west of Houghton and Higgins lakes . M @-@ 55 was shifted to run concurrently southward along the former M @-@ 169 which was replaced by US 27 . At the intersection with the former US 27 , M @-@ 55 was routed east , and the former route of M @-@ 55 was designated as a new M @-@ 169 . In 1950 , this M @-@ 169 was redesignated Business M @-@ 55 ( Bus . M @-@ 55 ) . M @-@ 55 was rerouted off US 27 when the US 27 freeway was completed in the area . In rerouting M @-@ 55 , it was shifted back to its former routing through Houghton Lake Heights , replacing Bus . M @-@ 55 in late 1961 . 
 The last gravel segments were paved in Iosco County in the late 1950s . Another segment east of Cadillac to M @-@ 66 south of Lake City was realigned in 1973 . At the same time , M @-@ 55 was co @-@ signed with a portion of the newly opened stretch of I @-@ 75 between M @-@ 157 and West Branch . The last routing change was made in November 2000 when the southern segment of the Cadillac bypass was opened . M @-@ 55 was moved out of downtown Cadillac and along the freeway and M @-@ 115 . US 131 joined M @-@ 55 on the bypass the next October when the northern half of the bypass was completed in 2001 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = Business loop = = 
 Business M @-@ 55 ( Bus . M @-@ 55 ) was a business loop designated for just over a decade in Houghton Lake Heights . Bus . M @-@ 55 ran for 2 @.@ 898 miles ( 4 @.@ 664 km ) along Houghton Lake Drive between US 27 and Federal Drive next to the Houghton Lake . M @-@ 55 was shifted off the road when several highways in the Houghton Lake area were rerouted . US 27 was moved to the west side of the lakes in the area , and M @-@ 55 was moved follow US 27 , replace the original M @-@ 169 in the area and replace a section of the former routing of US 27 in Houghton Lake in 1949 . By early 1950 , the former route of M @-@ 55 through Houghton Lake Heights was designated Bus . M @-@ 55 . This business loop existed until the US 27 freeway was built in the area in late 1961 . At that time , M @-@ 55 was moved back to its pre @-@ 1949 routing , replacing Bus . M @-@ 55 . 
 = The Who = 
 The Who are an English rock band that formed in 1964 . Their classic line @-@ up consisted of lead singer Roger Daltrey , guitarist Pete Townshend , bass guitarist John Entwistle , and drummer Keith Moon . They are considered one of the most influential rock bands of the 20th century , selling over 100 million records worldwide and holding a reputation for their live shows and studio work . 
 The Who developed from an earlier group , the Detours , and established themselves as part of the pop art and mod movements , featuring auto @-@ destructive art by destroying guitars and drums on stage . Their first single as the Who , " I Can 't Explain " , reached the UK top ten , followed by a string of singles including " My Generation " , " Substitute " and " Happy Jack " . In 1967 , they performed at the Monterey Pop Festival and released the US top ten single " I Can See for Miles " , while touring extensively . The group 's fourth album , 1969 's rock opera Tommy , included the single " Pinball Wizard " and was a critical and commercial success . Live appearances at Woodstock and the Isle of Wight Festival , along with the live album Live at Leeds , cemented their reputation as a respected rock act . With their success came increased pressure on lead songwriter and visionary Townshend , and the follow @-@ up to Tommy , Lifehouse , was abandoned . Songs from the project made up 1971 's Who 's Next , which included the hit " Won 't Get Fooled Again " . The group released the album Quadrophenia in 1973 as a celebration of their mod roots , and oversaw the film adaptation of Tommy in 1975 . They continued to tour to large audiences before semi @-@ retiring from live performances at the end of 1976 . The release of Who Are You in 1978 was overshadowed by the death of Moon shortly after . 
 Kenney Jones replaced Moon and the group resumed activity , releasing a film adaptation of Quadrophenia and the retrospective documentary The Kids Are Alright . After Townshend became weary of touring , the group split in 1982 . The Who occasionally re @-@ formed for live appearances such as Live Aid in 1985 , a 25th anniversary tour in 1989 and a tour of Quadrophenia in 1996 – 97 . They resumed regular touring in 1999 , with drummer Zak Starkey . After Entwistle 's death in 2002 , plans for a new album were delayed . Townshend and Daltrey continued as the Who , releasing Endless Wire in 2006 , and continued to play live regularly . 
 The Who 's major contributions to rock music include the development of the Marshall stack , large PA systems , use of the synthesizer , Entwistle and Moon 's lead playing styles , Townshend 's feedback and power chord guitar technique , and the development of the rock opera . They are cited as an influence by hard rock , punk rock and mod bands , and their songs still receive regular exposure . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The founding members of the Who , Roger Daltrey , Pete Townshend and John Entwistle , grew up in Acton , London and went to Acton County Grammar School . Townshend 's father , Cliff , played saxophone and his mother , Betty , had sung in the entertainment division of the Royal Air Force during World War II , and both supported their son 's interest in rock and roll . Townshend and Entwistle became friends in their second year of Acton County , and formed a trad jazz group ; Entwistle also played French horn in the Middlesex Schools ' Symphony Orchestra . Both were interested in rock , and Townshend particularly admired Cliff Richard 's début single , " Move It " . Entwistle moved to guitar , but struggled with it due to his large fingers , and moved to bass on hearing the guitar work of Duane Eddy . He was unable to afford a bass and built one at home . After Acton County , Townshend attended Ealing Art College , a move he later described as profoundly influential on the course of the Who . 
 Daltrey , who was in the year above , had moved to Acton from Shepherd 's Bush , a more working @-@ class area . He had trouble fitting in at the school , and discovered gangs and rock and roll . He was expelled at 15 and found work on a building site . In 1959 he started the Detours , the band that was to evolve into the Who . The band played professional gigs , such as corporate and wedding functions , and Daltrey kept a close eye on the finances as well as the music . 
 Daltrey spotted Entwistle by chance on the street carrying a bass and recruited him into the Detours . In mid @-@ 1961 , Entwistle suggested Townshend as a guitarist , Daltrey on lead guitar , Entwistle on bass , Harry Wilson on drums , and Colin Dawson on vocals . The band played instrumentals by the Shadows and the Ventures , and a variety of pop and trad jazz covers . Daltrey was considered the leader and , according to Townshend , " ran things the way he wanted them " . Wilson was fired in mid @-@ 1962 and replaced by Doug Sandom , though he was older than the rest of the band , married , and a more proficient musician , having been playing semi @-@ professionally for two years . 
 Dawson left after frequently arguing with Daltrey and after being briefly replaced by Gabby Connolly , Daltrey moved to lead vocals . Townshend , with Entwistle 's encouragement , became the sole guitarist . Through Townshend 's mother , the group obtained a management contract with local promoter Robert Druce , who started booking the band as a support act . The Detours were influenced by the bands they supported , including Screaming Lord Sutch , Cliff Bennett and the Rebel Rousers , Shane Fenton and the <unk> , and Johnny Kidd and the Pirates . The Detours were particularly interested in the Pirates as they also only had one guitarist , Mick Green , who inspired Townshend to combine rhythm and lead guitar in his style . Entwistle 's bass became more of a lead instrument , playing melodies . In February 1964 , the Detours became aware of the group Johnny Devlin and the Detours and changed their name . Townshend and his room @-@ mate Richard Barnes spent a night considering names , focusing on a theme of joke announcements , including " No One " and " the Group " . Townshend preferred " the Hair " , and Barnes liked " the Who " because it " had a pop punch " . Daltrey chose " the Who " the next morning . 
 = = = 1964 – 78 = = = 
 = = = = Early career = = = = 
 By the time the Detours had become the Who , they had already found regular gigs , including at the Oldfield Hotel in Greenford , the White Hart Hotel in Acton , the Goldhawk Social Club in Shepherd 's Bush , and the Notre Dame Hall in Leicester Square . They had also replaced Druce as manager with Helmut Gorden , with whom they secured an audition with Chris <unk> for Fontana Records . <unk> found problems with the drumming and , according to Sandom , Townshend immediately turned on him and threatened to fire him if his playing did not immediately improve . Sandom left in disgust , but was persuaded to lend his kit to any potential stand @-@ ins or replacements . Sandom and Townshend did not speak to each other again for 14 years . 
 During a gig with a stand @-@ in drummer in late April at the Oldfield , the band first met Keith Moon . Moon grew up in Wembley , and had been drumming in bands since 1961 . He was performing with a semi @-@ professional band called the Beachcombers , and wanted to play full @-@ time . Moon played a few songs with the group , breaking a bass drum pedal and tearing a drum skin . The band were impressed with his energy and enthusiasm , and offered him the job . Moon performed with the Beachcombers a few more times , but dates clashed and he chose to devote himself to the Who . The Beachcombers auditioned Sandom , but were unimpressed and did not ask him to join . 
 The Who changed managers to Peter Meaden . He decided that the group would be ideal to represent the growing mod movement in Britain which involved fashion , scooters and music genres such as rhythm and blues , soul and beat . He renamed the group the High Numbers , dressed them up in mod clothes , secured a second , more favourable audition with Fontana and wrote the lyrics for both sides of their single " Zoot Suit " / " I 'm the Face " to appeal to mods . The tune for " Zoot Suit " was " Misery " by the Dynamics , and " I 'm the Face " borrowed from Slim Harpo 's " I Got Love If You Want It " . Although Meaden tried to promote the single , it failed to reach the top 50 and the band reverted to calling themselves the Who . The group began to improve their stage image ; Daltrey started using his microphone cable as a whip on stage , and occasionally leapt into the crowd ; Moon threw drumsticks into the air mid @-@ beat ; Townshend mimed machine gunning the crowd with his guitar while jumping on stage and playing guitar with a fast arm @-@ windmilling motion , or stood with his arms aloft allowing his guitar to produce feedback in a posture dubbed " the Bird Man " . 
 Meaden was replaced as manager by two filmmakers , Kit Lambert and Chris Stamp . They were looking for a young , unsigned rock group that they could make a film about , and had seen the band at the Railway Hotel in Wealdstone , which had become a regular venue for them . Lambert related to Townshend and his art school background , and encouraged him to write songs . In August , Lambert and Stamp made a promotional film featuring the group and their audience at the Railway . The band changed their set towards soul , rhythm and blues and Motown covers , and created the slogan " Maximum R & B " . 
 In June 1964 , during a performance at the Railway , Townshend accidentally broke the head of his guitar on the low ceiling of the stage . Angered by the audience 's laughter , he smashed the instrument on the stage , then picked up another guitar and continued the show . The following week , the audience were keen to see a repeat of the event . Moon obliged by kicking his drum kit over , and auto @-@ destructive art became a feature of the Who 's live set . 
 = = = = First singles and My Generation = = = = 
 By late 1964 , the Who were becoming popular in London 's Marquee club , and a rave review of their live act appeared in Melody Maker . Lambert and Stamp attracted the attention of the American producer Shel Talmy , who had produced the Kinks . Townshend had written a song , " I Can 't Explain " , that deliberately sounded like the Kinks to attract Talmy 's attention . Talmy saw the group in rehearsals and was impressed . He signed them to his production company , and sold the recording to the US arm of Decca Records , which meant that the group 's early singles were released in Britain on Brunswick Records , one of UK Decca 's labels for US artists . " I Can 't Explain " was recorded in early November 1964 at Pye Studios in Marble Arch with the Ivy League on backing vocals , and Jimmy Page played fuzz guitar on the B @-@ side , " Bald Headed Woman " . 
 " I Can 't Explain " became popular with pirate radio stations such as Radio Caroline . Pirate radio was important for bands as there were no commercial radio stations in the UK and BBC Radio played little pop music . The group gained further exposure when they appeared on the television programme Ready Steady Go ! Lambert and Stamp were tasked with finding " typical teens " , and invited the group 's regular audience from the Goldhawk Social Club . Enthusiastic reception on television and regular airplay on pirate radio helped the single slowly climb the charts in early 1965 until it reached the top 10 . The follow @-@ up single , " Anyway , Anyhow , Anywhere " , by Townshend and Daltrey , features guitar noises such as pick sliding , toggle switching and feedback , which was so unconventional that it was initially rejected by the US arm of Decca . The single reached the top 10 in the UK and was used as the theme song to Ready Steady Go ! 
 The transition to a hit @-@ making band with original material , encouraged by Lambert , did not sit well with Daltrey , and a recording session of R & B covers went unreleased . The Who were not close friends either , apart from Moon and Entwistle , who enjoyed visiting nightclubs together in the West End of London . The group experienced a difficult time when touring Denmark in September , which culminated in Daltrey throwing Moon 's amphetamines down the toilet and assaulting him . Immediately on returning to Britain , Daltrey was sacked , but was reinstated on the condition that the group became a democracy without his dominant leadership . At this time , the group enlisted Richard Cole as a roadie . 
 The next single , " My Generation " , followed in October . Townshend had written it as a slow blues , but after several abortive attempts , it was turned into a more powerful song with a bass solo from Entwistle . The song used gimmicks such as a vocal stutter to simulate the speech of a mod on amphetamines , and two key changes . Townshend insisted in interviews that the lyrics " Hope I die before I get old " were not meant to be taken literally . Peaking at No. 2 , " My Generation " is the group 's highest @-@ charting single in the UK . The début album My Generation was released in late 1965 . Among original material by Townshend , including the title track and " The Kids Are Alright " , the album has several James Brown covers from the session earlier that year that Daltrey favoured . 
 After My Generation , the Who fell out with Talmy , which meant an abrupt end to their recording contract . The resulting legal acrimony resulted in Talmy holding the rights to the master tapes , which prevented the album from being reissued until 2002 . The Who were signed to Robert Stigwood 's label , Reaction , and released " Substitute " . Townshend said he wrote the song about identity crisis , and as a parody of the Rolling Stones 's " 19th Nervous Breakdown " . It was the first single to feature him playing an acoustic twelve @-@ string guitar . Talmy took legal action over the B @-@ side , " Instant Party " , and the single was withdrawn . A new B @-@ side , " Waltz for a Pig " , was recorded by the Graham Bond Organisation under the pseudonym " the Who Orchestra " . 
 In 1966 the Who released " I 'm a Boy " , about a boy dressed as a girl , taken from an abortive collection of songs called Quads ; " Happy Jack " ; and an EP , Ready Steady Who , that tied in with their regular appearances on Ready Steady Go ! The group continued to have conflict ; on 20 May , Moon and Entwistle were late to a gig having been on the Ready Steady Go ! set with The Beach Boys ' Bruce Johnston . During " My Generation " , Townshend attacked Moon with his guitar ; Moon suffered a black eye and bruises , and he and Entwistle left the band , but changed their minds and rejoined a week later . Moon kept looking for other work , and Jeff Beck had him to play drums on his song " Beck 's Bolero " ( with Page , John Paul Jones and Nicky Hopkins ) because he was " trying to get Keith out of the Who " . 
 = = = = A Quick One and The Who Sell Out = = = = 
 To alleviate financial pressure on the band , Lambert arranged a song @-@ writing deal which required each member to write two songs for the next album . Entwistle contributed " Boris the Spider " and " Whiskey Man " and found a niche role as second songwriter . The band found they needed to fill an extra ten minutes , and Lambert encouraged Townshend to write a longer piece , " A Quick One , While He 's Away " . The suite of song fragments is about a girl who has an affair while her lover is away , but is ultimately forgiven . The album was titled A Quick One ( Happy Jack in the US ) , and reached No. 4 in the UK charts . It was followed in 1967 by the UK Top 5 single " Pictures of Lily " . 
 By 1966 , Ready Steady Go ! had ended , the mod movement was becoming unfashionable , and the Who found themselves in competition on the London circuit with groups including Cream and the Jimi Hendrix Experience . Lambert and Stamp realised that commercial success in the US was paramount to the group 's future , and arranged a deal with promoter Frank Barsalona for a short package tour in New York . The group 's performances , which still involved smashing guitars and kicking over drums , were well received , and led to their first major US appearance at the Monterey Pop Festival . The group , especially Moon , were not fond of the hippie movement , and thought their violent stage act would stand in sharp contrast to the peaceful atmosphere of the festival . Hendrix was also on the bill , and was also going to smash his guitar on stage . Townshend verbally abused Hendrix and accused him of stealing his act , and the pair argued about who should go on stage first , with the Who winning the argument . The Who brought hired equipment to the festival ; Hendrix shipped over his regular touring gear from Britain , including a full Marshall stack . According to biographer Tony Fletcher , Hendrix sounded " so much better than the Who it was embarrassing " . The Who 's appearance at Monterey gave them recognition in the US , and " Happy Jack " reached the top 30 . 
 The group followed Monterey with a US tour supporting Herman 's Hermits . The Hermits were a straightforward pop band and enjoyed drugs and practical jokes . They bonded with Moon , who was excited to learn that cherry bombs were legal to purchase in Alabama . Moon acquired a reputation of destroying hotel rooms while on tour , with a particular interest in blowing up toilets . Entwistle said the first cherry bomb they tried " blew a hole in the suitcase and the chair " . Moon recalled his first attempt to flush one down the toilet : " [ A ] ll that porcelain flying through the air was quite unforgettable . I never realised dynamite was so powerful . " After a gig in Flint , Michigan on Moon 's 21st birthday on 23 August 1967 , the entourage caused $ 24 @,@ 000 of damage at the hotel , and Moon knocked out one of his front teeth . Daltrey later said that the tour brought the band closer , and as the support act , they could turn up and perform a short show without any major responsibilities . 
 After the Hermits tour , the Who recorded their next single , " I Can See for Miles " , which Townshend had written in 1966 but had avoided recording until he was sure it could be produced well . Townshend called it " the ultimate Who record " , and was disappointed it reached only No. 10 in the UK . It became their best selling single in the US , reaching No. 9 . The group toured the US again with Eric Burdon and the Animals , including an appearance on The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour , miming to " I Can See For Miles " and " My Generation " . Moon bribed a stage hand to put explosives in his drum kit , who loaded it with ten times the expected quantity . The resulting detonation threw Moon off his drum riser and his arm was cut by flying cymbal shrapnel . Townshend 's hair was singed and his left ear left ringing , and a camera and studio monitor were destroyed . 
 The next album was The Who Sell Out — a concept album paying tribute to pirate radio , which had been outlawed in August 1967 by the Marine , & c . , Broadcasting ( Offences ) Act 1967 . It included humorous jingles and mock commercials between songs , a mini rock opera called " Rael " , and " I Can See For Miles " . The Who declared themselves a pop art group and thus viewed advertising as an artform ; they recorded a wide variety of radio advertisements , such as for canned milkshakes and the American Cancer Society , in defiance of the rising anti @-@ consumerist ethos of the hippie counterculture . Townshend stated , " We don 't change offstage . We live pop art . " 
 Later that year , Lambert and Stamp formed a record label , Track Records , with distribution by Polydor . As well as signing Hendrix , Track became the imprint for all the Who 's UK output until the mid @-@ 1970s . 
 The group started 1968 by touring Australia and New Zealand with the Small Faces . The groups had trouble with the local authorities and the New Zealand Truth called them " unwashed , foul @-@ smelling , booze @-@ swilling no @-@ <unk> " . They continued to tour across the US and Canada during the first half of the year . 
 = = = = Tommy , Woodstock and Live at Leeds = = = = 
 By 1968 the Who had started to attract attention in the underground press . Townshend had stopped using drugs and became interested in the teachings of Meher Baba . In August , he gave an interview to Rolling Stone editor Jann Wenner describing in detail the plot of a new album project and its relationship to Baba 's teachings . The album went through several names during recording , including Deaf Dumb and Blind Boy and Amazing Journey ; Townshend settled on Tommy for the album about the life of a deaf , dumb and blind boy , and his attempt to communicate with others . Some songs , such as " Welcome " and " Amazing Journey " were inspired by Baba 's teaching , and others came from observations within the band . " Sally Simpson " is about a fan who tried to climb on stage at a gig by the Doors that they attended and " Pinball Wizard " was written so that New York Times journalist Nik Cohn , a pinball enthusiast , would give the album a good review . Townshend later said , " I wanted the story of Tommy to have several levels ... a rock singles level and a bigger concept level " , containing the spiritual message he wanted as well as being entertaining . The album was projected for a Christmas 1968 release but recording stalled after Townshend decided to make a double album to cover the story in sufficient depth . 
 By the end of the year , 18 months of touring had led to a well @-@ rehearsed and tight live band , which was evident when they performed " A Quick One While He 's Away " at The Rolling Stones Rock and Roll Circus television special . The Stones considered their own performance lacklustre , and the project was never broadcast . The Who had not released an album in over a year , and had not completed the recording of Tommy , which continued well into 1969 , interspersed with gigs at weekends . Lambert was a key figure in keeping the group focused and getting the album completed , and typed up a script to help them understand the story and how the songs fitted together . 
 The album was released in May with the accompanying single , " Pinball Wizard " , a début performance at Ronnie Scott 's , and a tour , playing most of the new album live . Tommy sold 200 @,@ 000 copies in the US in its first two weeks , and was a critical smash , Life saying , " ... for sheer power , invention and brilliance of performance , Tommy outstrips anything which has ever come out of a recording studio " . Melody Maker declared : " Surely the Who are now the band against which all others are to be judged . " Daltrey had significantly improved as a singer , and set a template for rock singers in the 1970s by growing his hair long and wearing open shirts on stage . Townshend had taken to wearing a boiler suit and Doctor Martens shoes . 
 In August , the Who performed at the Woodstock Festival , despite being reluctant and demanding $ 13 @,@ 000 up front . The group were scheduled to appear on Saturday night , 16 August , but the festival ran late and they did not take to the stage until 5am on Sunday ; they played most of Tommy . During their performance , Yippie leader Abbie Hoffman interrupted the set to give a political speech about the arrest of John Sinclair ; Townshend kicked him off stage , shouting : " Fuck off my fucking stage ! " During " See Me , Feel Me " , the sun rose almost as if on cue ; Entwistle later said , " God was our lighting man " . At the end , Townshend threw his guitar into the audience . The set was professionally recorded and filmed , and portions appear on the Woodstock film , The Old Grey Whistle Test and The Kids Are Alright . 
 Woodstock has been regarded as culturally significant , but the Who were critical of the event . Roadie John " <unk> " Wolff , who arranged the band 's payment , described it as " a shambles " . Daltrey declared it as " the worst gig [ they ] ever played " and Townshend said , " I thought the whole of America had gone mad . " A more enjoyable appearance came a few weeks later at the second Isle of Wight Festival , which Townshend described as " a great concert for " the band . 
 By 1970 , the Who were widely considered one of the best and most popular live rock bands ; Chris Charlesworth described their concerts as " leading to a kind of rock nirvana that most bands can only dream about " . They decided a live album would help demonstrate how different the sound at their gigs was to Tommy , and set about listening to the hours of recordings they had accumulated . Townshend baulked at the prospect of doing so , and demanded that all the tapes be burned . Instead , they booked two shows , one in Leeds on 14 February , and one in Hull the following day , with the intention of recording a live album . Technical problems from the Hull gig resulted in the Leeds gig being used , which became Live at Leeds . The album is viewed by several critics including The Independent , The Telegraph and the BBC , as one of the best live rock albums of all time . 
 The Tommy tour included shows in European opera houses and saw the Who become the first rock act to play at the Metropolitan Opera House in New York City . In March the Who released the UK top 20 hit " The Seeker " , continuing a theme of issuing singles separate to albums . Townshend wrote the song to commemorate the common man , as a contrast to the themes on Tommy . 
 = = = = Lifehouse and Who 's Next = = = = 
 Tommy secured the Who 's future , and made them millionaires . The group reacted in different ways — Daltrey and Entwistle lived comfortably , Townshend was embarrassed at his wealth , which he felt was at odds with Meher Baba 's ideals , and Moon spent frivolously . 
 During the latter part of 1970 , Townshend plotted a follow up Tommy : Lifehouse , which was to be a multi @-@ media project symbolising the relationship between an artist and his audience . He developed ideas in his home studio , creating layers of synthesizers , and the Young Vic theatre in London was booked for a series of experimental concerts . Townshend approached the gigs with optimism ; the rest of the band were just happy to be gigging again . Eventually , the others complained to Townshend that the project was too complicated and they should simply record another album . Things deteriorated until Townshend had a nervous breakdown and abandoned Lifehouse . 
 Entwistle was the first member of the group to release a solo album , Smash Your Head Against the Wall , in May 1971 . 
 Recording at the Record Plant in New York City in March 1971 was abandoned when Lambert 's addiction to hard drugs interfered with his ability to produce . The group restarted with Glyn Johns in April . The album was mostly Lifehouse material , with one unrelated song by Entwistle , " My Wife " , and was released as Who 's Next in August . The album reached No. 1 in the UK and the US . " Baba O 'Riley " and " Won 't Get Fooled Again " are early examples of synthesizer use in rock , featuring keyboard sounds generated in real time by a Lowrey organ ; on " Won 't Get Fooled Again " , it was further processed through a VCS3 synthesizer . The synthesizer intro to " Baba O 'Riley " was programmed based on Meher Baba 's vital stats , and the track featured a violin solo by Dave Arbus . The album was a critical and commercial success , and has been certified 3x platinum by the RIAA . The Who continued to issue Lifehouse @-@ related material over the next few years , including the singles " Let 's See Action " , " Join Together " and " Relay " . 
 The band went back on tour , and " Baba O ' Riley " and " Won 't Get Fooled Again " became live favourites . In November they performed at the newly opened Rainbow Theatre in London for three nights , continuing in the US later that month , where Robert Hilburn of the Los Angeles Times described the Who as " the Greatest Show on Earth " . The tour was slightly disrupted at the Civic Auditorium in San Francisco on 12 December when Moon passed out over his kit after overdosing on brandy and barbiturates . He recovered and completed the gig , playing to his usual strength . 
 = = = = Quadrophenia , Tommy film and The Who by Numbers = = = = 
 After touring Who 's Next , and needing time to write a follow @-@ up , Townshend insisted that the Who take a lengthy break , as they had not stopped touring since the band started . There was no group activity until May 1972 , when they started working on a proposed new album , Rock Is Dead — Long Live Rock ! , but , unhappy with the recordings , abandoned the sessions . Tensions began to emerge as Townshend believed Daltrey just wanted a money @-@ making band and Daltrey thought Townshend 's projects were getting pretentious . Moon 's behaviour was becoming increasingly destructive and problematic through excessive drinking and drugs use , and a desire to party and tour . Daltrey performed an audit of the group 's finances and discovered that Lambert and Stamp had not kept sufficient records . He believed them to be no longer effective managers , which Townshend and Moon disputed . The painful dissolution of the managerial and personal relationships are recounted in James D. Cooper 's 2014 retrospective documentary , Lambert & Stamp . Following a short European tour , the remainder of 1972 was spent working on an orchestral version of Tommy with Lou Reizner . 
 By 1973 , the Who turned to recording the album Quadrophenia about mod and its subculture , set against clashes with Rockers in early 1960s Britain . The story is about a boy named Jimmy , who undergoes a personality crisis , and his relationship with his family , friends and mod culture . The music features four themes , reflecting the four personalities of the Who . Townshend played multi @-@ tracked synthesizers , and Entwistle played several overdubbed horn parts . By the time the album was being recorded , relationships between the band and Lambert and Stamp had broken down irreparably , and Bill Curbishley replaced them . The album was the Who 's highest charting , peaking at No. 2 in both the UK and US . 
 The Quadrophenia tour started in Stoke on Trent in October and was immediately beset with problems . Daltrey resisted Townshend 's wish to add Joe Cocker 's keyboardist Chris Stainton ( who played on the album ) to the touring band . As a compromise , Townshend assembled the keyboard and synthesizer parts on backing tapes , as such a strategy had been successful with " Baba O 'Riley " and " Won 't Get Fooled Again " . Unfortunately , the technology was not sophisticated enough to deal with the demands of the music ; added to this issue , tour rehearsals had been interrupted due to an argument that culminated in Daltrey punching Townshend and knocking him out cold . At a gig in Newcastle , the tapes completely malfunctioned , and an enraged Townshend dragged sound @-@ man Bob Pridden on @-@ stage , screamed at him , kicked all the amps over and partially destroyed the backing tapes . The show was abandoned for an " oldies " set , at the end of which Townshend smashed his guitar and Moon kicked over his drumkit . The Independent described this gig as one of the worst of all time . The US tour started on 20 November at the Cow Palace in Daly City , California ; Moon passed out during " Won 't Get Fooled Again " and during " Magic Bus " . Townshend asked the audience , " Can anyone play the drums ? — I mean somebody good . " An audience member , Scot Halpin , filled in for the rest of the show . After a show in Montreal , the band ( except for Daltrey , who retired to bed early ) caused so much damage to their hotel room , including destroying an antique painting and ramming a marble table through a wall , that federal law enforcement arrested them . 
 By 1974 , work had begun in earnest on a Tommy film . Stigwood suggested Ken Russell as director , whose previous work Townshend had admired . The film featured a star @-@ studded cast , including the band members . David Essex auditioned for the title role , but the band persuaded Daltrey to take it . The cast included Ann @-@ Margret , Oliver Reed , Eric Clapton , Tina Turner , Elton John and Jack Nicholson . Townshend and Entwistle worked on the soundtrack for most of the year , handling the bulk of the instrumentation . Moon had moved to Los Angeles , so they used session drummers , including Kenney Jones . Elton John used his own band for " Pinball Wizard " . Filming was from April until August . 1500 extras appeared in the " Pinball Wizard " sequence . 
 The film premièred on 18 March 1975 to a standing ovation . Townshend was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Score . Tommy was shown at the 1975 Cannes Film Festival , but not in the main competition . It won the award for Rock Movie of the Year in the First Annual Rock Music Awards and generated over $ 2 million in its first month . The soundtrack reached number two on the Billboard charts . 
 Work on Tommy took up most of 1974 , and live performances by the Who were restricted to a show in May at the Valley , the home of Charlton Athletic , in front of 80 @,@ 000 fans , and a few dates at Madison Square Garden in June . Towards the end of the year , the group released the out @-@ takes album Odds & Sods , which featured several songs from the aborted Lifehouse project . 
 In 1975 , Daltrey and Townshend disagreed about the band 's future and criticised each other via interviews in the music paper New Musical Express . Daltrey was grateful that the Who had saved him from a career as a sheet @-@ metal worker and was unhappy at Townshend not playing well ; Townshend felt the commitment of the group prevented him from releasing solo material . The next album , The Who by Numbers , had introspective songs from Townshend that dealt with disillusionment such as " However Much I Booze " and " How Many Friends " ; they resembled his later solo work . Entwistle 's " Success Story " gave a humorous look at the music industry , and " Squeeze Box " was a hit single . The group toured from October , playing little new material and few Quadrophenia numbers , and reintroducing several from Tommy . On 6 December 1975 , the Who set the record for largest indoor concert at the Pontiac Silverdome , attended by 78 @,@ 000 . On 31 May 1976 , they played a second concert at the Valley which was listed in the Guinness Book of Records as the world 's loudest concert at over 120 dB . Townshend had become fed up of touring but Entwistle considered live performance to be at a peak . 
 = = = = Who Are You and Moon 's death = = = = 
 After the 1976 tour , Townshend took most of the following year off to spend time with his family . He discovered that former Beatles and Rolling Stones manager Allen Klein had bought a stake in his publishing company . A settlement was reached , but Townshend was upset and disillusioned that Klein had attempted to take ownership of his songs . Townshend went to the Speakeasy where he met the Sex Pistols ' Steve Jones and Paul Cook , fans of the Who . After leaving , he passed out in a doorway , where a policeman said he would not be arrested if he could stand and walk . The events inspired the title track of the next album , Who Are You . 
 The group reconvened in September 1977 , but Townshend announced there would be no live performances for the immediate future , a decision that Daltrey endorsed . By this point , Moon was so unhealthy that the Who conceded it would be difficult for him to cope with touring . The only gig that year was an informal show on 15 December at the Gaumont State Cinema in Kilburn , London , filmed for the documentary , The Kids Are Alright . The band had not played for 14 months , and their performance was so weak that the footage was unused . Moon 's playing was particularly lacklustre and he had gained a lot of weight , though Daltrey later said , " even at his worst , Keith Moon was amazing . " 
 Recording of Who Are You started in January 1978 . Daltrey clashed with Johns over the production of his vocals , and Moon 's drumming was so poor that Daltrey and Entwistle considered firing him . Moon 's playing improved , but on one track , " Music Must Change " , he was replaced as he could not play in 6 / 8 time . In May , the Who filmed another performance at Shepperton Sound Studios for The Kids Are Alright . This performance was strong , and several tracks were used in the film . It was the last gig Moon performed with the Who . 
 The album was released on 18 August , and became their biggest and fastest seller to date , peaking at No. 6 in the UK and No. 2 in the US . Instead of touring , Daltrey , Townshend and Moon did a series of promotional television interviews , and Entwistle worked on the soundtrack for The Kids Are Alright . 
 On 6 September , Moon attended a party held by Paul McCartney to celebrate Buddy Holly 's birthday . Returning to his flat , Moon took 32 tablets of clomethiazole which had been prescribed to combat his alcohol withdrawal . He passed out the following morning and was discovered dead later that day . 
 = = = 1978 – 83 = = = 
 The day after Moon 's death , Townshend issued the statement : " We are more determined than ever to carry on , and we want the spirit of the group to which Keith contributed so much to go on , although no human being can ever take his place . " Kenney Jones , of the Small Faces and the Faces , replaced Moon in November 1978 . John " Rabbit " Bundrick joined the live band as an unofficial keyboardist . On 2 May 1979 , the Who returned to the stage with a concert at the Rainbow Theatre , followed by the Cannes Film Festival in France and dates at Madison Square Garden in New York . 
 The Quadrophenia film was released that year . It was directed by Franc Roddam in his feature @-@ directing début , and had straightforward acting rather than musical numbers as in Tommy . John Lydon was considered as Jimmy , but the role went to Phil Daniels . Sting played Jimmy 's friend and fellow mod , the Ace Face . The soundtrack was Jones ' first appearance on a Who record , performing on newly written material not on the original album . The film was a critical and box office success in the UK and appealed to the growing mod revival movement . The Jam were influenced by the Who , and critics noticed a similarity between Townshend and the group 's leader , Paul Weller . 
 The Kids Are Alright was also completed in 1979 . It was a retrospective of the band 's career , directed by Jeff Stein . The film included footage of the band at Monterey , Woodstock and Pontiac , and clips from the Smothers Brothers ' show and Russell Harty Plus . Moon had died one week after seeing the rough cut with Daltrey . The film contains the Shepperton concert , and an audio track of him playing over silent footage of himself was the last time he ever played the drums . 
 In December , the Who became the third band , after the Beatles and the Band , to grace the cover of Time . The article , by Jay Cocks , said the band had " outpaced , outlasted , outlived and outclassed " all of their rock band contemporaries . 
 = = = = Cincinnati tragedy = = = = 
 On 3 December 1979 , a crowd crush at a Who gig at the Riverfront Coliseum , Cincinnati killed 11 fans . This was partly due to the festival seating , where the first to enter get the best positions . Some fans waiting outside mistook the band 's sound check for the concert , and attempted to force their way inside . As only a few entrance doors were opened , a bottleneck situation ensued with thousands trying to gain entry , and the crush became deadly . 
 The Who were not told until after the show because civic authorities feared crowd problems if the concert were cancelled . The band were deeply shaken upon learning of it and requested that appropriate safety precautions be taken in the future . The following evening , in Buffalo , New York , Daltrey told the crowd that the band had " lost a lot of family last night and this show 's for them " . 
 = = = = Change and break @-@ up = = = = 
 Daltrey took a break in 1980 to work on the film McVicar , in which he took the lead role of bank robber John McVicar . The soundtrack album is a Daltrey solo album , though all members of the Who are included in the supporting musicians , and was his most successful solo release . 
 The Who released two studio albums with Jones as drummer , Face Dances ( 1981 ) and It 's Hard ( 1982 ) . Face Dances produced a US top 20 and UK top ten hit with the single " You Better You Bet " , whose video was one of the first shown on MTV . Both Face Dances and It 's Hard sold well and the latter received a five @-@ star review in Rolling Stone . The single " Eminence Front " from It 's Hard was a hit , and became a regular at live shows . 
 By this time Townshend had fallen into depression , wondering if he was no longer a visionary . He was again at odds with Daltrey and Entwistle , who merely wanted to tour and play hits and thought Townshend had saved his best songs for his solo album , Empty Glass ( 1980 ) . Jones ' drumming style was very different from Moon 's and this drew criticism within the band . Townshend briefly became addicted to heroin before cleaning up early in 1982 . 
 Townshend wanted the Who to stop touring and become a studio act ; Entwistle threatened to quit , saying , " I don 't intend to get off the road ... there 's not much I can do about it except hope they change their minds . " Townshend did not change his mind , and so the Who embarked on a farewell tour of the US and Canada with the Clash as support , ending in Toronto on 17 December . 
 Townshend spent part of 1983 writing material for a studio album owed to Warner Bros. Records from a contract in 1980 , but Townshend found himself unable and at the end of 1983 paid for himself and Jones to be released from the contract . He focused on solo albums such as White City : A Novel ( 1985 ) , The Iron Man ( 1989 , featuring Daltrey and Entwistle and two songs credited to the Who ) , and <unk> ( 1993 ) . 
 = = = Reunions = = = 
 In July 1985 , the Who performed at Live Aid at Wembley Stadium , London . The BBC transmission truck blew a fuse during the set , temporarily interrupting the broadcast . At the 1988 Brit Awards , at the Royal Albert Hall , the band was given the British Phonographic Industry 's Lifetime Achievement Award . The short set they played there was the last time Jones played with the Who . 
 = = = = 1989 tour = = = = 
 In 1989 , the band embarked on a 25th @-@ anniversary The Kids Are Alright reunion tour with Simon Phillips on drums and Steve " Boltz " Bolton as a second guitarist . Townshend had announced in 1987 that he suffered from tinnitus and alternated acoustic , rhythm , and lead guitar to preserve his hearing . Their two shows at Sullivan Stadium in Foxborough , Massachusetts , sold 100 @,@ 000 tickets in less than eight hours , beating previous records set there by U2 and David Bowie . The tour was briefly marred at a gig in Tacoma , Washington , where Townshend injured his arm on @-@ stage . Some critics disliked the tour 's over @-@ produced and expanded line @-@ up , calling it " The Who on Ice " ; Stephen Thomas Erlewine at AllMusic said the tour " tarnished the reputation of the Who almost irreparably " . The tour included most of Tommy and included such guests as Phil Collins , Billy Idol and Elton John . A 2 @-@ CD live album , Join Together , was released in 1990 . 
 = = = = Partial reunions = = = = 
 In 1990 , the Who were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame . The group have a featured collection in the hall 's museum , including one of Moon 's velvet suits , a Warwick bass of Entwistle 's , and a drumhead from 1968 . 
 In 1991 , the Who recorded a cover of Elton John 's " Saturday Night 's Alright for Fighting " for the tribute album Two Rooms : Celebrating the Songs of Elton John & Bernie Taupin . It was the last studio recording to feature Entwistle . In 1994 , Daltrey turned 50 and celebrated with two concerts at New York 's Carnegie Hall . The shows included guest spots by Entwistle and Townshend . Although all three surviving original members of the Who attended , they appeared on stage together only during the finale , " Join Together " , with the other guests . Daltrey toured that year with Entwistle , Zak Starkey on drums and Simon Townshend filling in for his brother as guitarist . 
 = = = Re @-@ formation = = = 
