 = Paul Gascoigne = 
 Paul John Gascoigne ( born 27 May 1967 ) is a former England international footballer and football manager . He is also known by his nickname , Gazza . He earned 57 caps during his England career and has been described by the National Football Museum as " the most naturally gifted English midfielder of his generation " . 
 Born and raised in Gateshead , the midfielder signed schoolboy terms with Newcastle United , before turning professional with the top tier ( pre @-@ Premier League creation ) club in 1985 . Three years later he was sold on to Tottenham Hotspur for a £ 2 @.@ 2 million fee . He won the FA Cup with Spurs in 1991 , before he was sold to Italian club Lazio for £ 5 @.@ 5 million the following year . In July 1995 , he was transferred to Rangers for £ 4 @.@ 3 million , and helped the club to two league titles and two trophies . He returned to England in a £ 3 @.@ 4 million move to Middlesbrough in March 1998 . He made his debut in the Premier League in the 1998 – 99 season , having already featured in the 1998 Football League Cup Final . He switched to Everton in July 2000 , and later had spells with Burnley , Gansu Tianma ( China ) , and Boston United . 
 He was part of the England squad that reached fourth place in the 1990 FIFA World Cup , where he was reduced to tears after receiving a yellow card in the semi @-@ final with West Germany , which meant he would be suspended for the final itself had England won the game . He also helped the team to the semi @-@ finals of UEFA Euro 1996 , scoring a goal against Scotland which was described as one of the best of the tournament . 
 After retiring from professional football , his life became dominated by his mental and emotional problems , particularly his alcoholism . His personal struggles have received regular coverage in the British press , especially since leaving professional football . He has attempted to live without alcohol on numerous occasions , though rehabilitation programmes have provided only temporary relief . His problems ended his coaching career , and he has not worked since being fired as the manager of Kettering Town in 2005 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Gascoigne was born in the Dunston area of Gateshead , England on 27 May 1967 . His father , John , was a hod carrier , and his mother , Carol , worked in a factory . He was named Paul John Gascoigne in tribute to The Beatles members Paul McCartney and John Lennon . 
 He attended <unk> Junior High School , then the Heathfield Senior High School , both in the Low Fell area of Gateshead . He was noticed by football scouts while playing for Gateshead Boys , though failed to impress in a trial at Ipswich Town . Further trials at Middlesbrough and Southampton also proved unsuccessful , before the team he supported , Newcastle United , signed him as a schoolboy in 1980 . He was usually overweight whilst signed to Newcastle and frequently got into trouble with his friend Jimmy " Five <unk> " Gardner , particularly when the pair were taken to court and fined over a hit and run incident . Newcastle chairman Stan Seymour described Gascoigne as " George Best without brains " . 
 While Gascoigne was successful on the football field , his childhood was marked by instability and tragedy . Initially his family lived in a single upstairs room in a council house with a shared bathroom , and moved several times during Gascoigne 's early life . When he was ten , Gascoigne witnessed the death of Steven <unk> , the younger brother of a friend , who was killed in a traffic collision . Around this time , his father began to suffer from seizures . Gascoigne began developing obsessions and twitches , and was taken into therapy at age ten , but soon quit the therapy sessions after his father expressed doubts over the treatment methods . 
 Gascoigne developed an addiction to gaming machines , frequently spending all his money on them , and also began shoplifting to fund his addiction . Gascoigne experienced further tragedy when a friend , whom he had encouraged to join Newcastle United from Middlesbrough , died whilst he was working for Gascoigne 's uncle on a building site . At the age of 15 , he took the decision to provide for his family – his parents and two sisters – financially , as he saw professional football as a way of earning more money than the rest of the family were capable of . He enjoyed football , and later wrote that " I didn 't have twitches or worry about death when I was playing football " . He was signed on as an apprentice at Newcastle on his sixteenth birthday . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Newcastle United = = = 
 Gascoigne captained Newcastle United 's youth team to the FA Youth Cup in the 1984 – 85 season , and scored twice in the 4 – 1 victory over Watford in the final at Vicarage Road . Manager Jack Charlton handed Gascoigne his first team debut as a substitute for George Reilly in a 1 – 0 win over Queens Park Rangers on 13 April 1985 at St James ' Park . At the age of 18 Gascoigne signed a two @-@ year £ 120 a week contract at Newcastle , with the club also having a further two @-@ year option clause . 
 Willie McFaul took over as manager for the 1985 – 86 season , and named Gascoigne in his first eleven from the opening game of the campaign ; he took the place of Chris Waddle , who had been sold to Tottenham Hotspur in the summer . He scored his first goal at home to Oxford United in a 3 – 0 victory on 21 September 1985 , and claimed a further eight goals in the 1985 – 86 campaign . Newcastle finished 11th in the First Division that season and , at the end of it , Gascoigne was featured on the front cover of the Rothmans Football Yearbook . 
 He scored five goals in 24 league games in the 1986 – 87 season , as the " Magpies " slipped to 17th place , just three points above the relegation play @-@ offs . 
 In a 0 – 0 draw with Wimbledon at Plough Lane hard @-@ man Vinnie Jones singled him out for attention , and in an incident that would become a much @-@ publicised photograph , Jones grabbed him by the genitals as Gascoigne screamed in agony . Gascoigne subsequently sent Jones a red rose , and the two became good friends . He was named as the PFA Young Player of the Year and listed on the PFA Team of the Year in the 1987 – 88 season , and was the subject of offers from both Manchester United and Tottenham Hotspur . His first choice was Liverpool but with no offer forthcoming , Gascoigne promised Alex Ferguson that he would sign for Manchester United . Ferguson duly went on holiday to Malta , where he received the news that Gascoigne had signed for Spurs , for a record British fee of £ 2 @.@ 2 million . In his 1999 autobiography , Ferguson claimed that Gascoigne was wooed into signing for Tottenham after they bought a house for his impoverished family . 
 = = = Tottenham Hotspur = = = 
 In his first season at White Hart Lane Gascoigne helped Terry Venables 's Spurs to sixth in the First Division , scoring seven goals in 37 appearances . They rose to third place in 1989 – 90 , but were still 16 points behind champions Liverpool . He was named as BBC Sports Personality of the Year in 1990 , and on accepting the award said that " I haven 't won anything in the game as yet . But the World Cup did help to put England on the map " . He was also named as Tottenham Hotspur 's Player of the Year . 
 Gascoigne was named on the PFA Team of the Year in the 1990 – 91 season as Tottenham reached the FA Cup Final , with victories over Blackpool , Oxford United , Portsmouth , Notts County and North London derby rivals Arsenal . He scored the opening goal of the 3 – 1 victory over Arsenal at Wembley with a free @-@ kick , one of six goals he scored in the competition . Going into the final against Nottingham Forest he had already agreed terms to join Italian club Lazio in an £ 8 @.@ 5 million deal . However just 15 minutes into the game he committed a dangerous knee @-@ high foul on Gary Charles and ruptured his own cruciate ligaments in his right knee . England team mate Stuart Pearce scored from the resultant free kick , and Gascoigne subsequently collapsed after the kick @-@ off , forcing him to leave the match on a stretcher . Tottenham went on to win the Cup in extra @-@ time . 
 He missed the entire 1991 – 92 season while he recovered , suffering a further knee injury in late 1991 , when an incident at a nightclub on Tyneside kept him out for even longer . The saga over Gascoigne 's proposed transfer to Lazio dominated the tabloid press throughout 1991 , often overshadowing the key national news of that time – namely the recession and rise in unemployment that it sparked – although the broadsheet newspapers generally kept stories about Gascoigne confined to their back pages . 
 " I 'm very pleased for Paul but it 's like watching your mother @-@ in @-@ law drive off a cliff in your new car . " 
 = = = Lazio = = = 
 Gascoigne eventually joined Lazio for a fee of £ 5 @.@ 5 million ; he received a £ 2 million signing @-@ on fee and signed a contract worth £ 22 @,@ 000 a week . He made his Serie A debut on 27 September 1992 in a match against Genoa which was televised in Britain as well as Italy . He failed to fully settle in Italy and was beset by negative media interest which was not helped by the numerous occasions he punched reporters and the time when he belched down a microphone on live television . He was well received by the club 's fans , but not by the club 's owner Sergio <unk> , who resented him after Gascoigne greeted him by saying " Tua <unk> , grande <unk> " ( roughly translated as " Your daughter , big tits " ) . His form was inconsistent in his first season at the Stadio Olimpico as he had previously spent a year out injured , but he endeared himself to Eagles fans when he scored in the 89th minute to equalise during the Rome derby against A.S. Roma . He broke his cheekbone whilst on international duty in April 1993 , and had to play the remaining games of the season in a mask . Lazio ended the campaign in fifth place , which was considered a success as it meant qualification for European competition for the first time in 16 years . 
 He fell badly out of shape before the 1993 – 94 season and was told by manager Dino Zoff to lose two stone ( 13 kg ) by the start of the campaign else he would lose his first team place . Gascoigne went on an extreme weight loss diet and succeeded in shedding the excess fat . He kept his place in the team and captained the club against US Cremonese when regular captain Roberto <unk> was substituted . However , in April he broke his leg in training whilst attempting to tackle Alessandro Nesta . Upon his recovery he was disgruntled with new head coach Zdeněk Zeman 's stern fitness approach , and both club and player decided to part ways at the end of the 1994 – 95 season . 
 = = = Rangers = = = 
 Gascoigne signed for Rangers in July 1995 , for a club record fee of £ 4 @.@ 3 million , on wages of £ 15 @,@ 000 a week . He made an immediate impact ; in the fifth league game of the season in the Old Firm match at Celtic Park he scored a goal after running almost the full length of the pitch . On 30 December , in a match against Hibernian , Gascoigne was booked by referee Dougie Smith after he picked Smith 's yellow card up from the ground and jokingly ' booked ' the referee . Rangers went on to win the league in the 1995 – 96 season , clinching the title in the penultimate game of the season against Aberdeen at Ibrox Stadium ; Gascoigne scored a hat @-@ trick during the game . Rangers won the double as they also won the Scottish Cup by knocking out Keith , Clyde , Inverness Caledonian Thistle and Celtic , before beating Heart of Midlothian 5 – 1 in the final at Hampden Park . He scored 19 goals in 42 appearances in all competitions , and was named as both PFA Scotland Players ' Player of the Year and SFWA Footballer of the Year . 
 Rangers won the league title again in 1996 – 97 , their ninth in succession . Gascoigne claimed hat @-@ tricks against Kilmarnock and Motherwell , and ended the campaign with 17 goals in 34 games . However manager Walter Smith and assistant Archie Knox became increasingly concerned over Gascoigne 's reliance on alcohol . The " Gers " won another double by winning the League Cup , knocking out Clydebank , Ayr United , Hibernian and Dunfermline Athletic en route to the final . Rangers beat Hearts 4 – 3 in the final at Celtic Park , with Gascoigne scoring two goals and Ally McCoist claiming the other two . 
 In November 1997 , Gascoigne received a five @-@ match ban after being sent off for violent conduct during the Old Firm derby following an incident with Celtic midfielder Morten <unk> . In January 1998 , Gascoigne courted serious controversy after he played a mock flute ( symbolic of the flute @-@ playing of Orange Order marchers ) during an Old Firm match at Celtic Park . The gesture infuriated Celtic fans who had been taunting him and Gascoigne was fined £ 20 @,@ 000 by Rangers after the incident . He also received a death threat from an Irish Republican Army ( IRA ) Member following the incident . The 1997 – 98 season was not a success , as Gascoigne scored just three goals in 28 games and Rangers failed to win any trophies , losing the league title to Celtic . 
 = = = Middlesbrough = = = 
 Gascoigne left Scotland to join Middlesbrough for £ 3 @.@ 45 million in March 1998 , where former England teammate Bryan Robson was manager . His first match was the 1998 Football League Cup Final defeat to Chelsea at Wembley , where he came on as a substitute . He played seven games in the First Division , helping " Boro " into the Premier League as runners @-@ up to Nottingham Forest at the end of the 1997 – 98 season . 
 Before the 1998 – 99 campaign began , Gascoigne began suffering from blackouts after blaming himself for the death of a friend , who died after Gascoigne and a group of friends went on a night out drinking . Despite his ongoing personal problems and his spell in rehab , Gascoigne started the season in good form and helped Middlesbrough into fourth place by Christmas . They ended the season in ninth place and having scored three goals in 26 top @-@ flight games Gascoigne was linked with a recall to the England squad , who were now managed by former teammate Kevin Keegan and lacking a creative presence in midfield . 
 His career went into terminal decline during the 1999 – 2000 campaign , with Gascoigne breaking his arm after elbowing opposition midfield player George Boateng in the head during Middlesbrough 's 4 – 0 defeat to Aston Villa at the Riverside Stadium . He subsequently received a three match ban and £ 5 @,@ 000 fine from the Football Association . 
 = = = Everton = = = 
 Gascoigne signed a two @-@ year contract with Everton , managed by former Rangers boss Walter Smith , after joining on a free transfer in July 2000 . He started the 2000 – 01 season well despite not playing every game due to his lack of fitness , but a series of niggling injuries and his ongoing depression took him out of the first team picture by Christmas . 
 After spending time at an alcohol rehabilitation clinic in Arizona , Gascoigne was fit enough to play for the " <unk> " in the 2001 – 02 season , and he scored his first goal for the club – and last in English football – away to Bolton Wanderers on 3 November . However he then suffered a hernia injury , which kept him out of action for three months . Walter Smith left Goodison Park in March , and Gascoigne left the club shortly after his successor , David Moyes , took charge . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 Gascoigne finished the 2001 – 02 season with Stan Ternent 's Burnley , where he made six First Division appearances . The club narrowly missed out on the play @-@ offs , and he left Turf Moor after only two months . In 2002 , he was inducted to the National Football Museum , being described as " the most naturally gifted English midfielder of his generation " . Fellow England midfielder Paul Ince said that Gascoigne was " the best player I 've ever played with ... he had everything . He was amazing . " 
 In summer 2002 , Gascoigne went on trial with American club D.C. United , but rejected a contract . In February 2003 , he signed a nine @-@ month contract with China League One club Gansu Tianma in both a playing and coaching role . Gascoigne scored in his first match in China , and in total scored two goals in four league games but his mental state meant that he had to return to America for treatment against drink and depression in April , and he never returned despite the club ordering him to do so . 
 In July 2004 , Gascoigne was signed as player @-@ coach by League Two side Boston United , and upon signing spoke of his coaching aspirations , saying that " I can become a great coach and a great manager " . Gascoigne left Boston after he made five appearances in a three @-@ month spell , citing professional reasons including his coaching career . 
 = = International career = = 
 Gascoigne was called up to the England under @-@ 21 side in summer 1987 , and scored with a free @-@ kick in his debut in a 2 – 0 win over Morocco . He went on to win 12 caps for the under @-@ 21s under Dave Sexton . 
 Gascoigne was first called up to the full England squad by Bobby Robson for a friendly against Denmark on 14 September 1988 , and came on as a late substitute for Peter Beardsley in a 1 – 0 win . He scored his first goal for England in a 5 – 0 victory over Albania at Wembley on 26 April 1989 . He made his first start in the following game against Chile , and kept his first team place for most matches in the run in to the 1990 FIFA World Cup . He also played four games for the England B team . He secured his place in the World Cup squad in a 4 – 2 win against Czechoslovakia when he scored one goal and was a key component in the other three . 
 He played in all three of the group games in the 1990 World Cup in Italy , and England topped Group F , Gascoigne providing the assist for Mark Wright 's winner against Egypt . In the first knockout game against Belgium he made another assist after chipping a free @-@ kick into the penalty area , where David Platt volleyed the ball into the net . Gascoigne was at the centre of the action again in the quarter @-@ final clash with Cameroon when he gave away a penalty , which Cameroon converted . In extra @-@ time he made a successful through @-@ ball pass from which Gary Lineker won , and subsequently scored a penalty , which proved to be the winning goal . 
 On 4 July 1990 , England played West Germany in a World Cup semi @-@ final match at Juventus 's Stadio delle Alpi in Turin . Gascoigne , having already received a yellow card during England 's 1 – 0 victory over Belgium in the second round , was booked for a foul on Thomas Berthold , which meant that he would be suspended for the final if England won the match . Television cameras showed that he had tears in his eyes following the yellow card and made Gascoigne a highly popular figure with the sympathetic British public . The match culminated in a penalty shoot @-@ out , which the Germans won after Stuart Pearce and Chris Waddle missed their penalties . 
 Robson quit the England job after the tournament , and his successor Graham Taylor dropped Gascoigne in favour of 32 @-@ year @-@ old Gordon Cowans in a Euro ' 92 qualifier against Ireland in November 1990 , citing tactical reasons . He returned to the starting eleven for a friendly against Cameroon the following February , before injury in the FA Cup final three months later caused him to miss the next 21 England fixtures , including all of UEFA Euro 1992 , where England failed to progress beyond the group stages . 
 Gascoigne returned to fitness in time for the opening qualifying game against Norway in October 1992 , and before playing in the 1 – 1 draw he responded to a Norwegian television crew 's request to say ' a few words to Norway ' by saying " fuck off Norway " . His message was broadcast on Norwegian television and he was forced to apologize for the remark . The following month he scored two goals in a 4 – 0 victory over Turkey . Qualification ended badly for England , as they ended in third place behind Norway and the Netherlands and missed out on a place in the 1994 FIFA World Cup . 
 A broken leg in 1994 meant Gascoigne was unable to play for 15 months , but by the time he returned to fitness , Terry Venables – his former manager at Spurs – had been appointed as England manager . As England were hosting UEFA Euro 1996 they did not have to go through the qualification process , so they instead played numerous friendlies , most of which featured Gascoigne in the starting line @-@ up . The final of these games were played in Hong Kong , after which numerous England players were photographed on a night out in which Gascoigne and several others having drinks poured into their mouths whilst sitting in the " dentist 's chair " . The tournament opened with a 1 – 1 draw with Switzerland , during which Gascoigne was substituted . He scored a memorable goal in the second game of the tournament , against Scotland , when he received the ball from Darren Anderton outside the Scotland penalty area , flicked the ball over Colin Hendry with his left foot and changed direction ; Hendry was completely wrong @-@ footed and , as the ball dropped , Gascoigne volleyed it with his right foot past Andy Goram . The goal was followed by the " dentist 's chair " celebration referring to the incident before the Euro 1996 , where Gascoigne lay on the ground as if he were sitting in the dentist 's chair , and teammates sprayed <unk> from bottles into his open mouth . England beat the Netherlands 4 – 1 to make it through to the knock @-@ out stages . They then drew 0 – 0 with Spain before winning 4 – 2 on penalties , the last of which was converted by Gascoigne . England drew 1 – 1 with Germany in the semi @-@ finals , and Gascoigne missed the chance to win the game in extra @-@ time when he came inches away from connecting to an Alan Shearer cross yards in front of an unguarded German net . England lost to Germany in the resulting penalty shoot @-@ out , with Gareth Southgate missing England 's sudden death penalty . 
 Under Glenn Hoddle , Gascoigne was picked regularly and helped England to win the Tournoi de France in 1997 ahead of Brazil , France and Italy . Qualification for the 1998 FIFA World Cup went down to the last group game against Italy at the Stadio Olimpico , and Gascoigne put in a disciplined and mature performance to help England secure the 0 – 0 draw that was enough to take them through to the tournament . However , British tabloid newspapers showed pictures of Gascoigne eating kebabs late at night with DJ friend Chris Evans only a week before the final squad was due to be chosen . Hoddle elected not to pick Gascoigne in the final squad and after hearing the news Gascoigne wrecked Hoddle 's room in a rage before being restrained . Gascoigne was never to play for his country again , having won 57 caps and scored 10 goals . 
 = = Managerial and coaching career = = 
 Having already gained some coaching experience in China , Gascoigne signed for Boston United on 30 July 2004 . After being at the club for 11 games he left ( partly as a result of the club refusing to let him participate in the reality television show I 'm a Celebrity ... Get Me Out of Here ! ) on 5 October , to begin a football coaching course . After leaving Boston , he stated that he was interested in taking over as manager of Scottish side Greenock Morton , but this came to nothing . 
 In mid @-@ 2005 he spent two months as player @-@ coach at the recently founded Portuguese team Algarve United , but he returned to England after a proposed contract never materialised . He was appointed manager of Conference North club Kettering Town on 27 October 2005 , and also planned to put in enough money to own one @-@ third of the club to show his commitment . Previous manager Kevin Wilson was appointed as director of football , and Paul Davis was appointed as the club 's assistant manager . Bookmakers put odds on Gascoigne getting the sack before Christmas , though he insisted that he was at the club " for the long haul " . Attempts to get new sponsors on board were successful , though results on the pitch soon went against Kettering . His tenure lasted just 39 days , and he was dismissed by the club 's board on 5 December . The club 's owner , Imraan <unk> , blamed Gascoigne 's alcohol problems , stating that he drank almost every day he worked . Gascoigne later claimed that the owner had interfered incessantly and harboured ambitions of being a manager himself , despite knowing little about football . He was never on a contract at the club , and was never paid for his six weeks work , nor was he given the chance to invest money in the club as he had first planned . 
 Gascoigne came close to being appointed manager of Garforth Town in October 2010 , and after weeks of talks between his agent and the club he decided to turn down the offer , though reiterated his desire to return to football management . 
 = = Other projects = = 
 At the height of " <unk> " following the 1990 World Cup , he reached number 2 in the UK Top 40 with " Fog on the Tyne " , a collaborative cover with Lindisfarne that earned him a gold disc . He established Paul Gascoigne Promotions and hired a number of staff to handle the hundreds of requests from companies wishing to use his likeness and / or endorsement to promote their products . He signed an exclusive deal with The Sun , which did not prevent the newspaper from joining its rivals in sensationalising the various scandals he became embroiled in . He promoted two video games : Gazza 's Superstar Soccer and Gazza II . 
 In August 2006 , he visited Botswana on behalf of the Football Association 's international outreach week and played football with the children from the SOS Children 's Village there . On 25 July 2009 , Gascoigne appeared on a Sporting Heroes edition of the BBC television quiz The Weakest Link , where he engaged in banter with host Anne Robinson . The next day he played in an England versus Germany charity football match to help raise funds for the Sir Bobby Robson cancer fund . He took part in the first edition of Soccer Aid in 2006 , playing for an England team captained by Robbie Williams . 
 In August 2014 , Gascoigne began playing amateur football after signing for Bournemouth Sunday League Division Four team Abbey . In 2015 Paul Gascoigne was the subject of a documentary called Gascoigne . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 A creative , hard @-@ working , and technically gifted attacking midfielder , Gascoigne was capable both of scoring and setting up goals , due to his passing accuracy and his powerful striking ability . Gascoigne was gifted with pace , physical strength , balance , and excellent dribbling skills , which allowed him to protect the ball , beat opponents , and withstand physical challenges . Despite his talent , he was also criticised for his erratic behaviour and aggression on the pitch . His turbulent and often unhealthy lifestyle off the pitch , as well as his tendency to pick up injuries , is thought to have affected his career . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Gascoigne married his long @-@ term girlfriend Sheryl ( née <unk> ) in Ware , Hertfordshire , in July 1996 , after they had been together for around six years . He later admitted to violence towards Sheryl during their marriage . They divorced in early 1999 . In 2009 Sheryl published a tell @-@ all book entitled Stronger : My Life Surviving Gazza . Gascoigne had a son , Regan , with Sheryl and also adopted Sheryl 's two children from her first marriage , Mason and Bianca . Bianca is a glamour model and television personality , and appeared on reality TV show Love Island . 
 During the 1990s Gascoigne , Danny Baker and Chris Evans had a much publicized friendship , and Gascoigne frequently appeared on their radio and television shows on Talksport and TFI Friday . 
 In November 2008 , Gascoigne was faced with a bankruptcy petition over a £ 200 @,@ 000 tax bill , having not filed any tax returns for more than two years . On 25 May 2011 he avoided being declared bankrupt by the High Court in London , despite still owing £ 32 @,@ 000 . 
 Gascoigne has three autobiographies : Gazza : My Story ( with Hunter Davies ) published in 2004 , Being Gazza : Tackling My Demons ( with Hunter Davies and John McKeown ) , published in 2006 , and Glorious : My World , Football and Me , published in 2011 . In Gazza : My Story , and in Being Gazza : Tackling My Demons , he refers to treatment for bulimia , obsessive @-@ compulsive disorder ( OCD ) , bipolar disorder , and alcoholism . The books also describes his addictive personality , which has led him to develop addictions of varying severity on alcohol , cocaine , chain smoking , gambling , high @-@ caffeine energy drinks , exercise , and junk food . 
 = = = Mental illness and alcoholism = = = 
 Gascoigne first entered therapy sessions in October 1998 when he was admitted into Priory Hospital after a drinking session where he drank 32 shots of whisky which left him at " rock bottom " ; then @-@ manager Bryan Robson signed him into the clinic whilst Gascoigne was unconscious . He was released , at his own insistence , two weeks into the suggested minimum stay of 28 days . His subsequent visits to the Priory became more infrequent , and he eventually returned to drinking alcohol . In 2001 Gascoigne 's then @-@ chairman Bill Kenwright contacted Gascoigne 's therapist at the Priory , John McKeown , who organised more treatment to help Gascoigne to control his drinking . As part of the treatment he was sent to the United States where he had a stay at a clinic in Cottonwood , Arizona . He was diagnosed with bipolar disorder . He stayed at the clinic in 2003 after he suffered low points working in China , and again in 2004 after retiring from football . 
 In February 2008 he was sectioned under the Mental Health Act after an incident at the Malmaison Hotel in Newcastle upon Tyne . He was taken into protective custody to prevent self @-@ harm . He was sectioned again in June , and in September he was hospitalised after he overdosed on alcohol and drugs in an apparent suicide attempt . 
 Gascoigne was arrested for a disturbance outside a takeaway in February 2010 . The following month he was charged with drunk driving , driving without a licence , and driving without insurance . On 9 July 2010 Gascoigne appeared at the scene of the tense stand @-@ off between the police and Raoul Moat , claiming to be a friend of Raoul Moat and stating that he had brought him " a can of lager , some chicken , fishing rod , a Newcastle shirt and a dressing gown . " He was denied access to Moat . In August 2011 Gascoigne sued The Sun , claiming that its coverage of him during the Raoul Moat incident interrupted his treatment for alcoholism . 
 In October 2010 , Gascoigne was arrested for drink driving . He subsequently admitted being more than four times over the limit at Newcastle upon Tyne Magistrates Court . One day after being warned he could face a prison sentence for drink driving , Gascoigne was arrested for possession of cocaine . He should have appeared in court on 11 November to be sentenced for the drink driving offence , but instead he went into rehab on the south coast of England . He was given an eight @-@ week suspended sentence on 9 December 2010 . 
 In February 2013 his agent , Terry Baker , told BBC Radio 5 Live that Gascoigne had relapsed again : " He won 't thank me for saying it but he immediately needs to get help ... His life is always in danger because he is an alcoholic . Maybe no one can save him – I don 't know . I really don 't know . " Gascoigne was placed in intensive care in a US hospital while being treated for alcoholism in Arizona in a rehabilitation programme thanks to financial support provided by ex @-@ cricketer Ronnie Irani and Chris Evans . He was arrested for assaulting a railway security guard and being drunk and disorderly at Stevenage railway station on 4 July 2013 ; he was fined £ 1 @,@ 000 after admitting the offence , and ordered to pay £ 100 compensation to the guard . 
 In January 2014 Gascoigne entered rehab for his alcohol addiction for a seventh time at a £ 6 @,@ 000 @-@ a @-@ month clinic in Southampton . In August he was again admitted to hospital in relation to his problems following an incident outside his home . On 23 October 2014 , police were called to his home in Poole after he was in a drink binge ; he was sectioned under the Mental Health Act the next day and taken to a hospital for a three @-@ day detox . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = International goals = = = 
 Scores and results list England 's goal tally first . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Newcastle United 
 FA Youth Cup : 1985 
 Tottenham Hotspur 
 FA Cup : 1991 
 Rangers 
 Scottish Premier Division : 1995 – 96 , 1996 – 97 
 Scottish Cup : 1996 
 Scottish League Cup : 1996 
 Middlesbrough 
 Football League Cup Runner @-@ up : 1998 
 = = = International = = = 
 England 
 Rous Cup : 1989 
 Tournoi de France : 1997 
 FIFA World Cup Fourth Place : 1990 
 UEFA European Championship Semi @-@ finalist : 1996 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 PFA Young Player of the Year : 1987 – 88 
 PFA Team of the Year : 1987 – 88 , 1990 – 91 
 BBC Sports Personality of the Year : 1990 
 FIFA World Cup All @-@ Star Team : 1990 
 Goal of the Season : 1990 – 91 
 PFA Scotland Players ' Player of the Year : 1995 – 96 
 SFWA Footballer of the Year : 1995 – 96 
 UEFA European Football Championship Teams of the Tournament : 1996 
 Inducted into the English Football Hall of Fame in 2002 
 Rangers Hall of Fame Inductee : 2006 
 = = = Specific = = = 
 = = = General = = = 
 = Oregon Iron Company = 
 The Oregon Iron Company was an iron smelting company located in what is now Lake Oswego , Oregon . The company was established in 1865 , and in 1867 became the first company west of the Rocky Mountains in the United States to smelt iron . The company failed after a few years , but was reorganized as the Oswego Iron Company in 1878 , and again as the Oregon Iron and Steel Company in 1883 . With the addition of a larger furnace , the last incarnation of the company prospered , reaching peak production in 1890 . By 1894 , however , pressure from cheaper imported iron combined with the effects of the Panic of 1893 forced the company to close its smelter . The company continued to operate a pipe foundry until 1928 , and until the early 1960s , existed as a land management company , selling its real estate holdings which expanded the city of Lake Oswego . 
 = = Early history = = 
 The discovery of iron ore near the settlement of Oswego in the hills south of Portland is credited to Morton M. McCarver ( who had served as speaker of the Provisional Legislature of Oregon ) in 1862 . McCarver 's brown hematite ore was tested and found to be of excellent quality , containing from 56 to 75 % metal . In addition , the ore lay near the surface and the Oswego bed was estimated to contain 60 @,@ 000 short tons ( 54 @,@ 000 t ) of ore . Since the site also featured vast forests that could be turned into charcoal to feed the smelting furnaces , and ready access to water for power , the potential of a successful mining operation was easily recognized . 
 In 1865 , a group of financiers in Portland , which included former Portland mayors William S. Ladd and Henry Failing , as well as Portland Gas Light Company founders Herman C. Leonard and John Green , incorporated an iron smelting company which they named the Oregon Iron Company . Ladd , who served as President , and the others hoped to make Oswego the " Pittsburgh of the West , " believing that having a local source of iron would help their other businesses , which included the Oregon Central Railroad and the Oregon Steam Navigation Company . 
 = = Construction = = 
 To oversee construction of a charcoal @-@ fired blast furnace , the company recruited George Wilbur . He modeled his design on the Barnum and Richardson Company furnace in Lime Rock , Connecticut . The furnace was designed by British stonemason Richard Martin and was completed in 1867 . Meanwhile , a dam was built on Sucker Creek to harness water for power , forests were cleared to be turned into charcoal to feed the furnace , and limestone , used during iron smelting to remove impurities , was quarried from the San Juan Islands in Washington Territory , and shipped and unloaded at the company docks on the adjacent Willamette River . 
 On August 24 , 1867 , the Oregon Iron Company became the first company in the United States to smelt pig iron west of the Rocky Mountains . The first pigs were given to J. C. Trullinger , who owned the townsite of Oswego . From 1867 to 1869 , the company smelted nearly 2 @,@ 400 short tons ( 2 @,@ 200 t ) of iron . 
 Ladd 's group soon found their business expertise in other areas did not apply as well to the iron industry . Their lack of experience , coupled with a dispute over water rights , caused the company to close in 1869 . After a brief respite in which they filled an order for iron wheels for the Central Pacific Railroad from 1874 to 1876 , the company closed for good in 1878 and the assets were sold off at a sheriff 's auction . 
 = = Oswego Iron Company = = 
 The purchasers were led by Ernest Crichton and L. B. Seeley , experienced furnace managers from Ohio ’ s Hanging Rock iron region . Under the new name of the Oswego Iron Company , the company made a number of significant improvements : they purchased the Oswego townsite along with large tracts of forest , settled the water rights issue , remodeled the furnace , opened several new mines , constructed several homes for its workers , and built a narrow gauge railroad for hauling the ore . From 1877 to 1881 , the Oswego Iron Company produced 18 @,@ 500 short tons ( 16 @,@ 800 t ) of iron . 
 However , to finance these improvements , the company also incurred massive debt , and with the market price for iron remaining low , the company was sold in 1880 to another group of Portland financiers led by Simeon Gannett Reed and railroad baron Henry Villard . 
 = = Oregon Iron and Steel Company = = 
 In 1882 , the company was reincorporated as the Oregon Iron and Steel Company with Reed as its president and William M. Ladd , son of Oregon Iron Company founder William S. Ladd , as its vice president . With the elder Ladd , Villard , and Darius Ogden Mills also providing financing , the company built a new smelter north of the original furnace with five times its capacity , 50 short tons ( 45 t ) . The new iron works opened in 1888 , and production boomed . The company employed 300 men and Oswego 's population soared , as hotels , churches , saloons , and an opera house were built to support the town . A railroad line to Portland was completed in 1886 , making Oswego more accessible . 
 The company reached its peak production in 1890 , smelting 12 @,@ 305 short tons ( 11 @,@ 163 t ) of iron . However , half the company 's resources were dedicated to making charcoal from wood . The availability of cheaper imported coke @-@ fired iron , the overall reduction in demand for iron as railroad expansion slowed , and the economic effects of the Panic of 1893 , all combined to hasten the final closure of the furnace in 1894 . The company continued to operate a pipe foundry on the site of the new furnace until 1928 . 
 = = Land development = = 
 Despite its lack of industry , the company still found itself with thousands of acres of land that could be developed . William M. Ladd , who had succeeded Reed as President of Oregon Iron and Steel and his father as President of Ladd & Tilton Bank , formed the Ladd Estate Company to manage these real estate assets . The newly formed Ladd Estate Company converted the depressed company town into a prestigious suburb complete with country club , golf course , polo field , and even worked to rename the harsh @-@ sounding Sucker Lake to Oswego Lake . The company existed as a shell until 1960 , when in its final act , it deeded its powerhouse and dams to lake shareholders . 
 = = Remnants of infrastructure = = 
 The original blast furnace still stands in Lake Oswego 's George Rogers Park along the Willamette River , the only extant iron furnace west of the Rocky Mountains . It was placed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1974 . In 2010 , a seven @-@ year restoration of the furnace was completed . 
 Of the two first pigs smelted in 1867 , one is displayed in the Oregon Historical Society and one remains in place as a street marker at the northwest corner of Ladd and Durham streets in Lake Oswego . The crucible from the second furnace , which was dismantled and sold for scrap in 1926 , is still intact in Lake Oswego 's Roehr Park . 
 = St Peter 's Church , Sudbury = 
 St Peter 's Church is a redundant Anglican church in the town of Sudbury , Suffolk , England . It is recorded in the National Heritage List for England as a designated Grade I listed building , and is under the care of the Churches Conservation Trust . The church stands in the centre of the town in a dominating position on Market Hill . 
 A church has been on the site since at least 1180 , but the current structure dates from the 15th century , though there have been several restorations in the intervening period . Formerly a spired church , St. Peter 's now has a bell tower which , like the rest of the building , is mainly covered in flint . The interior of the church features paintings by George Frederick Bodley and Robert Cardinal , and a pipe organ originally made by T. C. Lewis . 
 = = History = = 
 The earliest documentary record of the church is in 1180 , when it was a chapel of ease to St Gregory 's church . The church was built in three stages , beginning with the first two bays of the chancel and the base of the tower in about 1330 – 48 . The later stages of building were in about 1360 , and in about 1425 – 50 . In 1643 , during the Civil War , the iconoclast William Dowsing damaged many of the items in the church . A restoration took place in 1685 , which included some alterations to the nave roof . A clock was installed in 1701 , and during the first half of the 18th century a spire of metal and wood was added ; this was replaced by another spire in 1810 . The church was restored again in 1858 – 59 by William Butterfield ; this included removal of the three galleries and the box pews , re @-@ laying the chancel floor , and replacement of the pulpit . Stained glass made by Hardman & Co. was installed in some of the windows , and more stained glass by Hardman was installed later in the century . 
 In 1898 the chancel was restored and redecorated by George Frederick Bodley . A wooden reredos was installed in the Lady Chapel . The stonework of the exterior was restored in 1911 , when statues were inserted into three niches in the south porch . A further restoration took place in 1968 when the upper part of the tower was replaced , the spire was taken down , and most of Bodley 's paintings were removed from the chancel . The church was declared redundant in 1972 , and in 1976 was vested in the Redundant Churches Fund , the forerunner of the Churches Conservation Trust . A charitable trust , The Friends of St. Peter 's has been established to maintain and improve the church . Since being made redundant , the church has been used occasionally for services , and for a variety of events , including concerts , organ recitals and exhibitions . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 The church is constructed mainly in flint , with some stone , brick and tiles . Its plan is not quite rectangular , as it had to be confined into a limited space . The northwest corner is cut across , and the chancel is not fully in alignment with the nave . The plan consists of a six @-@ bay nave with a clerestory , north and south aisles , a two @-@ bay chancel with the organ chamber and vestry to the north and the Lady Chapel to the south , and an extended sanctuary to the east , and a west tower incorporated in the body of the church . Its architectural styles are Decorated and Perpendicular . The tower is in three stages with angle buttresses . Its parapet consists of stepped battlements , and at the corners are statues rather than pinnacles . The aisles also have battlemented parapets , and there are more buttresses around the church . The main entrance to the church is through the west door at the base of the tower . Formerly the main entrance was through the south porch . The three statues on the exterior of the porch represent Christ , with Saint Peter on one side and Saint Gregory on the other . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 The arcades are in six bays , the piers on the north arcade differing from those on the south . The roof is <unk> and divided into panels , with gilt bosses at the intersections . It is the only medieval nave roof in Suffolk to be <unk> and panelled in its original form . Some of Bodley 's painting remains on the chancel arch . In the south aisle is the octagonal 15th @-@ century font . This was removed from the church in the 17th century to be used as a horse trough , but was returned to the church when the horses refused to drink from it . In the chancel the reredos designed by Bodley measures 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) high by 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) wide , and depicts the Crucifixion . On the sides of the chancel are 15th @-@ century screens . In the Lady Chapel the font is carved with a depiction of the Nativity , and the reredos is a copy of Leonardo da Vinci 's Last Supper . Over the north and south doors are paintings of Moses and Aaron . These were painted by Robert <unk> , and formerly hung in a position flanking the reredos at the east end of the church . The lectern , pulpit and altar are Victorian , as is the stained glass . The three @-@ manual organ was built in 1911 by T. C. Lewis . It was renovated in 1942 by Henry Willis & Sons , and rebuilt in 1987 by Bishop . A major rebuild was carried out by J. W. Walker & Sons Ltd in 1999 . There is a ring of ten bells , the oldest three being cast in about 1470 , and the most recent two in 1978 . 
 = A Vindication of the Rights of Woman = 
 A Vindication of the Rights of Woman : with Strictures on Political and Moral Subjects ( 1792 ) , written by the 18th @-@ century British proto @-@ feminist Mary Wollstonecraft , is one of the earliest works of feminist philosophy . In it , Wollstonecraft responds to those educational and political theorists of the 18th century who did not believe women should have an education . She argues that women ought to have an education commensurate with their position in society , claiming that women are essential to the nation because they educate its children and because they could be " companions " to their husbands , rather than mere wives . Instead of viewing women as ornaments to society or property to be traded in marriage , Wollstonecraft maintains that they are human beings deserving of the same fundamental rights as men . 
 Wollstonecraft was prompted to write the Rights of Woman after reading Charles Maurice de Talleyrand @-@ Périgord 's 1791 report to the French National Assembly , which stated that women should only receive a domestic education ; she used her commentary on this specific event to launch a broad attack against sexual double standards and to indict men for encouraging women to indulge in excessive emotion . Wollstonecraft wrote the Rights of Woman hurriedly to respond directly to ongoing events ; she intended to write a more thoughtful second volume but died before completing it . 
 While Wollstonecraft does call for equality between the sexes in particular areas of life , such as morality , she does not explicitly state that men and women are equal . Her ambiguous statements regarding the equality of the sexes have since made it difficult to classify Wollstonecraft as a modern feminist , particularly since the word and the concept were unavailable to her . Although it is commonly assumed now that the Rights of Woman was unfavourably received , this is a modern misconception based on the belief that Wollstonecraft was as reviled during her lifetime as she became after the publication of William Godwin 's Memoirs of the Author of A Vindication of the Rights of Woman ( 1798 ) . The Rights of Woman was actually well received when it was first published in 1792 . One biographer has called it " perhaps the most original book of [ Wollstonecraft 's ] century " . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 A Vindication of the Rights of Woman was written against the tumultuous background of the French Revolution and the debates that it spawned in Britain . In a lively and sometimes vicious pamphlet war , now referred to as the Revolution Controversy , British political commentators addressed topics ranging from representative government to human rights to the separation of church and state , many of these issues having been raised in France first . Wollstonecraft first entered this fray in 1790 with A Vindication of the Rights of Men , a response to Edmund Burke 's Reflections on the Revolution in France ( 1790 ) . In his Reflections , Burke criticised the view of many British thinkers and writers who had welcomed the early stages of the French revolution . While they saw the revolution as analogous to Britain 's own Glorious Revolution in 1688 , which had restricted the powers of the monarchy , Burke argued that the appropriate historical analogy was the English Civil War ( 1642 – 1651 ) in which Charles I had been executed in 1649 . He viewed the French revolution as the violent overthrow of a legitimate government . In Reflections he argues that citizens do not have the right to revolt against their government because civilisation is the result of social and political consensus ; its traditions cannot be continually challenged — the result would be anarchy . One of the key arguments of Wollstonecraft 's Rights of Men , published just six weeks after Burke 's Reflections , is that rights cannot be based on tradition ; rights , she argues , should be conferred because they are reasonable and just , regardless of their basis in tradition . 
 When Charles Maurice de Talleyrand @-@ Périgord presented his Rapport sur l <unk> publique ( 1791 ) to the National Assembly in France , Wollstonecraft was galvanised to respond . In his recommendations for a national system of education , Talleyrand had written : 
 Let us bring up women , not to aspire to advantages which the Constitution denies them , but to know and appreciate those which it guarantees them . . . Men are destined to live on the stage of the world . A public education suits them : it early places before their eyes all the scenes of life : only the proportions are different . The paternal home is better for the education of women ; they have less need to learn to deal with the interests of others , than to accustom themselves to a calm and secluded life . 
 Wollstonecraft dedicated the Rights of Woman to Talleyrand : " Having read with great pleasure a pamphlet which you have lately published , I dedicate this volume to you ; to induce you to reconsider the subject , and maturely weigh what I have advanced respecting the rights of woman and national education . " At the end of 1791 , French feminist Olympe de <unk> had published her Declaration of the Rights of Woman and the Female Citizen , and the question of women 's rights became central to political debates in both France and Britain . 
 The Rights of Woman is an extension of Wollstonecraft 's arguments in the Rights of Men . In the Rights of Men , as the title suggests , she is concerned with the rights of particular men ( 18th @-@ century British men ) while in the Rights of Woman , she is concerned with the rights afforded to " woman " , an abstract category . She does not isolate her argument to 18th @-@ century women or British women . The first chapter of the Rights of Woman addresses the issue of natural rights and asks who has those inalienable rights and on what grounds . She answers that since natural rights are given by God , for one segment of society to deny them to another segment is a sin . The Rights of Woman thus engages not only specific events in France and in Britain but also larger questions being raised by political philosophers such as John Locke and Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau . 
 = = Themes of writings = = 
 Wollstonecraft did not employ the formal argumentation or logical prose style common to 18th @-@ century philosophical writing when composing her own works . The Rights of Woman is a long essay that introduces all of its major topics in the opening chapters and then repeatedly returns to them , each time from a different point of view . It also adopts a hybrid tone that combines rational argument with the fervent rhetoric of sensibility . 
 In the 18th century , sensibility was a physical phenomenon that came to be attached to a specific set of moral beliefs . Physicians and anatomists believed that the more sensitive people 's nerves , the more emotionally affected they would be by their surroundings . Since women were thought to have keener nerves than men , it was also believed that women were more emotional than men . The emotional excess associated with sensibility also theoretically produced an ethic of compassion : those with sensibility could easily sympathise with people in pain . Thus historians have credited the discourse of sensibility and those who promoted it with the increased humanitarian efforts , such as the movement to abolish the slave trade . But sensibility also paralysed those who had too much of it ; as scholar G. J. Barker @-@ Benfield explains , " an innate refinement of nerves was also identifiable with greater suffering , with weakness , and a susceptibility to disorder " . 
 By the time Wollstonecraft was writing the Rights of Woman , sensibility had already been under sustained attack for a number of years . Sensibility , which had initially promised to draw individuals together through sympathy , was now viewed as " profoundly separatist " ; novels , plays , and poems that employed the language of sensibility asserted individual rights , sexual freedom , and unconventional familial relationships based only upon feeling . Furthermore , as Janet Todd , another scholar of sensibility , argues , " to many in Britain the cult of sensibility seemed to have feminized the nation , given women undue prominence , and emasculated men . " 
 = = = Rational education = = = 
 One of Wollstonecraft 's central arguments in the Rights of Woman is that women should be educated rationally to give them the opportunity to contribute to society . In the 18th century , it was often assumed by both educational philosophers and conduct book writers , who wrote what one might think of as early self @-@ help books , that women were incapable of rational or abstract thought . Women , it was believed , were too susceptible to sensibility and too fragile to be able to think clearly . Wollstonecraft , along with other female reformers such as Catharine Macaulay and Hester Chapone , maintained that women were indeed capable of rational thought and deserved to be educated . She argued this point in her own conduct book , Thoughts on the Education of Daughters ( 1787 ) , in her children 's book , Original Stories from Real Life ( 1788 ) , as well as in the Rights of Woman . 
 Stating in her preface that " my main argument is built on this simple principle , that if [ woman ] be not prepared by education to become the companion of man , she will stop the progress of knowledge and virtue ; for truth must be common to all " , Wollstonecraft contends that society will degenerate without educated women , particularly because mothers are the primary educators of young children . She attributes the problem of uneducated women to men and " a false system of education , gathered from the books written on this subject by men who [ consider ] females rather as women than human creatures " . Women are capable of rationality ; it only appears that they are not , because men have refused to educate them and encouraged them to be frivolous ( Wollstonecraft describes silly women as " spaniels " and " toys " ) . While stressing it is of the same kind , she entertains the notion that women might not be able to attain the same degree of knowledge that men do . 
 Wollstonecraft attacks conduct book writers such as James Fordyce and John Gregory as well as educational philosophers such as Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau who argue that a woman does not need a rational education . ( Rousseau famously argues in Emile ( 1762 ) that women should be educated for the pleasure of men ; Wollstonecraft , infuriated by this argument , attacks not only it but also Rousseau himself . ) Intent on illustrating the limitations that contemporary educational theory placed upon women , Wollstonecraft writes , " taught from their infancy that beauty is woman 's sceptre , the mind shapes itself to the body , and , roaming round its gilt cage , only seeks to adorn its prison " , implying that without this damaging ideology , which encourages young women to focus their attention on beauty and outward accomplishments , they could achieve much more . Wives could be the rational " companions " of their husbands and even pursue careers should they so choose : " women might certainly study the art of healing , and be physicians as well as nurses . And midwifery , decency seems to allot to them . . . they might , also , study politics . . . Business of various kinds , they might likewise pursue . " 
 For Wollstonecraft , " the most perfect education " is " an exercise of the understanding as is best calculated to strengthen the body and form the heart . Or , in other words , to enable the individual to attach such habits of virtue as will render it independent . " In addition to her broad philosophical arguments , Wollstonecraft lays out a specific plan for national education to counter Talleyrand 's . In Chapter 12 , " On National Education , " she proposes that children be sent to day schools as well as given some education at home " to inspire a love of home and domestic pleasures , " and that such schools be free for children " five to nine years of age . " She also maintains that schooling should be co @-@ educational , contending that men and women , whose marriages are " the cement of society , " should be " educated after the same model . " 
 = = = Feminism writings = = = 
 It is debatable to what extent the Rights of Woman is a feminist text ; because the definitions of feminist vary , different scholars have come to different conclusions . Wollstonecraft would never have referred to her text as feminist because the words feminist and feminism were not coined until the 1890s . Moreover , there was no feminist movement to speak of during Wollstonecraft 's lifetime . In the introduction to her seminal work on Wollstonecraft 's thought , Barbara Taylor writes : 
 Describing [ Wollstonecraft 's philosophy ] as feminist is problematic , and I do it only after much consideration . The label is of course anachronistic . . . Treating Wollstonecraft 's thought as an anticipation of nineteenth and twentieth @-@ century feminist argument has meant sacrificing or distorting some of its key elements . Leading examples of this . . . have been the widespread neglect of her religious beliefs , and the misrepresentation of her as a bourgeois liberal , which together have resulted in the displacement of a religiously inspired utopian radicalism by a secular , class @-@ partisan reformism as alien to Wollstonecraft 's political project as her dream of a divinely promised age of universal happiness is to our own . Even more important however has been the imposition on Wollstonecraft of a heroic @-@ individualist brand of politics utterly at odds with her own ethically driven case for women 's emancipation . Wollstonecraft 's leading ambition for women was that they should attain virtue , and it was to this end that she sought their liberation . 
 In the Rights of Woman , Wollstonecraft does not make the claim for gender equality using the same arguments or the same language that late 19th- and 20th century feminists later would . For instance , rather than unequivocally stating that men and women are equal , Wollstonecraft contends that men and women are equal in the eyes of God , which means that they are both subject to the same moral law . For Wollstonecraft , men and women are equal in the most important areas of life . While such an idea may not seem revolutionary to 21st @-@ century readers , its implications were revolutionary during the 18th century . For example , it implied that both men and women — not just women — should be modest and respect the sanctity of marriage . Wollstonecraft 's argument exposed the sexual double standard of the late 18th century and demanded that men adhere to the same virtues demanded of women . 
 However , Wollstonecraft 's arguments for equality stand in contrast to her statements respecting the superiority of masculine strength and valour . Wollstonecraft famously and ambiguously states : 
 Let it not be concluded , that I wish to invert the order of things ; I have already granted , that , from the constitution of their bodies , men seem to be designed by Providence to attain a greater degree of virtue . I speak collectively of the whole sex ; but I see not the shadow of a reason to conclude that their virtues should differ in respect to their nature . In fact , how can they , if virtue has only one eternal standard ? I must therefore , if I reason consequentially , as strenuously maintain that they have the same simple direction , as that there is a God . 
 Moreover , Wollstonecraft calls on men , rather than women , to initiate the social and political changes she outlines in the Rights of Woman . Because women are uneducated , they cannot alter their own situation — men must come to their aid . Wollstonecraft writes at the end of her chapter " Of the <unk> Effects Which Arise from the Unnatural Distinctions Established in Society " : 
 I then would fain convince reasonable men of the importance of some of my remarks ; and prevail on them to weigh dispassionately the whole tenor of my observations . – I appeal to their understandings ; and , as a fellow @-@ creature , claim , in the name of my sex , some interest in their hearts . I entreat them to assist to emancipate their companion , to make her a help meet for them ! Would men but generously snap our chains , and be content with rational fellowship instead of slavish obedience , they would find us more observant daughters , more affectionate sisters , more faithful wives , more reasonable mothers – in a word , better citizens . 
 It is Wollstonecraft 's last novel , Maria : or , The Wrongs of Woman ( 1798 ) , the fictionalised sequel to the Rights of Woman , that is usually considered her most radical feminist work . 
 = = = Sensibility = = = 
 One of Wollstonecraft 's most scathing criticisms in the Rights of Woman is against false and excessive sensibility , particularly in women . She argues that women who succumb to sensibility are " blown about by every momentary gust of feeling " ; because these women are " the prey of their senses " , they cannot think rationally . In fact , not only do they do harm to themselves but they also do harm to all of civilisation : these are not women who can refine civilisation – these are women who will destroy it . But reason and feeling are not independent for Wollstonecraft ; rather , she believes that they should inform each other . For Wollstonecraft , as for the important 18th @-@ century philosopher David Hume , the passions underpin all reason . This was a theme that she would return to throughout her career , but particularly in her novels Mary : A Fiction ( 1788 ) and Maria : or , The Wrongs of Woman . 
 As part of her argument that women should not be overly influenced by their feelings , Wollstonecraft emphasises that they should not be constrained by or made slaves to their bodies or their sexual feelings . This particular argument has led many modern feminists to suggest that Wollstonecraft intentionally avoids granting women any sexual desire . Cora Kaplan argues that the " negative and prescriptive assault on female sexuality " is a " leitmotif " of the Rights of Woman . For example , Wollstonecraft advises her readers to " calmly let passion subside into friendship " in the ideal <unk> marriage ( that is , in the ideal of a love @-@ based marriage that was developing at the time ) . It would be better , she writes , when " two virtuous young people marry . . . if some circumstances checked their passion " . According to Wollstonecraft , " love and friendship cannot subsist in the same bosom " . As Mary Poovey explains , " Wollstonecraft betrays her fear that female desire might in fact court man 's lascivious and degrading attentions , that the subordinate position women have been given might even be deserved . Until women can transcend their fleshly desires and fleshly forms , they will be hostage to the body . " If women are not interested in sexuality , they cannot be dominated by men . Wollstonecraft worries that women are consumed with " romantic wavering " , that is , they are interested only in satisfying their lusts . Because the Rights of Woman eliminates sexuality from a woman 's life , Kaplan contends , it " expresses a violent antagonism to the sexual " while at the same time " <unk> [ ing ] the importance of the sensual in the everyday life of women " . Wollstonecraft was so determined to wipe sexuality from her picture of the ideal woman that she ended up foregrounding it by insisting upon its absence . But as Kaplan and others have remarked , Wollstonecraft may have been forced to make this sacrifice : " it is important to remember that the notion of woman as politically enabled and independent [ was ] fatally linked [ during the eighteenth century ] to the unrestrained and vicious exercise of her sexuality . " 
 = = = Republicanism = = = 
 Claudia Johnson , a prominent Wollstonecraft scholar , has called the Rights of Woman " a republican manifesto " . Johnson contends that Wollstonecraft is hearkening back to the Commonwealth tradition of the 17th century and attempting to reestablish a republican ethos . In Wollstonecraft 's version , there would be strong , but separate , masculine and feminine roles for citizens . According to Johnson , Wollstonecraft " denounces the collapse of proper sexual distinction as the leading feature of her age , and as the grievous consequence of sentimentality itself . The problem undermining society in her view is feminized men " . If men feel free to adopt both the masculine position and the sentimental feminine position , she argues , women have no position open to them in society . Johnson therefore sees Wollstonecraft as a critic , in both the Rights of Men and the Rights of Woman , of the " masculinization of sensitivity " in such works as Edmund Burke 's Reflections on the Revolution in France . 
 In the Rights of Woman Wollstonecraft adheres to a version of republicanism that includes a belief in the eventual overthrow of all titles , including the monarchy . She also briefly suggests that all men and women should be represented in government . But the bulk of her " political criticism , " as Chris Jones , a Wollstonecraft scholar , explains , " is couched predominantly in terms of morality " . Her definition of virtue focuses on the individual 's happiness rather than , for example , the good of the entire society . This is reflected in her explanation of natural rights . Because rights ultimately proceed from God , Wollstonecraft maintains that there are duties , tied to those rights , incumbent upon each and every person . For Wollstonecraft , the individual is taught republicanism and benevolence within the family ; domestic relations and familial ties are crucial to her understanding of social cohesion and patriotism . 
 = = = Class = = = 
 In many ways the Rights of Woman is inflected by a bourgeois view of the world , as is its direct predecessor the Rights of Men . Wollstonecraft addresses her text to the middle class , which she calls the " most natural state " . She also frequently praises modesty and industry , virtues which , at the time , were associated with the middle class . From her position as a middle @-@ class writer arguing for a middle @-@ class ethos , Wollstonecraft also attacks the wealthy , criticising them using the same arguments she employs against women . She points out the " false @-@ refinement , immorality , and vanity " of the rich , calling them " weak , artificial beings , raised above the common wants and affections of their race , in a premature unnatural manner [ who ] undermine the very foundation of virtue , and spread corruption through the whole mass of society " . 
 But Wollstonecraft 's criticisms of the wealthy do not necessarily reflect a concomitant sympathy for the poor . For her , the poor are fortunate because they will never be trapped by the snares of wealth : " Happy is it when people have the cares of life to struggle with ; for these struggles prevent their becoming a prey to enervating vices , merely from idleness ! " Moreover , she contends that charity has only negative consequences because , as Jones puts it , she " sees it as sustaining an unequal society while giving the appearance of virtue to the rich " . 
 In her national plan for education , she retains class distinctions ( with an exception for the intelligent ) , suggesting that : " After the age of nine , girls and boys , intended for domestic employments , or mechanical trades , ought to be removed to other schools , and receive instruction , in some measure appropriated to the destination of each individual . . . The young people of superior abilities , or fortune , might now be taught , in another school , the dead and living languages , the elements of science , and continue the study of history and politics , on a more extensive scale , which would not exclude polite literature . " 
 = = Rhetoric and style = = 
 In attempting to navigate the cultural expectations of female writers and the generic conventions of political and philosophical discourse , Wollstonecraft , as she does throughout her oeuvre , constructs a unique blend of masculine and feminine styles in the Rights of Woman . She utilises the language of philosophy , referring to her work as a " treatise " with " arguments " and " principles " . However , Wollstonecraft also uses a personal tone , employing " I " and " you " , dashes and exclamation marks , and autobiographical references to create a distinctly feminine voice in the text . The Rights of Woman further hybridizes its genre by weaving together elements of the conduct book , the short essay , and the novel , genres often associated with women , while at the same time claiming that these genres could be used to discuss philosophical topics such as rights . 
 Although Wollstonecraft argues against excessive sensibility , the rhetoric of the Rights of Woman is at times heated and attempts to provoke the reader . Many of the most emotional comments in the book are directed at Rousseau . For example , after excerpting a long passage from Emile ( 1762 ) , Wollstonecraft <unk> states , " I shall make no other comments on this ingenious passage , than just to observe , that it is the philosophy of lasciviousness . " A mere page later , after indicting Rousseau 's plan for female education , she writes " I must relieve myself by drawing another picture . " These terse exclamations are meant to draw the reader to her side of the argument ( it is assumed that the reader will agree with them ) . While she claims to write in a plain style so that her ideas will reach the broadest possible audience , she actually combines the plain , rational language of the political treatise with the poetic , passionate language of sensibility to demonstrate that one can combine rationality and sensibility in the same self . Wollstonecraft defends her positions not only with reasoned argument but also with ardent rhetoric . 
 In her efforts to vividly describe the condition of women within society , Wollstonecraft employs several different analogies . She often compares women to slaves , arguing that their ignorance and powerlessness places them in that position . But at the same time , she also compares them to " capricious tyrants " who use cunning and deceit to manipulate the men around them . At one point , she reasons that a woman can become either a slave or tyrant , which she describes as two sides of the same coin . Wollstonecraft also compares women to soldiers ; like military men , they are valued only for their appearance . And like the rich , women 's " softness " has " debased mankind " . 
 = = Revision = = 
 Wollstonecraft was forced to write the Rights of Woman hurriedly to respond to Talleyrand and ongoing events . Upon completing the work , she wrote to her friend William Roscoe : " I am dissatisfied with myself for not having done justice to the subject . – Do not suspect me of false modesty – I mean to say that had I allowed myself more time I could have written a better book , in every sense of the word . . . I intend to finish the next volume before I begin to print , for it is not pleasant to have the Devil coming for the conclusion of a sheet fore it is written . " When Wollstonecraft revised the Rights of Woman for the second edition , she took the opportunity not only to fix small spelling and grammar mistakes but also to bolster the feminist claims of her argument . She changed some of her statements regarding female and male difference to reflect a greater equality between the sexes . 
 Wollstonecraft never wrote the second part to the Rights of Woman , although William Godwin published her " Hints " , which were " chiefly designed to have been incorporated in the second part of the Vindication of the Rights of Woman " , in the posthumous collection of her works . However , she did begin writing the novel Maria : or , The Wrongs of Woman , which most scholars consider a fictionalised sequel to the Rights of Woman . It was unfinished at her death and also included in the Posthumous Works published by Godwin . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 When it was first published in 1792 , the Rights of Woman was reviewed favourably by the Analytical Review , the General Magazine , the Literary Magazine , New York Magazine , and the Monthly Review , although the assumption persists even today that Rights of Woman received hostile reviews . It was almost immediately released in a second edition in 1792 , several American editions appeared , and it was translated into French . Taylor writes that " it was an immediate success " . Moreover , other writers such as Mary Hays and Mary Robinson specifically alluded to Wollstonecraft 's text in their own works . Hays cited the Rights of Woman in her novel Memoirs of Emma Courtney ( 1796 ) and modelled her female characters after Wollstonecraft 's ideal woman . Although female conservatives such as Hannah More excoriated Wollstonecraft personally , they actually shared many of the same values . As the scholar Anne Mellor has shown , both More and Wollstonecraft wanted a society founded on " Christian virtues of rational benevolence , honesty , personal virtue , the fulfillment of social duty , thrift , sobriety , and hard work " . During the early 1790s , many writers within British society were engaged in an intense debate regarding the position of women in society . For example , the respected poet and essayist Anna Laetitia Barbauld and Wollstonecraft sparred back and forth ; Barbauld published several poems responding to Wollstonecraft 's work and Wollstonecraft commented on them in footnotes to the Rights of Woman . The work also provoked outright hostility . The bluestocking Elizabeth Carter was unimpressed with the work . Thomas Taylor , the Neoplatonist translator who had been a landlord to the Wollstonecraft family in the late 1770s , swiftly wrote a satire called A Vindication of the Rights of Brutes : if women have rights , why not animals too ? 
 After Wollstonecraft died in 1797 , her husband William Godwin published his Memoirs of the Author of A Vindication of the Rights of Woman ( 1798 ) . He revealed much about her private life that had previously not been known to the public : her illegitimate child , her love affairs , and her attempts at suicide . While Godwin believed he was portraying his wife with love , sincerity , and compassion , contemporary readers were shocked by Wollstonecraft 's unorthodox lifestyle and she became a reviled figure . Richard <unk> targeted her in particular in his anonymous long poem The <unk> 'd Females ( 1798 ) , a defensive reaction to women 's literary self @-@ assertion : Hannah More is Christ to Wollstonecraft 's Satan . His poem was " well known " among the responses A Vindication . One reviewer comments this " ingenious poem " with its " playful sallies of sarcastic wit " against " our modern ladies , " though others found it " a tedious , lifeless piece of writing . " Critical responses largely fell along clear @-@ cut political lines . 
 Wollstonecraft 's ideas became associated with her life story and women writers felt that it was dangerous to mention her in their texts . Hays , who had previously been a close friend and an outspoken advocate for Wollstonecraft and her Rights of Woman , for example , did not include her in the collection of Illustrious and Celebrated Women she published in 1803 . Maria Edgeworth specifically distances herself from Wollstonecraft in her novel Belinda ( 1802 ) ; she caricatures Wollstonecraft as a radical feminist in the character of Harriet Freke . But , like Jane Austen , she does not reject Wollstonecraft 's ideas . Both Edgeworth and Austen argue that women are crucial to the development of the nation ; moreover , they portray women as rational beings who should choose <unk> marriage . 
 The negative views towards Wollstonecraft persisted for over a century . The Rights of Woman was not reprinted until the middle of the 19th century and it still retained an aura of ill @-@ repute . George Eliot wrote " there is in some quarters a vague prejudice against the Rights of Woman as in some way or other a reprehensible book , but readers who go to it with this impression will be surprised to find it eminently serious , severely moral , and withal rather heavy " . The suffragist ( i.e. moderate reformer , as opposed to suffragette ) Millicent Garrett Fawcett wrote the introduction to the centenary edition of the Rights of Woman , cleansing the memory of Wollstonecraft and claiming her as the <unk> of the struggle for the vote . While the Rights of Woman may have paved the way for feminist arguments , 20th century feminists have tended to use Wollstonecraft 's life story , rather than her texts , for inspiration ; her unorthodox lifestyle convinced them to try new " experiments in living " , as Virginia Woolf termed it in her famous essay on Wollstonecraft . However , there is some evidence that the Rights of Woman may be influencing current feminists . Ayaan Hirsi Ali , a feminist who is critical of Islam 's dictates regarding women , cites the Rights of Woman in her autobiography Infidel , writing that she was " inspired by Mary Wollstonecraft , the pioneering feminist thinker who told women they had the same ability to reason as men did and deserved the same rights " . 
 = = = Modern reprints = = = 
 Wollstonecraft , Mary . The Complete Works of Mary Wollstonecraft . Ed . Janet Todd and Marilyn Butler . 7 vols . London : William Pickering , 1989 . ISBN 0 @-@ 8147 @-@ 9225 @-@ 1 . 
 Wollstonecraft , Mary . The Vindications : The Rights of Men and The Rights of Woman . Eds . D.L. Macdonald and Kathleen Scherf . Toronto : Broadview Literary Texts , 1997 . ISBN 1 @-@ 55111 @-@ 088 @-@ 1 
 Wollstonecraft , Mary . A Vindication of the Rights of Woman . Ed . Miriam Brody <unk> . Rev. ed . Harmondsworth : Penguin , 2004 . ISBN 0 @-@ 14 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Wollstonecraft , Mary . A Vindication of the Rights of Woman . Ed . Deidre Shauna Lynch . 3rd ed . New York : W. W. Norton and Company , 2009 . ISBN 0 @-@ 393 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Wollstonecraft , Mary . A Vindication of the Rights of Men and A Vindication of the Rights of Woman . Ed . Sylvana <unk> . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1995 . ISBN 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 = = = = Contemporary reviews = = = = 
 Analytical Review 12 ( 1792 ) : 241 – 249 ; 13 ( 1792 ) : 418 – 489 . 
 Christian Miscellany 1 ( 1792 ) : 209 – 212 . 
 Critical Review New Series 4 ( 1792 ) : 389 – 398 ; 5 ( 1792 ) : 132 – 141 . 
 General Magazine and Imperial Review 6 @.@ 2 ( 1792 ) : 187 – 191 . 
 Literary Magazine and British Review 8 ( 1792 ) ; 133 – 139 . 
 Monthly Review New Series 8 ( 1792 ) : 198 – 209 . 
 New Annual Register 13 ( 1792 ) : 298 . 
 New @-@ York Magazine 4 ( 1793 ) : 77 – 81 . 
 Scots Magazine 54 ( 1792 ) : 284 – 290 . 
 Sentimental and Masonic Magazine 1 ( 1792 ) : 63 – 72 . 
 Town and Country Magazine 24 ( 1792 ) : 279 . 
 = Susan Mayer = 
 Susan Mayer is a fictional character played by Teri Hatcher on the ABC television series Desperate Housewives . The character was created by television producer and screenwriter Marc Cherry . She first appeared in the pilot episode of the series on October 3 , 2004 , and appeared in every episode until the series finale on May 13 , 2012 . Susan resides on the fictional Wisteria Lane in Fairview , Eagle State , the primary setting of the show . One of four lead characters , Susan is characterized as being a " notoriously clumsy " romantic with a " magnetic charm . " Her storylines tend to focus on her romantic relationships , most notably with Mike Delfino ( James Denton ) , whom she marries twice in the series . 
 Cherry originally created Susan as a girl next door archetype and intended for the character to provide an emotional anchor for the series . When developing the character , Cherry drew upon his personal experiences as well as those of single women in his life . The role was originally written for Mary @-@ Louise Parker , who turned it down ; as a result , Hatcher was cast in early 2004 . Hatcher 's portrayal of the character is both comedic and vulnerable . During the series ' debut season , both the character and Hatcher 's performance received positive critical reception ; however , as the series has progressed , the character has been received less favorably by critics and fans . Hatcher has received both a Golden Globe Award and Screen Actors Guild Award for her performance in the series . 
 = = Development and casting = = 
 While developing the series , Desperate Housewives creator Marc Cherry envisioned Susan as a girl next door and chose her to convey this image . In the original pilot , the character 's surname was spelled " Meyer " but had to be changed to " Mayer " for clearance purposes . Cherry commented , " I knew Susan was going to be my anchor character , and I didn 't really know my take on her at first . And then it occurred to me that one of these women should be divorced ... I thought there was something so real about a woman saying , ' I don 't have much time left , ' and when this available hunky guy moves onto the street , something in her saying ' Let me at him ' " . The character is a compendium of single mothers in Cherry 's life " desperate to land a man " . He also drew upon his own personal experiences while creating the character . 
 Julia Louis @-@ Dreyfus expressed interest in the role , but ABC executives felt she was not right for the part . Actors originally considered for the role include Courteney Cox , Calista Flockhart , Heather Locklear , Mary @-@ Louise Parker , and Sela Ward . Cherry wrote the part with Parker in mind , but she rejected the offer , later explaining " it just didn ’ t feel like I was gonna [ sic ] serve it as well as someone else might " . Teri Hatcher auditioned for the role in January 2004 and impressed Cherry immediately . After a second audition , Hatcher read for the role in front of network executives . Cherry praised her performance , saying " it was the best audition I 've ever seen in network " . Hatcher later commented , " I don 't think they were hot to hire me for Susan ... I was maybe on a B @-@ list , certainly not an A @-@ list " . Despite her reservations , Hatcher was the third reported cast member to have been cast in the series on February 18 , 2004 . 
 = = Personality and characteristics = = 
 Susan is primarily characterized as the girl next door . Teri Hatcher stated " I ’ m not exactly her , but I get her . I get her insecurities , her flaws . " She called the character " a great representation of what [ everyone ] deals with daily . Our responsibilities can be overwhelming and things often don 't go as you planned , so you have to roll with it . Susan celebrates rolling with it " . She is a hopeless romantic and often expresses her more openly and vulnerably than the other characters in the series . The series begins a year after Susan 's first divorce , when she is still emotionally raw . Throughout the series , several other characters have confronted Susan about her inability to live happily and without drama . Susan has a close relationship with her daughter , Julie ( Andrea Bowen ) , who often acts as the parent figure in the relationship . 
 Susan 's accident @-@ proneness is commonly used throughout the series to provide comic relief . Her susceptibility to bad luck and embarrassing situations have created some of the series ' most memorable moments , including accidentally burning down Edie 's house and being locked out of her own house completely naked . Susan 's poor cooking skills have also become a running gag in the series . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Past = = = 
 Susan Bremmer was raised by single mother Sophie Bremmer ( Lesley Ann Warren ) . She was told her father was a United States Merchant Marine who died in the Battle of Hanoi during the Vietnam War . She was a cheerleader in high school and graduated as valedictorian of her class . She graduated from community college with an art degree . Eventually , Susan began writing and illustrating children 's books , the first of which was Ants in My Picnic Basket . 
 In her early twenties , Susan married Karl Mayer ( Richard Burgi ) and gave birth to their daughter , Julie , at age 26 . In 1992 , the family moved to Wisteria Lane in Fairview , Eagle State , where Susan befriended Mary Alice Young ( Brenda Strong ) , her new neighbor . Susan became close friends with Bree Van de Kamp ( Marcia Cross ) , Lynette Scavo ( Felicity Huffman ) , and Gabrielle Solis ( Eva Longoria ) when they moved to Wisteria Lane . In 2003 , Karl left Susan for his secretary , Brandi ( Anne Dudek ) . The two divorced and agreed to share custody of Julie , although she chose to live primarily with Susan . 
 = = = Season 1 = = = 
 A year after her divorce , Susan takes an interest in Mike Delfino ( James Denton ) , a plumber who has recently moved in across the street . Susan begins dating Mike , despite competition from Edie Britt ( Nicollette Sheridan ) . Meanwhile , Susan begins investigating Mary Alice 's suicide after she and her friends discover a blackmail note addressed to her . Later , Susan discovers that Mary Alice 's husband , Paul ( Mark Moses ) , had their son , Zach ( Cody Kasch ) , committed to a youth mental institution after he broke into the Van de Kamp house and decorated it for Christmas , Julie begins corresponding with Zach without Susan 's knowledge and hides him in her room when he escapes from the institution . When Susan finds Zach in her home , she and Mike return him to Paul ; however , Julie and Zach continue dating . Paul fabricates unconvincing lies to thwart Susan 's efforts to discover his family 's secrets too . 
 As her relationship with Mike progresses , Susan becomes suspicious of his past , especially when she finds a gun and large sums of money in his kitchen cabinets . Additionally , evidence connecting Mike to the murder of Wisteria Lane resident , Martha Huber ( Christine Estabrook ) , surfaces . Susan ends the relationship when police inform her that Mike was convicted of manslaughter and drug trafficking . However , Susan learns the murder was accidental and the two renew their relationship and agree that Mike will move into Susan 's house . While Mike is away on business , Susan finds Zach , armed with a handgun , in Mike 's house . He vows to kill Mike when he comes home as he believes Mike killed Paul . 
 = = = Season 2 = = = 
 When Mike arrives home , Zach 's murder scheme backfires and he runs away . Mike informs Susan that he recently learned that Zach is his biological son . Susan agrees to help Mike search for Zach and finds him in a nearby park . When Zach expresses hope of rekindling his romance with Julie , she gives him money to look for Paul in Utah . When Mike finds out about her betrayal , he ends their relationship . Susan decides to write an autobiography following the break @-@ up . While researching her father , she learns that her mother lied and her father is local business owner Addison Prudy ( Paul Dooley ) . She tries to establish a relationship with her reluctant father , but her attempts are effectively unsuccessful . 
 Meanwhile , Susan is dismayed to learn that Karl has moved in with Edie . She begins dating her doctor , Ron McCready ( Jay Harrington ) , who informs her that she has a wandering spleen and will need a splenectomy . When Susan learns that her health insurance will not cover the operation , Karl offers to remarry her for his medical benefits . They agree to keep their sham marriage a secret from Edie and Ron . While under anesthesia before her operation , Susan professes her love for Mike to Ron , which prompts Ron to break up with her . Soon after , Karl leaves Edie , as his love for Susan has resurfaced . Upon learning that Susan is the other woman , Edie intentionally sets Susan 's house on fire . In this time of need , both Mike and Karl vie for Susan 's affections . She chooses to rekindle her relationship with Mike and Karl signs the divorce papers . Susan and Mike then make plans to meet for dinner at nearby Torch Lake , where Mike plans to propose . On his way to dinner , Mike is a victim of a hit @-@ and @-@ run at the hands of Orson Hodge ( Kyle MacLachlan ) , a dentist whom Susan had recently befriended . 
 = = = Season 3 = = = 
 As a result of the hit @-@ and @-@ run , Mike falls into a coma . Having waited six months for Mike to wake up , she reluctantly enters a relationship with Ian Hainsworth ( Dougray Scott ) , a British man whose wife , Jane ( Cecily <unk> ) , has been in a coma for years . When Mike finally awakens , doctors conclude that he now suffers from retrograde amnesia . While Susan is out of town , Edie convinces Mike that Susan was horrible to him during their relationship . Mike turns Susan away when she returns to Fairview . Having lost hope , Susan continues her romance with Ian . Meanwhile , Susan is suspicious of Orson , who has married Bree and is accused of killing his missing ex @-@ wife , Alma ( Valerie Mahaffey ) . When Mike is arrested for the murder of Monique <unk> ( Kathleen York ) , Orson 's former mistress , Edie breaks up with him , leaving him without bail . Susan defends Mike , which frustrates Ian . He promises to pay for Mike 's bail if Susan breaks off all contact with him . Mike is eventually acquitted for the crime . Following Jane 's death , Susan accepts Ian 's marriage proposal . 
 As he slowly regains his memory , Mike recalls his feelings for Susan and challenges Ian for her affections . When Susan learns that the two had made a bet on her in a game of poker , she calls off the wedding and declares that she does not want to see either of them again . Realizing that letting both of them go is a mistake , Susan decides to take Ian back . However , he tells her that he cannot spend the rest of his life wondering if she is still in love with Mike , and he leaves . Susan and Mike reunite and become engaged . The couple get married in a private ceremony in the woods , with Julie as their only guest . 
 = = = Season 4 = = = 
 In the fourth season premiere , one month after her wedding , Susan learns that she is pregnant . While looking into their medical histories for the baby 's interest , Mike is forced to tell Susan that he lied about his father being dead . Susan visits Mike 's father , Nick ( Robert Forster ) , who is in jail for murder . Nick warns Susan that Mike is still troubled by demons of his past . With the stress of finances for the baby , Mike begins working overtime , despite an injury resulting from the hit @-@ and @-@ run over a year ago . He begins relying heavily on painkillers . Susan confronts Mike about his addiction , threatening to leave him if he does not enter rehab ; he agrees to admit himself . After a devastating tornado hits Wisteria Lane , Bree , Orson , and their newborn , Benjamin , move into Susan 's house temporarily . During his stay , Orson develops a sleep walking habit and unconsciously admits to running over Mike with his car . Susan feels extremely betrayed and Bree , unable to forgive Orson , asks him to move out . Shortly after , Susan gives birth to a boy , whom she names Maynard , after Mike 's deceased grandfather . 
 = = = = Five @-@ year jump = = = = 
 In the five years that take place between seasons four and five , Susan and Mike are involved in a car crash that kills a mother and her daughter . Although Susan was driving , Mike takes the blame , as Susan did not have her license with her at the time . Susan feels incredibly guilty for taking the lives of Lila ( Marie <unk> ) and Paige Dash ( Madeleine Michelle Dunn ) , but Mike insists it was not their fault . The argument over the topic becomes so great that it results in divorce . Giving up on love , Susan engages in a casual relationship with her house painter , Jackson Braddock ( Gale Harold ) . 
 = = = Season 5 = = = 
 While Susan manages to keep her relationship with Jackson a secret from her friends and her son , nicknamed M.J. , Jackson seeks a deeper connection with her . Soon enough , Mike and M.J. learn about the relationship . Jackson makes the sudden announcement that he is moving to nearby Riverton for work and asks Susan to come with him . After much consideration , Susan decides that she is unsure of what she wants and turns down Jackson 's offer . Also , Mike moves across the street from Susan and begins dating her close friend and neighbor , Katherine Mayfair ( Dana Delany ) . Realizing she cannot keep Mike from being happy , she gives the couple her blessing , despite still feeling uncomfortable . Susan and Mike decide to enroll M.J. in private school , and Susan takes a job as an assistant art teacher at the school to help pay for the tuition . With both Susan and Mike employed , M.J. spends more time under Katherine 's care , which makes Susan uneasy . She is heartbroken to learn that Mike and Katherine have decided to move in with one another and become engaged . 
 Susan attempts to console Edie 's husband , Dave Williams ( Neal McDonough ) , following Edie 's death . She explains the truth behind her own accident , completely unaware that Lila and Paige Dash were Dave 's wife and daughter , respectively , and that he had been seeking revenge on Mike since moving to Wisteria Lane . Meanwhile , Jackson returns to Fairview and proposes to Susan , revealing that his visa has expired and he needs to marry an American citizen . When Susan learns that Mike , who is engaged to Katherine , will no longer have to pay alimony once she is married , she explains the false pretenses of her engagement . Dave , who now understands that Susan was driving the car that killed his family , overhears this and reports Jackson to immigration officials . With Jackson out of the picture , Dave invites Susan and M.J. on a fishing trip , planning to kill M.J. just like Susan killed his own child . Mike discovers Dave 's plans and is able to save Susan and M.J. After the ordeal , Susan and Mike share a brief , yet romantic kiss . Dave is sent to a psychiatric hospital in Boston and two months later , Mike marries an unidentified bride . 
 = = = Season 6 = = = 
 Susan is identified as Mike 's bride in the sixth season premiere . Her marriage to Mike destroys her friendship with Katherine . After the wedding , Julie is strangled outside of Susan 's home . Julie slips into a coma following her attack . While waiting for her to awaken , Susan learns that Julie had dropped out of medical school , was involved with a married man , and had a pregnancy scare before her attack . When Julie awakens , she refuses to identify the married man she was seeing . Later in the season , Julie 's attacker is revealed to be Eddie <unk> ( Josh Zuckerman ) , a local young adult who is also responsible for a handful of murders in Fairview . Prior to the attack , Susan had taken Eddie on as an art student and he developed a crush on her . When he discovered that she was remarrying Mike and that she did not see him as a romantic suitor , he attacked Julie , mistaking her for Susan . 
 Katherine continues to pursue Mike , believing that he is still in love with her . Mike warns her to leave his family alone and claims he never truly loved her . After he leaves , Katherine calls 9 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 asking for an ambulance , and then stabs herself with a knife with Mike 's fingerprints on it . Katherine frames Mike for her wound . Susan , realizing that Katherine has suffered a total nervous breakdown , calls Katherine 's daughter , Dylan ( Lyndsy Fonseca ) , who comes to town and has her mother committed for psychiatric observation . Susan later forgives Katherine once she recovers from her breakdown . Soon after , Mike reveals that he has accumulated an immense debt in the past year . Unable to balance their debt , Susan and Mike decide to move off Wisteria Lane and rent their house out temporarily . They move into an apartment across town while Paul Young rents their house on Wisteria Lane . 
 = = = Season 7 = = = 
 Susan accepts an offer from her landlady , Maxine Rosen ( Lainie Kazan ) , to appear on a website in which she does housework in her lingerie in order to make ends meet , though she keeps her new job a secret from her friends and family . Soon after , Maxine 's site is merged with a larger company that uses Susan 's image to advertise the website on billboards across the country . Susan pays the company $ 9 @,@ 000 to have the billboards removed . As a result , she begins working for the website 's video chatting services to earn back the money . Paul discovers her secret and threatens to expose it unless she sells him her home , in which he now lives with his second wife , Beth ( Emily Bergl ) . Hoping to derail Paul 's blackmail scheme , Susan tells Mike about her job on the website . Paul retaliates by spreading the word about Susan 's involvement with the website , causing her to lose her teaching job . <unk> for money , Mike accepts a job on an oil rig in Alaska and Susan becomes Lynette 's nanny . 
 After purchasing a majority of the houses on Wisteria Lane , Paul announces that he plans to open a halfway house for ex @-@ convicts on the street . A protest against his plan escalates into a violent riot and Susan is trampled by the unruly crowd . As a result , Susan loses a kidney and learns that her second kidney is deformed and she is at severe risk of renal failure . Susan reluctantly agrees to undergo dialysis while waiting for a transplant . After Paul throws her out , Beth submits paperwork indicating that in the event of her death , her kidney would be given to Susan , and then commits suicide . Despite initial refusal , Paul allows the operation to move forward and he and Susan reconcile . After discovering that Paul has been depressed following Beth 's suicide , Susan begins cooking meals for him with the assistance of Felicia Tilman ( Harriet Sansom Harris ) , Beth 's mother and Martha Huber 's sister , who secretly adds antifreeze to the food in an effort to kill him . Paul nearly dies as a result of the poisoned food . Unaware that Felicia is helping prepare his meals , Paul has Susan arrested for attempting to kill him . Eventually , Susan is released , Paul confesses to the murder of Martha Huber , and Felicia presumably dies in a car crash while fleeing town . Susan and her family move back onto Wisteria Lane . During a dinner party , Gabrielle 's former stepfather , Alejandro ( Tony Plana ) , who raped her during her childhood , attempts to harm Gabrielle until her husband , Carlos Solis ( Ricardo Antonio Chavira ) kills him . Susan , Lynette , and Bree agree to help cover up the crime . 
 = = = Season 8 = = = 
 Susan begins to withdraw from her friends and family out of guilt for having helped cover up Alejandro 's death . She bonds with Carlos over their mutual guilt . When Mike begins suspecting Susan and Carlos are having an affair , they agree to tell him the truth about the cover @-@ up . Soon after , Susan begins taking an art class with renowned painter , Andre Zeller ( Miguel Ferrer ) , and discovers that her guilt has given her a renewed artistic ability . In a series of paintings , Susan depicts the scene of Alejandro 's death and subsequent burial , arousing the suspicion of Detective Chuck Vance ( Jonathan Cake ) , Bree 's embittered ex @-@ boyfriend assigned to investigate Alejandro 's disappearance . She briefly considers moving to New York to explore new career opportunities , but ultimately decides against it . In an effort to ease her guilt , Susan visits Alejandro 's wife and stepdaughter , Claudia ( Justina Machado ) and Marisa ( Daniela Bobadilla ) , respectively , and write them a check to help their financial misfortune , which only arouses Claudia 's suspicions . Claudia confronts Susan and Gabrielle about Alejandro 's disappearance , but agrees to stop prying after learning that he had been sexually abusing Marisa . 
 In " Is This What You Call Love ? " , Susan learns that Julie is six months pregnant and has no relationship with the baby 's father . To her dismay , Julie plans to put the child up for adoption . When Susan discovers that Lynette 's son , Porter ( Max Carver ) , is the father , she supports his decision to raise the child himself . In " You Take for Granted " , Mike is murdered by a vengeful loan shark . The final episodes of the series deal with Susan grieving and eventually moving on from Mike 's death . In the series finale , Julie gives birth to a daughter , whom she now plans on keeping . Susan sells her home on Wisteria Lane and she and M.J. move to help Julie raise the baby . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 In the first season of Desperate Housewives , the character of Susan was a critics ' favorite and generally regarded as the series ' most prominent role . Hatcher 's portrayal as Susan received praise in the series ' first year . Tim Goodman of the San Francisco Chronicle called Hatcher 's performance in the pilot episode " a huge surprise , " commenting that she gives " self @-@ effacing , disheveled and sadly hopeless Susan a spirit that makes you root for her " . Robert Bianco of USA Today declared that Hatcher delivered " a revelatory performance " . Heather Havrilesky of Salon.com was less enthusiastic , criticizing Hatcher for overacting . In the series ' second season , Susan becomes less important as Bree " comfortably moves into position as the show 's lead " . Many critics noted that the character suffered as a result of the declining quality of the second season . Bianco wrote that the writers were making Susan " too stupid " . Hatcher continued to provide comic relief in the third season . 
 By season four , critics thought that Susan 's storylines were the least interesting and that she had not " operated at full potential since [ her ] pivotal role in the debut season " . Bianco was more forgiving , stating that while " Susan 's silliness sometimes spirals out of control , Teri Hatcher usually manages to keep her likable " . As a result of the five @-@ year time jump between seasons four and five , a new direction was taken with Susan 's character . The Stat @-@ Legend 's Alan Sepinwall calls Susan 's character arc in season five the " least annoying storyline she 's had in at least three years " . However , Tanner Stransky of Entertainment Weekly still felt the character was " ever @-@ annoying " . In the series ' sixth season , Stransky stated that Susan was still " whiny " and he would have rather seen Mike marry Katherine , though he was not surprised when the mystery bride was revealed to be Susan . Entertainment Weekly named her one of the " 21 Most Annoying TV Characters Ever " . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Hatcher won the Golden Globe Award for Best Performance by an Actress in a Television Comedy Series in 2005 , beating out fellow cast members Marcia Cross and Felicity Huffman . Also that year , Hatcher received the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Actress in a Comedy Series . In 2005 , Hatcher , along with Cross and Huffman , received a nomination for a Satellite Award in the Best Television Actress in a Musical or Comedy Series . She was also nominated for an Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series , but was beaten out by Huffman . In 2006 , Hatcher was once again nominated for the Golden Globe Award in the same category , along with Cross , Huffman , and Eva Longoria . All four Desperate Housewives stars lost to Mary @-@ Louise Parker . Hatcher was also nominated for a Teen Choice Award for Choice TV Actress and a People 's Choice Award for Favorite Female TV Star . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 ABC and the Desperate Housewives producers faced criticism following the September 30 , 2007 fourth season premiere in which the character of Susan made a controversial remark about Filipino doctors . When her gynecologist suggests that she may be entering menopause , Susan responds " OK , before we go any further , can I check these diplomas ? Just to make sure they aren 't , like , from some med school in the Philippines ? " Following its broadcast , viewers demanded an apology from the network . ABC issued an apology on October 3 , but the controversy grew to an international concern and Health Secretary Francisco Duque III of Manila publicly sought an apology from the series ' producers . Protests against the network and series were staged , prompting ABC to remove the episode from digital and online platforms in order to apply edits . As a result , the line of controversy was removed from all future broadcasts of the episode , as well as from DVD productions . However , protests continued even after this action was taken . The scene with the line in question is still viewable on YouTube . 
 = = = Cultural influences and merchandise = = = 
 Nicole Parker portrayed Susan in a Desperate Housewives parody on an episode of MADtv . Susan 's <unk> is mocked in the skit . Colette Whitaker voices Susan in the Desperate Housewives computer game , which was released in October 2006 . In 2007 , Madame Alexander released a line of 16 @-@ inch fashion dolls of the series ' main characters , including Susan . 
 = Spanish battleship Jaime I = 
 Jaime I was the third and final member of the España class of dreadnought battleships of the Spanish Navy . She had two sister ships , España and Alfonso XIII . Jaime I was built by the SECN shipyard ; she was laid down in February 1912 , launched in September 1914 , and completed in December 1921 . She was armed with a main battery of eight 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns and could steam at a speed of 19 @.@ 5 knots ( 36 @.@ 1 km / h ; 22 @.@ 4 mph ) . 
 Jaime I served in the Spanish fleet from 1921 to 1937 . She and her sisters participated in the Rif War , where they provided gunfire support to Spanish Army forces . During the conflict , she was damaged by a rebel coastal battery . The ship served with the Republicans during the Spanish Civil War . Nationalist bombers attacked the ship twice and on 17 June 1937 , she was destroyed by an accidental explosion . The wreck was later raised and scrapped . 
 = = Technical characteristics = = 
 Jaime I was 132 @.@ 6 m ( 435 ft ) long at the waterline and 140 m ( 460 ft ) long overall . She had a beam of 24 m ( 79 ft ) and a draft of 7 @.@ 8 m ( 26 ft ) ; her freeboard was 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) amidships . Her propulsion system consisted of four @-@ shaft Parsons steam turbines and twelve Yarrow boilers . The engines were rated at 15 @,@ 500 shaft horsepower ( 11 @,@ 600 kW ) and produced a top speed of 19 @.@ 5 knots ( 36 @.@ 1 km / h ; 22 @.@ 4 mph ) . Jaime I had a cruising radius of 5 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 9 @,@ 300 km ; 5 @,@ 800 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Her crew consisted of 854 officers and enlisted men . 
 Jaime I was armed with a main battery of eight 305 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) / 50 guns , mounted in four twin gun turrets . One turret was placed forward , two were positioned en echelon amidships , and the fourth was aft of the superstructure . This mounting scheme was chosen in preference to superimposed turrets , as was done in the South Carolinas , to save weight and cost . Her secondary battery consisted of twenty 102 mm ( 4 @.@ 0 in ) guns mounted in casemates along the length of the hull . They were too close to the waterline , however , which made them unusable in heavy seas . She was also armed with four 3 @-@ pounder guns and two machine guns . Her armored belt was 203 mm ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) thick amidships ; the main battery turrets were protected with the same amount of armor plate . The conning tower had 254 mm ( 10 @.@ 0 in ) thick sides . Her armored deck was 38 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) thick . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Jaime I was laid down at the Sociedad Española de Construcción Naval shipyard in Ferrol on 5 February 1912 . She was launched on 21 September 1914 , less than two months after the start of World War I. Spain remained neutral during the conflict , but because Britain supplied much of the armament and other building materials , work on Jaime I was considerably delayed . The ship was ready to go to sea by 1917 , but she was not completed until well after the end of the war ; work was finally finished on 20 December 1921 . Upon her completion , she joined her two sister ships in the 1st Squadron of the Spanish fleet . Jaime I saw action against insurgents in Morocco in the Rif War during the early 1920s along with her two sisters . Rif insurgents operating a coastal battery damaged the ship in 1924 . 
 She fought with the Spanish Republican Navy in the Spanish Civil War . At the outbreak of the Nationalist revolt , wireless operators in the navy headquarters Madrid intercepted radio messages from General Francisco Franco to rebels in Morocco . They alerted the crews aboard Jaime I and other ships , who mutinied against their rebellious officers and ensured the ships would remain under Republican control . The vessels were nevertheless crippled by poor discipline for some time , as they had murdered many of their officers , and distrusted those that were not killed . On the first months of the war , Jaime I shelled a number of rebel strongholds , among them Ceuta , Melilla and Algeciras . In Algeciras she hit with her secondary armament the Nationalist gunboat Eduardo Dato , which was burned down to the waterline , although she was later repaired and returned to service . 
 During the Civil War , Jaime I was damaged by a Nationalist air attack at Málaga on 13 August 1936 ; a single , small bomb struck the ship in the bow and caused minimal damage . On 21 May 1937 , she was attacked again while in drydock at Cartagena for repairs after a recent grounding . Three bombs hit the ship , that again caused only minor damage . On 17 June , while at Cartagena , she was wrecked by an accidental internal explosion and fire , although sabotage is suspected . She was refloated , but determined to be beyond repair . She was officially discarded on 3 July 1939 , and broken up in 1941 . 
 In 1940 , the all the guns were recovered , the front and rear twin turrets were used in the Gibraltar strait coastal defense batteries D9 and D10 , El <unk> and <unk> respectively , near Tarifa . Abandoned in 1985 , the twin turrets and canons are still in <unk> but under degradation . All the other guns were placed en single mounts in several locations 
 = Pharnavaz I of Iberia = 
 Pharnavaz ( Georgian : <unk> Georgian pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) also transliterated as <unk> or <unk> was the king of Kartli , an ancient Georgian kingdom known as Iberia to the Classical sources . The Georgian Chronicles credits him with being the first monarch founding the kingship of Kartli and the <unk> dynasty , while another independent chronicles , The Conversion of Kartli makes him the second Georgian monarch . Based on the medieval evidence , most scholars locate Pharnavaz ’ s rule in the 3rd century BC : 302 – 237 BC according to Prince <unk> of Kartli , 299 – 234 BC according to Cyril Toumanoff and 284 – 219 BC according to Pavle <unk> . Pharnavaz 's rise and the advent of the Iberian monarchy was directly tied to the victory of Alexander the Great over the Achaemenid Empire . 
 = = Life = = 
 According to the Georgian royal annals , Pharnavaz descended from <unk> , son of <unk> , son of <unk> , who was one of the powerful and famous eight brothers , who from their part were descendants of <unk> , son of <unk> , the grandson of Japheth , son of the Biblical Noah . He is not directly attested in non @-@ Georgian sources and there is no definite contemporary indication that he was indeed the first of the Georgian kings . His story is saturated with legendary imagery and symbols , and it seems feasible that , as the memory of the historical facts faded , the real Pharnavaz " accumulated a legendary façade " and emerged as the model pre @-@ Christian monarch in the Georgian annals . 
 According to the c . 800 chronicle The Life of Kings , Pharnavaz had a distinguished genealogy , tracing back to <unk> , the mythical <unk> of Kartli . His paternal uncle , Samara , held the position of <unk> ( " father of the house " ) of the Georgian tribes around Mtskheta . Pharnavaz ’ s mother is claimed to have been a Persian woman from Isfahan , whom Prince Teimuraz of Georgia and Patriarch Anton I of Georgia identify with a daughter of King Darius III . The entire story of Pharnavaz , although written by a Christian chronicler , abounds in ancient Iranian @-@ like imagery and mystic allusions , a reflection of the archaeologically confirmed cultural and presumably political ties between Iran and Kartli of that time . The name " Pharnavaz " is also an illustrative example with its root <unk> being based upon the Persian <unk> , the divine radiance believed by the ancient Iranians to mark a legitimate dynast ( cf. <unk> ) . The dynastic tag <unk> ( " of / from / named for Pharnavaz " ) is also preserved in the early Armenian histories as P <unk> ( Faustus of Byzantium 5 @.@ 15 ; fifth century ) and P <unk> ( History of Armenia 14 ; probably the early fifth century ) , an acknowledgment that a king named Pharnavaz was understood to have been the founder of a Georgian dynasty . Pharnavaz is also mentioned in the Armazi stele of <unk> . 
 Perhaps the most artistically rounded section of the Georgian annals , the narrative follows Pharnavaz 's life from birth to burial . Aged 3 , small Pharnavaz 's family is destroyed , and his heritage is usurped by Azon installed by Alexander the Great during his campaign in Kartli . Alexander 's invasion of Iberia , remembered not only by the Georgian historical tradition , but also by Pliny the Elder ( 4 @.@ 10 @.@ 39 ) and Gaius Julius Solinus ( 9 @.@ 19 ) , appears to be memory of some Macedonian interference in Iberia , which must have taken place in connection with the expedition mentioned by Strabo ( 11 @.@ 14 @.@ 9 ) sent by Alexander in 323 BC to the confines of Iberia , in search of gold mines . 
 Pharnavaz is brought up fatherless , but a magic dream , in which he anoints himself with the essence of the Sun , heralds the <unk> . He is persuaded by this vision to " devote [ himself ] to noble deeds " . He then sets off and goes hunting . In a pursuit of a deer , he encounters a mass of treasure stored in a hidden cave . Pharnavaz retrieves the treasure and exploits it to mount a loyal army against the tyrannical Azon . He is aided by Kuji of Colchis , who eventually marries Pharnavaz 's sister . The rebels are also joined by 1 @,@ 000 soldiers from Azon 's camp ; they are anachronistically referred to by the author as Romans , and claimed to have been entitled by the victorious Pharnavaz as <unk> ( i.e. , nobles ) after Azon ( this etymology is false , however ) . 
 The main threads of Pharnavaz 's story - a fatherless boy hidden and raised in a remote mountains , a forgotten lineage , his dreams , sacral kingship , solar imagery , the hunt , discovery of cave @-@ concealed treasure etc. are reminiscent of legends about Iran 's founding kings , like Cyrus the Great and Ardashir I. Pharnavaz 's self @-@ anointment may have a Sasanian inspiration , as some early <unk> crowned themselves . 
 = = Reign = = 
 In the ensuing battle , Azon is defeated and killed , and Pharnavaz becomes the king of Kartli at the age of 27 . He is reported to have acknowledged the suzerainty of the Seleucids , the Hellenistic successors of Alexander in the Middle East , who are afforded by the Georgian chronicles the generic name of Antiochus . 
 Pharnavaz is also said to have patterned his administration upon an " Iranian " model . 
 Pharnavaz had introduced a military @-@ administrative organization based on a network of regional governors or eristavi . The insignia of the eristavi , received from the king , constituted a sceptre , a special signet ring , belt and armament . Iberia had in total seven <unk> , in Colchis , Kakheti , <unk> ( modern @-@ day northern Azerbaijan ) , <unk> ( <unk> Kartli ) , <unk> ( included Javakheti , Kola and <unk> ) , <unk> and Klarjeti . The kingdom had one <unk> who was under the direct control of the royal power based in Inner Kartli . <unk> mimicked aspects of Achaemenid satrapies and Seleucid strategoi . The major motive of later historian of the chronicles was to convince posterity that the basic political structure of Kartli was created by the very first Georgian monarch in the wake of Wars of Alexander the Great ; was of Achaemenid administrative system and had remained stable throughout Hellenistic , Parthian and Sasanian times . In this way , the long @-@ term viability and stability of the Georgian realm are established . 
 The hierarchic structure created by Pharnavaz was the following : king ; commander @-@ in @-@ chief ( <unk> ) of the royal army ; <unk> ; middle commanders ( <unk> <unk> ) of the garrisons stationed in the royal strongholds ; junior commanders ( <unk> ) who were the younger sons of the aristocratic families ; mercenary professional warriors from the neighboring countries and all the soldiers organized around the entire kingdom . 
 It is evident that the division of Iberia by Pharnavaz into <unk> served first and foremost a military aim , namely the organization of people for the purpose of defence . This organization was not so much directed against other countries . Back then the total population of the kingdom would have been , including foreign captives and the population of the tributary areas , about 600 @,@ 000 , which could raise a fairly big army not less than 100 @,@ 000 . According to Strabo the Iberian army numbered 70 @-@ 80 @,@ 000 so it appears that each <unk> had 10 @,@ 000 soldiers . 
 While Georgian and Classical evidence makes the contemporaneous <unk> links with the Seleucids plausible ( Toumanoff has even implied that the kings of Kartli might have aided the Seleucids in holding the resurgent <unk> of Armenia in check ) , Pharnavaz 's alleged reform of the eristavi fiefdoms is most likely a back @-@ projection of the medieval pattern of subdivision to the remote past . 
 Pharnavaz is then reported to have embarked on social and cultural projects ; he supervised two building projects : the raising of the idol Armazi – reputedly named after him – on a mountain ledge and the construction of a similarly named fortress . 
 Pharnavaz made alliances with various North Caucasian peoples during his reign , to whom he called upon for help against both Macedonia and internal foes . He took a <unk> woman in marriage , in order to consolidate the alliance of Iberia with the <unk> , who helped him consolidate his reign against his unruly vassals . Similarly he married his sister to a Sarmatian chief . 
 According to the Georgian royal annals he also created the Georgian script and made the Georgian language an official language of the kingdom : 
 The chronicles report Pharnavaz 's lengthy reign of 65 years . 
 Upon his death , he was buried in front of the idol Armazi and worshipped . His son <unk> succeeded him to the throne . 
 Pharnavaz 's grave is undisclosed so far . One of the last monarchs who visited his grave to adorn it and pay his respects was King Mirian III . Pharnavaz 's very burial in front of idol Armazi suggests a Hellenistic deification of the early monarchs of Iberia . 
 = = Pharnavaz and Arrian 's Pharasmanes = = 
 Several modern scholars have been tempted to make identification between the Pharnavaz of the medieval Georgian tradition and the Pharasmanes of the Greco @-@ Roman historian Arrian , a 2nd @-@ century AD author of The Anabasis of Alexander . Arrian recounts that " Pharasmanes ( <unk> ) , king of the <unk> " , visited Alexander the Great with 1500 horseman , and pledged his support should Alexander desire to campaign to the Euxine lands and subdue <unk> , whom Pharasmanes names as his neighbors . Apart from the similarity of the names of Pharasmanes and Pharnavaz ( both names are apparently based on the same root , the Iranian <unk> ) , it is interesting to note that the king of <unk> in Central Asia reports Colchis ( today ’ s western Georgia , i.e. , the western neighbor of ancient Kartli / Iberia ) to be a neighboring country . Some Georgian scholars have suggested that the Greek copyists of Arrian might have confused <unk> with <unk> ( <unk> ) , a Classical rendering of the southwest Georgian <unk> ( the medieval Tao @-@ Klarjeti ) , which indeed bordered with Colchis and Pontus . 
 According to Arrian : 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Bagrationi dynasty claimed descent directly from Pharnavaz . During the continuity of monarchy in Georgia , the Georgian kings presented themselves as heirs to the Kingdom of Iberia founded by King Pharnavaz . 
 In Tbilisi there is a King Pharnavaz Street , Avenue , and also a statue of Pharnavaz . Also , there are streets named after Pharnavaz in Batumi , Kutaisi , <unk> , Gori , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and others . Some buildings , including schools and hotels , also bear his name , as well as about five hundred Georgians . 
 = Mycena vitilis = 
 Mycena vitilis , commonly known as the snapping bonnet , is a species of inedible mushroom in the Mycenaceae family . It is found in Europe and North America , where it grows on the ground among leaves in damp places , especially under alder . The small pale gray to whitish fruit bodies are usually attached to small sticks buried in the leaves and detritus . They are distinguished by their long , slender stems that root into the ground , and by the grooved cap that reaches diameters of up to 2 @.@ 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 9 in ) . The grayish @-@ white gills on the underside of the cap are distantly spaced , and <unk> attached to the stem . M. vitilis contains strobilurin B , a fungicidal compound with potential use in agriculture . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 First described as Agaricus vitilis by Swedish mycologist Elias Magnus Fries in 1838 , it was assigned to Mycena vitilis in 1872 by Lucien Quélet . The white @-@ bodied variant Mycena vitilis var. <unk> has been described from Italy , and differs from the main species by its white fruit bodies and differing measurements for several microscopic characters . Carleton Rea named another variety <unk> ( meaning " field by the roadside " ) , which differs from the type variety by its " <unk> umbonate " cap , its shorter and thicker stem , and its typical habitat of meadows and roadsides . The name " Mycena <unk> " has also been confusingly applied to this species by some authors , although M. <unk> ( Bull . ) P. <unk> is a species that is recognized as being distinct from M. vitilis " . 
 The specific epithet vitilis is derived from the Latin word for " good for tying or binding with " , or " plaited " . The mushroom 's common name is the " snapping bonnet " . In his 1871 Handbook of British Fungi , Mordecai Cubitt Cooke called it the " <unk> Mycena " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of M. vitilis is initially conic or bell @-@ shaped , but flattens out in maturity , and typically reaches dimensions of up to 2 @.@ 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 9 in ) . When young , the cap margin is pressed against the stem , but as the cap expands it becomes bell @-@ shaped or somewhat umbonate , and the margin flattens out or curves inward . The cap surface is initially hoary but soon becomes polished and slimy when moist , or shiny when dry . The cap margin is even , and has slight grooves that mark the position of the gills underneath . The cap color is beige ( sometimes with a grayish tinge ) with paler margins , fading to pale gray or nearly white in age . Occasionally , the mushroom cap has a strong brownish tint when fresh . Moist mushrooms have a slightly sticky surface . The flesh is thin but pliant , grayish or pallid , cartilaginous , and lacks any distinctive odor and taste . 
 The gills are attached by a tooth and are narrowly adnate , close to subdistant , narrow , equal , white or grayish , and with edges concolorous and often slightly eroded . Berkeley noted that the gills " vary a good deal in colour , and are sometimes very dark " . The stem is 6 – 12 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 – 4 @.@ 7 in ) long , 1 @.@ 5 – 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 06 – 0 @.@ 08 in ) thick , equal in width throughout , cartilaginous and tough . The stem color is brown with a tinge of pink , and the color lightens towards the top . It is usually straight but often curved toward the base , and roots into in the debris , or is attached to sticks . Smith has noted that in optimal weather conditions , " robust " forms may be found that are " strict and rigid in their appearance . " The buried portion of the stem is covered with thick , stiff whitish hairs , and is surrounded with a thin <unk> layer , which causes it to be slimy to the touch . Its color is initially bluish @-@ black , soon gray , nearly the same color as the cap , with the apex somewhat fibrous @-@ striate . The mushroom is inedible . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The spores are ellipsoid , hyaline , amyloid , and measure 9 – 11 by 5 – 6 μm . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are four @-@ spored . The pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the gill face ) are not differentiated or are occasionally present near the gill edge and similar to cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the gill edge ) . The cheilocystidia , which measure 32 – 46 by 8 – 14 μm , are tapered on either end and can have two to several obtuse fingerlike projections arising from the apex . The gill flesh stains vinaceous @-@ brown in iodine . The subhymenium ( the tissue layer directly underneath the hymenium ) is made of narrow , interwoven hyphae , with the central portion composed of long , cylindrical , and moderately broad cells . The flesh of the cap has a fairly thick <unk> pellicle , a well @-@ differentiated hypoderm , and a filamentous tramal body . All except the pellicle stain vinaceous @-@ brown in iodine . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The fruit bodies of Mycena vitilis are found growing scattered or in groups on debris in hardwood or mixed conifer and hardwood forests . Along the Pacific Coast it is sometimes abundant in Red alder slashes . In eastern North America it is quite commonly found growing in the autumn months of October and November with M. <unk> and M. <unk> . The fungus is widely distributed in Europe ( for example , Britain , Germany , Italy , Norway , Poland , Portugal ) . 
 = = Chemistry = = 
 The fruit bodies of Mycena vitilis contain the chlorinated compound strobilurin B. <unk> are aromatic compounds produced by some fungi that help them secure resources by giving them an advantage against other competing fungi . They have been investigated for potential use as lead compounds for agricultural fungicides . 
 = Can 't Stop Won 't Stop ( Usher song ) = 
 " Can 't Stop Won 't Stop " is a song recorded by American recording artist Usher for his seventh studio album Looking 4 Myself ( 2012 ) . Written and produced by Will " will.i.am " Adams and Keith Harris , the song contains an interpolation of the bridge to Billy Joel 's 1983 hit single " Uptown Girl " . Musically , " Can 't Stop Won 't Stop " is a eurodance and dance @-@ pop song that incorporates elements of dubstep . 
 " Can 't Stop Won 't Stop " received generally mixed reviews from music critics , who praised the song 's production , but dismissed its lyrics . Additionally , similarities between " Can 't Stop Won 't Stop " and Usher 's 2010 single " OMG " were noted . Upon the release of Looking 4 Myself , the song debuted at number 22 on the South Korea Gaon International Chart , with sales of 9 @,@ 374 digital copies . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Can 't Stop Won 't Stop " was written by William M. Joel , Keith Harris and William Adams . The production of the song was helmed by Harris and Adams under his stage name will.i.am. Adams had previously written and produced Usher 's 2010 single " OMG " . " Can 't Stop Won 't Stop " contains a portion of Joel 's single " Uptown Girl " ( An Innocent Man , 1983 ) . Mark " Exit " Goodchild recorded the song at Glenwood Place Studios in Burbank , while Jacob Dennis served as recording assistant . It was mixed by Dylan " 3 @-@ D " Dresdow at Paper V.U. Studios North Hollywood with Jaime Martinez serving as a mixing assistant . The track 's producers Harris and Adams provided the complete instrumentation of " Can 't Stop Won 't Stop " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Can 't Stop Won 't Stop " is a eurodance and dance @-@ pop song that incorporates dubstep elements with a length of three minutes and 51 seconds . According to Carrie Battan of Pitchfork Media , " even though the track opens builds like a arena anthem , but instead of exploding into oblivion after the breakdown it splits into a fizzy and wonky slap of a beat . " PopCrush 's Trent Fitzgerald compared " Can 't Stop Won 't Stop " to Usher 's 2010 single " OMG " . Ryan Hadfield of Time wrote that , " ' Can ’ t Stop Won ’ t Stop ' and ' Scream ' are aggressively seductive club songs " and drew comparisons to Usher 's single " Yeah ! " ( Confessions , 2004 ) and his collaboration with French disk jockey David Guetta entitled " Without You " ( Nothing but the Beat , 2011 ) . Billboard 's Erika Ramirez concluded that " Can 't Stop Won 't Stop " is built around " synth @-@ heavy hook " and was critical towards its " mediocre lyricism " . The song starts with the opening lines : " Hey what ’ s up / This is a jam , turn it up / Play it loud in the club / This is fire , burning it up " , while the chorus consists of the lyrics " I can ’ t can ’ t stop it / Can ’ t stop won ’ t stop " . Unterberger noted that the lines " I don ’ t want to do all the normal things / That all these other normal dudes do " could be the inspiration for the title of the album and its " thesis statement " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Can 't Stop Won 't Stop " received generally mixed review from music critics . Nathan S. of DJ Booth stated that " Can 't Stop Won 't Stop " would be shocking to a " My Way @-@ era Usher " , but " coming from a man who 's [ sic ] last huge hit was OMG , it 's really nothing new " . Sobhi Youssef of Sputnikmusic praised the song 's productions , but dismissed its " truly cliched lyrics " . Erika Ramirez of Billboard stated that the song " simply sets the stage for better tracks to come " . Eric Henderson of Slant Magazine wrote a negative review of the song , calling it " yet another <unk> hollow attempted <unk> @-@ upper in the Pitbull / LMFAO mode " . He also criticized the song 's interpolation from " Uptown Girl . " Killian Fox of The Guardian called the song " horribly overblown " , while Trent of the Lava Lizard labelled the song as " forgettable " . 
 Brad Wete of Complex disagreed , calling the song , along with " Lemme See " , a " gem " . Andrew Unterberger of Popdust called the song " not exactly single @-@ worthy material " , being " a hobbled @-@ together bunch of musical cliches , where David Guetta stadium house beats meets Skrillex wub @-@ wubs , like the brainchild of the most uncreative EDM think tank possible . " According to Unterberger , the lyrics are " even more hackneyed " , with its " Kardashian @-@ worthy opening lines " Evan Rytlewski of The AV Club both " Can 't Stop Won 't Stop " and " Scream " as two " overinflated dance numbers " that open the album on a " discouragingly perfunctory note " . He concluded by stating that : " If there ’ s a bright spot to either , it ’ s that they forgo the garish auto @-@ tune of Usher 's previous dance forays , so at least his whole register comes across cleanly . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Upon the release of Looking 4 Myself , due to digital downloads " Can 't Stop Won 't Stop " debuted on the singles chart in South Korea . It debuted on the South Korea Gaon International Chart at number 22 on June 10 , 2012 , with sales of 9 @,@ 374 digital copies . The next week , the song sold an additional 3 @,@ 593 copies and fell to number 78 . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording and mixing 
 Recorded at Glenwood Place Studios , Burbank , California ; mixed at Paper V.U. Studios North Hollywood , California 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Looking 4 Myself , RCA Records . 
 = M @-@ 86 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 86 is an east – west state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan in the southern portion of the Lower Peninsula . The highway starts at Business US Highway 131 ( Bus . US 131 ) and M @-@ 60 in Three Rivers and ends at US Highway 12 ( US 12 ) near Coldwater . In between , it crosses farm country and runs along a section of the Prairie River . Following a highway originally numbered M @-@ 7 , the roadway was renumbered M @-@ 86 in 1940 . It has been a part of the state highway system at least since 1927 . Two other roadways carried the M @-@ 86 designation in the 1920s . Two bridges along the road are eligible for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places ( NHRP ) . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 86 begins in Three Rivers at a junction with Bus . US 131 and M @-@ 60 . From there the road travels south out of town on Main Street and across the St. Joseph River . After crossing the river , the highway runs through a residential area of town and turns eastward into rural farm lands . M @-@ 86 crosses the Prairie River and follows Burr Oak Street into the community of Centreville . The highway switches to follow Main Street through downtown Centreville ; east of downtown , Main Street curves along a bend in the river , and it runs parallel to the river out of town . As part of its support of the state highway system , the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) tracks the traffic levels along the roads it maintains . These traffic counts are expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , a calculation of the vehicles using a segment of roadway on a typical day of the year . In 2009 , MDOT measured 7 @,@ 642 vehicles including 138 trucks along M @-@ 86 in Centreville , the highest traffic levels along the whole highway . As the highway leaves town , it passes by the north side of Lake <unk> , and Sand Lake near Nottawa before meeting M @-@ 66 . 
 From the junction , M @-@ 86 and M @-@ 66 run concurrently to the north for about 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) , at which point M @-@ 86 branches off to the east while M @-@ 66 continues on a northerly route . M @-@ 86 continues east through agricultural land into the village of Colon . The highway follows South Street and turns north on Blackstone Avenue between Sturgeon and Palmer lakes . Turning to follow State Street , the trunkline heads out of the village to the southeast . It continues eastward along Colon Road , passing north of Matteson Lake near Matteson and through Batavia Center . In Coldwater Township , M @-@ 86 experienced its lowest traffic level in 2009 at 1 @,@ 872 vehicles and 129 trucks AADT . The highway terminates at US 12 west of Coldwater near the Branch County Memorial Airport and Messenger Lake . No segment of M @-@ 86 has been listed on the National Highway System , a system of roads important to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Previous designations = = = 
 Upon its inception in 1921 , a very different M @-@ 86 was routed along a portion of present @-@ day M @-@ 66 from M @-@ 46 at Six Lakes northward to Remus , ending at M @-@ 24 ( modern M @-@ 20 ) . A few years later in 1924 – 25 , M @-@ 66 was extended north to Remus , supplanting the contemporary M @-@ 86 . At the same time , the M @-@ 86 designation was relocated to Ionia County to run from M @-@ 44 in Orleans to M @-@ 43 ( present day M @-@ 66 ) just east of there . In late 1929 , M @-@ 44 was extended east from Orleans to junction with M @-@ 43 , once again , causing M @-@ 86 to be supplanted and removed from the highway system . 
 = = = Current designation = = = 
 By the end of 1927 , the Michigan State Highway Department ( MSHD ) had designated a highway numbered M @-@ 7 between Three Rivers and Centreville . This highway was extended east by the middle of 1936 . The route connected US 131 in downtown Three Rivers to US 112 outside Coldwater . At the time of the extension , all of M @-@ 7 was a gravel road . Later that year , the original segment between Three Rivers and Colon was paved , and the state extended the hard @-@ surface route as far as Nottawa in 1937 . 
 In 1940 , at the same time all single @-@ digit highway numbers were renumbered in the state , the M @-@ 86 designation replaced M @-@ 7 . This incarnation of M @-@ 86 followed its present @-@ day routing . Near Nottawa , M @-@ 86 ran concurrently with the contemporary M @-@ 78 north and east to Colon . In late 1948 or early 1949 , the last section of highway was paved in Branch County , hard @-@ surfacing all of M @-@ 86 for the first time . A change related to M @-@ 66 and M @-@ 78 altered M @-@ 86 in 1965 . South of Battle Creek , M @-@ 66 replaced M @-@ 78 . Rather than follow M @-@ 78 between Colon and Athens , M @-@ 66 used a different series of roads . The net result was that along M @-@ 86 , the M @-@ 78 concurrency was replaced by a shorter M @-@ 66 concurrency . The routing has remain unchanged since . 
 = = = Historic bridges = = = 
 M @-@ 86 currently uses two bridges eligible for listing on the NRHP . The span over the St. Joseph River in Three Rivers was built in 1903 . It is a five @-@ span concrete arch bridge constructed to look as though created from stacked masonry blocks . The current railings were added in 1952 by the MSHD during a repair project . The second historic structure is the bridge over the Prairie River in Centreville . This camelback pony truss span was moved to its current location in 1938 – 39 , although it was originally built on an unknown location in 1923 . In the move , two sidewalks , one on either side of the trusses , were eliminated from the structure . This project was part of Public Works Administration relief work in the area . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Bart on the Road = 
 " Bart on the Road " is the twentieth episode of The Simpsons ' seventh season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 31 , 1996 . In the episode , Bart makes his own fake driver 's license . He rents a car with it and takes Milhouse , Martin , and Nelson on a road trip to Knoxville , Tennessee . In Knoxville , however , the car gets destroyed , and they are stranded without any money or transportation . To get Bart home , Homer orders equipment for the power plant and ships it via courier from Knoxville , with the boys stowed away inside the crate . 
 The episode was written by Richard Appel , and directed by Swinton O. Scott III . The idea of a road trip was " so exciting " that the writers immediately knew they wanted to write it . This features cultural references to the 1991 film Naked Lunch , American singer Andy Williams , and Look magazine . Since airing , the episode has received positive reviews from television critics , and Central Michigan Life named it the eighth best episode of the show . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 2 , and was the fifth highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Principal Skinner closes school the day before spring break and sends the children on a " go to work with your parents day " in order to take a trip to Hong Kong . Bart is forced to go to the DMV with his aunts Patty and Selma , and Lisa decides to go to the nuclear power plant with Homer , where she bonds with him . At the DMV , Bart makes himself a fake driver 's license , which he , Nelson , Martin , and Milhouse use to hire a rental car with $ 600 Martin earned in the <unk> . The boys tell their parents they are going to attend the " National Grammar Rodeo " in Canada , but secretly take the rented car for a road trip to Knoxville , Tennessee after finding a brochure for the 1982 World 's Fair . During the car ride , chaos ensues as they stop in Branson , Missouri to see Nelson 's favorite singer Andy Williams , and Nelson later manages to provoke an agitated father of a Canadian family traveling to Cape Canaveral to turn around and head back to Winnipeg . 
 In Knoxville , however , they find out that the fair was held fourteen years earlier , and that its featured attraction , the <unk> , is now being used as a warehouse for a wig shop , now called the <unk> . The boys ' car soon gets destroyed by the <unk> being toppled by a rock Nelson threw , and they are stranded without any money or transportation . They sign up as couriers and then go to Hong Kong . Bart places a collect call to Lisa , who has spent the entire spring break with Homer at work , to ask her for advice . Lisa obtains Homer 's promise that he will not get upset and she reveals Bart 's predicament , causing Homer to scream in his safety helmet . To get Bart home , Homer contacts a power station close to the boys ' location , and orders a new command module for the power plant , after spilling soda over the current one , and ships it via courier from Knoxville , with Milhouse , Nelson , and Martin stowed away inside the crate and Bart as the courier . 
 The ending credits begin with an unsuspecting Marge getting phone calls from Principal Skinner ( who spotted Bart in Hong Kong ) , the Tennessee State Police ( who inquire about the crushed rental car ) , and the courier office ( which has an assignment for Bart ) . Homer snickers at these calls , which leaves Marge furious . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Richard Appel , who wanted to do an episode that had two things ; a " go to work with your parents day " and Bart getting a driver 's license . The " go to work with your parents day " idea appealed to Appel because it was something he " lost the right " to do when he went from public school to private school as a child . Appel considered those days to be his favorites because he " didn 't have to do anything " at his parents ' job . The idea of having a driver 's license was something that Appel dreamed about when he was younger . 
 The writing staff had never done a spring break episode before so they thought , " What would Lisa and Bart do on spring break ? " and came up with the road trip plot . Bill Oakley , the show runner of The Simpsons at the time , said that road trips were something that the writers liked to write stories about . The idea of four children going on a road trip was " so exciting " that they immediately knew they wanted to write it . There was a debate over where the children would go , and Fort Lauderdale , Florida , was first suggested , but the writers eventually decided to have them go to a " funny unlikely place " . Oakley 's show runner partner , Josh Weinstein , said that the writers were always looking for combinations of characters that had not been done many times on the show . Homer and Lisa had not been done " too often " and they wanted the two characters to bond and get closer to each other . 
 The episode was directed by Swinton O. Scott III . It was difficult to animate because the animators had to draw completely new designs for the locations outside of Springfield , such as Knoxville . The car scenes were also difficult to animate . At the time , The Simpsons was using traditional animation without computers , but they had to get one for a scene where the camera spins around the car from above . The car was difficult to animate because it had to " look real " and not " boxy like a truck " . The car was based on a 1993 Oldsmobile car with rounded edges . The Simpsons animator David Silverman said that the episode was " probably the most difficult one " Scott had to direct on the show . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 When Lisa and Homer are playing with the radiation suits , Lisa says " Houston , we have a <unk> Homer 13 is spinning out of control ! " This is a reference to the Apollo 13 incident , where an onboard oxygen tank exploded , causing the spacecraft to temporarily lose control . 
 Bart and his friends use Bart 's fake license to see the R @-@ rated 1991 film Naked Lunch , an adaptation of William Burroughs 's novel dealing with heroin addiction , homosexuality , and hallucinogens . Nelson 's muted " I can think of at least two things wrong with that title " afterwards reflects the fact that the film has a titillating title but is very much a dark , bleak , un @-@ erotic arthouse film . 
 The boys also go see an Andy Williams concert in Branson , Missouri , and the marquee advertising it outside reads " Wow , he 's still got it – Look magazine " , Look having been out of business for years when the episode aired . 
 On the road , the boys pick up a hitchhiker who is based on the hitchhiker in the Texas Chainsaw Massacre horror film series . 
 Principal Skinner books a vacation with <unk> , a parody of America West Airlines . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Bart on the Road " finished 63rd in the ratings for the week of March 25 to March 31 , 1996 , with a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 2 . The episode was the fifth highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ Files , Cops , Party of Five , Martin and Melrose Place . 
 Since airing , the episode has received positive reviews from television critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , said that it " contains some superb touching character scenes between Homer and Lisa , a fascinating glimpse of Marge 's insecurities , and some nice touches that take it above the show 's very high average . " Dave Foster of DVD Times said that " Bart on the Road " is an episode which is built upon a " frankly ludicrous " idea which if the writers were to " stumble upon " now , " we 'd simply see Bart happen upon a license and skip town without anyone noticing , but here they do give the setup a great deal of consideration both on and off the screen . " He thought the story was " partly believable , though the opportunity when Bart hits the road is largely wasted with only a few well constructed jokes to speak of . " Foster thinks " what saves the episode is the opportunity to see Lisa and Homer connect , once again displaying what a strong season this is for Lisa as we see the two share some wonderfully tender moments , alongside some genuinely laugh @-@ out @-@ loud moments . " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson enjoyed the episode and said that he " loves " the children 's experiences at their parents ' jobs , " and when they head out of town , the fun continues . Any episode that sends the kids to the site of the World 's Fair is OK by me . " Jennifer Malkowski of DVD Verdict considered the best part of the episode to be when Patty and Selma explain their job at the DMV : " Somedays we don 't let the line move at all . We call those weekdays . " The website concluded its review by giving the episode a grade of B + . John Thorpe of Central Michigan Life named it the eighth best episode of the show . Robert Canning of IGN in a Flashback Review gave the episode a 9 @.@ 5 saying it was " Outstanding " and also stated " " Bart on the Road " is a fun trip and very funny , but it 's the way everything comes together that really makes it memorable " . 
 = Beckford 's Tower = 
 Beckford 's Tower , originally known as Lansdown Tower , is an architectural folly built in neo @-@ classical style on Lansdown Hill , just outside Bath , Somerset , England . The tower and its attached railings are designated as a Grade I listed building . Along with the adjoining <unk> Cemetery it is Grade II listed on the Register of Historic Parks and Gardens of special historic interest in England . 
 The tower was built for William Thomas Beckford , a rich novelist , art collector and critic , to designs by Henry Goodridge and completed in 1827 . Beckford used it as a library and a retreat , with the cupola at the top acting as a belvedere providing views over the surrounding countryside . The Italianate building at the base of the tower housed drawing rooms and a library . Extensive grounds between Beckford 's house in Lansdown Crescent were landscaped and planted to create Beckford 's Ride . 
 Following Beckford 's death in 1844 , the tower and lands were donated to Walcot parish and a burial ground created , with the Scarlet Drawing Room being converted into a chapel . In 1931 the house and tower were damaged by a fire and a public appeal was made for funds for its restoration . The cemetery closed in 1992 and the next year the site was bought by the Bath Preservation Trust who have carried out extensive renovation . It is now home to a museum collection displaying furniture originally made for the tower and paintings , prints and objects illustrating Beckford ’ s life as a writer , collector and patron of the arts . 
 = = History = = 
 Beckford 's Tower in Lansdown overlooking the city of Bath , was completed in 1827 for wealthy local resident William Beckford , to a design by Bath architect Henry Goodridge . Beckford was an English novelist , an art collector and patron of works of decorative art , a critic , travel writer and sometime politician , reputed at one stage in his life to be the richest commoner in England . In 1822 he sold Fonthill Abbey , and a large part of his art collection , to John Farquhar for £ 330 @,@ 000 , and moved to Bath , where he bought No. 20 Lansdown Crescent and No. 1 Lansdown Place West , joining them with a one @-@ storey arch thrown across a driveway . In 1836 he also bought Nos. 18 and 19 Lansdown Crescent . 
 Located at the end of pleasure gardens called Beckford 's Ride which ran from his house in Lansdown Crescent all the way north to the tower at the top of Lansdown Hill , Beckford used the monument as both a library and a retreat . He also made it his habit to ride up to the tower to view the progress of gardens and works then walk back down to Lansdown Crescent for breakfast . From the top of the tower , with a strong spyglass , Beckford could make out shipping in the Bristol Channel . Beckford wished that he had built the tower forty feet higher and admitted : " such as it is , it is a famous landmark for drunken farmers on their way home from market " . 
 Beckford 's own choice of the best of works of art , <unk> , books and prints as well as the rich furnishings from Fonthill Abbey , which he had sold in 1822 , were rehoused in his double adjoining houses in Lansdown Crescent , Bath and at the tower . One long narrow room in the tower was fitted out as an " oratory " , where the paintings were all of devotional subjects and a marble Virgin and Child stood bathed in light from a hidden skylight . In 1841 some of the contents of the tower were sold during a two @-@ day sale and the rooms refurnished . 
 After Beckford 's death on 2 May 1844 his younger daughter Susan Euphemia Beckford , wife of Alexander Hamilton , 10th Duke of Hamilton , removed the books and greatest treasures to Hamilton Palace and the Tower was put up for sale , however it failed to reach its reserve . In 1847 the tower was sold for £ 1 @,@ 000 to a local publican who turned it into a beer garden . Eventually it was re @-@ purchased by Beckford 's daughter , who gave the surrounding land to Walcot parish for consecration as a cemetery in 1848 . This enabled the return of Beckford 's body from his tomb in Bath Abbey Cemetery , Lyncombe Vale ( off Ralph Allen Drive ) for reburial near the tower as he had originally wished . His self @-@ designed tomb — a massive sarcophagus of polished pink granite with bronze armorial plaques — stands on a hillock in the cemetery surrounded by an oval ditch and ha @-@ ha . On one side is a quotation from his Gothic novel <unk> : " Enjoying humbly the most precious gift of heaven to man — Hope " ; and on another these lines from his poem , A Prayer : " Eternal Power ! Grant me , through obvious clouds one transient gleam Of thy bright essence in my dying hour . " The Scarlet Drawing Room was converted into a chapel in 1848 to serve the cemetery . In 1864 the Rector of Walcot gave £ 100 for the repair of tower stonework and in 1884 a similar amount of money for further repairs to the upper part of the tower , however the condition of the stonework was deteriorating by 1898 and described in 1918 as " piteous and dilapidated " . 
 In 1931 an unexplained fire destroyed much of the interior of the house , which had been turned into a cemetery chapel . The local fire brigade managed to stop the fire reaching the wooden stairs to the top of the tower . Prebendary F. E. Murphy , the rector of Walcot , established an appeal for funds of £ 300 for the restoration . By 1954 the stairs up the tower had become unsafe and a further appeal for public funds for the restoration was started . In 1970 the Church Commissioners declared the chapel redundant and plans drawn up by the new owners , Dr & Mrs Hilliard , to renovate the tower and create two flats . The Beckford Tower Trust and the museum were established in 1977 . 
 Since 1993 the tower has been owned by the Bath Preservation Trust and managed by its subsidiary , The Beckford Tower Trust . The tower was restored in 1995 . In 1972 it was designated as a Grade I listed building . The ground floor of the tower is available to rent through the Landmark Trust as a holiday home . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Standing 154 feet ( 47 m ) high , the tower is in three stages . The first stage of the tower is square with small windows and terminates in a Doric entablature and cornice . The second stage has plain square piers forming three openings with recessed arches . The tower is topped by a gilded lantern ( or belvedere ) , based on the <unk> temple at Tivoli and the Tower of the Winds at Athens . The octagonal belvedere has a cast iron roof supported by eight columns . The stone spiral <unk> staircase leads to the 53 wooden stairs leading into the cupola at the summit . At the base of the tower was a furnace and pump which sent warm air up through the structure . 
 Below the tower is an Italianate building . On the ground floor was the Scarlet Drawing Room and a vestibule with an annexe which housed a kitchen and offices . The first floor held the Crimson Drawing Room , sanctuary and library . 
 = = Cemetery and grounds = = 
 From Beckford 's house in Lansdown Crescent to the tower a series of interlinked gardens were laid out which became known as Beckford 's Ride . Nearest the crescent was a terraced Italianate garden and then a plantation of conifers . Above the plantation was a quarry garden and dyke garden before entering a grotto tunnel under a track . The tunnel lead into the tower garden . Specialist planting included : Pinus arborea , Royal Fern ( Osmunda regalis ) and Cistus alpina . These were to encourage bird species including nightingales , linnets and thrushes . The old quarry was made into a walled garden with fruit and vegetables . 
 Henry Goodridge designed a Byzantine entrance gateway to the grounds . Bronze railings were later added which had surrounded Beckford 's original tomb in Bath Abbey Cemetery . The railings were removed during World War II and replaced in 2000 . The gardens were surrounding by stone walls around 2 metres ( 6 ft 7 in ) high . 
 Part of the grounds were donated to the local parish after Beckford 's death and consecrated as a cemetery in 1848 . It became known as Lansdown Cemetery and burial plots were laid out in a grid pattern . It was extended in 1947 and again in 1961 . In addition to Beckford 's tomb , the cemetery is also the burial site for several notable people from Bath including : Henry Goodridge , Field Marshall William Rowan , the Holburne family who founded the Holburne Museum , Anne ( the wife of Sir Richard Bickerton , 2nd Baronet ) and the feminist writer Sarah Grand . 
 The cemetery closed in 1992 and since then has been maintained by the local council and the Lansdown Cemetery Trust . 
 = = Museum = = 
 The tower is home to a museum collection displaying furniture originally made for the tower , alongside paintings , prints and objects illustrating William Beckford ’ s life as a writer , collector and patron of the arts . Visitors can climb the spiral staircase to the restored belvedere below the lantern and experience panoramic views of the surrounding countryside . 
 = Russian battleship Gangut ( 1911 ) = 
 Gangut ( Russian : <unk> ) was both the lead ship of the Gangut @-@ class dreadnoughts of the Imperial Russian Navy built before World War I and the last of her class to be completed . She was named after the Russian victory over the Swedish Navy in the Battle of Gangut in 1714 . She was completed during the winter of 1914 – 15 , but was not ready for combat until mid @-@ 1915 . Her role was to defend the mouth of the Gulf of Finland against the Germans , who never tried to enter , so she spent her time training and providing cover for minelaying operations . Her crew joined the general mutiny of the Baltic Fleet after the February Revolution and joined the Bolsheviks in 1918 . She was laid up in 1918 for lack of manpower and not recommissioned until 1925 , by which time she had been renamed Oktyabrskaya Revolutsiya ( Russian : <unk> <unk> : October Revolution ) . 
 She was reconstructed between 1931 and 1934 with new boilers , fire @-@ control systems and greatly enlarged superstructures . During the Winter War she bombarded Finnish coastal artillery positions one time . Her anti @-@ aircraft armament was greatly reinforced in early 1941 , just before Operation Barbarossa . She provided gunfire support against the Germans during the Siege of Leningrad despite being bombed three times and under repair for a year . Retained on active duty after the war she became a training ship in 1954 before being struck off the Navy List in 1956 and slowly scrapped . 
 = = Design = = 
 Gangut was 180 meters ( 590 ft ) long at the waterline and 181 @.@ 2 meters ( 594 ft ) long overall . She had a beam of 26 @.@ 9 meters ( 88 ft ) and a draft of 8 @.@ 99 meters ( 29 @.@ 5 ft ) , 49 centimeters ( 1 @.@ 61 ft ) more than designed . Her displacement was 24 @,@ 800 tonnes ( 24 @,@ 400 long tons ; 27 @,@ 300 short tons ) at load , over 1 @,@ 500 t ( 1 @,@ 500 long tons ; 1 @,@ 700 short tons ) more than her designed displacement of 23 @,@ 288 t ( 22 @,@ 920 long tons ; 25 @,@ 671 short tons ) . 
 Gangut 's machinery was built by the Franco @-@ Russian Works . Ten Parsons @-@ type steam turbines drove the four propellers . The engine rooms were located between turrets three and four in three transverse compartments . The outer compartments each had a high @-@ pressure ahead and reverse turbine for each wing propeller shaft . The central engine room had two each low @-@ pressure ahead and astern turbines as well as two cruising turbines driving the two center shafts . The engines had a total designed output of 42 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 31 @,@ 319 kW ) , but they produced 52 @,@ 000 shp ( 38 @,@ 776 kW ) during her sister Poltava 's full @-@ speed trials on 21 November 1915 and gave a top speed of 24 @.@ 1 knots ( 44 @.@ 6 km / h ; 27 @.@ 7 mph ) . Twenty @-@ five Yarrow Admiralty @-@ type small @-@ tube boilers provided steam to the engines at a designed working pressure of 17 @.@ 5 standard atmospheres ( 1 @,@ 770 kPa ; 257 psi ) . Each boiler was fitted with Thornycroft oil sprayers for mixed oil / coal burning . They were arranged in two groups . The forward group consisted of two boiler rooms in front of the second turret , the foremost of which had three boilers while the second one had six . The rear group was between the second and third turrets and comprised two compartments , each with eight boilers . At full load she carried 1 @,@ 847 @.@ 5 long tons ( 1 @,@ 877 @.@ 1 t ) of coal and 700 long tons ( 710 t ) of fuel oil and that provided her a range of 3 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 500 km ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ) . 
 Her main armament consisted of a dozen Obukhovskii 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) Pattern 1907 52 @-@ caliber guns mounted in four triple turrets distributed the length of the ship . The Russians did not believe that superfiring turrets offered any advantage , discounting the value of axial fire and believing that superfiring turrets could not fire while over the lower turret because of muzzle blast problems . They also believed that distributing the turrets , and their associated magazines , over the length of the ship improved the survivability of the ship . Sixteen 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 119 mm ) 50 @-@ caliber Pattern 1905 guns were mounted in casemates as the secondary battery intended to defend the ship against torpedo boats . She completed with only a single 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) 30 @-@ caliber Lender anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) gun mounted on the quarterdeck . Other AA guns were probably added during the course of World War I , but details are lacking . Conway 's says that four 75 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) were added to the roofs of the end turrets during the war . Four 17 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 450 mm ) submerged torpedo tubes were mounted with three torpedoes for each tube . 
 = = Service = = 
 Gangut was built by the Admiralty Works in Saint Petersburg . Her keel was laid down on 16 June 1909 and she was launched on 22 September 1911 . At the end of October 1914 , she collided with her sister Poltava which delayed her trials , scheduled for 9 November 1914 , to late December 1914 . She entered service on 11 January 1915 when she reached Helsingfors and was assigned to the First Battleship Brigade of the Baltic Fleet . Gangut and her sister Sevastopol provided distant cover for minelaying operations south of Liepāja on 27 August , the furthest that any Russian dreadnought ventured out of the Gulf of Finland during World War I. She ran aground on 10 September , but suffered only minor damage . A minor mutiny broke out on 1 November when the executive officer refused to feed the crew the traditional meal of meat and macaroni after coaling . The return of the captain and the issue of a dinner of tinned meat restored order on the ship . On 10 – 11 November and 6 December Gangut and her sister Petropavlovsk again provided distant cover for minelaying operations . She saw no action of any kind during 1916 . Her crew joined the general mutiny of the Baltic Fleet on 16 March 1917 , after the idle sailors received word of the February Revolution in Saint Petersburg . The Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk required the Soviets to evacuate their base at Helsinki in March 1918 or have them interned by newly independent Finland even though the Gulf of Finland was still frozen over . Gangut and her sisters led the first group of ships on 12 March and reached Kronstadt five days later in what became known as the ' Ice Voyage ' . 
 Gangut was laid up on 9 November 1918 for lack of manpower and was renamed Oktyabrskaya Revolutsiya ( Russian : <unk> <unk> : October Revolution ) on 27 June 1925 while she was being refitted . She was recommissioned on 23 March 1926 and began a partial reconstruction on 12 October 1931 , incorporating the lessons from the earlier modernizations of her sisters Marat and Parizhskaya Kommuna . The tubular tower @-@ mast of Marat was replaced by a larger and sturdier structure with a KDP @-@ 6 fire control director , equipped with two 6 @-@ meter ( 20 ft ) Zeiss rangefinders positioned on top . The aft superstructure was enlarged and a new structure was built just forward of it , with another KDP @-@ 6 director surmounting it , which required the repositioning of the mainmast 9 meters ( 30 ft ) forward . This did not leave enough room for a derrick , as was used on Marat , so two large boat cranes were mounted on each side of the mainmast . Her funnel was curved to the rear rather than angled like Marat . Each turret received Italian 8 @-@ meter ( 26 ft ) rangefinders and their roof armor was increased to 152 @-@ millimeter ( 6 @.@ 0 in ) in thickness . A new forecastle was fitted , much like that Marat 's , to improve seakeeping . Six 76 @.@ 2 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 00 in ) 34 @-@ K anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns were added , three on the roofs of the fore and aft turrets . All twenty @-@ five of her old boilers were replaced by a dozen oil @-@ fired boilers originally intended for the Borodino @-@ class battlecruiser Izmail . The space saved was used to add another inboard longitudinal watertight bulkhead that greatly improved her underwater protection . Her original Pollen Argo Clock mechanical fire @-@ control computer was upgraded with a copy of a Vickers Ltd fire @-@ control computer , designated <unk> by the Soviets , as well as a copy of a Sperry stable vertical gyroscope . These changes increased her displacement to 26 @,@ 690 tonnes ( 26 @,@ 270 long tons ; 29 @,@ 420 short tons ) at full load and her overall length to 184 @.@ 9 meters ( 607 ft ) . Her metacentric height decreased to 1 @.@ 67 meters ( 5 ft 6 in ) from her designed 1 @.@ 76 meters ( 5 ft 9 in ) as a result of her enlarged superstructures . 
 She finished her reconstruction on 4 August 1934 . Her participation in the Winter War was limited to a bombardment of Finnish 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) coast defense guns on 18 December 1939 at Saarenpää in the Beryozovye Islands before the Gulf of Finland iced over . She failed to inflict any permanent damage before she was driven off by near misses . Oktyabrskaya Revolutsiya sailed to Tallinn shortly after the Soviets occupied Estonia , but she was refitted in February – March 1941 in Kronstadt and her anti @-@ aircraft armament was reinforced . Two twin 76 @.@ 2 @-@ mm 81 @-@ K mounts were mounted on her quarter deck . The magazines for these guns were probably situated in the rearmost casemates on each beam , which lost their 120 @-@ mm guns and twelve automatic 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) 70 @-@ K guns were also added , three guns each on the middle turrets and the other six in the fore and aft superstructures . Four twin and four single 12 @.@ 7 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 50 in ) DShK machine guns and two AA directors were also fitted . The large cranes were replaced by smaller ones taken from the ex @-@ German heavy cruiser Petropavlovsk to make room for the anti @-@ aircraft guns . 
 On 22 June 1941 Oktyabrskaya Revolutsiya was in Tallinn when the Germans invaded the Soviet Union , but she was forced to sail for Kronstadt by the advancing Germans . She opened fire on troop positions of the German 18th Army on 8 September from the channel between Leningrad and Kronstadt , and probably landed four 120 @-@ millimeter ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) guns on the following day for use ashore . She was badly damaged on 21 September by three bomb hits on her bow that knocked out two turrets and she was sent to the Ordzhonikidze Yard on 23 October for repairs . The Soviets took advantage of this time to add four more 37 @-@ mm 70 @-@ K AA guns and another twin 76 @.@ 2 @-@ mm K @-@ 81 gun mount between February and April 1942 . She was hit again by one heavy and three medium bombs dropped by Heinkel He 111s of KG 4 during the night of 4 – 5 <unk> and again by three bombs on 24 April . Her repairs were completed in November 1942 , although a quadruple 37 @-@ mm 46 @-@ K gun mount was added in September . She supported Soviet forces during the Siege of Leningrad , the Leningrad – Novgorod Offensive in January 1944 and the Vyborg – Petrozavodsk Offensive in June 1944 . She received a Lend @-@ Lease British Type 279 air @-@ warning radar sometime during 1944 . On 22 July 1944 she was awarded the Order of the Red Banner . 
 She was reclassified as a ' school battleship ' on 24 July 1954 and stricken on 17 February 1956 . She was slowly scrapped and her hulk still survived in May 1958 . 
 = Spanish Civil War = 
 The Spanish Civil War ( Spanish : Guerra Civil Española ) , widely known in Spain simply as The Civil War ( Spanish : Guerra Civil ) or The War ( Spanish : La Guerra ) , took place from 1936 to 1939 and was fought between the Republicans , who were loyal to the democratic , left @-@ leaning Second Spanish Republic , and the Nationalists , a <unk> group led by General Francisco Franco . Although often portrayed as a struggle between democracy and fascism , some historians consider it more accurately described as a struggle between leftist revolution and rightist counterrevolution . Ultimately , the Nationalists won , and Franco then ruled Spain for the next 36 years , from April 1939 until his death in November 1975 . 
 The war began after a <unk> ( declaration of opposition ) by a group of generals of the Spanish Republican Armed Forces , originally under the leadership of José Sanjurjo , against the elected , leftist government of the Second Spanish Republic , at the time under the leadership of President Manuel Azaña . The Nationalist group was supported by a number of conservative groups , including the Spanish Confederation of Autonomous Right @-@ wing Groups ( Confederación Española de Derechas Autónomas , or CEDA ) , monarchists such as the religious conservative ( Catholic ) Carlists , and the Falange Española <unk> y de las Juntas de <unk> Nacional <unk> , a fascist group . Sanjurjo was killed in an aircraft accident while attempting to return from exile in Portugal , whereupon Franco emerged as the leader of the Nationalists . 
 The coup was supported by military units in the Spanish protectorate in Morocco , Pamplona , Burgos , Zaragoza , Valladolid , Cádiz , Córdoba , and Seville . However , rebelling units in important cities — such as Madrid , Barcelona , Valencia , Bilbao , and Málaga — were unable to capture their objectives , and those cities remained under the control of the government . Spain was thus left militarily and politically divided . The Nationalists and the Republican government fought for control of the country . The Nationalist forces received munitions and soldiers from Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy , while the communist Soviet Union and socialist Mexico offered support to the " Republican " or " Loyalist " side . Other countries , such as the United Kingdom and France , operated an official policy of non @-@ intervention . 
 The Nationalists advanced from their strongholds in the south and west , capturing most of Spain 's northern coastline in 1937 . They also besieged Madrid and the area to its south and west for much of the war . After large parts of Catalonia were captured in 1938 and 1939 , the war ended with the victory of the Nationalists and the exile of thousands of leftist Spaniards , many of whom fled to refugee camps in southern France . Those associated with the losing Republicans were persecuted by the victorious Nationalists . With the establishment of a dictatorship led by General Francisco Franco in the aftermath of the war , all right @-@ wing parties fused into the structure of the Franco regime . 
 The war became notable for the passion and political division it inspired and for the many atrocities . Organized purges occurred in territory captured by Franco 's forces to consolidate the future regime . A significant number of killings took place in areas controlled by the Republicans . The extent to which Republican authorities took part in Republican territory killings varied . 
 = = Background = = 
 The 19th century was a turbulent time for Spain . Those in favour of reforming Spain 's government vied for political power with conservatives , who tried to prevent reforms from taking place . Some liberals , in a tradition that had started with the Spanish Constitution of 1812 , sought to limit the power of the monarchy of Spain and to establish a liberal state . The reforms of 1812 did not last after King Ferdinand VII dissolved the Constitution and ended the <unk> Liberal government . Twelve successful coups were carried out between 1814 and 1874 . Until the 1850s , the economy of Spain was primarily based on agriculture . There was little development of a bourgeois industrial or commercial class . The land @-@ based oligarchy remained powerful ; a small number of people held large estates called latifundia as well as all the important government positions . 
 In 1868 popular uprisings led to the overthrow of Queen Isabella II of the House of Bourbon . Two distinct factors led to the uprisings : a series of urban riots , and a liberal movement within the middle classes and the military ( led by General Joan Prim ) , who were concerned about the ultra @-@ conservatism of the monarchy . In 1873 , Isabella 's replacement , King Amadeo I of the House of Savoy , abdicated due to increasing political pressure , and the short @-@ lived First Spanish Republic was proclaimed . After the restoration of the Bourbons in December 1874 , Carlists and Anarchists emerged in opposition to the monarchy . Alejandro Lerroux , Spanish politician and leader of the Radical Republican Party , helped bring republicanism to the fore in Catalonia , where poverty was particularly acute . Growing resentment of conscription and of the military culminated in the Tragic Week in Barcelona in 1909 . 
 Spain was neutral in World War I. Afterwards the working class , the industrial class , and the military united in hopes of removing the corrupt central government , but were unsuccessful . Fears of communism grew . A military coup brought Miguel Primo de Rivera to power in 1923 , and he ran Spain as a military dictatorship . Support for his regime gradually faded , and he resigned in January 1930 . He was replaced by General Dámaso Berenguer and then Admiral Juan Bautista Aznar @-@ Cabañas , who both continued to rule by decree . There was little support for the monarchy in the major cities , and King Alfonso XIII gave in to popular pressure for the establishment of a republic and called municipal elections for 12 April 1931 . The socialist and liberal republicans won almost all the provincial capitals and with the resignation of Aznar 's government , King Alfonso XIII fled the country . The Second Spanish Republic was formed and would remain in power until the culmination of the Spanish Civil War . 
 The revolutionary committee headed by Niceto Alcalá @-@ Zamora became the provisional government , with Alcalá @-@ Zamora as president and head of state . The republic had broad support from all segments of society . In May , an incident where a taxi driver was attacked outside a monarchist club sparked anti @-@ clerical violence throughout Madrid and south @-@ west Spain ; the government 's slow response disillusioned the right and reinforced their view that the Republic was determined to persecute the church . In June and July the Confederación Nacional del Trabajo ( CNT ) called several strikes , which led to a violent incident between CNT members and the Civil Guard and a brutal crackdown by the Civil Guard and the army against the CNT in Seville ; this led many workers to believe the Spanish Second Republic was just as oppressive as the monarchy and the CNT announced their intention of overthrowing it via revolution . Elections in June 1931 returned a large majority of Republicans and Socialists . With the onset of the Great Depression , the government attempted to assist rural Spain by instituting an eight @-@ hour day and giving land tenure to farm workers . 
 Fascism remained a reactive threat , helped by controversial reforms to the military . In December , a new reformist , liberal , and democratic constitution was declared . It included strong provisions enforcing a broad secularization of the Catholic country , which many moderate committed Catholics opposed . In October 1931 , Republican Manuel Azaña became prime minister of a minority government . In 1933 , the right won the general elections , largely due to the anarchists ' abstention from the vote , increased right wing resentment of the incumbent government caused by a controversial decree implementing land reform , the Casas Viejas incident , and the formation of a right @-@ wing alliance , Spanish Confederation of Autonomous Right @-@ wing Groups ( CEDA ) ; women 's newfound right to vote also contributed to this ( most women voted for centre @-@ right parties ) . 
 Events in the period following November 1933 , called the " black two years " , seemed to make a civil war more likely . Alejandro Lerroux of the Radical Republican Party ( RRP ) formed a government and rolled back changes made under the previous administration and also granted amnesty to the collaborators of the unsuccessful uprising by General José Sanjurjo in August 1932 . Some monarchists joined with the then fascist @-@ nationalist Falange Española y de las <unk> ( " Falange " ) to help achieve their aims . Open violence occurred in the streets of Spanish cities , and militancy continued to increase , reflecting a movement towards radical upheaval , rather than peaceful democratic means as solutions . 
 In the last months of 1934 , two government collapses brought members of the CEDA into the government . Farm workers ' wages were cut in half , and the military was purged of Republican members . A popular front alliance was organized , which narrowly won the 1936 elections . Azaña led a weak minority government , but soon replaced Zamora as president in April . Prime Minister Santiago Casares Quiroga ignored warnings of a military conspiracy involving several generals , who decided that the government had to be replaced to prevent the dissolution of Spain . 
 = = Military coup = = 
 = = = Preparations = = = 
 In an attempt to remove suspect generals from their posts , the Republican government sacked Franco as chief of staff and transferred him to command of the Canary Islands . Manuel Goded Llopis was removed as inspector general and was made general of the Balearic Islands . Emilio Mola was moved from head of the Army of Africa to military commander of Pamplona in Navarre . This , however , allowed Mola to direct the mainland uprising . General Jose Sanjurjo became the figurehead of the operation and helped reach an agreement with the Carlists . Mola was chief planner and second in command . José Antonio Primo de Rivera was put in prison in mid @-@ March in order to restrict the Falange . However , government actions were not as thorough as they might have been , and warnings by the Director of Security and other figures were not acted upon . 
 On 12 June , Prime Minister Casares Quiroga met General Juan Yagüe , who managed to falsely convince Casares of his loyalty to the republic . Mola began serious planning in the spring . Franco was a key player because of his prestige as a former director of the military academy and as the man who suppressed the Asturian miners ' strike of 1934 . He was well respected in the Army of Africa , the Spanish Republican Army 's toughest military force . He wrote a cryptic letter to Casares on 23 June , suggesting that the military was disloyal , but could be restrained if he were put in charge . Casares did nothing , failing to arrest or buy off Franco . On 5 July , a ' Dragon Rapide ' aircraft was chartered in GB to take Franco from the Canary Islands to Morocco . It arrived on 14 July . 
 On 12 July 1936 , in Madrid , members of the Falange murdered a police officer who was a Socialist party member , Lieutenant José Castillo of the Guardia de Asalto , who , among other activities , was giving military training to the UGT young . Castillo was leading the unit of Guardia de Asalto that violently suppressed the riots after the funeral of Guardia Civil Lieutenant Anastasio de los Reyes . Los Reyes was shot by anarchists during the 14 April military parade that commemorated the 5 years of the Republic . 
 Fernando Condés , the leader of the Guardia de Asalto , was a close personal friend of Castillo . The next day , his squad had sought to arrest José María Gil @-@ Robles y Quiñones , founder of CEDA , as a reprisal for Castillo 's murder , but he was not at home , so they went to the house of José Calvo Sotelo , a leading Spanish monarchist and a prominent parliamentary conservative . Luis Cuenca , a member of the arresting group and a socialist , summarily executed Calvo Sotelo by shooting him in the back of the neck . Hugh Thomas concludes that Condés intended to arrest Sotelo and that Cuenca acted on his own initiative , although he acknowledges other sources that dispute this finding . 
 Massive reprisals followed . The killing of Sotelo with police involvement aroused suspicions and strong reactions among the government 's opponents on the right . Although the nationalist generals were already in the advanced stages of a planned uprising , the event provided a catalyst and a public justification for their coup . 
 The socialists and communists , led by Indalecio Prieto , demanded that arms be distributed to the people before the military took over . The prime minister was hesitant . 
 = = = Beginning of the coup = = = 
 The uprising 's timing was fixed at 17 July , at 17 : 01 , agreed to by the leader of the Carlists , Manuel Fal Conde . However , the timing was changed — the men in the Spanish protectorate in Morocco were to rise up at 05 : 00 on 18 July and those in Spain proper a day later so that control of Spanish Morocco could be achieved and forces sent back to the Iberian Peninsula to coincide with the risings there . The rising was intended to be a swift coup d 'état , but the government retained control of most of the country . 
 Control over Spanish Morocco was all but certain . The plan was discovered in Morocco on 17 July , which prompted the conspirators to enact it immediately . Little resistance was encountered . In total , the rebels shot 189 people . Goded and Franco immediately took control of the islands to which they were assigned . On 18 July , Casares Quiroga refused an offer of help from the CNT and Unión General de Trabajadores ( UGT ) , leading the groups to proclaim a general strike — in effect , mobilizing . They opened weapons caches , some buried since the 1934 risings . The paramilitary security forces often waited to see the outcome of militia action before either joining or suppressing the rebellion . Quick action by either the rebels or anarchist militias was often enough to decide the fate of a town . General Gonzalo Queipo de Llano managed to secure Seville for the rebels , arresting a number of other officers . 
 = = = Outcome = = = 
 The rebels failed to take any major cities with the critical exception of Seville , which provided a landing point for Franco 's African troops , and the primarily conservative and Catholic areas of Old Castile and León , which fell quickly . Cádiz was taken for the rebels , with the help of the first troops from the Army of Africa . 
 The government retained control of Málaga , Jaén , and Almería . In Madrid , the rebels were hemmed into the Montaña barracks , which fell with considerable bloodshed . Republican leader Casares Quiroga was replaced by José Giral , who ordered the distribution of weapons among the civilian population . This facilitated the defeat of the army insurrection in the main industrial centres , including Madrid , Barcelona , and Valencia , but it allowed anarchists to take control of Barcelona along with large swathes of Aragón and Catalonia . General Goded surrendered in Barcelona and was later condemned to death . The Republican government ended up controlling almost all of the east coast and central area around Madrid , as well as Asturias , Cantabria and part of the Basque Country in the north . 
 The rebels termed themselves Nacionales , normally translated " Nationalists " , although the former implies " true Spaniards " rather than a nationalistic cause . The result of the coup was a nationalist area of control containing 11 million of Spain 's population of 25 million . The Nationalists had secured the support of around half of Spain 's territorial army , some 60 @,@ 000 men , joined by the Army of Africa , made up of 35 @,@ 000 men , and a little under half of Spain 's militaristic police forces , the Assault Guards , the Civil Guards , and the Carabineers . Republicans controlled under half of the rifles and about a third of both machine guns and artillery pieces . 
 The Spanish Republican Army had just 18 tanks of a sufficiently modern design , and the Nationalists took control of 10 . Naval capacity was uneven , with the Republicans retaining a numerical advantage , but with the Navy 's top commanders and two of the most modern ships , heavy cruisers Canarias — captured at the Ferrol shipyard — and Baleares , in Nationalist hands . The Spanish Republican Navy suffered from the same problems as the army — many officers had defected or had been killed after trying to do so . Two @-@ thirds of air capability was retained by the government – however , the whole of the Republican Air Force was very outdated . 
 = = Combatants = = 
 The war was cast by Republican sympathizers as a struggle between tyranny and freedom , and by Nationalist supporters as communist and anarchist " red hordes " versus " Christian civilization " . Nationalists also claimed they were bringing security and direction to an ungoverned and lawless country . 
 Spanish politics , especially on the left , were quite fragmented , since socialists and communists supported the republic . During the republic , anarchists had mixed opinions , but major groups opposed the Nationalists during the Civil War . The Conservatives , in contrast , were united by their fervent opposition to the Republican government and presented a more unified front . 
 = = = Republicans = = = 
 Only two countries openly and fully supported the Republic : Mexico and the USSR . From them , especially the USSR , the Republic received diplomatic support , volunteers , and the ability to purchase weapons . Other countries remained neutral , said neutrality being a great source of distress to the intelligentsia in the United States and United Kingdom , and to a lesser extent in other European countries and to Marxists worldwide . This distress led to the International Brigades , thousands of foreigners of all nationalities who went to Spain to aid the Republic in the fight ; they meant a great deal to morale but militarily were not very significant . 
 The Republic 's supporters within Spain ranged from centrists who supported a moderately @-@ capitalist liberal democracy to revolutionary anarchists who opposed the Republic but sided with it against the coup forces . Their base was primarily secular and urban but also included landless peasants and was particularly strong in industrial regions like Asturias , the Basque country , and Catalonia . 
 This faction was called variously <unk> " Loyalists " by supporters , " Republicans " , the " Popular Front " , or " the government " by all parties ; and / or los <unk> " the Reds " by their opponents . Republicans were supported by urban workers , agricultural labourers , and parts of the middle class . 
 The conservative , strongly Catholic Basque country , along with Galicia and the more left @-@ leaning Catalonia , sought autonomy or independence from the central government of Madrid . The Republican government allowed for the possibility of self @-@ government for the two regions , whose forces were gathered under the People 's Republican Army ( Ejército Popular <unk> , or EPR ) , which was reorganized into mixed brigades after October 1936 . 
 A few well @-@ known people fought on the Republican side , such as English novelist George Orwell ( who wrote Homage to Catalonia ( 1938 ) , an account of his experiences in the war ) and Canadian thoracic surgeon Norman Bethune , who developed a mobile blood @-@ transfusion service for front line operations . Simone Weil added herself for a while to the anarchist columns of Buenaventura Durruti , but was expelled from the front by other fighters , who feared she inadvertently shot them because she was shortsighted . 
 = = = Nationalists = = = 
 The Nacionales or Nationalists — also called " insurgents " , " rebels " , or , by opponents , <unk> or " fascists " — feared national fragmentation and opposed the separatist movements . They were chiefly defined by their anti @-@ communism , which galvanized diverse or opposed movements like <unk> and monarchists . Their leaders had a generally wealthier , more conservative , monarchist , landowning background . 
 The Nationalist side included the Carlists and <unk> , Spanish nationalists , the fascist Falange , and most conservatives and monarchist liberals . Virtually all Nationalist groups had strong Catholic convictions and supported the native Spanish clergy . The Nationals included the majority of the Catholic clergy and practitioners ( outside of the Basque region ) , important elements of the army , most large landowners , and many businessmen . 
 One of the rightists ' principal motives was to confront the anti @-@ clericalism of the Republican regime and to defend the Catholic Church , which had been targeted by opponents , including Republicans , who blamed the institution for the country 's ills . The Church was against the Republicans ' liberal principles , which were fortified by the Spanish Constitution of 1931 . Prior to the war , during the Asturian miners ' strike of 1934 , religious buildings were burnt and at least 100 clergy , religious civilians , and pro @-@ Catholic police were killed by revolutionaries . 
 Franco had brought in the mercenaries of Spain 's colonial Army of Africa ( Spanish : Ejército de África or Cuerpo de Ejército <unk> ) and reduced the miners to submission by heavy artillery attacks and bombing raids . The Spanish Legion committed atrocities — many men , women and children were killed , and the army carried out summary executions of leftists . The repression in the aftermath was brutal . In Asturias , prisoners were tortured . 
 Articles 24 and 26 of the 1931 constitution had banned the Society of Jesus . This proscription deeply offended many within the conservative fold . The revolution in the Republican zone at the outset of the war , in which 7 @,@ 000 clergy and thousands of lay people were killed , deepened Catholic support for the Nationalists . 
 The Moroccan Fuerzas <unk> Indígenas joined the rebellion and played a significant role in the civil war . 
 = = = Other factions = = = 
 Catalan and Basque nationalists were not univocal . Left @-@ wing Catalan nationalists sided with the Republicans , while Conservative Catalan nationalists were far less vocal in supporting the government due to anti @-@ clericalism and confiscations occurring in areas within its control . Basque nationalists , heralded by the conservative Basque Nationalist Party , were mildly supportive of the Republican government , although some in Navarre sided with the uprising for the same reasons influencing conservative Catalans . Notwithstanding religious matters , Basque nationalists , who were for the most part Catholic , generally sided with the Republicans , although the <unk> , Basque nationalist party , was reported passing the plans of Bilbao defenses to the nationalists , in an attempt to reduce the duration and casualties of siege . 
 = = Foreign involvement = = 
 The Spanish Civil War exposed political divisions across Europe . The right and the Catholics supported the Nationalists as a way to stop the expansion of Bolshevism . On the left , including labor unions , students and intellectuals , the war represented a necessary battle to stop the spread of fascism . <unk> and pacifist sentiment was strong in many countries , leading to warnings that the Civil War had the potential of escalating into a second world war . In this respect , the war was an indicator of the growing instability across Europe . 
 The Spanish Civil War involved large numbers of non @-@ Spanish citizens who participated in combat and advisory positions . Britain and France led a political alliance of 27 nations that promised non @-@ intervention in the Spanish Civil War , including an embargo on all arms to Spain . The United States unofficially went along . Germany , Italy and the Soviet Union signed on officially , but ignored the embargo . The attempted suppression of imported materials was largely ineffective , however , and France especially was accused of allowing large shipments to Republican troops . The clandestine actions of the various European powers were , at the time , considered to be risking another world war , alarming antiwar elements across the world . 
 The League of Nations ' reaction to the war was influenced by a fear of communism , and insufficient to contain the massive importation by fighting factions of arms and other war resources . Although a Non @-@ Intervention Committee was formed , its policies accomplished little and its directives were ineffective . 
 = = = Support for the Nationalists = = = 
 = = = = Germany = = = = 
 German involvement began days after fighting broke out in July 1936 . Adolf Hitler quickly sent in powerful air and armored units to assist the Nationalists . The war provided combat experience with the latest technology for the German military . However , the intervention also posed the risk of escalating into a world war for which Hitler was not ready . He therefore limited his aid , and instead encouraged Benito Mussolini to send in large Italian units . 
 Nazi Germany 's actions included the formation of the multitasking Condor Legion , a unit composed of volunteers from the Luftwaffe and the German Army ( Heer ) from July 1936 to March 1939 . The Condor Legion proved to be especially useful in the 1936 Battle of the Toledo . German efforts to move the Army of Africa to mainland Spain proved successful in the war 's early stages . German operations slowly expanded to include strike targets , most notably – and controversially – the bombing of Guernica which , on 26 April 1937 , killed 200 to 300 civilians . Germany also used the war to test out new weapons , such as the Luftwaffe Stukas , hold secret to the nationalists , and Junkers Ju @-@ 52 transport <unk> used also as Bombers , which showed themselves to be effective . 
 German involvement was further manifested through undertakings such as Operation Ursula , a u @-@ boat undertaking , and contributions from the Kriegsmarine . The Legion spearheaded many Nationalist victories , particularly in aerial combat , while Spain further provided a proving ground for German tank tactics . The training German units provided to Nationalist forces would prove valuable . By the War 's end , perhaps 56 @,@ 000 Nationalist soldiers , encompassing infantry , artillery , aerial and naval forces , had been trained by German detachments . 
 A total of approximately 16 @,@ 000 German citizens fought in the war , including approximately 300 killed , though no more than 10 @,@ 000 participated at any one time . German aid to the Nationalists amounted to approximately £ 43 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ( $ 215 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ) in 1939 prices , 15 @.@ 5 percent of which was used for salaries and expenses and 21 @.@ 9 percent for direct delivery of supplies to Spain , while 62 @.@ 6 percent was expended on the Condor Legion . In total , Germany provided the Nationalists with 600 planes and 200 tanks . 
 = = = = Italy = = = = 
 After Francisco Franco 's request and encouragement by Hitler , Benito Mussolini joined the war . While the conquest of Ethiopia in the Second Italo @-@ Ethiopian War made Italy confident in its power , a Spanish ally would nonetheless help secure Italian control of the Mediterranean Theater of Operations . The Royal Italian Navy ( Italian : ' Regia Marina ) played a substantial role in the Mediterranean blockade , and ultimately Italy supplied machine guns , artillery , aircraft , tankettes , the <unk> <unk> , and the Corpo Truppe Volontarie ( CTV ) to the Nationalist cause . The Italian CTV would , at its peak , supply the Nationalists with 50 @,@ 000 men . Italian warships took part in breaking the Republican navy 's blockade of Nationalist @-@ held Spanish Morocco and took part in naval bombardment of Republican @-@ held Málaga , Valencia , and Barcelona . In total , Italy provided the Nationalists with 660 planes , 150 tanks , 800 artillery pieces , 10 @,@ 000 machine guns , and 240 @,@ 000 rifles . 
 = = = = Portugal = = = = 
 The Estado Novo regime of Portuguese Prime Minister António de Oliveira Salazar played an important role in supplying Franco 's forces with ammunition and logistical help . Despite its discreet direct military involvement – restrained to a somewhat " semi @-@ official " endorsement , by its authoritarian regime , of a volunteer force of up to 20 @,@ 000 , so @-@ called " <unk> " – for the whole duration of the conflict , Portugal was instrumental in providing the Nationalists with organizational skills and reassurance from the Iberian neighbour to Franco and his allies that no interference would hinder the supply traffic directed to the Nationalist cause . 
 = = = = Others = = = = 
 The Conservative government of the UK maintained a position of strong neutrality and was supported by elites and the mainstream media , while the far left mobilized aid to the Republic . The government refused to allow arms shipments and sent warships to try to stop shipments . It became a crime to volunteer to fight in Spain , but about 4 @,@ 000 went anyway . Intellectuals strongly favoured the Republicans . Many visited Spain , hoping to find authentic anti @-@ fascism . They had little impact on the government , and could not shake the strong public mood for peace . The Labour Party was split , with its Catholic element favouring the Nationalists . It officially endorsed the boycott and expelled a faction that demanded support for the Republican cause ; but it finally voiced some support to Loyalists . 
 Romanian volunteers were led by Ion Moța , deputy @-@ leader of the Iron Guard ( " Legion of the Archangel Michael " ) , whose group of Seven Legionaries visited Spain in December 1936 to ally their movement with the Nationalists . 
 Despite the Irish government 's prohibition against participating in the war , around 600 Irishmen , followers of Irish political activist and Irish Republican Army leader Eoin O 'Duffy , known as the " Irish Brigade " , went to Spain to fight alongside Franco . The majority of the volunteers were Catholics , and according to O 'Duffy had volunteered to help the Nationalists fight against communism . 
 = = = Support for the Republicans = = = 
 = = = = International Brigades = = = = 
 Many non @-@ Spaniards , often affiliated with radical communist or socialist entities , joined the International Brigades , believing that the Spanish Republic was a front line in the war against fascism . The units represented the largest foreign contingent of those fighting for the Republicans . Roughly 40 @,@ 000 foreign nationals fought with the Brigades , though no more than 18 @,@ 000 were entered into the conflict at any given time . They claimed to represent 53 nations . 
 Significant numbers of volunteers originated in the French Third Republic ( 10 @,@ 000 ) , Nazi Germany , the Federal State of Austria ( 5 @,@ 000 ) and the Kingdom of Italy ( 3 @,@ 350 ) . More than 1000 each came from the Soviet Union , the United States , the United Kingdom , the Second Polish Republic , the Kingdom of Yugoslavia , the Kingdom of Hungary , and Canada . The <unk> Battalion , a group of Germans , and the Garibaldi Battalion , a group of Italians , distinguished their units during the Siege of Madrid . Americans fought in units such as the XV International Brigade ( " Abraham Lincoln Brigade " ) , while Canadians joined the Mackenzie – Papineau Battalion . 
 Over 500 Romanians fought on the Republican side , including Romanian Communist Party members Petre <unk> and Valter Roman . About 145 men from Ireland formed the Connolly Column , which was immortalized by Irish folk singer Christy Moore in the song " Viva la Quinta Brigada " . Some Chinese joined the Brigades , and the majority of them eventually returned to China , while some went to prison or French refugee camps , and a handful remained in Spain . 
 = = = = Soviet Union = = = = 
 Though General Secretary Joseph Stalin had signed the Non @-@ Intervention Agreement , the Soviet Union contravened the League of Nations embargo by providing material assistance to the Republican forces , becoming their only source of major weapons . Unlike Hitler and Mussolini , Stalin tried to do this covertly . In total , estimates of material provided by the USSR to the Republicans vary between 634 and 806 planes , 331 and 362 tanks , and 1 @,@ 034 and 1 @,@ 895 artillery pieces . 
 Stalin also created Section X of the Soviet Union military to head the weapons shipment operation , called Operation X. Despite Stalin 's interest in aiding the Republicans , the quality of arms was inconsistent . On one hand , many of the rifles and field guns provided were old , obsolete or otherwise of limited use ( some dated back to the 1860s ) . On the other hand , the T @-@ 26 and BT @-@ 5 tanks were modern and effective in combat . The Soviet Union supplied aircraft that were in current service with their own forces , but the aircraft provided by Germany to the Nationalists proved superior by the end of the war . 
 The process of shipping arms from Russia to Spain was extremely slow . Many shipments were lost or arrived only partially matching what had been authorized . Stalin ordered shipbuilders to include false decks in the original designs of ships and , while at sea , Soviet captains employed deceptive flags and paint schemes to evade detection by the Nationalists . 
 The Republic paid for Soviet arms with official Bank of Spain gold reserves . This would later be the frequent subject of Franquist propaganda , under the term " Moscow Gold " . The cost of the Soviet Union arms was more than the value of Spain 's gold reserves , the fourth @-@ largest in the world , estimated at US $ 500 million ( 1936 prices ) , 176 tonnes of which was transferred through France . 
 The USSR sent a number of military advisers to Spain ( 2 @,@ 000 – 3 @,@ 000 ) , and , while Soviet troops were fewer than 500 men at a time , Soviet volunteers often operated Soviet @-@ made tanks and aircraft , particularly at the beginning of the war . In addition , the Soviet Union directed Communist parties around the world to organize and recruit the International Brigades . 
 Another significant Soviet involvement was the activity of the People 's Commissariat for Internal Affairs ( NKVD ) inside the Republican rearguard . Communist figures including Vittorio <unk> ( " Comandante Contreras " ) , Iosif <unk> , Mikhail Koltsov and , most prominently , Aleksandr Mikhailovich Orlov led operations that included the murders of Catalan anti @-@ <unk> Communist politician Andreu Nin and independent left @-@ wing activist José Robles . Also , the shooting down in December 1936 of the French aircraft in which the delegate of the International Committee of the Red Cross ( ICRC ) , Georges Henny , carried to France extensive documentation on the Paracuellos massacres was a NKVD @-@ led operation . 
 = = = = Mexico = = = = 
 Unlike the United States and major Latin American governments , such as the ABC nations and Peru , Mexico supported the Republicans . Mexico refused to follow the French @-@ British non @-@ intervention proposals , furnishing $ 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in aid and material assistance , which included 20 @,@ 000 rifles and 20 million cartridges . 
 Mexico 's most important contributions to the Spanish Republic was its diplomatic help , as well as the sanctuary the nation arranged for Republican refugees , including Spanish intellectuals and orphaned children from Republican families . Some 50 @,@ 000 took refuge , primarily in Mexico City and Morelia accompanied by $ 300 million in various treasures still owned by the Left . 
 = = = = France = = = = 
 Fearing it might spark a civil war inside France , the leftist " Popular Front " government in France did not send direct support to the Republicans . French Prime Minister Léon Blum was sympathetic to the republic , fearing that the success of Nationalist forces in Spain would result in the creation of an ally state of Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy , an alliance that would nearly encircle France . Right @-@ wing politicians opposed any aid and attacked the Blum government . In July 1936 , British officials convinced Blum not to send arms to the Republicans and , on 27 July , the French government declared that it would not send military aid , technology or forces to assist the Republican forces . However , Blum made clear that France reserved the right to provide aid should it wish to the Republic : " We could have delivered arms to the Spanish Government [ Republicans ] , a legitimate government ... We have not done so , in order not to give an excuse to those who would be tempted to send arms to the rebels [ Nationalists ] . " 
 On 1 August 1936 , a pro @-@ Republican rally of 20 @,@ 000 people confronted Blum , demanding that he send aircraft to the Republicans , at the same time as right @-@ wing politicians attacked Blum for supporting the Republic and being responsible for provoking Italian intervention on the side of Franco . Germany informed the French ambassador in Berlin that Germany would hold France responsible if it supported " the manoeuvres of Moscow " by supporting the Republicans . On 21 August 1936 , France signed the Non @-@ Intervention Agreement . However , the Blum government provided aircraft to the Republicans through covert means with Potez 540 bomber aircraft ( nicknamed the " Flying Coffin " ) by Spanish Republican pilots ) , Dewoitine aircraft , and Loire 46 fighter aircraft being sent from 7 August 1936 to December of that year to Republican forces . The French also sent pilots and engineers to the Republicans . Also , until 8 September 1936 , aircraft could freely pass from France into Spain if they were bought in other countries . 
 French novelist André Malraux was a strong supporter of the republican cause ; He tried to organise a volunteer air force ( <unk> <unk> ) on the republican side but as a practical organiser and squadron leader he was somewhat idealistic and inefficient . The Regular Spanish Air force commander Andres Garcia La Calle was openly critical of Malraux 's military efficiency but recognized his usefulness as a propagandist . His novel L <unk> and the film version he produced and directed ( Espoir : Sierra de Teruel ) were a great help for the republican cause in France . 
 Even after covert support by France to the Republicans ended in December 1936 , the possibility of French intervention against the Nationalists remained a serious possibility throughout the war . German intelligence reported to Franco and the Nationalists that the French military was engaging in open discussions about intervention in the war through French military intervention in Catalonia and the Balearic Islands . In 1938 , Franco feared an immediate French intervention against a potential Nationalist victory in Spain through French occupation of Catalonia , the Balearic Islands , and Spanish Morocco . 
 Besides the generally Republican @-@ oriented sympathies and support in France , some right wing extremists sided with Franco , most notably the members of La <unk> who where instrumental in sabotaging ships transporting guns and civil relief equipment to Republican Spain in French ports . 
 = = Course of the war = = 
 = = = 1936 = = = 
 A large air and sealift of Nationalist troops in Spanish Morocco was organized to the southwest of Spain . Coup leader Sanjurjo was killed in a plane crash on 20 July , leaving an effective command split between Mola in the North and Franco in the South . This period also saw the worst actions of the so @-@ called " Red " and " White Terrors " in Spain . On 21 July , the fifth day of the rebellion , the Nationalists captured the central Spanish naval base , located in Ferrol , Galicia . 
 A rebel force under Colonel Alfonso <unk> Canet , sent by General Mola and Colonel Esteban García , undertook the Campaign of Gipuzkoa from July to September . The capture of Gipuzkoa isolated the Republican provinces in the north . On 5 September , the Nationalists closed the French border to the Republicans in the battle of Irún . On 15 September , San Sebastián , home to a divided Republican force of anarchists and Basque nationalists , was taken by Nationalist soldiers . The Nationalists then advanced toward their capital , Bilbao , but were halted by Republican militias on the border of Biscay at the end of September . 
 The Republic proved ineffective militarily , relying on disorganized revolutionary militia . The Republican government under Giral resigned on 4 September , unable to cope with the situation , and was replaced by a mostly Socialist organization under Francisco Largo Caballero . The new leadership began to unify central command in the republican zone . 
 On the Nationalist side , Franco was chosen as chief military commander at a meeting of ranking generals at Salamanca on 21 September , now called by the title Generalísimo . Franco won another victory on 27 September when his troops relieved the siege of the Alcázar in Toledo , which had been held by a Nationalist garrison under Colonel José <unk> <unk> since the beginning of the rebellion , resisting thousands of Republican troops , who completely surrounded the isolated building . Moroccans and elements of the Spanish Legion came to the rescue . Two days after relieving the siege , Franco proclaimed himself Caudillo ( " chieftain " , the Spanish equivalent of the Italian Duce and the German Führer <unk> : ' director ' ) while forcibly unifying the various and diverse <unk> , Royalist and other elements within the Nationalist cause . The diversion to Toledo gave Madrid time to prepare a defense , but was hailed as a major propaganda victory and personal success for Franco . In October 1 , 1936 , general Franco was confirmed head of state and armies in Burgos . A similar dramatic success for the Nationalists occurred on 17 October , when troops coming from Galicia relieved the besieged town of Oviedo , in Northern Spain . 
 In October , the Francoist troops launched a major offensive toward Madrid , reaching it in early November and launching a major assault on the city on 8 November . The Republican government was forced to shift from Madrid to Valencia , outside the combat zone , on 6 November . However , the Nationalists ' attack on the capital was repulsed in fierce fighting between 8 and 23 November . A contributory factor in the successful Republican defense was the effectiveness of the Fifth Regiment and later the arrival of the International Brigades , though only an approximate 3 @,@ 000 foreign volunteers participated in the battle . Having failed to take the capital , Franco bombarded it from the air and , in the following two years , mounted several offensives to try to encircle Madrid , beginning the three @-@ year Siege of Madrid . The Second Battle of the Corunna Road , a Nationalist offensive to the northwest , pushed Republican forces back , but failed to isolate Madrid . The battle lasted into January . 
 = = = 1937 = = = 
 With his ranks swelled by Italian troops and Spanish colonial soldiers from Morocco , Franco made another attempt to capture Madrid in January and February 1937 , but was again unsuccessful . The Battle of Málaga started in mid @-@ January , and this Nationalist offensive in Spain 's southeast would turn into a disaster for the Republicans , who were poorly organised and armed . The city was taken by Franco on 8 February . The consolidation of various militias into the Republican Army had started in December 1936 . The main Nationalist advance to cross the Jarama and cut the supply to Madrid by the Valencia road , termed the Battle of Jarama , led to heavy casualties ( 6 @,@ 000 – 20 @,@ 000 ) on both sides . The operation 's main objective was not met , though Nationalists gained a modest amount of territory . 
 A similar Nationalist offensive , the Battle of Guadalajara , was a more significant defeat for Franco and his armies . It proved the only publicised Republican victory of the war . Italian troops and blitzkrieg tactics were used by Franco , and while many strategists blamed the latter for the rightists ' defeat , the Germans believed it was the former at fault for the Nationalists ' 5 @,@ 000 casualties and loss of valuable equipment . The German strategists successfully argued that the Nationalists needed to concentrate on vulnerable areas first . 
 The " War in the North " began in mid @-@ March , with the Biscay Campaign . The Basques suffered most from the lack of a suitable air force . On 26 April , the Condor Legion bombed the town of Guernica , killing 200 – 300 and causing significant damage . The destruction had a significant effect on international opinion . The Basques retreated . 
 April and May saw the May Days , infighting among Republican groups in Catalonia . The dispute was between an ultimately victorious government – Communist forces and the anarchist CNT . The disturbance pleased Nationalist command , but little was done to exploit Republican divisions . After the fall of Guernica , the Republican government began to fight back with increasing effectiveness . In July , it made a move to recapture Segovia , forcing Franco to delay his advance on the Bilbao front , but for only two weeks . A similar Republican attack , the Huesca Offensive , failed similarly . 
 Mola , Franco 's second @-@ in @-@ command , was killed on 3 June , in an airplane accident . In early July , despite the earlier loss at the Battle of Bilbao , the government launched a strong counter @-@ offensive to the west of Madrid , focusing on Brunete . The Battle of Brunete , however , was a significant defeat for the Republic , which lost many of its most accomplished troops . The offensive led to an advance of 50 square kilometres ( 19 sq mi ) , and left 25 @,@ 000 Republican casualties . 
 A Republican offensive against Zaragoza was also a failure . Despite having land and aerial advantages , the Battle of Belchite , a place lacking any military interest , resulted in an advance of only 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) and the loss of much equipment . Franco invaded Aragón in August and took the city of Santander . With the surrender of the Republican army in the Basque territory came the <unk> Agreement . Gijón finally fell in late October in the Asturias Offensive . Franco had effectively won in the north . At November 's end , with Franco 's troops closing in on Valencia , the government had to move again , this time to Barcelona . 
 = = = 1938 = = = 
 The Battle of Teruel was an important confrontation . The city , which had formerly belonged to the Nationalists , was conquered by Republicans in January . The Francoist troops launched an offensive and recovered the city by 22 February , but Franco was forced to rely heavily on German and Italian air support . 
 On 7 March , Nationalists launched the Aragon Offensive and , by 14 April , they had pushed through to the Mediterranean , cutting the Republican @-@ held portion of Spain in two . The Republican government attempted to sue for peace in May , but Franco demanded unconditional surrender , and the war raged on . In July , the Nationalist army pressed southward from Teruel and south along the coast toward the capital of the Republic at Valencia , but was halted in heavy fighting along the XYZ Line , a system of fortifications defending Valencia . 
 The Republican government then launched an all @-@ out campaign to reconnect their territory in the Battle of the Ebro , from 24 July until 26 November , where Franco personally took command . The campaign was unsuccessful , and was undermined by the Franco @-@ British appeasement of Hitler in Munich . The agreement with Britain effectively destroyed Republican morale by ending hope of an anti @-@ fascist alliance with Western powers . The retreat from the Ebro all but determined the final outcome of the war . Eight days before the new year , Franco threw massive forces into an invasion of Catalonia . 
 = = = 1939 = = = 
 Franco 's troops conquered Catalonia in a whirlwind campaign during the first two months of 1939 . Tarragona fell on 15 January , followed by Barcelona on 26 January and Girona on 2 February . On 27 February , the United Kingdom and France recognized the Franco regime . 
 Only Madrid and a few other strongholds remained for the Republican forces . On 5 March 1939 , the Republican army , led by the Colonel Segismundo Casado and the politician Julián <unk> , rose against the prime minister Juan Negrín and formed the National Defence Council ( Consejo Nacional de Defensa or CND ) to negotiate a peace deal . Negrín fled to France on 6 March , but the Communist troops around Madrid rose against the junta , starting a brief civil war within the civil war . Casado defeated them , and began peace negotiations with the Nationalists , but Franco refused to accept anything less than unconditional surrender . 
 On 26 March , the Nationalists started a general offensive , on 28 March the Nationalists occupied Madrid and , by 31 March , they controlled all Spanish territory . Franco proclaimed victory in a radio speech aired on 1 April , when the last of the Republican forces surrendered . 
 After the end of the war , there were harsh reprisals against Franco 's former enemies . Thousands of Republicans were imprisoned and at least 30 @,@ 000 executed . Other calculations of these deaths range from 50 @,@ 000 to 200 @,@ 000 , depending on which killings are included . Many others were put to forced labour , building railways , drying out swamps , and digging canals . 
 Hundreds of thousands of Republicans fled abroad , with some 500 @,@ 000 fleeing to France . Refugees were confined in internment camps of the French Third Republic , such as Camp <unk> or Camp Vernet , where 12 @,@ 000 Republicans were housed in squalid conditions . In his capacity as consul in Paris , Chilean poet and politician Pablo Neruda organized the immigration to Chile of 2 @,@ 200 Republican exiles in France using the ship SS Winnipeg . 
 Of the 17 @,@ 000 refugees housed in <unk> , farmers and others who could not find relations in France were encouraged by the Third Republic , in agreement with the Franquist government , to return to Spain . The great majority did so and were turned over to the Franquist authorities in Irún . From there , they were transferred to the Miranda de Ebro camp for " purification " according to the Law of Political Responsibilities . After the proclamation by Marshal Philippe Pétain of the Vichy regime , the refugees became political prisoners , and the French police attempted to round up those who had been liberated from the camp . Along with other " undesirable " people , the Spaniards were sent to the <unk> internment camp before being deported to Nazi Germany . About 5 @,@ 000 Spaniards died in the Mauthausen concentration camp . 
 After the official end of the war , guerrilla warfare was waged on an irregular basis by the Spanish Maquis well into the 1950s , gradually reduced by military defeats and scant support from the exhausted population . In 1944 , a group of republican veterans , who also fought in the French resistance against the Nazis , invaded the Val d <unk> in northwest Catalonia , but were defeated after 10 days . 
 = = Evacuation of children = = 
 The Republicans oversaw the evacuation of 30 @,@ 000 – 35 @,@ 000 children from their zone , starting with Basque areas , from which 20 @,@ 000 were evacuated . Their destinations included the United Kingdom and the USSR , and many other locations in Europe , along with Mexico . On 21 May 1937 , around 4 @,@ 000 Basque children were taken to the UK on the aging steamship SS Habana from the Spanish port of <unk> . This was against initial opposition from both the government and charitable groups , who saw the removal of children from their native country as potentially harmful . On arrival two days later in Southampton , the children were dispersed all over England , with over 200 children accommodated in Wales . The upper age limit was initially set at 12 , but raised to 15 . By mid @-@ September , all of los niños , as they became known , had found homes with families . Most were repatriated to Spain after the war , but some 250 still remained in Britain by the end of the Second World War in 1945 . 
 = = Atrocities = = 
 Death totals remain debated . British historian Antony Beevor wrote in his history of the Civil War that Franco 's ensuing " white terror " resulted in the deaths of 200 @,@ 000 people and that the " red terror " killed 38 @,@ 000 . Julius Ruiz contends that , " Although the figures remain disputed , a minimum of 37 @,@ 843 executions were carried out in the Republican zone , with a maximum of 150 @,@ 000 executions ( including 50 @,@ 000 after the war ) in Nationalist Spain " . 
 In 2008 a Spanish judge , Baltasar Garzón , opened an investigation into the executions and disappearances of 114 @,@ 266 people between 17 July 1936 and December 1951 . Among the executions investigated was that of the poet and dramatist Federico García Lorca , whose body has never been found . Mention of García Lorca 's death was forbidden during Franco 's regime . 
 The view of historians , including Helen Graham , Paul Preston , Antony Beevor , Gabriel Jackson and Hugh Thomas , is that the mass executions behind the Nationalists lines were organized and approved by the Nationalists rebel authorities , while the executions behind the Republican lines were the result of the breakdown of the Republican state and anarchy : 
 Though there was much wanton killing in rebel Spain , the idea of the limpieza , the " cleaning up " , of the country from the evils which had overtaken it , was a disciplined policy of the new authorities and a part of their programme of regeneration . In republican Spain , most of the killing was the consequence of anarchy , the outcome of a national breakdown , and not the work of the state , although some political parties in some cities abetted the enormities , and some of those responsible ultimately rose to positions of authority . – Hugh Thomas 
 = = = Nationalists = = = 
 Nationalist atrocities , which authorities frequently ordered to eradicate any trace of " leftism " in Spain , were common . The notion of a limpieza ( cleansing ) formed an essential part of the rebel strategy , and the process began immediately after an area had been captured . According to historian Paul Preston , the minimum number of those executed by the rebels is 130 @,@ 000 , and is likely to have been far higher , with other historians placing the figure at 200 @,@ 000 dead . The violence was carried out in the rebel zone by the military , the Civil Guard and the Falange in the name of the regime . 
 Many such acts were committed by reactionary groups during the first weeks of the war . This included the execution of schoolteachers , because the efforts of the Second Spanish Republic to promote <unk> and displace the Church from schools by closing religious educational institutions were considered by the Nationalists as an attack on the Roman Catholic Church . Extensive killings of civilians were carried out in the cities captured by the Nationalists , along with the execution of unwanted individuals . These included non @-@ combatants such as trade @-@ unionists , Popular Front politicians , suspected Freemasons , Basque , Catalan , Andalusian , and Galician Nationalists , Republican intellectuals , relatives of known Republicans , and those suspected of voting for the Popular Front . 
 Nationalist forces massacred civilians in Seville , where some 8 @,@ 000 people were shot ; 10 @,@ 000 were killed in Cordoba ; 6 @,@ 000 – 12 @,@ 000 were killed in Badajoz after more than one thousand of landowners and conservatives were killed by the revolutionaries . In Granada , where working @-@ class neighborhoods were hit with artillery and right @-@ wing squads were given free rein to kill government sympathizers , at least 2 @,@ 000 people were murdered . In February 1937 , over 7 @,@ 000 were killed after the capture of Málaga . When Bilbao was conquered , thousands of people were sent to prison . There were fewer executions than usual , however , because of the effect Guernica left on Nationalists ' reputations internationally . The numbers killed as the columns of the Army of Africa devastated and pillaged their way between Seville and Madrid are particularly difficult to calculate . 
 Nationalists also murdered Catholic clerics . In one particular incident , following the capture of Bilbao , they took hundreds of people , including 16 priests who had served as chaplains for the Republican forces , to the countryside or graveyards and murdered them . 
 Franco 's forces also persecuted Protestants , including murdering 20 Protestant ministers . Franco 's forces were determined to remove the " Protestant heresy " from Spain . The Nationalists also persecuted Basques , as they strove to eradicate Basque culture . According to Basque sources , some 22 @,@ 000 Basques were murdered by Nationalists immediately after the Civil War . 
 The Nationalist side conducted aerial bombing of cities in Republican territory , carried out mainly by the Luftwaffe volunteers of the Condor Legion and the Italian air force volunteers of the Corpo Truppe Volontarie : Madrid , Barcelona , Valencia , Guernica , Durango , and other cities were attacked . The Bombing of Guernica was the most controversial . 
 = = = Republicans = = = 
 According to the Nationalists , an estimated 55 @,@ 000 civilians died in Republican @-@ held territories . This is considered excessive by Antony Beevor . However , it was much less than the half a million claimed during the war . The deaths would form the prevailing outside opinion of the republic up until the bombing of Guernica . 
 The Republican government was anticlerical , and supporters attacked and murdered Roman Catholic clergy in reaction to the news of military revolt . In his 1961 book , Spanish archbishop Antonio Montero Moreno , who at the time was director of the journal Ecclesia , wrote that 6 @,@ 832 were killed during the war , including 4 @,@ 184 priests , 2 @,@ 365 monks and friars , and 283 nuns , in addition to 13 bishops , a figure accepted by historians , including Beevor . Some sources claim that by the conflict 's end , 20 percent of the nation 's clergy had been killed , The " Execution " of the Sacred Heart of Jesus by Communist militiamen at Cerro de los Ángeles near Madrid , on 7 August 1936 , was the most infamous of widespread desecration of religious property . In dioceses where the Republicans had general control , a large proportion – often a majority – of secular priests were killed . 
 Like clergy , civilians were executed in Republican territories . Some civilians were executed as suspected <unk> . Others died in acts of revenge after Republicans heard of massacres carried out in the Nationalist zone . Air raids committed against Republican cities were another driving factor . Shopkeepers and industrialists were shot if they did not sympathize with the Republicans , and were usually spared if they did . Fake justice was sought through a commission , known in Russia as <unk> . 
 As pressure mounted with the increasing success of the Nationalists , many civilians were executed by councils and tribunals controlled by competing Communist and anarchist groups . Some members of the latter were executed by Soviet @-@ advised communist functionaries in Catalonia , as recounted by George Orwell 's description of the purges in Barcelona in 1937 in Homage to Catalonia , which followed a period of increasing tension between competing elements of the Catalan political scene . Some individuals fled to friendly embassies , which would house up to 8 @,@ 500 people during the war . 
 In the Andalusian town of Ronda , 512 suspected Nationalists were executed in the first month of the war . Communist Santiago Carrillo <unk> was accused of the killing of Nationalists in the Paracuellos massacre near Paracuellos del Jarama . Pro @-@ Soviet Communists committed numerous atrocities against fellow Republicans , including other Marxists : André Marty , known as the Butcher of Albacete , was responsible for the deaths of some 500 members of the International Brigades . Andreu Nin , leader of the POUM ( Workers ' Party of Marxist Unification ) , and many other prominent POUM members , were murdered by the Communists , with the help of the USSR 's NKVD . 
 Thirty @-@ eight thousand people were killed in the Republican zone during the war , 17 @,@ 000 of whom were killed in Madrid or Catalonia within a month of the coup . Whilst the Communists were forthright in their support of extrajudicial killings , much of the Republican side was appalled by the murders . Azaña came close to resigning . He , alongside other members of Parliament and a great number of other local officials , attempted to prevent Nationalist supporters being lynched . Some of those in positions of power intervened personally to stop the killings . 
 = = Social revolution = = 
 In the anarchist @-@ controlled areas , Aragon and Catalonia , in addition to the temporary military success , there was a vast social revolution in which the workers and peasants collectivised land and industry and set up councils parallel to the paralyzed Republican government . This revolution was opposed by the Soviet @-@ supported communists who , perhaps surprisingly , campaigned against the loss of civil property rights . 
 As the war progressed , the government and the communists were able to exploit their access to Soviet arms to restore government control over the war effort , through diplomacy and force . Anarchists and the Workers ' Party of Marxist Unification ( Partido Obrero de <unk> <unk> , POUM ) were integrated into the regular army , albeit with resistance . The POUM Trotskyists were outlawed and falsely denounced as an instrument of the fascists . In the May Days of 1937 , many thousands of anarchist and communist Republican soldiers fought for control of strategic points in Barcelona . 
 The pre @-@ war Falange was a small party of some 30 @,@ 000 – 40 @,@ 000 members . It also called for a social revolution that would have seen Spanish society transformed by National Syndicalism . Following the execution of its leader , José Antonio Primo de Rivera , by the Republicans , the party swelled in size to several hundred thousand members . The leadership of the Falange suffered 60 percent casualties in the early days of the civil war , and the party was transformed by new members and rising new leaders , called <unk> nuevas ( " new shirts " ) , who were less interested in the revolutionary aspects of National Syndicalism . Subsequently , Franco united all fighting groups into the Traditionalist Spanish Falange and the National Syndicalist Offensive Juntas ( Spanish : Falange Española <unk> de las Juntas de <unk> Nacional @-@ <unk> , <unk> y de las <unk> ) . 
 The 1930s also saw Spain become a focus for pacifist organizations , including the Fellowship of Reconciliation , the War Resisters League , and the War Resisters ' International . Many people including , as they are now called , the " <unk> " ( " defiant ones " , conscientious objectors ) argued and worked for non @-@ violent strategies . Prominent Spanish pacifists , such as <unk> Poch y Gascón and José <unk> , supported the Republicans . <unk> argued that Spanish pacifists had no alternative but to make a stand against fascism . He put this stand into practice by various means , including organizing agricultural workers to maintain food supplies , and through humanitarian work with war refugees . 
 = = Art and propaganda = = 
 Throughout the course of the Spanish Civil War , people all over the world were exposed to the goings @-@ on and effects of it on its people not only through standard art , but also through propaganda . Motion pictures , posters , books , radio programs , and leaflets are a few examples of this media art that was so influential during the war . Produced by both nationalists and republicans , propaganda allowed Spaniards a way to spread awareness about their war all over the world . In a film co @-@ produced by famous early @-@ twentieth century authors such as Ernest Hemingway and Lillian Hellman , video footage was used as a way to advertise Spain ’ s need for military and monetary aid . This film , The Spanish Earth , premiered in America in July 1937 . In 1938 , George Orwell 's Homage to Catalonia , a personal account of his experiences and observations in the war , was published in the United Kingdom . 
 Leading works of sculpture include Alberto Sánchez Pérez 's El pueblo español tiene un camino que conduce a una estrella <unk> ( " The Spanish People Have a Path that Leads to a Star " ) , a 12.5m monolith constructed out of plaster representing the struggle for a socialist utopia ; Julio González 's La Montserrat , an anti @-@ war work which shares its title with a mountain near Barcelona , is created from a sheet of iron which has been hammered and welded to create a peasant mother carrying a small child in one arm and a sickle in the <unk> and Alexander Calder 's Fuente de <unk> ( Mercury Fountain ) a protest work by the American against the Nationalist forced control of <unk> 'n and the mercury mines there . 
 As to other works of art , Pablo Picasso painted Guernica in 1937 , taking inspiration from the bombing of Guernica , and in Leonardo de Vinci 's The Battle of Anghiari . Guernica , like many important Republican masterpieces , was featured at the 1937 International Exhibition in Paris . The work 's size ( 11 ft by 25 @.@ 6 ft ) grabbed much attention and cast the horrors of the mounting Spanish civil unrest into a global spotlight . The painting has since been heralded as an anti @-@ war work and a symbol of peace in the 20th century . 
 Joan Miró created El <unk> ( The Reaper ) , formally titled El campesino <unk> en <unk> ( Catalan peasant in revolt ) , which spans some 18 feet by 12 feet and depicted a peasant brandishing a sickle in the air , to which Miró commented that " The sickle is not a communist symbol . It is the reaper ’ s symbol , the tool of his work , and , when his freedom is threatened , his weapon . " This work , also featured at the 1937 International Exhibition in Paris , was shipped back to the Spanish Republic 's capital in Valencia following the Exhibition , but has since gone missing or has been destroyed . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 Spanish Civil War Timeline 
 = = People = = 
 = = Political parties and organizations = = 
 = = = Images and films = = = 
 Spain in Revolt , newsreel documentary ( Video Stream ) ( Part 1 , 2 ) 
 Imperial War Museum Collection of Spanish Civil War Posters hosted online by Visual Arts Data Service ( <unk> ) 
 Posters of the Spanish Civil War from UCSD 's Southworth collection 
 Civil War Documentaries made by the CNT 
 Spanish Civil War and Revolution image gallery – photographs and posters from the conflict 
 Aircraft of the Spanish Civil War 
 Battle of Rio Segre Photographs Capa , Robert ( 1938 ) International Center of Photography . 
 = = = Academics and governments = = = 
 A History of the Spanish Civil War , excerpted from a U.S. government country study . 
 Dutch Involvement in the Spanish Civil War . Columbia Historical Review . 
 " The Spanish Civil War – causes and legacy " on BBC Radio 4 's In Our Time featuring Paul Preston , Helen Graham and Dr Mary Vincent 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Original war reports from The Times 
 The Anarcho @-@ <unk> of Spain , a different view of the anarchists in the Spanish Civil War , George Mason University 
 Spanish Civil War information from Spartacus Educational 
 American Jews in Spanish Civil War at the Wayback Machine ( archived 8 December 2005 ) , by Martin Sugarman 
 The Spanish Revolution , 1936 – 39 articles and links , from Anarchy Now ! 
 The Revolutionary Institutions : The Central Committee of Anti @-@ Fascist Militias , by Juan García Oliver 
 Warships of the Spanish Civil War 
 ¡ No <unk> ! Speech Dolores <unk> 's famous rousing address for the defense of the Second Republic 
 New Zealand and the Spanish Civil War 
 Full text in translation of the Collective Letter of the Spanish Bishops , 1937 , a pastoral letter of the Spanish bishops which justified Franco 's uprising 
 11 Songs of the Spanish Civil War 
 = = = Archives = = = 
 Robert E. Burke Collection . 1892 – 1994 . 60 @.@ 43 cubic feet ( 68 boxes plus two oversize folders and one oversize vertical file ) . At the Labor Archives of Washington , University of Washington Libraries Special Collections . Contains materials collected by Burke on the Spanish Civil War . 
 = Wonder Stories = 
 Wonder Stories was an early American science fiction magazine which was published under several titles from 1929 to 1955 . It was founded by Hugo Gernsback in 1929 after he had lost control of his first science fiction magazine , Amazing Stories , when his media company Experimenter Publishing went bankrupt . Within a few months of the bankruptcy , Gernsback launched three new magazines : Air Wonder Stories , Science Wonder Stories and Science Wonder Quarterly . 
 Air Wonder Stories and Science Wonder Stories were merged in 1930 as Wonder Stories , and the quarterly was renamed Wonder Stories Quarterly . The magazines were not financially successful , and in 1936 Gernsback sold Wonder Stories to Ned Pines at Beacon Publications , where , retitled Thrilling Wonder Stories , it continued for nearly 20 years . The last issue was dated Winter 1955 , and the title was then merged with Startling Stories , another of Pines ' science fiction magazines . Startling itself lasted only to the end of 1955 before finally succumbing to the decline of the pulp magazine industry . 
 The editors under Gernsback 's ownership were David Lasser , who worked hard to improve the quality of the fiction , and , from mid @-@ 1933 , Charles Hornig . Both Lasser and Hornig published some well @-@ received fiction , such as Stanley Weinbaum 's " A Martian Odyssey " , but Hornig 's efforts in particular were overshadowed by the success of Astounding Stories , which had become the leading magazine in the new field of science fiction . Under its new title , Thrilling Wonder Stories was initially unable to improve its quality . For a period in the early 1940s it was aimed at younger readers , with a juvenile editorial tone and covers that depicted beautiful women in implausibly revealing spacesuits . Later editors began to improve the fiction , and by the end of the 1940s , in the opinion of science fiction historian Mike Ashley , the magazine briefly rivaled Astounding . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 By the end of the 19th century , stories centered on scientific inventions and set in the future , in the tradition of Jules Verne , were appearing regularly in popular fiction magazines . Magazines such as Munsey 's Magazine and The Argosy , launched in 1889 and 1896 respectively , carried a few science fiction stories each year . Some upmarket " slicks " such as McClure 's , which paid well and were aimed at a more literary audience , also carried scientific stories , but by the early years of the 20th century , science fiction ( though it was not yet called that ) was appearing more often in the pulp magazines than in the slicks . The first science fiction magazine , Amazing Stories , was launched in 1926 by Hugo Gernsback at the height of the pulp magazine era . It helped to form science fiction as a separately marketed genre , and by the end of the 1930s a " Golden Age of Science Fiction " had begun , inaugurated by the efforts of John W. Campbell , the editor of Astounding Science Fiction . Wonder Stories was launched in the pulp era , not long after Amazing Stories , and lasted through the Golden Age and well into the 1950s . 
 = = = Gernsback era = = = 
 Gernsback 's new magazine , Amazing Stories , was successful , but Gernsback lost control of the publisher when it went bankrupt in February 1929 . By April he had formed a new company , Gernsback Publications Incorporated , and created two subsidiaries : Techni @-@ Craft Publishing Corporation and Stellar Publishing Corporation . Gernsback sent out letters advertising his plans for new magazines ; the mailing lists he used almost certainly were compiled from the subscription lists of Amazing Stories . This would have been illegal , as the lists were owned by Irving Trust , the receiver of the bankruptcy . Gernsback denied using the lists under oath , but historians have generally agreed that he must have done so . The letters also asked potential subscribers to decide the name of the new magazine ; they voted for " Science Wonder Stories " , which became the name of one of Gernsback 's new magazines . 
 Gernsback 's recovery from the bankruptcy judgment was remarkably quick . By early June he had launched three new magazines , two of which published science fiction . The June 1929 issue of Science Wonder Stories appeared on newsstands on 5 May 1929 , and was followed on 5 June by the July 1929 issue of Air Wonder Stories . Both magazines were monthly , with Gernsback as editor @-@ in @-@ chief and David Lasser as editor . Lasser had no prior editing experience and knew little about science fiction , but his recently acquired degree from MIT convinced Gernsback to hire him . 
 Gernsback claimed that science fiction was educational . He repeatedly made this assertion in Amazing Stories , and continued to do so in his editorials for the new magazines , stating , for example , that " teachers encourage the reading of this fiction because they know that it gives the pupil a fundamental knowledge of science and aviation . " He also recruited a panel of " nationally known educators [ who ] pass upon the scientific principles of all stories " . Science fiction historian Everett Bleiler describes this as " fakery , pure and simple " , asserting that there is no evidence that the men on the panel — some of whom , such as Lee De Forest , were well @-@ known scientists — had any editorial influence . However , Donald Menzel , the astrophysicist on the panel , has said that Gernsback sent him manuscripts and made changes to stories as a result of Menzel 's commentary . 
 In 1930 , Gernsback decided to merge Science Wonder Stories and Air Wonder Stories into Wonder Stories . The reason for the merger is unknown , although it may have been that he needed the space in the printing schedule for his new Aviation Mechanics magazine . Bleiler has suggested that the merger was caused by poor sales and a consequent need to downsize . In addition , Air Wonder Stories was probably focused on too specialized a niche to succeed . In an editorial just before Science Wonder Stories changed its name , Gernsback commented that the word " Science " in the title " has tended to retard the progress of the magazine , because many people had the impression that it is a sort of scientific periodical rather than a fiction magazine " . Ironically , the inclusion of " science " in the title was the reason that science fiction writer Isaac Asimov began reading the magazine ; when he saw the August 1929 issue he obtained permission to read it from his father on the grounds that it was clearly educational . Concerns about the marketability of titles seem to have surfaced in the last two issues of Science Wonder , which had the word " Science " printed in a color that made it difficult to read . On the top of the cover appeared the words " Mystery @-@ Adventure @-@ Romance " , the last of which was a surprising way to advertise a science fiction magazine . 
 The first issue of the merged magazine appeared in June 1930 , still on a monthly schedule , with Lasser as editor . The volume numbering continued that of Science Wonder Stories , therefore Wonder Stories is sometimes regarded as a retitling of Science Wonder Stories . Gernsback had also produced a companion magazine for Science Wonder Stories , titled Science Wonder Quarterly , the first issue of which was published in the fall of 1929 . Three issues were produced under this title , but after the merger Gernsback changed the companion magazine 's title to Wonder Stories Quarterly , and produced a further eleven issues under that title . 
 In July 1933 , Gernsback dismissed Lasser as editor . Lasser had become active in promoting workers ' rights and was spending less time on his editorial duties . According to Lasser , Gernsback told him " if you like working with the unemployed so much , I suggest you go and join them " . It is likely that cost @-@ cutting was also a consideration , as Lasser was paid $ 65 per week , a substantial salary in those days . Soon after Lasser was let go , Gernsback received a fanzine , The Fantasy Fan , from a reader , Charles Hornig . Gernsback called Hornig to his office to interview him for the position of editor ; Hornig turned out to be only 17 , but Gernsback asked him to proofread a manuscript and decided that the results were satisfactory . Hornig was hired at an initial salary of $ 20 per week . That same year , Gernsback dissolved Stellar Publications and created Continental Publications as the new publisher for Wonder Stories . The schedule stuttered for the first time , missing the July and September 1933 issues ; the recent bankruptcy of the company 's distributor , Eastern Distributing Corporation , may have been partly responsible for this disruption . The first issue with Continental on the masthead , and the first listing Hornig as editor , was November 1933 . 
 Wonder Stories had a circulation of about 25 @,@ 000 in 1934 , comparable to that of Amazing Stories , which had declined from an early peak of about 100 @,@ 000 . Gernsback considered issuing a reprint magazine in 1934 , Wonder Stories Reprint Annual , but it never appeared . That year he experimented with other fiction magazines — Pirate Stories and High Seas Adventures — but neither was successful . Wonder Stories was also failing , and in November 1935 it started publishing bimonthly instead of monthly . Gernsback had a reputation for paying slowly and was therefore unpopular with many authors ; by 1936 he was even failing to pay Laurence Manning , one of his most reliable authors . Staff were sometimes asked to delay cashing their paychecks for weeks at a time . Gernsback felt the blame lay with dealers who were returning magazine covers as unsold copies , and then selling the stripped copies at a reduced rate . To bypass the dealers , he made a plea in the March 1936 issue to his readers , asking them to subscribe , and proposing to distribute Wonder Stories solely by subscription . There was little response , and Gernsback decided to sell . He made a deal with Ned Pines of Beacon Magazines and on 21 February 1936 Wonder Stories was sold . 
 = = = Thrilling Wonder Stories = = = 
 Pines ' magazines included several with " Thrilling " in the title , such as Thrilling Detective and Thrilling Love Stories . These were run by Leo Margulies , who had hired Mort Weisinger ( among others ) as the workload increased in the early 1930s . Weisinger was already an active science fiction fan , and when Wonder Stories was acquired , Margulies involved him in the editorial work . Margulies ' group worked as a team , with Margulies listed as editor @-@ in @-@ chief on the magazines and having final say . However , since Weisinger knew science fiction well , Weisinger was quickly given more leeway , and bibliographers generally list Weisinger as the editor for this period of the magazine 's history . 
 The title was changed to Thrilling Wonder Stories to match the rest of the " Thrilling " line . The first issue appeared in August 1936 — four months after the last Gernsback Wonder Stories appeared . Wonder Stories had been monthly until the last few Gernsback issues ; Thrilling Wonder was launched on a bimonthly schedule . In February 1938 Weisinger asked for reader feedback regarding the idea of a companion magazine ; the response was positive , and in January 1939 the first issue of Startling Stories appeared , alternating months with Thrilling Wonder . A year later Thrilling Wonder went monthly ; this lasted fewer than eighteen months , and the bimonthly schedule resumed after April 1941 . Weisinger left that summer and was replaced at both Startling and Thrilling Wonder by Oscar J. Friend , a pulp writer with more experience in Westerns than science fiction , though he had published a novel , The Kid from Mars , in Startling Stories just the year before . In mid @-@ 1943 both magazines went to a quarterly schedule , and at the end of 1944 Friend was replaced in his turn by Sam Merwin , Jr .. The quarterly schedule lasted until well after World War II ended : Thrilling Wonder returned to a bimonthly schedule with the December 1946 issue and again alternated with Startling which went bimonthly in January 1947 . Merwin left in 1951 in order to become a freelance editor , and was replaced by Samuel Mines , who had worked for Ned Pines since 1942 . 
 The Thrilling Wonder logo , a winged man against the background of a glass mountain was taken from the Noel Loomis story , " The Glass Mountain . " 
 By the summer of 1949 Street & Smith , one of the largest pulp publishers , had shut down every one of their pulps . This format was dying out , though it took several more years before the pulps completely disappeared from the newsstands . Both Thrilling Wonder and Startling went quarterly in 1954 , and at the end of that year Mines left . The magazines did not survive him for long ; only two more issues of Thrilling Wonder appeared , both edited by Alexander Samalman . After the beginning of 1955 , Thrilling Wonder was merged with Startling , which itself ceased publication at the end of 1955 . 
 After the demise of Thrilling Wonder Stories the old Wonder Stories title was revived for two issues , published in 1957 and 1963 . These were both edited by Jim Hendryx Jr . They were numbered vol . 45 , no . 1 and 2 , continuing the volume numbering of Thrilling Wonder . Both were selections from past issues of Thrilling Wonder ; the second one convinced Ned Pines , the publisher who had bought Wonder Stories from Gernsback in 1936 and who still owned the rights to the stories , to start a reprint magazine called Treasury of Great Science Fiction Stories in 1964 ; a companion , Treasury of Great Western Stories , was added the next year . 
 In 2007 , Winston Engle published a new magazine in book format , titled Thrilling Wonder Stories , with a cover date of Summer 2007 . Engle commented that it was " not a pastiche or nostalgia exercise as much as modern SF with the entertainment , inspirational value , and excitement of the golden age " . A second volume appeared in 2009 . 
 = = = If--- ! : a picture feature = = = 
 Six months after the debut of Thrilling Wonder Stories , its June 1937 issue contained a picture feature by Jack Binder entitled If--- ! . Binder 's earlier training as a fine artist helped him create detailed renderings of space ships , lost cities , future cities , landscapes , indigenous peoples , and even ancient <unk> . If--- ! ' s pen and ink drawings are hand @-@ lettered and rendered in black and white . These one @-@ to @-@ two page studies presented readers with possible outcomes to early 20th @-@ century scientific quandaries . These included : 
 IF Another Ice Age Grips the Earth ! ( June 1937 ) — Binder 's first picture feature is tucked in between " The <unk> of Mars " by Eando Binder and J. Harvey Haggard 's " Renegade : The Ways of the Ether are Strange When a Spaceman <unk> to <unk> . " Ice Age offered renderings of glaciated cities , infra @-@ red ray guns , and a floating city alongside underground habitations — " the safest and most practicable retreat ! " for chilly humans . It ends with the announcement : " Next Issue : If Atomic Power were <unk> ! " 
 IF the Oceans Dried ! ( April 1938 ) — Sailing vessels are museum pieces enshrined in huge bubble cases since the ocean floor is now home to meandering train tracks . All manner of minerals are mined to the benefit of mankind and the lost city of Atlantis ( if real ) is exposed . All ocean life becomes extinct and the earth 's climate undergoes dramatic , yet positive , change . 
 IF Science Reached the Earth 's Core ( Oct. 1938 ) — <unk> allows humans to penetrate to the earth 's core , which is not molten , but a gravity @-@ free haven where " vacationers enjoy the thrill of being weightless . " If--- ! is credited with the first use of the phrase " zero @-@ gravity , " a science fiction mainstay , where " Space Travel is solved . Starting at the zero @-@ gravity of Earth 's core , accumulative acceleration is easily built up in a four @-@ thousand @-@ mile tube . The ship 's reach Earth 's surface where gravitation ! | is strongest with an appreciable velocity that makes the take @-@ off a simple process of continuation ! " 
 IF Earth 's Axis <unk> ( April 1940 ) — An astronomical telescope points towards the night sky revealing that the planets have aligned and caused the earth 's axis to shift . Tidal waves sweep cities away . North America in now a tropic zone , while Siberia is balmy and Antarctica swarms with immigrants wanting to harvest the now accessible coal and metal . " Next Issue : IF the World were Ruled by Intelligent Robots ! " 
 = = Contents and reception = = 
 When Air Wonder Stories was launched in the middle of 1929 there were already pulp magazines such as Sky Birds and Flying Aces which focused on aerial adventures . Gernsback 's first editorial dismissed these as being of the " purely ' Wild West ' <unk> war adventure @-@ sky busting type " . By contrast , Gernsback said he planned to fill Air Wonder solely with " flying stories of the future , strictly along scientific @-@ mechanical @-@ technical lines , full of adventure , exploration and achievement . " Non @-@ fiction material on aviation was printed , including quizzes , short popular articles , and book reviews . The letters column made it clear that the readership comprised more science fiction fans than aviation fans , and Gernsback later commented that the overlap with Science Wonder readers was 90 % ( a figure that presumably referred only to the subscription base , not to newsstand sales ) . 
 Gernsback frequently ran reader contests , one of which , announced in the February 1930 issue of Air Wonder Stories , asked for a slogan for the magazine . John Wyndham , later to become famous as the author of The Day of the Triffids , won with " Future Flying Fiction " , submitted under his real name of John Beynon Harris . Later that year a contest in Science Wonder Quarterly asked readers for an answer to the question " What I Have Done to Spread Science Fiction " . The winner was Raymond Palmer who later became editor of Gernsback 's original magazine , Amazing Stories . He won the contest for his role in founding a " Science Correspondence Club " . 
 Science Wonder 's first issue included the first part of a serial , The Reign of the Ray , by Fletcher Pratt and Irwin Lester , and short stories by Stanton Coblentz and David H. Keller . Air Wonder began with a reprinted serial , Victor <unk> 's Ark of the Covenant . Writers who first appeared in the pages of these magazines include Neil R. Jones , Ed Earl Repp , Raymond Z. Gallun and Lloyd Eshbach . The quality of published science fiction at the time was generally low , and Lasser was keen to improve it . On 11 May 1931 he wrote to his regular contributors to tell them that their science fiction stories " should deal realistically with the effect upon people , individually and in groups , of a scientific invention or discovery . ... In other words , allow yourself one fundamental assumption — that a certain machine or discovery is possible — and then show what would be its logical and dramatic consequences upon the world ; also what would be the effect upon the group of characters that you pick to carry your theme . " 
 = = = After the merger = = = 
 Lasser provided ideas to his authors and commented on their drafts , attempting to improve both the level of scientific literacy and the quality of the writing . Some of his correspondence has survived , including an exchange with Jack Williamson , whom Lasser commissioned in early 1932 to write a story based on a plot provided by a reader — the winning entry in one of the magazine 's competitions . Lasser emphasized to Williamson the importance of scientific plausibility , citing as an example a moment in the story where the <unk> have to decipher a written Martian language : " You must be sure and make it convincing how they did it ; for they have absolutely no method of approach to a written language of another world . " On one occasion Lasser 's work with his authors extended to collaboration : " The Time Projector " , a story which appeared in the July 1931 issue of Wonder Stories , was credited to David H. Keller and David Lasser . Both Lasser and , later , Hornig , were given almost complete editorial freedom by Gernsback , who reserved only the right to give final approval to the contents . This was in contrast to the more detailed control Gernsback had exerted over the content of Amazing Stories in the first years of its existence . Science fiction historian Sam Moskowitz has suggested that the reason was the poor financial state of Wonder Stories — Gernsback perhaps avoided corresponding with authors as he owed many of them money . 
 Lasser allowed the letter column to become a free discussion of ideas and values , and published stories dealing with topics such as the relationship between the sexes . One such story , Thomas S. Gardner 's " The Last Woman " , portrayed a future in which men , having evolved beyond the need for love , keep the last woman in a museum . In " The Venus Adventurer " , an early story by John Wyndham , a spaceman corrupts the innocent natives of Venus . Lasser avoided printing space opera , and several stories from Wonder in the early 1930s were more realistic than most contemporary space fiction . Examples include Edmond Hamilton 's " A Conquest of Space " , P. Schuyler Miller 's " The Forgotten Man of Space " , and several stories by Frank K. Kelly , including " The Moon Tragedy " . 
 Lasser was one of the founders of the American Rocket Society which , under its initial name of the " Interplanetary Society " , announced its existence in the pages of the June 1930 Wonder Stories . Several of Wonder 's writers were also members of the Interplanetary Society , and perhaps as a consequence of the relationship Wonder Stories Quarterly began to focus increasingly on fiction with interplanetary settings . A survey of the last eight issues of Wonder Stories Quarterly by Bleiler found almost two @-@ thirds of the stories were interplanetary adventures , while only a third of the stories in the corresponding issues of Wonder Stories could be so described . Wonder Stories Quarterly added a banner reading " Interplanetary Number " to the cover of the Winter 1931 issue , and retained it , as " Interplanetary Stories " , for subsequent issues . Lasser and Gernsback were also briefly involved with the fledgling Technocracy movement . Gernsback published two issues of Technocracy Review , which Lasser edited , commissioning stories based on technocratic ideas from Nat <unk> . These appeared in Wonder Stories during 1933 , culminating in a novel , The Revolt of the Scientists . 
 Reviews of fiction and popular science books were published , and there was a science column which endeavored to answer readers ' questions . These features were at first of good quality , but deteriorated after Lasser 's departure , although it is not certain that Lasser wrote the content of either one . An influential non @-@ fiction initiative was the creation of the Science Fiction League , an organization that brought together local science fiction fan clubs across the country . Gernsback took the opportunity to sell items such as buttons and insignia , and it was undoubtedly a profitable enterprise for him as well as a good source of publicity . It was ultimately more important in becoming one of the foundations of science fiction fandom . 
 = = = Hornig = = = 
 When Hornig took over from Lasser at the end of 1933 he attempted to continue and expand Lasser 's approach . Hornig introduced a " New Policy " in the January 1934 issue , emphasizing originality and barring stories that merely reworked well @-@ worn ideas . He asked for stories that included good science , although " not enough to become boring to those readers who are not primarily interested in the technicalities of the science " . However , Astounding was moving into the lead position in the science fiction magazine field at this time , and Hornig had difficulty in competing . His rates of payment were lower than Astounding 's one cent per word ; sometimes his writers were paid very late , or not at all . Despite these handicaps , Hornig managed to find some good material , including Stanley G. Weinbaum 's " A Martian Odyssey " , which appeared in the July 1934 Wonder and has been frequently reprinted . 
 In the December 1934 – January 1935 issue of Hornig 's fanzine , Fantasy Magazine , he took the unusual step of listing several stories that he had rejected as lacking novelty , but which had subsequently appeared in print in other magazines . The list includes several by successful writers of the day , such as Raymond Z. Gallun and Miles Breuer . The most prominent story named is <unk> by E. E. Smith , which appeared in Amazing . 
 Both Lasser and Hornig printed fiction translated from French and German writers , including <unk> von Hanstein and Otto Willi Gail . With the rise of Adolf Hitler in Germany in the 1930s a few readers ( including Donald Wollheim ) wrote letters complaining about the inclusion of German stories . The editorial response was a strong defense of the translations ; Gernsback argued that events in Germany were irrelevant to the business of selecting fiction . 
 The covers for almost every issue of Air Wonder , Science Wonder , Wonder Stories and Wonder Stories Quarterly were painted by Frank R. Paul , who had followed Gernsback from Amazing Stories . The only exception was a cover image composed of colored dots , which appeared on the November 1932 issue . 
 = = = Weisinger and Friend = = = 
 When the magazine moved to Beacon Publications , as Thrilling Wonder , the fiction began to focus more on action than on ideas . The covers , often by Earle K. Bergey , typically depicted bizarre aliens and damsels in distress . In 1939 , a reader , Martin Alger , coined the phrase " bug @-@ eyed monster " to describe one such cover ; the phrase subsequently entered the dictionary as a word for an alien . Several well @-@ known writers contributed , including Ray Cummings , and John W. Campbell , whose " Brain @-@ Stealers of Mars " series began in Thrilling Wonder in the December 1936 issue . A comic @-@ strip began in August 1936 , the first issue of the Beacon Publications version . It was illustrated and possibly written by Max <unk> . The strip , titled " <unk> " , was not a success , and was cancelled after eight issues . 
 Weisinger 's successor , Friend , gave the magazine a significantly more juvenile feel . He used the alias " Sergeant Saturn " and was generally condescending to the readers ; this may not have been his fault as Margulies , who was still the editorial director , probably wanted him to attract a younger readership . Under Friend 's direction , Earle K. Bergey transformed the look of Thrilling Wonder Stories by foregrounding human figures in space , focusing on the anatomy of women in implausibly revealing spacesuits and his trademark " brass <unk> " . 
 = = = Merwin and Mines = = = 
 Merwin , who took over with the Winter 1945 issue , adopted a more mature approach than Friend 's . He obtained fiction from writers who had previously been publishing mainly in John Campbell 's Astounding . The Summer 1945 issue of Thrilling Wonder included Jack Vance 's first published story , " The World Thinker " . Merwin also published several stories by Ray Bradbury , some of which were later included in Bradbury 's collection The Martian Chronicles . Other well @-@ known writers that Merwin was able to attract included Theodore Sturgeon , A.E. van Vogt , and Robert A. Heinlein . Thrilling Wonder often published intelligent , thoughtful stories , some of which Campbell would have been unlikely to accept at Astounding : he did not like to publish stories that showed the negative consequences of scientific advances such as nuclear power . In the opinion of science fiction historian Mike Ashley , during the late 1940s Thrilling Wonder became a serious rival to Astounding 's long domination of the field . However , this is not a universal opinion , as the magazine is elsewhere described during Merwin 's tenure as " evidently secondary to Startling " . 
 Samuel Mines took over from Merwin at the end of 1951 , both at Startling Stories and Thrilling Wonder . He argued against restrictions in science fiction themes , and in 1952 published Philip José Farmer 's " The Lovers " , a ground @-@ breaking story about inter @-@ species sex , in Startling . He followed this in 1953 with another taboo @-@ breaking story from Farmer , " Mother " , in Thrilling Wonder , in which a spaceman makes his home in an alien womb . In the December 1952 Thrilling Wonder , Mines published Edmond Hamilton 's " What 's It Like Out There ? " , a downbeat story about the realities of space exploration that had been considered too bleak for publication when it had originally been written in the 1930s . Sherwood Springer 's " No Land of Nod " , in the same issue , dealt with incest between a father and his daughter in a world in which they are the only two survivors . These stories were all well received by the readership . 
 = = = Influence on the field = = = 
 For a few years , Lasser was the dominant force in science fiction . Under him , Wonder Stories was the best of the science fiction magazines of the early 1930s , and the most successful of all Gernsback 's forays into the field . Lasser shaped a new generation of writers , who in many cases had no prior writing experience of any kind ; Wonder Stories was part of a " forcing ground " , according to Isaac Asimov , where young writers learned their trade . The magazine was less constrained by pulp convention than its competitors , and published some novels such as Eric Temple Bell 's The Time Stream and Festus <unk> 's The Green Man of <unk> , which were not in the mainstream of development of the science fiction genre . 
 As Thrilling Wonder the magazine was much less influential . Until the mid @-@ 1940s it was focused on younger readers , and by the time Merwin and Mines introduced a more adult approach , Astounding Science Fiction had taken over as the unquestioned leader of the field . Thrilling Wonder could not compete with John Campbell and the Golden Age of science fiction that he brought into being , but it did periodically publish good stories . In the end it was unable to escape its roots in the pulp industry , and died in the carnage that swept away every remaining pulp magazine in the 1950s . 
 = = Publication details = = 
 The editorial duties at Wonder Stories and its related magazines were not always performed by the person who bore the title of " editor " in the magazine 's masthead . From the beginning until the sale to Beacon Publications , Gernsback was listed as editor @-@ in @-@ chief ; Lasser was variously listed as " literary editor " and " managing editor " , while Hornig was always listed as " managing editor " . Similarly , under Beacon Publications , the nominal editor ( initially Leo Margulies ) was not always the one to work on the magazine . The following list shows who actually performed the editorial duties . More details are given in the publishing history section , above , which focuses on when the editors involved actually obtained control of the magazine contents , instead of when their names appeared on the masthead . 
 Air Wonder Stories 
 David Lasser ( July 1929 – May 1930 ) 
 Science Wonder Stories 
 David Lasser ( June 1929 – May 1930 ) 
 Science Wonder Quarterly 
 David Lasser ( Fall 1929 – Spring 1930 ) 
 Wonder Stories 
 David Lasser ( June 1930 – October 1933 ) 
 Charles Hornig ( November 1933 – March – April 1936 ) 
 Wonder Stories Quarterly 
 David Lasser ( Summer 1930 – Winter 1933 ) 
 Thrilling Wonder Stories 
 Mort Weisinger ( August 1936 – April 1941 ) 
 Oscar Friend ( August 1941 – Fall 1944 ) 
 Sam Merwin ( Winter 1945 – October 1951 ) 
 Samuel Mines ( December 1951 – Summer 1954 ) 
 Alexander Samalman ( Fall 1954 – Winter 1955 ) 
 The publisher only changed once through the lifetime of the magazine , when Gernsback sold Wonder Stories in 1936 . However , Gernsback changed the name of his company from Stellar Publishing Corporation to Continental Publications , Incorporated , with effect from December 1933 . Thrilling Wonder 's publisher went by three names : Beacon Publications initially , then Better Publications from the August 1937 issue , and finally , starting with the Fall 1943 issue , Standard Magazines . 
 Gernsback experimented with the price and format , looking for a profitable combination . Both Air Wonder and Science Wonder were bedsheet @-@ sized ( 8 @.@ 5 × 11 @.@ 75 in , or 216 × 298 mm ) and priced at 25 cents , as were the first issues of Wonder Stories . With the November 1930 issue Wonder Stories changed to pulp format , 6 @.@ 75 × 9 @.@ 9 in ( 171 × 251 mm ) . It reverted to bedsheet after a year , and then in November 1933 became a pulp magazine for good . The pulp issues all had 144 pages ; the bedsheet issues generally had 96 pages , though five issues from November 1932 to March 1933 had only 64 pages . Those five issues coincided with a price cut to 15 cents , which was reversed with the April 1933 issue . Gernsback cut the price to 15 cents again from June 1935 until the sale to Beacon Publications in 1936 , though this time he did not reduce the page count . The short duration of these price cuts suggests Gernsback rapidly realized that the additional circulation they gained him cost too much in lost revenue . Under Beacon Publications Thrilling Wonder remained pulp @-@ sized throughout . 
 There were two British reprint editions of Thrilling Wonder . The earlier edition , from Atlas Publishing , produced three numbered issues from 1949 to 1950 , and a further seven from 1952 to 1953 . Another four issues appeared from Pemberton between 1953 and 1954 ; these were numbered from 101 to 104 . There were Canadian editions in 1945 – 1946 and 1948 – 1951 . 
 = George Robey = 
 Sir George Edward Wade , CBE ( 20 September 1869 – 29 November 1954 ) , known professionally as George Robey , was an English comedian , singer and actor in musical theatre , who became known as one of the greatest music hall performers of the late 19th and early 20th centuries . As a comedian , Robey mixed everyday situations and observations with comic absurdity . Apart from his music hall acts , he was a popular Christmas pantomime performer in the English provinces , where he excelled in the dame roles . He scored notable successes in musical revues during and after the First World War , particularly with the song " If You Were the Only Girl ( In the World ) " , which he performed with Violet Loraine in the revue The Bing Boys Are Here ( 1916 ) . One of his best @-@ known original characters in his six @-@ decade long career was the Prime Minister of Mirth . 
 Born in London , Robey came from a middle @-@ class family . After schooling in England and Germany , and a series of office jobs , he made his debut on the London stage , at the age of 21 , as the straight man to a comic hypnotist . He soon developed his own act and appeared at the Oxford Music Hall in 1890 , where he earned favourable notices singing " The Simple Pimple " and " He 'll Get It Where He 's Gone to Now " . In 1892 , Robey appeared in his first pantomime , Whittington Up @-@ to @-@ date in Brighton , which brought him to a wider audience . More provincial engagements followed in Manchester , Birmingham and Liverpool , and he soon became a mainstay of the popular Christmas pantomime scene . 
 Robey 's music hall act matured in the first decade of the 1900s , and he undertook a number of foreign tours . He starred in the Royal Command Performance in 1912 and regularly entertained before aristocracy . He was an avid sportsman , playing cricket and football at a semi @-@ professional level . During the First World War , he achieved great success in The Bing Boys Are Here ( 1916 ) and several other revues . He raised money for many war charities and was appointed a CBE in 1919 . From 1918 , he created sketches based on his Prime Minister of Mirth character and used a costume he had designed in the 1890s as a basis for the character 's attire . He made a successful transition from music hall to variety shows and starred in the revue Round in Fifty in 1922 , which earned him still wider notice . With the exception of his performances in revue and pantomime , he appeared as his Prime Minister of Mirth character in all the other entertainment media including variety , music hall and radio . 
 In 1913 he debuted in film , but he only had modest success in the medium . He continued to perform in variety theatre in the inter @-@ war years and , in 1932 , starred in Helen ! , his first straight theatre role . His appearance brought him to the attention of many influential directors , including Sydney Carroll , who signed him to appear on stage as Falstaff in Henry IV , Part 1 in 1935 , a role that he later repeated in Laurence Olivier 's 1944 film , Henry V. During the Second World War , Robey raised money for charities and promoted recruitment into the forces . By the 1950s , his health had deteriorated , and he entered into semi @-@ retirement . He was knighted a few months before his death in 1954 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Robey was born at 334 Kennington Road , Kennington , London . His father , Charles Wade , was a civil engineer who spent much of his career on tramline design and construction . Robey 's mother , Elizabeth Mary Wade née Keene , was a housewife ; he also had two sisters . His paternal ancestors originated from Hampshire ; his uncle , George Wade , married into aristocracy in 1848 , a link which provided a proud topic of conversation for future generations of the Wade family . When Robey was five , his father moved the family to Birkenhead , where he helped in the construction of the Mersey Railway . Robey began his schooling in nearby Hoylake at a dame school . Three years later the family moved back to London , near the border between Camberwell and Peckham . At around this time , trams were being introduced to the area , providing Charles Wade with a regular , well @-@ paid job . 
 To fulfil an offer of work , Charles Wade moved the family to Germany in 1880 , and Robey attended a school in Dresden . He devoted his leisure hours to visiting the city 's museums , art galleries and opera houses and gained a reasonable fluency in German by the time he was 12 . He enjoyed life in the country and was impressed with the many operatic productions held in the city and with the Germans ' high regard for the arts . When he was 14 , his father allowed him to move in with a clergyman 's family in the German countryside , which he used as a base while studying science at Leipzig University . To earn money , he taught English to his landlord 's children and minded them while their parents were at work . Having successfully enrolled at the university , he studied art and music and stayed with the family for a further 18 months so he could complete his studies before returning to England in 1885 . He later claimed , apparently untruthfully , to have studied at the University of Cambridge . 
 At the age of 18 Robey travelled to Birmingham , where he worked in a civil engineer 's office . It was here that he became interested in a career on the stage and often dreamed of starring in his own circus . He learned to play the mandolin and became a skilled performer on the instrument . This drew interest from a group of local musicians and , together with a friend from the group who played the guitar , Robey travelled the local area in search of engagements . Soon afterwards , they were hired to play at a charity concert at the local church , St Mary and St Ambrose in Edgbaston , a performance that led to more local bookings . For the next appearance , Robey performed an impromptu version of " <unk> " , a comic ditty taken from the burlesque Miss Esmeralda . The positive response from the audience encouraged him to give up playing the mandolin to concentrate instead on singing comic songs . 
 = = = = London debut = = = = 
 By 1890 Robey had become homesick , and so he returned to South London , where he took employment in a civil engineering company . He also joined a local branch of the Thirteen Club , whose members , many of whom were amateur musicians , performed in small venues across London . Hearing of his talent , the founder of the club , W. H. Branch , invited Robey to appear at Anderton 's Hotel in Fleet Street , where he performed the popular new comic song " Where Did You Get That Hat ? " . Robey 's performance secured him a number of private engagements for which he was paid a guinea a night . By the early months of 1891 , Robey was much in demand , and he decided to change his stage name . He swapped " Wade " for " Robey " after working for a company in Birmingham that bore the latter name . It was at around this time that he met E. W. Rogers , an established music hall composer who wrote songs for Marie Lloyd and Jenny Hill . For Robey , Rogers wrote three songs : " My Hat 's a Brown ' Un " , " The Simple Pimple " and " It Suddenly <unk> Upon Me " . 
 In 1891 Robey visited the Royal Aquarium in Westminster where he watched " Professor Kennedy " , a burlesque mesmerist from America . After the performance , Robey visited Kennedy in his dressing room and offered himself as the stooge for his next appearance . They agreed that Robey , as his young apprentice , would be " mesmerised " into singing a comic song . At a later rehearsal , Robey negotiated a deal to sing one of the comic songs that had been written for him by Rogers . Robey 's turn was a great success , and as a result he secured a permanent theatrical residency at the venue . Later that year , he appeared as a solo act at the Oxford Music Hall , where he performed " The Simple Pimple " and " He 'll Get It Where He 's Gone to Now " . The theatrical press soon became aware of his act , and The Stage called him a " comedian with a pretty sense of humour [ who ] delivers his songs with considerable point and meets with all success " . In early 1892 , together with his performances at the Royal Aquarium and the Oxford Music Hall , Robey starred alongside Jenny Hill , Bessie Bonehill and Harriet Vernon at the Paragon Theatre of Varieties in Mile End , where , according to his biographer Peter Cotes , he " stole the notices from experienced <unk> " . 
 That summer , Robey conducted a music hall tour of the English provinces which began in Chatham and took him to Liverpool , at a venue owned by the mother of the influential London impresario Oswald Stoll . Through this engagement Robey met Stoll , and the two became lifelong friends . In early December , Robey appeared in five music halls a night , including Gatti 's Under the Arches , the Tivoli Music Hall and the London Pavilion . In mid @-@ December , he travelled to Brighton , where he appeared in his first Christmas pantomime , Whittington Up @-@ to @-@ Date . Pantomime would become a lucrative and regular source of employment for the comedian . Cotes calls Robey 's festive performances the " cornerstone of his comic art " , and the source of " some of his greatest successes " . 
 = = = = Music hall characterisations = = = = 
 During the 1890s Robey created a number of music hall characters centred on everyday life . Among them were " The Chinese <unk> " and " Clarence , the Last of the Dandies " . As Clarence , Robey dressed in a top hat and frock coat and carried a <unk> cane , the garb of a stereotypical Victorian gentleman . For his drag pieces , the comedian established " The Lady Dresser " , a female tailor who was desperate to out @-@ dress her high class customers , and " Daisy <unk> , the District Nurse " who arrived on stage with a bicycle to share light @-@ hearted scandal and gossip with the audience before hurriedly cycling off . 
 With Robey 's popularity came an eagerness to differentiate himself from his music hall rivals , and so he devised a signature costume when appearing as himself : an oversized black coat fastened from the neck down with large , wooden buttons ; black , unkempt , baggy trousers and a partially bald wig with black , whispery strands of <unk> , dirty @-@ looking hair that poked below a large , dishevelled top @-@ hat . He applied thick white face paint and exaggerated the redness on his cheeks and nose with bright red make @-@ up ; his eye line and eyebrows were also enhanced with thick , black greasepaint . He held a short , <unk> , wooden walking stick , which was curved at the top . Robey later used the costume for his character , The Prime Minister of Mirth . The outfit helped Robey become instantly recognisable on the London music hall circuit . He next made a start at building his repertoire and bought the rights to comic songs and monologues by several well @-@ established music hall writers , including Sax Rohmer and Bennett Scott . For his routines , Robey developed a characteristic delivery described by Cotes as " a kind of machine @-@ gun staccato rattle through each polysyllabic line , ending abruptly , and holding the pause while he fixed his audience with his basilisk stare . " 
 = = = = Success in pantomime and the provinces = = = = 
 At the start of 1894 , Robey travelled to Manchester to participate in the pantomime Jack and Jill , where he was paid £ 25 a week for a three @-@ month contract . He did not appear in Jack and Jill until the third act but pleased the holiday crowds nonetheless . During one performance the scenery mechanism failed , which forced him to improvise for the first time . Robey fabricated a story that he had just dined with the Lord Mayor before detailing exactly what he had eaten . The routine was such a hit that it was incorporated into the show as part of the script . 
 In the final months of 1894 , Robey returned to London to honour a contract for Augustus Harris at the Theatre Royal , Drury Lane , the details of which are unknown . In September he starred in a series of stand @-@ up comedy shows that he would perform every September between 1894 and 1899 . These short performances , in English seaside resorts including Scarborough and Bournemouth , were designed chiefly to enhance his name among provincial audiences . For the 1895 and 1896 Christmas pantomimes , he appeared in Manchester and Birmingham , respectively , in the title role of Dick Whittington , for which he received favourable reviews and praise from audiences . Despite the show 's success , Robey and his co @-@ stars disliked the experience . The actress Ada Reeve felt that the production had a bad back @-@ stage atmosphere and was thankful when the season ended , while the comedian Barry Lupino was dismayed at having his role , Muffins , considerably reduced . 
 On 29 April 1898 , Robey married his first wife , the Australian @-@ born musical theatre actress Ethel Hayden , at St Clement Danes church in the Strand , London . The congregation was made up of various theatrical colleagues ; J. Pitt <unk> was his best man , and composer Leslie Stuart was the organist . Robey and Ethel resided briefly in Circus Road , St John 's Wood , until the birth of their first child Edward in 1900 . They then moved to 83 Finchley Road in Swiss Cottage , Hampstead . Family life suited Robey ; his son Edward recalled many happy experiences with his father , including the evenings when he would accompany him to the half @-@ dozen music halls at which he would be appearing each night . 
 By the start of the new century , Robey was a big name in pantomime , and he was able to choose his roles . Pantomime enjoyed wide popularity until the 1890s , but by the time Robey had reached his peak , interest in it was on the wane . A type of character he particularly enjoyed taking on was the pantomime dame , which historically was played by comedians from the music hall . Robey was inspired by the older comedians Herbert Campbell and Dan Leno , and , although post @-@ dating them , he rivalled their eccentricity and popularity , earning the festive entertainment a new audience . In his 1972 biography of Robey , Neville Cardus thought that the comedian was " at his fullest as a pantomime Dame " . 
