 In 1902 Robey created the character " The Prehistoric Man " . He dressed as a caveman and spoke of modern political issues , often complaining about the government " slapping another pound of rock on his taxes " . The character was received favourably by audiences , who found it easy to relate to his topical observations . That year he released " The Prehistoric Man " and " Not That I Wish to Say Anything " on shellac discs using the early acoustic recording process . 
 Robey signed a six @-@ year contract in June 1904 to appear annually at , among other venues , the Oxford Music Hall in London , for a fee of £ 120 a week . The contract also required him to perform during the spring and autumn seasons between 1910 and 1912 . Robey disputed this part of the contract and stated that he agreed to this only as a personal favour to the music hall manager George <unk> Payne and that it should have become void on Payne 's death in 1907 . The management of the Oxford counter @-@ claimed and forbade Robey from appearing in any other music hall during this period . The matter went to court , where the judge found in Robey 's favour . 
 Robey was engaged to play the title role in the 1905 pantomime Queen of Hearts . The show was considered risqué by the theatrical press . In one scene Robey accidentally sat on his crown before bellowing " Assistance ! Methinks I have sat upon a hedgehog " ; in another sketch , the comedian mused , " Then there 's Mrs Simkins , the swank ! Many 's the squeeze she 's had of my blue bag on washing day . " Robey scored a further hit with the show the following year , in Birmingham , which Cotes describes as " the most famous of all famous Birmingham Theatre Royal pantomimes " . Robey incorporated " The Dresser " , a music hall sketch taken from his own repertoire , into the show . Over the next few years he continued to tour the music hall circuit both in London and the English provinces and recorded two songs , " What Are You Looking at Me For ? " and " The Mayor of Mudcumdyke " , which were later released by the Gramophone and Typewriter Company . 
 = = = Career peak years = = = 
 = = = = Sporting interests and violin @-@ making = = = = 
 Off @-@ stage , Robey led an active lifestyle and was a keen amateur sportsman . He was proud of his healthy physique and maintained it by performing frequent exercise and following a careful diet . By the time he was in his mid @-@ thirties , he had played as an amateur against Millwall , Chelsea and Fulham football clubs . He organised and played in many charity football matches throughout England , which were described by the sporting press as being of a very high standard , and he remained an active football player well into his fifties . Robey became associated with cricket by 1895 when he led a team of amateur players for a match at Turney Road in Dulwich . In September 1904 , while appearing in Hull , he was asked by the cricketer Harry Wrathall to take part in a charity cricket match at the Yorkshire County Cricket Club . Robey played so well that Wrathall asked him to return the following Saturday to take part in a professional game . That weekend , while waiting in the pavilion before the game , Robey was approached by an agent for Hull City A.F.C. , who asked the comedian to play in a match that same afternoon . Robey agreed , swapped his cricket flannels for a football kit and played with the team against Nottingham Forest as an inside right . 
 By 1903 Robey was playing at a semi @-@ professional level . He was signed as an inside forward by Millwall Football Club and scored many goals for them . He also displayed a good level of ability in vigoro , an Australian sport derived from both cricket and baseball which was short @-@ lived in England . Two years later he became a member of the Marylebone Cricket Club and played in minor games for them for many years . He gained a reputation at the club for his comic antics on the field , such as raising his eyebrows at the approaching bowler in an attempt to distract him . The writer Neville Cardus was complimentary about Robey 's cricket prowess and called him " an elegant player " whose performances on the cricket field were as entertaining as they were on the stage . Although a versatile player , Robey thought of himself as a " medium @-@ paced , right @-@ handed bowler " . 
 Robey was asked to help organise a charity football match in 1907 by friends of the Scottish football trainer James Miller , who had died the previous year . Robey compiled a team of amateur footballers from the theatrical profession and met Miller 's former team Chelsea Football Club at their home ground . The match raised considerable proceeds for Miller 's widow . Robey was proud of the match and joked : " I just wanted to make sure that Chelsea stay in the first division . " 
 In his spare time , Robey made violins , a hobby that he first took up during his years in Dresden . He became a skilled craftsman of the instrument , although he never intended for them to be played in public . Speaking in the 1960s , the violinist and composer Yehudi Menuhin , who played one of Robey 's violins for a public performance during that decade , called the comedian 's finished instrument " very professional " . He was intrigued by the idea that a man as famous as Robey could produce such a " beautifully finished " instrument , unbeknown to the public . Robey was also an artist , and some of his pen and ink self @-@ caricatures are kept at the National Portrait Gallery , London . 
 = = = = Oswald Stoll = = = = 
 Robey 's first high @-@ profile invitation came in the first decade of the 1900s from Hugh Lowther , 5th Earl of Lonsdale , who hired him as entertainment for a party he was hosting at Carlton House Terrace in Westminster . Soon afterwards , the comedian appeared for the first time before royalty when King Edward VII had Robey hired for several private functions . Robey performed a series of songs and monologues and introduced the " Mayor of Mudcumdyke " , all of which was met with much praise and admiration from the royal watchers . He was later hired by Edward 's son , the Prince of Wales ( the future King George V ) , who arranged a performance at Carlton House Terrace for his friend Lord Curzon . 
 In July 1912 , at the invitation of the impresario Oswald Stoll , Robey took part for the first time in the Royal Command Performance , to which Cotes attributes " one of the prime factors in his continuing popularity " . King George V and Queen Mary were " delighted " with Robey 's comic sketch , in which he performed the " Mayor of Mudcumdyke " in public for the first time . Robey found the royal show to be a less daunting experience than the numerous private command performances that he gave during his career . 
 At the outbreak of the First World War , Robey wished to enlist in the army but , now in his 40s , he was too old for active service . Instead , he volunteered for the Special Constabulary and raised money for charity through his performances as a comedian . It was not uncommon for him to finish at the theatre at 1 : 00 am and then to patrol as a special constable until 6 : 00 am , where he would frequently help out during zeppelin raids . He combined his civilian duties with work for a volunteer motor transport unit towards the end of the war , in which he served as a lieutenant . He committed three nights a week to the corps while organising performances during the day to benefit war charities . Robey was a strong supporter of the Merchant Navy and thought that they were often overlooked when it came to charitable donations . He raised £ 22 @,@ 000 at a benefit held at the London Coliseum , which he donated in the navy 's favour . 
 = = = = Film debut and The Bing Boys Are Here = = = = 
 Robey 's first experience in cinema was in 1913 , with two early sound film shorts : " And Very Nice Too " and " Good Queen Bess " , made in the <unk> process , where the film was synchronised with phonograph records . The next year , he tried to emulate his music hall colleagues Billy Merson and Charlie Austin , who had set up Homeland Films and found success with the <unk> series of films starring Betty Balfour . Robey met filmmakers from the Burns Film Company , who engaged him in a silent short entitled " George Robey Turns Anarchist " , in which he played a character who fails to blow up the Houses of Parliament . He continued to appear sporadically in film throughout the rest of his career , never achieving more than a modest amount of success . 
 In 1914 , for the first time in many years , Robey appeared in a Christmas pantomime as a male when he was engaged to play the title role in Sinbad the Sailor ; Fred Emney Sr played the dame role . Although the critics were surprised by the casting , it appealed to audiences , and the scenes featuring Robey and Emney together proved the most memorable . During the war the demand for light entertainment in the English provinces guaranteed Robey frequent bookings and a regular income . His appearances in Manchester , Liverpool , Newcastle and Glasgow were as popular as his annual performances in Birmingham . His wife Ethel accompanied him on these tours and frequently starred alongside him . 
 By the First World War , music hall entertainment had fallen out of favour with audiences . Theatrical historians blame the music hall 's decline on the increasing salaries of performers and the halls ' inability to present profitably the twenty or thirty acts that the audiences expected to see . Revue appealed to wartime audiences , and Robey decided to capitalise on the medium 's popularity . Stoll offered Robey a lucrative contract in 1916 to appear in the new revue The Bing Boys Are Here at the Alhambra Theatre , London . Dividing his time between three or four music halls a night had become unappealing to the comedian , and he relished the opportunity to appear in a single theatre . He was cast as Lucius Bing opposite Violet Loraine , who played his love interest Emma , and the couple duetted in the show 's signature song " If You Were the Only Girl ( In the World ) " , which became an international success . 
 This London engagement was a new experience for Robey , who had only been familiar with provincial pantomimes and week @-@ long , one @-@ man comedy shows . Aside from pantomime , he had never taken part in a long @-@ running production , and he had never had to memorise lines precisely or keep to schedules enforced by strict directors and theatre managers . The Bing Boys Are Here ran for 378 performances and occupied the Alhambra for more than a year . The theatrical press praised Robey as " the first actor of the halls " . He made two films towards the end of the war : The Anti @-@ frivolity League in 1916 and Doing His Bit the following year . 
 = = = = Zig @-@ Zag to Joy Bells = = = = 
 Robey left the cast of The Bing Boys during its run , in January 1917 , to star at the London Hippodrome in Albert de Courville , Dave Stamper and Gene Buck 's lavishly @-@ staged revue Zig @-@ Zag ! . Robey included a sketch based on his music hall character " The Prehistoric Man " , with Daphne Pollard playing the role of " She of the Tireless Tongue " . In another scene , he played a drunken gentleman who accidentally secures a box at the Savoy Theatre instead of an intended hotel room . The audience appeared unresponsive to the character , so he changed it mid @-@ performance to that of a naive Yorkshire man . The change provoked much amusement , and it became one of the most popular scenes of the show . Zig @-@ Zag ran for 648 performances . Stoll again secured Robey for the Alhambra in 1918 for a sequel , The Bing Boys on Broadway . The show , again co @-@ starring Violet Loraine , matched the popularity of its predecessor and beat the original show 's run with a total of 562 performances . 
 Robey returned to the London Hippodrome in 1919 where he took a leading role in another hit revue , Joy Bells . Phyllis <unk> took over from Pollard as his stage partner , with Anita Elson and Leon Errol as supporting dancers . Robey played the role of an old @-@ fashioned father who is mystified over the changing traditions after the First World War . He interpolated two music hall sketches : " No , No , No " centred on turning innocent , everyday sayings into suggestive and provocative maxims , and " The Rest Cure " told the story of a pre @-@ op hospital patient who hears worrying stories of malpractice from his well @-@ meaning friends who visit him . In the Italian newspaper La Tribuna , the writer Emilio <unk> commented : " Robey , just by being Robey , makes us laugh until we weep . We do not want to see either Figaro or Othello ; it is quite enough for Robey to appear in travelling costume and to turn his eyes in crab @-@ like fashion from one side of the auditorium to another . Robey 's aspect in dealing with his audience is paternal and , one might say , apostolic . " Joy Bells ran for 723 performances . 
 In the early months of 1919 , Robey completed a book of memoirs , My Rest Cure , which was published later that year . During the run of Joy Bells he was awarded the Legion of Honour for raising £ 14 @,@ 000 for the French Red Cross . He declined a knighthood that same year because , according to Cotes , he was worried that the title would distance him from his working @-@ class audiences ; he was appointed a CBE by George V at Buckingham Palace instead . On the morning of the penultimate Joy Bells performance , Robey was invited to Stoll 's London office , where he was offered a role in a new revue at the Alhambra Theatre . On the journey , he met the theatre impresario Sir Alfred Butt , who agreed to pay him £ 100 more , but out of loyalty to Stoll , he declined the offer and resumed his £ 600 a week contract at the Alhambra . On 28 July 1919 , Robey took part in his second Royal Command Performance , at the London Coliseum . He and Loraine sang " If You Were the Only Girl ( In the World ) " . 
 = = = Inter @-@ war years = = = 
 = = = = Films and revues of the early 1920s = = = = 
 A gap in the Alhambra 's schedule allowed Stoll to showcase Robey in a new short film . " George Robey 's Day Off " ( 1919 ) showed the comedian acting out his daily domestic routines to comic effect , but the picture failed at the box office . The British director John Baxter concluded that producers did not know how best to apply Robey 's stage talents to film . 
 By 1920 variety theatre had become popular in Britain , and Robey had completed the successful transition from music hall to variety star . Pantomime , which relied on its stars to make up much of the script through ad lib , was also beginning to fall out of favour , and his contemporaries were finding it too difficult to create fresh material for every performance ; for Robey , however , the festive entertainment continued to be a lucrative source of employment . 
 Robey 's first revue of the 1920s was Johnny Jones , which opened on 1 June 1920 at the Alhambra Theatre . The show also featured Ivy St. Helier , Lupino Lane and Eric Blore and carried the advertisement " A Robey salad with musical dressing " . One of the show 's more popular gags was a scene in which Robey picked and ate cherries off St. Helier 's hat , before tossing the stones into the orchestra pit which were then met by loud bangs from the bass drum . A sign of his popularity came in August 1920 when he was depicted in scouting costume for a series of 12 Royal Mail stamps in aid of the Printers Pension Corporation War Orphans and the Prince of Wales Boy Scout Funds . 
 The revue Robey en Casserole ( 1921 ) was next for Robey , during which he led a troupe of dancers in a musical piece called the " Policemen Ballet " . Each dancer was dressed in a mock police uniform on top and a tutu below . The show was the first failure for the comedian under Stoll 's management . That December Robey appeared in his only London pantomime , Jack and the Beanstalk , at the Hippodrome . His biographer , Peter Cotes , remembered the comedian 's interpretation of Dame Trot as " enormously funny : a bucolic caricature of a woman , sturdy and fruity , leathery and forbidding " and thought that Robey 's comic timing was " in a class of its own . " In March 1922 Robey remained at the Hippodrome in the revue Round in Fifty , a modernised version of Round the World in Eighty Days , which proved to be another hit for the London theatre , and a personal favourite of the comedian . 
 = = = = Marriage breakdown and foreign tours = = = = 
 Stoll brought Robey to cinema audiences a further four times during 1923 . The first two films were written with the intention of showcasing the comedian 's pantomime talents : One Arabian Night was a reworking of Aladdin and co @-@ starred <unk> Howard and Edward O 'Neill , while Harlequinade visited the roots of pantomime . One of Robey 's more notable roles under Stoll was Sancho Panza in Maurice Elvey 's 1923 film Don Quixote , for which he received a fee of £ 700 a week . The amount of time he spent working away from home led to the breakdown of his marriage , and he separated from Ethel in 1923 . He had a brief affair with one of his leading ladies and walked out of the family home . 
 Robey made a return to the London Hippodrome in 1924 in the revue Leap Year in which he co @-@ starred with Laddie Cliff , Betty Chester and Vera Pearce . Leap Year was set in South Africa , Australia and Canada , and was written to appeal to the tourists who were visiting London from the Commonwealth countries . Robey was much to their tastes , and his rendition of " My Old Dutch " helped the show achieve another long run of 421 performances . Sky High was next and opened at the London Palladium in March 1925 . The chorus dancer Marie Blanche was his co @-@ star , a partnership that caused the gossip columnists to comment on the performers ' alleged romance two years previously . Despite the rumours Blanche continued as his leading lady for the next four years , and Sky High lasted for 309 performances on the West End stage . 
 The year 1926 was lacking in variety entertainment , a fact largely attributed to the UK general strike that had occurred in May of that year . The strike was unexpected by Robey , who had signed the previous year to star in a series of variety dates for Moss Empires . The contract was lucrative , made more so by the comedian 's willingness to manage his own bookings . He took the show to the provinces under the title of Bits and Pieces and employed a company of 25 artists as well as engineers and support staff . Despite the economic hardships of Britain in 1926 , large numbers of people turned out to see the show . He returned to Birmingham , a city where he was held in great affection , and where he was sure the audiences would embrace his new show . However , censors demanded that he omit the provocative song " I Stopped , I Looked , I <unk> " and that he heavily edit the sketch " The Cheat " . The restrictions failed to dampen the audiences ' enthusiasm , and Bits and Pieces enjoyed rave reviews . It ran until Christmas and earned a six @-@ month extension . 
 In the spring of 1927 Robey embraced the opportunity to tour abroad , when he and his company took Bits and Pieces to South Africa , where it was received favourably . By the time he had left Cape Town , he had played to over 60 @,@ 000 people and had travelled in excess of 15 @,@ 000 miles . Upon his return to England in October , he took Bits and Pieces to Bradford . In August 1928 , Robey and his company travelled to Canada , where they played to packed audiences for three months . It was there that he produced a new revue , Between Ourselves , in Vancouver , which was staged especially for the country 's armed forces . The Canadians were enthusiastic about Robey ; he was awarded the freedom of the city in London , Ontario , made a chieftain of the Sarcee tribe , and was an honorary guest at a cricket match in Edmonton , Alberta . He described the tour as " one of unbroken happiness . " In the late 1920s Robey also wrote and starred in two Phonofilm sound @-@ on @-@ film productions , Safety First ( 1928 ) and Mrs. Mephistopheles ( 1929 ) . 
 In early 1929 Robey returned to South Africa and then Canada for another tour with Bits and Pieces , after which he started another series of variety dates back in England . Among the towns he visited was Woolwich , where he performed to packed audiences over the course of a week . Here he met the theatre managers Frank and Agnes Littler , with the latter briefly becoming his manager . In 1932 Robey appeared in his first sound film , The Temperance Fête , and followed this with Marry Me , which was , according to his biographer A. E. Wilson , one of the most successful musical films of the comedian 's career . The film tells the story of a sound recordist in a gramophone company who romances a colleague when she becomes the family housekeeper . 
 By the later months of 1932 , Robey had formed a romantic relationship with the <unk> ' daughter Blanche ( 1897 – 1981 ) , who then took over as his manager . The couple grew close during the filming of Don Quixote , a remake of the comedian 's 1923 success as Sancho Panza . Unlike its predecessor , Don Quixote had an ambitious script , big budget and an authentic foreign setting . Robey , however , resented having to grow a beard for the role and disliked the French climate and gruelling 12 @-@ week filming schedule . He refused to act out his character 's death scene in a farcical way and also objected to the lateness of the " dreadfully banal " scripts , which were often written the night before filming . 
 = = = = Venture into legitimate theatre = = = = 
 Until 1932 Robey had never played in legitimate theatre , although he read Shakespeare from an early age . That year he took the part of King Menelaus in Helen ! , which was an English @-@ language adaptation by A. P. Herbert of Offenbach 's operetta La belle Hélène . The show 's producer C. B. Cochran , a longstanding admirer of Robey , engaged a prestigious cast for the production , including Evelyn Laye and W. H. Berry , with choreography by Léonide Massine and sets by Oliver Messel . The operetta opened on 30 January 1932 , becoming the Adelphi Theatre 's most successful show of the year . The critic Harold Conway wrote that while Robey had reached the pinnacle of his career as a variety star , which only required him to rely on his " breezy , cheeky personality " , he had reservations about the comedian 's ability to " integrate himself with the other stars ... to learn many pages of dialogue , and to remember countless cues . " 
 After the run of Helen ! , Robey briefly resumed his commitments to the variety stage before signing a contract to appear at the Savoy Theatre as Bold Ben Blister in the operetta Jolly Roger , which premiered in March 1933 . The production had a run of bad luck , including an actors ' strike which was caused by Robey 's refusal to join the actors ' union Equity . The dispute was settled when he was included as a co @-@ producer of the show , thus excluding him as a full @-@ time actor . Robey made a substantial donation to the union , and the production went ahead . Despite its troubles , the show was a success and received much praise from the press . Harold Conway of the Daily Mail called the piece " one of the outstanding triumphs of personality witnessed in a London theatre " . Later that year , Robey completed his final autobiography , Looking Back on Life . The literary critic Graham Sutton admired Robey for his honest and frank account , and thought that he was " at his best when most personal " . 
 = = = = = Shakespearean roles = = = = = 
 According to Wilson , Robey revered Shakespeare and had an " excellent reading knowledge of the Bard " even though the comedian had never seen a Shakespeare play . As a child , he had committed to memory the " ghost " scene in Hamlet . Writing in 1933 , Cochran expressed the opinion that Robey had been a victim of a largely conservative and " snobbish " attitude from theatre managers , that the comedian was " cut out for Shakespeare " , and that if he had been frequently engaged in playing the Bard 's works , then " Shakespeare would probably have been popular . " In 1934 , the theatre director Sydney Carroll offered Robey the chance to appear as Nick Bottom in A Midsummer Night 's Dream at the Open Air Theatre , Regent 's Park , but he initially declined the offer , citing a hectic schedule , including a conflict with his appearance in that year 's Royal Variety Performance on 8 May . He was also concerned that he would not be taken seriously by legitimate theatre critics and knew that he would not be able to include a comic sketch or to engage in his customary resourceful gagging . In the same year , Robey starred in a film version of the hit musical Chu Chin Chow . The New York Times called him " a lovable and laughable Ali Baba " . 
 At the start of 1935 Robey accepted his first Shakespearean role , as Falstaff in Henry IV , Part 1 , which surprised the press and worried fans who thought that he might retire the Prime Minister of Mirth . The theatrical press were sceptical of a music hall performer taking on such a distinguished role ; Carroll , the play 's producer , vehemently defended his casting choice . Carroll later admitted taking a gamble on employing Robey but wrote that the comedian " has unlimited courage in challenging criticism and risking his reputation on a venture of this kind ; he takes both his past and his future in both hands and is faced with the alternative of dashing them into the depths or lifting them to a height hitherto <unk> of . " Carroll further opined that " [ Robey ] has never failed in anything he has undertaken . He is one of the most intelligent and capable of actors . " 
 Henry IV , Part I opened on 28 February at Her Majesty 's Theatre , and Robey proved himself to be a capable Shakespearean actor , though his Shakespearean debut was marred initially by an inability to remember his lines . A journalist from The Daily Express thought that Robey seemed uncomfortable , displayed a halting delivery and was " far from word perfect " . Writing in The Observer , the critic Ivor Brown said of Robey 's portrayal : " In no performance within my memory has the actor been more obviously the afflicted servant of his lines and more obviously the omnipotent master of the situation " . Another journalist , writing in the Daily Mirror , thought that Robey " gave 25 percent of Shakespeare and 75 percent of himself " . 
 In any case , such was Robey 's popularity in the role that the German theatre and film producer Max Reinhardt declared that , should the opportunity arise for a film version , the comedian would be his perfect choice as Falstaff . Cotes described Robey as having " a great vitality and immense command of the [ role ] . He never faltered , he had to take his audience by the throat and make them attentive at once because he couldn 't play himself in . " Although he was eager to be taken seriously as a legitimate actor , Robey provided a subtle nod in the direction of his comic career by using the wooden cane intended for the Prime Minister of Mirth for the majority of his scenes as Falstaff . The poet John Betjeman responded to the critics ' early scepticism : " Variety artistes are a separate world from the legitimate stage . They are separate too , from ballet , opera , and musical comedy . It is possible for variety artists to appear in all of these . Indeed , no one who saw will ever forget the superb pathos and humour of George Robey 's Falstaff " . Later , in 1935 , Blanche Littler persuaded Robey to accept Carroll 's earlier offer to play Bottom , and the comedian cancelled three weeks ' worth of dates . The press were complimentary of his performance , and he later attributed his success to Littler and her encouragement . 
 = = = Later career : 1936 – 50 = = = 
 = = = = Radio and television debut = = = = 
 Robey made his radio debut in 1936 when he was interviewed for The Spice of Life programme for the BBC . He spoke about his private life and his time spent on the music hall circuit , which he described as the " most enjoyable experience " of his life . The usually reserved Robey admitted that privately he was not a sociable person and that he often grew tired of his audiences while performing on stage , but that he got his biggest thrill from making others laugh . He also declared a love for the outdoors and mentioned that , to relax , he would draw " comic scribbles " of himself as the Prime Minister of Mirth , which he would occasionally give to fans . As a result of the interview he received more than a thousand fan letters from listeners . Wilson thought that Robey 's " perfect diction and intimate manner made him an ideal broadcast speaker " . The press commented favourably on his performance , with one reporter from Variety Life writing : " I doubt whether any speaker other than a stage idol could have used , as Robey did , the first person singular almost incessantly for half an hour without causing something akin to resentment . ... The comedian 's talk was brilliantly conceived and written . " 
 In the later months of 1936 , Robey repeated his radio success with a thirty @-@ minute programme entitled " Music @-@ Hall " , recorded for American audiences , to honour the tenth birthday of the National Broadcasting Corporation . In it , he presented a montage of his characterisations as well as impressions of other famous acts of the day . A second programme , which he recorded the following year , featured the comedian speaking fondly of cricket and of the many well @-@ known players whom he had met on his frequent visits to the Oval and Lord 's cricket grounds over his fifty @-@ year association . 
 In the summer of 1938 Robey appeared in the film A Girl Must Live , directed by Carol Reed , in which he played the role of Horace Blount . A report in the Kinematograph Weekly commented that the 69 @-@ year @-@ old comedian was still able to " stand up to the screen by day and variety by night . " A journalist for The Times opined that Robey 's performance as an elderly furrier , the love interest of both Margaret Lockwood and Lilli Palmer , was " a perfect study in bewildered embarrassment " . 
 Robey made his television debut in August 1938 but was <unk> with the medium and only made rare appearances . The BBC producer Grace Wyndham Goldie was dismayed at how little of his " comic quality " was conveyed on the small screen . Goldie thought that Robey 's comic abilities were not limited to his voice and depended largely on the relation between his facial expressions and his witty words . She felt that he should " be forbidden , by his own angel , if nobody else , to approach the ordinary microphone " . Nonetheless , Goldie remained optimistic about Robey 's future television career . The journalist L. Marsland Gander disagreed and thought that Robey 's methods were " really too slow for television " . 
 That November , and with his divorce from Ethel finalised , Robey married Blanche Littler , who was more than two decades his junior , at Marylebone Town Hall . At Christmas , he fractured three ribs and bruised his spine when he accidentally fell into the orchestra pit while appearing in the 1938 – 39 pantomime Robinson Crusoe in Birmingham . He attributed the fall to his face mask which gave him a limited view of the stage . The critic Harold Conway was less forgiving , blaming the accident on the comedian 's " lost self @-@ confidence " and opining that the accident was the start of Robey 's professional decline . 
 = = = = Second World War = = = = 
 Aware of demand for his act in Australia , Robey conducted a second tour of the country at the start of 1939 . While he was appearing at the Tivoli Theatre in Sydney , war broke out with Germany . Robey returned to England and concentrated his efforts on entertaining to raise money for the war effort . He signed up with the Entertainments National Service Association ( ENSA ) for whom he appeared in a wide range of shows and also in his own one @-@ man engagements . He would sometimes turn up unannounced to perform at hospitals , munition factories , airfields , anti @-@ aircraft posts and other venues where there was an audience of just a few people . 
 During the 1940s , Robey appeared predominantly in troop concerts as himself but caused controversy by jokingly supporting the Nazis and belittling black people during his act . His intentions were to gently poke fun at the " Little Englanders " , but audiences thought that he was sympathising with Nazism . His jocular view that a defeat for Hitler would mean a victory for <unk> was highlighted in a series of controversial interviews , which caused him much embarrassment when challenged and which he regretted afterwards . His views became known in the press as " <unk> " , which drew increasing criticism , but his Prime Minister of Mirth remained popular , and he used the character to divert the negative publicity . Cotes wrote that Robey was not a politician , merely a jingoist , who " lived long enough to feel [ that ] his little @-@ Englander outlook [ was causing him ] acute embarrassment , and his army of admirers deep dismay . " 
 Robey starred in the film Salute John Citizen in 1942 , directed by Maurice Elvey and co @-@ starring Edward Rigby and Stanley Holloway , about the effects that the war had on a normal British family . In a 1944 review of the film , Robey was described as being " convincing in [ an ] important role " but the film itself had " dull moments in the simple tale " . That Christmas , Robey travelled to Bristol , where he starred in the pantomime Robinson Crusoe . A further four films followed in 1943 , one of which promoted war propaganda while the other two displayed the popular medium of cine @-@ variety . Cine @-@ variety introduced Robey to the Astoria in Finsbury Park , London , a venue which was used to huge audiences and big @-@ name acts and was described as " a super @-@ cinema " . 
 During the early months of 1944 , Robey returned to the role of Falstaff when he appeared in the film version of Henry V , produced by Eagle @-@ Lion Films . The American film critic Bosley Crowther had mixed opinions of the film . Writing in The New York Times in 1946 , he thought that it showcased " a fine group of British film craftsmen and actors " , who contributed to " a stunningly brilliant and intriguing screen spectacle " . Despite that , he considered the film 's additional screenplay poor and called Falstaff 's deathbed scene " non @-@ essential and just a bit grotesque . " Late in 1944 , he appeared in Burnley in a show entitled Vive <unk> alongside Janice Hart and Frank O 'Brian . In 1945 , Robey starred in two minor film roles , as " Old Sam " in The Trojan Brothers , a short comedy film in which two actors experience various problems as a pantomime horse , and as " Vogel " in the musical romance Waltz Time . He spent 1947 touring England , while the following spring he undertook a provincial tour of Frederick Bowyer 's fairy play The Windmill Man , which he also co @-@ produced with his wife . 
 = = = Last years = = = 
 = = = = Decline in health = = = = 
 In June 1951 , now aged 81 , Robey starred in a midnight gala performance at the London Palladium in aid of the family of Sid Field who had died that year . For the finale , Robey performed " I Stopped , I Looked , I <unk> " and " If You Were the Only Girl in the World " ; the rest of the three @-@ hour performance featured celebrities from the radio , television and film mediums . The American comedian Danny Kaye , who was also engaged for the performance , called Robey a " great , great artist " . The same month , Robey returned to Birmingham , where he opened a garden party at St. Mary and St. Ambrose Church , a venue in which he had appeared at the beginning of his career . On 25 September he appeared for the BBC on an edition of the radio series Desert Island Discs for which he chose among others " Mondo <unk> " , Falstaff 's rueful complaint about the wicked world in Verdi 's opera Falstaff . For the rest of the year Robey made a number of personal appearances opening <unk> and attending charity events . 
 Robey took part in the Festival of Variety for the BBC in 1951 , which paid tribute to the British music hall . For his performance , he adopted an ad @-@ lib style rather than use a script . His wife sat at the side of the stage , ready to provide support should he need it . According to Wilson , Robey 's turn earned the loudest applause of the evening . The following month Robey undertook a long provincial tour in the variety show Do You Remember ? under the management of Bernard Delfont . After an evening 's performance in Sheffield , he was asked by a local newspaper reporter if he considered retiring . The comedian quipped : " Me retire ? Good gracious , I 'm too old for that . I could not think of starting a new career at my age ! " In December , he opened the Lansbury Lodge home for retired cricketers in Poplar , East London ; he considered the ceremony to be one of the " happiest memories of his life . " 
 By early 1952 , Robey was becoming noticeably frail , and he lost interest in many of his sporting pastimes . Instead , he stayed at home and drew comic sketches featuring the Prime Minister of Mirth . In May he filmed The Pickwick Papers , in which he played the role of old Tony Weller , a part which he had initially turned down on health grounds . The following year , and in aid of the games fund , he starred as Clown in a short pantomime at the Olympic Variety Show at the Victoria Palace Theatre . Organisers asked for him to appear in the Prime Minister of Mirth costume instead of the usual clown garb , a request the comedian was happy to fulfil . 
 = = = = Knighthood and death = = = = 
 In the early months of 1954 , Robey accepted a knighthood which was conferred on him by Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother at Buckingham Palace . During the following weeks , his health declined ; he became confined to a wheelchair and spent the majority of his time at home under the care of his wife . In May he opened a British Red Cross fete in Seaford , East Sussex , and , a month later , made his last public appearance , on television as a panellist in the English version of The Name 's the Same . Wilson called Robey 's performance " pathetic " and thought that he appeared with only " a hint of his old self " . By June he had become housebound and quietly celebrated his 85th birthday surrounded by family ; visiting friends were organised into appointments by his wife Blanche , but theatrical colleagues were barred in case they caused the comedian too much excitement . 
 Robey suffered a stroke on 20 November and remained in a semi @-@ coma for just over a week . He died on 29 November 1954 at his home in Saltdean , East Sussex , and was cremated at the Downs Crematorium in Brighton . Blanche continued to live on the Sussex coast until her death at the age of 83 in 1981 . 
 = = Tributes and legacy = = 
 News of Robey 's death prompted tributes from the press , who printed illustrations , anecdotes and reminders of his stage performances and charitable activities . " Knighthood notwithstanding , George Robey long ago made himself a place as an entertainer and artist of the people " , declared a reporter from the Daily Worker , while a critic for the Daily Mail wrote : " Personality has become a wildly misused word since his heyday , but George Robey breathed it in every pore . " In Robey 's obituary in The Spectator , Compton Mackenzie called the comedian " one of the last great figures of the late Victorian and Edwardian music @-@ hall . " 
 In December 1954 , a memorial service for Robey was held at St Paul 's Cathedral . The diverse congregation consisted of royalty , actors , hospital workers , stage personnel , students and taxi drivers , among others . The Bishop of Stepney , Joost de Blank , said : " We have lost a great English music hall artist , one of the greatest this country has known in the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries . " Performers gave readings at the service , including the comedian Leslie Henson , who called Robey " that great obstinate bullock of variety " . In his lifetime , Robey helped to earn more than £ 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 for charitable causes , with £ 500 @,@ 000 of that figure being raised during the First World War . In recognition of his efforts , the Merchant Seaman 's Convalescent Home in Limpsfield , Surrey , named a ward after him , and managerial staff at the Royal Sussex Hospital later bought a new dialysis machine in his memory . In the 1960s , a public house in Finsbury Park , North London , was named " The George Robey " . 
 Robey 's comic delivery influenced other comedians , but opinions of his effectiveness as a comic vary . The radio personality Robb Wilton acknowledged learning a lot from him , and although he felt that Robey " was not very funny " , he could time a comic situation perfectly . Similarly , the comedian Charlie Chester admitted that , as a comedian , Robey " still didn 't make me laugh , " although he described him as " a legend " whose Prime Minister of Mirth character used a beautiful make @-@ up design . Robey 's biographer Peter Cotes disagreed with these assessments , praising the comedian 's " droll like humour " and comparing it in greatness to Chaplin 's miming and <unk> 's clowning . Cotes wrote : " His Mayor , Professor of Music , Saracen , Dame Trot , Queen of Hearts , District Nurse , Pro 's Landlady , and of course his immortal Prime Minister , were all absurdities : rich , outsize in prim and pride , gloriously disapproving bureaucratic petty officialdom at its worst , best and funniest . " 
 Violet Loraine called her former co @-@ star " one of the greatest comedians the world has ever known " , while the theatrical producer Basil Dean opined that " George was a great artist , one of the last and [ sic ] the really big figures of his era . They don 't breed them like that now . " The actor John Gielgud , who remembered meeting Robey at the Alhambra Theatre in 1953 , called the comedian " charming , gracious [ and ] one of the few really great ones " of the music hall era . Upon his death , Robey 's costume for the Prime Minister of Mirth was donated to the London Museum , where it is on permanent display . 
 = Jack Parsons ( rocket engineer ) = 
 John Whiteside Parsons ( born Marvel Whiteside Parsons ; October 2 , 1914 – June 17 , 1952 ) , better known as Jack Parsons , was an American rocket engineer and rocket propulsion researcher , chemist , and Thelemite occultist . Associated with the California Institute of Technology ( Caltech ) , Parsons was one of the principal founders of both the Jet Propulsion Laboratory ( JPL ) and the Aerojet Engineering Corporation . He invented the first rocket engine using a castable , composite rocket propellant , and pioneered the advancement of both liquid @-@ fuel and solid @-@ fuel rockets . 
 Born in Los Angeles , California , Parsons was raised by a wealthy family on Orange Grove Avenue in Pasadena . Inspired by science fiction literature , he developed an interest in rocketry in his childhood and in 1928 began amateur rocket experiments with school friend Ed Forman . He dropped out of Pasadena Junior College and Stanford University due to financial difficulties during the Great Depression , but in 1934 he united with Forman and graduate student Frank Malina to form the Caltech @-@ affiliated GALCIT Rocket Research Group , supported by Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory chairman Theodore von Kármán . In 1939 the GALCIT Group gained funding from the National Academy of Sciences ( NAS ) to work on Jet @-@ Assisted Take Off ( JATO ) for the U.S. military . Following American entry into World War II , in 1942 they founded Aerojet to develop and sell their JATO technology , while the GALCIT Group became JPL in 1943 . 
 After a brief involvement with Marxism in 1939 , Parsons converted to Thelema , the English occultist Aleister Crowley 's new religious movement . In 1941 , alongside his first wife Helen Northrup , Parsons joined the Agape Lodge , the Californian branch of the Thelemite Ordo Templi Orientis ( O.T.O. ) . At Crowley 's bidding , he replaced Wilfred Talbot Smith as its leader in 1942 and ran the Lodge from his mansion on Orange Grove Avenue . Parsons was expelled from JPL and Aerojet in 1944 due to the Lodge 's infamy and allegedly illicit activities , along with his hazardous workplace conduct . In 1945 Parsons separated from Helen after having an affair with her sister Sara ; when Sara left him for L. Ron Hubbard , he conducted the Babalon Working , a series of rituals designed to invoke the Thelemic goddess Babalon to Earth . He and Hubbard continued the procedure with Marjorie Cameron , whom Parsons married in 1946 . After Hubbard and Sara defrauded him of his life savings , Parsons resigned from the O.T.O. and went through various jobs while acting as a consultant for the Israeli rocket program . Amid the climate of McCarthyism , he was accused of espionage and left unable to work in rocketry . In 1952 , Parsons died at the age of 37 in a home laboratory explosion that attracted national media attention ; the police ruled it an accident , but many associates suspected suicide or assassination . 
 Parsons ' occult and libertarian polemical writings were published posthumously , with Western esoteric and countercultural circles citing him as one of the most significant figures in propagating Thelema across North America . Although academic interest in his scientific career was originally negligible , in subsequent decades historians came to recognize Parsons ' contributions to rocket engineering . For these innovations , his advocacy of space exploration and human spaceflight , and his role in the founding of JPL and Aerojet , Parsons is regarded as among the most important figures in the history of the U.S. space program . He has been the subject of several biographies and fictionalized portrayals . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life : 1914 – 34 = = = 
 Marvel Whiteside Parsons was born on October 2 , 1914 , at the Good Samaritan Hospital in Los Angeles . His parents , Ruth Virginia Whiteside ( c . 1893 – 1952 ) and Marvel H. Parsons ( c . 1894 – 1947 ) , had moved to California from Massachusetts the previous year , purchasing a house on Scarf Street in downtown Los Angeles . Although their son was his father 's namesake , he was known in the household as Jack . Their marriage broke down soon after Jack 's birth , when Ruth discovered that his father had made numerous visits to a prostitute , and she filed for divorce in March 1915 . Parsons ' father returned to Massachusetts after being publicly exposed as an adulterer , with Ruth forbidding him from having any contact with Jack . Parsons ' father would later join the armed forces , reaching the rank of major , and marry a woman with whom he had a son named Charles — a half @-@ brother whom Jack would only meet once . Although she retained her ex @-@ husband 's surname , Ruth started calling her son John ; many friends throughout his life knew him as Jack . Ruth 's parents Walter and Carrie Whiteside moved to California to be with Jack and their daughter , using their wealth to buy an up @-@ market house on Orange Grove Avenue in Pasadena — known locally as " Millionaire 's Mile " — where they could live together . Jack was surrounded by domestic servants . Having few friends , he lived a solitary childhood and spent much time reading ; he took a particular interest in works of mythology , Arthurian legend , and the Arabian Nights . Through the works of Jules Verne he became interested in science fiction and a keen reader of pulp magazines like Amazing Stories , which led to his early interest in rocketry . 
 At age twelve , Parsons began attending Washington Junior High School , where he performed poorly — something biographer George Pendle attributed to undiagnosed dyslexia — and was bullied for his upper @-@ class status and perceived effeminacy . Although unpopular , he formed a strong friendship with Edward Forman , a boy from a poor working class family who defended him from bullies and shared his interest in science fiction and rocketry , with the well @-@ read Parsons enthralling Forman with his literary prowess . In 1928 the pair — adopting the Latin motto per aspera ad astra ( through hardship to the stars ) — began engaging in homemade gunpowder @-@ based rocket experiments in the nearby Arroyo Seco canyon , as well as the Parsons family 's back garden , which left it pockmarked with craters from explosive test failures . They incorporated commonly available fireworks such as cherry bombs into their rockets , and Parsons suggested using glue as a binding agent to reduce the rocket fuel 's volatility . This research became more complex when they began using materials such as aluminium foil to enhance the <unk> of the gunpowder . Parsons had also begun to investigate occultism , and performed a ritual intended to invoke the Devil into his bedroom ; he worried that the invocation was successful and was frightened into ceasing these activities . In 1929 he began attending John Muir High School , where he maintained an insular friendship with Forman and was a keen participant in the sports of fencing and archery . After receiving poor school results , Parsons ' mother sent him away to study at a private boarding school in San Diego — the Brown Military Academy for Boys — but he was expelled for blowing up the toilets . 
 The Parsons family spent the summer of 1929 on a tour of Europe before returning to Pasadena , where they moved into a house on San Rafael Avenue . With the onset of the Great Depression their fortune began to dwindle , and in July 1931 Jack 's grandfather Walter died . Parsons began studying at the privately run University School , a liberal institution that took an unconventional approach to teaching . He flourished academically , becoming editor of the school 's newspaper El <unk> and winning an award for literary excellence , while teachers that had trained at the nearby California Institute of Technology ( Caltech ) honed his attentions on the study of chemistry . With the family 's financial difficulties deepening , Parsons began working during weekends and school holidays at the offices of the Hercules Powder Company , where he learned more about explosives and their potential use in rocket propulsion . He and Forman continued to independently explore the subject in their spare time , building and testing different rockets — sometimes with materials that Parsons had stolen from work . Parsons soon constructed a solid @-@ fuel rocket engine , and with Forman corresponded with pioneer rocket engineers including Robert H. Goddard , Hermann Oberth and Konstantin Tsiolkovsky , and Germans Willy Ley and Wernher von Braun . Parsons and von Braun had hours of telephone conversations about rocketry in their respective countries as well as their own research . 
 Graduating from University School in the summer of 1933 , Parsons moved with his mother and grandmother to a more modest house on St. John Avenue , where he continued to pursue his interests in literature and poetry . In the autumn he enrolled in Pasadena Junior College with the hope of earning an associate degree in physics and chemistry , but dropped out after only a term because of his financial situation and he took up permanent employment at the Hercules Powder Company . His employers then sent him to work at their manufacturing plant in <unk> on San Francisco Bay , where he earned a relatively high wage of $ 100 a month ; however , he was plagued by headaches caused by exposure to nitroglycerin . He saved money in the hope of continuing his academic studies and began a degree in chemistry at Stanford University , but again found the tuition fees unaffordable and returned to Pasadena . 
 = = = GALCIT Rocket Research Group and the Kynette trial : 1934 – 38 = = = 
 In the hope of gaining access to the state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art resources of Caltech to use in their rocketry research , Parsons and Forman attended a lecture on the work of Austrian rocket engineer Eugen <unk> and hypothetical above @-@ stratospheric aircraft by the institute 's William <unk> — a PhD student specializing in rocket @-@ powered aircraft — and approached him to express their interest in designing a liquid @-@ fuel rocket motor . <unk> redirected them to another PhD student named Frank Malina , a mathematician and mechanical engineer composing a thesis on rocket propulsion who shared their interests and soon befriended the pair . Parsons , Forman , and Malina applied for funding from Caltech together ; they did not mention that their ultimate objective was to develop rockets for space exploration , realizing that most of the scientific establishment then relegated such ideas to science fiction . While Caltech 's Clark Blanchard Millikan immediately rebuffed them , Malina 's doctoral advisor Theodore von Kármán saw more promise in their proposal and agreed to allow them to operate under the auspices of the university 's Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory ( GALCIT ) . Naming themselves the GALCIT Rocket Research Group , they gained access to Caltech 's specialist equipment , though the economics of the Great Depression left von Kármán unable to finance them . 
 The trio focused their distinct skills on collaborative rocket development ; Parsons was the chemist , Forman the machinist , and Malina the technical theoretician . Malina wrote in 1968 that the self @-@ educated Parsons " lacked the discipline of a formal higher education , [ and ] had an uninhibited and fruitful imagination . " The informally trained Parsons and Forman who , as described by Geoffrey A. Landis , " were eager to try whatever idea happened to spring to mind " , contrasted with the approach of Malina , who insisted on the need for scientific discipline as informed by von Kármán . Landis writes that their creativity , however , " kept Malina focused toward building actual rocket engines , not just solving equations on paper " . Sharing socialist values , they operated on an egalitarian basis ; Malina taught the others about scientific procedure and they taught him about the practical elements of rocketry . They often socialized , smoking marijuana and drinking , while Malina and Parsons set about writing a <unk> science fiction screenplay they planned to pitch to Hollywood with strong anti @-@ capitalist and pacifist themes . 
 Parsons had met Helen Northup at a local church dance and proposed marriage in July 1934 . She accepted and they were married in April 1935 at the Little Church of the Flowers in Forest Lane Memorial Park , Glendale , before undertaking a brief honeymoon in San Diego . They moved into a house on South Terrace Drive , Pasadena , while Parsons gained employment for the explosives manufacturer Halifax Powder Company at their facility in Saugus . Much to Helen 's dismay , Parsons spent most of his wages funding the GALCIT Rocket Research Group . For extra money he manufactured nitroglycerin in their home , constructing a home laboratory on their front porch , and at one point he pawned Helen 's engagement ring and would often ask her family for loans . 
 Malina recounted that " Parsons and Forman were not too pleased with an austere program that did not include at least the launching of model rockets " , but the Group reached the consensus of developing a working static rocket @-@ motor before embarking on more complex research . They contacted liquid @-@ fuel rocket pioneer Robert H. Goddard and he invited Malina to his facility in Roswell , New Mexico , but he was not interested in cooperating — reticent about sharing his research and having been subjected to widespread derision for his work in rocketry . They were instead joined by Caltech graduate students Apollo M. O. " Amo " Smith , Carlos C. Wood , Mark Muir Mills , Fred S. Miller , William C. Rockefeller , and Rudolph Schott ; Schott was relied upon for the use of his pickup truck to transport equipment . Their first liquid @-@ fuel motor test took place near the Devil 's Gate Dam in the Arroyo Seco on Halloween 1936 . Parsons ' biographer John Carter described the layout of the contraption as showing 
 oxygen flowing from one side , with methyl alcohol ( the fuel ) and nitrogen flowing from the other side . Water cooled the rocket during the burn . Thrust pulled down a spring which measured force . The deflection of the spring measured the force applied to it . A small diamond tip on the apparatus scratched a glass plate to mark the furthest point of deflection . The rocket and mount were protected by sandbags , with the tanks ( and the experimenters ) well away from it . 
 Three attempts to fire the rocket failed ; on the fourth the oxygen line was accidentally ignited and perilously billowed fire at the Group , but they viewed this experience as formative . They continued their experiments throughout the final quarter of 1936 ; after the final test was successfully completed in January 1937 von Kármán agreed that they could perform their future experiments at an exclusive rocket testing facility on campus . 
 In April 1937 Caltech mathematician Qian Xuesen ( a Chinese citizen ) joined the Group . Several months later Weld Arnold , a Caltech laboratory assistant who worked as the Group 's official photographer , also joined . The main reason for Arnold 's appointment to this position was his provision of a donation to the Group on behalf of an anonymous benefactor whose identity was never revealed . They became well known on campus , earning the moniker of the " Suicide Squad " for the dangerous nature of some of their experiments and attracting attention from the local press . Parsons himself gained further media publicity when he appeared as an expert explosives witness in the trial of Captain Earl Kynette , the head of police intelligence in Los Angeles who was accused of conspiring to set a car bomb in the attempted murder of private investigator Harry Raymond , a former LAPD detective who was fired after whistleblowing against police corruption . When Kynette was convicted largely on Parsons ' testimony , which included his forensic reconstruction of the car bomb and its explosion , his identity as an expert scientist in the public eye was established despite his lack of a university education . While working at Caltech , Parsons was admitted to evening courses in chemistry at the University of Southern California ( USC ) , but distracted by his GALCIT workload he attended sporadically and received unexceptional grades . 
 By early 1938 the Group had made their static rocket motor , which originally burned for three seconds , run for over a minute . In May that year , Parsons was invited by Forrest J Ackerman to lecture on his rocketry work at Chapter Number 4 of the Los Angeles Science Fiction League ( <unk> ) . Although he never joined the society , he occasionally attended their talks , on one occasion conversing with a teenage Ray Bradbury . Another scientist to become involved in the GALCIT project was Sidney Weinbaum , a Jewish refugee from Europe who was a vocal Marxist ; he led Parsons , Malina , and Qian in their creation of a largely secretive communist discussion group at Caltech , which became known as Professional Unit 122 of the Pasadena Communist Party . Although Parsons subscribed to the People 's Daily World and joined the American Civil Liberties Union ( ACLU ) , he refused to join the American Communist Party , causing a break in his and Weinbaum 's friendship . This coupled with the need to focus on paid employment led to the disintegration of much of the Rocket Research Group , leaving only its three founding members by late 1938 . 
 = = = Embracing Thelema ; advancing JATO and foundation of Aerojet : 1939 – 42 = = = 
 In January 1939 John and Frances Baxter , a brother and sister who had befriended Jack and Helen Parsons , took Jack to the Church of Thelema in Winona Boulevard , Hollywood , where he witnessed the performance of The Gnostic Mass . Notable attendees of the church had included Hollywood actor John Carradine and gay rights activist Harry Hay . Parsons was intrigued , having already heard of Thelema 's founder and Outer Head of the Ordo Templi Orientis ( O.T.O. ) , Aleister Crowley , after reading a copy of Crowley 's text <unk> om Pax ( 1907 ) . 
 Parsons was introduced to leading members Regina Kahl , Jane Wolfe , and Wilfred Talbot Smith at the mass . Feeling both " repulsion and attraction " for Smith , Parsons continued to sporadically attend the Church 's events for a year . He continued to read Crowley 's works , which increasingly interested him , and encouraged Helen to read them . Parsons came to believe in the reality of magic — or magick in Thelemic terms — as a force that could be explained through quantum physics . He tried to interest his friends and acquaintances in Thelema , taking science fiction writers Jack Williamson and Cleve Cartmill to a performance of The Gnostic Mass . Although they were unimpressed , Parsons was more successful with Grady Louis McMurtry , a young Caltech student whom he had befriended , as well as McMurtry 's fiancée Claire Palmer , and Helen 's sister Sara " Betty " Northrup . 
 Jack and Helen were initiated into the Agape Lodge , the renamed Church of Thelema , in February 1941 . Parsons adopted the Thelemic motto of Thelema <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , a Latin mistranslation of " The establishment of Thelema through the rituals of love " . The initials of this motto spelled out <unk> , also serving as the declaration " To Pan " . Commenting on Parsons ' errors of translation , in jest Crowley said that " the motto which you mention is couched in a language beyond my powers of understanding " . Parsons also adopted the Thelemic title Frater <unk> — with <unk> represented in Kabbalistic numerology as 210 — the name with which he frequently signed letters to occult associates — while Helen became known as Soror <unk> . Smith wrote to Crowley claiming that Parsons was " a really excellent man ... He has an excellent mind and much better intellect than myself ... JP is going to be very valuable " . Wolfe wrote to German O.T.O. representative Karl Germer that Parsons was " an A1 man ... <unk> in attainment as a matter of fact " , and mooted Parsons as a potential successor to Crowley himself as Outer Head of the Order . Crowley concurred with such assessments , informing Smith that Parsons " is the most valued member of the whole Order , with no exception ! " 
 At von Kármán 's suggestion , Malina approached the National Academy of Sciences ( NAS ) Committee on Army Air Corps Research to request funding for research into what they referred to as " jet propulsion " , a term chosen to avoid the stigma attached to rocketry . The military were interested in jet propulsion as a means of getting aircraft quickly airborne where there was insufficient room for a full @-@ length runway , and gave the Rocket Research Group $ 1 @,@ 000 to put together a proposal on the feasibility of Jet @-@ Assisted Take Off ( JATO ) by June 1939 , making Parsons et al. the first U.S. government @-@ sanctioned rocket research group . Since their formation in 1934 , they had also performed experiments involving model , black powder motor @-@ propelled multistage rockets . In a research paper submitted to the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics ( AIAA ) , Parsons reported these rockets reaching velocities of 4 @,@ 875 miles per hour , thereby demonstrating the potential of solid fuels as being significantly more effective than liquid types primarily preferred by researchers such as Goddard . In light of this progress , Caltech and the GALCIT Group received an additional $ 10 @,@ 000 rocketry research grant from the AIAA . 
 Although a quarter of their funding went on repairing damage to Caltech buildings caused by their experiments , in June 1940 they submitted a report to the NAS in which they showed the feasibility of the project for the development of JATO and requested $ 100 @,@ 000 to continue ; however , they only received $ 22 @,@ 000 . Now known as GALCIT Project Number 1 , they continued to be ostracized by other Caltech scientists who grew increasingly irritated by their accidents and noise pollution , and were made to relocate their experiments back to the Arroyo Seco , at a site with unventilated , corrugated iron sheds that served as both research facilities and administrative offices . It was here that JPL would be founded . Parsons and Forman 's rocket experiments were the cover story of the August 1940 edition of Popular Mechanics , in which the pair discussed the prospect of rockets being able to ascend above Earth 's atmosphere and orbit around it for research purposes , as well as reaching the Moon . 
 For the JATO project , they were joined by Caltech mathematician Martin Summerfield and 18 workers supplied by the Works Progress Administration . Former colleagues like Qian were prevented from returning to the project by the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) , who ensured the secrecy of the operation and restricted the involvement of foreign nationals and political extremists . The FBI was satisfied that Parsons was not a Marxist but were concerned when Thelemite friend Paul Seckler used Parsons ' gun in a drunken car hijacking , for which Seckler was imprisoned in San Quentin State Prison for two years . Englishman George Emerson replaced Arnold as the Group 's official photographer . 
 The Group 's aim was to find a replacement for black @-@ powder rocket motors — units consisting of charcoal , sulphur and potassium nitrate with <unk> as a binding agent — the volatility of which frequently resulted in explosions damaging military aircraft . The solid JATO fuel invented by Parsons consisted of amide , corn starch , and ammonium nitrate bound together in the JATO unit with glue and blotting paper . It was codenamed GALCIT @-@ 27 , implying the previous invention of 26 new fuels . The first JATO tests using an Ercoupe plane took place in late July 1941 ; though effectively aiding propulsion , the units frequently exploded and damaged the aircraft . Parsons theorized that this was because the ammonium nitrate became dangerously combustible following overnight storage , during which temperature and consistency changes had resulted in a chemical imbalance . Parsons and Malina accordingly devised a method in which they would fill the JATOs with the fuel in the early mornings shortly before the tests , enduring sleep deprivation to do so . On August 21 , 1941 , Navy Captain Homer J. <unk> , Jr . — watched by such figures as Clark Millikan and William F. Durand — piloted the JATO @-@ equipped Ercoupe at the March Air Force Base in Moreno Valley , California . It proved a success and reduced takeoff distance by 30 % , but one of the JATOs partially exploded . Over the following weeks 62 further tests took place , and the NAS increased their grant to $ 125 @,@ 000 . During a series of static experiments , an exploding JATO did significant damage to the fuselage in the Ercoupe 's tail ; one observer optimistically noted that " at least it wasn 't a big hole " , but necessary repairs delayed their efforts . 
 The military ordered a flight test using liquid fuel rather than the pre @-@ existing solid fuel in early 1942 . Upon the United States ' entry into the Second World War in December 1941 , the Group realized they could be drafted directly into military service if they failed to provide viable JATO technology for the military . Informed by their left @-@ wing politics , aiding the war effort against Nazi Germany and the Axis powers was as much of a moral vocation to Parsons , Forman and Malina as it was a practical one . Parsons , Summerfield and the GALCIT workers focused on the task and found success with a combination of gasoline with red fuming nitric acid as its oxidizer — with the latter , suggested by Parsons , proving to be an effective substitute for liquid oxygen . The testing of this fuel resulted in another calamity , however , when the testing rocket motor exploded ; the fire , containing iron shed fragments and shrapnel inexplicably left the experimenters unscathed . Malina solved the problem by replacing the gasoline with aniline , resulting in a successful test launch of a JATO @-@ equipped A @-@ 20A plane at the Mura Auxiliary Air Field in the Mojave Desert . Providing a thrust five times more powerful than GALCIT @-@ 27 , and again reducing takeoff distance by 30 % , Malina wrote to his parents that " We now have something that really works and we should be able to help give the Fascists hell ! " 
 The Group then agreed to produce and sell 60 JATO engines to the United States Army Air Corps . To do so they formed the Aerojet Engineering Corporation in March 1942 , into which Parsons , Forman , Malina , von Kármán , and Summerfield each invested $ 250 , opening their offices on Colorado Boulevard and bringing in Amo Smith as their engineer . Andrew G. Haley was recruited by von Kármán as their lawyer and treasurer . Although Aerojet was a for @-@ profit operation that provided technology for military means , the founders ' mentality was rooted in the ideal of using rockets for peaceful space exploration . As Haley recounted von Kármán requesting : " we will make the rockets — you must make the corporation and obtain the money . Later on you will have to see that we all behave well in outer space . " 
 Despite these successes , Parsons — project engineer of Aerojet 's Solid Fuel Department — remained motivated to address the malfunctions observed during the Ercoupe tests . In June 1942 — assisted by Mills and Miller — he focused his attention on developing an effective method of restricted burning when using solid rocket fuel , as the military demanded JATOs that could provide over 100 pounds of thrust without any risk of exploding . Although solid fuels such as GALCIT @-@ 27 were less volatile than their liquid counterparts , they were disfavored for military JATO use as they provided less immediate thrust and did not have the versatility of being turned on and off mid @-@ flight . Parsons tried to resolve GALCIT @-@ 27 's volatility issue with <unk> @-@ 46 , which replaced the former 's ammonium nitrate with guanidine nitrate . To avoid the problems seen with ammonium nitrate , he had GALCIT @-@ 46 supercooled and then superheated prior to testing . When it failed the test , he realized that the fuel 's binding black powders rather than the oxidizers which had resulted in their volatility , and in June that year had the idea of using <unk> asphalt as an appropriate binding agent with potassium perchlorate as its oxidizer . 
 Malina recounted that Parsons was inspired to use asphalt by the ancient incendiary weapon Greek fire , while in a 1982 talk for the International Association of Astronomical Artists Captain <unk> stated that Parsons experienced an epiphany after watching manual workers using molten asphalt to fix tiles onto a roof . Known as GALCIT @-@ 53 , this fuel proved to be significantly less volatile than the Group 's earlier concoctions , fulfilling Parsons ' aim of creating a restricted @-@ burn rocket fuel inside a castable container , and providing a thrust 427 % more powerful than that of GALCIT @-@ 27 . This set a precedent which according to his biographer John Carter " changed the future of rocket technology " : the thermoplastic asphalt casting — durable in all climates — allowing for mass @-@ production and indefinite storage of the Group 's invention and transforming solid @-@ fuel agents into a safe and viable form of rocket propulsion . <unk> variants of Parsons ' solid @-@ fuel design — invented by JPL 's Charles Bartley — were later used by NASA in Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Boosters and by the Strategic Air Command in Polaris , Poseidon and Minuteman intercontinental ballistic missiles . 
 = = = Foundation of JPL and leading the Agape Lodge : 1942 – 44 = = = 
 Aerojet 's first two contracts were from the U.S. Navy ; the Bureau of Aeronautics requested a solid @-@ fuel JATO and the Wilbur Wright Field requested a liquid @-@ fuel unit . The Air Corps had requested two thousand JATOs from Aerojet by late 1943 , committing $ 256 @,@ 000 toward Parsons ' solid @-@ fuel type . Despite this drastically increased turnover , the company continued to operate informally and remained intertwined with the GALCIT project . Caltech astronomer Fritz Zwicky was brought in as head of the company 's research department , and Haley replaced von Kármán as Aerojet chairman and imposed payroll cuts instead of reducing JATO output ; the alternative was to cut staff numbers while maintaining more generous salaries , but Haley 's priority was Aerojet 's contribution to the war effort . However , company heads including Parsons were exempted from this austerity , drawing the ire of many personnel . 
 Parsons ' newfound credentials and financial security gave him the opportunity to travel more widely throughout the U.S. as an ambassador for Aerojet , meeting with other rocket enthusiasts . In New York he met with Karl Germer , the head of the O.T.O. in North America and in Washington , D.C. he met Poet Laureate Joseph Auslander , donating some of Crowley 's poetry books to the Library of Congress . He also became a regular at the <unk> Literary Society , which met in Laurel Canyon at the home of Parsons ' friend Robert A. Heinlein and included science fiction writers including Cleve Cartmill , Jack Williamson , and Anthony Boucher . Among Parsons ' favorite works of fiction was Williamson 's Darker Than You Think , a novelette published in the fantasy magazine Unknown in 1940 , which inspired his later occult workings . Boucher used Parsons as a partial basis for the character of Hugo <unk> in his murder mystery Rocket to the Morgue ( 1942 ) . 
 Helen went away for a period in June 1941 , during which Parsons , encouraged to do so by the sexually permissive attitude of the O.T.O. , began a sexual relationship with her 17 @-@ year @-@ old sister , Sara . Upon Helen 's return , Sara asserted that she was Parsons ' new wife , and Parsons himself admitted that he found Sara more sexually attractive than Helen . <unk> in her feelings , Helen sought comfort in Smith and began a relationship with him that would last for the rest of his life ; the four remained friends . The two couples , along with a number of other Thelemites ( some of whom with their children ) , relocated to 1003 South Orange Grove Avenue , an American Craftsman @-@ style mansion . They all contributed to the rent of $ 100 a month and lived communally in what replaced Winona Boulevard as the new base of the Agape Lodge , maintaining an allotment and slaughtering their own livestock for meat as well as blood rituals . Parsons decorated his new room with a copy of the Stele of Revealing , a statue of Pan , and his collection of swords and daggers . He converted the garage and laundry room into a chemical laboratory and often held science fiction discussion meetings in the kitchen , and entertained the children with hunts for fairies in the 25 acre garden . 
 Although there were arguments among the commune members , Parsons remained dedicated to Thelema . He gave almost all of his salary to the O.T.O. while actively seeking out new members — including Forman — and financially supported Crowley in London through Germer . Parsons ' enthusiasm for the Lodge quickly began to impact on his professional life . He frequently appeared at Aerojet hungover and sleep deprived from late nights of Lodge activities , and invited many of his colleagues to them , drawing the ire of staff who previously tolerated Parsons ' occultism as harmless eccentricity ; known to von Kármán as a " delightful screwball " , he was frequently observed reciting Crowley 's poem " Hymn to Pan " in an ecstatic manner compared to the preaching of Billy Graham during rocket tests — and on request at parties to their great amusement . However , they disapproved of his hesitancy to separate his vocations ; Parsons became more rigorously engaged in Aerojet 's day @-@ to @-@ day business in an effort to resolve this weariness , but the Agape Lodge soon came under investigation by both the Pasadena Police Department and the FBI . Both had received allegations of a " black magic cult " involved in sexual orgies ; one complainant was a 16 @-@ year @-@ old boy who claimed that he was raped by lodge members , while neighbors reported a ritual involving a naked pregnant woman jumping through fire . After Parsons explained that the Lodge was simply " an organization dedicated to religious and philosophical speculation " , neither agency found evidence of illegal activity and came to the conclusion that the Lodge constituted no threat to national security . Having been a long @-@ term heavy @-@ user of alcohol and marijuana , Parsons now habitually used cocaine , amphetamines , peyote , mescaline and opiates as well . He continued to have sexual relations with multiple women , including McMurtry 's fiancee Claire . When Parsons paid for Claire to have an abortion , McMurtry was angered and their friendship broke down . 
 Crowley and Germer wanted to see Smith removed as head of the Agape Lodge , believing that he had become a bad influence on its members . Parsons and Helen wrote to them to defend their mentor but Germer nevertheless ordered him to stand down and Parsons was appointed as temporary head of the Lodge . Some veteran Lodge members disliked Parsons ' influence , concerned that it encouraged excessive sexual polyandry that was religiously detrimental , but his charismatic orations at Lodge meetings assured his popularity among the majority of followers . Parsons soon created the Thelemite journal <unk> , in which he published his own poetry , but Crowley was unimpressed — particularly due to Parsons ' descriptions of drug use — and the project was soon shelved . Helen gave birth to Smith 's son in April ; the child was named <unk> Lanval Parsons . Smith and Helen left with <unk> for a two @-@ room cabin in Rainbow Valley in May . Concurrently in England , Crowley undertook an astrological analysis of Smith 's birth chart and came to the conclusion that Smith was the incarnation of a god , greatly altering his estimation of him . Smith remained skeptical as Crowley 's analysis was seemingly deliberately devised in Parsons ' favor , encouraging Smith to step down from his role in the Agape Lodge and instructing him to take a meditative retreat . Refusing to take orders from Germer anymore , Smith resigned from the O.T.O. Parsons — who remained sympathetic and friendly to Smith during the conflict and was weary of Crowley 's " appalling egotism , bad taste , bad judgement , and <unk> " — ceased lodge activities and resigned as its head , but withdrew his resignation after receiving a pacifying letter from Crowley . 
 By the summer of 1943 Aerojet was operating on a budget of $ 650 @,@ 000 . The same year Parsons and von Kármán traveled to Norfolk , Virginia to consult on a new JATO contract for the U.S. Navy on the invitation of Secretary of the Navy Frank Knox . Though JATOs were being mass @-@ produced for military applications , JATO @-@ propelled aircraft could not " keep up " with larger , bomber planes taking off from long aircraft carrier runways — which made Aerojet 's industry at risk of becoming defunct . Parsons demonstrated the efficacy of the newer JATOs to solve this issue by equipping a Grumman plane with solid @-@ fuel units ; its assisted takeoff from the USS Charger was successful , but produced smoke containing a noxious , yellow @-@ colored residue . The Navy guaranteed Parsons a contract on the condition that this residue was removed ; this led to the invention of Aeroplex , a technology for smokeless vapor trails developed at Aerojet by Parsons . 
 As the U.S. became aware that Nazi Germany had developed the V @-@ 2 rocket , the military — following recommendations from von Kármán based upon research using British intelligence — placed a renewed impetus on its own rocket research , reinstating Qian to the GALCIT project . They gave the Group a $ 3 million grant to develop rocket @-@ based weapons , and the Group was expanded and renamed the Jet Propulsion Laboratory ( JPL ) . By this point the Navy were ordering 20 @,@ 000 JATOs a month from Aerojet , and in December 1944 Haley negotiated for the company to sell 51 % of its stock to the General Tire and Rubber Company to cope with the increased demand . However , Aerojet 's Caltech @-@ linked employees — including Zwicky , Malina and Summerfield — would only agree to the sale on the condition that Parsons and Forman were removed from the company , viewing their occult activities as disreputable . JPL historian Erik M. Conway also attributes Parsons ' expulsion to more practical concerns : he " still wanted to work in the same way as he 'd done in his backyard , instinctive and without regard for safety " . Parsons and Forman were unfazed , informing Haley of their prediction that the rocket industry would become obsolete in the postwar age and seeing more financial incentive in starting a chain of <unk> . Haley persuaded them to sell their stock , resulting in Parsons leaving the company with $ 11 @,@ 000 . With this money he bought the lease to 1003 , which had come to be known as " the Parsonage " after him . 
 = = = L. Ron Hubbard and the Babalon Working : 1945 – 46 = = = 
 Now disassociated from JPL and Aerojet , Parsons and Forman founded the Ad Astra Engineering Company , under which Parsons founded the chemical manufacturing Vulcan Powder Company . Ad Astra was subject to an FBI investigation under suspicion of espionage when security agents from the Manhattan Project discovered that Parsons and Forman had procured a chemical used in a top secret project for a material known only as x @-@ metal , but they were later acquitted of any wrongdoing . Parsons continued to financially support Smith and Helen , although he asked for a divorce from her and ignored Crowley 's commands by welcoming Smith back to the Parsonage when his retreat was finished . Parsons continued to hold O.T.O. activities at the Parsonage but began renting rooms at the house to non @-@ Thelemites , including journalist <unk> Himmel , Manhattan Project physicist Robert Cornog , and science fiction artist Louis Goldstone . Parsons attracted controversy in Pasadena for his preferred clientele . Parsonage resident Alva Rogers recalled in a 1962 article for an occultist fanzine : " In the ads placed in the local paper Jack specified that only bohemians , artists , musicians , atheists , anarchists , or any other exotic types need to apply for rooms — any mundane soul would be unceremoniously rejected " . 
 Science fiction writer and U.S. Navy officer L. Ron Hubbard soon moved in to the Parsonage ; he and Parsons became close friends . Parsons wrote to Crowley that although Hubbard had " no formal training in Magick he has an extraordinary amount of experience and understanding in the field . From some of his experiences I deduce he is direct touch with some higher intelligence , possibly his Guardian Angel . ... He is the most Thelemic person I have ever met and is in complete accord with our own principles . " 
 Although Parsons and Sara were in an open relationship encouraged by the O.T.O. ' s polyandrous sexual ethics , she became enamored with Hubbard ; Parsons , despite attempting to repress his passions , became intensely jealous . Motivated to find a new partner through occult means , Parsons began to devote his energies to conducting black magic , causing concern among fellow O.T.O. members who believed that it was invoking troublesome spirits into the Parsonage ; Jane Wolfe wrote to Crowley that " our own Jack is enamored with Witchcraft , the <unk> , voodoo . From the start he always wanted to evoke something — no matter what , I am inclined to think , as long as he got a result . " He claimed to the residents that he was imbuing statues in the house with a magical energy in order to sell them to fellow occultists . Parsons reported paranormal events in the house resulting from the rituals ; including poltergeist activity , sightings of orbs and ghostly apparitions , alchemical ( <unk> ) effect on the weather , and disembodied voices . Pendle suggested that Parsons was particularly susceptible to these interpretations and attributed the voices to a prank by Hubbard and Sara . One ritual allegedly brought screaming banshees to the windows of the Parsonage , an incident that disturbed Forman for the rest of his life . In December 1945 Parsons began a series of rituals based on Enochian magic during which he masturbated onto magical tablets , accompanied by Sergei Prokofiev 's Second Violin Concerto and using his own semen and blood for this purpose . Describing this magical operation as the Babalon Working , he hoped to bring about the incarnation of Thelemite goddess Babalon onto Earth . He allowed Hubbard to take part as his " scribe " , believing that he was particularly sensitive to detecting magical phenomena . As described by Richard Metzger , " Parsons jerked off in the name of spiritual advancement " while Hubbard " scanned the astral plane for signs and visions . " 
 Their final ritual took place in the Mojave Desert in late February 1946 , during which Parsons abruptly decided that his undertaking was complete . On returning to the Parsonage he discovered that a woman named Marjorie Cameron — an unemployed illustrator and former Navy WAVE — had come to visit . Believing her to be the " elemental " woman and manifestation of Babalon that he had invoked , in early March Parsons began performing sex magic rituals with Cameron , who acted as his " Scarlet Woman " , while Hubbard continued to participate as the amanuensis . Unlike the rest of the household , Cameron knew nothing at first of Parsons ' magical intentions : " I didn 't know anything about the O.T.O. , I didn 't know that they had invoked me , I didn 't know anything , but the whole house knew it . Everybody was watching to see what was going on . " Despite this ignorance and her skepticism about Parsons ' magic , Cameron reported her sighting of a UFO to Parsons , who secretly recorded the sighting as a materialization of Babalon . 
 Inspired by Crowley 's novel Moonchild ( 1917 ) , Parsons and Hubbard aimed to magically fertilize a " magical child " through immaculate conception , which when born to a woman somewhere on Earth nine months following the working 's completion would become the Thelemic messiah embodying Babalon . To quote Metzger , the purpose of the Babalon Working was " a daring attempt to shatter the boundaries of space and time " facilitating , according to Parsons , the emergence of Thelema 's Æon of Horus . When Cameron departed for a trip to New York , Parsons retreated to the desert , where he believed that a preternatural entity <unk> provided him with Liber 49 , which represented a fourth part of Crowley 's The Book of the Law , the primary sacred text of Thelema , as well as part of a new sacred text he called the Book of Babalon . Crowley was bewildered and concerned by the endeavor , complaining to Germer of being " fairly frantic when I contemplate the idiocy of these louts ! " Believing the Babalon Working was accomplished , Parsons sold the Parsonage to developers for $ 25 @,@ 000 under the condition that he and Cameron could continue to live in the coach house , and he appointed Roy Leffingwell to head the Agape Lodge , which would now have to meet elsewhere for its rituals . 
 Parsons decided to co @-@ found a company called Allied Enterprises with Hubbard and Sara , into which Parsons invested his life savings of $ 20 @,@ 970 . Hubbard suggested that with this money they travel to Miami to purchase three yachts , which they would then sail through the Panama Canal to the West Coast , where they could sell them on for a profit . Parsons agreed , but many of his friends thought it was a bad idea . Hubbard had secretly requested permission from the U.S. Navy to sail to China and South and Central America on a mission to " collect writing material " ; his real plans were for a world cruise . Left " flat broke " by this defrauding , Parsons was incensed when he discovered that Hubbard and Sara had left for Miami with $ 10 @,@ 000 of the money ; he suspected a scam but was placated by a telephone call from Hubbard and agreed to remain business partners . When Crowley , in a telegram to Germer , dismissed Parsons as a " weak fool " and victim to Hubbard and Sara 's obvious confidence trick , Parsons changed his mind , flew to Miami and placed a temporary injunction and restraining order on them . Upon tracking them down to a harbor in County Causeway , Parsons discovered that the couple had purchased three yachts as planned ; they tried to flee aboard one but hit a squall and were forced to return to port . Parsons was convinced that he had brought them to shore through a lesser banishing ritual of the pentagram containing an astrological , geomantic invocation of <unk> — a vengeful spirit of Mars . Allied Enterprises was dissolved and in a court settlement Hubbard was made to promise to reimburse Parsons . Parsons was discouraged from taking further action by Sara , who threatened to report him for statutory rape since their sexual relationship took place when she was under California 's age of consent of 18 . Parsons was ultimately compensated with only $ 2 @,@ 900 . Hubbard , already married to Margaret Grubb , bigamously married Sara and went on to found Dianetics and Scientology . 
 The Sunday Times published an article about Hubbard 's involvement with the O.T.O. and Parsons ' occult activities in December 1969 . In response , the Church of Scientology released an unsubstantiated press statement which said that Hubbard had been sent as an undercover agent by the U.S. Navy to intercept and destroy Parsons ' " black magic cult " , and save Sara from its influence . The Church also claimed that Robert A. Heinlein was the clandestine Navy operative who " sent in " Hubbard to undertake this operation . Returning to California , Parsons completed the sale of the Parsonage , which was then demolished , and resigned from the O.T.O. He wrote in his letter to Crowley that he did not believe that " as an autocratic organization , [ the O.T.O. ] constitutes a true and proper medium for the expression and attainment " of Thelema . 
 = = = Work for Israelis and espionage accusations : 1946 – 52 = = = 
 Parsons was employed by North American Aviation at Inglewood , where he worked on the Navaho Missile Program . He and Cameron moved into a house in Manhattan Beach , where he instructed her in occultism and esotericism . When Cameron developed catalepsy , Parsons referred her to Sylvan Muldoon 's books on astral projection , suggesting that she could manipulate her seizures to accomplish it . They were married on October 19 , 1946 , four days after his divorce from Helen was finalized , with Forman as their witness . Parsons continued to be seen as a specialist in rocketry ; he acted as an expert consultant in numerous industrial tribunals and police and Army Ordnance investigations regarding explosions . In May 1947 , Parsons gave a talk at the Pacific Rocket Society in which he predicted that rockets would take humans to the Moon . Although he had become distant from the now largely defunct O.T.O. and had sold much of his <unk> library , he continued to correspond with Crowley until the latter 's death in December 1947 . 
 At the emergence of the Cold War , a Red Scare developed in the U.S. as the Congressional House Un @-@ American Activities Committee began investigating and obstructing the careers of people with perceived communist sympathies . Many of Parsons ' former colleagues lost their security clearances and jobs as a result , and eventually the FBI stripped Parsons of his clearance because of his " subversive " character , including his involvement in and advocacy of " sexual perversion " in the O.T.O. He speculated in a June 1949 letter to Germer that his clearance was revoked in response to his public dissemination of Crowley 's Liber OZ , a 1941 tract summarizing the individualist moral principles of Thelema . Declassified FBI documents would reveal that the FBI 's primary concern was Parsons ' former connections to Marxists at Caltech and his membership of the also " subversive " ACLU . When they interviewed Parsons he denied communist sympathies but informed them of Sidney Weinbaum 's " extreme communist views " and Frank Malina 's involvement in Weinbaum 's communist cell at Caltech , which resulted in Weinbaum 's arrest for perjury since he had lied under oath by denying any involvement in communist groups . Malina 's security clearance was withdrawn as well . In reaction to this hostile treatment , Parsons sought work in the rocket industry abroad . He sought advice to do so in correspondence with von Kármán ; whose advice he followed by enrolling in an evening course in advanced mathematics at USC to bolster his employability in the field — but again he neglected attendance and failed the course . Parsons again resorted to bootlegging nitroglycerin for money , and managed to earn a wage as a car mechanic , a manual laborer at a gas station , and a hospital orderly ; for two years he was also a faculty member at the USC Department of Pharmacology . Relations between Parsons and Cameron became strained ; they agreed to a temporary separation and she moved to Mexico to join an artists ' commune in San Miguel de Allende . 
 Unable to pursue his scientific career , without his wife and devoid of friendship , Parsons decided to return to occultism and embarked on sexually based magical operations with prostitutes . He was intent , informally following the ritualistic practice of Thelemite organization the A ∴ A ∴ , on performing " the Crossing of the Abyss " , attaining union with the universal consciousness , or " All " as understood in Thelemic mysticism , and becoming the " Master of the Temple " . Following his apparent success in doing so , Parsons recounted having an out @-@ of @-@ body experience invoked by Babalon , who <unk> transported him to the biblical City of <unk> , an experience he referred to as a " Black Pilgrimage " . Accompanying Parsons ' " Oath of the Abyss " was his own " Oath of the AntiChrist " , which was witnessed by Wilfred Talbot Smith . In this oath , Parsons professed to embody an entity named <unk> <unk> Al <unk> , the Antichrist " who am come [ sic ] to fulfill the law of the Beast 666 [ Aleister Crowley ] " . Viewing these oaths as the completion of the Babalon Working , Parsons wrote an <unk> autobiography titled Analysis by a Master of the Temple and an occult text titled The Book of AntiChrist . In the latter work , Parsons ( writing as <unk> ) prophesied within nine years Babalon would manifest on Earth and supersede the dominance of the Abrahamic religions . 
 During this period , Parsons also wrote an essay on his individualist philosophy and politics — which he described as standing for " liberalism and liberal principles " — titled " Freedom is a Two @-@ Edged Sword " , in which he condemned the authoritarianism , censorship , corruption , <unk> and racism he saw as prevalent in American society . None of these works were published in his lifetime . Through Heinlein , Parsons received a visit from writer L. Sprague de Camp , with whom he discussed magic and science fiction , and disclosed that Hubbard had sent a letter offering him Sara back . De Camp later referred to Parsons as " An authentic mad genius if I ever met one " , and based the character Courtney James on him in his time travel story A Gun for Dinosaur ( 1956 ) . Parsons was also visited by Jane Wolfe , who unsuccessfully appealed for him to rejoin the dilapidated O.T.O. He entered a brief relationship with an Irishwoman named Gladis Gohan ; they moved to a house on Redondo Beach , a building known by them as the " Concrete Castle " . Cameron returned to Redondo Beach from San Miguel de Allende and violently argued with Parsons upon discovering his infidelity , before she again left for Mexico . Parsons responded by initiating divorce proceedings against her on the grounds of " extreme cruelty " . 
 Parsons testified to a closed federal court that the moral philosophy of Thelema was both anti @-@ fascist and anti @-@ communist , emphasizing his belief in individualism . This along with references from his scientific colleagues resulted in his security clearance being reinstated by the Industrial Employment Review Board , which ruled that there was insufficient evidence that he had ever had communist sympathies . This allowed Parsons to obtain a contract in designing and constructing a chemical plant for the Hughes Aircraft Company in Culver City . Von Kármán put Parsons in touch with Herbert T. Rosenfeld , President of the Southern Californian chapter of the American Technion Society — a Zionist group dedicated to supporting the newly created State of Israel . Rosenfeld offered Parsons a job with the Israeli rocket program and hired him to produce technical reports for them . In November 1950 , as the Red Scare intensified , Parsons decided to migrate to Israel to pursue Rosenfeld 's offer , but a Hughes secretary whom Parsons had asked to type up a portfolio of technical documents reported him to the FBI . She accused Parsons of espionage and attempted theft of classified company documents on the basis of some of the reports that he had sought to submit to the Technion Society . 
 Parsons was immediately fired from Hughes ; the FBI investigated the complaint and were suspicious that Parsons was spying for the Israeli government . Parsons denied the allegations when interrogated ; he insisted that his intentions were peaceful and had suffered an error of judgment in procurement of the documents . Some of Parsons ' scientific colleagues rallied to his defense , but the case against him worsened when the FBI investigated Rosenfeld for being linked to Soviet agents , and more accounts of his occult and sexually permissive activities at the Parsonage came to light . In October 1951 the U.S. attorney decided that because the contents of the reports did not constitute state secrets , Parsons was not guilty of espionage . 
 The Review Board , however , still considered Parsons a liability because of his historical Marxist affiliations and investigations by the FBI , and in January 1952 they permanently reinstated their ban on him working for classified projects , effectively prohibiting him from working in rocketry . To make a living he founded the Parsons Chemical Manufacturing Company , which was based in North Hollywood and created pyrotechnics and explosives such as fog effects and imitation gunshot wounds for the film industry , and he also returned to chemical manufacturing at the Bermite Powder Company in Saugus . 
 Reconciling with Cameron , they resumed their relationship and moved into a former coach house on Orange Grove Avenue . Parsons converted its large , first @-@ floor laundry room into a home laboratory to work on his chemical and pyrotechnic projects , homebrew absinthe and stockpile his materials . They let out the upstairs bedrooms and began holding parties that were attended largely by bohemians and members of the Beat Generation , along with old friends including Forman , Malina and Cornog . They also congregated at the home of Andrew Haley , who lived on the same street . Though Parsons in his mid @-@ thirties was a " prewar relic " to the younger attendees , the raucous socials often lasted until dawn and frequently attracted police attention . Parsons also founded a new Thelemite group known as " the Witchcraft " , whose beliefs revolved around a simplified version of Crowley 's Thelema and Parsons ' own Babalon prophecies . He offered a course in its teachings for a ten dollar fee , which included a new Thelemic belief system called " the Gnosis " , a version of Christian Gnosticism with Sophia as its <unk> and the Christian God as its demiurge . He also collaborated with Cameron on Songs for the Witch Woman , a collection of poems which she illustrated that remained unpublished until 2014 . 
 = = = Death : 1952 = = = 
 Parsons and Cameron decided to travel to Mexico for a few months , both for a vacation and for Parsons to take up a job opportunity establishing an explosives factory for the Mexican government . They hoped that this would facilitate a move to Israel , where they could start a family , and where Parsons could bypass the U.S. government to recommence his rocketry career . He was particularly disturbed by the presence of the FBI , convinced that they were spying on him . 
 On June 17 , 1952 , a day before their planned departure , Parsons received a rush order of explosives for a film set and began to work on it in his home laboratory . An explosion destroyed the lower part of the building , during which Parsons sustained mortal wounds . His right forearm was amputated , his legs and left arm were broken and a hole was torn in the right side of his face . Despite these critical injuries , Parsons was found conscious by the upstairs lodgers . He tried to communicate with the arriving ambulance workers , who rushed him to the Huntingdon Memorial Hospital , where he was declared dead around thirty @-@ seven minutes after the explosion . Parsons ' last words are frequently said to have been " I wasn 't done " , but Cameron recited them as " Who will take care of me now ? " When his mother , Ruth , was informed of the events , she immediately committed suicide by taking an overdose of barbiturates . Cameron learned of her husband 's death from reporters at the scene when she returned home from grocery shopping . 
 Pasadena Police Department criminologist Don Harding led the official investigation ; he concluded that Parsons had been mixing fulminate of mercury in a coffee can when he dropped it on the floor , causing the initial explosion , which worsened when it came into contact with other chemicals in the room . Forman considered this likely , stating that Parsons often had sweaty hands and could easily have dropped the can . Some of Parsons ' colleagues rejected this explanation , saying that he was very attentive about safety . Two colleagues from the Bermite Powder Company described Parsons ' work habits as " scrupulously neat " and " exceptionally cautious " . The latter statement — from chemical engineer George <unk> — insisted that the explosion must have come from beneath the floorboards , implying an organized plot to kill Parsons . Harding accepted that these inconsistencies were " incongruous " but described the manner in which Parsons had stored his chemicals as " criminally negligent " , and noted that Parsons had previously been investigated by the police for illegally storing chemicals at the Parsonage . He also found a morphine @-@ filled syringe at the scene , indicating that Parsons was <unk> . The police saw insufficient evidence to continue the investigation and closed the case as an accidental death . 
 Both Wolfe and Smith suggested that Parsons ' death had been suicide , stating that he had suffered from depression for some time . Others theorized that the explosion was an assassination planned by Howard Hughes in response to Parsons ' suspected theft of Hughes Aircraft Company documents . Cameron became convinced that Parsons had been murdered — either by police officers seeking vengeance for his role in the conviction of Earl Kynette or by anti @-@ Zionists opposed to his work for Israel . One of Cameron 's friends , the artist Renate Druks , later stated her belief that Parsons had died in a rite designed to create a homunculus . His death has never been definitively explained . 
 The immediate aftermath of the explosion attracted the interest of the U.S. media , making headline news in the Los Angeles Times . These initial reports focused on Parsons ' prominence in rocketry but neglected to mention his occult interests . When asked for comment , Aerojet secretary @-@ treasurer T.E. <unk> said that Parsons " liked to wander , but he was one of the top men in the field " . However , within several days , journalists had discovered his involvement in Thelema and emphasized this in their reports . 
 A private prayer service was held for Parsons at the funeral home where his body was cremated . Cameron scattered his ashes in the Mojave Desert , before burning most of his possessions . She later tried to perform astral projection to commune with him . The O.T.O. also held a memorial service — with attendees including Helen and Sara — at which Smith led the Gnostic Mass . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 Although considered effeminate as a child , in adult life Parsons was known to exhibit an attitude of machismo . His FBI file described him as " potentially bisexual " and he once expressed experiencing a latent homosexuality . The actor Paul Mathison claimed to have had a gay relationship with Parsons in the 1950s , though this was disputed by others who knew him and Cameron . Parsons had the reputation of being a womanizer , and was notorious for frequently flirting and having sexual liaisons with female staff members at JPL and Aerojet . He was also known for personal eccentricity such as greeting house guests with a large pet snake around his neck , driving to work in a rundown Pontiac , and using a mannequin dressed in a tuxedo with a bucket labelled " The Resident " as his mailbox . 
 As well as a fencing and archery enthusiast , Parsons was also a keen shooter ; he often hunted jack rabbits and cotton tails in the desert , and was amused by mock duelling with Forman while on test sites with rifles and shotguns . Upon proposing to his first wife Helen , he also gifted her with a pistol . Parsons also enjoyed playing pranks on his colleagues , often through detonating explosives such as firecrackers and smoke bombs , and was known to spend hours at a time in the bathtub playing with toy boats while living at the Parsonage . 
 As well as intense bursts of creativity , Parsons suffered from what he described as " manic hysteria and depressing melancholy . " His father Marvel , after suffering a near @-@ fatal heart attack , died as a psychiatric patient at St. Elizabeths Hospital in Washington D.C. diagnosed with severe clinical depression , a condition Pendle suggested the younger Parsons inherited . 
 = = = Professional associations = = = 
 Parsons ' obituary listed him as a member of the Army Ordnance Corps Association , the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics , the American Chemical Society , the American Association for the Advancement of Science , and — despite his lack of an academic degree — the Sigma Xi fraternity . It also stated that he had turned down several honorary degrees . 
 = = Philosophy = = 
 = = = Religious beliefs = = = 
 Parsons adhered to the occult philosophy of Thelema , which had been founded in 1904 by the English occultist Aleister Crowley following a spiritual revelation that he had in the city of Cairo , Egypt , when — according to Crowley 's own accounts — a spirit being known as Aiwass dictated to him a prophetic text known as The Book of the Law . Prior to becoming aware of Thelema and Crowley , Parsons ' interest in esotericism was developed through his reading of The Golden Bough ( 1890 ) , a work in comparative mythology by Scottish social anthropologist James George Frazer . Parsons had also attended lectures on Theosophy by philosopher Jiddu Krishnamurti with his first wife Helen , but disliked the belief system 's sentiment of " the good and the true " . During rocket tests , Parsons often recited Crowley 's poem " Hymn to Pan " as a good luck charm . He took to addressing Crowley as his " Most Beloved Father " and signed off to him as " thy son , John " . 
 In July 1945 , Parsons gave a speech to the Agape Lodge , in which he attempted to explain how he felt that The Book of the Law could be made relevant to " modern life " . In this speech , which was subsequently published under the title of " Doing your Will " , he examined the Thelemite concept of True Will , writing that : 
 The mainspring of an individual is his creative Will . This Will is the sum of his tendencies , his destiny , his inner truth . It is one with the force that makes the birds sing and flowers bloom ; as inevitable as gravity , as implicit as a bowel movement , it informs alike atoms and men and suns . 
 To the man who knows this Will , there is no why or why not , no can or cannot ; he IS ! 
 There is no known force that can turn an apple into an alley cat ; there is no known force that can turn a man from his Will . This is the triumph of genius ; that , surviving the centuries , enlightens the world . 
 This force burns in every man . 
 Parsons identified four obstacles that prevented humans from achieving and performing their True Will , all of which he connected with fear : the fear of incompetence , the fear of the opinion of others , the fear of hurting others , and the fear of insecurity . He insisted that these must be overcome , writing that " The Will must be freed of its fetters . The ruthless examination and destruction of taboos , complexes , frustrations , dislikes , fears and disgusts hostile to the Will is essential to progress . " 
 Though Parsons was a lifelong devotee to Thelema , he grew weary of and eventually left the Ordo Templi Orientis — the religious organization that began propagating Thelema under Crowley 's leadership from the 1910s — which Parsons viewed , despite the disagreement of Crowley himself , as excessively hierarchical and impeding upon the rigorous spiritual and philosophical practice of True Will , describing the O.T.O. as " an excellent training school for adepts , but hardly an appropriate Order for the manifestation of Thelema " . In this sense Parsons was described by Carter as an " almost fundamentalist " Thelemite who placed The Book of the Law 's dogma above all other doctrine . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 From early on in his career , Parsons took an interest in socialism and communism , views that he shared with his friend Malina . Under the influence of another friend , Sidney Weinbaum , the two joined a communist group in the late 1930s , with Parsons reading Marxist literature , but he remained unconvinced and refused to join the American Communist Party . Malina asserted that this was because Parsons was a " political romantic " , whose attitude was more anti @-@ authoritarian than anti @-@ capitalist . Parsons would later become critical of the Marxist @-@ Leninist government of the Soviet Union led by Joseph Stalin , sarcastically commenting that 
 The dictatorship of the proletariat is merely temporary — the state will eventually wither away like a snark hunter , leaving us all free as birds . Meanwhile it may be necessary to kill , torture and imprison a few million people , but whose fault is it if they get in the way of progress ? 
 During the era of McCarthyism and the Second Red Scare in the early 1950s , Parsons was questioned regarding his former links to the communist movement , by which time he denied any connection to it , instead describing himself as " an individualist " who was both anti @-@ communist and anti @-@ fascist . In reaction to the McCarthyite red @-@ baiting of scientists , he expressed disdain that 
 Science , that was going to save the world in H. G. Wells ' time is regimented , straight @-@ jacked , [ and ] scared <unk> , its universal language diminished to one word : security . 
 Parsons was politically influenced by Thelema — which holds to the ethical code of " Do what thou wilt " — equating this principle to the libertarian views of some of the Founding Fathers of the United States in his article " Freedom is a Lonely Star " , claiming that by his own time these values had been " sold out by America , and for that reason the heart of America is sick and the soul of America is dead . " He proceeded to criticize many aspects of contemporary U.S. society , particularly the police force , remarking that " The police mind is usually of a sadistic and homicidal trend " and noting that they carried out the " ruthless punishment of symbolic scapegoats " such as African @-@ Americans , prostitutes , alcoholics , homeless people and sociopolitical radicals , under the pretense of a country that upheld " liberty and justice for all . " 
 To bring about a freer future Parsons believed in liberalizing attitudes to sexual morality stating that , in his belief , the publication of the Kinsey report and development of the <unk> sciences had as significant an influence on Western society as the creation of the atomic bomb and the development of nuclear physics . He also believed that in the future the restrictions on sexual morality within society should be abolished in order to bring about greater freedom and individuality . Parsons concluded that 
 the liberty of the individual is the foundation of civilization . No true civilization is possible without this liberty and no state , national or international , is stable in its absence . The proper relation between individual liberty on the one hand and social responsibility on the other is the balance which will assure a stable society . The only other road to social equilibrium demands the total annihilation of individuality . There is not further evasion of nature 's immemorial ultimatum : change or perish but the choice of change is ours . 
 Jack <unk> , American studies professor at Purdue University , argues that " Although his literary career never got much beyond pamphleteering and an untitled anti @-@ war , anti @-@ capitalist manuscript " , Parsons played a significant role — greater than that of Church of Satan founder Anton LaVey — in shaping the Californian counterculture of the 1960s and beyond through his influence on contemporaries such as Hubbard and Heinlein . Hugh Urban , religious studies professor at Ohio State University , cites Parsons ' Witchcraft group as precipitating the neopagan revival of the 1950s . 
 Science fiction writer and occultist Robert Anton Wilson described Parsons ' political writings as exemplifying an " ultra @-@ individualist " who exhibited a " genuine sympathy for working people " , strongly empathized with feminism and held an antipathy toward patriarchy comparable to that of John Stuart Mill , arguing in this context that Parsons was an influence on the American libertarian and anarchist movements of the 20th century . Parsons was also supportive of the creation of the State of Israel , making plans to emigrate there when his military security clearance was revoked . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 In the decades following his death , Parsons would be better remembered among the Western esoteric community rather than their scientific counterpart , with his recognition in the latter frequently amounting to a footnote . For instance , English Thelemite Kenneth Grant suggested that Parsons ' Babalon Working marked the start of the appearance of flying saucers in the skies , leading to phenomena such as the Roswell UFO incident and Kenneth Arnold UFO sighting . Cameron herself postulated that the 1952 Washington , D.C. UFO incident was a spiritual reaction to Parsons ' death . In 1954 she portrayed Babalon in American Thelemite Kenneth Anger 's short film Inauguration of the Pleasure Dome , viewing this cinematic depiction of a Thelemic ritual as aiding the literal invocation of Babalon begun by Parsons ' working , and later claimed that his Book of the AntiChrist prophecies were fulfilled through the manifestation of Babalon in her person . 
 In December 1958 JPL was integrated into the newly established National Aeronautics and Space Administration , after having built the Explorer 1 satellite that commenced America 's Space Race with the Soviet Union . Aerojet was contracted by NASA to build the main engine of the Apollo Command / Service Module , and the Space Shuttle Orbital Maneuvering System . In a letter to Malina , von Kármán ranked Parsons first in a list of figures he viewed as most important to modern rocketry and the foundation of the American space program . According to Richard Metzger , Wernher von Braun — who was nicknamed " The Father of Rocket Science " — once argued that Parsons was more worthy of this moniker . In October 1968 Malina — himself a pioneer in sounding rocketry — gave a speech at JPL in which he highlighted Parsons ' contribution to the U.S. rocket project , and lamented how it had come to be neglected , crediting him for making " key contributions to the development of storable propellants and of long duration solid propellant agents that play such an important role in American and European space technology . " 
 The same month JPL held an open access event to mark the 32nd anniversary of its foundation — which featured a " nativity scene " of mannequins reconstructing the November 1936 photograph of the GALCIT Group — and erected a monument commemorating their first rocket test on Halloween 1936 . Among the aerospace industry , JPL was nicknamed as standing for " Jack Parsons ' Laboratory " or " Jack Parsons Lives " . The International Astronomical Union decided to name a crater on the far side of the Moon Parsons after him in 1972 . JPL would later credit him for making " distinctive technical innovations that advanced early efforts " in rocket engineering , with aerospace journalist Craig <unk> stating that the work of Parsons , Qian Xuesen and the GALCIT Group " planted the seeds for JPL to become preeminent in space and rocketry . " 
 Many of Parsons ' writings would see posthumous publication as Freedom is a Two @-@ Edged Sword in 1989 , a compilation co @-@ edited by Cameron and O.T.O. leader <unk> Beta ( ceremonial name of musician William Breeze ) , which incited a resurgence of interest in Parsons within occult and countercultural circles . For example , comic book artist and occultist Alan Moore noted Parsons as a creative influence in a 1998 interview with Clifford Meth . The Cameron @-@ Parsons Foundation was founded as an incorporated company in 2006 , with the intention of conserving and promoting Parsons ' writings and Cameron 's artwork , and in 2014 <unk> <unk> published Songs for the Witch Woman — a limited edition book of poems by Parsons with illustrations by Cameron , released to coincide with his centenary . An exhibition of the same name was held at the Museum of Contemporary Art , Los Angeles . 
 In 1999 Feral House published the biography Sex and Rockets : The Occult World of Jack Parsons by John Carter , who expressed the opinion that Parsons had accomplished more in under five years of research than Robert H. Goddard had in his lifetime , and noted that his role in the development of rocket technology had been neglected by historians of science ; conversely , Carter thought that Parsons ' abilities and accomplishments as an occultist had been overestimated and exaggerated among Western esotericists , emphasizing his disowning by Crowley for practising magic beyond his grade . Feral House republished the work as a new edition in 2004 , accompanied with an introduction by Robert Anton Wilson . Wilson believed that Parsons was " the one single individual who contributed the most to rocket science " , describing him as being " very strange , very brilliant , very funny , [ and ] very tormented " , and considering it noteworthy that the day of Parsons ' birth was the predicted beginning of the apocalypse advocated by Charles Taze Russell , the founder of the Jehovah 's Witness movement . 
 A second biography of Parsons was published in 2005 through Weidenfeld & Nicolson with the title Strange Angel : The Otherworldly Life of Rocket Scientist John Whiteside Parsons ; it was authored by George Pendle , who described Parsons as " the Che Guevara of occultism " and noted that although Parsons " would not live to see his dream of space travel come true , he was essential to making it a reality . " Pendle considered that the cultural stigma attached to Parsons ' occultism was the primary cause of his low public profile , noting that " Like many scientific mavericks , Parsons was eventually discarded by the establishment once he had served his purpose . " It was this unorthodox mindset , creatively facilitated by his science fiction fandom and " willingness to believe in magic 's efficacy " , Pendle argued , " that allowed him to break scientific barriers previously thought to be indestructible " — commenting that Parsons " saw both space and magic as ways of exploring these new frontiers — one breaking free from Earth literally and metaphysically . " 
 L. Ron Hubbard 's role in Parsons ' Agape Lodge — and the ensuing yacht scam — was explored in Russell Miller 's 1987 Hubbard biography Bare @-@ faced Messiah . Parsons ' involvement in the Agape Lodge would also be discussed by Martin P. Starr in his history of the American Thelemite movement , The Unknown God : W.T. Smith and the Thelemites , published by <unk> Press in 2003 . Parsons ' occult partnership with Hubbard was also mentioned in Alex Gibney 's 2015 documentary film Going Clear : Scientology and the Prison of Belief , produced by HBO . 
 Before his death , Parsons appeared in science fiction writer Anthony Boucher 's murder @-@ mystery novel Rocket to the Morgue ( 1942 ) under the guise of mad scientist character Hugo <unk> . Another fictional character based on Parsons was Courtney James , a wealthy socialite who features in L. Sprague de Camp 's 1956 short time travel story A Gun for Dinosaur . In 2005 Pasadena Babalon , a stage play about Parsons written by George D. Morgan and directed by Brian Brophy , premiered at Caltech as a production by its theater Arts Group in 2010 , the same year Cellar Door Publishing released Richard Carbonneau and Robin Simon Ng 's graphic novel , The Marvel : A Biography of Jack Parsons . In 2012 the Science Channel broadcast a documentary dramatization titled Magical Jet Propulsion in an episode of its Dark Matters : Twisted But True television series — in which Parsons was portrayed by English actor Adam Howden — while independent record label Drag City released Parsons ' Blues , an instrumental tribute single by experimental rock act Six Organs of Admittance . In 2014 AMC Networks announced plans for a serial television dramatization of Parsons ' life titled Strange Angel , produced by Ridley Scott and David Zucker , and written by Mark Heyman . 
 = = Patents = = 
 = 2009 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 2009 Atlantic hurricane season was a below @-@ average Atlantic hurricane season that produced eleven tropical cyclones , nine named storms , three hurricanes , and two major hurricanes . It officially began on June 1 and ended on November 30 , dates that conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones develop in the Atlantic basin . The season 's first tropical cyclone , Tropical Depression One , developed on May 28 , while the final storm , Hurricane Ida , dissipated on November 10 . The most intense hurricane , Bill , was a powerful Cape Verde @-@ type hurricane that affected areas from the Leeward Islands to Newfoundland . The season featured the lowest number of tropical cyclones since the 1997 season , and only one system , Claudette , made landfall in the United States . Forming from the interaction of a tropical wave and an upper level low , Claudette made landfall on the Florida Panhandle with maximum sustained winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) before quickly dissipating over Alabama . The storm killed two people and caused $ 228 @,@ 000 ( 2009 USD ) in damage . 
 Pre @-@ season forecasts issued by Colorado State University ( CSU ) called for fourteen named storms and seven hurricanes , of which three were expected to attain major hurricane status . The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) later issued its initial forecast , which predicted nine to fourteen named storms , four to seven hurricanes , and one to three major hurricanes . After several revisions in the projected number of named storms , both agencies lowered their forecasts by the middle of the season . 
 Several storms made landfall or directly affected land outside of the United States . Tropical Storm Ana brought substantial rainfall totals to many of the Caribbean islands , including Puerto Rico , which led to minor street flooding . Hurricane Bill delivered gusty winds and rain to the island of Newfoundland , while Tropical Storm Danny affected the U.S. state of North Carolina , and Erika affected the Lesser Antilles as a poorly organized tropical system . Hurricane Fred affected the Cape Verde Islands as a developing tropical cyclone and Tropical Storm Grace briefly impacted the Azores , becoming the farthest northeast forming storm on record . The season 's final storm , Ida , affected portions of Central America before bringing significant rainfall to the Southeast United States as an extratropical cyclone . 
 = = Seasonal forecasts = = 
 Forecasts of hurricane activity are issued before each hurricane season by noted hurricane experts Philip J. Klotzbach , William M. Gray , and their associates at Colorado State University ; and separately by NOAA forecasters . 
 Klotzbach 's team ( formerly led by Gray ) defined the average number of storms per season ( 1950 to 2000 ) as 9 @.@ 6 tropical storms , 5 @.@ 9 hurricanes , 2 @.@ 3 major hurricanes ( storms reaching at least Category 3 strength in the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale ) and ACE Index 96 @.@ 1 . NOAA defines a season as above @-@ normal , near @-@ normal or below @-@ normal by a combination of the number of named storms , the number reaching hurricane strength , the number reaching major hurricane strength and ACE Index . 
 = = = Pre @-@ season forecasts = = = 
 On December 10 , 2008 , Klotzbach 's team issued its first extended @-@ range forecast for the 2009 season , predicting above @-@ average activity ( 14 named storms , 7 hurricanes , 3 of Category 3 or higher and ACE Index of 125 ) . On April 7 , 2009 , Klotzbach 's team issued an updated forecast for the 2009 season , predicting near @-@ average activity ( 12 named storms , 6 hurricanes , 2 of Category 3 or higher and ACE Index of 100 ) , citing the possible cause as the high probability of a weak El Niño forming during the season . On May 21 , 2009 , NOAA issued their forecast for the season , predicting near or slightly above average activity , ( 9 to 14 named storms , 4 to 7 hurricanes , and 1 to 3 of Category 3 or higher ) . 
 = = = Midseason outlooks = = = 
 On June 2 , 2009 , Klotzbach 's team issued another updated forecast for the 2009 season , predicting slightly below average activity ( 11 named storms , 5 hurricanes , 2 of Category 3 or higher and ACE Index of 85 ) . Also on June 2 , 2009 , the Florida State University Center for Ocean @-@ Atmospheric Prediction Studies ( FSU COAPS ) issued its first ever Atlantic hurricane season forecast . The FSU COAPS forecast predicted 8 named storms , including 4 hurricanes , and an ACE Index of 65 . On June 18 , 2009 , the UK Met Office ( UKMO ) issued a forecast of 6 tropical storms in the July to November period with a 70 % chance that the number would be in the range 3 to 9 . They also predicted an ACE Index of 60 with a 70 % chance that the index would be in the range 40 to 80 . On August 4 , 2009 , Klotzbach 's team updated their forecast for the 2009 season , again predicting slightly below average activity ( 10 named storms , 4 hurricanes , and 2 major hurricanes ) . On August 6 , 2009 , the NOAA also updated their forecast for the 2009 season , predicting below average activity ( 7 – 11 named storms , 3 – 6 hurricanes , and 1 – 2 major hurricanes ) . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 During the 2009 season , nine of the eleven tropical cyclones affected land , of which five actually made landfall . The United States experienced one of its quietest years , with no hurricanes making landfall in the country . Throughout the basin , six people were killed in tropical cyclone @-@ related incidents and total losses reached roughly $ 77 million . Most of the damage resulted from Hurricane Bill , which caused severe beach erosion throughout the east coast of the United States . In the United States , tropical cyclones killed six people and caused roughly $ 50 million in damage . In the Lesser Antilles , Tropical Storms Ana and Erika brought moderate rainfall to several islands but resulted in little damage . Elsewhere in the Atlantic , the Azores Islands , Atlantic Canada , Bermuda , Cape Verde Islands and Wales were affected by tropical cyclones or their remnants . In Canada , Hurricane Bill produced widespread moderate rainfall in Nova Scotia and Newfoundland , leaving roughly $ 10 million in losses . The hurricane also produced tropical storm @-@ force winds in Bermuda . Hurricane Fred briefly impacted the southern Cape Verde Islands as it bypassed the islands early in its existence . The Azores and Wales were also affected by Tropical Storm Grace ; however , both areas recorded only minor effects . 
 Overall , the season 's activity was reflected with a low cumulative accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 53 , the lowest since 1997 . Due to the low number of storms in the 2009 season , many of which were short @-@ lived , the overall ACE value was ranked as below @-@ average , totaling under 66 . Hurricane Bill was responsible for the ACE value for August being 30 % above average . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . ACE is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 34 knots ( 39 mph , 63 km / h ) or tropical storm strength . Subtropical cyclones are excluded from the total . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Depression One = = = 
 During mid @-@ May , a frontal boundary stalled near The Bahamas and slowly degenerated . On May 25 , 2009 , an area of low pressure developed along the tail @-@ end of a decaying cold front near the northern Bahamas . Tracking northward , this low gradually developed as it moved within 85 mi ( 140 km ) of North Carolina 's Outer Banks . By May 28 , deep convection developed across a small area over the low pressure system , leading to the National Hurricane Center classifying the system as Tropical Depression One . The depression moved over the warm waters of the Gulf Stream for the following 24 hours , allowing it to maintain its convection , before moving into a hostile environment characterized by strong wind shear and cooler waters . Late on May 29 , the system degenerated into a remnant low . Several hours later , on May 30 , about 345 mi ( 555 km ) south @-@ southeast of Halifax , Nova Scotia , Tropical Depression One was absorbed by a warm front . 
 As a tropical cyclone , the depression had no impact on land . However , the precursor to the system brought scattered rainfall and increased winds to parts of the North Carolina coastline , but no damage . Upon becoming a tropical depression on May 28 , Tropical Depression One became the northernmost forming May tropical cyclone in Atlantic history , though subtropical cyclones formed equally far north in 1972 and 2007 . It also marked the third consecutive year with pre @-@ season tropical or subtropical cyclones in the basin . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Ana = = = 
 Ana formed out of an area of low pressure associated with a tropical wave on August 11 , Ana briefly attained tropical storm intensity on August 12 before weakening back to a depression . The following day , the system degenerated into a non @-@ convective remnant low as it tracked westward . On August 14 , the depression regenerated roughly 1 @,@ 075 mi ( 1 @,@ 735 km ) east of the Leeward Islands . Early on August 15 , the storm re @-@ attained tropical storm status , at which time it was named Ana . After reaching a peak intensity with winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 1003 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 65 inHg ) , the storm began to weaken again due to increasing wind shear and the unusually fast movement of Ana . In post @-@ storm analysis , it was discovered that Ana had degenerated into a tropical wave once more on August 16 , before reaching any landmasses . 
 Numerous tropical storm watches were issued for the Lesser Antilles , Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic between August 15 and 17 . Several islands took minor precautions for the storm , including St. Croix which evacuated 40 residents from flood @-@ prone areas ahead of the storm . In the Dominican Republic , officials took preparations by setting up relief agencies and setting up shelters . Impact from Ana was minimal , mainly consisting of light to moderate rainfall . In Puerto Rico , up to 2 @.@ 76 in ( 70 mm ) , causing street flooding and forcing the evacuation of three schools . High winds associated with the storm also downed trees and power lines , leaving roughly 6 @,@ 000 residents without power . 
 = = = Hurricane Bill = = = 
 As Ana regenerated into a tropical depression , a new tropical depression developed early on August 15 southwest of the Cape Verde Islands . Light wind shear and warm waters allowed the depression to steadily intensify , becoming Tropical Storm Bill later that day . By August 17 , Bill attained hurricane @-@ status about midway between the Cape Verde Islands and the Lesser Antilles . Eventually the hurricane attained its peak intensity as a Category 4 storm roughly 345 mi ( 555 km ) east @-@ northeast of the Leeward Islands . The storm attained maximum winds of 130 mph ( 215 km / h ) , the highest of any storm during the season , before weakening slightly as it turned north . The large storm passed roughly 175 mi ( 280 km ) west of Bermuda as a Category 2 hurricane . Further weakening took place as Bill brushed the southern coast of Nova Scotia the following day . Shortly before making landfall in Newfoundland , Bill weakened to a tropical storm and accelerated . The storm eventually transitioned into an extratropical cyclone after moving over the north Atlantic before being absorbed by a larger non @-@ tropical low on August 24 . 
 Two people were killed by the storm 's large swells — one in Maine and another in Florida . The hurricane came close enough to warrant tropical cyclone watches and warnings in both the US and Canada . Bill was one of three tropical storms active on August 16 . Large , life @-@ threatening swells produced by the storm impacted north @-@ facing coastlines of Puerto Rico and Hispaniola as Hurricane Bill approached Bermuda . Along the coasts of North Carolina , waves averaging 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) in height impacted beaches . On Long Island , beach damage was severe ; in some areas the damage was worse than Hurricane Gloria in 1985 . In New York , severe beach erosion caused by the storm resulted in over $ 35 @.@ 5 million in losses . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Claudette = = = 
 Just one day after the formation of Hurricane Bill , the season 's third named storm developed on August 16 . Forming out of a tropical wave and an upper @-@ level low pressure system , Claudette quickly intensified into a tropical storm offshore south of Tallahassee , Florida . By the afternoon , the storm had attained winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) and steadily tracked towards the Florida Panhandle . Early on August 17 , the center of Claudette made landfall on Santa Rosa Island . Several hours after landfall , the storm weakened to a tropical depression and the Hydrometeorological Prediction Center took over primary responsibility of the storm . The system quickly dissipated and was last noted over Alabama on August 18 . 
 The National Hurricane Center issued tropical storm warnings for the Florida coastline and residents in some counties were advised to evacuate storm @-@ surge @-@ prone areas . Tropical Storm Claudette , produced moderate rainfall across portions of Florida , Georgia , and Alabama between August 16 and 18 . Two people were killed offshore amidst rough seas from the storm . An EF @-@ 0 tornado spawned by the storm in Cape Coral damaged 11 homes , leaving $ 103 @,@ 000 in damages . Additional damages to coastal property and beaches amounted to $ 125 @,@ 000 as a result of Claudette . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Danny = = = 
 Around the same time the remnants of Hurricane Bill dissipated over the northern Atlantic , a new tropical storm developed near the Bahamas on August 26 . The system , immediately declared Tropical Storm Danny on its first advisory , erratically moved in a general northwestward direction . Danny attained peak winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) before succumbing to high wind shear . After turning northward , the storm weakened and was eventually absorbed by another low pressure system off the east coast of the United States early on August 29 . High waves from Danny killed a boy in the Outer Banks . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Erika = = = 
 On September 1 , the season 's fifth named storm , Tropical Storm Erika , formed east of the Lesser Antilles . Upon forming , the storm had attained its peak intensity with winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . Persistent wind shear prevented the system from intensifying and resulted in the storm 's convection being completely displaced from the center of circulation by the time it passed over Guadeloupe on September 2 . After entering the Caribbean Sea , Erika briefly regained strength before fully succumbing to strong shear . The system eventually dissipated on September 4 , to the south of Puerto Rico . Damages were minor , though one island received several inches of rain . 
 = = = Hurricane Fred = = = 
 Several days after Erika dissipated , a new tropical depression formed southeast of the Cape Verde Islands on September 7 . This depression rapidly intensified within an environment of low wind shear and high sea surface temperatures . Receiving the name Fred on September 8 , the storm quickly developed an eye feature and was upgraded to a hurricane roughly 24 hours after being named . Within a 12 ‑ hour span , the storm 's winds increased by 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) to its peak of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) . Upon reaching this intensity , Fred became the strongest storm on record south of 30 ° N and east of 35 ° W in the Atlantic basin . Not long after the intensification ceased , it began to weaken as dry air became entrained within the system . By September 11 , the storm nearly stalled northwest of the Cape Verde Islands and weakened to a tropical storm . The following day , Fred degenerated into a remnant low before taking a westward track across the Atlantic . The remnants of Fred persisted for nearly a week , nearly regenerating into a tropical depression several times . The low eventually dissipated on September 19 , to the south of Bermuda . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Eight = = = 
 In late September , a new , well @-@ defined tropical wave moved off the west coast of Africa into the Atlantic Ocean . By September 25 , the system had developed sufficient deep convection for the NHC to classify it as Tropical Depression Eight . At this time , the depression attained its peak intensity with winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 1008 mbar ( hPa ) . Shortly thereafter , wind shear and decreasing sea surface temperatures caused the depression to weaken . The system degenerated into a remnant low on September 26 before degenerating into a trough of low pressure . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Grace = = = 
 Originating from an extratropical cyclone east of Newfoundland on September 27 , the precursor to Tropical Storm Grace tracked southeastward towards the Azores , gaining subtropical characteristics . After executing a counterclockwise loop between October 1 and 3 , deep convection wrapped around a small circulation center that had developed within the larger cyclone . On October 4 , this smaller low developed into a tropical storm while situated near the Azores Islands , becoming the northeastern @-@ most forming Atlantic tropical cyclone on record . The storm quickly turned northeastward and intensified , developing an eye @-@ like feature as it attained peak winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 986 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 11 inHg ) . It weakened over increasingly colder waters and began merging with an approaching frontal boundary . Early on October 6 , Grace transitioned into an extratropical cyclone before dissipating later that day near Wales . 
 Although Grace passed through the Azores Islands , the storm had little known effects there . In Europe , the system and its remnants brought rain to several countries , including Portugal , the United Kingdom and Belgium . No fatalities were linked to Grace and overall damage was minimal . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Henri = = = 
 A tropical wave left the coast of Africa on October 1 , moving westward with intermittent showers and thunderstorms . On October 5 , the system became better organized , and a low pressure area formed . Although the thunderstorms were displaced east of the center of circulation and the probability for development was never high , the disturbance became a tropical depression around 0000 UTC on October 6 about 775 mi ( 1 @,@ 247 km ) east of the Lesser Antilles . Operationally , the storm was not designated a tropical cyclone until later on October 6 , when it was immediately declared a tropical storm . 
 Affected by strong wind shear , Henri remained disorganized with its center located on the western edge of the convection . Moving northwestward , Henri intensified slightly to peak winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) on October 7 after the convection increased . Shortly thereafter , the wind shear grew stronger , and on October 8 the storm weakened to a tropical depression . The structure became further disorganized with several low @-@ level vortices . Just twelve hours after weakening into a depression , Henri degenerated into a remnant area of low pressure . The remnants continued northwestward before turning to the west @-@ southwest due to a ridge . On October 11 , the storm 's circulation dissipated near Hispaniola , having never impacted land . 
 = = = Hurricane Ida = = = 
 The final storm of the 2009 season formed over the southern Caribbean Sea on November 4 . The slow moving system quickly developed into Tropical Storm Ida within a favorable environment as it neared the coastline of Nicaragua . Several hours before moving over land , Ida attained hurricane @-@ status , with winds reaching 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . Hours after moving inland , Ida weakened to a tropical storm and further to a tropical depression as it turned northward . On November 7 , the depression re @-@ entered the Caribbean Sea and quickly intensified . Early on November 8 , the system re @-@ attained hurricane intensity as it rapidly intensified over warm waters . Ida attained its peak intensity as a Category 2 hurricane early the next day with winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) as it moved over the Yucatan Channel . Not long after reaching this intensity , Ida quickly weakened to a tropical storm as it entered the Gulf of Mexico . Despite strong wind shear , the storm briefly re @-@ attained hurricane status for a third time near the southeastern Louisiana coastline before quickly weakening to a tropical storm . Shortly before moving inland over the southern United States , Ida transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . The remnants of Ida persisted until November 11 , at which time the low dissipated . Remnant energy from Ida provided energy for another system which became a powerful nor 'easter , causing significant damage in the Mid @-@ Atlantic States . The resulting storm came to be known as Nor <unk> . 
 In the southern Caribbean , Hurricane Ida caused roughly $ 2 @.@ 1 million in damage in Nicaragua after destroying numerous homes and leaving an estimated 40 @,@ 000 people homeless . Ida also produced significant rainfall across portions of western Cuba , with some areas recording up to 12 @.@ 5 in ( 320 mm ) of rain during the storm 's passage . In the United States , the hurricane and the subsequent nor 'easter caused substantial damage , mainly in the Mid @-@ Atlantic States . One person was killed by Ida after drowning in rough seas while six others were killed in various incidents related to the nor 'easter . Overall , the two systems caused nearly $ 300 million in damage throughout the country . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms in the North Atlantic in 2009 . Names that were not used are marked in gray . This is the same list used in the 2003 season with the exception of Fred , Ida , and Joaquin , which replaced Fabian , Isabel , and Juan , respectively . The names Fred and Ida were used for Atlantic storms for the first time in 2009 , as the name Joaquin was not used during the course of this season . There were no names retired this year ; thus , the same list was used again in the 2015 season . 
 = = Season effects = = 
 This is a table of all of the storms that formed in the 2009 Atlantic hurricane season . It includes their duration , names , landfall ( s ) – denoted by bold location names – damages , and death totals . Deaths in parentheses are additional and indirect ( an example of an indirect death would be a traffic accident ) , but were still related to that storm . Damage and deaths include totals while the storm was extratropical , a wave , or a low , and all of the damage figures are in 2009 USD . 
 = Bessas ( general ) = 
 Bessas ( Greek : <unk> , before 480 – after 554 ) was an East Roman ( Byzantine ) general of Gothic origin from Thrace , primarily known for his career in the wars of Justinian I ( reigned 527 – 565 ) . He distinguished himself against the Sassanid Persians in the Iberian War and under the command of Belisarius in the Gothic War , but after Belisarius ' departure from Italy he failed to confront the resurgent Goths and was largely responsible for the loss of Rome in 546 . Returning east in disgrace , despite his advanced age he was appointed as commander in the Lazic War . There he redeemed himself with the recapture of Petra , but his subsequent idleness led Justinian to dismiss him and exile him to <unk> . 
 = = Origin = = 
 According to the contemporary historian Procopius of Caesarea , Bessas was born in the 470s and hailed from a noble Gothic family long established in Thrace , belonging to those Goths who had not followed Theodoric the Great when he left in 488 to invade Italy , then held by Odoacer . Procopius remarks on his fluency in Gothic , but another contemporary writer , Jordanes , claims that he hailed from the settlement of Castra Martis , comprising Sarmatians , <unk> and certain of the Huns ( Getica 265 ) . This evidence has been variously interpreted , with most modern commentators leaning towards a Gothic identity . Nevertheless , according to Patrick Amory , it is impossible from the sources at hand to draw any definite conclusion about his ethnicity . Amory maintains that Bessas was a typical example of the " blurry ethnographic identity " evidenced in 6th @-@ century Balkan populations , especially among the military . 
 = = Career in the east = = 
 Very little is known of Bessas ' early life and career : he joined the imperial army in his youth and according to Procopius was already " experienced in war " by 503 , when the Anastasian War with the Sassanid Persians broke out . He took part in the war as an officer , but nothing is known of his service there . On the other hand , he is probably to be identified with a comes of the same name who was addressed in a letter of the bishop Jacob of <unk> ( d . 521 ) . If this identification is valid , then Bessas was a ( probably moderate ) Monophysite . 
 Bessas reappears in 531 , during the Iberian War against Persia , when he was appointed dux Mesopotamiae , with Martyropolis as his base . In this capacity , Bessas led 500 cavalry against the Persian force guarding the same frontier sector , comprising 700 infantry and cavalry under the generals Gadar and Yazdgerd . The Byzantines engaged the Persians in battle on the banks of the Tigris and routed them , killing Gadar and taking Yazdgerd captive . Bessas then raided the province of Arzanene and returned to Martyropolis . In retaliation for this Byzantine success , the Persian shah Kavadh I sent against Martyropolis a large army commanded by three senior generals , <unk> , Mihr @-@ Mihroe and <unk> . The Persians besieged the city through the autumn , digging trenches and mines , but the garrison , under Bessas and Bouzes , held firm . Finally , the approach of winter , the arrival of large Byzantine forces at nearby Amida , and the news of the death of Kavadh forced the Persian commanders to raise the siege ( in November or December ) . Soon after their withdrawal , a force of Sabir Huns , who the Persians had hired as mercenaries , invaded Roman territory and raided as far as Antioch , but Bessas caught one of their raiding parties and destroyed it , capturing 500 horses and much booty . 
 = = Actions in Italy = = 
 In 535 , Bessas was appointed as one of Belisarius ' lieutenants ( along with Constantine and <unk> ) in the expedition against the Ostrogothic kingdom of Italy . He accompanied Belisarius in the early stages of the campaign , from the recovery of Sicily to the siege of Naples , and was present at the latter 's fall in November 536 . From there the Byzantine army advanced on Rome , which it captured without a fight . Belisarius sent Constantine and Bessas to capture various outlying towns , but when he learned that the new Gothic king , <unk> , was marching on Rome , he recalled them . Bessas tarried for a while near the town of <unk> , which controlled the direct route from the Gothic capital , Ravenna , over the Apennines to Rome , and there met and defeated the Gothic vanguard in a skirmish . 
 During the year @-@ long siege of Rome by the Goths , Bessas commanded the troops at the Porta <unk> gate and distinguished himself in a number of skirmishes . Nothing is known of his role in the subsequent events until 540 , except that it was probably at about this time that he was raised to the rank of patricius . In early 538 , Bessas had protected Belisarius when the general Constantine tried to kill him during a dispute , but by 540 , when Belisarius was preparing to enter Ravenna under pretense of accepting the Gothic offer to become Emperor of the West , he clearly felt that Bessas could not be trusted , and sent him , along with other troublemaking generals such as John and Narses , to occupy remote locations in Italy . 
 Following the departure of Belisarius in mid @-@ 540 , Bessas remained in Italy . Justinian did not appoint an overall commander to replace Belisarius , and as a result the various Byzantine generals left in Italy failed to co @-@ ordinate their actions . Instead of subduing the last remnants of the Ostrogoths in northern Italy , they retreated to the safety of various fortified cities , allowing the Goths to gather around a new leader , Ildibad . Ildibad marched on Treviso and routed a Byzantine force under Vitalius , whereupon Bessas advanced with his troops to Piacenza . In late 541 , after Totila had become king of the Goths , Bessas and the other Byzantine commanders assembled in Ravenna to co @-@ ordinate their efforts , but the imperial troops were repulsed from Verona and defeated at <unk> by Totila 's Goths . The Goths then invaded Tuscany and threatened Florence , held by the general Justin . Bessas , along with John and Cyprian , marched to Justin 's aid . The Goths retreated before the Byzantine reinforcements , but as the latter pursued , the Goths fell upon them and drove them to flight . After this new defeat the Byzantine commanders dispersed again to various cities and abandoned each other to his fate . Bessas withdrew with his forces to Spoleto . 
 Nothing is known of his activities from then until early 545 , by which time he was the garrison commander of Rome . Along with the general Conon he was responsible for the city 's defence during the siege by Totila in 546 . During the siege he restricted himself to passive defence , refusing to sally forth from the walls even when Belisarius , who had returned from the east and landed with reinforcements at the nearby Portus Romanus , ordered him to do so . As a result , Belisarius ' attempts to succour the beleaguered city failed . Procopius heavily criticizes Bessas for his conduct during the siege . He neglected of the civilian population of the city and enriched himself by selling the starving populace the grain he had hoarded at exorbitant prices . The civilians were so exhausted by famine that when he finally allowed those who wanted to leave the city to do so , many simply died on the wayside , while others were killed by the Goths . Finally , he proved negligent in the conduct of the defence , and allowed security measures to grow lax : guards slept at their posts , and patrols were discontinued . This allowed four Isaurian soldiers to contact Totila , and on 17 December 546 , the city was betrayed to the Goths . Bessas managed to escape with the greater part of the garrison , but the treasure that he had amassed was left behind for the Goths to enjoy . Following his dismal performance in Italy , Bessas was apparently recalled to Constantinople . 
 = = Return to the eastern front and command in Lazica = = 
 Bessas re @-@ appears in 550 , following the failure of a large Byzantine army under the magister militum per Armeniam Dagisthaeus to capture the strategic fortress of Petra in the ongoing war with the Persians over Lazica ( western Georgia ) . To general surprise — and considerable criticism , in view of his advanced age and failure at Rome — Justinian named Bessas as Dagisthaeus ' successor and entrusted him with the conduct of the war in Lazica . 
 Bessas first sent an expeditionary force to suppress a rebellion among the Abasgians , who neighboured Lazica to the north . The expedition , under John <unk> , was successful , and the <unk> leader Opsites was forced to flee across the Caucasus to the Sabir Huns . In spring 551 , after a long siege and thanks largely to his own perseverance and bravery , the Byzantines and their Sabir allies ( some 6 @,@ 000 troops ) captured Petra . A few Persians continued to resist from the citadel , but Bessas ordered it torched . Following his victory , he ordered the city walls razed to the ground . 
 If the capture of Petra redeemed Bessas in the eyes of his contemporaries , his subsequent actions tarnished it again : instead of following up his success and capture the mountain passes connecting Lazica with the Persian province of Iberia , he retired west to the Roman provinces of Pontica and busied himself with its administration . This inactivity allowed the Persians under Mihr @-@ Mihroe to consolidate Persian control over the eastern part of Lazica . The Byzantine forces in Lazica withdrew west to the mouth of the Phasis , while the Lazi , including their king Gubazes and his family , sought refuge in the mountains . Despite enduring harsh conditions in the winter of 551 – 552 , Gubazes rejected the peace offers conveyed by envoys from Mihr @-@ Mihroe . In 552 , the Persians received substantial reinforcements , but their attacks on the fortresses held by the Byzantines and the Lazi were repulsed . 
 Bessas reappears in the campaign of 554 , when he was appointed joint commander in Lazica with Martin , Bouzes and Justin . Gubazes , though , soon protested to Justinian about the incompetence of the Byzantine generals . Bessas was dismissed , his property was confiscated , and he was sent in exile among the Abasgians . Nothing more is known about him thereafter . 
 = Irresistible ( Jessica Simpson album ) = 
 Irresistible is the second studio album by American recording artist Jessica Simpson , released on May 25 , 2001 , through Columbia Records . Simpson , who began working on the project in July 2000 , contacted already established writers and producers to collaborate on the project , including Cory Rooney , Rodney Jerkins , and Walter Afanasieff . In contrast to her debut album Sweet Kisses ( 1999 ) , which included more ballads , Irresistible explored hip hop and R & B genres of music . Simpson described the material as " Mariah Carey meets Britney Spears " , indicating the soulfulness of the songs as well as their contemporary appeal . Lyrical themes addressed in the album include love and heartbreak , sexuality , and self @-@ respect . 
 Sweet Kisses , which was aimed at an older audience , did not perform well commercially , and so Simpson re @-@ evaluated her career . At the suggestion of her label executives , Simpson modified her image and sound in Irresistible , deciding to delve more into the teen pop and R & B genres , as she felt that restyling herself to match the image of her contemporaries — Spears and Christina Aguilera — would help rejuvenate her career . After its release , Irresistible received mostly negative reviews from critics , most of whom were disappointed by the music ; some of them also felt it was too generic and over @-@ produced . Initially , the album enjoyed commercial success , debuting at number six on the Billboard 200 . It was an improvement from her previous endeavor and the album went on to sell about 850 @,@ 000 copies in the US . It was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipments of 500 @,@ 000 copies . Elsewhere , the album was not as successful , reaching number thirteen in Canada and cracking the top forty in Sweden , Japan , and Germany . 
 Two singles were released from Irresistible . The title track , the album 's lead single , was commercially successful , as it reached the top twenty in charts of eleven countries , including number eleven on the UK Singles Chart , and at number fifteen on the United States ' Billboard Hot 100 . It was followed by " A Little Bit " , which failed to chart in the US , but reached a peak position of number sixty @-@ two in Australia . Simpson performed songs from Irresistible on a number of occasions . In 2001 she embarked on her first headlining tour , titled the DreamChaser Tour , to promote the album . 
 = = Background = = 
 Simpson signed a record deal with Columbia Records in 1998 and the next year she released her debut album titled Sweet Kisses . The album featured mostly ballads , and was targeted at a more mature audience than the works of her contemporaries , Britney Spears and Christina Aguilera . Simpson even stayed true to her Christian beliefs and dressed conservatively , unlike her peers . The album only managed a peak of number twenty @-@ five on the US Billboard 200 , far from the success of her contemporaries . This led Simpson to reevaluate her career and although she was enjoying some success , she felt she could improve on this . Feeling her more " innocent " image would halt her career from developing further , Simpson adopted a sexier image and newer sound , at the suggestion of the Columbia executives . 
 She moved into the teen @-@ pop genre , as she felt that restyling herself to match the image of Spears and Aguilera would help remake her career . She separated from her then @-@ boyfriend Nick Lachey , in March 2001 , feeling the need to concentrate on her career . Her new image was promoted through appearances on many events , where Simpson wore revealing outfits . The development of this image coincided with the production and release of her second studio effort , Irresistible . Simpson said that she wanted to portray a " sexier , more mature style " in her new album . " I recorded Sweet Kisses when I was 17 years old and I 'm 21 [ this month ] so there is four years of growth involved , " Simpson said in an interview with Coventry Newspapers in July 2001 . In an interview with Cosmopolitan in June 2001 , she explained , " This record is about who I am now . The music is edgier , and I 'm all grown up . " According to Terri <unk> , author of People in the News : Jessica Simpson and Nick Lachey , Simpson hoped her new image would bring more attention to the power of her voice . " It 's not just me singing about being in love . I also have heartbreak songs and girls telling off guys songs . It 's going to take me a while to recoup [ on ] this album , because we spent a lot of money on it , " Simpson said to Entertainment Weekly . 
 = = Development = = 
 Simpson started working on the album in mid @-@ July 2000 . While compiling songs for Sweet Kisses , she had expressed inconvenience when a track 's lyrics were too suggestive or delivered a message she did not agree with and thus asked for its modification . However , for Irresistible , she decided to let Tommy Mottola , the CEO of Columbia , take control of the whole project . He enlisted many established composers and producers for the album , hand @-@ picked each song for the track list , and rejected those he felt were not so good . Although she had previously announced that she would write a few songs for her second album , Simpson does not share songwriting credits on any of the tracks . On being asked why , she said that she was very shy when it came to songwriting and felt that it requires a lot of " bravery " to write songs . She also expressed that she could not find the right words for the songs and hence did not write for the record . According to Simpson , the album did not have a definite concept or theme ; Mottola selected songs which they felt were good enough for Simpson and compiled them into an album . 
 Described as being very sexy and more grown up by Simpson , the opening title track was written by the Swedish duo Anders Bagge and Arnthor Birgisson , in collaboration with English singer @-@ songwriter Pamela Sheyne . Birgisson told music technology magazine Sound on Sound that they started developing the song after Sheyne proposed the title and concept . Bagge and Birgisson developed the melody and completed the song 's lyrics . Sheyne also sings backing vocals in the song . " A Little Bit " was written by Kara DioGuardi , along with Steve Morales and David Siegal . Although she had the written songs for other artists including Kylie Minogue and Martine McCutcheon , the song became DioGuardi 's first writing credit for an artist from her native country . Simpson said that " the message behind the song is for the guys to listen to the girl . " The next track , " Forever in Your Eyes " , was co @-@ written by Lachey , along with Rhett Lawrence . 
 Walter Afanasieff , long @-@ time Mariah Carey collaborator , worked with Simpson on three cuts from Irresistible . One of the songs , " When You Told Me You Loved Me " , was written by Afanasieff in collaboration with Billy Mann . In an interview with <unk> , Simpson named the song as one of her favorites and said , " I really base that on a situation of a friend of mine whose parents are divorced . I like the emotion behind that song . " Cory Rooney wrote " Hot Like Fire " solely , which Simpson described as " certainly not kid stuff " , a song " with a lot of attitude . " Louis Biancaniello and Sam Watters were also brought in to write and produce songs for the album . One of the cuts , " For Your Love " , according to Simpson , is reminiscent of " I Wanna Love You Forever " ( 1999 ) . Simpson covered the gospel hymn " His Eye is on the Sparrow " as the last song of the album . She said , " I wanted to give my audience a piece of my heart and soul . The message is there 's so much in life that can get you discouraged , but if you trust that you 're being watched over , you have a reason to live and a sense of freedom . It 's different for everyone , but for me , my relationship with God is the way I clear out the shadows that hang in our lives . " 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 <unk> selected Cory Rooney as the executive producer of Irresistible . Most of the recording and mixing works were done at Sony Music Studios , New York City and was completed over a time span of eight months . Rooney also coordinated the recording process while Robert Williams miked the vocals . Sony 's C @-@ <unk> Tube <unk> Microphone , equipped with a dual large diaphragm and electronically selectable pick @-@ up pattern , was used to record the vocals . In an interview with Sony 's <unk> magazine in 2002 , Williams said of his choice : " In the studio , it comes down to what you hear . [ ... ] She has such a big range , from a whisper to really belting it out , and you need a microphone that can handle the range without distortion . " He had used the microphone for Simpson 's first album and felt that it suited her well . He also noted that on ballads , " the S 's and wet sounds of lips " are important to the texture of the song . According to him , as Simpson 's vocals tended to be " bright " , he edited the lower ends of her voice to equalize the track . 
 To mix the tracks , a Sony Oxford Console was used . Audio engineer Mick Guzauski explained to <unk> that he used the console 's " Automated EQ feature " on the tracks . He said that he could " tailor the frequency responses and dynamics within each song with optimum equalizer at every pitch and level . " For the Afanasieff tracks , the background vocals and overdubs were accomplished on the Oxford console at his Wally World Studio B , at San Rafael , California . Simpson 's label @-@ mate and Latin singer Marc Anthony is featured as a guest vocalist on the ballad " There You Were " . Simpson met Anthony at the taping of the TV special A Christmas in Washington in 2000 . They talked to each other , and proposed recording a song on both of their next albums . They sang the song side by side in the studio and the whole song was completed within six hours . " Forever in Your Eyes " was one of the first songs to be recorded for the album , and was produced by Rhett Lawrence . It was recorded at Sony Music Studios within two hours . Rodney Jerkins , who was acquainted with Mottola , produced two cuts on Irresistible . In an interview with Sony Music Japan , Simpson said that she never met Jerkins in person . He produced and recorded the songs ' music and sent the tape to Columbia , from which " Imagination " and " I Never " were selected . Cory Rooney produced Simpson 's vocals and Tony Maserati mixed the vocals . Initially , Simpson did not want to record " What 's It Gonna Be " as she felt the line " Are you gonna be a dog or a gentleman " was a little awkward . However , due to her record label 's persuasion , she recorded the song and ultimately became fond of it . In order to record the title track , Simpson traveled to Murlyn Music Studios , in Sweden . " A Little Bit " was produced by Ric Wake ; although he produced many songs for the album , only " A Little Bit " made the final cut . The Japanese version of the album contains a bonus track — the Hex Hector remix of " Irresistible " — for which Simpson re @-@ recorded her vocals . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Simpson described Irresistible 's material as " Mariah Carey meets Britney Spears ... very mature but accessible to teens . " She said that she wanted to blend house , R & B , pop genres into the record . The opening track , " Irresistible " , is an R & B song with dance @-@ pop influences . It also exhibits elements of pop rock and funk genres , while incorporating latin rhythms . Aside from including a string section , the track features Simpson 's breathy vocals , spoken passages and a mid @-@ section breakdown , where her vocals are " funk @-@ fortified " . According to author Ben Graham , the lyrics of the song see Simpson stripping her famous virginity image down . Bob Waliszewski of Plugged In gave a similar observation of the lyrics , writing that they point to an imminent sexual compromise . " A Little Bit " is a dance @-@ pop song following the same beat @-@ oriented pattern as " Irresistible " . It features piano instrumentation and Simpson sings the lyrics as rapid @-@ fire verses and with start @-@ and @-@ stop hooks . Simpson again adopts breathy vocals , and the lyrics talk about what she expects from her partner : " A little more time , a little less wait / A little more heart , a little less break " . The lyrics also demand healthy changes in her relationship . " Forever In Your Eyes " explores elements of Latin music , as the song is backed by Spanish guitar and infused with hip @-@ hop beats . The lyrics describe a couple in love lying together " all through the night " . " There You Were " is a torchy power ballad which drew comparisons to Simpson 's previous song " Where You Are " ( 2000 ) . The lyrics of the song are a homage to the protagonist 's partner , who changed her life . The song received negative response from critics , with some calling it " sappy " and " unnecessary " . " What 's It Gonna Be " is a bubblegum pop song influenced by ' 80s funk music , which was compared to outtakes from Spears ' Oops ! ... I Did It Again ( 2000 ) . The lyrics deal with Simpson expecting a reply from her lover regarding his fear of commitment . 
 " When You Told Me You Loved Me " is another power ballad about love , this time utilizing a spanish guitar . Backed by a full 60 piece orchestra , the song and Simpson 's vocals were compared to that of Mariah Carey and Celine Dion . " Hot Like Fire " , which received positive reviews from critics , is a funky mid @-@ tempo number . Compared to the likes of Michael Jackson and Destiny 's Child , the song begins with a " faux " telephone call between Simpson and her friend ; the latter explains that Simpson 's boyfriend has been cheating on her . The lyrics , sung with " hard edge vocals " over synth horns , hip @-@ hop beats , and electronica rhythms , demonstrate Simpson 's annoyance at being cheated on by her boyfriend . " Imagination " is a song with electronic and R & B influences . Rick de <unk> of The Daytona Beach News @-@ Journal commented that the song contained Stevie Wonder @-@ styled funk music . " To Fall in Love Again " and " For Your Love " are ballads ; the former is backed by a 60 piece orchestra , and Peter Marsh of BBC Music noted it " morphs [ ... ] into an R 'n'B tinged slow jam . " It also contains a jazz breakdown , towards its end . Bob Waliszewski wrote that through the latter , " Simpson pledges devotion to a partner " . " I Never " , produced by Darkchild , infuses Spanish guitars , and has an " urban " tinge . The song portrays the theme of self @-@ respect , and has Simpson getting rid of her cheating partner . The closing track , the cover of the hymn " His Eye Is on the Sparrow " , is backed by a gospel choir and " praises God for watching over His children " . Reviewers called it one of the standout tracks from the album . According to Kirsten Koba of PopMatters , Simpson sings it " with a depth and passion that is lacking on the rest of the album . " 
 = = Artwork , title and release = = 
 The album artwork for Irresistible was shot by Alberto Tolot in April 2001 . The front sleeve cover shows Simpson , wearing heavy makeup and with blond hair , dressed in a semi @-@ transparent shirt , raising it a bit to expose her navel . Simpson said " God gave me my body , you know . I 'm just doing what I can to make it look good . " Later in an interview with the Orlando Sentinel , she said that the album art was " a sign of confidence " . However , the cover received negative attention from many critics , including the conservative Christian publication Plugged In , which was a strong supporter of Simpson and her virgin image , and Sweet Kisses . They stated , " If anything , Irresistible copes with temptation by yielding to it which , in conjunction with Simpson 's general immodesty , models a dubious sexual ethic . " Canadian music magazine Chart also gave a negative response , writing " it takes more than wearing see @-@ through clothes , with airbrushed , non @-@ existent nipples , to show that you have matured . " A few critics criticized the art for being digitally edited , while others commented on Simpson 's similarity to Spears . The Japanese version of the album has the same front sleeve artwork as that of " Irresistible " single . 
 The title of the album was tentatively set to be Hot Like Fire , later changed to Imagination , before being confirmed to be Irresistible on March 16 , 2001 . In the United States , Irresistible was initially slated for release on March 20 , 2001 . However , due to undisclosed reasons , the release was pushed to June 5 , 2001 . A listening party was arranged by AOL on June 4 , 2001 , a day before the album 's release date . The album 's release was celebrated with a release party at the New York Water Club . Simpson rode down Manhattan 's East River on a yacht decorated with banners for the celebration , which included a water ski show , a fireboat spraying water , and fireworks . Simpson said the album 's release was a critical moment in her career , one " which could send her to stardom or obscurity . " In an interview , she said " I 'm right there ready to explode . " " Or I could go <unk> [ sic ] . No one could ever hear from me again , " she added . In the United Kingdom , Irresistible was released on July 16 , 2001 , and in Japan on May 25 , 2001 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon release , Irresistible was not well received by critics who said the album sounded generic and over @-@ produced . Chuck Campbell of Daily News gave the album a rating of 2 @.@ 5 out of 5 . He said the album was " nothing but a footnote " , and remarked that the songs sounded too similar to works by Spears and Aguilera . He concluded by commenting on Simpson 's version of " His Eye Is on the Sparrow " : " So if her pop fortunes fail , perhaps she 'll find some contemporary Christian singers to imitate . " Teresa Gubbins of The Dallas Morning News wrote that it " doesn 't do much to set her apart . It 's likable but definitely not distinctive – just another formulaic entry into the already saturated teen @-@ pop field . " She gave the album a grade of C. 
 David Browne of Entertainment Weekly gave the album a D and said that it " should have been called ' Relentless ' . Exploiting every cliché in the pop 2001 handbook – florid ballads seemingly formulated for movie soundtracks [ ... ] it quite literally hits you baby , and more than one time . " Although he gave Simpson credit for being able to sing , he said that she did it in a " talent show manner " . Kirsten Koba of Popmatters commented that " Irresistible is more reminiscent of trips to the dentist 's office , or any equally oppressive place that only plays adult contemporary schlock . " Barry Walters of Rolling Stone wrote that except " Hot Like Fire " , every other track on Irresistible needed remixing . He concluded by saying , " With so many teen @-@ pop choices , this prom @-@ queen cyborg remains redundant and reactionary . " Sal Cinquemani of Slant called the album a " lackluster sophomore " effort . He commented that there was no " original note " on the album and compared the tracks to those by Spears . 
 Allmusic critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine graded the album 2 @.@ 5 stars out of 5 , and commented that the album was " filled with frothy , sugary pop tunes . " He said that , apart from the title track and " A Little Bit " , none of the songs " register as songs – they 're just stylish background music . " He concluded by commenting , " it 's a bit of the inverse of Sweet Kisses , which was too heavy on ballads , and , like that record , this is the work of pros , so it sounds fine as it plays but it lacks a song as strong as ' I Think I 'm in Love With You ' to anchor it – so it floats away from memory . " Peter Marsh of the BBC said the album sounded like a mixture of Spears , Aguilera , Carey and Dion , and wrote that it covered all the " bases " . Larry Printz of The Morning Call called the album " pleasant , palatable modern pop . " He wrote that the album was " clearly the best of the lot " , and commended Simpson 's vocals . Chuck Taylor of Billboard described " What 's It Gonna Be " like " another bid for chart domination " . He viewed the album as " a great step forward for youth pop and sure footing for [ this ] glamorous talent . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States , Irresistible debuted at number six on the Billboard 200 , the week dated June 23 , 2001 . It sold 120 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , a major improvement over Sweet Kisses , which sold just 65 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . However , the album dropped to number twelve the following week , before falling to number twenty @-@ five the week after . The album stayed on the charts for just sixteen weeks , and was ranked at number 171 on the Billboard 200 @-@ year @-@ end albums chart . It was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipments of 500 @,@ 000 copies in the country , and as of February 2009 , Irresistible had sold 755 @,@ 000 copies in the US . In Canada , Irresistible debuted at number fifteen on the Canadian Albums Chart for the week dated June 23 , 2001 . It ascended to its peak of number thirteen the following week before dropping out of the top twenty the week after . Irresistible was certified gold by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) in April 2005 , for shipments of 50 @,@ 000 units . 
 Overseas , in Australia , the album debuted at number eighty @-@ one on the ARIA Albums Chart , in the issue dated September 17 , 2001 . It dropped out of the chart the next week . Similarly , Irresistible debuted at number seventy @-@ five on the Austrian Albums Chart , the week of August 5 , 2001 . It rose to its peak position of number fifty @-@ eight the next week . In Switzerland , the album debuted at number twenty , the week dated July 8 , 2001 . After attaining its peak position of number fifteen , it dropped to number sixteen . The album stayed on the charts for a total of ten weeks , including one re @-@ entry at number ninety @-@ five on September 16 , 2001 . In Japan , Irresistible debuted at number twenty @-@ five on the Oricon Albums Chart , with sales of 9 @,@ 560 copies . The following week , it ascended to number twenty @-@ four with additional sales of 12 @,@ 430 units . The album stayed in the top 100 for six weeks , and according to Oricon , has sold 44 @,@ 580 copies in Japan . In the United Kingdom , Irresistible peaked at a position of number 103 . The album saw moderate success in Germany , where it peaked at number thirty @-@ four , and stayed on the chart for three weeks . According to The Daytona Beach News @-@ Journal , the album has achieved multiplatinum sales worldwide . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 As a part of promotion , Simpson performed tracks from the album on several televised appearances and occasions , including Macy 's 4th of July Fireworks Spectacular , in celebration of Independence Day , and the 2001 Dick Clark 's New Year 's Rockin ' Eve . In July 2001 , she performed the tracks , including " Irresistible " at Wango Tango , an annual all @-@ day concert organized by KIIS @-@ FM , in California . She also toured with Destiny 's Child , Nelly , and Eve on MTV 's first Total Request Live ( TRL ) Tour , which spanned thirty dates in the US . In November , she joined the lineup of United Service Organizations ' ( USO ) Tour , to entertain the US troops fighting in Operation Enduring Freedom . The tour , which started in Arlington , Virginia , ventured through the Middle East , including Afghanistan . The next month , she joined the cast of KBKS @-@ FM 's Jingle Bell Bash in Seattle . At the event , she performed " Irresistible " , " A Little Bit " , " I Wanna Love You Forever " , and " I Think I 'm in Love with You " . Simpson also promoted the album through performance at MTV 's Spring Break program , held in Cancún , Mexico . 
 = = = DreamChaser Tour = = = 
 Apart from the live performances , Simpson went out on a North America only headlining tour titled the DreamChaser Tour . In contrast to her previous co @-@ headlining tour with 98 Degrees , Simpson wanted " DreamChaser " to present her as a singer and a performer , in the mold of Spears . Simpson decided to make the tour risque by adding more backup dancers and wearing <unk> clothing . She took dance lessons for the tour , as she felt that she had to transform herself into a performer . The tour was set up on a portable stage called the " Extreme Mobile Venue " , with a capacity to hold 10 @,@ 000 people , and ran in mall parking lots . The arena featured a 300 feet ( 91 m ) stadium stage , complete with a sound system and lights . Arrangements for concertgoers to bungee jump , climb a rock wall , and go mechanical surfing while the singer was not performing were also provided . The venue featured interactive games and exhibits , and was supported by a 9 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) -high ramp for extreme motorcycle riders . The tour openers included Eden 's Crush , Youngstown , Toya , and Plus One . It was choreographed by Dan <unk> . 
 The tour launched on August 7 , 2001 , at Corpus Christi , Texas , and ran twenty @-@ five dates through mid @-@ September . Tickets price ranged between $ 29 @.@ 99 and $ 39 @.@ 99 . In an interview with Deseret News , Simpson said that it " was a fun tour . That was like a preparation for me . It was one of those things where I just wanted to go out and meet all my fans . " A video tape , titled Dream Chaser , was released on January 22 , 2002 , which included Simpson 's biography , music videos , behind @-@ the @-@ scenes looks at " Irresistible " and " A Little Bit " , and footage from the tour . The tape reached number twenty @-@ five on Billboard Top Music Videos chart , for the issue dated February 9 , 2002 . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 The lead single from the album , " Irresistible " , was released on April 12 , 2001 , as a CD single . The song received generally negative reviews from music critics . They criticized the sexuality of its lyrics and the over @-@ usage of digital sound manipulators , with Associated Press calling it " unimaginative " . In 2003 , the song won a Broadcast Music Incorporated ( BMI ) " Pop Music Award " . " Irresistible " became a moderate commercial success , peaking within the top twenty hit in the United States and the United Kingdom . The song was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . The accompanying music video was directed by Simon Brand , and features Simpson dressed as a spy , trying to compromise some evidence in a laboratory . 
 " A Little Bit " was released as the second single , on October 29 , 2001 . The song was used to promote Bally Total Fitness and thus , a limited CD single pressing was made available to people who joined the club . The song only managed to reach number sixty @-@ two on the Australian Singles Chart . A music video , directed by Hype Williams , features Simpson dancing in a futuristic spaceship @-@ like setting , with her backup dancers . " When You Told Me You Loved Me " was planned as the album 's third single but later canceled . The single however charted and peaked at number 192 on the South Korean Download Chart . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Irresistible liner notes . 
 Musicians 
 Production 
 = = Recording locations = = 
 Adapted from Irresistible liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Charles Pomeroy Stone = 
 Charles Pomeroy Stone ( September 30 , 1824 – January 24 , 1887 ) was a career United States Army officer , civil engineer , and surveyor . He fought with distinction in the Mexican – American War , earning two brevet promotions for his performance in the conflict . After resigning and surveying for the Mexican Government , he returned to the U.S. Army to fight in the American Civil War . 
 Stone was reportedly the first volunteer to enter the Union Army , and during the war he served as a general officer , noted for his involvement at the Battle of Ball 's Bluff in October 1861 . Held responsible for the Union defeat , Stone was arrested and imprisoned for almost six months , mostly for political reasons . He never received a trial , and after his release he would not hold a significant command during the war again . Stone later served again with distinction as a general in the Egyptian Army , and is also noted for his role in constructing the base of the Statue of Liberty . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Stone was born in Greenfield , Massachusetts , a son of Alpheus Fletcher Stone , the town 's doctor , and his wife Fanny Cushing . In 1841 he entered the United States Military Academy at West Point and graduated four years later , standing seventh out of 41 cadets . He was appointed a brevet second lieutenant of ordnance on July 1 , 1845 . 
 = = Military career = = 
 = = = Ordnance officer = = = 
 Stone stayed at West Point , serving as an assistant professor and teaching geography , history , and also ethics from August 28 , 1845 , to January 13 , 1846 . Afterwards he was posted to the Watervliet Arsenal in New York as Assistant Ordnance Officer , and then to Fortress Monroe at Old Point Comfort , Virginia , both in 1846 . While there Stone worked in the facilities arsenal and was an assistant to Capt. Benjamin Huger , whom he would serve under in the war with Mexico . 
 = = = Mexican war = = = 
 Fighting with Maj. Gen. Winfield Scott 's army in the Mexican – American War , Stone was promoted to second lieutenant on March 3 , 1847 . He first saw action during the Siege of Veracruz from March 9 – 29 , then the skirmishing near <unk> on May 14 , and the Battle of Contreras on August 19 – 20 . Stone then fought notably during the Battle of Molino del Rey on September 8 , and was appointed a brevet first lieutenant from that date for " gallant and meritorious conduct " in this fight . 
 On September 13 , 1847 , Stone participated in the Battle of Chapultepec , and was appointed a brevet captain for his conduct on that day . He then fought in the Battle for Mexico City until September 15 , and was part of a successful climbing party of the volcano at <unk> , raising an American Flag at its summit . He was an original member of the Aztec Club of 1847 , a military society formed by U.S. Army officers who had served in Mexico . 
 = = = Pacific coast = = = 
 After the war with Mexico ended , Stone returned to the Watervliet Arsenal in 1848 , again taking up his position as Assistant Ordnance Officer . He then was granted a leave of absence from the U.S. Army , and proceeded to Europe to study military practices of the armies there for two years . In 1850 he resumed duty at the Watervliet Arsenal briefly , and then was given command of the Ft . Monroe Arsenal into 1851 . Later that year Stone was appointed Chief of Ordnance for the Pacific Department , a post he held until 1855 , and also began construction of the Benicia Arsenal in California that year . During this time he was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant , effective February 26 , 1853 . 
 Also in 1853 Stone married Maria Louisa Clary , daughter of Esther Philipson and Lt. Robert Emmett Clary , a West Point classmate of Jefferson Davis ; Davis served as best man at Esther 's wedding on March 31 , 1829 . On November 17 , 1856 , he resigned his commission in the U.S. Army , " finding the pay inadequate " for his family . He briefly became a banker in 1856 in San Francisco , but the bank failed the following year due to the " ... absconding of its treasurer . " Stone then went back to Mexico , where he worked in various government jobs . From 1857 to 1860 he surveyed the Mexican state of Sonora , and from 1858 to 1860 he surveyed the lower region of California . Also from 1858 to 1859 Stone served as acting consul at Guaymas , Mexico , the municipal center of Sonora . In 1860 he moved his family back to the U.S. , settling in Washington , D.C. In 1861 he published his survey findings , entitled Notes on the State of Sonora . 
 = = = Civil War = = = 
 At the outbreak of secession , Stone found himself in Washington writing his report on Sonora . After a dinner with his former commander Winfield Scott , Stone was requested to be Inspector General of the District of Columbia Militia at the rank of colonel as of January 1 , 1861 , and was thus reputed to be the first volunteer officer mustered into the Union Army before the Civil War . In this role , he secured the capital for the arrival of President @-@ elect Abraham Lincoln , and was personally responsible for security at the new president 's inaugural . 
 Stone was appointed Colonel of the 14th U.S. Infantry Regiment on May 14 , and then a brigadier general in the Union Army that August , to rank from May 17 . He commanded a brigade in Maj. Gen. Robert Patterson 's Army of the Shenandoah during the First Bull Run campaign in June and July . Stone then was given command of a division , called the Corps of Observation , guarding the fords along the upper Potomac River that fall . 
 In his efforts to carry out his orders and maintain discipline , Stone drew the attention and wrath of his home state 's governor , John A. Andrew , and Charles Sumner , the senior U.S. Senator from Massachusetts , both powerful and influential Radical Republican politicians . In late September Stone issued general orders that required his men " not to incite and encourage insubordination among the coloured servants in the neighbourhood . " When two runaway slaves came into their lines , one of his regiments , the 20th Massachusetts Infantry , promptly caught them and returned them to their owner . This was done in compliance with Stone 's orders as well as both Federal and Maryland law . However , many of the 20th Massachusetts were abolitionists , disagreed with Stone 's insistence on returning runaways back into slavery , and wrote both their families and their representatives about the incident . Governor Andrew strongly reprimanded the colonel of the regiment , who gave the letter to Stone . After reading it Stone wrote back , its contents summarized by military historian Bruce Catton as follows : " this regiment was in United States service now and the governor had no business meddling with discipline , the young lieutenant and the colonel had properly done what they were told to do and were not subject to reprimand from any governor , and would the governor in future please keep his hand off ? " 
 More heated letters passed between Andrew and Stone , and then Andrew involved Sumner , who quickly and strongly denounced Stone to the U.S. Senate . Stone 's written response to this — described as " in terms so bitter that it almost seemed as if he were challenging the senator to duel " — further inflamed the situation . Stone 's dealings with these two men would have tragic consequences in his near future . 
 = = = = Ball 's Bluff = = = = 
 On October 20 , 1861 , Stone was ordered by Maj. Gen. George B. McClellan to conduct a reconnaissance across the Potomac River to report on Confederate activities in Leesburg , Virginia . McClellan also hoped this action , combined with a movement by Brig. Gen. George A. McCall 's division of 13 @,@ 000 men toward <unk> the day before , would encourage a Confederate withdrawal from the area without an engagement occurring . This message from McClellan 's staff related the situation and outlined Stone 's orders : 
 General McCall occupied <unk> yesterday , and is still there . Will send out heavy reconnaissances today in all directions from that point . The general desires that you keep a good lookout upon Leesburg , to see if this movement has the effect to drive them away . Perhaps a slight demonstration on your part would have the effect to move them . 
 From this order Stone reasonably believed he had support nearby from McCall if needed ; what he did not know was that McClellan had ordered McCall back to his previous position at Langley on October 21 , putting any help for Stone further away . Stone 's division numbered about 10 @,@ 000 men and was posted around <unk> , Maryland , about eight miles from Leesburg , with portions of his command at points along the Potomac shore . He moved his artillery to Edward 's Ferry along the Potomac , from which he could shell the woods on the opposite side of the river , held by Confederate forces . Stone then sent three small boats with about 100 men from the 1st Minnesota Infantry across , who returned shortly without incident . Near sunset he sent out a small patrol of 20 soldiers of the 15th Massachusetts Infantry to scout toward Leesburg and see whether the Union movements had the desired effect or not . Crossing at Harrison 's Island on the river , these men scaled Ball 's Bluff and encountered what they believed was a Confederate camp of at least thirty men less than a mile inland . The patrol returned to Harrison 's Island around 10 p.m. and reported by messenger to Stone at Edwards Ferry . 
 In response to this report , Stone thought the Confederate forces were indeed leaving Leesburg , and decided to investigate further . While he led part of his command directly across at Edwards Ferry at 5 p.m. , Stone ordered Col. Charles Devens and 300 men of his 15th Massachusetts to immediately cross over to Ball 's Bluff that night . Stone 's instructions were to " March silently under cover of night to the position of the camp [ and ] attack and destroy it at daybreak ... and return rapidly to the island . " Devens carried out Stone 's orders and made the difficult crossing on three small 10 @-@ man boats , taking him four hours to accomplish . Stone also gave Devens discretion over what to do after the attack ; either hold Leesburg or return to Harrison 's Island . Stone ordered the rest of the 15th Massachusetts over and added the 20th Massachusetts Infantry , under Col. William R. Lee , to this effort as well , and ordered General and U.S. Senator Edward D. Baker to take overall command . Devens found no camp , since an earlier patrol apparently confused corn shocks as tents in the evening shadows ; he halted and asked Stone for instructions , who responded to push closer to Leesburg . Devens determined to hold there , waiting several hours for reinforcements , when skirmishing began at 7 a.m. , before Baker had arrived . 
 Confederate Col. Nathan G. " Shanks " Evans was in charge of the forces opposing Stone , and when he learned of the crossings he split his 2 @,@ 000 @-@ man command . Three of his regiments were ordered to deal with Stone by blocking the road from Edwards Ferry to Leesburg , while the remainder fought and defeated Baker 's force at Ball 's Bluff . Since Baker sent no updates , Stone had no idea a battle was occurring there , and finding his path blocked by Confederates Stone returned to Edwards Ferry . He then moved toward Harrison 's Island , learned of the defeat at Ball 's Bluff , and quickly asked McClellan for help from McCall , whom he thought nearby but was actually more than twenty miles away . 
 Stone lost about 1 @,@ 000 men killed , wounded , captured , and drowned during Ball 's Bluff , while the Confederates lost less than 160 . The Union total included Baker , the only sitting U.S. Senator killed in combat when " Four bullets ripped into him , and he was dead before he hit the ground . " . Baker 's death and the action at Ball 's Bluff would have serious consequences for Stone , and also affect the way the American Civil War would be prosecuted . In his official report about the battle on October 24 , McClellan did not hold Stone personally responsible for the defeat , saying " The disaster was caused by errors committed by the immediate Commander — not General Stone . " 
 = = = = Arrest and imprisonment = = = = 
 Stone bore the brunt of much public criticism ; the U.S. Congress Joint Committee on the Conduct of the War was established in the wake of Baker 's congressional eulogies and anger over the defeat . This seven @-@ man group called Stone as one of their first witnesses about the Ball 's Bluff affair , and all testimony given by him and 38 others was kept secret . Before the end of October 1861 , Stone 's official report about Ball 's Bluff had been leaked to the New York Tribune newspaper , and in it Stone praised Baker 's bravery but made clear his shortcomings as a field commander . Baker 's congressional allies , among them Governor Andrew and Senator Sumner , openly denounced this report and began to point accusing fingers at Stone , not at Baker . Stone 's loyalty to the Union and position on slavery were more in question than his military abilities and decisions . The committee 's questions accused him of improper and frequent communications with the Confederates , of not re @-@ enforcing Baker , of using his men to protect slaveholder property in Maryland , and of returning runaway slaves to their owners — despite the last two of these following Maryland as well as Federal law . Another problem for Stone defending himself was an order from McClellan forbidding him to give testimony " regarding his [ McClellan 's ] plans , his orders for the movement of troops , or his orders concerning the position of troops . " This made it impossible for Stone to explain his movements to the committee , but kept McClellan out of the investigation as well . 
 Under a cloud for suspected disloyalty and treason , Stone was arrested just after midnight on February 8 , 1862 , on orders of Maj. Gen. McClellan , who was acting under orders from Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton , dated January 28 . Awaiting Stone near his home in Washington were 18 soldiers led by Brig. Gen. George Sykes . When Stone approached , Sykes stated " I have now the most disagreeable duty to perform that I ever had — it is to arrest you . " When Stone angrily asked why , Sykes said " I don 't know . It 's by order of Maj. Gen. George B. McClellan , general @-@ in @-@ chief of the army ... I may as well tell you that you are to be sent to Fort Lafayette . " This shocked Stone , who stated " That 's where they send secessionists ! I have been as true a soldier to the Government as any in service . " 
 Under guard , Stone was ordered to be sent to the military prison at Fort Lafayette by train . When he reached the rail depot at Philadelphia , confusion as to payment for his ticket caused Stone to buy his own ticket . Upon reaching the facility he was put immediately into solitary confinement , but he managed to hire an attorney and waited for official charges to be filed . According to the Articles of War this had to be done within eight days of an arrest , but was never done in Stone 's case . He sent several inquiries to McClellan , to the army 's adjutant general 's office , and to Stanton himself , who stated " ... the charges were being reviewed prior to being publicized ... " , but received no satisfactory explanation . 
 Contrary to U.S. Army regulations as well , no charges were ever filed against Stone nor did he stand trial . While he was in solitary confinement at Fort Lafayette , he could not exercise , and consequently Stone 's health began to degrade . His physicians protested heavily to Stanton , who ordered him transferred to the military prison at Fort Hamilton . There Stone was allowed to exercise and his condition improved . He stayed at Fort Lafayette for fifty days , and would spend another 139 in Fort Hamilton . Stone was finally released without explanation or apology on August 16 , 1862 . The reason for his release was new legislation written by California Senator James A. McDougall . In a small addition to another bill , McDougall reiterated the Articles of War requirement that official charges be filed within eight days of arrest , but went on to include that any imprisoned officer must be given their trial within thirty days . McDougall also made it clear this legislation applied to those currently under arrest , which covered Stone 's case . It passed the U.S. Congress and was signed into law by President Lincoln on July 17 , 1862 . Stanton then waited the thirty days before releasing Stone . 
 It may , or may not be that President Lincoln ordered the arrest of Stone . In a communication of September 30 , 1862 , General in Chief H. W. Halleck wrote about Stone ’ s arrest : “ I understood that it was made by the orders of the President . ” 
 = = = = Release and reassignment = = = = 
 After his release , Stone returned home to Washington and awaited orders , and also continued to try to clear his name . Despite the arrest and confinement , Stone 's services were still in demand . In September 1862 , as the Maryland Campaign developed , McClellan asked the War Department to re @-@ instate Stone , but Stanton declined . When Maj. Gen Joseph Hooker took over command of the Army of the Potomac in early 1863 , he asked for Stone as his chief of staff , but Stanton denied this request as well . On February 27 , Stone was finally allowed to hear the testimony that caused him to be arrested , and with McClellan no longer his commander Stone could freely answer the accusations . He did this to the Committee 's satisfaction , who soon afterwards published its revised findings , clearing Stone . With the facts now known , the New York Times newspaper editorialized : 
 General Stone has sustained a most flagrant wrong — a wrong which will probably stand as the very worst blot on the National side in the history of the war . 
 Without assignment until May , Stone was ordered to the Department of the Gulf , serving as a member of the surrender commission at Port Hudson and in the Red River Campaign as Maj. Gen. Nathaniel P. Banks 's chief of staff . However , on April 4 , 1864 , Stanton ordered Stone mustered out of his volunteer commission as a brigadier general and he reverted to his rank of colonel within the regular army . He served briefly as a brigade commander in the Army of the Potomac during the Siege of Petersburg , but finally resigned from the Army on September 13 , 1864 , before the end of the war . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After the American Civil War ended in 1865 , Stone worked as an engineer and later superintendent for Virginia 's Dover Mining Company until 1869 . The following year William T. Sherman , by now the U.S. Army 's Commanding General , recommended Stone for service in the Egyptian Army . From 1870 to 1883 he served as chief of staff and general aide @-@ de @-@ camp for the khedive Isma 'il Pasha of Egypt . While there he was given the rank of lieutenant general and the title of Ferik Pasha . Stone 's career in the Egyptian Army has been described as : 
 Stone served the Khedive well , implementing a general staff , expanding Egypt 's boundaries , and establishing schools for the education of Egypt 's soldiers and their children . He remained in the service of Khedive Ismail ( and Ismail 's successor , son Tewfik ) for 13 years . When the British bombarded Alexandria , and Arabi led the revolt of the Egyptian army , Stone stayed with Tewfik in Alexandria , even while his wife and daughters were trapped in Cairo . 
 Stone later returned to the United States , where he worked as an engineer for the Florida Ship Canal Company in 1883 . He also served as the Chief Engineer for the construction of the Statue of Liberty 's pedestal and concrete foundation . He fell ill after the dedication ceremony and died in New York City . Stone is buried in West Point National Cemetery . 
 Stone 's first wife Maria died in Washington , D.C. , shortly after Stone 's release from Fort Hamilton . While serving in New Orleans during 1863 , Stone fell in love with Jeanne Stone and they had two daughters and a son , John Stone Stone , who later became a pioneer in the field of wireless telegraphy . Stone was also an original founding member of the Aztec Club of 1847 , a social organization for officers who served in the Mexican – American War . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Military historian Ezra J. Warner held Stone 's treatment following Ball 's Bluff in disdain , saying in 1964 : 
 The arrest and imprisonment of Stone is without parallel in the annals of American military and / or civil jurisprudence .... he was victim of a demonstration on the part of the Joint Committee on the Conduct of the War to avenge the death of one of their colleagues and to make it known that this was war to the knife , and a war to end slavery as well as to preserve the Union . 
 = Gangnam Style = 
 " Gangnam Style " ( Korean : <unk> , IPA : [ <unk> <unk> ] ) is the 18th K @-@ pop single by the South Korean musician Psy . The song was released on July 15 , 2012 , as the lead single of his sixth studio album Psy 6 ( Six Rules ) , Part 1 , and debuted at number one on South Korea 's Gaon Chart . On December 21 , 2012 , " Gangnam Style " became the first YouTube video to reach one billion views . The song 's music video has been viewed over 2 @.@ 61 billion times on YouTube , and has been YouTube 's most watched video since November 24 , 2012 , when it surpassed the music video for " Baby " by Justin Bieber . 
 The phrase " Gangnam Style " is a Korean neologism that refers to a lifestyle associated with the Gangnam District of Seoul . The song and its accompanying music video went viral in August 2012 and have influenced popular culture worldwide since then . " Gangnam Style " received mixed to positive reviews , with praise going to its catchy beat and Psy 's amusing dance moves ( which themselves have become a phenomenon ) in the music video and during live performances in various locations around the world . In September 2012 , " Gangnam Style " was recognized by Guinness World Records as the most " liked " video on YouTube . It subsequently won Best Video at the MTV Europe Music Awards held later that year . It became a source of parodies and reaction videos by many different individuals , groups and organizations . 
 By the end of 2012 , the song had topped the music charts of more than 30 countries including Australia , Canada , France , Germany , Italy , Russia , Spain , and the United Kingdom . As the song continued to rapidly gain popularity and ubiquity , its signature dance moves were attempted by many notable political leaders such as the British Prime Minister David Cameron , U.S. President Barack Obama , and United Nations Secretary @-@ General Ban Ki @-@ moon , who hailed it as a " force for world peace " . On May 7 , 2013 , at a bilateral meeting with South Korea 's President Park Geun @-@ hye at the White House , U.S. President Barack Obama cited the success of " Gangnam Style " as an example of how people around the world are being " swept up " by the Korean Wave of culture . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " Gangnam Style " is a Korean neologism that refers to a lifestyle associated with the Gangnam District of Seoul , where people are trendy , hip and exude a certain supposed " class " . The term was listed in Time 's weekly vocabulary list as a manner associated with lavish lifestyles in Seoul 's Gangnam district . Psy likened the Gangnam District to Beverly Hills , California , and said in an interview that he intended in a twisted sense of humor by claiming himself to be " Gangnam Style " when everything about the song , dance , looks , and the music video is far from being such a high class : 
 People who are actually from Gangnam never proclaim that they are — it 's only the <unk> and wannabes that put on these airs and say that they are " Gangnam Style " — so this song is actually poking fun at those kinds of people who are trying very hard to be something that they 're not . 
 The song talks about " the perfect girlfriend who knows when to be refined and when to get wild " . The song 's refrain " <unk> <unk> <unk> ( <unk> Gangnam style ) " has been translated as " Big brother is Gangnam style " , with Psy referring to himself . During an interview with The New York Times , Psy revealed that the Korean fans have huge expectations about his dancing , so he felt a lot of pressure . In order to keep up with expectations , he studied hard to find something new and stayed up late for about 30 nights to come up with the " Gangnam Style " dance . Along the way , he had tested various " cheesy " animal @-@ inspired dance moves with his choreographer , including panda and kangaroo moves , before settling for the horse trot , which involves pretending to ride a horse , alternately holding the reins and spinning a lasso , and moving into a legs @-@ shuffling side gallop . 
 During an interview with Reuters , Psy claimed that " Gangnam Style " was originally produced only for local K @-@ pop fans . On July 11 , Psy and his music label YG Entertainment started releasing several promotional teasers for " Gangnam Style " to their subscribers on YouTube . On July 15 , 2012 , the full music video of " Gangnam Style " was uploaded onto YouTube and was immediately a sensation , receiving about 500 @,@ 000 views on its first day . However , in Germany , an ongoing dispute between YouTube and the GEMA ( the country 's performance rights organization ) regarding copyright issues has led to thousands of music videos including " Gangnam Style " being blocked in the country . 
 = = = K @-@ pop and the Korean Wave = = = 
 According to the news agency Agence France @-@ Presse , the success of " Gangnam Style " could be considered as part of the Korean Wave , a term coined by Chinese journalists to refer to the significant increase in the popularity of South Korean entertainment and culture since the late 1990s . 
 Korean popular music ( K @-@ pop ) , considered by some to be the most important aspect of the Korean Wave , is a music genre that relies on cultural technology to adapt to the tastes of foreign audiences and has now grown into a popular subculture among teenagers and young adults in many places around the world . Although it has spread to the Middle East , Eastern Europe , and parts of South America , its reception in the Western world has so far been lukewarm . However , social media networks such as YouTube , Facebook and Twitter have made it easier for K @-@ pop musicians to reach a wider audience in the West . According to Mark James Russell from Foreign Policy , while the Korean Wave " may not ( yet ) turn heads in Los Angeles or London " , this could soon change because of " Gangnam Style " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The song has received mixed to positive ratings from music critics . Billboard K @-@ Town columnist Jeff Benjamin became one of the first music critics to review the song when he published an article and reported that " Gangnam Style " has gone viral on the Internet . In his article , Benjamin introduced the reader to a couple of popular K @-@ pop songs and wrote that " Gangnam Style " in particular , plays all the right moves sonically while " borrowing from LMFAO along the way " . 
 The next day , Hallie <unk> of The Huffington Post quoted from the video 's official YouTube video description that the song is characterized by its " strongly addictive beats " , and wrote that this is not too far @-@ fetched , considering " how obsessed we 've found ourselves . " London 's mayor Boris Johnson considered the song to be the greatest cultural masterpiece of 2012 . 
 Despite its popularity , a few music critics including Robert Copsey from Digital Spy criticized the song for being monotonous . Cospey wrote that " you could slap an LMFAO tag on the cover and few would know the difference " and Paul Lester of The Guardian similarly labelled it as " generic ravey Euro dance with guitars " . Lester described the song as " Pump Up the Jam meets the Macarena with a dash of Cotton Eye Joe " while Robert Myers of The Village Voice dismissed " Gangnam Style " as an " inspired piece of silliness " . 
 = = = = South Korea and Japan = = = = 
 Cha Woo @-@ jin , a South Korean music critic , told The <unk> Ilbo that " Gangnam Style " ' s sophisticated rendering and arrangement has made it very appealing to the general public . Choe Kwang @-@ <unk> , the South Korean Minister of Culture , Sports and Tourism , told reporters that " Gangnam Style " had played an important role in introducing the Korean culture , language , and lifestyle to the rest of the world . However , some have criticized the song for failing to accurately represent South Korean culture . Oh Young @-@ Jin , managing editor of The Korea Times , wrote that the dance has more to do with Americans than Koreans . 
 In Japan , the song has met with considerable criticism . When " Gangnam Style " first appeared in Japanese TV shows in July , the reaction from viewers was negative . As a result , Psy 's Japanese record label <unk> cancelled a previously planned Japanese language re @-@ release of " Gangnam Style " . According to The Dong @-@ a Ilbo , a South Korean newspaper , the song 's lukewarm reception in Japan could have been caused by a diplomatic conflict between the two countries and the newspaper accused the Japanese media of keeping its people " in the dark " . However , Jun <unk> of the Japanese daily newspaper Asahi Shimbun explained that " Gangnam Style " had caused " barely a ripple in Japan " because Psy does not conform to the image of other " traditionally polished " K @-@ pop acts popular in Japan such as Girls ' Generation and TVXQ . Erica Ho from Time magazine similarly noted that despite the K @-@ pop musical genre being very popular in Japan , the country seemed to be " immune to PSY Mania " and she advised her readers who dislike the song to " pack your bags for Japan " . 
 Immediately after its release , " Gangnam Style " was mentioned by various English @-@ language websites providing coverage of Korean pop culture for international fans , including Allkpop and <unk> . Simon and Martina <unk> , a Canadian couple living in Seoul who were among the first to parody " Gangnam Style " in late July , wrote that the song has the potential to become " one of the biggest songs of the year " . However , during an interview with Al Jazeera a few weeks later , Martina <unk> claimed that the worldwide popularity of " Gangnam Style " has been viewed negatively by some K @-@ pop fans , because " they [ the fans ] didn 't want K @-@ pop being liked by other people who don 't understand K @-@ Pop " . This view is also supported by the British journalist and K @-@ pop fan <unk> <unk> , who wrote that the song has managed to " find its way into our clubs " while the best K @-@ pop songs are limited to niche groups on social media websites . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 = = = Asia = = = 
 Following the release of " Gangnam Style " , Psy made several performances on television and at concerts in Korea . Early performances included his appearance on the weekly South Korean music program , The Music Trend . Psy also performed at several concerts prior to his departure to the United States , including during " The <unk> Show " and the Summer Stand Concert in Seoul . After returning to South Korea , Psy performed " Gangnam Style " during a free concert that he held outside the Seoul City Hall . More than 80 @,@ 000 fans attended the event , leading to the closure of part of the city center and an increase in subway operations . While Psy was in the US , it was announced that he , as ambassador of the Formula One Korean Grand Prix , would perform " Gangnam Style " at the event during the 2012 edition . At the event Psy taught Formula One drivers Mark Webber and Sebastian Vettel how to perform the dance . 
 On November 28 , Psy visited Thailand and held his concert " Gangnam Style Thailand Extra Live " at the SCG Stadium in Muang Thong Thani , Bangkok . At the show , a part of celebration for the 85th birthday of Thai 's King Bhumibol Adulyadej , he performed the song along with his other hits . During the 2012 Mnet Asian Music Awards held in Hong Kong on November 30 , he performed the song on stage , joined by the video 's co @-@ star Hyuna and Yoo Jae @-@ Seok look @-@ alikes in yellow suits . The track was one of three @-@ song setlist on Psy 's free showcase , held at the Marina Bay Sands in Singapore on December 1 , 2012 . 
 On February 11 , 2013 , Psy arrived at the Malaysian state of Penang and performed " Gangnam Style " at a concert in front of more than 100 @,@ 000 guests , including the Prime Minister of Malaysia Mohd Najib Abdul Razak as well as other high @-@ ranking politicians from the country 's ruling Barisan Nasional party . 
 = = = Oceania = = = 
 In early October 2012 , Psy travelled to Sydney , Australia and performed " Gangnam Style " on The X Factor , a reality TV music competition , where Melanie Brown joined him in performing the " horse dance " on stage . The following day , he performed on breakfast TV show Sunrise in Martin Place , Sydney . 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 Psy 's first public performance in Europe was on November 5 , 2012 in France , where he and 20 @,@ 000 fans danced " Gangnam Style " in front of the Eiffel Tower in Paris during a flashmob organized by NRJ Radio . Then , he travelled to Oxford and performed a short rendition of " Gangnam Style " with students from the Oxford Union , before moving on to the <unk> House in London where he danced " Gangnam Style " with the BBC 's radio DJ Scott Mills . Shortly afterwards , Psy left for Cologne and met up with the German comedian and television host Stefan Raab during the popular late @-@ night show TV total , where Psy gave an interview and performed " Gangnam Style " for Raab . During the 2012 MTV Europe Music Awards held in Frankfurt on November 11 , Psy delivered a performance of " Gangnam Style " which featured a David Hasselhoff appearance and backup dancing of Psy look @-@ alikes . 
 In early 2013 , Psy returned to France for the 2013 NRJ Music Awards at the Palais des Festivals et des Congrès in Cannes , where he began performing " Gangnam Style " on the red carpet before finishing the rest of the choreography on stage and leaving the ceremony with 3 awards . 
 = = = North America = = = 
 Following the viral success of his music video , Psy left for the United States and performed " Gangnam Style " in various locations . On August 20 , Psy posted on Twitter " Bringing # <unk> to the Dodgers – Giants game this evening " . Dodger Stadium presented a segment called " Psy Dance Cam " where they showed clips of the music video , followed by live shots of baseball fans dancing , and then Psy , who waves and does the dance . Two days later , Psy appeared on VH1 's Big Morning Buzz Live show , and taught television hosts Carrie <unk> and Jason Dundas how to dance " Gangnam Style " . 
 On September 6 , Psy appeared at the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards performing his " Gangnam Style " dance alongside comedian Kevin Hart . After the event , he would make several more appearances on US TV programs . On September 10 , he appeared on The Ellen DeGeneres Show in Burbank , California , introducing himself as " Psy from Korea " , before teaching Britney Spears the dance . He described the dance as " pretending to bounce like riding on an invisible horse " and when Ellen told Britney she would have to remove her high @-@ heeled shoes to perform the dance Psy protested that no , the point was , ' to dress classy , and dance cheesy . ' On September 14 , he appeared on NBC 's morning program Today in New York City for its Toyota Concert Series , where he performed the song and also taught the anchors the dance . The September 15 season premiere episode of Saturday Night Live featured a sketch based on the song and its video . Bobby Moynihan portrayed Psy , but was joined mid @-@ sketch by Psy himself . He also made his second appearance on The Ellen Show 's September 19 episode to perform the song along with his backup dancers . On September 22 , Psy made an appearance at the iHeartRadio Music Festival to perform " Gangnam Style " . Psy , dressed in a black jacket , blue pants , two @-@ tone shoes and his signature shades , appeared on the US national TV show The View on October 25 and performed the song for Barbara Walters and the ladies of the show who donned sunglasses and got out of their seats . 
 On November 13 , he joined the American recording artist Madonna on stage during her concert at Madison Square Garden in New York City and they performed a mashup of the song and her 2008 hit " Give It 2 Me " . Psy later told reporters that his gig with Madonna had " topped his list of accomplishments " . On November 18 , Psy , who rocked out in traditional Hammer pants , closed out the 40th American Music Awards show with a performance of " Gangnam Style " , joined by surprise guest MC Hammer who brought in his own moves and Psy 's horse @-@ riding dance as the song mashed into his 1990s hit " 2 Legit 2 Quit " . Jason Lipshutz of Billboard commented that " Psy 's feverish rendition of ' Gangnam Style ' accomplished what so few award show performances can : a palpable sense of excitement . The combination of the K @-@ pop star and MC Hammer ... was a stroke of genius that very few could have seen coming " , choosing it as the best performance of the night . The Tonight Show with Jay Leno did a special Thanksgiving broadcast with an all @-@ military audience on November 22 , and Psy dropped by as the musical guest . The singer sang the song and danced alongside the soldiers , going into the crowd for part of his performance . 
 Psy performed " Gangnam Style " during the second night of KIIS @-@ FM Jingle Ball concert at Nokia Theatre L.A. Live on December 3 , 2012 . He ― wearing an all @-@ red outfit including a sparkling , sequined top ― sang the song at TNT 's Christmas in Washington special , attended by the US President Barack Obama and his family , and held at the National Building Museum On December 9 . On December 16 , he performed the song at the halftime show of the NFL game between the Buffalo Bills and Seattle Seahawks in Toronto . During the Dick Clark 's New Year 's Rockin ' Eve event at Times Square in Manhattan on December 31 , 2012 , more than one million people witnessed a live " Gangnam Style " performance by Psy as he was joined on stage by characters ( Yoo Jae @-@ Seok , Noh Hong @-@ <unk> ) from the song 's video for the first part of the performance , before MC Hammer appeared to perform a mash @-@ up of the song and " 2 Legit 2 Quit " . 
 = = = South America = = = 
 During the five @-@ day Carnival in Rio attended by more than 5 million people , Psy performed " Gangnam Style " with singers Claudia Leitte and Gilberto Gil to mark the 50th anniversary of Korean immigration to Brazil . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 After the release of " Gangnam Style " , the American talent manager Scooter Braun , who discovered Justin Bieber on YouTube , asked on Twitter " How did I not sign this guy ( Psy ) " . Soon afterwards , it was reported that Psy had left for Los Angeles to meet with representatives of Justin Bieber , to explore collaboration opportunities . On September 3 , Braun made a public announcement that was later uploaded onto YouTube , saying that he and Psy have decided to " make some history together . [ To ] be the first Korean artist to break a big record in the United States . " On September 4 , it was confirmed that Psy was signed to Braun 's School Boy Records . 
 The music video for the song has gone viral and is an Internet meme . Although Psy attributed the song 's popularity to YouTube and his fans while at the same time insisted that he is not responsible for the song 's success , the South Korean Ministry of Culture , Sports and Tourism recognized the singer for " increasing the world 's interest in Korea " and announced its decision to award Psy with a 4th Class Order of Cultural Merit . 
 The phrase " <unk> Gangnam Style " was entered into The Yale Book of Quotations as one of the most famous quotes of 2012 . 
 = = = Social = = = 
 As the song 's popularity continued to rise , it caused the share price of the song 's music label YG Entertainment to gain as much as 50 % on the Korea Exchange . DI Corporation , whose executive Chairman Park Won @-@ Ho is Psy 's father , saw its share price increase by 568 @.@ 8 % within a few months of the song 's release despite making a year @-@ over @-@ year loss . Soon , " Gangnam Style " began to attract the attention of several business and political leaders , including UN Secretary @-@ General Ban Ki @-@ moon who recognized the song as a " force for world peace " . During his meeting with Psy at the United Nations Headquarters , he commented , " We have tough negotiations in the United Nations . In such a case I was also thinking of playing Gangnam Style @-@ dance so that everybody would stop and dance . Maybe you can bring UN style . " 
 Through social networks like Facebook , many small , unofficial fan @-@ organized flash mobs have been held in universities and colleges throughout the world . The earliest flash mobs were held in Pasadena , California , and Sydney , Australia . On September 12 , Times Square in Manhattan was filled with a dance mob dancing to the music of " Gangnam Style " during ABC 's Good Morning America . Major flash mobs ( those with more than 1 @,@ 000 participants ) were also held in Seoul ( South Korea ) , South Sulawesi ( Indonesia ) , Palermo ( Italy ) , Milan ( Italy ) , and Paris ( France ) . 
 The song has been tweeted by the United Nations , the United Nations Children 's Fund , the American space agency NASA , mentioned by a reporter during a U.S. State Department briefing and referenced by the President of the International Criminal Court Song Sang @-@ Hyun during his speech in front of the UN Security Council . On October 9 , the Mayor of London Boris Johnson held a speech at the 2012 Conservative Party Conference where he told the audience that he and the British Prime Minister David Cameron have danced " Gangnam Style " . A few days before the conference , they had performed the dance at Chequers Court in Buckinghamshire . During a Google Earnings call , Larry Page , the CEO and co @-@ founder of Google , hailed the song as a glimpse of the future of worldwide distribution through YouTube . 
 The American Council on Exercise estimated that dancing " Gangnam Style " will burn 150 – 200 calories per half @-@ hour and the song was used by Northampton General Hospital to promote hand washing as part of the 2012 Global <unk> Day on October 15 . <unk> , an input method for Android operating systems , included " Gangnam Style " in its list of recognized words and phrases . 
 U.S. President Barack Obama revealed possible plans to privately perform " Gangnam Style " for his spouse Michelle Obama . 
 In November 2012 , a Maori cultural group from Rotorua performed a version of the Gangnam Style dance mixed with a traditional Maori haka in Seoul , celebrating 50 years of diplomatic relations between South Korea and New Zealand . 
 In Thailand , officials from the Dan Sai municipality in Loei Province shot a video of people wearing masks and performing " Gangnam Style " during the Phi Ta <unk> " ghost " festival . According to the Thai newspaper The Nation , villagers and spiritual leaders from Loei province felt " uneasy " and also " greatly offended " about this " Gangnam Style " performance which tarnishes the image of a 400 @-@ year @-@ old tradition . Another controversial incident was sparked by a " Gangnam Style " parody by officers from the Royal Thai Navy , which was not well received by some high @-@ ranking commanders . Although Vice Admiral <unk> <unk> from the Third Naval Area Command insisted that " we had no intention to insult or make fun of navy officers in uniform " , some senior officers have called it " improper " . <unk> claimed that his subordinates had the right to upload the video to YouTube , although he did not expect them to do so . On October 1 , 2012 , he issued an apology to his colleagues . Commander <unk> <unk> believes an investigation is unnecessary because the video caused no damage to the Navy , but he admits that there was some impropriety about military officers doing their " fancy stepping in uniform " . 
 = = = Popular culture = = = 
 = = = = Music = = = = 
 In mid @-@ September , the Brazilian singer Latino released the song " Despedida de <unk> " ( " The Bachelor 's Party " ) , which is supposed to be a cover of " Gangnam Style " . Many felt offended by his disrespectful lyrics , and some have called it a plagiarized copy of " Gangnam Style " . While Psy 's original lyrics talk about the lifestyle of the Gangnam people , Latino 's version is about a man that is enjoying his bachelor 's party in a club , wanting ( and having ) sex with many women , so drunk that he says he does not know if he 's really going to get married the next day . Latino had stated that it was an authorized version . 
 = = = = Sports = = = = 
 Since September 2012 , the dance has been performed by athletes in international competitions . These people include : 
 Serbian tennis player Novak Djokovic , 
 Jamaican cricketer Chris Gayle , who danced " Gangnam Style " twice during the West Indies ' match against Ireland and then repeated the act during the 2012 ICC World Twenty20 match against England . Bangladesh national cricket team also celebrated their ODI series win against West Indies with " Gangnam Style " dance on December 8 , 2012 . 
 Filipino boxer Manny Pacquiao , Uruguayan footballer Edinson Cavani , 
 = = = = Television = = = = 
 In Fall 2012 , a cover version of the song was performed on the Fox TV show Glee in the episode " Thanksgiving " . 
 The dance was also shown on the Argentine TV series Graduados , performed by the Argentine @-@ Korean actor Chang Kim Sung . 
 <unk> and Rylan Clark , finalists of the British music competition The X Factor , lip @-@ synced and danced to " Gangnam Style " in a promotion . 
 = = = = Other = = = = 
 On September 27 , Eric Schmidt , the executive chairman of Google was reported to have danced " Gangnam Style " when he visited the company 's office in Seoul . Nick Carbone from TIME described it as cringe @-@ worthy because " It 's the same reason why you 'd never want to see your dad planking on top of the family car " . 
 = = = Political and environmental activism = = = 
 On September 18 , 2012 , the North Korean government became the first to use " Gangnam Style " for political activism when it uploaded a parody with the title " I 'm Yushin style ! " onto the government website <unk> . The parody mocks the South Korean ruling conservative party presidential @-@ elect Park Geun @-@ hye . It shows a <unk> image of the presidential candidate performing the dance moves of " Gangnam Style " and labels her as a devoted admirer of the Yushin system of autocratic rule set up by her father , Park Chung @-@ hee . A few weeks later , " <unk> style " ( literally , " Grass Mud Horse Style " ) , was uploaded onto YouTube and other Chinese websites by the political activist and dissident Ai Weiwei . In his parody , Ai Weiwei dances " Gangnam Style " with a pair of handcuffs as a symbol of his arrest by Chinese authorities in 2011 . According to the Associated Press , government authorities had removed the video from almost all Chinese websites the next day . 
 South Korean President Park Geun @-@ hye took office on February 25 , 2013 . At her inauguration Psy performed " Gangnam Style " and " Champion " , one of his first hits in his native country . 
 In order to show his solidarity with Ai Weiwei and to advocate the freedom of expression , the British sculptor Anish Kapoor produced the video Gangnam for Freedom , which features other prominent British artists as well as human rights activists from various international organisations including Index on Censorship and Amnesty International . A few days before , the global grassroots network Students for a Free Tibet had uploaded a parody of " Gangnam Style " to show its support for the Tibetan independence movement . According to Max Fisher from The Washington Post , this parody of " Gangnam Style " was likely to be filmed in Dharamshala , the home of Tibet 's government @-@ in @-@ exile in the northern Indian state of Himachal Pradesh . 
 Greenpeace announced that it was " Going Gangnam , Greenpeace Style " in order to raise public awareness about illegal and unsustainable fishing practices off the coast of Mozambique . Activists from Greenpeace had parodied " Gangnam Style " on board the organization 's excursion yacht Rainbow Warrior . 
 Songdo , a ubiquitous city 40 miles ( 65 km ) west of Gangnam , was among five cities vying for the right to host the Green Climate Fund ( GCF ) , a project developed by the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change to channel $ 100 billion a year from developed countries to help developing countries combat climate change . During its campaign to win the right to host the GCF , the country 's Presidential Committee on Green Growth produced a promotional video entitled " GCF Songdo Style by Psy " in which Psy recommends Songdo as the host city for the GCF . He announces that a " new paradigm " will begin at Songdo with the GCF and the video heralds " The beginning of Songdo Style " while " Gangnam Style " plays in the background . On October 20 , 2012 , the Board of the GCF announced that Songdo had won the right to host the fund . 
 In December 2012 , the Department of Health in the Philippines launched a " Gangnam Style " dance campaign against the use of firecrackers to celebrate the New Year . Janine <unk> , 2012 Miss Universe 1st runner @-@ up , joined and danced on one of their campaign at <unk> , Manila . According to the Department 's Assistant Secretary , Dr. Eric <unk> , the popularity of the song will attract people especially children to use safer means of celebration such as dancing " Gangnam Style " . In contrast , the Philippine National Police was confirming intelligence reports about a firecracker named " Gangnam bomb " , which supposedly produced by illegal firecracker makers in <unk> , Bulacan and apparently riding on the popularity of the song . According to Chief Superintendent Raul <unk> , director of the Firearms and Explosives Office of the Philippine National Police , he did not know what the possibly dangerous " Gangnam bomb " looks like . 
 Muhammad Rahim al Afghani , a close associate of Osama bin Laden currently held at the Guantanamo Bay detention camp , had also used the song to demonstrate his ability to gain access to popular cultural trends despite being confined within a top secret prison . In a letter to his lawyer , Muhammad wrote , " I like this new song Gangnam Style . I want to do the dance for you but cannot because of my shackles . " 
 = = = Other parodies and covers = = = 
 Reaction videos and parodies have been made for or with the music respectively . Some of these user generated videos have received international media recognition . " Gangnam Style " -related videos have also been uploaded by the CPDRC Dancing Inmates , Cody Simpson , Seungri , Latino , Fine Brothers , Barely Political , and the Tampa Bay Buccaneers Cheerleaders . 
 College campuses have spawned numerous parodies . The Massachusetts Institute of Technology 's version ( " MIT Gangnam Style " ) featured Donald <unk> , recognized in Time Magazine as one of 2012 " Top 100 Most Influential People in the World " , Eric Lander , who is co @-@ chairman of President Barack Obama 's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology , and linguistics pioneer Noam Chomsky . In addition , there are parodies from The Ohio University Marching 110 , York University , McMaster University , Cornell University , University of Oregon , University of Illinois at Urbana – Champaign , Boston University , Dartmouth College , Stanford University Colegio de la Preciosa Sangre de Pichilemu , Eton College , and the University of Michigan . 
 The American space agency NASA uploaded an educational parody shot by its students at its Mission Control Center in Houston , Texas . The video features cameo appearances by astronauts Tracy Caldwell Dyson , Mike Massimino , Michael Coats , Ellen Ochoa , and the International Space Station 's Expedition 15 flight engineer Clayton Anderson , who dances " Gangnam Style " halfway through the video . Shortly after its upload , the parody was re @-@ tweeted by the European Space Agency and the SETI Institute . 
 The song was also parodied by cadets from the United States Military Academy , United States Merchant Marine Academy , United States Naval Academy , United States Air Force Academy , and the Royal Military College of Canada ; soldiers from the 210th Fires Brigade , the 2nd Infantry Division , servicemembers from an undisclosed unit and location in Afghanistan , servicemembers from the China Coast Guard 's Jiangsu division , 150 officers from the People 's Liberation Army Air Force , as well as high @-@ ranking officers from the Royal Thai Navy . CollegeHumor uploaded Mitt Romney Style ; while What 's Trending uploaded Obama Style . During the two weeks before August 7 , nearly 1 @,@ 000 videos with the word " Gangnam " in the title were uploaded onto YouTube . 
 Psy parodied his own video of the song , in an advertisement for pistachio nuts during Super Bowl XLVII . 
 The Portuguese public broadcaster <unk> spoofed the song in its late @-@ night show 5 Para A <unk> @-@ <unk> as <unk> com Style , sung by the comedian Pedro " Pacheco " Fernandes , criticizing the Prime Minister Pedro Passos Coelho , the European Union , the IMF and the 2010 – 13 Portuguese financial crisis . 
 There are many " Gangnam Style " parodies used for education , similar to " The Elements " , a humorous song in which a man recites the elements on the periodic table to a well @-@ known tune . One such parody includes " Conjugation Style " , a parody used to teach students about the conjugation of -er verbs in the French language . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The success of " Gangnam Style " is a result of the build @-@ up of South Korea 's music industry that has been in the works for over 20 years , and it has led to other K @-@ pop artists positioning themselves for a similar breakthrough in the U.S. music industry . Frances Moore , chief executive of the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry , brought up Gangnam Style as an example of how South Korea became one of the " most successful exporters of repertoire " . 
 = = = Increased interest in the Korean Wave = = = 
 According to the news agency Agence France @-@ Presse , the success of " Gangnam Style " has led to the further rise and spread of the Korean Wave to other countries . As the song continued to attract worldwide media attention , it also led to various broadcasting networks and national newspapers focusing its attention on K @-@ pop and other aspects of Korean culture . For example , The Daily Telegraph published an article recommending its readers to try out everything from K @-@ Pop to " K @-@ Cars " , " K @-@ Phones " and " K @-@ Cuisine " . The British multinational grocery and retailer Tesco reported that its total sales of Korean food had more than doubled as a result of the popularity of " Gangnam Style " . Kim <unk> @-@ gi , the Korean Ambassador to Lebanon , wrote that " Gangnam Style " has helped bridge Lebanese and Korean cultures . The French @-@ born political commentator Tim <unk> , a Research fellow at Monash University , agrees that the Gangnam phenomenon is " something worth studying " . According to <unk> , the world is only beginning to appreciate Gangnam Style as " part of a broader <unk> cultural wave coming out of the country [ South Korea ] " . 
 = = = South Korea = = = 
 In 2012 , the South Korean government announced that " Gangnam Style " had brought in $ 13 @.@ 4 million to the country ’ s audio sector , and it subsequently launched a campaign to further expand the K @-@ Pop music industry overseas . According to the Bank of Korea , the country 's services account recorded a surplus of USD 2 @.@ 3 billion in the first nine months of this year , compared to a deficit of USD 4 @.@ 5 billion last year . This was mainly due to the growing influence and popularity of K @-@ pop songs such as " Gangnam Style " . However , the American journalist John Seabrook noted that by " satirizing standard K @-@ pop tropes in Gangnam Style " , Psy may have subverted the music genre 's chances of making it big in the West . 
 = = = Music industry = = = 
 Record executives in the music industry believe that music charts will increasingly be filled with YouTube @-@ driven globalised acts from foreign countries . Sean Carey , a research fellow in the School of Social Sciences at the University of Roehampton , wrote that the flow of popular music will no longer be a single traffic route from North America and Europe to other parts of the globe , but will also move the other way as well . According to Adam Sherwin from The Independent , the global web demand for Gangnam Style had short @-@ circuited the " traditional reluctance " of radio stations to play foreign @-@ language songs . The song is also underlining a shift in how money is being made in the music business . Although Psy earned more than US $ 60 @,@ 000 from music sales of " Gangnam Style " in South Korea alone , he and his music label YG Entertainment have raked in almost US $ 1 million from advertisements which appear on YouTube videos identified for using " Gangnam Style " in its content . The Harvard Business Review published an article written by Kevin Evers , who explained how " Gangnam Style " had changed Billboard 's ranking methodology of its music charts . Instead of relying solely on radio plays and paid purchases , Billboard started to place a heavier emphasis on digital sales and YouTube views . As a result of the change , Gangnam Style moved up to the top position of Billboard 's Hot Rap Songs music chart . According to the British Phonographic Industry 's report based on Official Charts Company sales data , thanks to Psy 's song and Carly Rae Jepsen ’ s " Call Me Maybe , " pop became the UK ’ s favourite musical genre of the year , taking the lion ’ s share of the singles market ( 38 @.@ 5 % ) in 2012 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Psy – vocals , producer , songwriter ( lyrics and music ) 
 Yoo Gun @-@ hyung – producer , songwriter ( music ) , arrangement 
 Credits adapted from Psy 6 ( Six Rules ) , Part 1 EP liner notes and YG Entertainment official website . 
 = = Accolades and records = = 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 = = = Records attained = = = 
 The song and its accompanying music video currently hold , or have attained , the following records : 
 Most viewed K @-@ pop video on YouTube – On September 1 , 2012 , it overtook " Gee " by the 9 @-@ member K @-@ Pop idol @-@ group Girls ' Generation with 89 million views . 
 Most liked video on YouTube – On September 13 , 2012 , it overtook " Party Rock Anthem " by the American electro recording duo LMFAO upon receiving 1 @.@ 57 million " likes " , and subsequently won its first Guinness World Record one week later . 
 First K @-@ pop song to top the UK Singles Chart – On October 6 , 2012 , the song reached number one of the UK singles chart and Psy became the first South Korean musician to achieve that feat . 
 Most viewed video on YouTube – On November 24 , 2012 , it overtook " Baby " by the Canadian singer @-@ songwriter Justin Bieber after receiving more than 803 million views . 
 First video in Internet history to be viewed more than a billion times – On December 21 , 2012 , it acquired its billionth view at around 15 : 50 UTC . 
 First video in Internet history to be viewed more than two billion times – On May 31 , 2014 , it acquired its 2 billionth view . 
 = = = Year @-@ end media picks = = = 
 = = = = Song = = = = 
 " Gangnam Style " was ranked No. 25 on the Rolling Stone 's 50 best songs of 2012 list and No. 8 on SPIN 's 40 best songs of the year . The song also took the No. 8 spot on the 2012 Billboard 20 best K @-@ Pop songs list by Jeff Benjamin and Jessica Oak , who commented " [ the song ] stands out not only for its slick , electronic production but also for its deeper critique on high @-@ class society . " According to MTV 's list of the 2012 best songs , the song was ranked No. 8 with MTV news staff James Montgomery 's comment : " ' Gangnam ' is either the track we , as a culture needed right now , or the track we , as a culture , deserved " . TIME magazine chose it as the second best song of 2012 after Usher 's " Climax " , writing " The YouTube meme , a good @-@ natured , mind @-@ bendingly catchy lampoon [ ... ] turned into a global obsession " . The song was one of the best songs of the year on The New York Times pop critics ' list and E ! Online 's No. 1 pick on the top 10 pop songs of 2012 list . Digital Spy ranked the song No. 20 among the 20 best singles of the year . It was voted the 12th best single of 2012 by The Village Voice 's 40th annual Pazz & Jop critics ' poll . Music critic Robert Christgau placed " Gangnam Style " as the No. 2 single on his 2012 Dean 's List . 
 = = = = Video = = = = 
 The music video for " Gangnam Style " was chosen as the best music video of 2012 by TIME . Melissa Locker of the magazine wrote " The catchy song paired with social satire and tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek vibe has spread so quickly it reminds us why videos are called viral . The video has sparked an International dance craze and catapulted Psy to international super stardom . " Rolling Stone also ranked the video No. 1 on its " The Best Music Videos of 2012 " list , saying " The Korean auteur [ Psy ] conquered the world with his ' dress classy , dance cheesy ' aesthetic , blurring the line between parody and celebration . " The video took No. 4 position on the Digital Spy 's list of 10 top pop music videos of the year . 
 = = = Miscellaneous = = = 
 The music video came in first with 21 % rating in the 2012 Billboard.com 's readers poll , beating " Where Have You Been " by Rihanna ( 19 % ) and " Beauty and a Beat " by Justin Bieber featuring Nicki Minaj ( 11 % ) . The song was the most popular song played on New Year 's Eve and the most sung song on the day , leaving " Auld Lang Syne " in second place for the first time since 2005 , on karaoke company Lucky Voice 's online service in the United Kingdom . CNN readers picked " Gangnam Style " as the eighth best song of 2012 . The Week ( US edition ) ranked the song 's global popularity at No. 6 with the strapline " ' Gangnam Style ' takes over the world " on the 13 biggest pop culture moments of the year list . The phenomenon of the song and the video was also picked as one of the 2012 's most viral moments in music by Wendy Geller of Yahoo ! Music , and No. 2 on the 2012 top 20 music moments list after Whitney Houston 's passing by Billboard , being written " If there 's one meme , song and face that has been truly inescapable in the second half of 2012 , it 's South Korean rapper Psy and his outrageous ' Gangnam Style ' . " 
 On December 1 , 2014 YouTube announced that " Gangnam Style " had exceeded the number of views that are possible to store using a 32 @-@ bit signed integer , that being 2 @,@ 147 @,@ 483 @,@ 647 ( 231 − 1 , or two billion ) . As a result , YouTube was forced to upgrade to using 64 @-@ bit integers to store view numbers , with a maximum value of 9 @,@ 223 @,@ 372 @,@ 036 @,@ 854 @,@ 775 @,@ 807 ( 263 − 1 , or nine quintillion ) . " We never thought a video would be watched in numbers greater than a 32 @-@ bit integer , but that was before we met Psy , " stated a YouTube spokesman . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = = South Korea = = = 
 Upon its release , " Gangnam Style " was an enormous hit . The song went straight to number one on the Gaon Singles Chart on the fourth week of July , 2012 , with 816 @,@ 868 digital downloads , and spent five consecutive weeks at the top position of the chart , tying it with IU 's " Good Day " for the most weeks at number one single in the chart 's history . In addition , the song became the first @-@ place winner on various weekly chart shows such as M ! Countdown ( three straight weeks ) and Music Bank ( a total of 16 weeks including a record 10 @-@ consecutive @-@ week ) . According to the Korea Music Content Industry Association , " Gangnam Style " became the best selling song of 2012 in South Korea with 3 @,@ 842 @,@ 109 download sales . 
 The song debuted at number six on the Billboard Korea K @-@ Pop Hot 100 for the week of July 28 , 2012 . It then topped the chart the week after and remained at the summit for five consecutive weeks , tying IU 's record with " You and I " for the longest running number one song on the chart . The record , however , was broken by Lee Seung @-@ gi 's " Return " earned six weeks at the top spot from December 2012 to January 2013 . " Gangnam Style " took number one spot on the 2012 Billboard K @-@ Pop Hot 100 year @-@ end chart . 
 = = = Oceania = = = 
 In Oceania , " Gangnam Style " was a huge success . The single made its chart debut on the New Zealand Singles Chart at number 21 on September 3 , 2012 . After two weeks , the song reached in the top ten and the following week topped the chart , becoming the first K @-@ pop song and the first foreign language song in three decades to achieve that feat since German band Nena 's " 99 Luftballons " hit the top spot in March 1982 . The song remained atop the chart for two consecutive weeks before being deposed of the top spot by One Direction 's " Live While We 're Young " . After one week of the band 's reign , " Gangnam Style " regained its number one position and stayed at the top spot for a further four weeks , tallying a total of six non @-@ consecutive weeks atop the chart . The track was ranked in the top ten of the chart for 17 consecutive weeks before it fell to number 11 on the January 14 , 2013 chart . The song has been certified 4 × Platinum with sales exceeding 60 @,@ 000 by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) . " Gangnam Style " was the second biggest @-@ selling single of 2012 in the country behind Carly Rae Jepsen 's " Call Me Maybe " . 
 In Australia , the song debuted at number seven on the ARIA Singles Chart on September 17 , 2012 , becoming the highest debut for the week . It reached number one on the chart just three weeks after its release , overtaking " Battle Scars " by Guy Sebastian featuring Lupe Fiasco , and spent six consecutive weeks at the summit , making it the second longest running chart @-@ topper for 2012 behind Flo Rida 's " Whistle " remained at the pole position for seven weeks . As a result , Psy became the first artist to reach number one on the chart with a foreign language song since Las Ketchup topped the chart with " The Ketchup Song " in September 2002 , and the eighth overall . In addition , " Gangnam Style " was the first Korean song to enter the chart and to climb to the top spot in Australian chart history . After the single spent the first fourteen weeks in the top ten of the chart since its chart debut , it dropped to number eleven in its 15th week . The song , however , rebounded from the position to number three on the issue date of December 31 , 2012 . It descended to number 14 in its 18th week , ending a 16 @-@ week in the top ten , and out of the top 20 the following week , placed at number 23 . It has been certified 10 × Platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , with sales exceeding 700 @,@ 000 copies . " Gangnam Style " was placed at number two on the 2012 ARIA Singles year @-@ end chart behind Carly Rae Jepsen 's " Call Me Maybe " . The song is currently the fourth best @-@ selling single in Australian music history . 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 In European region , the song made a massive success as well , topping the charts in almost all countries . " Gangnam Style " made its first European chart appearance , entering the Danish Singles Chart at number 40 on August 3 , 2012 . It reached the top ten in its fifth week , and climbed to number four in its sixth . For the issue dated September 14 , 2012 , the song became Psy 's first number one on the chart , ending the one @-@ week reign of the Danish rock band Nephew 's " <unk> " . The song remained at the top position for seven consecutive weeks , tying it with " Somebody That I Used to Know " performed by Gotye featuring Kimbra for the longest running number one single on the chart for 2012 . In its 24th week , it climbed back to the top , giving it its 8th week in that position . The single spent 22 straight weeks in the top ten of the chart . In January 2013 , the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI Denmark ) certified the single 2 × Platinum , denoting sales of 60 @,@ 000 copies . 
 The song entered the UK Singles Chart at number 196 on September 1 , 2012 , and in its fourth week broke into the top 40 at number 37 . In its fifth week , the song reached the top five on the chart and eventually peaked at number one on the week of October 6 , becoming the first ever K @-@ pop song to achieve that feat . While the track only remained atop the chart for one week before being overtaken by Rihanna 's " Diamonds " , it spent a further 17 consecutive weeks in the top ten of the chart before it fell to number twelve on the January 26 , 2013 chart . The song was the sixth biggest selling single of 2012 with 878 @,@ 000 sales , and ranked at number 24 among the top 40 most streamed tracks of the year in the United Kingdom . According to Official Charts Company sales data , Gangnam Style has become not only the 129th track to sell over a million copies in the history of the UK ’ s Official Singles Chart , but also the first million seller by an Asian music star . On April 9 , 2013 , the song became 13th most downloaded single of all time in the UK . 
 Elsewhere in Europe , the song also peaked at number one on the German Singles Chart for two non @-@ consecutive weeks in 2012 . For the week of January 11 , 2013 , it returned to the summit , ending the ten @-@ consecutive @-@ week reign of " Diamonds " by Rihanna , and spent a week at the top . Psy 's song has remained in the top ten on the chart for a 19 straight week including fifteen in the top three position since October 2012 . It has been certified Gold by the Bundesverband Musikindustrie ( BVMI ) , denoting sales of 150 @,@ 000 copies . In addition , the single has remained number one in Austria for four non @-@ consecutive weeks , Belgium ( Flanders ) for five consecutive weeks , Belgium ( Wallonia ) for seven straight weeks , Czech Republic for one week , Finland for four consecutive weeks , France for six non @-@ consecutive weeks , Italy for a week , the Netherlands for two consecutive weeks , Norway for four straight weeks , Scotland for a week , Spain for twelve consecutive weeks , and Switzerland for three non @-@ consecutive weeks . It has additionally placed top five positions in Iceland , Ireland and Sweden , and top ten in Hungary and Slovakia . 
 = = = North America = = = 
 In the United States , " Gangnam Style " debuted at number 64 the Billboard Hot 100 in the week of September 22 , 2012 , with 61 @,@ 000 downloads sold , more than the total number of previous weeks ( 57 @,@ 000 ) , becoming the second K @-@ pop song to enter the chart behind the Wonder Girls ' " Nobody " , which spent a week at No. 76 on the Oct. 31 , 2009 , chart . The following week , the song rocketed to number eleven on the chart with 188 @,@ 000 downloads , seeing a sales increase of 210 % after Psy appeared on various TV shows such as The Ellen DeGeneres Show and NBC 's Today . In its third week , it rose to number two on the chart , topping the Hot Digital Songs chart with a 60 % increase to 301 @,@ 000 downloads sold and climbing to number nine on On @-@ Demand Songs chart . Since then , the song has peaked at the runner @-@ up spot for seven consecutive weeks behind Maroon 5 's " One More Night " , failing to gain in enough radio audience to ascend to the summit , although it ruled Hot Digital Songs for a fourth week and On @-@ Demand Songs for a fifth week during that period . While " One More Night " dominated the Radio Songs chart for eight weeks , " Gangnam Style " peaked at just number twelve on the chart . 
 For the week of November 24 , the song dropped to number five on the Hot 100 , despite leading in sales with 188 @,@ 000 downloads . In its 12th week , the single rebounded from number seven to number five with top Digital Gainer accolades , spurred by Psy 's show @-@ closing performance of the song with MC Hammer at the AMA . The track returned for a sixth week atop Hot Digital Songs with 229 @,@ 000 downloads sold including 41 @,@ 000 stemmed from the duet version , which mixed in Hammer 's 1992 No. 5 Hot 100 hit " 2 Legit 2 Quit . " It was the first song to spend six weeks at number one on the Digital Songs chart without reaching the top spot on the Hot 100 since Miley Cyrus ' " Party in the U.S.A. " in 2009 . After the song stayed in the top ten of the Hot 100 for 11 consecutive weeks , it dropped out of the top ten on the December 22 , 2012 chart , falling from number ten to number eleven . The following week , " Gangnam Style " descended to number 18 on the chart but achieved the milestone of 3 million downloads sold in the country , becoming the first and only K @-@ pop song to reach the mark . For the week of January 12 , 2013 , powered by consumers purchasing some of 2012 's most <unk> hits and radio airplay recounting the same in year @-@ end retrospectives , the song resurged from number 19 to number six with its best weekly total 400 @,@ 000 downloads sold , returning to the Hot 100 's top ten after three weeks out of the top ten . The track dropped to number 14 in its 18th week , ending a 12 @-@ week in the top 10 , and number 22 in its 19th week , despite staying in the top ten of Digital Songs chart with 192 @,@ 000 and 105 @,@ 000 copies sold , respectively . On February 20 , 2013 , Billboard and Nielsen announced the addition of U.S. YouTube video streaming data to its platforms , which includes an update to the methodology for the Billboard Hot 100 chart . Thanks to the change to reflect online video activity , " Gangnam Style " rebounded from number 48 to number 26 on the Hot 100 for the week of March 2 , 2013 . 
 On October 11 , 2012 , Billboard unveiled new methodology for the Hot Rap Songs chart , including digital download sales and streaming data for the first time , along with radio airplay audience impressions as measured by Nielsen BDS . Due to this , " Gangnam Style " soared from number 20 to number one on the October 20 , 2012 chart . The song spent eight consecutive weeks atop the chart before being overtaken by Flo Rida 's " I Cry " . After four weeks of his reign , " Gangnam Style " regained its number one position in the week of January 12 , 2013 . The track also peaked at number three on the Hot Dance / Club Play Songs chart in the week of November 17 , 2012 . The song was certified 4 × Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on April 19 , 2013 , denoting digital download sales of 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . According to Nielsen SoundScan , " Gangnam Style " became the 9th best selling song of 2012 in the United States with 3 @,@ 592 @,@ 000 download sales . In late January 2013 , the song topped the 4 million mark in digital sales , becoming the third comic / novelty song to reach the mark , following LMFAO 's " Sexy and I Know It " and Cee Lo Green 's " Fuck You ! " . 
 In Canada , " Gangnam Style " was a big hit just like the rest of the world . The song entered the Canadian Hot 100 chart at number 71 on the week of September 8 , 2012 . In its fourth week , it reached in the top ten of the chart , climbing to number three , and the following week hit the pole position . The single spent seven consecutive weeks atop the chart , making it the second longest running number one song of 2012 behind Maroon 5 's " Payphone " remained at the top for eight straight weeks . On the week of September 12 , 2012 , the song debuted at number seven on the Top 20 Digital Tracks chart , based on Nielsen SoundScan data . The following week it topped the chart and spent four weeks at the top spot before giving the summit to " I Knew You Were Trouble " by Taylor Swift . " Gangnam Style " , however , was back on top of the chart for the week of October 24 , and grabbed the number one position for another four straight weeks , tallying a total of eight non @-@ consecutive weeks atop the chart . On November 16 , 2012 , the track was certified 4 × Platinum by Music Canada , and as of January 2013 has sold over 476 @,@ 000 copies in the country . 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 On August 21 , 2012 , " Gangnam Style " charted number one on the iTunes Music Video Charts , overtaking Justin Bieber 's " As Long as You Love Me " and Katy Perry 's " Wide Awake " ; this feat is the first for any South Korean artist . From September 8 , 2012 to February 23 , 2013 , the song has also peaked and stayed at number one on Billboard 's YouTube Chart for 22 weeks , until being surpassed by " Stay " by Rihanna for one week ; It has since reclaimed its top position for a 30th week as of April , 2013 . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = " <unk> Is Just My Style " = = 
 " Gangnam Style " was officially re @-@ released on August 14 , 2012 , as " <unk> Is Just My Style " ( Korean : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , featuring additional vocals provided by Korean singer and <unk> member Hyuna . Mallika Rao of The Huffington Post wrote that the video was " apparently retrofitted here to work from a woman 's point of view , but the main difference we 're spotting is less invisible horse riding and more sultry side @-@ eyeing . " As of July 2016 , the accompanying music video has garnered over 640 million views on YouTube . 
 = Super Mario Bros. = 
 Super Mario Bros. is a platform video game developed and published by Nintendo as a pseudo @-@ sequel to the 1983 game , Mario Bros. It was originally released in Japan for the Family Computer on September 13 , 1985 , and later that year for the Nintendo Entertainment System in North America and Europe on May 15 , 1987 , and Australia later in 1987 . 
 It is the first of the Super Mario series of games . In Super Mario Bros. , the player controls Mario and in a two @-@ player game , a second player controls Mario 's brother Luigi as he travels through the Mushroom Kingdom in order to rescue Princess Toadstool from the antagonist Bowser . 
 In 2005 , IGN 's poll named the " pioneering " and " highly influential " title as the " greatest game of all time " , considering it to have aided in resurrecting the crashed American video game market of the 1980s . The game 's mid @-@ 1980s release served to further popularize the side @-@ scrolling subgenre of the already popular platform video game genre of the early 1980s . In addition to its definitive features , the game has also sold enormously well , and was the best @-@ selling game of all time for a single platform for approximately three decades at over 40 million units , until Nintendo 's Wii Sports took that title . The commercial success of Super Mario Bros. has caused it to be ported to almost every one of Nintendo 's major gaming consoles . Nintendo released special red variants of the Wii and Nintendo DSi XL consoles in re @-@ packaged , Mario @-@ themed , limited edition bundles in late 2010 as part of the 25th anniversary of the game 's release . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The player takes on the role of the main protagonist of the series , Mario . Mario 's younger brother , Luigi , is only playable by the second player in the game 's multiplayer mode , and assumes the same plot role and functionality as Mario . The objective is to race through the Mushroom Kingdom , survive the main antagonist Bowser 's forces , and save Princess Toadstool . The player moves from the left side of the screen to the right side in order to reach the flag pole at the end of each level . 
 The game world has coins scattered around it for Mario to collect , and special bricks marked with a question mark ( ? ) , which when hit from below by Mario , may reveal more coins or a special item . Other " secret " , often invisible , bricks may contain more coins or rare items . If the player gains a red and yellow Super Mushroom , Mario grows to double his size and can take one extra hit from most enemies and obstacles , in addition to being able to break bricks above him . Players are given a certain number of lives , and may gain additional lives by picking up green and orange 1 @-@ Up mushrooms , collecting 100 coins , defeating several enemies in a row with a Koopa shell , or bouncing on enemies successively without touching the ground . One life is lost when Mario takes damage while small , falls in a pit , or runs out of time . The game ends when all lives are lost . 
 Mario 's primary attack is jumping on top of enemies , though many enemies have differing responses to this . For example , a Goomba will flatten and be defeated , while a Koopa Troopa will temporarily retract into its shell , allowing Mario to use it as a projectile . These shells may be deflected off a wall to destroy other enemies , though they can also bounce back against Mario , which will hurt or kill him . Another attack , for enemies standing overhead , is to jump up and hit beneath the brick that the enemy is standing on . Another is the Fire Flower ; when picked up , this item changes the color of Super Mario 's outfit and allows him to throw fireballs , or only upgrades Mario to Super Mario if he has not already . A less common item is the Starman , which often appears when Mario hits certain concealed or otherwise invisible blocks . This item makes Mario temporarily invincible to most hazards and capable of defeating enemies on contact . 
 The game consists of eight worlds with four sub @-@ levels called " stages " in each world . The final stage of each world takes place in a castle where Bowser or one of his decoys are fought . The game also includes some stages taking place underwater , which contain different enemies . In addition , there are bonuses and secret areas in the game . Most secret areas contain more coins for Mario to collect , but some contain " warp pipes " that allow Mario to advance to later worlds in the game , skipping over earlier ones . 
 = = Development = = 
 Super Mario Bros. , the successor to the 1983 arcade title Mario Bros. , was designed by Shigeru Miyamoto and Takashi Tezuka , both of whom belonged to Nintendo 's former creative department at the time . Miyamoto designed the game world and led a team of seven programmers and artists who turned his ideas into code , sprites , music and sound effects . The development of SMB was thus an early example of specialization in the video game industry , made possible and necessary by the capabilities of the Famicom . 
 The game 's development was motivated by a desire to give Famicom ( i.e. , Nintendo Entertainment System game cartridges ) a swan song in light of the forthcoming Famicom Disk System , and to further progress Nintendo 's work on " athletic games " . Originally , the game was based around a shooting mechanic with very different controls . A desire to focus on jumping and the mapping of the mechanic to the A button resulted in it being dropped . Unlike in Mario Bros. , where Mario would be hurt by stomping on turtles without first flipping them on their backs , Mario could defeat turtles by stomping on their shells , as the developers decided the previous method had been illogical . The ability to have Mario change size was a result of basing level design around a smaller Mario , then intending to make his size bigger in the final version . They later decided it would be fun to have Mario become bigger as a power @-@ up . Early level design was focused on teaching players that mushrooms were distinct from Goombas and would be beneficial to them : In the first level of the game , the first mushroom is difficult to avoid if it is released . 
 Using mushrooms to change size was influenced by folk tales in which people wander into forests and eat magical Mushrooms ; this also resulted in the game world being named the " Mushroom Kingdom " . 
 Development was aimed at keeping things simple , in order to have a new game available for the end @-@ of @-@ year shopping season . Originally an idea for a run and gun stage in which Mario would jump onto a cloud and fire at enemies was to be included ; however , this was dropped to maintain the game 's focus on jumping action , but the sky @-@ based bonus stages still remained . 
 = = = World 1 @-@ 1 = = = 
 During the third generation of video game consoles , tutorials in which players are explained the mechanics of a video game were rare , and instead , they had to learn how a video game worked by being guided by level design . The opening sections of Nintendo Entertainment System games such as Metroid , The Legend of Zelda and Super Mario Bros. are all designed in such a way that players were forced to explore the mechanics of the game to be able to advance . Super Mario Bros. was the first side @-@ scrolling video game featuring Mario , and one of the first video games directed and designed by Shigeru Miyamoto . Rather to confront the player with obstacles , the first level of Super Mario Bros. lays down the variety of in @-@ game hazards by means of repetition , iteration , and escalation . 
 In an interview with Eurogamer , Miyamoto explained that he created " World 1 @-@ 1 " to contain everything a player needs to " gradually and naturally understand what they ’ re doing , " so that they can quickly understand how the game works . According to Miyamoto , once the player understands the mechanics of the game , the player will be able to play more freely and it becomes " their game . " 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Koji Kondo wrote the six @-@ song musical score for Super Mario Bros. , as well as all of the sound effects . At the time he was composing , video game music was mostly meant to attract attention , not necessarily to enhance or conform to the game . Kondo 's work on Super Mario Bros. was one of the major forces in the shift towards music becoming an integral and participatory part of video games . Whenever he has been asked , Kondo lists the Overworld themes from Super Mario Bros. and The Legend of Zelda as his favourite . 
 Kondo had two specific goals for his music : " to convey an unambiguous sonic image of the game world " , and " to enhance the emotional and physical experience of the gamer " . The music of Super Mario Bros. is coordinated with the onscreen animations of the various sprites , which was one way he created a sense of greater immersion . He wasn 't the first to do this , for example , Space Invaders has a simple song that gets faster and faster as the aliens speed up , eliciting a sense of stress and impending doom that matches the increasing challenge of the game . However , he took the idea further than that , saying that , “ the guiding question which decides whether to accept or reject his own ( and , more recently , others ’ ) musical tracks is : do the game and music fit one another ? ” 
 This shift in ideals and results was , in part , born of a method of design that was unusual at the time : instead of bring hired later in the process to add music to a nearly finished game , Kondo was there almost from the beginning , working in tandem with the rest of the team . As he said , " the [ Super Mario Bros. ] music is inspired by the game controls , and its purpose is to heighten the feeling of how the game controls " . Before composition began , a prototype was presented to Kondo for the game so that he could get an idea of Mario 's general environment . Kondo wrote the score with the help of small pianos for an appropriate melody of this scene . After the development of the game showed progress , he realized that his music did not quite fit the pace of the game , so he changed it a bit by increasing the tempo . The music was further adjusted based on the expectations of Nintendo 's play @-@ testers . 
 = = Minus World = = 
 The " Minus World " ( also referred to as " World Negative One " ) is the name given to an unbeatable glitch level in Super Mario Bros. World 1 @-@ 2 contains a hidden warp zone , with warp pipes that transport the player to worlds 2 , 3 , and 4 , accessed by running over a wall near the exit . If the player is able to exploit a bug that allows Mario to pass through bricks , the player can enter the warp zone by passing through the wall and the pipe to World 4 @-@ 1 may instead transport the player to a stage labeled " World -1 " . This stage 's map is identical to worlds 2 @-@ 2 and 7 @-@ 2 and upon entering the warp pipe at the end , the player is taken back to the start of the level , thus trapping the player in the level until losing all extra lives . Although the level name is shown as " -1 " ( note the leading space ) on the heads @-@ up display , it is actually World 36 @-@ 1 . The game displays tile No. 36 , which is a blank space , to the left of the hyphen . 
 The glitch occurs because passing through the wall allows the player to reach the warp pipes before the screen has scrolled far enough to activate the invisible object that initializes the warp . The game defaults to the World 4 @-@ 2 warp data since this is the first warp defined in the program . Most warps have three pipes with the destination world number displayed above them ; since the World 4 @-@ 2 warp has only one pipe , the other two exits are set to World 36 , so that a blank tile is displayed in the empty spots . Since the World 1 @-@ 2 warp has three pipes , the player is able to take the other two to World 36 @-@ 1 ( World " -1 " ) . 
 The Minus World bug in the Japanese Famicom Disk System version of the game behaves differently and creates multiple , <unk> stages . " World -1 " is an underwater version of World 1 @-@ 3 with an alternate color palette , and contains sprites of Princess Toadstool , Bowser , and Hammer Bros. " World -2 " is an identical copy of World 7 @-@ 3 , and " World -3 " is a copy of World 4 @-@ 4 , also with an alternate color palette , and contains flying Bloopers , no Bowser , and water instead of lava . After completing these levels , the player returns to the title screen as if the game were completed . 
 The Minus World bug was fixed in Super Mario All @-@ Stars and subsequent remakes ; however , the Virtual Console releases for Wii , 3DS and Wii U allow players to perform the glitch , as they are emulations of the original Super Mario Bros. Additionally , the game NES Remix for Wii U is also based upon authentic emulation and thus yields the same initially exploitable wall @-@ traversal bug , but the game 's strictly compartmentalized gameplay format yields a loss of a life if the player finally attempts to access the entrance pipe to the Minus World . 
 On November 25 , 2013 , WatchMojo.com ranked the glitch at No. 1 in the video " Top 10 Video Game Glitches " . 
 = = Alternate versions = = 
 As one of Nintendo 's most popular games , Super Mario Bros. has been re @-@ released and remade numerous times , ranging from an arcade version released soon after the original NES release , to the game being available for download on the Virtual Console for the Wii , Nintendo 3DS and Wii U. 
 = = = Ports = = = 
 Super Mario Bros. was ported several times in the years following its original release on the Famicom / NES . A side @-@ scrolling platform game entitled Super Mario Bros. was released for the Game & Watch range of handheld LCD game systems by Nintendo . The Game & Watch Super Mario Bros. is an entirely new game , featuring none of the stages from the Famicom / NES original . In Japan , Super Mario Bros. was released for the Disk System , Nintendo 's proprietary floppy disk drive for the Famicom . This version also had multiple Minus World levels and featured on its packaging an artwork drawn by Miyamoto himself . It was also released for the North American NES with other games on the same cartridge ( Super Mario <unk> Hunt and Super Mario <unk> Hunt @-@ World Class Track Meet ) . 
 = = = Vs . Super Mario Bros. = = = 
 One alternate version , Vs . Super Mario Bros. , is nearly a separate game in its own right . This game , one of several made for Nintendo 's NES @-@ based arcade cabinet , the Nintendo Vs . <unk> ( and its variant , Nintendo Vs . <unk> ) , is based on Super Mario Bros. , and has an identical format . The stages are different ; the early stages are subtly different , with small differences like the omission of 1 @-@ up mushrooms and other hidden items , narrower platforms and more dangerous enemies , but later stages are changed entirely . These changes have a net effect of making Vs . Super Mario Bros. more difficult than the original Super Mario Bros. Many of these later , changed stages reappeared in the 1986 game , Super Mario Bros. 2 . 
 As with many older arcade games , it is unclear exactly when this game was released ; while the arcade boards themselves are stamped " 1985 " , the Killer List of Video Games , the title screen , and the <unk> game listing list the game as having been released in 1986 . 
 = = = All Night Nippon Super Mario Bros. = = = 
 All Night Nippon Super Mario Bros. ( <unk> , <unk> Naito Nippon Sūpā Mario Burazāzu ) is a very rare version of Super Mario Bros. with graphics based upon the popular Japanese radio show All Night Nippon . The game , which was only released in Japan for the Famicom Disk System , was a special promotional version that was given away by the show in December 1986 . The creators altered the sprites of the enemies , mushroom retainers , and other characters to look like famous Japanese music idols , recording artists , and DJs as well as other people related to All @-@ Night Nippon . They also used the same slightly upgraded graphics and physics that Super Mario Bros. : The Lost Levels used . It was published by Fuji TV , the same company that later published the game Yume <unk> : Doki Doki Panic ( which was later modified into the Super Mario Bros. 2 that was released outside Japan ) . 
 = = = Super Mario Bros. Special = = = 
 Super Mario Bros. Special ( <unk> , Sūpā Mario Burazāzu <unk> ) was a game released only in Japan by Hudson Soft for the NEC PC @-@ 8801 and Sharp X1 computers in Q2 1986 . Although it has similar controls and graphics , there are new level layouts and the game scrolls in a different manner than the original game ( differing based on the computer ) . In addition , many new enemies are included , including enemies from Mario Bros. and Donkey Kong . 
 On the NEC version , the game goes at a greater speed , meaning that the timer drains more swiftly , and the screen does not scroll . The Sharp X1 version has a speed that is much closer to the original game . Neither version features Luigi or a two @-@ player mode . 
 = = = Super Mario All @-@ Stars = = = 
 In 1993 , Nintendo released an enhanced Super NES compilation titled Super Mario All @-@ Stars . It includes all of the Super Mario Bros. games released for the Nintendo Entertainment System and Famicom . The version of Super Mario Bros. included in the compilation has improved graphics and sound to match the SNES 's 16 @-@ bit capabilities , as well as minor alterations in some collision mechanics . Another new feature introduced in this game is the ability for the player to switch to Luigi after the end of the stage , unlike in the original Super Mario Bros. where the second player could only play after Mario died . The new version also included a save game feature . Several glitches from the original NES release were also fixed . This version has also been released for the Wii under a re @-@ packaged , special 25th anniversary compilation known as Super Mario All @-@ Stars : 25th Anniversary Edition . 
 = = = Super Mario Bros. Deluxe = = = 
 Super Mario Bros. Deluxe ( <unk> , Sūpā Mario Burazāzu <unk> ) , sometimes referred to as Super Mario Bros. DX was released on the Game Boy Color in 1999 in North America and Europe and in 2000 in Japan . Based on the original Super Mario Bros. , it featured an overworld level map , simultaneous multiplayer , a Challenge mode ( in which the player had to find hidden objects and achieve a certain score in addition to normally completing the level ) and eight additional worlds based on the main worlds of the 1986 Super Mario Bros. 2 ( which was released on Super Mario All @-@ Stars as Super Mario Bros. : The Lost Levels ) as an unlockable extra , under the name " For Super Players " . It also was compatible with the Game Boy Printer . The game did not feature any upgraded visuals ( aside from some graphics such as water and lava now being animated rather than static ) , and , since the screen resolution of the Game Boy Color was smaller than the NES , the view distance of the player is reduced . To compensate , players can press up and down to see above and below the player . Pressing select during the game also places the player in the middle or off to the left of the screen so that player can see well . Players can also go back for a very short distance instead of always going to the right . Players can alternate between Mario and Luigi by pressing select on the map screen , and Luigi 's outfit was changed from the original white overalls and green shirt to green overalls and brown shirt to better match Mario and the more common color palette . Fire Luigi , originally identical to Fire Mario , took on normal Luigi ’ s original colors to fit with his Fire colors in later games . 
 The game holds an aggregate score of 92 @.@ 11 percent on Game Rankings , coming in as the second best game on the Game Boy Color and the 150th best game overall on its lists . IGN 's Craig Harris gave it a perfect score , praising it as a perfect translation of the NES game . He hoped that it would be the example for other NES games to follow when being ported to the Game Boy Color . GameSpot gave the game a 9 @.@ 9 , hailing it as the " killer app " for the Game Boy Color and praising the controls and the visuals ( it was also the highest rated game in the series , later surpassed by Super Mario Galaxy 2 which holds a perfect 10 ) . Both gave it their Editors ' Choice Award . Allgame 's Colin Williamson praised the porting of the game as well as the extras , noting the only flaw of the game being that sometimes the camera goes with Mario as he jumps up . Nintendo World Report 's Jon Lindemann , in 2009 , called it their " ( Likely ) 1999 NWR Handheld Game of the Year , " calling the quality of its porting and offerings undeniable . Nintendo Life gave it a perfect score , noting that it retains the qualities of the original game and the extras . St. Petersburg Times ′ Robb Guido commented that in this form , Super Mario Bros. " never looked better . " The Lakeland Ledger ′ s Nick S. agreed , praising the visuals and the controls . In 2004 , a Game Boy Advance port of Super Mario Bros. ( part of the Classic NES Series ) was released , which had none of the extras or unlockables available in Super Mario Bros. Deluxe . Of that version , IGN noted that the version did not " offer nearly as much as what was already given on the Game Boy Color " and gave it an 8 @.@ 0 out of 10 . Super Mario Bros. Deluxe ranked third in the best @-@ selling handheld game charts in the U.S. between June 6 and 12 , 1999 and sold over 2 @.@ 8 million copies in the U.S. It was included on Singapore Airlines flights in 2006 . <unk> noted Deluxe as a notable handheld release in 1999 . 
 It was released on the Nintendo 3DS Virtual Console in 2014 . In Japan , users who registered a Nintendo Network ID on their Nintendo 3DS system between December 10 , 2013 and January 10 , 2014 received a free download code , with emails with download codes being sent out starting January 27 , 2014 . In Europe and Australia , users who registered a Nintendo Network ID on their Nintendo 3DS system between December 10 , 2013 and January 31 , 2014 received a free download code , with emails with download codes being sent out from February 13 to 28 , 2014 . It was released for purchase on the Nintendo 3DS eShop in Europe on February 27 , 2014 , in Australia on February 28 , 2014 , and in North America on December 25 , 2014 . 
 = = = Super Luigi Bros. = = = 
 Super Luigi Bros. is a remake of Super Mario Bros. included in NES Remix 2 , featuring Luigi and mirrored to scroll from right to left . The only playable character in the game is Luigi , with the same performance attributes he has in the Japan release of Super Mario Bros. 2 . If the two player mode is played then both players play as Luigi . The game is based on a mission in NES Remix , featuring Luigi in a mirrored version of World 1 @-@ 2 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Super Mario Bros. received favorable reviews , and further popularized the side @-@ scrolling subgenre of the already popular platform video game . This led to many sequels in the series that built upon the same basic premise . Altogether , excluding Game Boy Advance and Virtual Console sales , the game has sold 40 @.@ 24 million copies , making it the best @-@ selling video game in the Mario series . 
 Allgame gave Super Mario Bros. a five star rating , stating that " The sense of excitement , wonder and most of all -- enjoyment felt upon first playing this masterpiece of videogame can 't barely be put into words . And while its sequels have far surpassed it in terms of length , graphics , sound and other aspects , Super Mario Bros. , like any classic -- whether of a cinematic or musical nature -- has withstood the test of time , continuing to be fun and playable . " and that " Anyone who considers them self a gamer needs to play this game at least once , if not simply for a history lesson . " 
 Almost all of the game 's aspects have been praised at one time or another , from its large cast of characters to a diverse set of levels . One of the most @-@ praised aspects of the game is the precise controls . The player is able to control how high and far Mario or Luigi jumps , and how fast he can run . Nintendo Power listed it as the fourth best Nintendo Entertainment System video game , describing it as the game that started the modern era of video games as well as " Shigeru Miyamoto 's masterpiece " . The game ranked first on Electronic Gaming Monthly ′ s " Greatest 200 Games of Their Time " list and was named in IGN 's top 100 games of all @-@ time list twice ( in 2005 and 2007 ) . ScrewAttack declared it the second @-@ best Mario game of all time . In 2009 , Game Informer put Super Mario Bros. in second place on their list of " The Top 200 Games of All Time , " behind The Legend of Zelda , saying that it " remains a monument to brilliant design and fun gameplay " . The Game Informer staff also ranked it the second best in their 2001 list of the top 100 games ever made . In 2012 , G4 ranked Super Mario Bros. first of the " Top 100 Video Games of All Time , " citing its revolutionary gameplay as well as its role in helping recover the NA gaming industry from the Video Game Crash of 1983 . In 2014 , IGN ranked Super Mario Bros. as the best Nintendo game in their " Top 125 Nintendo Games of All Time " list , saying that " this is the most important Nintendo game ever made . " 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Super Mario Bros. ' s success led to the development of many successors in the Super Mario series of video games , which in turn form the core of the greater Mario franchise . The gameplay concepts and elements established in Super Mario Bros. are prevalent in nearly every Super Mario game . The series consists of over 15 entries ; at least one Super Mario game has been released on nearly every Nintendo console to date . The most recent release is Super Mario Maker , released in 2015 for the Wii U. The series is one of the best @-@ selling , with over 310 million copies of games sold worldwide as of September 2015 . 
 Super Mario Bros. and its sequels inspired products in various media , such as the 1986 anime film , Super Mario Bros. : The Great Mission to Rescue Princess Peach ! ; the 1989 American animated series , The Super Mario Bros. Super Show ! ; and the 1993 live action film , Super Mario Bros. , which stars Bob Hoskins and John Leguizamo as Mario and Luigi , respectively . 
 In the United States Supreme Court case Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Association , the Electronic Frontier Foundation submitted an amicus brief citing social research that declared Super Mario Bros to be a violent video game . It was compared to Mighty Mouse and Road Runner , cartoons that depict a similar form of violence with little negative reaction from the public . 
 = = Re @-@ releases = = 
 In early 2003 , Nintendo re @-@ released the game on the Game Boy Advance in Japan as part of their Famicom Minis collection and in the U.S. as part of the NES Series . Unlike previous re @-@ releases , these versions contain no graphical updates and all of the original glitches remain . Super Mario Bros. was one of the best @-@ selling of these re @-@ releases ; according to the NPD Group ( which tracks game sales in North America ) , this re @-@ released version of Super Mario Bros. was the best @-@ selling Game Boy Advance game in June 2004 to December 2004 . In 2005 , Nintendo released this game again for the GBA as part of its 20th Anniversary with a special edition , which sold approximately 876 @,@ 000 units . Super Mario Bros. is also one of the 19 NES games included in the GameCube game Animal Crossing . The only known way to unlock Super Mario Bros. in most versions is by use of a game modification device ( like the Game Shark or Action Replay ) , though it was distributed as a Famitsu prize to owners of <unk> no Mori + . The game is fully emulated ( in fact , it is the original ROM ) , so it includes every glitch from the NES including the Minus World glitch . Super Mario Bros. was released on December 2 , 2006 in Japan , December 25 , 2006 in North America and January 5 , 2007 in PAL regions for Wii 's Virtual Console . As it is a copy of the original game , all glitches — including the Minus World — remain in the game . Super Mario Bros. is also one of the trial games available in the " Masterpieces " section in Super Smash Bros. Brawl . Super Mario Bros. was released on the Nintendo 3DS in September 2011 for members of Nintendo 's 3DS Ambassador Program , and a general release came through in Japan on January 5 , 2012 , in North America on February 16 , 2012 and in Europe on March 1 , 2012 . 
 = The Firebrand = 
 The Firebrand is an 1987 historical fantasy novel by American author Marion Zimmer Bradley . Set in the ancient city of Troy , the novel is a re @-@ telling of Homer 's epic poem , the Iliad . The Firebrand is written from the point of view of Kassandra , the prophet daughter of King Priam of Troy , and also features other prominent characters from Greek mythology . As in the Iliad , Kassandra foresees catastrophe for her city but few pay heed to her warnings . In Bradley 's story , Kassandra is presented as a strong and insightful woman , rather than as a sufferer of insanity . 
 The novel has been described as belonging to the genres of revisionist history and feminist literature , and employs themes of gender , religion , and power . Bradley wrote it after the success of her 1983 novel The Mists of Avalon , a re @-@ telling of the Arthurian legend from a female perspective . To appeal to a wider readership , The Firebrand includes fewer elements of fantasy than Bradley 's previous works . Her only novel set in ancient Greece , her husband Walter H. Breen helped her research the story . 
 Simon & Schuster released The Firebrand on October 1 , 1987 in hardcover , and it was issued in paperback in September 1988 . The Firebrand has been overshadowed by the popularity of The Mists of Avalon , receiving less attention and critical praise . Reviews of the book ranged from mixed to positive , with many literary critics praising Bradley 's ability to give new characterizations to legendary figures . It has been translated into at least twelve languages , beginning with Portuguese and French in 1989 . 
 = = Main characters = = 
 Princess Kassandra of Troy is the story 's protagonist , and it is told from her perspective . It begins when an elderly Kassandra <unk> agrees to correct the Homeric version of the Trojan War that is told by a traveling minstrel . Kassandra recounts her life experiences at Troy and Colchis , how she came to balk at the gender roles dictated by Trojan culture , and her inner turmoil over whether she should be serving the Goddess or Apollo . 
 In her early years , Kassandra is known among her family as the " clever girl , " while her older sister Polyxena is the " proper , modest " , and " pretty one " . Her parents intend for Kassandra to be brought up as a lady and to eventually marry a nobleman — to her gradual displeasure . She often comes into conflict with her father , King Priam , who is characterized as cruel , violent , and power @-@ hungry . Queen Hecuba and Kassandra are not close ; the queen often disparages her daughter for her prophecies . Though Hecuba grew up as an Amazon , she gradually adopted patriarchal Trojan customs as her own . 
 The warrior Hector is close to their sister Polyxena , and is described by Kassandra as a bully . He disapproves of Kassandra 's desire to be a warrior , but he is much loved in the city . As an adult , Kassandra reflects , " of all [ Priam and Hecuba 's children ] , Hector was closest to their hearts , and [ she ] the least loved . Was it only that she had always been so different from the others ? " Kassandra is happiest when she travels with the Amazons , whose chief Penthesilea becomes a mother figure for Kassandra . 
 Hector 's wife , Andromache , is the elder daughter of Queen Imandra ; despite Colchis ' matriarchal culture Andromache is content to adopt Trojan culture and be subservient to her husband . She and Kassandra become close , as does Kassandra with Helen , despite her initial distaste for the problems Helen brings to Troy . Despite being her twin , Paris dislikes Kassandra . Early in the story , Bradley writes that Paris ' main character flaw is " a total lack of interest in anything that did not relate to himself or contribute in some way to his own comfort and satisfaction . " 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Volume One = = = 
 In the wealthy and powerful city of Troy , the pregnant queen Hecuba experiences a prophetic dream which distresses her . When consulted , a priestess of the Great Goddess tells Hecuba and her husband , King Priam , that the dream indicates she will birth a son who will bring destruction to Troy . Priam declares that this boy must be exposed to death , but upon his birth three days later , Priam agrees to Hecuba 's pleas and has him fostered by a shepherd on the slopes of Mount Ida . Priam names the boy Alexandros ( later Paris ) , and names his twin sister Alexandra , whom Hecuba keeps and decides to call Kassandra . 
 While visiting the temple of Apollo with her mother , six @-@ year @-@ old Kassandra experiences a vision of the god telling her she is to become " his priestess " . In the following years , Kassandra experiences further visions . When she is twelve , Kassandra sees a vision of Paris , who is now a shepherd . Kassandra asks her father the boy 's identity but he reacts angrily . Kassandra is sent to be fostered by Hecuba 's sister Penthesilea , chief of the Amazons — a nomadic warrior tribe consisting only of women . There , Kassandra comes to love their lifestyle — though it is not without its trials — and she learns of her twin , continuing to experience visions of him . Kassandra sees the Judgement of Paris , in which her brother deems Aphrodite more beautiful than Athena or Hera ; Aphrodite rewards Paris by eventually promising the love of Helen of Sparta — daughter of Leda and Zeus . 
 In Colchis , ruled over by Queen Imandra , Kassandra undergoes the rites of a priestess and is told that serving the Goddess is her destiny . At the age of fifteen , Kassandra is unhappily returned to her home . She arrives during a festival in time to see Paris win and be revealed to his true parents as their son . Despite the prophecy , Priam and Hecuba happily welcome him home . However , Hector and his other brothers , jealous of the attention and achievements Paris has suddenly garnered , suggest that he be sent abroad to treaty with King Agamemnon — who holds Priam 's sister . Paris readily agrees . Meanwhile , Kassandra begins training as a priestess of the temple of Apollo , despite misgivings that she is abandoning the Goddess . Part of her duties include helping care for the temple serpents — symbols of Python whom Apollo is said to have slain . Paris returns to Troy with the beautiful Helen , wife of King Menelaus , and she is welcomed into the city . Kassandra 's warnings that Helen will destroy Troy go unheeded , and Paris denounces his sister as a madwoman . 
 = = = Volume Two = = = 
 At the temple , Kassandra is assaulted by Khryse , a priest who disguises himself as Apollo in order to seduce her . She sees through his trickery and fights him off , but the god feels insulted by her refusal and makes the city 's residents stop believing her prophecies . Menelaus ' brother Agamemnon uses Helen 's flight as a pretext for war and soon begins launching daily raids on Troy , beginning the Trojan War . Kassandra spends more time with her family to help with daily tasks while the men — led by Hector — fight off the Akhaian invaders . The war continues sporadically despite the attempts of former Trojan ally Odysseus to end the conflict . 
 Two years into the war , Kassandra returns to Colchis to learn more of serpent lore . Along the way , she encounters Penthesilea . Kassandra is unhappy to find that the nomadic ways of life of the Amazon and <unk> are ending , and that Penthesilea 's tribe is dwindling in number . Kassandra experiences a horrifying vision of Apollo firing arrows indiscriminately at both armies — a sign of his wrath — which prompts her to return home . Accompanied with an adopted infant daughter named Honey whom she finds alongside the road , Kassandra returns to Troy and finds that the war is not going well for the Trojans . 
 Soon after her return , Apollo takes the form of Khryse and spreads a plague in the Akhaians ' camp in response to Agamemnon 's sacrilegious refusal to return Khryse 's daughter , who has been Agamemnon 's prisoner for three years . Khryse 's daughter is reluctantly returned to her father and the Akhaian leader takes the young warrior Akhilles ' concubine as reparation for his loss . The furious Akhilles refuses to continue fighting . Menelaus and Paris duel each other , but Paris flees the fight due to the intervention of Helen and Aphrodite . 
 = = = Volume Three = = = 
 Most of Kassandra 's family has come to think of her as mad , and become angry when she feels compelled to vocalize prophecies that foretell the end of Troy . Despite Kassandra 's warnings , the city experiences an earthquake sent by Poseidon , killing the three young sons of Helen and Paris . After <unk> is killed by Hector , his closest friend Akhilles again joins the fight to get his revenge . Hector and his younger brother Troilus are killed , to the grief of everyone in Troy . Akhilles kills Penthesilea in battle , and soon after Kassandra fires a fatally poisoned arrow at his unprotected heel . 
 Poseidon sends another earthquake , knocking down Troy 's defenses . The Akhaians flood into the city , and Kassandra and Honey are raped by the warrior Ajax . The women of Troy are divided up among the Akhaians , and Kassandra becomes Agamemnon 's concubine . She is freed when his wife Klytemnestra murders him upon their return to <unk> . Kassandra makes her way back to Asia Minor , where in the desert she hopes to recreate a kingdom of old — one ruled by a powerful queen . 
 = = Development = = 
 The Firebrand was written by American author Marion Zimmer Bradley ( 1930 – 1999 ) , who was best known for her <unk> science fiction series and her novel , The Mists of Avalon ; a re @-@ telling of the Arthurian legend from the point of view of Arthur 's antagonist , Morgan le Fay . Bradley wrote The Firebrand after publishing The Mists of Avalon in 1983 . The Encyclopedia of Fantasy said that after The Mists of Avalon , Bradley wrote stories with a strong literary appeal to appeal to a wide readership rather than focus on the fantasy genre . Bradley 's later works often centered on strong lead characters in " <unk> @-@ historic settings " with few fantasy elements . For instance , in The Firebrand the <unk> are depicted as a nomadic tribe of short , naked riders of horses rather than as the half @-@ human , half @-@ horsemen legends traditionally portray . 
 The Firebrand is Bradley 's second re @-@ telling of a famous legend , and her only novel set in ancient Greece . She decided to re @-@ envision legends from a female perspective , and said that she had an interest to " hear more about the human realities " surrounding well @-@ known stories , but did not believe this constituted a feminist writing style . In an interview with Lisa See of Publishers Weekly , Bradley said she viewed the Trojan War legend as an example of masculine culture dominating and obfuscating female viewpoints and contributions . She said : 
 " During the Dorian invasion , when iron won out over bronze , the female cult died . The Minoan and Mycenaean cultures were dead overnight . But you could also look at that period of history and say , here were two cultures that should have been ruled by female twins — Helen and Klytemnestra . And what do you know ? When they married Menelaus and Agamemnon , the men took over their cities . I just want to look at what history was really like before the women @-@ haters got hold of it . I want to look at these people like any other people , as though no one had ever written about them before . " 
 Unlike The Mists of Avalon , which featured a wide range of Arthurian legends that Bradley drew upon as source material , Bradley cited few sources while writing The Firebrand . She credits her then @-@ husband , author Walter H. Breen , with helping her research the book and create the story . Breen was knowledgeable about ancient Greek history and language ; according to Bradley he persuaded her to use linguistically correct transliterations of the characters ' names , such as Akhilles rather than the commonly known form Achilles . Though Kassandra 's fate remains unknown in the Iliad , Bradley found inspiration for the character 's ending from an inscription at the Archaeological Museum in Athens , which mentioned Kassandra 's descendants . Bradley believed that this inscription provided the historical basis for Kassandra 's existence . 
 = = Themes and analysis = = 
 = = = Gender roles = = = 
 In the original story found in the Iliad , female characters receive little attention ; although they are often crucial to progressing events , they have no developed identities of their own , and are instead defined by motherhood , <unk> , and sisterhood . Cassandra is described in that story as " the loveliest of [ Priam 's ] lovely daughters , " but does not speak at all . Today she is remembered for portending the city 's doom and for not being believed by its inhabitants , who think she is mad . On ancient Greek pottery she is depicted as half naked with long , wild hair , and Shakespeare 's 1602 play Troilus and Cressida characterizes her as an insane woman . After the Akhaians use the Trojan Horse to enter Troy , the Aeneid and other accounts relay how Cassandra is raped by Ajax , is taken captive by Agamemnon , and is later killed with him by his angry wife Clytemnestra . By setting her story from the female perspective , Bradley gives women — especially the formerly silent Cassandra — a voice . Here , Kassandra is depicted as a strong and insightful woman rather than as a lunatic , yet she is still misunderstood by many of those around her . She is allowed to survive Klytemnestra 's wrath to record a female counter @-@ narrative . 
 The Firebrand employs similar themes to Bradley 's other works , including the reversal of gender roles where " women are the true heroes " while the " proud , arrogant " men who lead Troy to doom " fail to invoke the reader 's sympathy " . The novel 's title refers to Paris and the destruction he brings to Troy . The Firebrand has been perceived as belonging to the revisionist history genre , as it fits into a " reinvent [ ion of ] stories that are either historical or derived from myth / legend but often taken to be historical , " and then told with a different narrative . The novel has also been seen as an example of feminist literature . Despite Bradley 's refusal to label herself as a feminist , her works often dealt with themes of gender , religion , and power , particularly in historically patriarchal societies . In The Firebrand , Bradley introduces feminist ideals by equating the patriarchal culture with oppressive tendencies ; perceived to have been scorned by the male god Apollo , Kassandra is not believed by Trojan citizens because of her gender . 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> noted that because there is " no humanity or compassion in this masculine world , " characters traditionally associated with noble , positive qualities are instead " stripped of their own glamor " and are portrayed in a negative light — Akhilles for instance is a " mad dog " who rapes Penthesilea as an act of cold @-@ blooded contempt , rather than as an act of sudden love upon causing her death . Agamemnon and Menelaus are rendered as patriarchal stereotypes . In her entry for Science Fiction & Fantasy Book Review Annual , Mary @-@ Kay Bray wrote that Bradley 's account makes these traditional heroes seem more human and flawed , even if they are also less admirable . 
 = = = Religion and gender = = = 
 Bradley believed that " cultural shock , the clash of alien cultures , is the essence of literature and drama , " and incorporated this viewpoint into many of her works . The Firebrand is set in a time of change and Kassandra is caught between new and old cultures . Despite being ruled by a king and worshiping the male god Apollo , the Trojans still respect the ancient cult surrounding the Earth Mother . In Colchis , the powerful queen Imandra rules alone but her way of life is declining — she is aging and uncertain of her successor , and the impoverished areas surrounding Colchis contain two other dwindling civilizations ; the Amazons and the <unk> . 
 Literary critics have observed elements of neo @-@ paganism in the novel . Bradley often included characteristics of neo @-@ paganism into her stories as she explored the intersection of gender and religion . While neo @-@ paganism lacks a singular definition , many followers have come to define it as a primitive , matriarchal religion that flourished in Western Europe , centered on the worship of a " Mother Goddess " , and became largely decimated by Christianity . Fry wrote that " a basic assumption [ in The Firebrand ] is that the people of ancient Greece had worshiped the Goddess prior to the arrival of the Akhaians , " a people who brought with them a " male warrior pantheon of Gods ... and gradually subverted the old ways . " Bradley 's Penthesilea tells a young Kassandra , " But remember , child : before ever Apollo Sun Lord came to rule these lands , our Horse Mother — the Great Mare , the Earth Mother from whom we all are born — she was here . " 
 The Firebrand combines two belief systems and mixes neo @-@ paganism with elements of Greek mythology . Scholars have found similarities between The Firebrand and The Mists of Avalon ; they serve " parallel purposes " by retelling old legends from female perspectives . Both stories deal with the confrontation between female @-@ based , Earth @-@ centered belief systems and rising patriarchal religions . This religious dichotomy appears first as a conflict between Apollo and the Goddess , and later as a confrontation between the Akhaian and Trojan gods . In the novel 's tradition , serpents represent the Mother Goddess ' prominent place in religious life , immortality , rebirth , and regeneration . Readers are told that Python — a female snake deity and symbol of the Goddess — was slain by the Hellenistic Apollo , representing the destruction of feminine social , political , and religious power . 
 Bradley also uses the story 's female characters to create a feminist dichotomy ; Kassandra and Penthesilea represent the " feminist side " in their pursuit of independence , while many of the other women — such as Andromache , Hecuba , and Helen — " subordinate themselves to patriarchal traditions , values , goods . " The loss of this matriarchal culture has been viewed as the novel 's main theme . Bradley writes of the power of women in many of her works , including The Mists of Avalon and the <unk> series , and The Firebrand continues this by depicting Kassandra in an idealized world ; the Amazons follow the Earth Goddess but are slowly dwindling in the wake of the patriarchal " male warrior pantheon of Gods . " Through Kassandra 's experiences with the Amazons , Bradley shows that she idealizes this group of women . 
 = = Release = = 
 The novel was published on October 1 , 1987 by Simon & Schuster , and a paperback edition was released in September 1988 . In 1989 , The Firebrand was translated into Portuguese by A. B. Pinheiro de Lemos and into French by Hubert <unk> . It has been published in at least ten other languages , including Italian , German , Lithuanian , Japanese , and modern Greek . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The Firebrand has received less critical attention and success than Bradley 's earlier novel The Mists of Avalon , which has tended to overshadow it . The Firebrand received mixed to positive reviews from mainstream literary critics . Magill Book Reviews applauded Bradley 's faithfulness to the source material in the Iliad , despite the " startling liberties [ she takes ] with Homer 's work . " However , the reviewer said her themes of gender and religion , " rendered artfully and gracefully in [ The Mists of Avalon ] , becomes tiresome with repetition . " Bradley said that some readers would take umbrage at her changes to the Trojan legend ; she said , " had I been content with the account in the Iliad , there would have been no reason to write a novel . Besides , the Iliad stops short just at the most interesting point , leaving the writer to conjecture about the end from assorted legends and traditions . " The Library Journal said readers should familiarize themselves with Greek mythology before beginning the novel , and said the author " makes a strong statement about the desirability of women having control of their own destinies and about the cruelties men inflict upon them . " The Encyclopedia of Fantasy said that The Firebrand and Bradley 's 1994 novel The Forest House " display [ Bradley 's ] talent for plot , character , vision and fine storytelling . " 
 Reviewing for The Globe and Mail , H.J. Kirchhoff compared The Firebrand to The Mists of Avalon , and wrote that the former " is neither as refreshing nor as lovely , even though it is a pretty good read . " Kirchhoff wrote that The Firebrand contained too many similarities to Bradley 's previous novels , saying , " the <unk> of old story and feminist ideology seems forced , " though he praised her " flesh @-@ and @-@ blood " depiction of the men associated with the legend . Vicki McCash of the Sun Sentinel commended the novel for making the legendary characters " breathe and feel " and for giving a " refreshing " twist to the ancient story . McCash wrote , " From the first pages , the reader is gripped in the magic of ancient Troy . These stories have been revered for centuries , but in The Firebrand they are retold to become one epic novel , not only of heroes and gods , but of heroines and goddesses and of change in the very fabric of society . " McCash said that male readers might be troubled by the negative portrayals of their sex , but that Bradley attempted to avoid this by inputting a few sympathetic men such as Aeneas , and several evil women such as Klytemnestra . Virginia Judge of The Herald called it a " fascinating , but lengthy tale , " and praised Bradley 's depictions of the old religion . She criticized the ending for seeming " contrived . " 
 A reviewer for the English Journal praised the novel and found one of its main strengths is " its ability to entertain the reader with characters who are basically faithful to their origins in the Iliad , yet at the same time rounder , fuller , and more personally engaging . " The reviewer wrote the Bradley " fleshes out the stereotypes on which the characterization in the epic poem rests — the cold calculating Achilles ; crafty , gregarious Odysseus ; frustrated Cassandra — with convincing dialogue which not only carries the plot but gives reference to other events both mythical and historical . " The English Journal also said that " Bradley tempers the bitterness and cynicism of Homer 's Cassandra , presenting instead a woman confused and tormented by knowledge on which she is powerless to act . " In an overview of Bradley 's body of work , Encyclopedia of Fantasy and Horror Fiction author Don D <unk> called the novel " one of her better fantasies . " Bradley 's works have received praise from feminist critics , who have particularly lauded her ability to portray multidimensional women as " revered conduit [ s ] of nature @-@ based religion and mysticism " as seen with the character of Kassandra . At the 1988 Locus Awards , The Firebrand was voted the twentieth best fantasy novel of the year . 
 = Archimedes = 
 Archimedes of Syracuse ( / <unk> / ; Greek : <unk> ; c . 287 BC – c . 212 BC ) was an Ancient Greek mathematician , physicist , engineer , inventor , and astronomer . Although few details of his life are known , he is regarded as one of the leading scientists in classical antiquity . Generally considered the greatest mathematician of antiquity and one of the greatest of all time , Archimedes anticipated modern calculus and analysis by applying concepts of infinitesimals and the method of exhaustion to derive and rigorously prove a range of geometrical theorems , including the area of a circle , the surface area and volume of a sphere , and the area under a parabola . 
 Other mathematical achievements include deriving an accurate approximation of pi , defining and investigating the spiral bearing his name , and creating a system using exponentiation for expressing very large numbers . He was also one of the first to apply mathematics to physical phenomena , founding hydrostatics and statics , including an explanation of the principle of the lever . He is credited with designing innovative machines , such as his screw pump , compound pulleys , and defensive war machines to protect his native Syracuse from invasion . 
 Archimedes died during the Siege of Syracuse when he was killed by a Roman soldier despite orders that he should not be harmed . Cicero describes visiting the tomb of Archimedes , which was surmounted by a sphere and a cylinder , which Archimedes had requested to be placed on his tomb , representing his mathematical discoveries . 
 Unlike his inventions , the mathematical writings of Archimedes were little known in antiquity . Mathematicians from Alexandria read and quoted him , but the first comprehensive compilation was not made until c . 530 AD by Isidore of Miletus in Byzantine Constantinople , while commentaries on the works of Archimedes written by <unk> in the sixth century AD opened them to wider readership for the first time . The relatively few copies of Archimedes ' written work that survived through the Middle Ages were an influential source of ideas for scientists during the Renaissance , while the discovery in 1906 of previously unknown works by Archimedes in the Archimedes Palimpsest has provided new insights into how he obtained mathematical results . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Archimedes was born c . 287 BC in the seaport city of Syracuse , Sicily , at that time a self @-@ governing colony in Magna Graecia , located along the coast of Southern Italy . The date of birth is based on a statement by the Byzantine Greek historian John Tzetzes that Archimedes lived for 75 years . In The Sand Reckoner , Archimedes gives his father 's name as Phidias , an astronomer about whom nothing is known . Plutarch wrote in his Parallel Lives that Archimedes was related to King Hiero II , the ruler of Syracuse . A biography of Archimedes was written by his friend Heracleides but this work has been lost , leaving the details of his life obscure . It is unknown , for instance , whether he ever married or had children . During his youth , Archimedes may have studied in Alexandria , Egypt , where Conon of Samos and Eratosthenes of Cyrene were contemporaries . He referred to Conon of Samos as his friend , while two of his works ( The Method of Mechanical Theorems and the Cattle Problem ) have introductions addressed to Eratosthenes . 
 Archimedes died c . 212 BC during the Second Punic War , when Roman forces under General Marcus Claudius Marcellus captured the city of Syracuse after a two @-@ year @-@ long siege . According to the popular account given by Plutarch , Archimedes was contemplating a mathematical diagram when the city was captured . A Roman soldier commanded him to come and meet General Marcellus but he declined , saying that he had to finish working on the problem . The soldier was enraged by this , and killed Archimedes with his sword . Plutarch also gives a lesser @-@ known account of the death of Archimedes which suggests that he may have been killed while attempting to surrender to a Roman soldier . According to this story , Archimedes was carrying mathematical instruments , and was killed because the soldier thought that they were valuable items . General Marcellus was reportedly angered by the death of Archimedes , as he considered him a valuable scientific asset and had ordered that he not be harmed . Marcellus called Archimedes " a geometrical <unk> " . 
 The last words attributed to Archimedes are " Do not disturb my circles " , a reference to the circles in the mathematical drawing that he was supposedly studying when disturbed by the Roman soldier . This quote is often given in Latin as " Noli <unk> <unk> <unk> , " but there is no reliable evidence that Archimedes uttered these words and they do not appear in the account given by Plutarch . Valerius Maximus , writing in Memorable Doings and Sayings in the 1st century AD , gives the phrase as " ... sed <unk> <unk> <unk> ' noli ' <unk> , ' <unk> , <unk> <unk> ' " - " ... but protecting the dust with his hands , said ' I beg of you , do not disturb this . ' " The phrase is also given in Katharevousa Greek as " <unk> μου τοὺς <unk> <unk> ! " ( <unk> mou tous <unk> <unk> ! ) . 
 The tomb of Archimedes carried a sculpture illustrating his favorite mathematical proof , consisting of a sphere and a cylinder of the same height and diameter . Archimedes had proven that the volume and surface area of the sphere are two thirds that of the cylinder including its bases . In 75 BC , 137 years after his death , the Roman orator Cicero was serving as quaestor in Sicily . He had heard stories about the tomb of Archimedes , but none of the locals was able to give him the location . Eventually he found the tomb near the <unk> gate in Syracuse , in a neglected condition and overgrown with bushes . Cicero had the tomb cleaned up , and was able to see the carving and read some of the verses that had been added as an inscription . A tomb discovered in the courtyard of the Hotel Panorama in Syracuse in the early 1960s was claimed to be that of Archimedes , but there was no compelling evidence for this and the location of his tomb today is unknown . 
 The standard versions of the life of Archimedes were written long after his death by the historians of Ancient Rome . The account of the siege of Syracuse given by Polybius in his Universal History was written around seventy years after Archimedes ' death , and was used subsequently as a source by Plutarch and Livy . It sheds little light on Archimedes as a person , and focuses on the war machines that he is said to have built in order to defend the city . 
 = = Discoveries and inventions = = 
 = = = Archimedes ' principle = = = 
 The most widely known anecdote about Archimedes tells of how he invented a method for determining the volume of an object with an irregular shape . According to Vitruvius , a votive crown for a temple had been made for King Hiero II , who had supplied the pure gold to be used , and Archimedes was asked to determine whether some silver had been substituted by the dishonest goldsmith . Archimedes had to solve the problem without damaging the crown , so he could not melt it down into a regularly shaped body in order to calculate its density . While taking a bath , he noticed that the level of the water in the tub rose as he got in , and realized that this effect could be used to determine the volume of the crown . For practical purposes water is <unk> , so the submerged crown would displace an amount of water equal to its own volume . By dividing the mass of the crown by the volume of water displaced , the density of the crown could be obtained . This density would be lower than that of gold if cheaper and less dense metals had been added . Archimedes then took to the streets naked , so excited by his discovery that he had forgotten to dress , crying " Eureka ! " ( Greek : " <unk> , <unk> ! " , meaning " I have found [ it ] ! " ) . The test was conducted successfully , proving that silver had indeed been mixed in . 
 The story of the golden crown does not appear in the known works of Archimedes . Moreover , the practicality of the method it describes has been called into question , due to the extreme accuracy with which one would have to measure the water displacement . Archimedes may have instead sought a solution that applied the principle known in hydrostatics as Archimedes ' principle , which he describes in his treatise On Floating Bodies . This principle states that a body immersed in a fluid experiences a buoyant force equal to the weight of the fluid it displaces . Using this principle , it would have been possible to compare the density of the golden crown to that of solid gold by balancing the crown on a scale with a gold reference sample , then immersing the apparatus in water . The difference in density between the two samples would cause the scale to tip accordingly . Galileo considered it " probable that this method is the same that Archimedes followed , since , besides being very accurate , it is based on demonstrations found by Archimedes himself . " In a 12th @-@ century text titled <unk> <unk> there are instructions on how to perform the <unk> in the water in order to calculate the percentage of silver used , and thus solve the problem . The Latin poem Carmen de <unk> et <unk> of the 4th or 5th century describes the use of a hydrostatic balance to solve the problem of the crown , and attributes the method to Archimedes . 
 = = = Archimedes ' screw = = = 
 A large part of Archimedes ' work in engineering arose from fulfilling the needs of his home city of Syracuse . The Greek writer Athenaeus of <unk> described how King Hiero II commissioned Archimedes to design a huge ship , the <unk> , which could be used for luxury travel , carrying supplies , and as a naval warship . The <unk> is said to have been the largest ship built in classical antiquity . According to Athenaeus , it was capable of carrying 600 people and included garden decorations , a gymnasium and a temple dedicated to the goddess Aphrodite among its facilities . Since a ship of this size would leak a considerable amount of water through the hull , the Archimedes ' screw was purportedly developed in order to remove the bilge water . Archimedes ' machine was a device with a revolving screw @-@ shaped blade inside a cylinder . It was turned by hand , and could also be used to transfer water from a low @-@ lying body of water into irrigation canals . The Archimedes ' screw is still in use today for pumping liquids and granulated solids such as coal and grain . The Archimedes ' screw described in Roman times by Vitruvius may have been an improvement on a screw pump that was used to irrigate the Hanging Gardens of Babylon . The world 's first seagoing steamship with a screw propeller was the SS Archimedes , which was launched in 1839 and named in honor of Archimedes and his work on the screw . 
 = = = Claw of Archimedes = = = 
 The Claw of Archimedes is a weapon that he is said to have designed in order to defend the city of Syracuse . Also known as " the ship shaker , " the claw consisted of a crane @-@ like arm from which a large metal grappling hook was suspended . When the claw was dropped onto an attacking ship the arm would swing upwards , lifting the ship out of the water and possibly sinking it . There have been modern experiments to test the feasibility of the claw , and in 2005 a television documentary entitled <unk> of the Ancient World built a version of the claw and concluded that it was a workable device . 
 = = = Heat ray = = = 
 Archimedes may have used mirrors acting collectively as a parabolic reflector to burn ships attacking Syracuse . The 2nd century AD author Lucian wrote that during the Siege of Syracuse ( c . 214 – 212 BC ) , Archimedes destroyed enemy ships with fire . Centuries later , Anthemius of Tralles mentions burning @-@ glasses as Archimedes ' weapon . The device , sometimes called the " Archimedes heat ray " , was used to focus sunlight onto approaching ships , causing them to catch fire . 
 This purported weapon has been the subject of ongoing debate about its credibility since the Renaissance . René Descartes rejected it as false , while modern researchers have attempted to recreate the effect using only the means that would have been available to Archimedes . It has been suggested that a large array of highly polished bronze or copper shields acting as mirrors could have been employed to focus sunlight onto a ship . This would have used the principle of the parabolic reflector in a manner similar to a solar furnace . 
 A test of the Archimedes heat ray was carried out in 1973 by the Greek scientist Ioannis <unk> . The experiment took place at the <unk> naval base outside Athens . On this occasion 70 mirrors were used , each with a copper coating and a size of around five by three feet ( 1 @.@ 5 by 1 m ) . The mirrors were pointed at a plywood mock @-@ up of a Roman warship at a distance of around 160 feet ( 50 m ) . When the mirrors were focused accurately , the ship burst into flames within a few seconds . The plywood ship had a coating of tar paint , which may have aided combustion . A coating of tar would have been commonplace on ships in the classical era . 
 In October 2005 a group of students from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology carried out an experiment with 127 one @-@ foot ( 30 cm ) square mirror tiles , focused on a mock @-@ up wooden ship at a range of around 100 feet ( 30 m ) . Flames broke out on a patch of the ship , but only after the sky had been cloudless and the ship had remained stationary for around ten minutes . It was concluded that the device was a feasible weapon under these conditions . The MIT group repeated the experiment for the television show MythBusters , using a wooden fishing boat in San Francisco as the target . Again some charring occurred , along with a small amount of flame . In order to catch fire , wood needs to reach its autoignition temperature , which is around 300 ° C ( 570 ° F ) . 
 When MythBusters broadcast the result of the San Francisco experiment in January 2006 , the claim was placed in the category of " busted " ( or failed ) because of the length of time and the ideal weather conditions required for combustion to occur . It was also pointed out that since Syracuse faces the sea towards the east , the Roman fleet would have had to attack during the morning for optimal gathering of light by the mirrors . MythBusters also pointed out that conventional weaponry , such as flaming arrows or bolts from a catapult , would have been a far easier way of setting a ship on fire at short distances . 
 In December 2010 , MythBusters again looked at the heat ray story in a special edition entitled " President 's Challenge " . Several experiments were carried out , including a large scale test with 500 schoolchildren aiming mirrors at a mock @-@ up of a Roman sailing ship 400 feet ( 120 m ) away . In all of the experiments , the sail failed to reach the 210 ° C ( 410 ° F ) required to catch fire , and the verdict was again " busted " . The show concluded that a more likely effect of the mirrors would have been blinding , dazzling , or distracting the crew of the ship . 
 = = = Other discoveries and inventions = = = 
 While Archimedes did not invent the lever , he gave an explanation of the principle involved in his work On the Equilibrium of Planes . Earlier descriptions of the lever are found in the Peripatetic school of the followers of Aristotle , and are sometimes attributed to <unk> . According to Pappus of Alexandria , Archimedes ' work on levers caused him to remark : " Give me a place to stand on , and I will move the Earth . " ( Greek : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> καὶ <unk> <unk> <unk> ) Plutarch describes how Archimedes designed block @-@ and @-@ tackle pulley systems , allowing sailors to use the principle of leverage to lift objects that would otherwise have been too heavy to move . Archimedes has also been credited with improving the power and accuracy of the catapult , and with inventing the odometer during the First Punic War . The odometer was described as a cart with a gear mechanism that dropped a ball into a container after each mile traveled . 
 Cicero ( 106 – 43 BC ) mentions Archimedes briefly in his dialogue De re publica , which portrays a fictional conversation taking place in 129 BC . After the capture of Syracuse c . 212 BC , General Marcus Claudius Marcellus is said to have taken back to Rome two mechanisms , constructed by Archimedes and used as aids in astronomy , which showed the motion of the Sun , Moon and five planets . Cicero mentions similar mechanisms designed by Thales of Miletus and Eudoxus of Cnidus . The dialogue says that Marcellus kept one of the devices as his only personal loot from Syracuse , and donated the other to the Temple of Virtue in Rome . Marcellus ' mechanism was demonstrated , according to Cicero , by Gaius Sulpicius Gallus to Lucius Furius <unk> , who described it thus : 
 <unk> <unk> Gallus cum <unk> , <unk> ut soli luna <unk> <unk> in <unk> illo <unk> <unk> in ipso caelo <unk> , ex quo et in caelo <unk> solis <unk> <unk> illa <unk> , et <unk> luna tum in <unk> <unk> quae <unk> umbra terrae , cum sol e <unk> . — When Gallus moved the globe , it happened that the Moon followed the Sun by as many turns on that bronze contrivance as in the sky itself , from which also in the sky the Sun 's globe became to have that same eclipse , and the Moon came then to that position which was its shadow on the Earth , when the Sun was in line . 
 This is a description of a planetarium or orrery . Pappus of Alexandria stated that Archimedes had written a manuscript ( now lost ) on the construction of these mechanisms entitled On Sphere @-@ Making . Modern research in this area has been focused on the Antikythera mechanism , another device built c . 100 BC that was probably designed for the same purpose . Constructing mechanisms of this kind would have required a sophisticated knowledge of differential gearing . This was once thought to have been beyond the range of the technology available in ancient times , but the discovery of the Antikythera mechanism in 1902 has confirmed that devices of this kind were known to the ancient Greeks . 
 = = Mathematics = = 
 While he is often regarded as a designer of mechanical devices , Archimedes also made contributions to the field of mathematics . Plutarch wrote : " He placed his whole affection and ambition in those purer speculations where there can be no reference to the vulgar needs of life . " Archimedes was able to use infinitesimals in a way that is similar to modern integral calculus . Through proof by contradiction ( reductio ad absurdum ) , he could give answers to problems to an arbitrary degree of accuracy , while specifying the limits within which the answer lay . This technique is known as the method of exhaustion , and he employed it to approximate the value of π . In Measurement of a Circle he did this by drawing a larger regular hexagon outside a circle and a smaller regular hexagon inside the circle , and progressively doubling the number of sides of each regular polygon , calculating the length of a side of each polygon at each step . As the number of sides increases , it becomes a more accurate approximation of a circle . After four such steps , when the polygons had 96 sides each , he was able to determine that the value of π lay between 31 / 7 ( approximately 3 @.@ 1429 ) and 310 / 71 ( approximately 3 @.@ 1408 ) , consistent with its actual value of approximately 3 @.@ 1416 . He also proved that the area of a circle was equal to π multiplied by the square of the radius of the circle ( πr2 ) . In On the Sphere and Cylinder , Archimedes postulates that any magnitude when added to itself enough times will exceed any given magnitude . This is the Archimedean property of real numbers . 
 In Measurement of a Circle , Archimedes gives the value of the square root of 3 as lying between 265 / 153 ( approximately 1 @.@ <unk> ) and 1351 / 780 ( approximately 1 @.@ <unk> ) . The actual value is approximately 1 @.@ <unk> , making this a very accurate estimate . He introduced this result without offering any explanation of how he had obtained it . This aspect of the work of Archimedes caused John Wallis to remark that he was : " as it were of set purpose to have covered up the traces of his investigation as if he had <unk> posterity the secret of his method of inquiry while he wished to extort from them assent to his results . " It is possible that he used an iterative procedure to calculate these values . 
 In The Quadrature of the Parabola , Archimedes proved that the area enclosed by a parabola and a straight line is 4 / 3 times the area of a corresponding inscribed triangle as shown in the figure at right . He expressed the solution to the problem as an infinite geometric series with the common ratio 1 / 4 : 
 <formula> 
 If the first term in this series is the area of the triangle , then the second is the sum of the areas of two triangles whose bases are the two smaller secant lines , and so on . This proof uses a variation of the series 1 / 4 + 1 / 16 + 1 / 64 + 1 / 256 + · · · which sums to 1 / 3 . 
 In The Sand Reckoner , Archimedes set out to calculate the number of grains of sand that the universe could contain . In doing so , he challenged the notion that the number of grains of sand was too large to be counted . He wrote : " There are some , King Gelo ( Gelo II , son of Hiero II ) , who think that the number of the sand is infinite in multitude ; and I mean by the sand not only that which exists about Syracuse and the rest of Sicily but also that which is found in every region whether inhabited or uninhabited . " To solve the problem , Archimedes devised a system of counting based on the myriad . The word is from the Greek <unk> <unk> , for the number 10 @,@ 000 . He proposed a number system using powers of a myriad of myriads ( 100 million ) and concluded that the number of grains of sand required to fill the universe would be 8 <unk> , or 8 × 1063 . 
 = = Writings = = 
 The works of Archimedes were written in Doric Greek , the dialect of ancient Syracuse . The written work of Archimedes has not survived as well as that of Euclid , and seven of his treatises are known to have existed only through references made to them by other authors . Pappus of Alexandria mentions On Sphere @-@ Making and another work on polyhedra , while Theon of Alexandria quotes a remark about refraction from the now @-@ lost <unk> . During his lifetime , Archimedes made his work known through correspondence with the mathematicians in Alexandria . The writings of Archimedes were first collected by the Byzantine Greek architect Isidore of Miletus ( c . 530 AD ) , while commentaries on the works of Archimedes written by <unk> in the sixth century AD helped to bring his work a wider audience . Archimedes ' work was translated into Arabic by Thābit ibn Qurra ( 836 – 901 AD ) , and Latin by Gerard of Cremona ( c . 1114 – 1187 AD ) . During the Renaissance , the Editio Princeps ( First Edition ) was published in Basel in 1544 by Johann <unk> with the works of Archimedes in Greek and Latin . Around the year 1586 Galileo Galilei invented a hydrostatic balance for weighing metals in air and water after apparently being inspired by the work of Archimedes . 
 = = = Surviving works = = = 
 On the Equilibrium of Planes ( two volumes ) 
 The first book is in fifteen propositions with seven postulates , while the second book is in ten propositions . In this work Archimedes explains the Law of the Lever , stating , " Magnitudes are in equilibrium at distances reciprocally proportional to their weights . " 
 Archimedes uses the principles derived to calculate the areas and centers of gravity of various geometric figures including triangles , parallelograms and parabolas . 
 On the Measurement of a Circle 
 This is a short work consisting of three propositions . It is written in the form of a correspondence with Dositheus of Pelusium , who was a student of Conon of Samos . In Proposition II , Archimedes gives an approximation of the value of pi ( π ) , showing that it is greater than 223 / 71 and less than 22 / 7 . 
 On Spirals 
 This work of 28 propositions is also addressed to Dositheus . The treatise defines what is now called the Archimedean spiral . It is the locus of points corresponding to the locations over time of a point moving away from a fixed point with a constant speed along a line which rotates with constant angular velocity . Equivalently , in polar coordinates ( r , θ ) it can be described by the equation 
 <formula> 
 with real numbers a and b . This is an early example of a mechanical curve ( a curve traced by a moving point ) considered by a Greek mathematician . 
 On the Sphere and the Cylinder ( two volumes ) 
 In this treatise addressed to Dositheus , Archimedes obtains the result of which he was most proud , namely the relationship between a sphere and a circumscribed cylinder of the same height and diameter . The volume is 4 / <unk> for the sphere , and <unk> for the cylinder . The surface area is <unk> for the sphere , and <unk> for the cylinder ( including its two bases ) , where r is the radius of the sphere and cylinder . The sphere has a volume two @-@ thirds that of the circumscribed cylinder . Similarly , the sphere has an area two @-@ thirds that of the cylinder ( including the bases ) . A sculpted sphere and cylinder were placed on the tomb of Archimedes at his request . 
 On <unk> and <unk> 
 This is a work in 32 propositions addressed to Dositheus . In this treatise Archimedes calculates the areas and volumes of sections of cones , spheres , and paraboloids . 
 On Floating Bodies ( two volumes ) 
 In the first part of this treatise , Archimedes spells out the law of equilibrium of fluids , and proves that water will adopt a spherical form around a center of gravity . This may have been an attempt at explaining the theory of contemporary Greek astronomers such as Eratosthenes that the Earth is round . The fluids described by Archimedes are not self @-@ gravitating , since he assumes the existence of a point towards which all things fall in order to derive the spherical shape . 
 In the second part , he calculates the equilibrium positions of sections of paraboloids . This was probably an idealization of the shapes of ships ' hulls . Some of his sections float with the base under water and the summit above water , similar to the way that icebergs float . Archimedes ' principle of buoyancy is given in the work , stated as follows : 
 Any body wholly or partially immersed in a fluid experiences an upthrust equal to , but opposite in sense to , the weight of the fluid displaced . 
 The Quadrature of the Parabola 
 In this work of 24 propositions addressed to Dositheus , Archimedes proves by two methods that the area enclosed by a parabola and a straight line is 4 / 3 multiplied by the area of a triangle with equal base and height . He achieves this by calculating the value of a geometric series that sums to infinity with the ratio 1 / 4 . 
 ( O ) <unk> 
 This is a dissection puzzle similar to a <unk> , and the treatise describing it was found in more complete form in the Archimedes Palimpsest . Archimedes calculates the areas of the 14 pieces which can be assembled to form a square . Research published by Dr. <unk> Netz of Stanford University in 2003 argued that Archimedes was attempting to determine how many ways the pieces could be assembled into the shape of a square . Dr. Netz calculates that the pieces can be made into a square 17 @,@ 152 ways . The number of arrangements is 536 when solutions that are equivalent by rotation and reflection have been excluded . The puzzle represents an example of an early problem in combinatorics . 
 The origin of the puzzle 's name is unclear , and it has been suggested that it is taken from the Ancient Greek word for throat or gullet , <unk> ( <unk> ) . Ausonius refers to the puzzle as <unk> , a Greek compound word formed from the roots of <unk> ( osteon , bone ) and <unk> ( <unk> – fight ) . The puzzle is also known as the <unk> of Archimedes or Archimedes ' Box . 
 Archimedes ' cattle problem 
 This work was discovered by Gotthold Ephraim Lessing in a Greek manuscript consisting of a poem of 44 lines , in the Herzog August Library in Wolfenbüttel , Germany in 1773 . It is addressed to Eratosthenes and the mathematicians in Alexandria . Archimedes challenges them to count the numbers of cattle in the Herd of the Sun by solving a number of simultaneous Diophantine equations . There is a more difficult version of the problem in which some of the answers are required to be square numbers . This version of the problem was first solved by A. <unk> in 1880 , and the answer is a very large number , approximately 7 @.@ <unk> × <unk> . 
 The Sand Reckoner 
 In this treatise , Archimedes counts the number of grains of sand that will fit inside the universe . This book mentions the heliocentric theory of the solar system proposed by Aristarchus of Samos , as well as contemporary ideas about the size of the Earth and the distance between various celestial bodies . By using a system of numbers based on powers of the myriad , Archimedes concludes that the number of grains of sand required to fill the universe is 8 × 1063 in modern notation . The introductory letter states that Archimedes ' father was an astronomer named Phidias . The Sand Reckoner or <unk> is the only surviving work in which Archimedes discusses his views on astronomy . 
 The Method of Mechanical Theorems 
 This treatise was thought lost until the discovery of the Archimedes Palimpsest in 1906 . In this work Archimedes uses infinitesimals , and shows how breaking up a figure into an infinite number of infinitely small parts can be used to determine its area or volume . Archimedes may have considered this method lacking in formal rigor , so he also used the method of exhaustion to derive the results . As with The Cattle Problem , The Method of Mechanical Theorems was written in the form of a letter to Eratosthenes in Alexandria . 
 = = = Apocryphal works = = = 
 Archimedes ' Book of <unk> or Liber <unk> is a treatise with fifteen propositions on the nature of circles . The earliest known copy of the text is in Arabic . The scholars T. L. Heath and Marshall <unk> argued that it cannot have been written by Archimedes in its current form , since it quotes Archimedes , suggesting modification by another author . The <unk> may be based on an earlier work by Archimedes that is now lost . 
 It has also been claimed that Heron 's formula for calculating the area of a triangle from the length of its sides was known to Archimedes . However , the first reliable reference to the formula is given by Heron of Alexandria in the 1st century AD . 
 = = Archimedes Palimpsest = = 
 The foremost document containing the work of Archimedes is the Archimedes Palimpsest . In 1906 , the Danish professor Johan Ludvig Heiberg visited Constantinople and examined a 174 @-@ page goatskin parchment of prayers written in the 13th century AD . He discovered that it was a palimpsest , a document with text that had been written over an erased older work . <unk> were created by scraping the ink from existing works and reusing them , which was a common practice in the Middle Ages as vellum was expensive . The older works in the palimpsest were identified by scholars as 10th century AD copies of previously unknown treatises by Archimedes . The parchment spent hundreds of years in a monastery library in Constantinople before being sold to a private collector in the 1920s . On October 29 , 1998 it was sold at auction to an anonymous buyer for $ 2 million at Christie 's in New York . The palimpsest holds seven treatises , including the only surviving copy of On Floating Bodies in the original Greek . It is the only known source of The Method of Mechanical Theorems , referred to by Suidas and thought to have been lost forever . <unk> was also discovered in the palimpsest , with a more complete analysis of the puzzle than had been found in previous texts . The palimpsest is now stored at the Walters Art Museum in Baltimore , Maryland , where it has been subjected to a range of modern tests including the use of ultraviolet and x @-@ ray light to read the overwritten text . 
 The treatises in the Archimedes Palimpsest are : On the Equilibrium of Planes , On Spirals , Measurement of a Circle , On the Sphere and the Cylinder , On Floating Bodies , The Method of Mechanical Theorems and <unk> . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Galileo praised Archimedes many times , and referred to him as a " superhuman " . Leibniz said " He who understands Archimedes and Apollonius will admire less the achievements of the foremost men of later times . " 
 There is a crater on the Moon named Archimedes ( 29 @.@ 7 ° N , 4 @.@ 0 ° W ) in his honor , as well as a lunar mountain range , the Montes Archimedes ( 25 @.@ 3 ° N , 4 @.@ 6 ° W ) . 
 The Fields Medal for outstanding achievement in mathematics carries a portrait of Archimedes , along with a carving illustrating his proof on the sphere and the cylinder . The inscription around the head of Archimedes is a quote attributed to him which reads in Latin : " <unk> suum pectus <unk> <unk> " ( Rise above oneself and grasp the world ) . 
 Archimedes has appeared on postage stamps issued by East Germany ( 1973 ) , Greece ( 1983 ) , Italy ( 1983 ) , Nicaragua ( 1971 ) , San Marino ( 1982 ) , and Spain ( 1963 ) . 
 The exclamation of Eureka ! attributed to Archimedes is the state motto of California . In this instance the word refers to the discovery of gold near Sutter 's Mill in 1848 which sparked the California Gold Rush . 
 = = = The Works of Archimedes online = = = 
 Text in Classical Greek : PDF scans of Heiberg 's edition of the Works of Archimedes , now in the public domain 
 In English translation : The Works of Archimedes , trans . T.L. Heath ; supplemented by The Method of Mechanical Theorems , trans . L.G. Robinson 
 = Marie Curie = 
 Marie Skłodowska Curie ( / <unk> , <unk> / ; French : [ <unk> ] ; Polish : [ <unk> ] ; 7 November 1867 – 4 July 1934 ) , born Maria Salomea Skłodowska [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] , was a Polish and naturalized @-@ French physicist and chemist who conducted pioneering research on radioactivity . She was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize , the first person and only woman to win twice , the only person to win twice in multiple sciences , and was part of the Curie family legacy of five Nobel Prizes . She was also the first woman to become a professor at the University of Paris , and in 1995 became the first woman to be entombed on her own merits in the Panthéon in Paris . 
 She was born in Warsaw , in what was then the Kingdom of Poland , part of the Russian Empire . She studied at Warsaw 's clandestine Floating University and began her practical scientific training in Warsaw . In 1891 , aged 24 , she followed her older sister Bronisława to study in Paris , where she earned her higher degrees and conducted her subsequent scientific work . She shared the 1903 Nobel Prize in Physics with her husband Pierre Curie and with physicist Henri Becquerel . She won the 1911 Nobel Prize in Chemistry . 
 Her achievements included the development of the theory of radioactivity ( a term that she coined ) , techniques for isolating radioactive isotopes , and the discovery of two elements , polonium and radium . Under her direction , the world 's first studies were conducted into the treatment of neoplasms , using radioactive isotopes . She founded the Curie Institutes in Paris and in Warsaw , which remain major centres of medical research today . During World War I , she established the first military field radiological centres . 
