 The most important isotope is astatine @-@ 211 , the only one in commercial use . To produce the bismuth target , the metal is sputtered onto a gold , copper , or aluminium surface at 50 to 100 milligrams per square centimeter . Bismuth oxide can be used instead ; this is forcibly fused with a copper plate . The target is kept under a chemically neutral nitrogen atmosphere , and is cooled with water to prevent premature astatine vaporization . In a particle accelerator , such as a cyclotron , alpha particles are collided with the bismuth . Even though only one bismuth isotope is used ( bismuth @-@ 209 ) , the reaction may occur in three possible ways , producing astatine @-@ 209 , astatine @-@ 210 , or astatine @-@ 211 . In order to eliminate undesired nuclides , the maximum energy of the particle accelerator is set to a value ( optimally 29 @.@ 17 MeV ) above that for the reaction producing astatine @-@ 211 ( to produce the desired isotope ) and below the one producing astatine @-@ 210 ( to avoid producing other astatine isotopes ) . 
 = = = Separation methods = = = 
 Since astatine is the main product of the synthesis , after its formation it must only be separated from the target and any significant contaminants . Several methods are available , " but they generally follow one of two approaches — dry distillation or [ wet ] acid treatment of the target followed by solvent extraction . " The methods summarized below are modern adaptations of older procedures , as reviewed by Kugler and Keller . Pre @-@ 1985 techniques more often addressed the elimination of co @-@ produced toxic polonium ; this requirement is now mitigated by capping the energy of the cyclotron irradiation beam . 
 = = = = Dry = = = = 
 The astatine @-@ containing cyclotron target is heated to a temperature of around 650 ° C. The astatine <unk> and is condensed in ( typically ) a cold trap . Higher temperatures of up to around 850 ° C may increase the yield , at the risk of bismuth contamination from concurrent volatilization . <unk> the condensate may be required to minimize the presence of bismuth ( as bismuth can interfere with astatine labeling reactions ) . The astatine is recovered from the trap using one or more low concentration solvents such as sodium hydroxide , methanol or chloroform . Astatine yields of up to around 80 % may be achieved . Dry separation is the method most commonly used to produce a chemically useful form of astatine . 
 = = = = Wet = = = = 
 The bismuth ( or sometimes bismuth trioxide ) target is dissolved in , for example , concentrated nitric or perchloric acid . Astatine is extracted using an organic solvent such as butyl or isopropyl ether , or <unk> . A separation yield of 93 % using nitric acid has been reported , falling to 72 % by the time purification procedures were completed ( distillation of nitric acid , purging residual nitrogen oxides , and <unk> bismuth nitrate to enable liquid @-@ liquid extraction ) . Wet methods involve " multiple radioactivity handling steps " and are not well suited for isolating larger quantities of astatine . They can enable the production of astatine in a specific oxidation state and may have greater applicability in experimental radiochemistry . 
 = = Uses and precautions = = 
 Newly formed astatine @-@ 211 is the subject of ongoing research in nuclear medicine . It must be used quickly as it decays with a half @-@ life of 7 @.@ 2 hours ; this is long enough to permit multistep labeling strategies . Astatine @-@ 211 has potential for targeted alpha particle radiotherapy , since it decays either via emission of an alpha particle ( to bismuth @-@ 207 ) , or via electron capture ( to an extremely short @-@ lived nuclide , polonium @-@ 211 , which undergoes further alpha decay ) . Polonium X @-@ rays emitted as a result of the electron capture branch , in the range of 77 – 92 keV , enable the tracking of astatine in animals and patients . 
 The principal medicinal difference between astatine @-@ 211 and iodine @-@ 131 ( a radioactive iodine isotope also used in medicine ) is that iodine @-@ 131 emits high energy beta particles , and astatine does not . Beta particles have much greater penetrating power through tissues than do the much heavier alpha particles . An average alpha particle released by astatine @-@ 211 can travel up to 70 µm through surrounding tissues ; an average energy beta particle emitted by iodine @-@ 131 can travel nearly 30 times as far , to about 2 mm . The short half @-@ life and limited penetrating power of alpha radiation through tissues offers advantages in situations where the " tumor burden is low and / or malignant cell populations are located in close proximity to essential normal tissues . " Significant morbidity in cell culture models of human cancers has been achieved with from one to ten astatine @-@ 211 atoms bound per cell . 
 Several obstacles have been encountered in the development of astatine @-@ based radiopharmaceuticals for cancer treatment . World War II delayed research for close to a decade . Results of early experiments indicated that a cancer @-@ selective carrier would need to be developed and it was not until the 1970s that monoclonal antibodies became available for this purpose . Unlike iodine , astatine shows a tendency to <unk> from molecular carriers such as these , particularly at sp3 carbon sites ( less so from <unk> sites ) . Given the toxicity of astatine accumulated and retained in the body , this emphasized the need to ensure it remained attached to its host molecule . While astatine carriers that are slowly metabolized can be assessed for their efficacy , more rapidly metabolized carriers remain a significant obstacle to the evaluation of astatine in nuclear medicine . Mitigating the effects of astatine induced radiolysis of labeling chemistry and carrier molecules is another area requiring further development . A practical application for astatine as a cancer treatment would potentially be suitable for a " staggering " number of patients ; production of astatine in the quantities that would be required remains an issue . 
 Animal studies show that astatine , similarly to iodine , although to a lesser extent , is preferentially concentrated in the thyroid gland . Unlike iodine , astatine also shows a tendency to be taken up by the lungs and spleen , possibly because of in body oxidation of At – to At + . If administered in the form of a <unk> it tends to concentrate in the liver . Experiments in rats and monkeys suggest that astatine @-@ 211 causes much greater damage to the thyroid gland than does iodine @-@ 131 , with repetitive injection of the nuclide resulting in necrosis and cell dysplasia within the gland . Early research suggested that injection of astatine into female rodents caused morphological changes in breast tissue ; this conclusion remained controversial for many years . General agreement was later reached that this was likely caused by the effect of breast tissue irradiation combined with hormonal changes due to irradiation of the ovaries . 
 = Osborne Reef = 
 Osborne Reef is an artificial reef off the coast of Fort Lauderdale , Florida , constructed of concrete jacks in a 50 feet ( 15 m ) diameter circle . 
 In the 1970s , the reef was the subject of an ambitious expansion project utilizing old and discarded tires . The project ultimately failed , and the " reef " has come to be considered an environmental disaster — ultimately doing more harm than good in the coastal Florida waters . 
 In 2007 , after several false starts , cleanup efforts began when the United States military took on the project . This cleanup exercise provides the military with a real @-@ world training environment for their diving and recovery personnel , coupled with the benefit of helping the Florida coast without incurring significant costs to the state . 
 = = Construction = = 
 In 1972 , Broward Artificial Reef Inc . ( <unk> ) proposed the construction of an enlarged artificial reef to Broward County as a way to both dispose of old tires as well as lure more game fish to the area . Similarly designed reefs had already been constructed in the Northeastern United States , the neighboring Gulf of Mexico , Indonesia , Malaysia , Australia , and Africa . Gregory McIntosh , an employee of <unk> , lauded the project to the attendees of a 1974 conference on artificial reefs : " Tires , which were an esthetic pollutant ashore , could be recycled , so to speak , to build a fishing reef at sea . " 
 With endorsement of the project by the US Army Corps of Engineers , the Broward County government approved the project : that spring more than 100 privately owned boats enthusiastically volunteered to assist with the project ; accompanied by the USS Thrush thousands of tire bundles were simultaneously dropped onto the reef . The Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company provided equipment for the auspicious undertaking ; even supporting the project so far as to drop a gold @-@ painted tire from a Goodyear Blimp to christen the site . The culmination of the project was the deposit of over two million tires bound with steel clips over 36 acres ( 150 @,@ 000 m2 ) of the ocean floor , approximately 7 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 100 m ) offshore and at a depth of 65 feet ( 20 m ) . Multiple concrete jacks were spread in a circle of 50 feet ( 15 m ) diameter . 
 = = Failure = = 
 Ultimately , little marine life has been successful in latching onto the man @-@ made reef and the majority never even had the opportunity to do so . When deposited , while a few tires were individual loose entities , the majority were bound together with nylon or steel clips ( or bands ) . As there were no exceptional efforts made to ensure the non @-@ corrosivity of the steel restraints , they summarily failed — resulting in the loosing of over two million individual , lightweight tires . This newfound mobility destroyed any marine life that had thus far grown on the tires , and effectively prevented the growth of any new organisms . Furthermore , the tires were now easily subject to the tropical winds and storms that frequent the east coast of Florida and continue to collide ( at times with tremendous force ) with other natural coral reefs only 70 feet ( 21 m ) away : compounding their uselessness with environmentally damaging side @-@ effects . 
 Lastly , the concern of adjacent coastal areas is that the tires are not remaining within the boundaries of Osborne Reef . In 1995 , Hurricane Opal managed to spread over 1 @,@ 000 tires onto the Florida Panhandle , west of Pensacola ; and in 1998 , Hurricane Bonnie deposited thousands of the tires onto North Carolina beaches . 
 This project is not the only one of its nature to fail ; Indonesia and Malaysia mounted enormous tire @-@ reef programs in the 1980s and are now seeing the ramifications of the failure of tire reefs , from littered beaches to reef destruction . Jack Sobel , The Ocean Conservancy 's director of strategic conservation said in a 2002 interview that " I don 't know of any cases where there 's been a success with tire reefs . " That year , The Ocean Conservancy 's International Coastal Cleanup removed 11 @,@ 956 tires from beaches all over the world . 
 = = Cleanup = = 
 In 2001 , Dr. Robin Sherman of Nova Southeastern University was awarded a US $ 30 @,@ 000 grant by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) to begin a tire removal program . She was able to coordinate the removal of only 1 @,@ 600 tires from the reef , and at a cost estimated at $ 17 a tire . 
 In 2002 , Florida and Broward County environmental officials began the long and arduous process of setting into motion a plan to remove the tires . An original estimate of between $ 40 and $ 100 million led the Florida Department of Environmental Protection ( DEP ) to plan to arrange a deal with those companies whose construction damages the seabed and reefs . Where they would previously mitigate their destructive construction with replacement constructs for reefs , the state would require them to make their amends by removing tires from the Osborne Reef . This plan faced criticism by environmental groups who felt that this would only hasten the destruction of more marine habitats . Florida did not follow through on these plans . 
 In May 2015 , a two @-@ year project to clear 90 @,@ 000 tires from the site was commenced by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection . 
 = = = US military involvement = = = 
 In 2007 , Broward County contacted the United States Assistant Secretary of Defense for Reserve Affairs about their Innovative Readiness Training ( IRT ) program , which looks for civil @-@ military projects that improve military readiness and address the needs of the American public . <unk> Donovan Motley said that the cleanup of Osborne Reef easily met those requirements : " This project allows these military divers and Army <unk> crew members ' real @-@ world training in ' wartime ' salvage ops . And perhaps , more importantly , it exercises interoperability with federal , state and county agencies and these skill sets could have the most significance in the aftermath of a Katrina @-@ type natural disaster . " Beginning in June 2007 , the United States military and Coast Guard began “ <unk> 07 " to ascertain the best and most efficient processes for the cleanup effort . Barring unforeseen operational commitments and engagements , military divers hope to use this project as a training platform for several years and " recover the maximum number of tires possible from day one . " Coastal America , an office of the United States federal government was tasked with coordinating the cleanup of the reef ; they were instrumental in finalizing the deal wherein the Florida government would allocate $ 2 million to cover transport and recycling of the tires . Ken Banks with the Florida DEP estimated the project to take three to five years , and while that timeline won 't allow for the removal of all two million tires , it should mitigate the majority of the damage they 're causing to the corals and coastline , though Banks predicted it could take decades for the reefs to rebuild . 
 Summer 2007 saw US Navy , Army , and Coast Guard divers based out of a Coast Guard base in Dania Beach , Florida working to clean the reef . The joint team first worked to remove the tires from where they were doing the most damage , abutting against natural reefs in the area . In 2007 , the recovery effort brought approximately 10 @,@ 000 tires ashore . 
 In 2008 , recovery stopped after 26 days on May 24 after retrieving 43 @,@ 900 tires . That year , Florida spent approximately $ 140 @,@ 000 on the cleanup , some of which constituted transport for the tires to a shredding facility in neighboring Georgia whereafter they were burnt as fuel at a paper mill . 
 Key members of the 2008 cleanup effort were US Army Captain Russell <unk> and his 86th Engineer Dive Team ; on August 10 , 2009 , they were presented with the 2008 Coastal America Partnership Award and a letter from President Obama for their participation in the reef cleanup effort . The award recognizes " outstanding partnerships that make a significant contribution toward the restoration and protection of our Nation 's coastal and marine environment " and is the only environmental award of its kind given by the White House . Two days later in Hollywood , California , Coastal America and Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Reserve Affairs David L. McGinnis awarded the partner cleanup team from the Florida Department of Environmental Protection the same award . The 86th Engineer Dive Team deployed to the AOR in March 2009 for a one @-@ year stint , and was unable to participate in that year 's cleanup term . 
 I am particularly proud of the many Sailors and Soldiers who have found a way to enhance their training on skills important to our Nation 's readiness for war while also making a significant contribution to the health of our living ocean resources , [ ... ] Just as you protect our Nation when serving overseas , at home you have found another way to protect our Nation 's wellbeing . 
 In 2009 , recovery began on July 24 with thirty Army and Navy divers at Hugh Taylor Birch State Park , where it was thought about 300 @,@ 000 tires were caught against a natural reef . Loading the caught tires onto the Army craft Brandy Station , the first day 's haul brought approximately 1 @,@ 400 tires ashore . Wrapping up for the year in mid @-@ August , Coastal America 's William <unk> told the Associated Press that cleanup efforts have thus far recovered approximately 73 @,@ 000 tires from the reef . 
 = Prehistoric art in Scotland = 
 Prehistoric art in Scotland is visual art created or found within the modern borders of Scotland , before the departure of the Romans from southern and central Britain in the early fifth century CE , which is usually seen as the beginning of the early historic or Medieval era . There is no clear definition of prehistoric art among scholars and objects that may involve creativity often lack a context that would allow them to be understood . 
 The earliest examples of portable art from what is now Scotland are highly decorated carved stone balls from the Neolithic period , which share patterns with Irish and Scottish stone carvings . Other items from this period include elaborate carved maceheads and figurines from Links of Noltland , including the Westray Wife , which is the earliest known depiction of a human face from Scotland . 
 From the Bronze Age there are examples of carvings , including the first representations of objects , and cup and ring marks . Representations of an axe and a boat at the Ri Cruin Cairn in Kilmartin , and a boat pecked into Wemyss Cave , are probably the oldest two @-@ dimensional representations of real objects that survive in Scotland . Elaborate carved stone battle @-@ axes may be symbolic representations of power . Surviving metalwork includes gold <unk> or <unk> , jet beaded necklaces and elaborate weaponry , such as leaf swords and ceremonial shields of sheet bronze . 
 From the Iron Age there are more extensive examples of patterned objects and gold work . Evidence of the wider La Tène culture includes the Torrs Pony @-@ cap and Horns . The Stirling torcs demonstrate common styles found in Scotland and Ireland and continental workmanship . One of the most impressive items from this period is the boar 's head fragment of the Deskford <unk> . From the first century CE , as Rome carried out a series of occupations , there are Roman artifacts like the Cramond Lioness and Roman influence on material culture can be seen in local stone carvings . 
 = = Definitions and meanings = = 
 The ability to study prehistoric art is dependent on surviving artifacts . Art created in mediums such as sand , bark , hides and textiles has not normally endured , while less @-@ perishable materials , such as rock , stone , bone , ivory ( and to a lesser extent wood ) , later pottery and metal , are more likely to be extant . Whether all these artifacts can be defined as works of art is contested between scholars . Alexander <unk> argued that the earliest , non @-@ representational incisions on rock mark the beginnings of human art . More cautiously , Paul <unk> suggests that the relative rarity of these works means they cannot be seen as integral to early human society and evidence of an artistic culture . 
 Colin Renfrew has pointed out the dangers of applying modern values of art to past societies and cultures . Günter Berghaus argues that these works have often been approached with a set of post @-@ Renaissance aesthetic values that distinguish between artists and craftsman and art and artifact , although these categories are not universal and may be inappropriate for understanding prehistoric society . Duncan Garrow has pointed to the difficulties of the modern distinction drawn between form and decoration . The emphasis in studies of prehistoric art tend to be placed on decoration in objects such as ceramics and ignores the importance of form , found in objects such as weapons . 
 Many meanings have been suggested for the advent and nature of prehistoric art . It may have helped develop human solidarity in its early stages . Open air rock art may have acted as signposts for the route of animal migrations . Cave art may have had a ritual role in rites of initiation , vision quests or totemic ceremonies . Portable objects may have acted as notation systems and anthropomorphic figures may have had a role in religious rituals . However , most artifacts can only be understood in their context , which is often lost or poorly understood . 
 = = Stone Age = = 
 Scotland was occupied by Mesolithic hunter @-@ gatherers from around 8500 BCE , who were highly mobile boat @-@ using people making tools from bone , stone and antlers . Neolithic farming brought permanent settlements , like the stone house at Knap of Howar on Papa Westray , dating from around 3500 BCE . The settlers also introduced chambered cairn tombs , as at Maeshowe , and the many standing stones and circles such as those at Stenness on the mainland of Orkney , which dates from about 3100 BCE , and similar stones to which are found across Europe from about the same time . 
 There is no surviving art from the Mesolithic period in Scotland , probably because the mobile peoples of the period would have made this on perishable organic items . Probably the oldest surviving portable visual art from Scotland are carved stone balls , or petrospheres , that date from the late Neolithic era . They are a uniquely Scottish phenomenon , with over 425 known examples . Most are from modern Aberdeenshire , but a handful of examples are known from Iona , Skye , Harris , Uist , Lewis , Arran , Hawick , Wigtownshire and fifteen from Orkney , five of which were found at the Neolithic village of Skara Brae . Many functions have been suggested for these objects , most indicating that they were prestigious and powerful possessions . Their production may have continued into the Iron Age . The complex carved circles and spirals on these balls can be seen mirrored in the carving on what was probably a lintel from a chambered cairn at Pierowall on Westray , Orkney , which seem to be part of the same culture that produced carvings at Newgrange in Ireland . Similarly , elaborately carved maceheads are often found in burial sites , like that found at <unk> in Sutherland , which has a pattern of interlocking diamond @-@ shaped facets , similar to those found across Neolithic Britain and Europe . 
 Pottery appeared in the Neolithic period once hunters and gatherers transitioned to a sedentary lifestyle , until then they needed to use lightweight , mobile containers . Finely made and decorated Unstan ware , survives from the fourth and third millennia BCE and is named after the Unstan Chambered Cairn on the Mainland of the Orkney Islands . Typical are elegant and distinctive shallow bowls with a band of grooved patterning below the rim , using a technique known as " stab @-@ and @-@ drag " . A second variation consists of undecorated , round @-@ bottomed bowls . Unstan ware is mostly found in tombs , specifically tombs of the Orkney @-@ Cromarty type , that include the so @-@ called Tomb of the Eagles at Isbister on South Ronaldsay , and <unk> <unk> and Midhowe on Rousay , but has occasionally been found outside of tombs , as at the farmstead of Knap of Howar on Papa Westray . There are scattered occurrences of Unstan ware on the Scottish Mainland , as at Balbridie , and in the Western Isles , as at Eilean <unk> . Unstan ware may have evolved into the later grooved ware style , associated with the builders of the Maeshowe class of chambered tomb , which began on Orkney early in the third millennium BCE , and was soon adopted throughout Britain and Ireland . Grooved ware vessels are often highly decorated and flat bottomed , often with patterns similar to those on petrospheres and carved maceheads . 
 In 2009 the Westray Wife , a lozenge @-@ shaped figurine that is believed to be the earliest representation of a human face found in Scotland , was discovered at the site of a Neolithic village at Links of Noltland near <unk> Bay on the north coast of Westray . The figurine 's face has two dots for eyes , heavy brows and an oblong nose and a pattern of hatches on the body could represent clothing . Two figurines were subsequently found at the site in 2010 and 2012 . 
 = = Bronze Age = = 
 The Bronze Age began in Scotland about 2000 BCE as new techniques of metalworking began to reach northern Britain . The creation of cairns and Megalithic monuments continued . There was probably a fall in population in this period . There is evidence of cellular round houses of stone on Shetland and wooden crannogs , roundhouses partially or entirely built on artificial islands . As elsewhere in Europe , hill forts were first introduced in this period . 
 From this period there are extensive examples of rock art . These include cup and ring marks , a central depression carved into stone , surrounded by rings , sometimes not completed . These are common elsewhere in Atlantic Europe and have been found on natural rocks and isolated stones across Scotland . The most elaborate sets of markings are in western Scotland , particularly in the Kilmartin district . The representations of an axe and a boat at the Ri Cruin Cairn in Kilmartin , and a boat pecked into Wemyss Cave , are probably the oldest two @-@ dimensional representations of real objects that survive in Scotland . Similar carved spirals have also been found on the cover stones of burial cists in Lanarkshire and Kincardine . 
 There are also elaborate carved stone battle @-@ axes found in East Lothian , <unk> and Lanarkshire . These show little sign of use or wear , and so , rather than being practical objects , may be symbolic representations of power . Similarly , the site at Forteviot , in Perthshire , produced a unique warrior burial under a giant sandstone slab . The slab is engraved with a spiral and has an axehead pecked into the underside , and underneath there are grave goods of a copper dagger with leather scabbard and a carved wooden bowl . 
 Surviving metalwork includes personal items like the gold <unk> or <unk> found at <unk> in Dumfriesshire and Southside , Lanarkshire , which date from about 2000 BCE and are similar to those found in relatively large numbers in Ireland , but also with examples across Great Britain and in Portugal . Jet beaded necklaces strung in a crescent shape have been found at sites including Poltalloch and Melfort in Argyll and Aberlemno in Angus . 
 Sophisticated pottery with impressed designs was found in Scotland during the Bronze Age . One example is a decorated grave food vessel dated from about 1000 BCE that was found at a Kincardineshire grave group . Two bronze armlets were also found at the site . 
 Elaborate weaponry includes bronze leaf swords and ceremonial shields of sheet bronze made in Scotland between 900 and 600 BCE . The <unk> Hoard is an early Bronze Age find at Skibo Castle that includes two bronze axes ; several pairs of armlets and anklets , a necklace of forty bronze beads , ear pendants and bosses of bronze and jet buttons . The " <unk> Goddess " is a life @-@ sized female figure from 700 – 500 BCE in oak with quartz pebbles for eyes , found at <unk> , Argyll . 
 = = Iron Age = = 
 The Iron Age began in Scotland from about the seventh century BCE . From this point there are the first finds of iron artifacts in hoards that are consistent containing other items that are consistent with Bronze Age <unk> there is also evidence of smithing and smelting on some settlement sites . Iron Age society in Scotland shared many traits with Southern Britain , Ireland and in some cases continental Europe . These included roundhouses and enclosed and fortified settlements , but it also contained elements of independent development . 
 From the early part of the period there is relatively little metalwork and a larger amount of ceramics . The assemblage of early Iron Age ceramics from Atlantic Scotland is large compared with the rest of Britain . There are a wide variety of forms and styles , some which resemble those of southern Britain , particularly those with incised geometric ornament . 
 By this period Scotland had been penetrated by the wider La Tène culture , which is named after the archaeological site of La Tène on the north side of Lake Neuchâtel in Switzerland . The Torrs Pony @-@ cap and Horns are perhaps the most impressive of the relatively few finds of La Tène decoration from Scotland , and indicate links with Ireland and southern Britain . The Stirling torcs , found in 2009 , are a group of four gold torcs in different styles , dating from 300 BCE and 100 BCE . Two demonstrate common styles found in Scotland and Ireland , but the other two indicate workmanship from what is now southern France , and the Greek and Roman worlds . 
 There are surviving ring @-@ headed pins , which were probably made locally and not imported , and appear to be part of a British and Irish type that was not part of the La Tène culture . There are also spiral finger rings , glass beads and long @-@ handled combs , which are found across Britain , but have local characteristics . The bronze <unk> collar is a large engraved necklace , fastened at the back with a pin . The <unk> scabbard , probably from the first century CE , is elaborately decorated with trumpet curves and " S " <unk> . Further north there are finds of massive bronze armlets , often with enamelled decoration , like the ones found at Culbin Sands , Moray . One of the most impressive items from this period is the boars head fragment of the Deskford <unk> , a war @-@ trumpet from Deskford in Banffshire , probably dating from the first century CE . Similar instruments are mentioned in Roman sources and depicted on the <unk> Cauldron found in Denmark . 
 In stone carving there are a number of simple stone heads from Scotland , like that found at Coupar Angus in Perthshire , that may date from the Iron Age . They are similar to those found across Great Britain and Ireland , although they are difficult to date and may have been made much later . 
 = = Roman influence = = 
 The Romans began military expeditions into what is now Scotland from about 71 CE , building a series of forts , but by 87 the occupation was limited to the Southern Uplands and by the end of the first century the northern limit of Roman expansion was a line drawn between the Tyne and Solway Firth . The Romans eventually withdrew to a line in what is now northern England , building the fortification known as Hadrian 's Wall from coast to coast . Around 141 CE they undertook a reoccupation of southern Scotland , moving up to construct a new limes between the Firth of Forth and the Firth of Clyde , where they built the fortification known as the Antonine Wall . The wall was overrun and abandoned soon after 160 and the Romans withdrew back to the line of Hadrian 's Wall , until Roman authority collapsed in the early fifth century . 
 The Antonine Wall and its associated forts left a direct sculptural legacy in Scotland . There are 19 distance slabs along the wall that depict graphically the victories and marches of the legions involved in its construction . There are also surviving sculptures , including an altar to Diana and Apollo . There is a fountainhead from a bath @-@ house in the shape of a man 's head with a gaping mouth , and the head from a bust or statue , perhaps the goddess Fortuna , both found at Bearsden Roman Fort , East Dunbartonshire , both showing a local Celtic influence in their style . 
 Away from the wall , Roman sculptures include the marble head of a Roman emperor or general , broken from a larger statue , which was found at Hawkshaw , <unk> in the late eighteenth century . It dates to the second century CE and may have been looted from a Roman monument further to the south . The Cramond Lioness is a sculpture , probably imported , of a lioness devouring a bound prisoner , found near the Roman base of Cramond Roman Fort near Edinburgh . A relief of the goddess <unk> found near <unk> in Dumfriesshire , combines elements of native and classical art . 
 The Newstead Helmet , found at the Roman fort in Newstead , near Melrose in Roxburghshire , is one of the most impressive of many finds of Roman arms and armour . The Staffordshire Moorlands Pan is a second @-@ century Romano @-@ British <unk> apparently decorated as a souvenir for a soldier who had served on Hadrian 's Wall , and probably made locally . A number of items were also found in the Sculptor 's Cave , <unk> in Morayshire , including Roman pottery , rings , bracelets , needles and coins , some of which had been re @-@ used for ornaments . 
 = 1970 North Indian Ocean cyclone season = 
 The 1970 North Indian Ocean cyclone season had no bounds , but tropical cyclones in the North Indian Ocean tend to form between April and December , with peaks in May and November . The 1970 season saw a total of seven cyclonic storms , of which three developed into severe cyclonic storms . The Bay of Bengal was more active than the Arabian Sea during 1970 , with all of the three severe cyclonic storms in the season forming there . Unusually , none of the storms in the Arabian Sea made landfall this year . The most significant storm of the season was the Bhola cyclone , which formed in the Bay of Bengal and hit Bangladesh on November 12 . The storm killed at least 300 @,@ 000 and possibly even over half a million people , making it the deadliest tropical cyclone in recorded history . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Very Severe Cyclonic Storm One = = = 
 A low pressure area that developed over the southern Andaman Sea late in April moved north into the Bay of Bengal becoming the first depression of the year on May 2 . The depression intensified under the influence of a high @-@ level anticyclone and became a cyclonic storm the next day . The storm then turned to the northeast and strengthened into a severe cyclonic storm on May 4 . Soon after this , it peaked with winds of 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) and a well @-@ defined eye formed . The storm made its landfall near Cox 's Bazar in easternmost East Pakistan ( now Bangladesh ) early in the morning of May 7 and dissipated over western Burma that evening . 
 The cyclone brought widespread rain to the Andaman and Nicobar Islands before it moved clear of them on May 3 . Effects in East Pakistan are unknown , but Akyab in western Burma reported winds of 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) as the cyclone approached land . 
 = = = Depression Two = = = 
 A depression formed in the northeast of the Bay of Bengal on during the morning of May 23 near the East Pakistan coast . It moved towards the coast and made landfall to the south of Cox 's Bazar that night , before dissipating over southern Assam the next day . Any effects on land are unknown . 
 = = = Severe Cyclonic Storm Three = = = 
 A low pressure area developed off the Karnataka @-@ Goa coastline in the Arabian Sea on May 27 and developed into a depression the next day . The system developed further into a cyclonic storm on May 29 as it moved to the north . The storm reached its peak with 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) soon after this as it turned to the west , but soon degenerated into a deep depression over the northern Arabian Sea on May 31 . The depression continued to move west , weakening to a remnant low shortly as it made landfall on the Arabian Peninsula on June 2 . The remnant low dissipated over southern Saudi Arabia the next day . 
 The cyclone itself had minimal effects on land , but the monsoon advanced into western India in late May in association with the system . As the cyclone moved to the west away from the subcontinent , the incursion of moist air from the Arabian Sea persisted over northwestern India for the first three days of June . This brought moderate rainfall to regions of Gujarat , Rajasthan and western Madhya Pradesh . 
 = = = Cyclonic Storm Four = = = 
 A low pressure area developed in the northern Bay of Bengal on June 6 and developed into a depression the next day as it drifted to the north , moving over south of the Ganges Delta . The depression reversed its course overland , reemerging into the Bay of Bengal on June 8 . Once over water , the depression intensified into a cyclonic storm on the morning of June 9 . The cyclone 's motion shifted to the northwest and it made a second landfall near Balasore in northern Orissa that night . The cyclone quickly weakened to a deep depression overland and tracked to the west over central India , where it degenerated into a broad area of low pressure on June 11 . 
 Sustained winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) were recorded at Sandheads on June 9 , while the cyclone was at its peak offshore . High levels of rain affected much of Orissa and West Bengal , with over 100 mm ( 4 inches ) falling over large areas of both states . As the storm dissipated overland , it brought severe rain to Vidarbha and southern Madhya Pradesh . The highest recorded rainfall was at <unk> were 280 mm ( 11 inches ) fell on June 13 alone . The rains led to localised flooding in parts of Vidarbha and disrupted road transport in the region . 
 = = = Deep Depression Five = = = 
 A low pressure area that had developed over the northern Bay of Bengal the previous day concentrated into a depression early on June 29 . The depression intensified as it moved to the northwest , becoming a deep depression shortly before it crossed the Orissa coast . After landfall the storm continued to move to the northwest , weakening to a depression again on July 2 over northeast Madhya Pradesh . It degenerated into a remnant low over central Uttar Pradesh during the evening on July 3 . 
 The depression brought intense monsoon conditions to Orissa , Madhya Pradesh and Vidarbha during its life . Over 210 mm ( 8 inches ) of rain and winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) were recorded in Paradip as the depression made landfall on June 30 . Inland , the heavy rains caused some rivers in Orissa to overflow and flooded rice paddies in Cuttack District . Further west , the <unk> River overflowed its banks in places . Road transport in Madhya Pradesh was disrupted and there was damage to crops in the Raipur area . Raipur recorded the highest 24 @-@ hour rains associated with the depression , with 230 mm ( 9 inches ) falling there on July 2 . 
 = = = Deep Depression Six = = = 
 A low pressure area moved to the west off the Burmese coast on July 5 and developed into a depression the next day in the north central Bay of Bengal . The depression intensified as it moved to the northwest , becoming a deep depression on July 7 . The system made landfall on the Orissa coast during the morning of July 8 and rapidly degenerated into a broad area of low pressure overland . The remnant low moved north over western Bihar and it persisted there until July 12 when it was absorbed by the monsoon trough . 
 Winds of 55 km / h ( 30 mph ) were recorded offshore at Sandheads when the system was at its peak . The depression brought isolated heavy rains to many places throughout East India , with rains in excess of 100 mm ( 4 inches ) falling every day from the depression 's landfall until the absorption of the remnant low . 
 = = = Depression Seven = = = 
 A low pressure area that lay over Burma on August 15 , moved to the west across the Bay of Bengal and developed into a depression on the evening of August 17 when it was 100 km ( 62 mi ) southeast of Gopalpur @-@ on @-@ Sea . The depression moved to the northwest and made landfall near Gopalpur @-@ on @-@ Sea and turned to the west overland . The depression had weakened into a remnant low by August 20 , when it was over western Madhya Pradesh . 
 The depression and associated weather brought widespread rain to much of south and central India , with heavy rain falling in some locations . The heavy rain in Maharashtra disrupted road transport in many areas , especially in the east of the state . The Godavari River inundated parts of Bhadrachalam and many villages in regions of Andhra Pradesh . The rains also damaged rice paddies and disrupted transport in Telangana . Rains associated with the depression reached as far west as Bombay with 200 mm ( 8 inches ) falling there on August 19 . 
 = = = Cyclonic Storm Eight = = = 
 A low pressure area that was centred over West Bengal on August 31 concentrated into a depression on September 2 when it was 50 km ( 31 mi ) to the east of Midnapore . It intensified as it moved to the west , becoming a deep depression the next day , about 50 km ( 31 mi ) east of Ranchi . The system continued move west across India , before weakening into a depression on September 7 near Ahmedabad , Gujarat . The depression then turned north and entered southwest Rajasthan . On September 8 , the system turned to the southwest and emerged into the Arabian Sea the following evening . Over water it intensified again , becoming a cyclonic storm by the evening of September 10 . The cyclone developed a short @-@ lived eye on September 11 as it drifted slowly to the west , before degenerating into a broad area of low pressure as it neared the Oman coast on September 14 . 
 This system brought widespread rains to a wide swathe of India during its existence . Some heavy rains in West Bengal flooded vast areas of many districts and resulted in some fatalities , whilst in parts of neighbouring Orissa the floodwaters damaged fields . 390 mm ( 15 inches ) of rain fell on Bardhaman over two days as the depression passed overhead . Several thousand people were made homeless in West Bengal . Both the Narmada and Tapti Rivers inundated parts of Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat . The floods in Gujarat took many lives and caused severe damage to crops and other properties . Between 300 and 400 people were washed away in two villages in Bharuch district . 260 mm ( 10 inches ) of rain fell on Surat on July 7 and a further 80 mm ( 3 inches ) on Kutch District as the cyclone moved out to sea . 
 = = = Deep Depression Nine = = = 
 A low pressure area moved from Burma to the Bay of Bengal on September 8 where it developed into a depression . The depression strengthened as it moved to the northwest and became a deep depression the next day , when it was 150 km ( 93 mi ) southeast of Calcutta . The system crossed the West Bengal coast later and moved to the northwest across the Chota Nagpur Plateau . The depression stalled over Uttar Pradesh on September 12 and remained near Lucknow until September 14 . The depression then turned to the east and weakened to a remnant low over northern Bihar on September 18 . 
 The depression brought widespread rain to West Bengal , Orissa , Bihar , Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh during its lifespan , with rains of 140 mm ( 5 @.@ 5 inches ) as far west as Lucknow . The rains in Uttar Pradesh caused severe property damage and flooding , with some 150 people losing their lives in the state . The Ganges flooded in northern Bihar , inundating parts of Munger District , whilst the <unk> River flooded parts of <unk> . The rains worsened floods in south Bengal , increasing the death toll from the floods there to 80 and affecting 8 million people , with considerable damage done to crops and housing . <unk> in Orissa was entirely flooded . 
 = = = Depression Ten = = = 
 A well @-@ defined low pressure area formed over the west central Bay of Bengal on September 20 and developed into a depression the next morning about 100 km ( 62 mi ) south @-@ east of Visakhapatnam . The depression then moved overland and after crossing Vidarbha weakened into a remnant low over Gujarat on September 23 . 
 The depression brought widespread rain to northern South India as it passed over the country and its remnants brought scattered rain to Gujarat over the following week . Over a period of four hours , heavy rain fell on Hyderabad and Secunderabad , destroying many houses in the two cities . About 130 mm ( 5 inches ) of rain fell on Bombay as the system dissipated . The heavy rains claimed about 75 lives . 
 = = = Depression Eleven = = = 
 A low pressure area that developed in the Bay of Bengal passed over the southern Indian subcontinent and developed into a depression in the Arabian Sea off the southern Maharashtra coast on October 11 . The depression did not develop as it drifted west , and it degenerated into an area of low pressure as it was approaching the Arabian Peninsula . The depression brought widespread rains to southern Maharashtra and Karnataka states , with 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) of rain recorded in Karwar . Scattered heavy rain was also reported in the <unk> . 
 = = = Very Severe Cyclonic Storm Twelve = = = 
 A depression formed on October 18 in the central Bay of Bengal and moved to the north . It gradually intensified and turned to the northeast , becoming a cyclonic storm on October 20 . The storm became the second severe cyclonic storm of the season the following day , and turned onto a more northerly track towards the Ganges Delta . The storm peaked with winds of 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) before it made landfall near the West Bengal @-@ East Pakistan border during the morning of October 23 . The storm then crossed over East Pakistan , before dissipating over southern Assam on October 24 . 
 This cyclone brought widespread rain to Tamil Nadu as it formed and to the Andaman and Nicobar Islands as it moved over the Bay of Bengal . After its landfall it brought severe rains to West Bengal , Assam and East Pakistan . The highest recorded rainfall in India was at Shillong where 220 mm ( 8 @.@ 6 inches ) fell on October 24 . A gust of 105 km / h ( 65 mph ) was recorded in Calcutta as the storm passed by to the east , where it caused the failure of the power supply . 
 The cyclone claimed between 200 and 300 lives in East Pakistan , with the worst of the damage occurring in Khulna District . Over 200 villages were destroyed in the district leaving several thousand people homeless , and there was extensive damage to crops . 
 = = = Extremely Severe Cyclonic Storm Thirteen = = = 
 On the morning of November 8 a depression formed in the south @-@ central Bay of Bengal . It moved very slowly to the north , becoming a cyclonic storm the next day . It continued to intensify as it approached the head of the Bay , becoming the third severe cyclonic storm of the season on November 11 . That evening it reached its peak with winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) with a well @-@ developed eye and became the strongest storm of the season . It then made landfall on the coast of East Pakistan during the night of November 12 . The cyclone weakened rapidly as it moved inland and dissipated the next day over south Assam . 
 This cyclone brought a devastating storm surge of up to 10 metres ( 33 ft ) high to the Ganges Delta . Largely as a result of this surge somewhere between 300 @,@ 000 and 500 @,@ 000 people lost their lives , making this storm the deadliest tropical cyclone ever recorded and one of the deadliest natural disasters of modern times . The total damage from the storm exceeded $ 85 million ( 1970 USD , $ 480 million 2008 USD ) and much of the agricultural and fishing capacity of the region was wiped out . In total some 3 @.@ 6 million people suffered direct effects from this cyclone . 
 The Pakistani government was severely criticised for its handling of the relief operations following the storm , both by local political leaders in East Pakistan and in the international media . In the December national elections , the opposition Awami League gained a landslide victory , gaining 160 of the 162 East Pakistani seats . Continuing unrest between East Pakistanis and the central government trigged the Bangladesh Liberation War , which concluded with the creation of the state of Bangladesh . This is one of the first times that a natural event helped to trigger a civil war . 
 = = = Deep Depression Fourteen = = = 
 A low pressure that had developed over the south Andaman Sea moved west across the southern Bay of Bengal and concentrated into a depression on the morning of November 19 , when it was about 600 km ( 370 mi ) southeast of Madras . The system intensified further into a deep depression as it moved west @-@ northwest and hit the Tamil Nadu the following day . The depression weakened into a remnant low over Tamil Nadu . 
 The depression brought widespread rain to much of Tamil Nadu , with heavy rain hitting the coastal regions . Low @-@ lying coastal regions from Pondicherry to <unk> . There was damage to crops and housing in Thanjavur District and the rains left thousands homeless in Madras . Cuddalore experienced exceptionally heavy rains with over 440 mm ( 17 inches ) falling there , of which 310 mm ( 12 inches ) fell on November 20 alone . 
 = = = Cyclonic Storm Fifteen = = = 
 The remnant low of a depression emerged into the Arabian Sea off Kerala late on November 21 and developed into a new depression the next day as it moved west . The depression moved further west , and gradually turned toward the southwest , intensifying as it did so . It became a cyclonic storm on November 28 to the southeast of Socotra and reached its peak with 75 km / h ( 25 mph ) winds soon after . The cyclone continued to move west @-@ southwestwards and rapidly weakened into a remnant low pressure area off the Somalia coast the next day , ending the season . 
 The cyclone brought widespread rain to the <unk> from November 22 to November 24 , with 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 inches ) recorded on Amini on November 23 . 
 = Upper West Side Story = 
 " Upper West Side Story " is the 12th episode of the third season of the American comedy @-@ drama television series White Collar , and the 42nd episode overall . It was first broadcast on USA Network in the United States on January 24 , 2012 . The episode was directed by Russell Lee Fine and written by Alexandra McNally and Jim Campolongo . 
 The episode features many themes of Shakespeare 's Romeo and Juliet , and contains various allusions to Shakespearean and Victorian @-@ era literature . After a student ( Graham Phillips ) at a prestigious prep school approaches Peter Burke and Neal Caffrey about missing scholarship funds , they begin investigating the father ( Dylan Baker ) of the boy 's crush ( Elizabeth Gillies ) . 
 According to the Nielsen ratings system , an estimated 3 @.@ 472 million household viewers watched the original broadcast of the episode , with 1 @.@ 1 million in the 18 – 49 demographic . " Upper West Side Story " received mostly positive reviews . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Neal ( Matt Bomer ) and Peter ( Tim DeKay ) are approached by Evan Leary ( Graham Phillips ) , a student at the prestigious Manhattan Preparatory Academy . Evan explains that he believes the money from his scholarship fund was embezzled by a rich investor by the name of Andy Woods ( Dylan Baker ) . Peter quickly takes the case , realizing that Woods is already believed to be associated with a major cartel . 
 Peter visits the school under the guise of the parent of a potential student . Neal is to pose as his assistant , but he instead takes on the role of a substitute English teacher after learning that both Evan and Woods ' daughter , Chloe ( Elizabeth Gillies ) , are in the class . Woods soon discovers that Peter may not be who he says he is after learning that he lied about his hotel arrangements ; Peter covers for this by admitting that he spent the night with his mistress . Later , Neal tells Mozzie ( Willie Garson ) about Evan 's silent attraction to Chloe , and that he plans to set them up using a sonnet . 
 Peter discovers that Woods may be working with Graham Slater ( John Rothman ) , the school 's headmaster , in order to embezzle the funds . The following day , at the school , Neal sees Slater drop an envelope into Chloe 's locker . In order to check the contents of the envelope , Peter pulls the fire alarm . Neal finds the school 's quarterly finance report inside . 
 Chloe later asks Neal to tutor her at home ; he accepts and invites Evan to come as well . Woods invites Peter to dinner the same night , and asks that he bring his mistress along as well . Diana ( Marsha Thomason ) , posing as Peter 's mistress , accompanies Peter , and , while there , stages a quarrel . Peter , feigning frustration , opens a door to exit , setting off an alarm in the process . Woods turns the alarm off ; this allows Neal to easily break into his office and clone Woods ' hard drive . Chloe follows Neal into her father 's office and accidentally pocket dials Woods . Realizing something is wrong , Woods goes downstairs to his office and discovers Neal with Chloe . Evan quickly enters , taking the blame for the mistake . 
 The next day , Evan lets Neal know that Woods suspects something . Peter is taken hostage by Woods and held in the shop classroom , where Woods quickly discovers that Peter is with the FBI . Neal takes Chloe 's phone and calls Woods , forcing him to step out of the room . Neal and Mozzie create a smokescreen out of lab chemicals and free Peter ; Diana meanwhile arrests Woods . Neal explains to Chloe that her life will not be easy , and she begins a relationship with Evan after discovering roses and the sonnet left by Neal and Mozzie . 
 Later , Peter must give a statement to the commutation committee about Neal 's involvement with the Keller case . Although Neal 's actions had caused the kidnapping of Elizabeth ( Tiffani Thiessen ) , Peter opts to omit the details surrounding Neal 's theft of the art . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Alexandra McNally and Jim Campolongo . It was McNally 's fifth episode since joining the series during the second season , and Campolongo 's sixth overall . It was their first time to collaborate on an episode . " Upper West Side Story " was directed by Russell Lee Fine , his third directing credit for the series after the episodes " Payback " and " On Guard " . Working titles for the episode included " Well Endowed " and " Hangin ' with Mr. Cooper " . It was first reported on July 11 , 2011 that Dylan Baker and Elizabeth Gillies would appear in an episode of White Collar as Andy Woods and his daughter . Other guest stars to appear in the episode include Graham Phillips . 
 Series star Tim DeKay stated that he enjoyed working on the episode , in part because it was primarily a standalone . Bomer said , speaking of " Upper West Side Story " , that he enjoys portraying different aspects of Neal 's undercover roles . Bomer stated that he received a phone call from Campolongo requesting that he memorize a Byron poem by the next morning . The poem was ultimately included in a scene in which Neal is teaching an English class . Kenny Herzog of The A.V. Club pointed out that the episode contained various references to Shakespearian and Victorian @-@ era literature , specifically mentioning Romeo and Juliet . He stated that these metaphors helped move the plot forward . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The initial broadcast of the episode drew 3 @.@ 472 million viewers , and earned a 1 @.@ 1 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic . " Upper West Side Story " ranked seventh place among cable series for the night in the 18 – 49 demographic and fourth in its timeslot , surpassed by Teen Mom 2 , Storage Wars , and The Game . The original broadcast of the episode overlapped with the 2012 State of the Union Address for the first 17 minutes ; however , viewership for the episode increased slightly from the previous week . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Upper West Side Story " received mostly positive reviews from critics , with many praising the mostly standalone format and the rebuilding of Neal and Peter 's relationship . Morgan Glennon of the Huffington Post called the episode " a really fun undercover romp that still deals with the fallout between Neal and Peter . " Michelle Carlbert stated that she " felt like it put Neal and Peter back on track " and that she enjoyed the standalone case . Brittany Frederick of Starpulse.com said that " this is an episode that reminds me why I fell in love with White Collar . " Frederick compared the episode to " Mr. Monk Goes Back to School " , an episode of USA Network 's Monk ; she likened Baker 's character to that of Andrew McCarthy 's in Monk , stating that as a villain , McCarthy was evil yet endearing , while Baker appeared genuinely evil . She also praised the series for utilizing comedy rather than drama . Kenny Herzog of The A.V. Club gave the episode a more mixed review , stating that while the series was " at its caper @-@ hatching best , " it was " also its most excessively ludicrous . " Like Frederick , Herzog praised the use of comedy , though he felt that Baker appeared to be more like " a cartoon bully . " He ultimately gave the episode a B- . 
 = Southeast Asia Treaty Organization = 
 The Southeast Asia Treaty Organization ( SEATO ) was an international organization for collective defense in Southeast Asia created by the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty , or Manila Pact , signed in September 1954 in Manila , Philippines . The formal institution of SEATO was established on 19 February 1955 at a meeting of treaty partners in Bangkok , Thailand The organization 's headquarters were also in Bangkok . Eight members joined the organization . 
 Primarily created to block further communist gains in Southeast Asia , SEATO is generally considered a failure because internal conflict and dispute hindered general use of the SEATO military ; however , SEATO @-@ funded cultural and educational programs left long @-@ standing effects in Southeast Asia . SEATO was dissolved on 30 June 1977 after many members lost interest and withdrew . 
 The United States still considers the mutual defense aspects of its treaty active for Australia , France , New Zealand , Philippines , Thailand , and the United Kingdom . 
 = = Origins and structure = = 
 The Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty , or Manila Pact , was signed on 8 September 1954 in Manila , as part of the American Truman Doctrine of creating anti @-@ communist bilateral and collective defense treaties . These treaties and agreements were intended to create alliances that would contain communist powers ( Communist China , in SEATO 's case ) . This policy was considered to have been largely developed by American diplomat and Soviet expert George F. Kennan . President Dwight D. Eisenhower 's Secretary of State John Foster Dulles ( 1953 – 1959 ) is considered to be the primary force behind the creation of SEATO , which expanded the concept of anti @-@ communist collective defense to Southeast Asia , and then @-@ Vice President Richard Nixon advocated an Asian equivalent of NATO upon returning from his late @-@ 1953 Asia trip . The organization , headquartered in Bangkok , was created in 1955 at the first meeting of the Council of Ministers set up by the treaty , contrary to Dulles 's preference to call the organization " <unk> " . 
 SEATO was intended to be a Southeast Asian version of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization ( NATO ) , in which the military forces of each member would be coordinated to provide for the collective defense of the members ' country . Organizationally , SEATO was headed by the Secretary General , whose office was created in 1957 at a meeting in Canberra , with a council of representatives from member nations and an international staff . Also present were committees for economics , security , and information . SEATO 's first Secretary General was Pote Sarasin , a Thai diplomat and politician who had served as Thailand 's ambassador to the U.S. between 1952 and 1957 , and as Prime Minister of Thailand from September 1957 to 1 January 1958 . 
 Unlike the NATO alliance , SEATO had no joint commands with standing forces . In addition , SEATO 's response protocol in the event of communism presenting a " common danger " to the member nations was vague and ineffective , though membership in the SEATO alliance did provide a rationale for a large @-@ scale U.S. military intervention in the region during the Vietnam War ( 1955 – 1975 ) . 
 = = Membership = = 
 Despite its name , SEATO mostly included countries located outside of the region but with an interest either in the region or the organization itself . They were Australia , France , New Zealand , Pakistan ( including East Pakistan , now Bangladesh ) , the Philippines , Thailand , the United Kingdom and the United States . 
 The Philippines and Thailand were the only Southeast Asian countries that actually participated in the organization . Both shared close ties with the United States , particularly the Philippines , and both faced incipient communist insurgencies against their own governments . Thailand became a member upon the discovery of the newly founded " Thai Autonomous Region " ( the <unk> Dai Autonomous Prefecture ) in Yunnan ( in South West China ) - apparently feeling threatened by potential Chinese communist subversion on its land . Other regional countries like Burma and Indonesia were far more minded with domestic internal stability rather than concern of communist threat , and thus rejected joining it . Malaya ( including Singapore ) also chose to not participate formally , though it was kept updated with key developments due to its close relationship with the United Kingdom . The rest of Southeast Asian countries : Vietnam , Cambodia and Laos were prevented from taking part in any international military alliance as a result of the Geneva Agreements signed 20 July of the same year concluding the end of the First Indochina War . However , with the lingering threat coming from communist North Vietnam and the possibility of the domino theory with Indochina turning into a communist frontier , SEATO got these countries under its protection - an act that would be considered to be one of the main justifications for the U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War . Cambodia , however rejected the protection in 1956 . 
 The majority of SEATO members were not located in Southeast Asia . To Australia and New Zealand , SEATO was seen as a more satisfying organization than ANZUS – a collective defense organization with the U.S. Great Britain and France joined partly due to having long maintained colonies in the region , and partly due to concerns over developments in Indochina . Pakistan , however , was simply interested in joining over the appeal of potential support for its long struggle against India . Last but not least , the U.S. upon perceiving Southeast Asia to be a pivotal frontier for Cold War geopolitics saw the establishment of SEATO as essential to its Cold War containment policy . 
 All in all , the membership reflected a mid @-@ 1950s combination of anti @-@ communist Western nations and such nations in Southeast Asia . The United Kingdom , France and the United States , the latter of which joined after the U.S. Senate ratified the treaty by an 82 – 1 vote , represented the strongest Western powers . Canada also considered joining , but decided against it in order to concentrate on its NATO responsibilities . 
 = = = Secretaries @-@ General = = = 
 Secretaries @-@ General of SEATO : 
 = = Military aspects = = 
 After its creation , SEATO quickly became insignificant militarily , as most of its member nations contributed very little to the alliance . While SEATO military forces held joint military training , they were never employed because of internal disagreements . SEATO was unable to intervene in conflicts in Laos because France and Britain rejected use of military action . As a result , the U.S. provided unilateral support for Laos after 1962 . Though sought by the U.S. , involvement of SEATO in the Vietnam War was denied because of lack of British and French cooperation . 
 Both the United States and Australia cited the alliance as justification for involvement in Vietnam . American membership in SEATO provided the United States with a rationale for a large @-@ scale U.S. military intervention in Southeast Asia . Other countries , such as Great Britain and key nations in Asia , accepted the rationale . In 1962 , as part of its commitment to SEATO , the Royal Australian Air Force deployed CAC Sabres of its No. 79 Squadron to Ubon Royal Thai Air Force Base , Thailand . The Sabres began to play a role in the Vietnam War in 1965 , when their air defence responsibilities expanded to include protection of USAF aircraft using Ubon as a base for strikes against North Vietnam . 
 = = Cultural effects = = 
 In addition to joint military training , SEATO member states worked on improving mutual social and economic issues . Such activities were overseen by SEATO 's Committee of Information , Culture , Education , and Labor Activities , and proved to be some of SEATO 's greatest successes . In 1959 , SEATO 's first Secretary General , Pote Sarasin , created the SEATO Graduate School of Engineering ( currently the Asian Institute of Technology ) in Thailand to train engineers . SEATO also sponsored the creation of the Teacher Development Center in Bangkok , as well as the Thai Military Technical Training School , which offered technical programs for supervisors and workmen . SEATO 's Skilled Labor Project ( SLP ) created artisan training facilities , especially in Thailand , where ninety @-@ one training workshops were established . 
 SEATO also provided research funding and grants in agriculture and medical fields . In 1959 , SEATO set up the Cholera Research Laboratory in Bangkok , later establishing a second Cholera Research Laboratory in Dhaka , Bangladesh . The Dhaka laboratory soon became the world 's leading cholera research facility and was later renamed the International Centre for <unk> Disease Research , Bangladesh . SEATO was also interested in literature , and a SEATO Literature Award was created and given to writers from member states . 
 = = Criticism and dissolution = = 
 Though Secretary of State Dulles considered SEATO an essential element in American foreign policy in Asia , historians have considered the Manila Pact a failure and the pact is rarely mentioned in history books . In The Geneva Conference of 1954 on Indochina , Sir James Cable , a diplomat and naval strategist , described SEATO as " a fig leaf for the nakedness of American policy " , citing the Manila Pact as a " zoo of paper tigers " . 
 Consequently , questions of dissolving the organization arose . Pakistan withdrew in 1972 after East Pakistan seceded and became Bangladesh in 26th March 1971 . France withdrew financial support in 1975 , and the SEATO council agreed to the phasing out of the organization . After a final exercise on 20 February 1976 , the organization was formally dissolved on 30 June 1977 . 
 = Hurricane Iris ( 1995 ) = 
 Hurricane Iris was the ninth named storm and fifth hurricane of the 1995 Atlantic hurricane season . Iris was the first of three tropical cyclones to affect the Lesser Antilles in a three @-@ week period , preceding the more destructive hurricanes Luis and Marilyn . It developed from a tropical wave to the east of the Lesser Antilles on August 22 and attained hurricane status within 30 hours . The hurricane weakened to a tropical storm before crossing the islands of the eastern Caribbean from August 26 through August 28 . During that time , Iris became one of four active tropical storms in the Atlantic basin . Earlier it had interacted with Hurricane Humberto , and beginning on August 30 , Iris interacted with Tropical Storm Karen . Iris re @-@ intensified into a hurricane and attained peak sustained winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) while moving slowly across the central Atlantic . The hurricane accelerated to the north and absorbed a dissipating Tropical Depression Karen on September 3 . Iris weakened to a tropical storm and became extratropical on September 4 , though its remnants reattained hurricane @-@ force winds before affecting western Europe on September 7 . 
 As a tropical storm , Iris produced heavy rainfall across much of the Leeward Islands . In the southern Lesser Antilles , high waves caused coastal flooding in Trinidad , while in Martinique further north , significant amounts of precipitation led to flooding and landslides . The threat from the hurricane halted airplane evacuations on Montserrat , which was being threatened by the eruption of the Soufrière Hills volcano . There were five deaths in association with Iris — four in Martinique , and one in Guadeloupe . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave exited western Africa on August 16 , with a circulation emerging just south of Dakar , Senegal . It was the first of four consecutive waves that would later develop into tropical cyclones . As the system moved westward , thunderstorms diminished on August 18 , before they gradually redeveloped . At around 1200 UTC , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) classified the system as Tropical Depression Ten about 690 mi ( 1 @,@ 110 km ) east of the Lesser Antilles . Around that time , the depression had a well @-@ organized area of convection and evident circulation , as confirmed by a nearby ship . Within six hours of developing , the depression had intensified into a tropical storm . Initially , tropical cyclone forecast models had difficulty predicting the future of the storm , due to uncertain interaction between it and Tropical Storm Humberto to its northeast . In real @-@ time , the NHC upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Iris at 1500 UTC on August 23 , or about 21 hours later than assessed in post @-@ analysis . The intensity was based on satellite intensity estimates . At that time , the storm had a ragged central dense overcast — a uniformly circular area of thunderstorms — as well as rainbands to the north and south . A hurricane hunters flight late on August 23 indicated that Iris was significantly stronger , reporting 10 – second sustained winds of 106 mph ( 170 km / h ) at flight @-@ level . Based on the reading , it is estimated Iris attained hurricane status around 1800 UTC that day , or about three hours after it was named . 
 After Iris strengthened into a hurricane , it turned to the west @-@ southwest due to interaction with Hurricane Humberto . An upper @-@ level low north of Puerto Rico increased wind shear over the hurricane , which dislocated the center from the deep convection . As a result , Iris weakened to tropical storm status on August 24 after being a hurricane for about 24 hours . As the storm approached the Lesser Antilles , the thunderstorms decreased markedly and the cloud pattern became disorganized . As late as August 25 , there was uncertainty whether Iris would continue toward the islands or turn to the north . A new circulation became the dominant center as the storm continued westward , and Iris brushed Saint Lucia early on August 26 . An approaching trough turned the storm to the northwest , bringing it near most of the Lesser Antilles . Early on August 27 , Iris weakened to an intensity of 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) , although it immediately began restrengthening . Later that day , the center made landfall on Montserrat , Anguilla , and Barbuda with winds of over 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . By that time , an eye began reforming , and the structure became better organized as wind shear decreased . 
 On August 28 , Iris moved away from the Lesser Antilles , and at 1800 UTC re @-@ attained hurricane status as it began a steady motion to the north @-@ northwest . By that time , there was uncertainty in its future track due to the possible interactions among Iris , Humberto to the northeast , Tropical Storm Karen to the southeast , and the remnants of Tropical Storm Jerry to the west . In addition , after Tropical Storm Luis formed on August 27 , there were four active tropical cyclones in the Atlantic . A few days later , there were three simultaneous hurricanes , which is a rare event , when Luis attained hurricane status . On August 30 , Iris turned to the northeast while it began interacting directly with Tropical Storm Karen . Over the next few days , the smaller tropical storm moved around the larger circulation of Iris , potentially causing the hurricane to move erratically . Iris ' intensity did not change significantly during that time , and it maintained strong outflow but a weak eyewall . An eastward @-@ moving trough bypassed the storm to the north , causing the motion to become nearly stationary . A building ridge to the northeast caused Iris to turn to a northwest drift on September 1 . By that time , the eye had become distinct and well @-@ organized , and at 0600 UTC that day , Iris attained peak winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) to the southeast of Bermuda . 
 After reaching peak intensity , the hurricane began weakening due to increasing shear and cooler waters . An approaching trough turned Iris to the north , and early on September 3 the hurricane passed about 350 mi ( 560 km ) east of Bermuda . That day , Iris absorbed the dissipating Tropical Depression Karen . It accelerated to the northeast as it lost tropical characteristics , and after weakening to a tropical storm , Iris transitioned into an extratropical cyclone on September 4 to the southeast of Newfoundland . The remnants turned to the east , moving in tandem with an extratropical storm to its north . On September 5 , the barometric pressure dropped by more than 24 millibars ( 0 @.@ 71 inHg ) , which qualified as being classified as a meteorological bomb . The next day , the winds strengthened to hurricane @-@ status , and the storm maintained a track to the east due to a ridge weakening to the north . The pressure reached a minimum of 957 mb ( 28 @.@ 3 inHg ) early on September 7 , lower than while Iris was tropical . That day , the storm weakened as it entered the English Channel , and the extratropical remnants continued across western Europe . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Before Iris moved through the Lesser Antilles , tropical storm watches , and later warnings , were issued from Barbados through the British Virgin Islands . The storm produced tropical storm force winds across the eastern Caribbean , although the primary meteorological event occurred from heavy rainfall . Flooding prompted evacuations in communities in Saint Lucia , Dominica , and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines . Iris was the first of three storms in a three @-@ week period to affect the region , preceding the more destructive hurricanes Luis and Marilyn . 
 In western Trinidad , a feeder produced winds of 37 mph ( 60 km / h ) along the Gulf of Paria . The winds increased waves that caused coastal flooding and some damage to boats . On Martinique , Iris produced gusts of 56 mph ( 90 km / h ) , with torrential rainfall occurring on the island . A station in Les Trois @-@ <unk> recorded 1 @.@ 89 in ( 48 mm ) in a 30 minute period , and the highest total on the island was 17 @.@ 72 in ( 450 mm ) at Ducos . The rains caused mudslides that killed four people , including two after a house was swept off a cliff in Le Vauclin . Flooding was reported across coastal areas of Martinique , and heavy damage was reported in the southern city of Le Vauclin . To the north of Martinique , winds reached 43 mph ( 69 km / h ) on Dominica . While the storm passed Guadeloupe , it produced sustained winds of 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) , with gusts to 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) on La Désirade . There was one death on the island after a person drowned in a storm @-@ flooded river . To the northwest , the hurricane moved over Montserrat , causing additional problems on the island just weeks after the Soufrière Hills volcano began erupting . Officials on the island closed the primary airport due to the storm , which prevented residents from evacuating from the island from the volcano threat . Further north , Iris dropped 6 in ( 150 mm ) of rain on Antigua , which destroyed banana trees and caused flooding in low @-@ lying areas . 
 Due to uncertainties in Iris ' track , the government of Bermuda issued a tropical storm watch on September 1 . This was downgraded on September 3 after the hurricane bypassed the island . Later , after Iris became extratropical , the storm produced winds of 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) at La Rochelle on the Atlantic coast of France . 
 = Further Instructions = 
 " Further Instructions " is the third episode of the third season of the American science fiction television series Lost . It first aired on October 18 , 2006 , on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) , making it the 52nd episode of the series . The episode was written by showrunner Carlton Cuse and supervising producer Elizabeth Sarnoff and was directed by Stephen Williams . 
 The series follows the survivors of the crash of a commercial passenger jet flying between Sydney and Los Angeles , on a mysterious tropical island somewhere in the South Pacific Ocean . In this episode , John Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) recovers from the Hatch implosion and rescues Mr. Eko ( Adewale Akinnuoye @-@ Agbaje ) from a polar bear . Locke is featured in the episode 's flashbacks . 
 The episode featured the return of previous main cast member Ian Somerhalder . It also introduced the characters of Nikki and Paulo ( Kiele Sanchez and Rodrigo Santoro ) , who were added in the wake of some criticism that the series focused too much on the same fifteen survivors . An estimated 16 @.@ 31 million Americans watched the episode upon its original broadcast . " Further Instructions " received mixed to positive reviews from television critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Flashbacks = = = 
 Locke is a member of a commune in Humboldt County , California . He considers its members his new family . One day Locke picks up a young hitchhiker , named Eddie Colburn ( Justin Chatwin ) , who tells him he is leaving home . Eddie joins the commune , but after six weeks , he asks Locke why he is never allowed to know what is going on in a greenhouse ( into which he sees an exceptional amount of fertilizer going ) . Eddie expresses his discontent with being kept out of the secret and affirms to Locke his desire to be in on " whatever you guys are trying to blow up " . Locke laughs and says he will talk to the commune leaders , Mike ( Chris Mulkey ) and Jan ( Virginia Morris ) . 
 Upon entering the greenhouse some time later , in which marijuana is grown , Locke finds Mike and Jan in the midst of a frantic preparation to flee . They blame Locke for bringing Eddie , who they have discovered is an undercover police officer . Locke promises to fix the situation . He takes Eddie hunting and holds Eddie at gunpoint . Eddie says that Locke was chosen because his psych profile said he would be " amenable for coercion " . Eddie walks away , stating that Locke will not shoot him because he is " a good man , " though Locke insists that he is a hunter , not a farmer . 
 = = = On the Island = = = 
 John Locke , calling himself Marvin Candle , wakes up in the jungle and sees a naked Desmond Hume ( Henry Ian Cusick ) run by , but Locke cannot speak . Mr. Eko 's ( Adewale Akinnuoye @-@ Agbaje ) stick falls from above nearly hitting him . In the frame of Eko 's church , he builds a sweat lodge and convinces Charlie Pace ( Dominic Monaghan ) to stand guard . Locke takes a hallucinogenic drug and enters the lodge in order to " speak with the Island " . There , Boone Carlyle ( Ian Somerhalder ) appears to help him " find [ his ] way again , so that [ he ] can bring the family back together " . Locke ( <unk> ) apologizes for the day Boone died , and he accepts the apology , however , in a taunting and seemingly sarcastic manner . Locke 's hallucination takes him to Sydney airport . Boone wheels Locke through the airport where he tells him someone is " in serious danger " . Locke sees his fellow survivors , and is told by Boone that he must " clean up [ his ] own mess " . Locke finds Eko 's stick covered in blood and Boone tells him " they have him , you don 't have much time " . Upon exiting the sweat lodge he sees a flash of a polar bear . He recovers his ability to speak and tells Charlie that he is going to save Eko . 
 Locke and Charlie track Eko , who Locke believes has been captured by a polar bear . They pause at a large pit in the ground where the hatch imploded . They encounter Hugo " Hurley " Reyes ( Jorge Garcia ) , who tells them that Jack , Kate , and Sawyer were kidnapped by the Others , and that " Henry Gale " is their leader . While continuing back to the camp alone , Hurley finds Desmond naked and lends him a tie @-@ dyed t @-@ shirt . Desmond says the electromagnetic anomaly may have been destroyed , and Hurley questions why Desmond was not destroyed . Desmond mentions Locke 's speech and his plan to save Jack Shephard , Kate Austen , and James " Sawyer " Ford . However , Hurley responds , " What speech ? " , as Locke has yet to give any such speech . Desmond seems confused , and drops the whole matter . 
 Locke finds the polar bear 's cave and rescues Eko from the polar bear . While Charlie fetches water from a stream , Locke apologizes to an unconscious Eko for his lack of faith . Eko appears to briefly awaken and tells Locke that he must rescue Jack , Kate and Sawyer . Upon arriving at camp , Hurley informs the camp that Jack and the others have been captured . As an explanation , Locke announces to the survivors that he plans to rescue Jack , Kate , and Sawyer , as Desmond indicated to Hurley earlier . Hurley mentions to Charlie a sense of déjà vu . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Further Instructions " was written by showrunner Carlton Cuse and supervising producer Elizabeth Sarnoff ; Stephen Williams served as the director . As the third episode of the season , " Further Instructions " was the first episode to feature the fate of the main cast camped on the beach , as well as the first to begin resolving the Hatch storyline from the season two finale . Leading up to the third season 's broadcast , ABC attempted to reveal as few details as possible to the public . Ian Somerhalder 's return was one piece of information that press releases included . Somerhalder , a former series regular , was credited as a guest actor to play his character Boone Carlyle in Locke 's hallucinations , as his character died during the first season . Guest star Justin Chatwin made his first and only appearance in the episode . Other guest stars included Virginia Morris and Chris Mulkey as the commune leaders Jan and <unk> , and Dion Donahue as Kim . The polar bear was mostly depicted by having stuntman Jonathan Arthur inside a bear suit . 
 Kiele Sanchez and Rodrigo Santoro make their first appearances as Nikki and Paulo in this episode . Prior to the third season , the producers of the show were often asked what the rest of the plane @-@ crash survivors were doing because the show only focused on approximately fifteen of the survivors , and the characters of Nikki and Paulo were created in response . Reaction to the characters was generally negative because of their abrupt introduction onto the show . Nikki and Paulo 's original introduction onto the show was deleted for time from the final cut of the episode . They were supposed to be accidentally found by Claire Littleton in Jack 's tent having sex in the middle of the episode . They were instead introduced at the end of the episode when Locke makes a speech . The deleted scene was included on the third season DVD . The DVD also contained another deleted scene of Locke returning to the commune and seeing Mike and Jan getting arrested . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Hurley worries that the Hatch implosion turned Desmond into the Hulk , a Marvel Comics character who turned large and green upon being exposed to Gamma rays . The Bible verses seen on Mr. Eko 's stick include Romans 6 : 12 , which says " Do not obey the lusts of sin " and John 3 : 5 , which says " Jesus answered , ' I tell you the truth , no one can enter the kingdom of God unless he is born of water and the Spirit ' . " Hurley 's numbers are also visible . Dominic Monaghan as his character Charlie , says , while trying to figure out who Locke needs to speak to : " Trees ? Yea I heard they are wonderful <unk> " , a reference to Monaghan 's work in The Lord of the Rings , in which he talks to trees . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Further Instructions " was originally scheduled to air October 11 , 2006 as the second episode of the show 's third season , but swapped with another Lost episode , " The Glass Ballerina " . Upon its original broadcast on October 18 , 2006 in the United States on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) , " Further Instructions " was watched live by an estimated 16 @.@ 31 million viewers . In the 18 @-@ 49 demographic , Lost received a 6 @.@ 5 / 16 ratings share , helping ABC place first for the night when compared to the other major networks . 
 The episode has received mixed to positive reviews from television critics . Chris Carabott of IGN wrote that " Further Instructions " was " an entertaining hour of television . The episode certainly offers its fair share of excitement , but as with any typical Lost episode we are presented with more questions than answers " . Carabott also called it an improvement over the preceding episode , " The Glass Ballerina . " Andrew Dignan of Slant Magazine expressed relief in having Locke " back to the way we fondly remember <unk> a wide @-@ eyed , knife @-@ wielding , face @-@ smeared madman " , but disliked his flashbacks , calling them a " largely under @-@ developed affair " . Dignan was also pleased to have Hurley back at the camp and referred to him as " someone [ who ] will keep the show grounded " , but concluded his review by unhappily noting the sudden emergence of Nikki and Paulo as " a colossal misjudgment on the producers ' part " and " a dangerous precedent that bears keeping an eye on . " 
 Writing for Entertainment Weekly , Christine Fenno believed the episode had " false starts " but still " enjoyed the trippy places the writers took us . " While disliking the initial scenes with Charlie and Locke , Fenno thought the episode " found its groove " after Locke entered into the trance , and called the final scene between Eddie and Locke the episode 's " strongest moment . " The Record gave a negative review , noting that " Unfortunately , ' Instructions ' seemed devoid of everything that made ' The Glass Ballerina ' hum . It was disjointed , it was graceless , and it seemed filled with gaping holes and not terribly helpful information . " In a 2008 review , Ryan McGee of Zap2It gave the episode another negative review and considered it the weakest of the season 's first three episodes . He explained that after watching it for a second time , it " just feels off to me in hindsight . Maybe it 's the lack of forward movement , maybe it 's the lackluster flashback , maybe because the central plot is rendered moot in just two more episodes ... I can 't quite say . " 
 = Death ( South Park ) = 
 " Death " is the sixth episode in the first season of the American animated television series South Park . It originally aired on Comedy Central in the United States on September 17 , 1997 . In the episode , Grandpa Marvin tries to convince Stan to kill him , while the parents of South Park protest the foul @-@ mouthed cartoon Terrance and Phillip . Death himself arrives to kill Kenny , and presents a warning to Grandpa Marvin against forcing others to help him commit suicide . 
 " Death " was written and directed by series co @-@ creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone . The episode , along with the Terrance and Phillip show , were inspired by early criticism that South Park was little more than flatulence jokes and primitive animation . The script portrays the parents as so invested in protesting television programs , they fail to pay any attention to what is actually going on in their children 's lives . They seem to want to make television clean and wholesome so the entertainment industry can raise their kids so they themselves don 't have to make the time and effort to be full @-@ time parents . The episode also advocates against censorship and addresses the morality and ethics of euthanasia . 
 " Death " was the last of the original six South Park episodes ordered by Comedy Central before the network committed to a full season . The episode 's plot heavily influenced the screenplay of the 1999 film South Park : Bigger , Longer & Uncut , which also involves South Park parents protesting Terrance and Phillip . In addition to Terrance and Phillip , the episode introduced recurring characters Grandpa Marsh and Sheila ( then known as Carol ) , Kyle 's mother . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Marsh family celebrates Grandpa Marvin Marsh 's 102nd birthday , but he is tired of living and tries unsuccessfully to commit suicide . He tries to convince Stan to kill him , but Stan refuses because he fears he might get in trouble . Meanwhile , Kyle watches the cartoon Terrance and Phillip , which revolves largely around fart jokes . Kyle 's mother gets outraged by the foul language and crude humor , and contacts other South Park parents to organize a boycott at the Cartoon Central headquarters in New York City . Later at school , Stan asks Mr. Garrison , Chef and Jesus whether he should help his grandpa kill himself , but they avoid discussing the issue as they can 't put it in terms that Stan might understand , much to Stan 's anger . 
 Meanwhile , Kenny suffers from a bout of " explosive diarrhea " , which spreads to others in the town , including the adults protesting Terrance and Phillip . Despite objecting to the show , the adults themselves laugh and make jokes at their own real @-@ life toilet humor . Carol proclaims that if Cartoon Central does not take the show off the air , the protesters will kill themselves , and they start using a slingshot to send themselves flying into the building . With the adults out of town for the protest , the boys are free to watch Terrance and Phillip at their leisure . Grandpa Marvin continues asking Stan to kill him , and demonstrates how terrible his life is by locking Stan in a room and forcing him to listen to a song in the style of Enya 's " Orinoco Flow " . Now convinced that his life is excruciating , Stan finally agrees to kill his grandpa , and tries to do so by rigging a cow on a pulley and dropping it on him . Just as the boys are about to do it , Death himself arrives , but starts chasing after the boys instead of Grandpa Marvin . 
 While fleeing , Stan calls his mother , who is too busy protesting Terrance and Phillip to listen to his problems . More than a dozen people have killed themselves against the headquarters building . Eventually , the network agrees to take the show off the air , not because of the deaths but because of the stench of the protesters ' explosive diarrhea . Meanwhile , Death continues chasing the boys , but stops in front of a television playing Terrance and Phillip . Death and the boys start laughing together , but after it is taken off the air , Death angrily touches and kills Kenny . Angered , Grandpa Marvin demands that Death kill him , but Death refuses . Death then brings in the spirit of Stan 's great great grandfather ( Marvin 's grandfather ) , who was killed by Marvin when he was Stan 's age ; the ghost warns Marvin that he must die of natural causes and not place the burden of his suicide on anybody else 's shoulders or else he will spend his eternity after death in limbo . 
 Terrence and Phillip is replaced by the Suzanne Sommers show She 's the Sheriff which also contains obscenities . Furious about all this , the parents go back to the Cartoon Central network building to protest again . Grandpa Marvin decides to visit Africa , where over 400 people are " naturally " eaten by lions every year . The episode ends with the boys laughing , and then laughing harder when Kyle farts . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Death " was written and directed by series co @-@ creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone . It was the last of the original six South Park episodes ordered by Comedy Central before the network committed to a full season of 13 episodes . Parker long wanted to feature a Grim Reaper @-@ like death character in South Park because since his childhood , Parker enjoyed drawing cartoon images of Death riding on a tricycle . This was the inspiration behind a scene in which Death inexplicably rides a tricycle while chasing the South Park boys through the streets . 
 The subplot of Kenny 's diarrhea problems came from a real @-@ life high school experience from Stone , who said students used to offer each other $ 20 if they would pass a note to the teacher explaining they had " explosive diarrhea " , like Kenny did in the episode . The image of Kenny sitting on a toilet in " Death " became a popular South Park poster . " Death " included a consistency error in that Mr. Garrison 's classroom had its own separate bathroom , which was never again seen in future South Park episodes . During one scene , Cartman moons Kyle while making fun of Kyle 's mother . Comedy Central censors forced Parker and Stone to remove the image of Cartman 's bare bottom , although such images would be allowed in future episodes . A man named Mr. McCormick was killed in " Death " after he was flung via slingshot into the Cartoon Central building . The character 's name led many to mistakenly believe it was Kenny 's father , Stuart McCormick , but Parker denied this and said the similar character names were just a coincidence . 
 = = Themes = = 
 During the first few weeks of South Park 's run , Parker and Stone received criticism from some commentators and media outlets that the series was little more than flatulence jokes and primitive animation , and thus must be a simple show to produce . " Death " was written in response to that criticism . The episode introduced Terrance and Phillip , a comedy duo with a popular cartoon series within the South Park universe , whose show is literally nothing but a series of flatulence jokes , with even cruder animation than South Park itself . 
 The episode 's script parodied parents who voiced strong opposition to South Park , portraying them as so invested in fighting the television program that they fail to pay attention to what is actually going on in their children 's lives . This is illustrated in the episode when Stan calls his mother seeking help because Death is chasing him , only for his mother to ignore him because she is too busy protesting the Terrance and Phillip show . This is also demonstrated by the line Kyle says , " I think that parents only get so offended by television because they rely on it as a babysitter and the sole educator of their kids . " 
 " Death " warns against such misplaced values and condemns the practice of censorship , as well as demonstrating there can be value in a show often dismissed as juvenile and immature , like South Park or Terrance and Phillip . The episode also takes the position that parents who blame their children 's behavior entirely on television are evading true responsibility for problems that likely have roots elsewhere . The plot of " Death " heavily influenced the screenplay Parker and Stone wrote for their 1999 film , South Park : Bigger , Longer & Uncut . The plot and theme of both scripts revolves heavily around the parents of South Park protesting Terrance and Phillip due to the perceived negative influence it has over their children . Parker said , " After about the first year of South Park , Paramount already wanted to make a South Park movie , and we sort of thought this episode would make the best model just because we liked the sort of pointing at ourselves kind of thing . " 
 " Death " also touches upon the issue of euthanasia , and whether it is morally or ethically wrong to commit suicide . The episode 's script indicates it is wrong for someone wishing to kill oneself to place the burden of that decision on a loved one : in this case , Grandpa Marvin demanding that Stan kill him , without considering how traumatizing an experience it would be for Stan . This is most strongly illustrated at the end of the episode , in which the ghost of Marvin 's grandfather ( who had Marvin kill him long ago ) tells Marvin he must not force Stan to commit such a traumatizing act . Although the ghost tells Grandpa Marvin he must die of " natural causes " , Marvin nevertheless continues seeking ways to kill himself , but without involving other people . Parker said this reflects his opinion that , " Basically , it is OK to kill yourself , but you shouldn 't ask someone else to do it and put someone else through the trip . " 
 = = Cultural references and impact = = 
 " Death " introduced several characters who would maintain important recurring roles throughout the rest of the series . Among them were Sheila Broflovski and Grandpa Marvin Marsh . Sheila and Gerald Broflovski , Kyle 's parents , were named after Stone 's parents , although he insists the characters are nothing like his real parents . Marvin Marsh was not based on any real @-@ life person , but Parker and Stone wanted to create a rude and unlikeable grandfather character because they felt most elderly people were portrayed as sweet and lovable on television . Originally , they wanted Marvin Marsh to be known as the " molesting grandpa " who kept making sexual comments to Stan and attempting to play inappropriate games with him , but Comedy Central refused to allow it , which Parker said was " probably the right call " . Terrance and Phillip are loosely based on Parker and Stone themselves , and were also inspired by the Itchy & Scratchy characters from The Simpsons , as well as the protagonists from the MTV cartoon Beavis and Butt @-@ Head . Although " Death " marked the first appearance of Terrance and Phillip , Parker said the duo " took on a life of their own " . They made frequent appearances throughout the rest of the series , and played a major role in South Park : Bigger , Longer & Uncut . 
 The episode refers to Jack Kevorkian , the right @-@ to @-@ die activist best known for his advocacy of physician @-@ assisted suicide , although Kyle mistakenly refers to him as " Jack <unk> " . When Terrance and Phillip is cancelled in " Death " , it is replaced by She 's the Sheriff , a sitcom starring actress Suzanne Somers . The Cartoon Central network in " Death " is based on Comedy Central , the real @-@ life television network that broadcasts South Park . John <unk> , the man who runs Cartoon Central in " Death " , is based on Doug Herzog , the Comedy Central executive who was responsible for bringing South Park to the network . Herzog was excited to be featured in the episode and enjoyed the portrayal . During one scene , Stan 's grandfather locks him in a room and plays music by the Irish vocalist Enya as a form of torture to show Stan what it 's like to be his age , and convince Stan to kill him . The parody of Enya 's Orinoco Flow used in " Death " was sung by Toddy Walters , who played protagonist Polly Pry in Trey Parker 's 1996 film , Cannibal ! The Musical . " Death " marked the first appearance of <unk> Cakes , one of Cartman 's favorite snack foods . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In the book Leaving Springfield , author William J. Savage , Jr. said the episode " reveals a fine edged attack on censors and a thoughtful and subtle consideration of issues regarding assisted suicide . " In the book The Deep End of South Park , Anne Gossage complimented the ambition of episode 's themes of censorship and the morality of assisted suicide , which she called " a great deal of ground to cover in 20 minutes " . Gossage also said the episode shared many of the same characteristics of William Shakespeare 's play Hamlet , comparing Stan 's contemplation of killing his grandfather to Hamlet 's dilemmas after encountering his father 's ghost . 
 = = Home video release = = 
 " Death " was released alongside five other episodes in a three @-@ VHS set on May 5 , 1998 , marking the first time South Park was made available on video . The episode was released on the " Volume III " video along with " An Elephant Makes Love to a Pig " ; other featured episodes included " Cartman Gets an Anal Probe " , " Volcano " , " Weight Gain 4000 " , and " Big Gay Al 's Big Gay Boat Ride " . " Death " , along with the other twelve episodes from the first season , was also included in the DVD release " South Park : The Complete First Season " , which was released on November 12 , 2002 . Parker and Stone recorded commentary tracks for each episode , but they were not included with the DVDs due to " standards " issues with some of the statements ; Parker and Stone refused to allow the tracks to be edited and censored , so they were released in a CD separate from the DVDs . In 2008 , Parker and Stone made " Death " and all South Park episodes available to watch for free on the show 's official website , " South Park Studios " . 
 = Raging Bully = 
 " Raging Bully " is the sixth broadcast episode of the animated television series Phineas and Ferb . In the episode , Phineas Flynn is challenged to a thumb wrestling competition at the mall with the local bully , Buford , after he accidentally embarrasses him in the food court . Meanwhile , the evil Dr. Heinz Doofenshmirtz tries using a hypnotic contraption to force everyone to celebrate his birthday and clean up their mess after the party . 
 " Raging Bully " was written by series co @-@ founders Dan Povenmire and Jeff " Swampy " Marsh and directed by Povenmire . Heavyweight boxing champion Evander Holyfield guest starred as himself , training Phineas for the big thumb @-@ wrestling match . The episode originally broadcast on Disney Channel on February 6 , 2008 , as part of the month @-@ long special event , " Phineas and Ferb @-@ urary . " It received generally positive reviews from television critics and the featured musical number , " He 's a Bully , " became available on the official Phineas and Ferb soundtrack in 2009 . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 While at the food court in the mall , Phineas accidentally drops his ice cream cone on bully Buford 's pants , causing the whole food court to laugh at Buford . Enraged , he challenges Phineas to a fight right there , but boxing champion Evander Holyfield arrives and convinces them to instead fight in an organized thumb wrestling match later that day , which Buford accepts . Despite being cautioned by Phineas 's friends Baljeet and Isabella , Holyfield trains Phineas through simple tasks , including punching a chain of sausages and playing Dance Dance Revolution . 
 Meanwhile , Perry the Platypus arrives at an abandoned cake factory , where he is trapped in a vat of cake mix . His nemesis , Dr. Heinz Doofenshmirtz , appears and explains that today is his birthday . All throughout his life , his parents never showed up to his birthday parties ( even his own birth ) ; now , he plans on using a hypnotic device to force everyone to celebrate his birthday . He then rides off with the invention on a flying machine . Perry escapes from the mix and follows after him . In the air , Perry and Doofenshmirtz fight and the machine is activated , but while trying to get Perry to let go of the wall of the flying machine he accidentally makes the machine malfunction , causing the people below to still not want to celebrate his birthday . Doofenshmirtz , defeated , drops the ice cream cone he is eating in the fight and it falls to the ground below . 
 Finally , the big match commences and Phineas is vigorously beaten by Buford in each round . When the final round begins , Buford overpowers Phineas and pulls him up through the air . Just then , Doofenshmirtz 's ice cream cone falls and lands on Phineas 's head . Buford is satisfied now that Phineas is embarrassed and calls off the match . The audience who was watching cleans up the mess ( due to Doofenshmirtz 's machine accidentally telling them to ) . At the parking lot a few minutes later , Phineas thanks Holyfield for his help and Holyfield walks off . Ferb makes a comment which accidentally offends Buford and he is about to be beaten up , but he knocks Buford out with a Vulcan nerve pinch , to Phineas 's surprise . When Phineas asks him why he did it he responds , " Well , he was all up in my face . " 
 = = Production = = 
 " Raging Bully " was written by Phineas and Ferb co @-@ founders Dan Povenmire and Jeff " Swampy " Marsh . It was storyboarded by artists Wendy <unk> and Kent Osbourne and was directed by Povenmire , who manages the bulk of animation direction in the series along with Zac Moncrief . It was originally broadcast in the United States on February 4 , 2008 , on Disney Channel with a TV @-@ G parental rating . It was part of the network 's marathon event " Phineas and Ferb @-@ urary , " which debuted new episodes of the series every night for the entire month . 
 Heavyweight boxing champion Evander Holyfield guest starred in the episode as himself , appearing at the mall to help train Phineas for the big thumb wrestling match against Buford . Holyfield 's guest performance was heavily expected since the original announcement of guest stars lined up for the series released in September 2007 . Cast members response to working with Holyfield was highly positive ; Vincent Martella and Alyson Stoner , who portray Phineas and Isabella respectively , cited working along guest stars like him as a benefit of working on the show . 
 In 2008 , " Raging Bully " became available on the DVD compilation Phineas and Ferb : The Fast and the Phineas , along with fellow first season episodes of the series " One Good Scare Ought to Do It ! " " Lawn Gnome Beach Party of Terror , " " The Fast and the Phineas , " " Are You My Mummy ? " " Flop Starz , " " Lights , Candace , Action ! " and " It 's About Time ! " In 2009 , the episode 's song , " He 's a Bully , " became available on the official Phineas and Ferb soundtrack . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Raging Bully " received generally positive reviews from television critics . DVD Talk 's David Cornelius stated that he enjoyed Holyfield 's guest appearance . Ed Liu , of Toon Zone , wrote that the episode and others included on the DVD The Fast and the Phineas were " way too manic for their own good , never giving a gag enough time to develop a proper laugh before ripping off to the next one , " but considered Phineas 's " He 's a Bully " training montage to be one of the series ' " amusing video sequences . " A Wired magazine review for the soundtrack said that the " He 's a Bully " was " butt @-@ rock , " but blended nicely with other melodies of completely different genres . 
 = Hygrocybe appalachianensis = 
 Hygrocybe appalachianensis , commonly known as the Appalachian waxy cap , is a gilled fungus of the waxcap family . It is found in the eastern United States , where it fruits singly , in groups , or clusters on the ground in deciduous and mixed forests . The species , described in 1963 from collections made in the Appalachian Mountains , was originally classified in the related genus Hygrophorus . It was transferred to Hygrocybe in 1998 , in which it has been proposed as the type species of section <unk> . 
 Fruit bodies of the Appalachian waxy cap are bright purplish @-@ red to reddish @-@ orange . They have convex to somewhat funnel @-@ shaped caps that are 3 – 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 8 in ) in diameter , held up by a cylindrical stipe up to 7 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) long . The gills are thick and widely spaced , with a color similar to that of the cap or paler , and a whitish @-@ yellow edge . Microscopically , the spores and spore @-@ bearing cells are dimorphic — of two different sizes . 
 = = Systematics = = 
 The fungus was described as new to science in 1963 by mycologists Lexemuel Ray Hesler and Alexander H. Smith in their monograph on North American species of Hygrophorus . Hesler collected the type on July 28 , 1958 in Cades Cove , Great Smoky Mountains National Park ( Tennessee ) . The fungus was recorded from the same location in a fungal survey conducted about 50 years later . It was transferred to the genus Hygrocybe in a 1998 paper by Ingeborg <unk> and Andreas Bresinsky . In this publication , the basionym was given as " <unk> " instead of the original spelling appalachianensis , and so Hygrocybe <unk> is an orthographic variant spelling . A reference to the type locality – the Appalachian Mountains – appears in both the specific epithet and in the common name , Appalachian waxy cap . 
 Because of its color and habit , Hesler and Smith originally thought the unknown agaric was H. coccinea or perhaps a large form of H. miniata , but study of its microscopic characteristics revealed that it was distinct from these . They noted that the fibrillose @-@ squamulose texture of the cap ( i.e. that it appears to be made of thin fibers , or covered with small scales ) and the large spores suggested a relationship with H. <unk> . The type of Hygrocybe appalachianensis is of an immature specimen , and the description of the basidia only accounted for <unk> ( i.e. , the smaller of the two forms of basidia in the hymenium ) . The immature macrobasidia were described as pleurocystidia ( i.e. , cystidia arising from the side , or face , of the gill ) , which Hesler and Smith described as " more or less embedded in the hymenium " . <unk> ( the smaller of the two spore types produced by the fungus ) were not accounted for in their original description , although they are present in the type . 
 Deborah Jean Lodge and colleagues , in a reorganization of the family Hygrophoraceae based on molecular phylogenetics , proposed that H. appalachianensis should be the type species of the new section <unk> in genus Hygrocybe . Species in this section , which include Hygrocybe <unk> , H. rosea , and H. <unk> , have sticky or glutinous caps that often have perforations in the center . Their spores and basidia are dimorphic ( of two sizes ) , and the development of the <unk> and macrobasidia is often staggered . The macrobasidia are club shaped and appear as if they have a stalk . 
 = = Description = = 
 Fruitbodies of H. appalachianensis have convex caps that are 2 – 7 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 8 in ) in diameter . As the mushroom matures , the cap margins curl upward , and the central depression in the cap deepens , becoming more or less funnel shaped . Its color is bright red to purplish @-@ red , which fades in age . The cap margin is often whitish . The well @-@ spaced gills are initially adnate @-@ decurrent , becoming more decurrent in age . Their color is that of the cap or paler ; the gill edges are sometimes whitish @-@ yellow . The cylindrical stipe , which measures 3 – 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 8 in ) long by 0 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 5 in ) , is more or less the same width throughout its length . Its surface texture is smooth to slightly scurfy , and it is often whitish at its base . The flesh of the mushroom lacks any distinctive taste or odor . It is yellowish with orange tinges , with reddish color near the cap cuticle . Alan Bessette and colleagues , in their 2012 monograph on eastern North American waxcap mushrooms , note that the mushroom is " reported to be edible " . 
 Hygrocybe appalachianensis mushrooms produce a white spore print . Both the spores and the basidia are dimorphic . The larger spores ( <unk> ) are smooth , ellipsoid , and measure 11 – 17 @.@ 5 by 7 – 10 µm . They are hyaline ( translucent ) , and inamyloid . The macrobasidia are club shaped , measuring 38 – 57 by 8 – 14 µm , and can be one- two- , three- or four @-@ spored . The ratio of macrobasidia length to <unk> length is usually less than five to one . Clamp connections are present on the hyphae of several tissues of the mushroom . The hyphae of the gills ( the lamellar trama ) are arranged in a parallel fashion . 
 The colors of Hygrocybe mushrooms originate from <unk> , a class of red and yellow indole @-@ derived pigments . Specific <unk> found in H. appalachianensis include <unk> , and a group of compounds called <unk> , which are derived from <unk> by conjugation with amino acids . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 There are several lookalike species found in North American with which the Appalachian waxy cap might be confused . Hygrocybe cantharellus is a bright red mushroom that has smaller fruit bodies and a more slender stipe than H. appalachianensis . It also has smaller spores , measuring 7 – 12 by 4 – 8 µm . Hygrocybe <unk> , found in Europe and northeastern North America , has flesh with a sweet odor that reminiscent of honey . This smell is sometimes weak and only noticeable when the tissue is rubbed , or when it is drying . Its scarlet cap initially has a narrow yellow @-@ orange margin . 
 Widespread and common in the Northern Hemisphere , the scarlet waxcap ( Hygrocybe coccinea ) is most reliably distinguished from H. appalachianensis by its smaller spores , measuring 7 – 11 by 4 – 5 µm . The sphagnum waxcap , H. <unk> , also has colors that are similar to H. appalachianensis . In addition to its smaller spores ( 8 – 12 by 5 @.@ 5 – 8 µm ) , its fruit bodies have smaller caps , measuring 0 @.@ 6 – 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) in diameter , and it is typically found fruiting in mosses . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Fruit bodies of Hygrocybe appalachianensis grow singly , in groups , or clusters on the ground . Like all Hygrocybe species , the fungus is believed to be saprophytic , meaning it obtains nutrients by breaking down organic matter . It fruits in deciduous or mixed forest , typically appearing between the months of July and December . Its range covers a region extending from the states Ohio and West Virginia south to South Carolina and Tennessee . Its occurrence is occasional to locally common . 
 = = = Cited literature = = = 
 Bessette AE , Roody WC , Sturgeon WE , Bessette AR ( 2012 ) . <unk> Mushrooms of Eastern North America . Syracuse , New York : Syracuse University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8156 @-@ 3268 @-@ 9 . 
 Lodge DJ , Padamsee M , Matheny PB , Aime MC , Cantrell SA , <unk> D , Kovalenko A , Vizzini A , <unk> BT , Kirk PM , Ainsworth AM , <unk> JM , <unk> R , Larsson E , <unk> R , Griffith GW , Smith ME , Norvell LL , Desjardin DE , Redhead SA , <unk> CL , Lickey EB , Ercole E , Hughes KW , Courtecuisse R , Young A , Binder M , Minnis AM , Lindner DL , Ortiz @-@ Santana B , Haight J , <unk> T , Baroni TJ , Geml J , Hattori T ( 2014 ) . " Molecular phylogeny , morphology , pigment chemistry and ecology in Hygrophoraceae ( Agaricales ) " . Fungal Diversity 64 ( 1 ) : 1 – 99 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / <unk> @-@ 013 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 = Estuary stingray = 
 The estuary stingray ( Dasyatis <unk> ) , also called the estuary stingaree or brown stingray , is a species of stingray in the family Dasyatidae . Endemic to eastern Australia , it typically inhabits shallow , mangrove @-@ lined tidal rivers , estuaries , and bays in southern Queensland and New South Wales . This yellow @-@ brown to olive ray grows to at least 93 cm ( 37 in ) across . It has a diamond @-@ shaped pectoral fin disc and a mostly smooth , whip @-@ like tail bearing both dorsal and ventral fin folds . It can additionally be identified by its long , narrow nostrils and the row of thorns along the midline of its back . 
 While the estuary stingray has gained infamy for consuming farmed shellfish such as oysters , it mainly feeds on crustaceans and polychaete worms . It is aplacental viviparous , with the unborn young sustained to term by maternal histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) . Once common , this species has apparently declined across much of its range , likely from a combination of habitat degradation , mortality from commercial and recreational fishing , and persecution by shellfish farmers . As a result , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed it as Vulnerable . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The first reference to the estuary stingray in scientific literature was probably a record by 19th @-@ century English naturalist William Saville @-@ Kent of a " Trygon pastinaca " feeding on oysters in a Queensland estuary . This species was formally described by Australian ichthyologist James Douglas Ogilby in a 1908 volume of Proceedings of the Royal Society of Queensland , based on a specimen collected from the Brisbane River . The specific epithet <unk> means " of the rivers " in Latin . 
 = = Description = = 
 The estuary stingray has a diamond @-@ shaped pectoral fin disc about as wide as long , with gently convex anterior margins and broadly rounded outer corners . The snout is wide and triangular , and tapers to a point . The small , widely spaced eyes are immediately followed by the spiracles . Between the long and narrow nostrils , there is a short and broad " skirt " of skin with a weakly fringed posterior margin . The small , bow @-@ shaped mouth is surrounded by deep furrows and contains a row of five papillae across the floor , with the outermost pair tiny and set apart from the others . The teeth are small and arranged into pavement @-@ like surfaces . There are five pairs of gill slits beneath the disc . The pelvic fins are relatively large . 
 The tail measures twice as long as the disc , and is broad and flattened at the base . On its upper surface is at least one , often two serrated stinging spines . Past the spines , the tail quickly tapers to become whip @-@ like and bears a well @-@ developed keel above and a long , low fin fold beneath . There are wide patches of small dermal denticles with flattened crowns between the eyes and over the middle of the back , along with a midline row of enlarged thorns that become progressively longer until they reach the base of the sting . Aside from the thorns at the base , the tail is smooth . This species is yellowish to greenish brown above , lightening towards the disc margins and darkening past the tail spine , and white below . It grows to at least 93 cm ( 37 in ) across , and possibly reaches a width of 1 @.@ 2 m ( 3 @.@ 9 ft ) . Its maximum recorded weight is 6 @.@ 1 kg ( 13 lb ) . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The range of the estuary stingray spans approximately 1 @,@ 700 km ( 1 @,@ 100 mi ) along Australia 's eastern coast , from Repulse Bay in Queensland to the Hacking River in New South Wales . It is most common in southern Queensland , including in Hervey Bay and Moreton Bay . This species was formerly suspected to have disappeared from Botany Bay and Port Jackson in the 1880s , but recent observations have shown this is not the case . Additional species records from the Cape York Peninsula , Northern Territory , New Guinea , and the South China Sea probably represent misidentifications of other stingrays , primarily the freshwater whipray ( Himantura dalyensis ) and the Merauke stingray ( D. longicauda ) . 
 The habitat requirements of the estuary stingray appear to be rather stringent , as significant numbers are only found at particular locations . It prefers tidal rivers and the intertidal flats of estuaries and bays , which are lined with mangroves and have sandy to muddy bottoms . This species is rarely found outside these sheltered areas , though it has been recorded to a depth of 28 m ( 92 ft ) in offshore waters . It inhabits marine and brackish waters , and may be able to tolerate fresh water as well as it has been known to swim upriver beyond the limit of high tide . Surface water temperatures within its range vary from 24 – 29 ° C ( 75 – 84 ° F ) in the north to 17 – 23 ° C ( 63 – 73 ° F ) in the south . This species seems to segregate by size and sex . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 Despite its reputation for preying voraciously on oysters and other farmed shellfish , the estuary stingray 's diet in fact consists mainly of crustaceans and polychaete worms . In Moreton Bay , an important prey species is the soldier crab ( <unk> <unk> ) . This ray has been observed entering mudflats with the rising tide to forage for food . Known parasites of the estuary stingray include the tapeworm <unk> <unk> , the nematode Echinocephalus overstreeti and the monogeneans Heterocotyle chin , Empruthotrema <unk> and Neoentobdella <unk> . 
 Like other stingrays , the estuary stingray exhibits aplacental viviparity , with the developing embryos sustained initially by yolk and later by histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) produced by the mother . Females probably produce offspring every year . Courtship , in which the male follows the female and bites her disc , has been observed at night in water approximately 80 cm ( 31 in ) deep in Hays Inlet from July to October . The newborns measure around 11 cm ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) across and 35 cm ( 14 in ) long . Young rays have been caught in the <unk> and Macleay Rivers and in Hays Inlet ; such fresh or brackish environments may serve as nurseries . Males mature at around 41 cm ( 16 in ) across and seven years of age , and females mature at around 63 cm ( 25 in ) across and 13 years of age . This disparity in maturation size between the sexes is among the widest known for stingrays . The maximum lifespan is estimated to be 16 years for males and 23 years for females . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Historical and anecdotal evidence strongly suggest that the once @-@ abundant estuary stingray has declined substantially across its range . Although it is not commercially utilized , it faces a number of other threats . This species is captured incidentally by commercial bottom trawl and gillnet fisheries ; bycatch mortality is exacerbated by the practice of " spiking " , in which the ray 's cranium is pierced with a metal bar or sharpened stick so as to move it . It is also readily caught , and often killed , by recreational anglers . Surveys in Moreton Bay have found fishing @-@ related effects , such as embedded hooks and mutilated tails , in over 10 % of the population . Habitat degradation is another major threat to the estuary stingray , especially given its habitat specificity . Its range encompasses some of the most urbanized areas in Australia , where there is extensive land reclamation , water pollution , and construction of flood mitigation barriers on rivers . Finally , this ray 's reputation for damaging shellfish has led to persecution by commercial shellfish farmers . 
 The estuary stingray 's diminished population and susceptibility to multiple threats have led the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) to assess it as Vulnerable . Demographic modelling has shown that it is likely to become Endangered without intervention . Several Marine Protected Areas ( MPAs ) are located within its range , but at present they lack adequate protection from fishing . As this ray remains locally abundant in Hervey Bay and parts of Moreton Bay , these areas may become important centers for preserving the species . The Queensland government has listed the estuary stingray on the Back on Track species prioritisation framework , to facilitate the development of conservation measures . 
 = Bonded by Blood ( band ) = 
 Bonded by Blood is an American thrash metal band , named after Exodus ' debut album Bonded by Blood . Like its labelmates Evile , Gama Bomb , and Municipal Waste , Bonded by Blood is part of the thrash metal revival movement . The band was formed in mid @-@ 2005 by vocalist Jose Barrales , who with the help of friends completed the band 's original lineup with guitarist Alex Lee , drummer Carlos Regalado , and bassist Ruben Dominguez . 
 In 2006 Bonded by Blood won a battle of bands that featured over 250 musical groups . With the contest prize , the band recorded the demo Four Pints of Blood and a year later they self @-@ financed the recording of the EP Extinguish the Weak , releasing the songs through their MySpace page . The band attracted the attention of Earache Records , which signed them in late 2007 . The band released its first full length Feed the Beast in 2008 . While on tour Dominguez left the band and was replaced by bassist Jerry Garcia , who had his debut on Bonded by Blood 's second full length Exiled to Earth , released in 2010 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and win at battle of bands = = = 
 Hailing from Pomona , California , the members of Bonded by Blood met through mutual friends . The idea of creating a band was conceived by lead vocalist Jose Barrales , a singer with hardcore punk and crossover thrash backgrounds , influenced by groups like The <unk> , Cryptic Slaughter , D.R.I. and Black Flag . He always had an appreciation for heavy metal music , but it was not until a friend recommended him to listen to Exodus that Barrales got into the thrash metal subgenre . Exodus ' debut album Bonded by Blood had a profound impact on Barrales , and it was inspiring to the point he idealized the creation of a thrash metal band , as he had noticed that there were few or even no groups in this genre in the music scene . 
 In mid @-@ 2005 Barrales began looking for musicians for the band , asking friends of his to see if they could recommend anyone , which is how he heard of guitarist Alex Lee . When Barrales saw Lee play , he dropped the thought of trying to play rhythm guitar himself because he had a fear of not being able to keep up . There were a few years that Lee was playing guitar , but he was already playing along to music by Steve Vai , John Petrucci , Rusty Cooley , Paul Gilbert and Michael Angelo <unk> . Lee decided to join Barrales , and together , they went on searching until they found themselves the drummer Carlos Regalado , who was known locally by playing covers of Megadeth and Metallica . With Regalado in the band , he helped to find bassist Ruben Dominguez . The band was impressed with the skills of Dominguez , who soon joined the band completing its line @-@ up . The band then decided to name themselves after Exodus ' Bonded by Blood , an album they had in common in their collection , even though their music tastes differed . 
 A year later , the band decided to enter into a battle of bands contest , which included over 250 musical ensembles . The music competition 's prize was $ 3 @,@ 000 and two days in a recording studio . The band then decided it was time for another guitarist , to fill in some of that empty sounds during guitar solo 's and to add to the band for a more full sound live . Through friends , Barrales contacted guitarist Juan Juarez and asked him to join Bonded by Blood . Juarez accepted and he then met the rest of the members and they all liked him as well . After winning round after round , Bonded by Blood finally won first place . The band then recorded the demo Four Pints of Blood at Love Juice Labs in the Californian city of Riverside . With this demo , Bonded by Blood gave people something to listen to and it gave the band an audience . 
 = = = Internet exposure and recording contract = = = 
 At that time , the band was courted by some independent record labels , but they refused any offer because they felt they were not ready to sign a recording contract . After playing plenty more shows and making a few more songs , they recorded the Extinguish the Weak EP in August 2007 . Just as many of its contemporaries , Bonded by Blood self @-@ released the EP through MySpace , and it garner the attention of Earache Records , which signed the band in September 2007 . In late October , Bonded by Blood was one of the support acts for Exodus on a three @-@ date Mexican tour . 
 Bonded by Blood commenced the recording of its first full @-@ length , Feed the Beast , in January 2008 at J Street studios in Sacramento , California with producer Michael Rosen . At first , the recording sessions were going well , but when the band finish off Rosen began to manipulate the songs in ways that musicians were not enjoying it . The band then decided to re @-@ record the album in the same studio where they recorded the Extinguish the Weak EP . Earache released Feed the Beast on May 9 in the United Kingdom and June 24 in the United States . Bonded by Blood supported the album with the Thrashing Like a Maniac tour . They toured the United States between June and July along with Fueled by Fire and Merciless Death , and in Europe between September and October with Gama Bomb headlining . 
 The band continued the tour returning to the UK in May 2009 for a short string of dates with support from labelmates Cauldron . In November 2009 they announced the departure of Dominguez , who was replaced by bassist Jerry Garcia from San Bernardino thrash metal band Taking Over . Meanwhile , the band was finishing the writing process of their second album , and in January 2010 they entered the Highland Recorders studio in Phoenix , Arizona to begin recording with producer Ralph <unk> . Bonded by Blood 's second full @-@ length , Exiled to Earth , was released through Earache on August 10 in North America and August 16 in Europe . 
 Just a month after the release of Exiled to Earth , Bonded by Blood have parted ways with Barrales , who decided to leave the band due to personal and financial reasons . The band 's founding member was replaced by Mauro Gonzales from local band Mutants of War . The new lineup have been rehearsing for the upcoming tour dates . In early 2011 Jerry left the band for personal and financial reasons and Alex Lee left the band to join Holy Grail . On October 8 , 2011 they welcomed Jessie Sanchez ( ex Holy Grail ) into the group as their new bassist . 
 = = Style , influences and reception = = 
 According to Barrales , beyond the name , Bonded by Blood borrowed from Exodus for inspiration everything . " From the guitars being razor @-@ sharp to the drums , the speed . We wanted to do something that resemble that . Something that is gonna be fast and in @-@ your @-@ face . And what better band than Exodus to be inspired by ? " Exodus ' lead guitarist Gary Holt says that is a compliment that the band has named themselves after Bonded by Blood . " Could I have imagined that all these years later a band was going to name themselves after our first album ? Probably not . It is not like that convention — naming bands after songs — is something new , but I think it is great . " 
 Bonded by Blood along with its labelmates Evile , Gama Bomb , and Municipal Waste are part of the thrash metal revival movement . These young bands are bringing the classism of the new wave of British heavy metal and the aggressiveness of hardcore punk to a new generation of fans . Even though the members of Bonded by Blood were not born when their favorite 1980s thrash metal bands released their debut albums , the music and fashion of that era had a profound impact on them . 
 Aside from being aficionados by the 1980s thrash metal , the band has expressed their love of skateboarding , comic books , and cartoons ( most notably the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles ) . At the time of recordings of the Extinguish the Weak EP — while the band were rehearsing — Barrales was listening to the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles theme song online and suggested the band to create a cover version . Initially , Bonded by Blood played the song in live performances , but after receiving positive feedback from the audience the band decided to record it . " Theme from Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles " was originally included on the Extinguish the Weak EP and later on Feed the Beast . 
 Bonded By Blood have recently announced that they are going to begin the works on a new album that plans to be released in early 2012 . On October 8 , 2011 they officially announced their new bass player Jessie Sanchez ( ex Holy Grail ) into the band . 
 = = Members = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Four Pints of Blood ( Demo , 2006 ) 
 Extinguish the Weak ( self @-@ released EP , 2007 ) 
 Feed the Beast ( Earache , 2008 ) 
 Exiled to Earth ( Earache , 2010 ) 
 The Aftermath ( Earache , 2012 ) 
 = = = Appears on = = = 
 Thrashing Like a Maniac ( Compilation , 2007 ) 
 = Asthma = 
 Asthma is a common long term inflammatory disease of the airways of the lungs . It is characterized by variable and recurring symptoms , reversible airflow obstruction , and bronchospasm . Symptoms include episodes of wheezing , coughing , chest tightness , and shortness of breath . These episodes may occur a few times a day or a few times per week . Depending on the person they may become worse at night or with exercise . 
 Asthma is thought to be caused by a combination of genetic and environmental factors . Environmental factors include exposure to air pollution and allergens . Other potential triggers include medications such as aspirin and beta blockers . Diagnosis is usually based on the pattern of symptoms , response to therapy over time , and spirometry . Asthma is classified according to the frequency of symptoms , forced expiratory volume in one second ( FEV1 ) , and peak expiratory flow rate . It may also be classified as atopic or non @-@ atopic where atopy refers to a predisposition toward developing a type 1 hypersensitivity reaction . 
 There is no cure for asthma . Symptoms can be prevented by avoiding triggers , such as allergens and irritants , and by the use of inhaled corticosteroids . Long @-@ acting beta agonists ( LABA ) or <unk> agents may be used in addition to inhaled corticosteroids if asthma symptoms remain uncontrolled . Treatment of rapidly worsening symptoms is usually with an inhaled short @-@ acting beta @-@ 2 agonist such as salbutamol and corticosteroids taken by mouth . In very severe cases , intravenous corticosteroids , magnesium sulfate , and hospitalization may be required . 
 In 2013 , 242 million people globally had asthma up from 183 million in 1990 . It caused about 489 @,@ 000 deaths in 2013 , most of which occurred in the developing world . It often begins in childhood . The rates of asthma have increased significantly since the 1960s . Asthma was recognized as early as Ancient Egypt . The word asthma is from the Greek <unk> , <unk> which means " panting " . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 Asthma is characterized by recurrent episodes of wheezing , shortness of breath , chest tightness , and coughing . <unk> may be produced from the lung by coughing but is often hard to bring up . During recovery from an attack , it may appear pus @-@ like due to high levels of white blood cells called eosinophils . Symptoms are usually worse at night and in the early morning or in response to exercise or cold air . Some people with asthma rarely experience symptoms , usually in response to triggers , whereas others may have marked and persistent symptoms . 
 = = = Associated conditions = = = 
 A number of other health conditions occur more frequently in those with asthma , including gastro @-@ esophageal reflux disease ( <unk> ) , <unk> , and obstructive sleep apnea . Psychological disorders are also more common , with anxiety disorders occurring in between 16 – 52 % and mood disorders in 14 – 41 % . However , it is not known if asthma causes psychological problems or if psychological problems lead to asthma . Those with asthma , especially if it is poorly controlled , are at high risk for radiocontrast reactions . 
 = = Causes = = 
 Asthma is caused by a combination of complex and incompletely understood environmental and genetic interactions . These factors influence both its severity and its responsiveness to treatment . It is believed that the recent increased rates of asthma are due to changing epigenetics ( heritable factors other than those related to the DNA sequence ) and a changing living environment . Onset before age 12 is more likely due to genetic influence , while onset after 12 is more likely due to environmental influence . 
 = = = Environmental = = = 
 Many environmental factors have been associated with asthma 's development and exacerbation including allergens , air pollution , and other environmental chemicals . Smoking during pregnancy and after delivery is associated with a greater risk of asthma @-@ like symptoms . Low air quality from factors such as traffic pollution or high ozone levels , has been associated with both asthma development and increased asthma severity . Over half of cases in children in the United States occur in areas with air quality below EPA standards . Exposure to indoor volatile organic compounds may be a trigger for asthma ; formaldehyde exposure , for example , has a positive association . Also , <unk> in certain types of PVC are associated with asthma in children and adults . 
 There is an association between acetaminophen ( paracetamol ) use and asthma . The majority of the evidence does not , however , support a causal role . A 2014 review found that the association disappeared when respiratory infections were taken into account . Use by a mother during pregnancy is also associated with an increased risk as is psychological stress during pregnancy . 
 Asthma is associated with exposure to indoor allergens . Common indoor allergens include dust mites , cockroaches , animal dander , and mold . Efforts to decrease dust mites have been found to be ineffective on symptoms in sensitized subjects . Certain viral respiratory infections , such as respiratory syncytial virus and rhinovirus , may increase the risk of developing asthma when acquired as young children . Certain other infections , however , may decrease the risk . 
 = = = = Hygiene hypothesis = = = = 
 The hygiene hypothesis attempts to explain the increased rates of asthma worldwide as a direct and unintended result of reduced exposure , during childhood , to non @-@ pathogenic bacteria and viruses . It has been proposed that the reduced exposure to bacteria and viruses is due , in part , to increased cleanliness and decreased family size in modern societies . Exposure to bacterial endotoxin in early childhood may prevent the development of asthma , but exposure at an older age may provoke bronchoconstriction . Evidence supporting the hygiene hypothesis includes lower rates of asthma on farms and in households with pets . 
 Use of antibiotics in early life has been linked to the development of asthma . Also , delivery via caesarean section is associated with an increased risk ( estimated at 20 – 80 % ) of asthma — this increased risk is attributed to the lack of healthy bacterial colonization that the newborn would have acquired from passage through the birth canal . There is a link between asthma and the degree of affluence . 
 = = = Genetic = = = 
 Family history is a risk factor for asthma , with many different genes being implicated . If one identical twin is affected , the probability of the other having the disease is approximately 25 % . By the end of 2005 , 25 genes had been associated with asthma in six or more separate populations , including <unk> , <unk> , <unk> @-@ 4 , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , among others . Many of these genes are related to the immune system or modulating inflammation . Even among this list of genes supported by highly replicated studies , results have not been consistent among all populations tested . In 2006 over 100 genes were associated with asthma in one genetic association study alone ; more continue to be found . 
 Some genetic variants may only cause asthma when they are combined with specific environmental exposures . An example is a specific single nucleotide polymorphism in the <unk> region and exposure to endotoxin ( a bacterial product ) . <unk> exposure can come from several environmental sources including tobacco smoke , dogs , and farms . Risk for asthma , then , is determined by both a person 's genetics and the level of endotoxin exposure . 
 = = = Medical conditions = = = 
 A triad of atopic eczema , allergic rhinitis and asthma is called atopy . The strongest risk factor for developing asthma is a history of atopic disease ; with asthma occurring at a much greater rate in those who have either eczema or hay fever . Asthma has been associated with eosinophilic <unk> with <unk> ( formerly known as <unk> – Strauss syndrome ) , an autoimmune disease and vasculitis . Individuals with certain types of urticaria may also experience symptoms of asthma . 
 There is a correlation between obesity and the risk of asthma with both having increased in recent years . Several factors may be at play including decreased respiratory function due to a buildup of fat and the fact that adipose tissue leads to a pro @-@ inflammatory state . 
 Beta blocker medications such as propranolol can trigger asthma in those who are susceptible . <unk> beta @-@ blockers , however , appear safe in those with mild or moderate disease . Other medications that can cause problems in asthmatics are angiotensin @-@ converting enzyme inhibitors , aspirin , and NSAIDs . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Some individuals will have stable asthma for weeks or months and then suddenly develop an episode of acute asthma . Different individuals react to various factors in different ways . Most individuals can develop severe exacerbation from a number of triggering agents . 
 Home factors that can lead to exacerbation of asthma include dust , animal dander ( especially cat and dog hair ) , cockroach allergens and mold . Perfumes are a common cause of acute attacks in women and children . Both viral and bacterial infections of the upper respiratory tract can worsen the disease . Psychological stress may worsen symptoms — it is thought that stress alters the immune system and thus increases the airway inflammatory response to allergens and irritants . 
 = = Pathophysiology = = 
 Asthma is the result of chronic inflammation of the conducting zone of the airways ( most especially the bronchi and bronchioles ) , which subsequently results in increased <unk> of the surrounding smooth muscles . This among other factors leads to bouts of narrowing of the airway and the classic symptoms of wheezing . The narrowing is typically reversible with or without treatment . Occasionally the airways themselves change . Typical changes in the airways include an increase in eosinophils and thickening of the lamina reticularis . Chronically the airways ' smooth muscle may increase in size along with an increase in the numbers of mucous glands . Other cell types involved include : T lymphocytes , macrophages , and neutrophils . There may also be involvement of other components of the immune system including : cytokines , chemokines , histamine , and leukotrienes among others . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 While asthma is a well @-@ recognized condition , there is not one universal agreed upon definition . It is defined by the Global Initiative for Asthma as " a chronic inflammatory disorder of the airways in which many cells and cellular elements play a role . The chronic inflammation is associated with airway hyper @-@ responsiveness that leads to recurrent episodes of wheezing , breathlessness , chest tightness and coughing particularly at night or in the early morning . These episodes are usually associated with widespread but variable airflow obstruction within the lung that is often reversible either spontaneously or with treatment " . 
 There is currently no precise test for the diagnosis , which is typically based on the pattern of symptoms and response to therapy over time . A diagnosis of asthma should be suspected if there is a history of recurrent wheezing , coughing or difficulty breathing and these symptoms occur or worsen due to exercise , viral infections , allergens or air pollution . Spirometry is then used to confirm the diagnosis . In children under the age of six the diagnosis is more difficult as they are too young for spirometry . 
 = = = Spirometry = = = 
 Spirometry is recommended to aid in diagnosis and management . It is the single best test for asthma . If the FEV1 measured by this technique improves more than 12 % following administration of a bronchodilator such as salbutamol , this is supportive of the diagnosis . It however may be normal in those with a history of mild asthma , not currently acting up . As caffeine is a bronchodilator in people with asthma , the use of caffeine before a lung function test may interfere with the results . Single @-@ breath diffusing capacity can help differentiate asthma from COPD . It is reasonable to perform spirometry every one or two years to follow how well a person 's asthma is controlled . 
 = = = Others = = = 
 The <unk> challenge involves the inhalation of increasing concentrations of a substance that causes airway narrowing in those predisposed . If negative it means that a person does not have asthma ; if positive , however , it is not specific for the disease . 
 Other supportive evidence includes : a ≥ 20 % difference in peak expiratory flow rate on at least three days in a week for at least two weeks , a ≥ 20 % improvement of peak flow following treatment with either salbutamol , inhaled corticosteroids or prednisone , or a ≥ 20 % decrease in peak flow following exposure to a trigger . Testing peak expiratory flow is more variable than spirometry , however , and thus not recommended for routine diagnosis . It may be useful for daily self @-@ monitoring in those with moderate to severe disease and for checking the effectiveness of new medications . It may also be helpful in guiding treatment in those with acute exacerbations . 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 Asthma is clinically classified according to the frequency of symptoms , forced expiratory volume in one second ( FEV1 ) , and peak expiratory flow rate . Asthma may also be classified as atopic ( extrinsic ) or non @-@ atopic ( intrinsic ) , based on whether symptoms are precipitated by allergens ( atopic ) or not ( non @-@ atopic ) . While asthma is classified based on severity , at the moment there is no clear method for classifying different subgroups of asthma beyond this system . Finding ways to identify subgroups that respond well to different types of treatments is a current critical goal of asthma research . 
 Although asthma is a chronic obstructive condition , it is not considered as a part of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease as this term refers specifically to combinations of disease that are irreversible such as bronchiectasis , chronic bronchitis , and emphysema . Unlike these diseases , the airway obstruction in asthma is usually reversible ; however , if left untreated , the chronic inflammation from asthma can lead the lungs to become irreversibly obstructed due to airway remodeling . In contrast to emphysema , asthma affects the bronchi , not the alveoli . 
 = = = = Asthma exacerbation = = = = 
 An acute asthma exacerbation is commonly referred to as an asthma attack . The classic symptoms are shortness of breath , wheezing , and chest tightness . The wheezing is most often when breathing out . While these are the primary symptoms of asthma , some people present primarily with coughing , and in severe cases , air motion may be significantly impaired such that no wheezing is heard . In children , chest pain is often present . 
 Signs which occur during an asthma attack include the use of accessory muscles of respiration ( <unk> and scalene muscles of the neck ) , there may be a paradoxical pulse ( a pulse that is weaker during inhalation and stronger during exhalation ) , and over @-@ inflation of the chest . A blue color of the skin and nails may occur from lack of oxygen . 
 In a mild exacerbation the peak expiratory flow rate ( <unk> ) is ≥ 200 L / min or ≥ 50 % of the predicted best . Moderate is defined as between 80 and 200 L / min or 25 % and 50 % of the predicted best while severe is defined as ≤ 80 L / min or ≤ 25 % of the predicted best . 
 Acute severe asthma , previously known as status <unk> , is an acute exacerbation of asthma that does not respond to standard treatments of bronchodilators and corticosteroids . Half of cases are due to infections with others caused by allergen , air pollution , or insufficient or inappropriate medication use . 
 Brittle asthma is a kind of asthma distinguishable by recurrent , severe attacks . Type 1 brittle asthma is a disease with wide peak flow variability , despite intense medication . Type 2 brittle asthma is background well @-@ controlled asthma with sudden severe exacerbations . 
 = = = = Exercise @-@ induced = = = = 
 Exercise can trigger bronchoconstriction both in people with or without asthma . It occurs in most people with asthma and up to 20 % of people without asthma . Exercise @-@ induced bronchoconstriction is common in professional athletes . The highest rates are among cyclists ( up to 45 % ) , swimmers , and cross @-@ country skiers . While it may occur with any weather conditions it is more common when it is dry and cold . Inhaled <unk> @-@ agonists do not appear to improve athletic performance among those without asthma however oral doses may improve endurance and strength . 
 = = = = Occupational = = = = 
 Asthma as a result of ( or worsened by ) workplace exposures , is a commonly reported occupational disease . Many cases however are not reported or recognized as such . It is estimated that 5 – 25 % of asthma cases in adults are work – related . A few hundred different agents have been implicated with the most common being : <unk> , grain and wood dust , <unk> , soldering flux , latex , animals , and aldehydes . The employment associated with the highest risk of problems include : those who spray paint , bakers and those who process food , nurses , chemical workers , those who work with animals , welders , hairdressers and timber workers . 
 = = = = Aspirin @-@ induced asthma = = = = 
 Aspirin @-@ exacerbated respiratory disease , also known as aspirin @-@ induced asthma , affects up to 9 % of asthmatics . Reactions may also occur to other NSAIDs . People affected often also have trouble with nasal polyps . In people who are affected low doses paracetamol or COX @-@ 2 inhibitors are generally safe . 
 = = = = Alcohol @-@ induced asthma = = = = 
 Alcohol may worsen asthmatic symptoms in up to a third of people . This may be even more common in some ethnic groups such as the Japanese and those with aspirin @-@ induced asthma . Other studies have found improvement in asthmatic symptoms from alcohol . 
 = = = = <unk> asthma = = = = 
 <unk> asthma , also known as intrinsic or <unk> asthma makes up between 10 and 33 % of cases . There is negative skin test to common inhalant allergens and normal serum concentrations of IgE . Often it starts latter and life and women are more commonly affect than men . Usual treatments may not work as well . 
 = = = Differential diagnosis = = = 
 Many other conditions can cause symptoms similar to those of asthma . In children , other upper airway diseases such as allergic rhinitis and sinusitis should be considered as well as other causes of airway obstruction including : foreign body aspiration , tracheal stenosis or <unk> , vascular rings , enlarged lymph nodes or neck masses . <unk> and other viral infections may also produce wheezing . In adults , COPD , congestive heart failure , airway masses , as well as drug @-@ induced coughing due to ACE inhibitors should be considered . In both populations vocal cord dysfunction may present similarly . 
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease can coexist with asthma and can occur as a complication of chronic asthma . After the age of 65 , most people with obstructive airway disease will have asthma and COPD . In this setting , COPD can be differentiated by increased airway neutrophils , abnormally increased wall thickness , and increased smooth muscle in the bronchi . However , this level of investigation is not performed due to COPD and asthma sharing similar principles of management : corticosteroids , long @-@ acting beta @-@ agonists , and smoking cessation . It closely resembles asthma in symptoms , is correlated with more exposure to cigarette smoke , an older age , less symptom reversibility after bronchodilator administration , and decreased likelihood of family history of atopy . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 The evidence for the effectiveness of measures to prevent the development of asthma is weak . Some show promise including : limiting smoke exposure both in utero and after delivery , breastfeeding , and increased exposure to daycare or large families but none are well supported enough to be recommended for this indication . Early pet exposure may be useful . Results from exposure to pets at other times are inconclusive and it is only recommended that pets be removed from the home if a person has allergic symptoms to said pet . Dietary restrictions during pregnancy or when breast feeding have not been found to be effective and thus are not recommended . Reducing or eliminating compounds known to sensitive people from the work place may be effective . It is not clear if annual influenza vaccinations effects the risk of exacerbations . Immunization ; however , is recommended by the World Health Organization . Smoking bans are effective in decreasing exacerbations of asthma . 
 = = Management = = 
 While there is no cure for asthma , symptoms can typically be improved . A specific , customized plan for proactively monitoring and managing symptoms should be created . This plan should include the reduction of exposure to allergens , testing to assess the severity of symptoms , and the usage of medications . The treatment plan should be written down and advise adjustments to treatment according to changes in symptoms . 
 The most effective treatment for asthma is identifying triggers , such as cigarette smoke , pets , or aspirin , and eliminating exposure to them . If trigger avoidance is insufficient , the use of medication is recommended . Pharmaceutical drugs are selected based on , among other things , the severity of illness and the frequency of symptoms . Specific medications for asthma are broadly classified into fast @-@ acting and long @-@ acting categories . 
 Bronchodilators are recommended for short @-@ term relief of symptoms . In those with occasional attacks , no other medication is needed . If mild persistent disease is present ( more than two attacks a week ) , low @-@ dose inhaled corticosteroids or alternatively , an oral leukotriene antagonist or a mast cell stabilizer is recommended . For those who have daily attacks , a higher dose of inhaled corticosteroids is used . In a moderate or severe exacerbation , oral corticosteroids are added to these treatments . 
 = = = Lifestyle modification = = = 
 Avoidance of triggers is a key component of improving control and preventing attacks . The most common triggers include allergens , smoke ( tobacco and other ) , air pollution , non selective beta @-@ blockers , and sulfite @-@ containing foods . Cigarette smoking and second @-@ hand smoke ( passive smoke ) may reduce the effectiveness of medications such as corticosteroids . Laws that limit smoking decrease the number of people hospitalized for asthma . Dust mite control measures , including air filtration , chemicals to kill mites , vacuuming , mattress covers and others methods had no effect on asthma symptoms . Overall , exercise is beneficial in people with stable asthma . Yoga could provide small improvements in quality of life and symptoms in people with asthma . 
 = = = Medications = = = 
 Medications used to treat asthma are divided into two general classes : quick @-@ relief medications used to treat acute symptoms ; and long @-@ term control medications used to prevent further exacerbation . 
 = = = = Fast – acting = = = = 
 Short @-@ acting <unk> @-@ adrenoceptor agonists ( SABA ) , such as salbutamol ( <unk> USAN ) are the first line treatment for asthma symptoms . They are recommended before exercise in those with exercise induced symptoms . 
 <unk> medications , such as ipratropium bromide , provide additional benefit when used in combination with SABA in those with moderate or severe symptoms . <unk> bronchodilators can also be used if a person cannot tolerate a SABA . If a child requires admission to hospital additional ipratropium does not appear to help over a SABA . 
 Older , less selective adrenergic agonists , such as inhaled epinephrine , have similar efficacy to <unk> . They are however not recommended due to concerns regarding excessive cardiac stimulation . 
 = = = = Long – term control = = = = 
 Corticosteroids are generally considered the most effective treatment available for long @-@ term control . Inhaled forms such as <unk> are usually used except in the case of severe persistent disease , in which oral corticosteroids may be needed . It is usually recommended that inhaled formulations be used once or twice daily , depending on the severity of symptoms . 
 Long @-@ acting beta @-@ adrenoceptor agonists ( LABA ) such as <unk> and <unk> can improve asthma control , at least in adults , when given in combination with inhaled corticosteroids . In children this benefit is uncertain . When used without steroids they increase the risk of severe side @-@ effects and even with corticosteroids they may slightly increase the risk . 
 <unk> receptor antagonists ( such as <unk> and <unk> ) may be used in addition to inhaled corticosteroids , typically also in conjunction with a LABA . Evidence is insufficient to support use in acute exacerbations . In children they appear to be of little benefit when added to inhaled steroids , and the same applies in adolescents and adults . They are useful by themselves . In those under five years of age , they were the preferred add @-@ on therapy after inhaled corticosteroids by the British Thoracic Society in 2009 . A similar class of drugs , 5 @-@ LOX inhibitors , may be used as an alternative in the chronic treatment of mild to moderate asthma among older children and adults . As of 2013 there is one medication in this family known as <unk> . 
 Mast cell stabilizers ( such as <unk> sodium ) are another non @-@ preferred alternative to corticosteroids . 
 = = = = Delivery methods = = = = 
 Medications are typically provided as metered @-@ dose inhalers ( <unk> ) in combination with an asthma spacer or as a dry powder inhaler . The spacer is a plastic cylinder that mixes the medication with air , making it easier to receive a full dose of the drug . A <unk> may also be used . <unk> and spacers are equally effective in those with mild to moderate symptoms . However , insufficient evidence is available to determine whether a difference exists in those with severe disease . 
 = = = = Adverse effects = = = = 
 Long @-@ term use of inhaled corticosteroids at conventional doses carries a minor risk of adverse effects . Risks include the development of cataracts and a mild regression in stature . 
 = = = Others = = = 
 When asthma is unresponsive to usual medications , other options are available for both emergency management and prevention of <unk> . For emergency management other options include : 
 Oxygen to alleviate hypoxia if saturations fall below 92 % . 
 Oral corticosteroid are recommended with five days of prednisone being the same 2 days of dexamethasone . 
 Magnesium sulfate intravenous treatment increases <unk> when used in addition to other treatment in moderate severe acute asthma attacks . In adults it results in a reduction of hospital admissions . 
 Heliox , a mixture of helium and oxygen , may also be considered in severe unresponsive cases . 
 Intravenous salbutamol is not supported by available evidence and is thus used only in extreme cases . 
 <unk> ( such as theophylline ) were once widely used , but do not add significantly to the effects of inhaled beta @-@ agonists . Their use in acute exacerbations is controversial . 
 The dissociative anesthetic ketamine is theoretically useful if intubation and mechanical ventilation is needed in people who are approaching respiratory arrest ; however , there is no evidence from clinical trials to support this . 
 For those with severe persistent asthma not controlled by inhaled corticosteroids and LABAs , bronchial <unk> may be an option . It involves the delivery of controlled thermal energy to the airway wall during a series of <unk> . While it may increase exacerbation frequency in the first few months it appears to decrease the subsequent rate . Effects beyond one year are unknown . Evidence suggests that sublingual immunotherapy in those with both allergic rhinitis and asthma improve outcomes . 
 = = = Alternative medicine = = = 
 Many people with asthma , like those with other chronic disorders , use alternative treatments ; surveys show that roughly 50 % use some form of unconventional therapy . There is little data to support the effectiveness of most of these therapies . Evidence is insufficient to support the usage of Vitamin C. There is tentative support for its use in exercise induced <unk> . 
 Acupuncture is not recommended for the treatment as there is insufficient evidence to support its use . Air <unk> show no evidence that they improve asthma symptoms or benefit lung function ; this applied equally to positive and negative ion generators . 
 Manual therapies , including osteopathic , chiropractic , <unk> and respiratory therapeutic maneuvers , have insufficient evidence to support their use in treating asthma . The <unk> breathing technique for controlling hyperventilation may result in a reduction in medication use ; however , the technique does not have any effect on lung function . Thus an expert panel felt that evidence was insufficient to support its use . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 The prognosis for asthma is generally good , especially for children with mild disease . Mortality has decreased over the last few decades due to better recognition and improvement in care . In 2010 the death rate was 170 per million for males and 90 per million for females . Rates very between countries by 100 fold . 
 Globally it causes moderate or severe disability in 19 @.@ 4 million people as of 2004 ( 16 million of which are in low and middle income countries ) . Of asthma diagnosed during childhood , half of cases will no longer carry the diagnosis after a decade . Airway remodeling is observed , but it is unknown whether these represent harmful or beneficial changes . Early treatment with corticosteroids seems to prevent or ameliorates a decline in lung function . Asthma in children also has negative effects on quality of life of their parents . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 As of 2011 , 235 – 330 million people worldwide are affected by asthma , and approximately 250 @,@ 000 – 345 @,@ 000 people die per year from the disease . Rates vary between countries with prevalences between 1 and 18 % . It is more common in developed than developing countries . One thus sees lower rates in Asia , Eastern Europe and Africa . Within developed countries it is more common in those who are economically disadvantaged while in contrast in developing countries it is more common in the affluent . The reason for these differences is not well known . Low and middle income countries make up more than 80 % of the mortality . 
 While asthma is twice as common in boys as girls , severe asthma occurs at equal rates . In contrast adult women have a higher rate of asthma than men and it is more common in the young than the old . In children , asthma was the most common reason for admission to the hospital following an emergency department visit in the US in 2011 . 
 Global rates of asthma have increased significantly between the 1960s and 2008 with it being recognized as a major public health problem since the 1970s . Rates of asthma have plateaued in the developed world since the mid @-@ 1990s with recent increases primarily in the developing world . Asthma affects approximately 7 % of the population of the United States and 5 % of people in the United Kingdom . Canada , Australia and New Zealand have rates of about 14 – 15 % . 
 = = Economics = = 
 From 2000 to 2010 , the average cost per asthma @-@ related hospital stay in the United States for children remained relatively stable at about $ 3 @,@ 600 , whereas the average cost per asthma @-@ related hospital stay for adults increased from $ 5 @,@ 200 to $ 6 @,@ 600 . In 2010 , Medicaid was the most frequent primary payer among children and adults aged 18 – 44 years in the United States ; private insurance was the second most frequent payer . Among both children and adults in the lowest income communities in the United States there is a higher rate of hospital stays for asthma in 2010 than those in the highest income communities . 
 = = History = = 
 Asthma was recognized in Ancient Egypt and was treated by drinking an incense mixture known as <unk> . It was officially named as a specific respiratory problem by Hippocrates circa 450 BC , with the Greek word for " panting " forming the basis of our modern name . In 200 BC it was believed to be at least partly related to the emotions . 
 In 1873 , one of the first papers in modern medicine on the subject tried to explain the pathophysiology of the disease while one in 1872 , concluded that asthma can be cured by rubbing the chest with chloroform liniment . Medical treatment in 1880 , included the use of intravenous doses of a drug called <unk> . In 1886 , F.H. Bosworth theorized a connection between asthma and hay fever . Epinephrine was first referred to in the treatment of asthma in 1905 . Oral corticosteroids began to be used for this condition in the 1950s while inhaled corticosteroids and selective short acting beta agonist came into wide use in the 1960s . 
 A notable and well @-@ documented case in the 19th century was that of young Theodore Roosevelt ( 1858 – 1919 ) . At that time there was no effective treatment . Roosevelt 's youth was in large part shaped by his poor health partly related to his asthma . He experienced recurring nighttime asthma attacks that caused the experience of being smothered to death , terrifying the boy and his parents . 
 During the 1930s – 1950s , asthma was known as one of the " holy seven " psychosomatic illnesses . Its cause was considered to be psychological , with treatment often based on psychoanalysis and other talking cures . As these psychoanalysts interpreted the asthmatic wheeze as the suppressed cry of the child for its mother , they considered the treatment of depression to be especially important for individuals with asthma . 
 = Tropical Storm Odile ( 2008 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Odile was a late season tropical storm that formed during the 2008 Pacific hurricane season and affected parts of southern Mexico . A tropical depression formed on October 8 , and became Tropical Storm Odile 18 hours later . The storm paralleled the south coast of Mexico , with the center located only several miles offshore . After peaking in intensity , increasing southeasterly vertical wind shear induced a trend of rapid weakening on the storm . Correspondingly , Odile was downgraded to a tropical depression early on 12 October , subsequently degenerating into a remnant low about 55 mi ( 85 km ) south of Manzanillo , Colima . From thereon , the low proceeded slowly south @-@ southwestward before dissipating on October 13 . Since Odile stayed at sea , its effects along coastlines were limited . The most notable damages were caused by flooding along the southern coast of Mexico , mostly in Chiapas , Oaxaca , Guerrero and Michoacán . The exact amount of damage , however , remains unknown , and no fatalities were reported as a result of the storm . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave emerged off the west coast of Africa on September 23 , and merged with the southern end of a decaying frontal system over the Caribbean Sea . The combined disturbance gradually split , with the northernmost section eventually becoming Tropical Storm Marco . The southernmost end moved into the eastern Pacific , which then immediately showed signs of organization . The system stalled just south of El Salvador throughout October 5 , where it came under the influence of strong vertical wind shear . The circulation slowly drifted east @-@ northeastward and became absorbed by a neighboring tropical wave , with the broad resultant low re @-@ curving to the west @-@ northwest . In response to relaxing shear aloft , convection redeveloped around the newly formed center of circulation . It subsequently acquired a sufficiently organized structure and post @-@ analysis found that a tropical depression formed at around 1200 UTC on October 8 . Upon developing , the depression was designated as Sixteen @-@ E about 120 mi ( 195 km ) south @-@ southwest of San Salvador , El Salvador , and operationally , advisories were initiated at 2100 UTC — 9 hours after post @-@ analytic estimates of formation . 
 Despite being in an area with favorable conditions , lack of inner core organization proved difficult for rapid deepening to occur , and initially , model guidance did not forecast any significant strengthening . Contrary to expectations , satellite imagery showed a gradual increase in organization later that evening . Bands of convection deepened in the southern quadrant , indicating that the storm was steadily strengthening . Located just to the south of a large mid @-@ level ridge over Mexico , the system was steered toward the west @-@ northwest , proceeding within a favorable environment . Based on the improved appearance on satellite imagery , it is estimated the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Odile at 0600 UTC on October 9 about 330 mi ( 530 km ) southeast of Puerto Ángel , Mexico . Shortly after attaining tropical storm status , Odile began to develop a small area of central dense overcast , and upper @-@ level cirrus outflow became well @-@ defined within the western semicircle of the storm . Convective banding organized to the south and southwest of the circulation , leading Dvorak T @-@ numbers to estimate an intensity of at least 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) . Based on this estimate , the NHC noted a high chance of further intensification into a minimal hurricane . Odile maintained its intensity , as upper @-@ level outflow of the circulation was reduced to the northeast . Although wind shear initially dislocated the circulation from the main convection , a large burst of convection allowed Odile to intensify slightly further to peak winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) at around 0600 UTC on October 10 . 
 Odile closely paralleled the Mexican coastline . The intensification did not last long , in fact , the convection associated with Odile diminished in the afternoon and its rainbands became rather distorted . Another cluster of convection sprung up that evening , this time with cloud tops colder than − 80 ° C ( − 112 ° F ) . The circulation center was well embedded within the convection . As a consequence of the slightly improved organization , Odile had a stronger interaction with the easterlies aloft , therefore increasing forward movement speed . Later that day , an reconnaissance aircraft passed through Odile and observed a rather weak and disorganized tropical cyclone , resulting in meteorologists at the NHC to change its forecasts . Early on October 12 , Odile made its closest approach to coastline of Mexico , only about 50 mi ( 80 km ) offshore of Guerrero , Mexico . Increasing southeasterly vertical wind shear took toll on the system . Furthermore , around 0600 UTC , NHC confirmed that Odile weakened into a tropical depression . The last advisory regarding Odile was issued later that day stating that it has subsequently degenerated into a remnant low @-@ pressure area , a swirl of low @-@ level clouds . The remnants of Odile meandered slowly south @-@ southwestward before completely dissipating on October 13 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Throughout Odile 's existence , the National Weather Service of Mexico declared several tropical storm watches and warnings for the Pacific coast of Mexico spanning from Jalisco to Oaxaca . They were extended and discontinued as Odile progressed westward . On October 11 at around 2 AM PDT , a hurricane watch was declared for the Pacific coast of Mexico from Tecpán de Galeana to Punta San Telmo . Six hours later , the hurricane watch was adjusted and in effect for the coast from Zihuatanejo to Manzanillo . They were all discontinued later that day as the chance of Odile becoming a hurricane diminished . 
 On October 8 , blue alerts were declared for 118 municipalities in Chiapas following the minimal threat of tropical storm @-@ force impact . The civil defense system in the state of Chiapas warned that the storm could leave up to 5 @.@ 9 in ( 150 mm ) of rainfall . <unk> were closed in the Port of Chiapas , leaving over 3 @,@ 000 boats stranded ashore on October 9 . Flooding in Acapulco forced officials to close schools on October 10 . Meanwhile , the state government reported that 232 police were ready to provide assistance to citizens in advance of Odile . Civil defense officials in the state of Guerrero ordered about 10 @,@ 000 people to evacuate their homes . On October 11 , a yellow alert were declared for the state of Michoacán , where the civil defense committee also announced that the shelters were opened for schools in the municipality of Lázaro Cárdenas and the towns of Playa Azul and Guacamayas . Ports in Lázaro Cárdenas were also closed later that day . 
 On October 10 , about 4 @.@ 8 in ( 120 mm ) of rainfall were accumulated in the city of Acapulco . The torrential rainfall caused flooding which damaged more than 100 houses , with two of them completely destroyed . Excess floodwater collapsed walls and covered roads with mud that reached as much as 2 @.@ 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 70 m ) . Nearly 150 homes were inundated with 13 ft ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) of water . The flooding is also responsible for causing strong current that had swept away parked vehicles , downing of at least 16 trees and carrying debris to the main streets of the port . Odile also managed to cause damage toward the plumbing and sewage supplies of Acapulco , resulting no clean water access in about fifty communities of the suburban areas of Acapulco for several days . The water levels of Papagayo River reached its maximum capacity , damaging electrical supplies . In Michoacán , strong winds resulted 30 downed trees and the collapse of 5 power poles , leaving 10 minutes without electricity for a large part of the city . 
 = Duncan Edwards = 
 Duncan Edwards ( 1 October 1936 – 21 February 1958 ) was an English footballer who played for Manchester United and the England national team . He was one of the Busby Babes , the young United team formed under manager Matt Busby in the mid @-@ 1950s , and one of eight players who died as a result of the Munich air disaster . 
 Born in Woodside , Dudley , Worcestershire , Edwards signed for Manchester United as a teenager and went on to become the youngest player to play in the Football League First Division and the then youngest England player since the Second World War . In a professional career of less than five years he helped United to win two Football League championships and reach the semi @-@ finals of the European Cup . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Edwards was born on 1 October 1936 at 23 Malvern Crescent in the Woodside district of Dudley , which at the time was part of the county of Worcestershire . He was the first child of Gladstone and Sarah Anne Edwards and their only child to survive to adulthood , his younger sister Carol Anne dying in 1947 at the age of 14 weeks . His cousin , three years his elder , was Dennis Stevens , who also went on to become a professional footballer . 
 The Edwards family later moved to 31 Elm Road on the Priory Estate , also in Dudley . Edwards attended Priory Primary School from 1941 to 1948 , and Wolverhampton Street Secondary School from 1948 to 1952 . He played football for his school as well as for Dudley Schools , Worcestershire and Birmingham and District teams , and also represented his school at morris dancing . He was selected to compete in the National Morris and Sword Dancing Festival , but was also offered a trial for the English Schools Football Association 's under @-@ 14 team , which fell on the same day , and opted to attend the latter . 
 Edwards impressed the selectors and was chosen to play for the English Schools XI , making his debut against the equivalent team from Wales at Wembley Stadium on 1 April 1950 . He was soon appointed captain of the team , a position he held for two seasons . By this stage , he had already attracted the attention of major clubs , with Manchester United scout Jack O 'Brien reporting back to manager Matt Busby in 1948 that he had " today seen a 12 @-@ year @-@ old schoolboy who merits special watching . His name is Duncan Edwards , of Dudley " . 
 Joe Mercer , who was then coaching the England schools team , urged Busby to sign Edwards , who was also attracting interest from Wolverhampton Wanderers and Aston Villa . Edwards signed for United as an amateur on 2 June 1952 , but accounts of when he signed his first professional contract vary . Some reports state that it occurred on his 17th birthday in October 1953 , but others contend that it took place a year earlier . Those accounts that favour the earlier date usually state that a club official , either Busby himself or coach Bert Whalley , arrived at the Edwards family home soon after midnight to secure the youngster 's signature as early as possible , but other reports claim that this occurred when he signed his amateur contract . Wolves manager Stan Cullis was indignant at missing out on a highly touted local youngster and accused United of improperly offering financial inducements to Edwards or his family , but Edwards maintained that he had always wanted to play for the Lancashire team . To guard against the possibility that he might not make a success of his football career , he also began an apprenticeship as a carpenter . 
 = = = Football career = = = 
 Edwards began his Manchester United career in the youth team and made several appearances for the team that won the first ever FA Youth Cup in 1953 , but by the time of the final had already made his debut for the first team . On 4 April 1953 , he played in a Football League First Division match against Cardiff City , which United lost 4 – 1 , aged just 16 years and 185 days , making him the youngest player ever to play in the top division . Mindful of the fact that his team contained a large number of relatively old players , Busby was keen to bring new young players through the ranks , and Edwards , along with the likes of Dennis Viollet and Jackie Blanchflower , was among a number of youngsters introduced to the team during 1953 , who came to be known collectively as the Busby Babes . Reviewing his performance on his first team debut the Manchester Guardian newspaper commented that " he showed promise of fine ability in passing and shooting , but will have to move faster as a wing half " . 
 The 1953 – 54 season saw Edwards emerge as a regular in the United first team . After impressing in a friendly against Kilmarnock he replaced the injured Henry Cockburn for the away match against Huddersfield Town on 31 October 1953 , and went on to appear in 24 league matches as well as United 's FA Cup defeat to Burnley . Nonetheless he was also still an active part of the youth team and played in the team which won the Youth Cup for the second consecutive season . He made his first appearance for the national under @-@ 23 team on 20 January 1954 in Italy , and was considered for inclusion in the full England team , but on the day when the selection committee watched him in action , against Arsenal on 27 March , he gave a poor performance and was not called up . 
 The following season he made 36 first team appearances and scored his first senior goals , finishing the season with six to his name . His performances revived calls for him to be selected for the senior England team , and a member of the selection committee was despatched to watch him play against Huddersfield Town on 18 September 1954 , but nothing came of it in the short term , although he was selected for a Football League XI which played an exhibition match against a Scottish League team . In March , he played for England B against an equivalent team from Germany and , despite being criticised in the press for his " poor showing " , was called up for the full national team a week later . He made his debut in a match against Scotland on 2 April 1955 in the British Home Championship aged 18 years and 183 days , making him England 's youngest debutant since the Second World War , a record which stood , until Michael Owen made his England debut in 1998 . Three weeks later , United took advantage of the fact that he was still eligible for the youth team to select him for the club 's third consecutive FA Youth Cup final . The decision to field an England international player in the youth team was heavily criticised , and Matt Busby was forced to pen a newspaper article defending Edwards ' selection , which paid off for United as the player was instrumental in a third Youth Cup win . 
 In May 1955 , Edwards was selected for the England squad which travelled to mainland Europe for matches against France , Portugal and Spain , starting all three matches . Upon returning from the tour , he began a two @-@ year stint in the British Army with the Royal Army Ordnance Corps . Army service was compulsory at the time for all men of his age under the National Service scheme . He was stationed at <unk> near Shrewsbury along with team @-@ mate Bobby Charlton , but was allowed leave to play for United . He also took part in army matches , and in one season played nearly one hundred matches in total . In the 1955 – 56 season , despite missing nearly two months of action due to a severe bout of influenza , Edwards played 33 times as United won the championship of the Football League by a margin of 11 points from Blackpool . The following season he made 34 league appearances , taking his total past the 100 mark , as United won a second consecutive league title , and was also in the team that contested the 1957 FA Cup Final , in which United missed out on the Double after a 2 – 1 defeat to Aston Villa . He also made seven appearances during United 's first ever foray into the European Cup , including a 10 – 0 win over Anderlecht which remains the club 's biggest ever margin of victory . By now he was also a regular in the England team , featuring in all four of England 's qualifying matches for the 1958 World Cup and scoring two goals in the 5 – 2 win over Denmark on 5 December 1956 . He was expected to be a key player for England in the World Cup finals , and was seen as a likely candidate to replace the veteran Billy Wright as national team captain . 
 Edwards began the 1957 – 58 season in good form and rumours abounded that top Italian clubs were seeking to sign him . His final match in England took place on 1 February 1958 , when he scored the opening goal to help United defeat Arsenal 5 – 4 . The press were critical of his performance , with the Sunday Pictorial 's correspondent writing that he did not " think [ Edwards ' ] display in this thrilling game would impress England team manager Walter Winterbottom , who was watching . He was clearly at fault for Arsenal 's fourth goal when , instead of clearing , he <unk> on the ball " . Five days later , he played his last ever match as United drew 3 – 3 away to Red Star Belgrade to progress to the semi @-@ finals of the European Cup by an aggregate score of 5 – 4 . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Returning home from Belgrade , the aeroplane carrying Edwards and his team mates crashed on takeoff after a refuelling stop in Munich , Germany . Seven players and 14 other passengers died at the scene , and Edwards was taken to the <unk> der Isar Hospital with multiple leg fractures , fractured ribs and severely damaged kidneys . The doctors treating him were confident that he stood some chance of recovery , but were doubtful that he would ever be able to play football again . 
 Doctors had an artificial kidney rushed to the hospital for him , but the artificial organ reduced his blood 's ability to clot and he began to bleed internally . Despite this it is said that he asked assistant manager Jimmy Murphy " What time is the kick off against Wolves , Jimmy ? I mustn 't miss that match " . By 14 February , his condition was reported to have " dramatically improved " . However , on 19 February it was reported that he was " sinking rapidly " , with use of the artificial kidney machine developing into a " vicious circle , gradually sapping his strength " . Doctors were " amazed " at his fight for life , and the next day a " very slight improvement " in his condition was reported , but he died at 2 : 15 a.m. on 21 February 1958 . Hours before his death , by coincidence , a new issue of Charles Buchan 's Football Monthly was published in the United Kingdom , with a photograph of a smiling Edwards on the cover . 
 Edwards was buried at Dudley Cemetery five days later , alongside his sister Carol Anne . More than 5 @,@ 000 people lined the streets of Dudley for his funeral . His tombstone reads : " A day of memory , Sad to recall , Without farewell , He left us all " , and his grave is regularly visited by fans . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Edwards is commemorated in a number of ways in his home town of Dudley . A stained @-@ glass window depicting the player , designed by Francis Skeat , was unveiled in St Francis 's Church , the parish church for the Priory Estate , by Matt Busby in 1961 , and a statue in the town centre was dedicated by his mother and Bobby Charlton in 1999 . In 1993 , a cul @-@ de @-@ sac of housing association homes near to the cemetery in which he is buried was named " Duncan Edwards Close " . The Wren 's Nest pub on the Priory Estate , near where he grew up , was renamed " The Duncan Edwards " in honour of him in 2001 , but it closed within five years and was subsequently destroyed by arsonists . In 2006 , a £ 100 @,@ 000 games facility was opened in Priory Park , where Edwards often played as a boy , in his memory . In 2008 , Dudley 's southern bypass was renamed ' Duncan Edwards Way ' in his memory . Dudley Museum and Art Gallery hosts an exhibition of memorabilia devoted to his career , including his England caps . A housing complex called Duncan Edwards Court exists in Manchester , among a network of streets , named after his fellow Munich victims , including Eddie Colman , Roger Byrne and Tommy Taylor . On 8 July 2011 a Blue Plaque was unveiled by Bobby Charlton at the site of Edwards ' former digs in Stretford , and in 2016 local dignitaries in Dudley launched a fundraising drive with the aim of placing a similar plaque in the town . 
 In 1996 , Edwards was one of five players chosen to appear on British stamps issued as part of a " Football Legends " set issued to commemorate the UEFA Euro 1996 tournament . He was portrayed by Sam Claflin in the 2011 British TV film United based on the Munich disaster . 
 Contemporaries of Edwards have been unstinting in their praise of his abilities . Bobby Charlton described him as " the only player that made me feel inferior " and said his death was " the biggest single tragedy ever to happen to Manchester United and English football " . Terry Venables claimed that , had he lived , it would have been Edwards , not Bobby Moore , who lifted the World Cup trophy as England captain in 1966 . Tommy Docherty stated that " there is no doubt in my mind that Duncan would have become the greatest player ever . Not just in British football , with United and England , but the best in the world . George Best was something special , as was Pelé and Maradona , but in my mind Duncan was much better in terms of all @-@ round ability and skill . " In recognition of his talents Edwards was made an inaugural inductee to the English Football Hall of Fame in 2002 . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Although he is primarily remembered as a defensive midfielder , Edwards is said to have been able to operate in any outfield position on the field of play . His versatility was such that on one occasion he started the match playing as an emergency striker in place of one injured player before being switched to central defence in place of another . His greatest assets were his physical strength and his level of authority on the pitch , which was said to be remarkable for such a young player , and he was particularly noted for his high level of stamina . Stanley Matthews described him as being " like a rock in a raging sea " , and Bobby Moore likened him to the Rock of Gibraltar when defending but also noted that he was " dynamic coming forward " . His imposing physique earned him the nicknames " Big Dunc " and " The Tank " , and he has been ranked amongst the toughest players of all time . 
 Edwards was noted for the power and timing of his tackles and for his ability to pass and shoot equally well with both feet . He was known for his surging runs up the pitch and was equally skilled at heading the ball and at striking fierce long @-@ range shots . After scoring a goal on 26 May 1956 , in a 3 – 1 friendly win against West Germany , he was given the nickname " Boom Boom " by the local press because of " the Big Bertha shot in his boots " . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = International goals = = = 
 Scores and results list England 's goal tally first . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Manchester United 
 First Division : 1955 – 56 , 1956 – 57 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 Football League 100 Legends : 1958 
 Inducted into the inaugural English Football Hall of Fame in 2002 
 PFA Team of the Century ( 1907 @-@ 1976 ) : 2007 
 = = Outside football = = 
 Edwards was a teetotaller and outside football was known as a very private individual , whose interests included fishing , playing cards and visiting the cinema . Although he attended dances with his team @-@ mates he was never confident in social surroundings . He was described by Jimmy Murphy as an " unspoilt boy " and retained a strong Black Country accent which his team @-@ mates would impersonate . He was once stopped by the police for riding his bicycle without lights and fined five shillings by the authorities and two weeks ' wages by his club . 
 At the time of his death Edwards was living in lodgings in Gorse Avenue , Stretford . He was engaged to be married to Molly Leech , who was 22 years old and worked in the offices of a textile machine manufacturer in Altrincham . The couple met at a function at a hotel at Manchester Airport , dated for a year before becoming engaged , and were godparents to the daughter of Leech 's friend Josephine Stott . 
 Edwards appeared in advertisements for <unk> glucose tablets and had written a book entitled " Tackle Soccer This Way " , commercial endeavours which supplemented his wage of £ 15 per week during the season and £ 12 per week during the summer . The book was published shortly after his death with the approval of his family and , after being out of print for many years , was re @-@ published in November 2009 . 
 = Education in Iceland = 
 The system of education in Iceland is divided in four levels : playschool , compulsory , upper secondary and higher , and is similar to that of other Nordic countries . Education is mandatory for children aged 6 – 16 . Most institutions are funded by the state ; there are very few private schools in the country . Iceland is a country with gymnasia . 
 = = Background = = 
 The first national education law was the 1907 education law , and the first national curriculum was published in 1926 . Although the curriculum was periodically revised , the overall education system was not significantly modernized until the Compulsory Education Act of 1974 , which mandated special education services for all students with disabilities . 
 According to the Ministry of Education , Science and Culture : 
 The Ministry of Education , Science and Culture has the jurisdiction of educational responsibility . Traditionally , education in Iceland has been run in the public sector ; there is a small , although growing , number of private education institutions in the country . Over the years , the educational system has been decentralised , and responsibility for primary and lower secondary schools lies with the local authorities . The state runs upper secondary schools and higher education institutions . 
 The Ministry issues the National Curriculum Guidelines . The National Centre for Educational Materials publishes educational materials for education institutions , and issues them free of charge . The Educational Testing Institute is the country ’ s sole examination board ; responsible for issuing and grading national assessments . 
 There are 192 institutions catering for compulsory education , 42 schools for upper secondary education and 9 higher education institutions . 
 = = History = = 
 The oldest gymnasiums in the country are Menntaskólinn í Reykjavík and Menntaskólinn á Akureyri . Menntaskólinn í Reykjavík traces its origin to 1056 , when a school was established in <unk> . The school was moved to Reykjavík in 1786 , but poor housing conditions forced it to move again in 1805 to <unk> near Reykjavík . In 1846 the school was moved to its current location , and a new building was erected for it in Reykjavík . 
 The University of Iceland was the first higher education institution in the country , and was established on 17 June 1911 , uniting three former Icelandic schools : <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , which taught theology , medicine and law , respectively . The university originally had only faculties for these three fields , in addition to a faculty of humanities . The first rector of the university was Björn M. <unk> , a professor in the faculty of humanities . 
 = = Levels = = 
 The Icelandic education system comprises four levels : playschool , compulsory , upper secondary and higher . 
 = = = Playschool = = = 
 Playschool or <unk> , is non @-@ compulsory education for those under the age of six , and is the first step in the education system . The current legislation concerning playschools was passed in 2007 . The Ministry of Education , Science and Culture is responsible for the policies and methods that playschools must use , and they issue the National Curriculum Guidelines . They are also responsible for ensuring that the curriculum is suitable so as to make the transition into compulsory education as easy as possible . However , the Ministry does not implement the regulations and guidelines ; instead this is the responsibility of the local authority , who fund and administer playschools . In addition , the local authority employs representatives who supervise the playschools ’ operation . 
 Parents must pay for their children to attend playschools . Around 30 % of the costs of running the institutions are covered by these fees . Private playschools ’ fees can be around 10 – 20 % higher than those of public institutions . Almost all private schools receive some municipal funding . 
 The buildings are often purpose @-@ built on a site where around 30 @-@ <unk> of playing space is available for each child in the playground . Around 6 m2 per child is allocated indoors . The institutions are intended to be mixed sex . <unk> are intended for children under the age of six ; the youngest children to attend are at least two years old . Children of single parents and students are given priority , and in some cases children with a handicap are also given priority . In the majority of cases , the children are divided into age groups , but in some smaller communities these may be grouped together . 
 Children attend playschool for a minimum of four and a maximum of nine hours per day . 
 = = = Compulsory = = = 
 Compulsory education or <unk> ( lit . “ basic school ” ) , is the period of education which is compulsory for all . The legislation concerning compulsory education was passed in 2007 , and in 1996 municipalities took over the running of compulsory education . It comprises primary and lower secondary education , which often takes place at the same institution . The law states that education is mandatory for children and adolescents between the ages of 6 and 16 . The school year lasts nine months , and begins between August 21 and September 1 , ending between May 31 and June 10 . The minimum number of school days is 170 , but after a new teachers ’ wage contract , this will increase to 180 . Lessons take place five days a week . 
 Responsibility lies with parents for making sure that their children attend and register at school . The law states that it is the responsibility of the municipality to give instruction and fund institutions ( this includes teaching , substitute teaching , administration and specialist services ) , and provide special education if required . There are no entry requirements for pupils , and the acceptance rate is 100 % at six years of age . 
 Pupils have the right to attend a school in the area in which they live . The state requires that the school integrates handicapped pupils into mainstream education . 
 The state is responsible for assessing institutions to make sure that they are operating within the law and the National Curriculum Guidelines . They also produce educational materials , and implement educational law and regulations . 
 Compulsory education is divided into ten years . Schools which have all ten years , year one to seven , and years eight to ten are common . Those schools which teach from years eight to ten often have a wider catchment area . The size of institutions is widely varied . In the Reykjavík urban area , schools can be up to 1200 pupils in size . In rural areas , schools can have fewer than 10 pupils , and around 50 % of schools have fewer than 100 pupils . All compulsory education institutions are mixed sex . Many counselling services are available , including help with studies and specific subjects ; psychological counselling is also available . 
 Each school must follow the National Curriculum Guidelines , but exceptions are made for schools with special characteristics . The school is required to create a school working plan and an annual calendar , organise teaching and pupil assessment and to provide extracurricular activities . The number of lessons for each year is as follows : 
 Nowadays , the National Curriculum Guidelines have provisions for those learning Icelandic whose mother tongue is a foreign language and deaf and hearing @-@ impaired pupils . Pupils are expected to keep up with the pace of teaching ; however those students who are struggling receive remedial teaching without being moved from most of their classes . An emphasis is made on providing a variety of teaching methods . 
 = = = = Assessment = = = = 
 In Iceland , assessment and evaluation of pupils is conducted internally , and is not standardised between different institutions . Pupils are given regular reports to year their progress ; however the way in which this is done varies between schools . For example , a numerical year could be given , or an oral and written assessment may be given . 
 Their principal purpose is to help ease the transition into upper secondary education and help the pupil to choose a course of study . Pupils are awarded a certificate with their marks at the end of the compulsory schooling period . 
 In addition to pupil assessment , the law requires that schools implement some form of self @-@ evaluation on the quality of their services and to make sure that institutions are operating inside the law and within guidelines . Schools are assessed externally every five years by the Ministry of Education , Science and Culture . 
 = = = = Teachers = = = = 
 Similar to primary education in other countries , from years one to seven , the same teacher teaches the pupils all of their subjects . From year eight upwards , pupils receive teaching from a number of different teachers ( this marks the boundary between primary education and lower secondary education ) . Groups may be mixed around year by year . 
 Primary school teachers are general teachers who have received their training at either the University of Iceland or the University of Akureyri . The typical course lasts three years . Lower secondary teachers may also be trained at the University of Iceland . A BA or BS degree is required in this situation . The courses are designed to be both academic and practical . Municipalities are responsible for the employment of teachers . Optional in @-@ service teacher training courses are offered on an annual basis . 
 = = = Upper secondary = = = 
 Upper secondary education or <unk> ( lit . “ continued school ” ) , follows lower secondary education . These schools are also known as gymnasia in English . It is not compulsory , but everyone who has had their compulsory education has the right to upper secondary education . The typical course length is four years , for students aged between 16 and 20 . The length of the course can vary , especially in vocational courses . This stage of education is governed by the Upper Secondary School Act of 2007 . Like all other schools in Iceland , upper secondary schools are mixed sex . 
 Students do not have to pay tuition fees , but they must pay an enrolment fee and are expected to buy their own textbooks . Students who enrol in vocational courses pay a portion of the costs of the materials that they use . 
 All students have the right to enter upper secondary education when they turn sixteen . Around 97 % of students leaving lower secondary education enter into upper secondary education ; however there is a notable drop @-@ out rate . There are specific entry requirements for different courses , but as all students have the right to this sort of education , a general program of study is available for those students who may fail to meet requirements . Some schools enjoy more prestige and popularity than others , especially in Reykjavík , and those may need to turn away hundreds of students every year . 
 The school year lasts for nine months , and is divided into two terms : autumn and spring . Students attend around 32 – 40 lessons a week , each lasting 40 – 80 minutes . This can vary drastically between institutions . 
 There are around forty gymnasia in the country ; sizes vary as much as the primary schools . The largest gymnasia have over 3 @,@ 000 students — the smallest , less than fifty . The gymnasia can be divided thus : 
 grammar schools — offering four @-@ year @-@ long programmes of study , ending with matriculation exams ; 
 industrial @-@ vocational schools — theoretical and practical courses in various trades ; 
 comprehensive schools — offering a mixture of courses , has qualities of both a grammar school and an industrial @-@ vocational institution , in addition to specialised vocational programmes ; 
 specialised vocational schools — programmes of study for specific trades and careers . 
 The law requires that there are academic , vocational , artistic and general programmes of study , all of which lead to higher education . Any gymnasium can therefore offer the matriculation examination , called the <unk> , providing it complies with Ministry of Education regulations . 
 The gymnasia have forms which operate on a unit @-@ credit system , that is to say a term is divided into course units , each of which is worth a certain number of credits . Students are consequently able to regulate the speed of their education based on their personal circumstances . This system is used in most upper secondary institutions in Iceland . 
 Many institutions also offer evening classes targeted at adults , some of which are on @-@ a @-@ par with their daytime courses . Distance learning is also offered at most schools . 
 Counselling services are also offered , like those of the compulsory education institutions . 
 = = = = Assessment = = = = 
 Examinations are taken at the end of every term as opposed to at the end of the year . Final years are often based on continuous assessments and assignments ; however some courses do have final exams . There were no nationally co @-@ ordinated exams in upper secondary education until school year 2003 – 4 , when certain subjects were introduced . Institutions are also required to self @-@ assess , like compulsory education institutions they are assessed externally every five years . 
 = = = = Teachers = = = = 
 Upper secondary teachers are required to have completed four years at university , of which at least two years must have been devoted to a major subject , and at least one to teaching methodology and skills . Vocational teachers must be qualified in their particular discipline , or must be a master craftsman in their trade , and have at least two years of experience . 
 In @-@ service training courses are also offered . Teachers are paid by the state but hired by the individual school . 
 = = = Higher education = = = 
 The final level is higher education , or <unk> ( lit . “ high school ” ) . There are eight such institutions in the country , most of which are run by the state . The first institution , the University of Iceland , opened in 1911 , and is still the principal higher education institution in the country . In recent years , however , more universities have opened across the country , widening the range of choices available . Legislation concerning higher education institutions was passed in 1997 , which includes a definition of the term <unk> ( to include universities which do not carry out research ) . There is also separate legislation in place for each public institution , defining their role in research and general organisation . Private and public universities both receive funding from the state . 
 The administration of each university is divided into the Senate , the rector , faculty meetings , faculty councils and deans ( however , some universities are not divided into faculties ) . The Senate ultimately makes decisions on the running and organisation of the institution , and formulates policy . The state will formulate a contract with the university , defining the institution ’ s objectives and the amount of funding that the state will give to the institution . 
 Despite the growing number of higher education institutions in the country , many students decide to pursue their university education abroad ( around 16 % , mostly in postgraduate studies ) . 
 The academic year lasts from September to May , and is divided into two terms : autumn and spring . 
 = = = = Admission = = = = 
 Most undergraduates will have to pass some form of matriculation exam to get into university ; however those with sufficient work experience may be admitted in some cases . Vocational and technical courses have looser requirements , only stating that the applicant have some sort of experience in their chosen field of study . Institutions are free to set their own admission criteria . Registration for potential students takes place from May to June each year ; however the application deadline for foreign students is earlier : March 15 . 
 = = = = Student finance = = = = 
 In state @-@ run institutions , students only need pay registration fees ; there are no tuition fees . Private institutions , however , charge fees . All students are eligible to some financial support from the Icelandic Student Loan Fund ; the exact amount depends on their financial and personal situation . The student must begin to repay this money two years after completing their study programme . In addition to Icelandic students , students from the European Union or EEA @-@ EFTA member states are also eligible to apply for loans , if they have been working in their trade in the country for at least one year . 
 Annually there are a limited number of scholarships available for foreign students to study the Icelandic language and literature at the University of Iceland , offered by the Ministry of Education , Science and Culture . 
 Grants are available for post @-@ graduates in research universities , which are awarded on the basis of joint submission from student and professor , and approval from the respective faculty . 
 = = Special education = = 
 Before the Compulsory Education Act of 1974 , only selected groups of students with disabilities , such as deaf and blind students , received any formal special education , although students with mild disabilities had been accommodated at rural schools since 1907 . With the changes in the law , a special school was opened in Reykjavik for students with mental retardation , and similar programs followed . Students with physical disabilities were mainstreamed into regular classrooms . The Iceland University of Education developed programs to train teachers and other specialists to provide appropriate services . 
 Reflecting Icelandic cultural values of tolerance , equity , and celebrating differences rather than individualism , current government policy emphasizes inclusion , or " one school for all " , although segregated classrooms and schools are still permitted and supported . 
 The Education Law on Upper Secondary Education of 1992 entitles students to attend schools and university , and to receive appropriate supports for doing so , but does not exempt them from the normal entrance requirements , such as demonstrating a given level of reading or mathematics achievement . Consequently , after reaching the end of compulsory school age , it is difficult for students with significant cognitive impairments to find further education . 
 = Arthur Adams ( comics ) = 
 For other people named Arthur Adams , see the Arthur Adams disambiguation page 
 Arthur " Art " Adams ( born April 5 , 1963 ) is an American comic book artist and writer . He first broke into the American comic book industry with the 1985 Marvel Comics miniseries Longshot . His subsequent interior comics work includes a number of Marvel 's major books , including The Uncanny X @-@ Men , Excalibur , X @-@ Factor , Fantastic Four , Hulk and Ultimate X , as well books by various other publishers , such as Action Comics , Vampirella , The Rocketeer and The Authority . Adams has also illustrated books featuring characters for which he has a personal love , such as Godzilla , The Creature from the Black Lagoon and Gumby , the latter of which garnered him a 1988 Eisner Award for Best Single Issue . 
 In 1994 , Adams joined a group of creators that included Frank Miller , John Byrne and Mike Mignola to form Legend , an imprint of creator @-@ owned comics published by Dark Horse Comics , through which Adams published Monkeyman and O 'Brien , a science fiction adventure series featuring archetypal sci @-@ fi monsters that Adams wrote and illustrated . Although the Legend imprint ceased in 1998 , Monkeyman and O 'Brien continued to appear in print , sometimes in crossover stories with other comics characters , such as Gen ¹ ³ / Monkeyman and O 'Brien ( 1998 ) , and Savage Dragon # 41 ( September 1997 ) . 
 Because of his reputedly tight , labor @-@ intensive penciling style , which was initially influenced by Michael Golden and Walter Simonson , and his admittedly slow pace , Adams does not work as the regular artist on long @-@ running monthly series , but usually provides artwork for short storylines , one @-@ shots , miniseries or contributions to anthologies , such as his 2002 – 2004 work on " Jonni Future " , a pulp science fiction series he co @-@ created with Steve Moore for the Wildstorm Productions anthology Tom Strong 's Terrific Tales , and his 2008 work on Hulk # 7 - 9 . His other published work consists of cover work for books such as Avengers Classic , Wonder Woman and JLA , as well as pinups and other spot illustrations for books such as Sin City , The Official Handbook of the Marvel Universe and his own published sketchbook series , Arthur Adams Sketchbook . He has also done design work for toys and video games . He is one of the most popular and widely imitated artists in the comics industry , whose drawing style has been credited as an influence upon the artists associated with the founding and early days of Image Comics such as J. Scott Campbell . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Arthur Adams was born on April 5 , 1963 in Holyoke , Massachusetts . His father was a loadmaster in the United States Air Force , and as a result , Adams frequently moved with his parents and four younger brothers to places that included West Virginia . When Adams was five years old , the family settled in <unk> , California , near Travis Air Force Base . Adams ' first exposure to superhero and monster comics came through the ones his mother would buy for him once a month at a thrift store . His enthusiasm for superhero stories by particular creators began when his father returned from an overseas trip with the first Marvel Treasury Grab @-@ Bag , which included stories by Ross <unk> , Wally Wood , and Gene Colan . He particularly liked Marvel Comics for their stories with monster @-@ like characters like the Thing , the Hulk and Man @-@ Thing . He became interested in dinosaurs and monsters like King Kong after watching Creature Features on TV every Saturday , and Universal Monster movies such as Frankenstein and Creature from the Black Lagoon . He also enjoyed superhero and science fiction programming , such as Super Friends , the 1967 Spider @-@ Man cartoon and Star Trek . Adams enjoyed drawing frequently in his youth , as far back as he could remember . He discovered the work of Frank Frazetta when he was 13 or 14 , which was a " huge " early influence on him , and attempted to mimic his style using watercolor . Adams did not consider illustration as a profession , however , as he aspired to be a paleontologist . His interest in professional paleontology waned , however , when he realized that the extreme climates of the environments in which he would be required to work were not appealing to him . 
 Adams first thought about drawing comics professionally while in high school , when he bought Marvel Comics ' Micronauts # 1 , which was illustrated by Michael Golden , the first artist Adams noticed significantly . Adams would subsequently seek out work by other artists , and names as influences Barry Windsor @-@ Smith , Mike Kaluta , Bernie Wrightson and Terry Austin . Adams also cites Bill Sienkiewicz 's " Moon Knight " work in Hulk magazine and in particular Walter Simonson 's work on The Uncanny X @-@ Men and The New Teen Titans , which Adams saw as " the bible of how to draw comics " , and " the perfect example of how to do a team book . " Simonson and his wife , Louise Simonson , became close friends and collaborators with Adams , and Louise would later edit Adams ' breakthrough project , Longshot . Adams names Simonson and Golden as his two largest artistic influences . Adams also says he was influenced by Jack Kirby after he became a professional artist . In a 1997 interview , Adams responded to the observation that fans had noticed a manga influence in his work by stating that he had likely been influenced by Masamune Shirou . Aside from books on drawing human anatomy , Adams ' only formal education in illustration was learning newspaper strip @-@ type drawing in his freshman year of high school from Mr. Vandenberg , a teacher who stressed the importance of clear storytelling and perspective . After a female classmate Adams was attracted to talked him into joining the acting club , Adams also considered becoming an actor , eventually doing community theater for two years . He quit acting when he turned 19 , in order to concentrate on drawing . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early work = = = 
 Adams ' first published work was a Farrah <unk> pinup that he copied from Farrah Fawcett 's iconic 1976 swimsuit poster , which he submitted to the letters page of the DC Comics series Captain Carrot and His Amazing Zoo Crew ! That series ' editor , Roy Thomas , paid Adams $ 10 to publish the piece as a fan pinup . 
 Adams initially created a portfolio of pinups and monster splash pages , and added story sequences when he began attending comic book conventions at age 17 , including a Creation Convention in San Francisco , where he received career advice from Steve <unk> and Chris Claremont , and also met another aspiring illustrator , Mike Mignola ( with whom he became friends , and later , business partners ) . Because of the popularity of the X @-@ Men , he included a Wolverine story in his portfolio , although he was only a casual fan of the X @-@ Men himself . He would later become closely associated with the X @-@ Men in his early career . After showing his portfolio to editor Bob Schreck at a Creation Convention , he gained permission to set up a table , doing drawings for fans for $ 5 – $ 10 . His early convention appearances led to a meeting with a collaborator who asked him to illustrate some horror material for a comic book magazine , but the work , which Adams deems as poor , was never published . He began submitting samples to Marvel Comics when he was 18 , taking a job at a pizzeria after graduating high school . 
 In 1982 he was given an unpaid job illustrating " One @-@ Eyed Jack " , a story that was self @-@ published in High Energy # 1 . 
 Adams ' first professional job came about after he met Joe Rubinstein at a Creation Convention . Rubinstein took Adams ' samples to Marvel editors Dennis O 'Neil and Linda Grant , who in 1983 offered Adams the chance to write and draw " The Return of Richard <unk> " , a short story for the black and white anthology Bizarre Adventures . Though Adams completed the story , the series was canceled before his story was published , and Adams returned to submitting samples while working at the pizzeria . Adams later dismissed the story as poorly drawn . He also drew " Away Off There Amid The Softly Winking Lights " , a story in the 1984 Pacific Comics anthology Three Dimensional Alien Worlds . 
 = = = Longshot and X @-@ Men = = = 
 Al Milgrom , who was ending his career as a Marvel editor to go freelance , found Adams ' samples as he was cleaning out his office for its future occupant , editor Carl Potts . Potts and his assistant editor , Ann Nocenti , sent Adams a Defenders script , from which Adams did layouts of 10 to 15 pages . Adams stated that while his action scenes were not rendered very well , the editors praised his casual , character @-@ based scenes . Nocenti described to Adams the concept for a miniseries she was writing , Longshot , which had been turned down by every other artist she offered it to . Adams , now a couple of months before his twentieth birthday , did a series of preliminary design drawings , basing the main character 's appearance and hairstyle on that of singer Limahl , and the female lead , Ricochet Rita , on Nocenti herself . The series was freelance @-@ edited by Louise Simonson , and without a firm schedule , which provided Adams the time he needed to complete it . This was due in part to his problems with perspective and other things he was not accustomed to drawing , such as windmills , babies and people smiling , and in part because he had to redraw the first half of it , as Ann Nocenti 's story was so dense that the pages featured up to 20 panels . As a result , Adams took eight months to draw the first issue . This problem was addressed by editor Elliot Brown , who showed Adams how to compose panels depicting multiple actions . Simonson would later introduce Adams to Marvel editor @-@ in @-@ chief Jim Shooter , who furthered Adams ' understanding of storytelling clarity by sitting down with him and showing him the panel @-@ to @-@ panel structure in an old Marvel book . He would take two years to draw all six issues of the miniseries . Longshot # 1 was published with a cover date of September 1985 . Reviewing the first issue for Amazing Heroes , R.A. Jones , who criticized the writing , stating : 
 " Longshot does have one major saving grace , and that is the penciling of Arthur Adams . I 'm going to once again go out on my prophetic limb and predict that Art will soon become a fan favorite . He has a dynamic style that grabs your attention and won 't let go . To be sure , he exhibits some of the weaknesses of any young artist , the occasional awkward pose or crude <unk> as a first effort this is incredibly impressive . In fact , this limited series should be worth buying simply to watch the progress Adams makes from issue to issue . 
 Nocenti 's position as editor on the X @-@ Men books led to Uncanny X @-@ Men writer Chris Claremont 's discovery of Adams ' work , and in turn to Adams ' frequent association with that franchise during the 1980s , which began with New Mutants Special Edition # 1 and Uncanny X @-@ Men Annual # 9 , which were part of the " Asgardian Wars " storyline , and which Adams illustrated before Longshot # 1 was published . Nocenti also asked Adams to produce a cover for Heroes for Hope , a 1985 book intended to benefit famine relief in Africa , which was written and illustrated by dozens of creators , including writers Harlan Ellison and Stephen King , and artists John Byrne , Charles Vess and Bernie Wrightson . Nocenti asked Adams to pattern the cover after Paul Smith 's 1983 cover of Uncanny X @-@ Men # 173 , whose focus was Wolverine charging the viewer . This in turn led to Bob <unk> , who was in charge of producing Marvel 's posters , asking Adams to produce a Wolverine poster with the same type of pose . The image , inked by Terry Austin , became not only a bestselling poster , but an iconic life @-@ size <unk> for comics shops , and led to two other posters by Adams , a 1987 X @-@ Men poster featuring most of the characters that had ever been a member of that team , and " Mutants " , a modification of Adams ' 1988 Marvel Age Annual # 4 cover that featured most of the characters appearing in all the X @-@ Men @-@ related books at the time , also with a charging Wolverine in the center . By 1986 , Adams ' professional career had been cemented , and he moved out of his parents ' home and into an Oakland , California apartment that he shared with Mike Mignola and Steve Purcell . Adams and Nocenti reunited for a story in Web of Spider @-@ Man Annual # 2 ( 1986 ) in which Warlock of the New Mutants encountered Spider @-@ Man . 
 His work on the X @-@ Men franchise would continue with a number of covers for The New Mutants and The Uncanny X @-@ Men in 1986 and 1987 , respectively . He also drew all but three of the first 23 covers and interior <unk> to Classic X @-@ Men from 1986 to 1988 . His interior X @-@ Men @-@ related work included a two @-@ issue run on X @-@ Factor and the one @-@ shot Excalibur : Mojo Mayhem , both in 1989 , and three Uncanny X @-@ Men Annuals , in 1986 , 1988 and 1990 . It was in drawing the 1988 annual that Adams says he felt like a professional comic book artist for the first time , as he first felt confident that he knew what he was doing . 
 = = = Diversification and experimentation = = = 
 Adams did work for publishers other than Marvel during the 1980s , as when he drew several pages of Batman # 400 in 1986 and Action Comics Annual # 1 in 1987 . The latter is viewed as a turning point in Adam 's drawing style , characterized by bulkier figures of Batman and Superman , though Adams explains that this was in part due to the influence of The Dark Knight Returns , and that the overall change in art was style partly due to deliberate experimentation on his part , and partly to Dick Giordano 's inking , which exhibited a different line weight . That same year , he illustrated Gumby Summer Fun Special # 1 by Comico Comics , a job he obtained through Comico editor Diana Schutz , an old friend who noticed the incidental images of Gumby that Adams had included in the pages of Longshot . Adams , who did not harbor fond memories of that cartoon as a child , and who feared he would be typecast as a Gumby artist if he took the job , told Schultz he would only do it if she could get Bob Burden to write it , on the assumption that Schultz would decline this condition . Schultz , who initially wanted Mark Evanier for the job , considered this , and eventually agreed to it after contacting Burden , who was enthusiastic about the idea . That book , which demonstrated Adams ' versatility in handling comedy as well as superheroics , garnered him and Burden a 1988 Eisner Award for Best Single Issue . Adams would later illustrate a second Gumby book , Gumby 's Winter Fun Special , which was written by Steve Purcell . 
 Adams was one of 54 artists profiled in Ron Goulart 's 1989 book , The Great Comic Book Artists , Volume 2 , whose front and back covers Adams himself illustrated . 
 = = = 1990s monster and creator @-@ owned work = = = 
 Adams ' 1990s Marvel work included a 1990 three @-@ issue run on Fantastic Four , in which the Hulk , Spider @-@ Man , Wolverine and Ghost Rider formed a replacement Fantastic Four after being falsely informed that three of the original Fantastic Four had been murdered . The story allowed Adams the opportunity to draw a number of various monsters and other characters , such as the classic FF foe , Mole Man , the <unk> and the <unk> , and is cited by Adams as one of his favorite works . It was later referenced by late night talk show host Conan O 'Brien in a " Fan Corrections " segment in a 2012 episode of Conan . Adams did more work for the X @-@ Men franchise , such as the 1997 intercompany crossover one @-@ shot Gen ¹ ³ / Generation X. His 1990s Marvel work also included providing designs for a line of Hulk action figures . 
 Adams became acquainted with Randy Stradley and other staff members of Dark Horse Comics , after which he illustrated a number of their books featuring the classic Universal Monsters he loved in his youth . His first Godzilla work was Godzilla Color Special # 1 in 1992 . For that story Adams created an organization called G @-@ Force , which he designed to be a Japanese version of the Fantastic Four , and in the story , had that group mention that they had fought the Shrewmanoid , a villain Adams later created for Monkeyman & O 'Brien . Toho , the production company that produces the Godzilla films , would later introduce a version of that team in the 1993 film Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II . A book on the making of that film features a cover illustration of Godzilla that was copied from the Color Special , which amused Adams . Adams would follow these with other Godzilla works , such as " King Kong vs. Godzilla " , a story that appeared in the anthology Urban Legends # 1 that is notable for being the only work of his to date that he wrote , penciled , inked and lettered , and " <unk> ' Tokyo " , an Alan Moore story he drew for Negative Burn # 18 ( December 1994 ) . In 1995 he drew Godzilla vs. Hero Zero , and wrote issues 5 - 8 of Target : Godzilla ! When Adams learned that Dark Horse would acquire the rights to the Universal Monsters , Adams lobbied to them to illustrate a comics sequel to the 1954 film Creature from the Black Lagoon , but Dark Horse wanted to produce an adaptation of the film first , and told Adams that if he illustrated that , that he would be able to illustrate a future sequel . The 50 @-@ page adaptation was published in 1993 , but the line 's low sales cost Dark Horse money , and it was cancelled after four books , precluding the sequel that Adams wanted to draw . 
 In the early 1990s , Adams and Mignola were contacted by Erik Larsen , who invited them to produce books of their own creation for Image Comics , which Larsen and a group of other artists formed to publish creator @-@ owned books . Adams had never before considered producing his own original material , as he preferred to illustrate the properties he enjoyed as a child . However , his talks with Larsen convinced him to create Monkeyman and O 'Brien , a duo similar in concept to Angel and the Ape . The stories star San Francisco native Ann Darrow O 'Brien , whose name is a tribute to Fay Wray 's character from King Kong and that film 's special effects creator Willis O 'Brien , and <unk> Tiberius , a super @-@ intelligent gorilla man from another dimension . The duo finds itself embroiled in a variety of adventures typical of classic B @-@ movies , often featuring the type of movie monsters Adams is fond of , such as the subterranean Shrewmanoid and the extraterrestrial <unk> . Despite the offer from Image , Adams and Mignola ( the latter of whom created Hellboy , which had been rejected by DC Comics ) , took their ideas to Dark Horse , for whom Adams had already done work , as it would allow them to collaborate with creators they admired , such as Frank Miller and John Byrne . Together with Paul Chadwick , Mike Allred , Dave Gibbons , and Geof Darrow , the creators formed Legend , a creator @-@ owned imprint of Dark Horse . After an initial 1993 appearance in San Diego Comic Con Comics # 2 , Monkeyman and O 'Brien appeared in installments in Dark Horse Presents # 80 in 1993 and Dark Horse Insider # 27 in 1994 . The duo 's first appearance under the Legend imprint was an ongoing backup story in Mike Mignola 's 1994 Hellboy : Seed of Destruction miniseries . They would eventually graduate to their own self @-@ titled miniseries in 1996 . When first producing the series , Adams had on hand the Marvel <unk> reprint of the Atlas Comics monster stories " Where Monsters Dwell " and " Creatures on the Loose " for inspiration . Although the Legend imprint ceased in 1998 , Monkeyman and O 'Brien continued to appear in print , sometimes in crossover stories with other comics characters , as in Savage Dragon # 41 ( September 1997 ) by Erik Larsen , and Gen ¹ ³ / <unk> and O 'Brien ( 1998 ) , both published by Image Comics , the latter of which Adams wrote and drew for Wildstorm Productions . 
 In 1996 Dark Horse Comics published Art Adams ' Creature Features , a collection of Adams ' previously published stories that paid tribute to various B @-@ movie monsters , some of which had originally been published in black and white , but which were colored for the collection . They included Adams ' Creature from the Black Lagoon , two of his Godzilla stories , and the " Trapped In The Lair of the Shrewmanoid " story from Dark Horse Insider # 27 . The collection featured an introduction by Geoff Darrow . 
 = = = 1999 – present = = = 
 In 1999 , Adams returned to Wildstorm to draw an eight @-@ page flashback sequence in issue # 4 of Alan Moore 's series , Tom Strong , which was published under Moore 's brand for Wildstorm , America 's Best Comics . His subsequent Wildstorm work would include Danger Girl Special # 1 ( 2000 ) and two issues of The Authority in 2002 , significant portions of which Adams was asked by DC Comics to redraw in order to de @-@ emphasize the violence , in light of the September 11 attacks , much to Adams ' frustration . That same year , Adams and writer Steve Moore co @-@ created " Jonni Future " , a pastiche of a pulp science fiction series such as Adam Strange and Barbarella , which was published in eight @-@ page installments in the America 's Best Comics anthology Tom Strong 's Terrific Tales , the first ten issues of which Adams penciled from 2002 to 2004 . Adams work on " Jonni Future " has been characterized as exhibiting a romantic influence , with greater amounts realism and fine hatching , which Adams refers to as " noodling " . Adams says he was inspired by sources such as Paolo <unk> <unk> , Warren Publishing 's Vampirella , and the character designs in Capcom video game character books when he drew " Jonni Future " , and refrained from using straight edges or templates in order to achieve a more elegant , hand @-@ drawn appearance . He regards " Jonni Future " as his best work . 
 Throughout the 2000s , Adams provided cover images for various DC Comics , such as Superman , Batman and JLA : Scary Monsters , as well as for books by various other publishers , such as Vampirella , Red Sonja , Jurassic Park , Madman Adventures , Thundercats , Xena : Warrior Princess and Buffy the Vampire Slayer . Adams ' 2000s Marvel cover work include Generation X # 67 - 72 in 2000 and 2001 , and Incredible Hercules # 113 - 115 in 2008 , as well for three of its collected editions . His 2000s interior comics work includes Superman / Batman # 26 ( 2006 ) , an issue dedicated to writer Jeph Loeb 's late son , Sam , to which dozens of writers and artists contributed . In 2008 he illustrated a Red Hulk story in King @-@ Size Hulk # 1 , and later illustrated a Hulk / Wendigo story that appeared in 11 @-@ page installments Hulk # 7 - 9 , as well as those issues ' covers . In 2010 he illustrated Ultimate X # 1 @-@ 5 , his first work for the Ultimate Marvel line of comic books . 
 On November 30 , 2011 , Gumby Comics / Wildcard Ink published a single volume collecting Adams ' previous two specials featuring Gumby . The book was initially called Gumby 's Arthur Adams Specials , but was eventually published with a sticker covering Adams ' name on the cover , effectively renaming the book Gumby 's Spring Specials . According to Rich Johnston of Bleeding Cool , this was done on Adams ' request , who wanted nothing to do with the publisher , and took action to keep his name off the book 's cover . The book is nonetheless sold by merchants such as Mile High Comics under its originally intended name . 
 Outside the field of comics , Adams has also provided illustrations for various magazines , such as PlayStation Magazine , as well as toy designs , video games , and X @-@ Men @-@ themed cans of Chef Boyardee pasta . In 2016 he provided the illustration for a satirical piece in GQ magazine that imagined a number of controversial public figures as comic book supervillains , including Donald Trump , Vladimir Putin , Sepp Blatter , Martin Shkreli and Kris Jenner . 
 Though his work for Marvel takes priority for him , he also makes a significant amount of his income from private commissions , which he produces when time permits . 
 = = Technique and materials = = 
 Adams ' art style is noted for its high level of detail , and he has a reputation of being a " tight " penciller . He states that he works at a slow pace , which limits the amount of work he does . When he penciled Fantastic Four # 347 - 349 in 1990 for regular writer / illustrator Walter Simonson , who needed a break in order to catch up on his own work on that title , Adams managed to pencil the first two issues in five weeks and four weeks , respectively , but was considerably late on the third . In 1997 Adams stated that he could produce a page of either pencils or inks in a day . In a 2007 interview , he stated he tends to produce 2 / 3 to 3 / 4 of a page a day , and can also ink at that rate , but can do up to two pages in a day if he is under pressure , as when he produced Cloak and Dagger # 9 ( 1986 ) in 22 days , for example . Another example is the 1989 one @-@ shot Excalibur : Mojo Mayhem , which due to changing deadlines , he completed at a quicker pace . Adams singles out one page of that book that he drew a half @-@ hour as his personal record for speed , but decries its poor quality . Adams is also noted for the humor in his work , as with , for example , the extraneous characters he places in cameo appearances in the backgrounds of his comics , as when he drew Gumby in the panels of Longshot , or the forms in which he depicted the shapeshifting alien Warlock in his The New Mutants work . 
 Adams prefers to work from a plot rather than from a full script , a result of Ann Nocenti 's dense Longshot scripts , though he has worked from a full script , as with his work on Three Dimensional Alien Worlds for Pacific Comics and The Authority . Though he says he prefers group books because they more easily allow him to hide his " bad layout skills " , he is nonetheless comfortable with solo character books . He begins drawing thumbnail layouts from the story he is given , either at home or in a public place . The thumbnails range in size from 2 inches x 3 inches to half the size of the printed comic book . He or an assistant will then enlarge the thumbnails and trace them onto illustration board with a non @-@ photo blue pencil , sometimes using a <unk> light blue pencil , because it is not too waxy , and erases easily . When working on the final illustration board , he does so on a large drawing board when in his basement studio , and a <unk> when sitting on his living room couch . After tracing the thumbnails , he will then clarify details with another light blue pencil , and finalize the details with a Number 2 pencil . He drew the first three chapters of " Jonni Future " at twice the printed comic size , and also drew the fifth chapter , " The Garden of the <unk> " , at a size larger than standard , in order to render more detail than usual in those stories . For a large poster image with a multitude of characters , he will go over the figure outlines with a marker in order to emphasize them . He will use photographic reference when appropriate , as when he draws things that he is not accustomed to . 
 In the early part of his career , Adams ' pencils were embellished by inkers such as Whilce Portacio , Dick Giordano and Terry Austin . When Adams attempted to ink his own work before becoming a professional , he initially used a <unk> pen , but after meeting Mike Mignola , he was spurred to switch to a brush , which he used for approximately a year before returning to a <unk> . He eventually began to ink his own work , which he prefers to do . Beginning in the late 1990s , he began using the <unk> Pigment Liner , a felt @-@ tip pen . He prefers pens to brushes because pens feel " looser " , and cited this as his reason for using felt @-@ tip pens when he inked " Jonni Future " . 
 Although Adams has experimented with painting with watercolor and oil paints ( his 1989 covers for Appleseed were rendered with a combination of ink , watercolor and color pencil ) , his color work is so sporadic that he says he has to relearn what he has forgotten in the interim each time , and is usually dissatisfied with the results . Because a significant portion of his income is derived from selling his original artwork , he is reluctant to learn how to produce his work digitally . 
 = = Influence = = 
 Adams is one of the most popular and widely imitated artists in the American comics industry . Adams ' style is attributed as a direct influence on the artists who would go on to found Image Comics , and the other popular artists of the 1990s associated with that era , such a Jim Lee and Rob Liefeld . Timothy Callahan of Comic Book Resources points to the use of dynamic action poses , idealized figures , costume designs featuring numerous accessories , a preference for copious <unk> over brushwork in rendering , and the depiction of cybernetic limbs and other reflective surfaces seen in those artists ' styles as being derived from Adams work , in particular his run on Longshot . Callahan also points out that the detailed webbing for which Todd McFarlane became known during his run on Spider @-@ Man had previously been used by Adams on the cover of Longshot # 4 . Though Callahan notes that Adams did not necessarily originate these elements , but was influenced himself by Michael Golden and Micronauts , he states that Adams popularized them . Noting also that Adams ' Longshot pencils were inked by Whilce Portacio and an uncredited Scott Williams , Callahan refers to that book as " early Image , in primal form " . Artists who have named Adams as an influence include J. Scott Campbell , Aaron <unk> and Shelby Robertson . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Adams is married to Joyce Chin , a comics artist who has inked a number of his cover pencils . Adams has also inked Chin 's pencils , as on Xena : Warrior Princess # 4 ( January 2000 ) . As of 1997 they lived in Portland , Oregon , but as of 2001 they and their children live in San Francisco , California . Regarding religion , Adams has stated that he does not believe in " any particular god " . His favorite Godzilla film is Godzilla vs. The Thing , and his other favorites include <unk> , the Three @-@ Headed Monster and Monster Zero . 
 = = Awards = = 
 1986 Russ Manning Most Promising Newcomer Award 
 1988 Eisner Award for Best Single Issue ( with Bob Burden for Gumby Summer Fun Special # 1 ) 
 = = = Interior work = = = 
 Three Dimensional Alien Worlds : " Away Off There Amid the Softly Winking Lights " ( with Bruce Jones , one @-@ shot , Pacific Comics , 1984 ) 
 Longshot # 1 @-@ 6 ( with Ann Nocenti , Marvel , 1985 ) 
 New Mutants Special Edition # 1 : " Home is Where the Heart is " ( with Chris Claremont , Marvel , 1985 ) 
 Uncanny X @-@ Men Annual # 9 @-@ 10 , 12 , 14 ( with Chris Claremont , Marvel , 1985 – 1990 ) 
 Batman # 400 : " Resurrection Night ! " ( with Doug <unk> , among other artists , DC Comics , 1986 ) 
 Cloak and Dagger # 9 : " The Lady and the Unicorn " ( with Bill <unk> , Marvel , 1986 ) 
 Web of Spider @-@ Man Annual # 2 : " Wake Me Up I Gotta Be Dreaming " ( with Ann Nocenti , Marvel , 1986 ) 
 Action Comics Annual # 1 : " Skeeter " ( with John Byrne , DC Comics , 1987 ) 
 Gumby 's Summer Fun Special : " Summer Fun Adventure " ( with Bob Burden , one @-@ shot , Comico , 1987 ) 
 Gumby 's Winter Fun Special : " Winter Fun Adventure " ( with Steve Purcell , one @-@ shot , Comico , 1988 ) 
 Wonder Woman Annual # 1 : " Chapter 1 : The Diving Bird " ( with George Pérez , DC Comics , 1988 ) 
 X @-@ Factor # 41 @-@ 42 ( with Louise Simonson , Marvel , 1989 ) 
 Excalibur : Mojo Mayhem ( with Chris Claremont , one @-@ shot , Marvel , 1989 ) 
 Fantastic Four # 347 @-@ 349 ( with Walter Simonson , Marvel , 1990 – 1991 ) 
 Marvel Holiday Special # 1 ( Marvel , 1991 ) 
 Armageddon : Inferno # 1 , 3 @-@ 4 ( with John Ostrander , DC Comics , 1992 ) 
 Godzilla Color Special : " Godzilla : King of the Monsters " ( with Randy Stradley , one @-@ shot , Dark Horse , 1992 ) 
 Creepy 1993 Fearbook : " Bugs " ( with Kurt Busiek , Harris Comics , 1993 ) 
 Urban Legends : " King Kong vs. Godzilla " ( one @-@ shot , Dark Horse , 1993 ) 
 Universal Monsters : Creature from the Black Lagoon ( with Steve Moncuse , one @-@ shot , Dark Horse , 1993 ) 
 Monkeyman and O 'Brien ( Dark Horse , 1993 – 1999 ) : 
 Dark Horse Presents # 80 , 100 , 118 @-@ 119 ( 1993 – 1997 ) 
 Hellboy : Seed of Destruction # 1 @-@ 4 ( co @-@ feature , 1994 ) 
 Monkeyman and O 'Brien # 1 @-@ 3 ( 1996 ) 
 Dark Horse Extra # 1 @-@ 7 ( 1998 – 1999 ) 
 The Big Book of Urban Legends : " The Spider in the <unk> " ( with Robert Boyd , Jan Harold <unk> and Robert Loren Fleming , Paradox Press , 1994 ) 
 Negative Burn # 18 : " Alan Moore 's Songbook : Trampling Tokyo " ( with Alan Moore , Caliber Press , 1994 ) 
 Asylum # 1 : " <unk> " ( with Eric Stephenson , Extreme Comics , 1995 ) 
 Aliens : Havoc # 1 ( with Mark Schultz , among other artists , Dark Horse , 1997 ) 
 Gen ¹ ³ ( Wildstorm , 1997 – 1998 ) : 
 Gen ¹ ³ / Generation X : " Generation Gap " ( with Brandon Choi , one @-@ shot , 1997 ) 
 Gen ¹ ³ 3D Special : " <unk> " ( one @-@ shot , 1997 ) 
 Gen ¹ ³ / Monkeyman and O 'Brien # 1 @-@ 2 ( 1998 ) 
 Gen ¹ ³ # 34 : " I Want My <unk> ! ! " ( with John <unk> , 1998 ) 
 Starship Troopers # 1 @-@ 2 ( with Bruce Jones and Mitch Byrd , Dark Horse , 1997 ) 
 Legends of the DC Universe 80 @-@ Page Giant # 2 : " The Great Unknown ! " ( with Karl Kesel , DC Comics , 1998 ) 
 Danger Girl Special : " Delusions of Grandeur " ( with J. Scott Campbell and Andy Hartnell , Cliffhanger , 2000 ) 
 Superman # 165 : " Help ! " ( with Jeph Loeb , DC Comics , 2001 ) 
 Orion # 10 , 12 : " Legends of Apokolips " ( with Walter Simonson , DC Comics , 2001 ) 
 The Authority # 27 @-@ 28 : " Brave New World , Parts Two and Three " ( with Mark Millar and Grant Morrison ( uncredited ) , Wildstorm , 2002 ) 
 Tom Strong 's Terrific Tales # 1 @-@ 4 , 6 @-@ 10 : " Jonni Future " ( with Steve Moore , America 's Best Comics , 2002 – 2004 ) 
 The Many Worlds of Tesla Strong ( with Alan Moore and Peter K. Hogan , among other artists , one @-@ shot , Wildstorm , 2003 ) 
 Action Comics Annual # 10 : " The Many Deaths of Superman " ( DC Comics , 2007 ) 
 Countdown to Final Crisis # 14 : " The Origin of Gorilla Grodd " ( with Scott Beatty , co @-@ feature , DC Comics , 2008 ) 
 King @-@ Size Hulk : " Where Monsters Dwell " ( with Jeph Loeb , Marvel , 2008 ) 
 Hulk # 7 @-@ 9 ( with Jeph Loeb , Marvel , 2008 ) 
 Ultimate Comics : X # 1 @-@ 5 ( with Jeph Loeb , Marvel , 2010 – 2011 ) 
 <unk> : VS # 6 ( with Jeph Loeb , Marvel , 2012 , pg 18 ) 
 All @-@ New X @-@ Men # 25 ( Marvel , 2014 ) 
 = = = Cover work = = = 
 Marvel Fanfare # 13 ( Marvel Comics , 1984 ) 
 Marvel Team @-@ Up # 141 ( Marvel , 1984 ) 
 Micronauts : The New Voyages # 2 ( Marvel , 1984 ) 
 The Defenders # 142 ( Marvel , 1985 ) 
 The New Mutants # 38 @-@ 39 ( Marvel , 1986 ) 
 Firestar # 3 ( Marvel , 1986 ) 
 Classic X @-@ Men # 1 @-@ 23 ( Marvel , 1986 – 1988 ) 
 Daredevil # 238 @-@ 239 ( Marvel , 1987 ) 
 Uncanny X @-@ Men # 214 , 218 ( Marvel , 1987 ) 
 The Spectre Annual # 1 ( DC Comics , 1988 ) 
 Marvel Age Annual # 4 ( Marvel , 1988 ) 
 The Last of the Viking Heroes # 7 ( Genesis West Comics ] , 1989 ) 
 Tommy and the Monsters # 1 ( New Comics Group , 1989 ) 
 Appleseed Book Two # 1 @-@ 5 ( Eclipse Comics , 1989 ) 
 The Impossible Man Summer Vacation Spectacular ( Marvel , 1990 ) 
 Marvel Super @-@ Heroes # 6 ( 1991 ) 
 Conan the Barbarian # 247 @-@ 249 ( Marvel , 1991 ) 
 Animal Confidential ] ' ( Dark Horse Comics , 1992 ) 
 Vampirella : Summer Nights # 1 ( Harris Comics , 1992 ) 
 Marvel Holiday Special ' 92 ( Marvel , 1993 ) 
 Showcase ' 93 # 1 ( DC Comics , 1993 ) 
 Superman : Legacy of Superman # 1 ( DC Comics , 1993 ) 
 Dark Horse Comics # 11 ( Dark Horse , 1993 ) 
 Comics ' Greatest World : Vortex # 2 ( Comics ' Greatest World , 1993 ) 
 Out of the Vortex # 7 ( Dark Horse , 1994 ) 
 Classic Star Wars : A New Hope # 1 ( Dark Horse , 1994 ) 
 Division 13 # 1 ( Comics ' Greatest World , 1994 ) 
 Medal of Honor # 2 ( Dark Horse , 1994 ) 
 Gen ¹ ³ # 1 ( Wildstorm , 1995 ) 
 New Men # 12 ( Extreme Studios , 1995 ) 
 Godzilla # 1 @-@ 7 ( Dark Horse , 1995 ) 
 <unk> # 3 ( Maximum Press , 1995 ) 
 <unk> Annual # 1 ( Image , 1995 ) 
 Godzilla vs. Hero Zero # 1 ( Dark Horse , 1995 ) 
 Leonard Nimoy 's <unk> : Origins # 1 @-@ 2 ( Tekno Comix , 1995 ) 
 Oblivion # 1 ( Comico , 1995 ) 
