 = = = International = = = 
 = Pulling Strings ( White Collar ) = 
 " Pulling Strings " is the 14th episode of the third season of the American comedy @-@ drama television series White Collar , and the 44th episode overall . It was first broadcast on USA Network in the United States on February 7 , 2012 . The episode was directed by Anton Cropper and written by Channing Powell . 
 In the episode , Peter Burke ( Tim DeKay ) assigns Neal Caffrey ( Matt Bomer ) to work with his former girlfriend , Sara Ellis ( Hilarie Burton ) , to track down a missing Stradivarius violin . Meanwhile , Peter must deal with the arrival of Elizabeth 's ( Tiffani Thiessen ) parents ( Tom Skerritt and Debra Monk ) , who are in New York for their daughter 's birthday . 
 According to the Nielsen ratings system , an estimated 2 @.@ 469 million household viewers watched the original broadcast of the episode , with 0 @.@ 8 million in the 18 – 49 demographic . " Pulling Strings " received mostly mixed to positive reviews from critics , with many praising individual elements of the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After taking vacation from work to be with his wife – and her parents – on her birthday , Peter turns Neal over to Sara in order to retrieve a missing Stradivarius that she believes was stolen by her former fiancé and current boss , Bryan McKenzie ( Bailey Chase ) . Before beginning work on the case , Neal is approached by Agent Kramer ( Beau Bridges ) , who is in New York to look into Neal ’ s upcoming commutation hearing . Searching McKenzie ’ s apartment , Neal discovers a hidden security tape . Meanwhile , Sara convinces him to attend the symphony with her . With help from June ( Diahann Carroll ) , Neal and Diana Berrigan ( Marsha Thomason ) are able to go to the symphony as well . While they quickly discover that the second @-@ chair violinist is the woman on the security video , McKenzie realizes that Neal is not exactly who he claims to be . While searching backstage , Neal and Diana find a body ; they quickly recognize him as the symphony ’ s instrument expert . Upon questioning the violinist from the security tape , Diana discovers that she had damaged the violin and had given it to the instrument expert for repairs . Sara approaches McKenzie with the information she has , pretending to want to join him . Diana and Neal soon arrive to arrest McKenzie , and Sara tells Neal to “ call [ her ] sometime . ” 
 Meanwhile , Peter suffers through the arrival of his in @-@ laws . Everything goes wrong at Elizabeth ’ s birthday : her parents give her a much @-@ despised doll from her childhood , Peter ’ s gift to Elizabeth does not turn out the way he had planned , and Elizabeth ’ s father continues to disapprove of Peter . Peter eventually calls upon Mozzie ( Willie Garson ) for assistance , and together they right all of the wrongs . 
 Agent Kramer returns to the FBI to speak with Diana , who has recently announced her engagement to Christie . Kramer intimidates Diana , learning that she , Peter , and Jones ( Sharif Atkins ) have been covering up Neal ’ s recent crimes . 
 = = Production = = 
 On June 20 , 2011 , it was announced that Beau Bridges had been cast as Peter 's mentor ; his first appearance was in " Countdown " , and he returned for " Pulling Strings " . The next month , the casting of Tom Skerritt was announced ; he was reported to play Alan Mitchell , the father of Elizabeth Burke . Bailey Chase 's casting as Bryan McKenzie , a Sterling @-@ Bosch vice president , was announced simultaneously . Debra Monk 's appearance in the series was confirmed simultaneously with the announcement of the fourth season renewal ; while it was not stated which episode she would appear in , it was revealed that she would appear in one of the season 's last six episodes . With this announcement also came news that Diahann Carroll would return to the series in her recurring role as June . " Pulling Strings " was directed by Anton Cropper , his first directing credit for the series . The episode was written by Channing Powell ; it was his fifth writing contribution . Powell has stated that Peter 's reduced role in the episode was due to actor Tim DeKay 's preparation for directing the next episode . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 Upon its premiere , " Pulling Strings " drew 2 @.@ 469 million viewers , which , at the time , was the lowest of the series . The episode drew 0 @.@ 8 million viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic , which was down 0 @.@ 3 and 0 @.@ 2 million from the previous two episodes , " Upper West Side Story " and " Neighborhood Watch " , respectively . The episode ranked 28th in the 18 – 49 demographic for the night , down seventeen places from the previous week . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Pulling Strings " received mostly mixed to positive reviews , with many critics praising Tom Skerritt 's performance , but with many criticizing the use of Hilarie Burton 's character . Kenny Herzog of The A.V. Club gave the episode a B + rating , praising Channing Powell 's writing in a mostly standalone episode . While he complimented Bomer and Garson 's rapport and Garson 's scenes at the Burke home , he stated that Burton 's character " continues to feel just off . " He went on to say that the episode is " once again an example of ... just how good they 've gotten at making White Collar tick . " Hilary Rothing of CraveOnline wrote that she enjoyed the performances of Bridges and Skerritt and that the Burkes ' storyline was " fun " but " still schmaltzy . " She also praised the episode 's use of Burton 's character . Rothing later complimented both the episodic case and Bridges 's story arc ; she ultimately gave the episode a rating of 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 . C. Charles of TV Fanatic called the episode " intriguing " and praised many aspects of " Pulling Strings " , including Bridges and Burton 's reintroductions and the use of Elizabeth 's parents ; Charles rated the episode 4 @.@ 8 out of 5 . Reviewer Gregg Wright gave the episode an 8 out of 10 , elaborating that while the episode " could have easily been an average or sub @-@ par procedural , " it became above @-@ average when all of the elements were combined . He also complimented Carroll 's appearance and Bridges 's performance as a strong antagonist . 
 Brittany Frederick of Starpulse.com gave the episode a more mediocre review , calling it " lackluster " and mentioning that she has " never felt Hilarie Burton 's chemistry with Matt Bomer . " She did , however , praise the heightened roles of Thomason and Atkins and the introduction of Elizabeth 's parents . 
 = Colorado River = 
 The Colorado River is one of the principal rivers of the Southwestern United States and northern Mexico ( the other being the Rio Grande ) . The 1 @,@ 450 @-@ mile ( 2 @,@ 330 km ) Colorado River drains an expansive , arid watershed that encompasses parts of seven U.S. and two Mexican states . Starting in the central Rocky Mountains in the U.S. , the river flows generally southwest across the Colorado Plateau and through the Grand Canyon before reaching Lake Mead on the Arizona – Nevada border , where it turns south toward the international border . After entering Mexico , the Colorado approaches the large Colorado River Delta at the tip of the Gulf of California between Baja California and Sonora . 
 Known for its dramatic canyons and whitewater rapids , the Colorado is a vital source of water for agricultural and urban areas in much of the southwestern desert lands of North America . The river and its tributaries are controlled by an extensive system of dams , reservoirs , and aqueducts , which in most years divert its entire flow to furnish irrigation and municipal water supply for almost 40 million people both inside and outside the watershed . The Colorado 's large flow and steep gradient are used for generating hydroelectric power , and its major dams regulate peaking power demands in much of the Intermountain West . This intensive consumption has dried up the lower 100 miles ( 160 km ) of the river , such that it has reached the sea only a few times since the 1960s . 
 Beginning with small bands of nomadic hunter @-@ gatherers , Native Americans have inhabited the Colorado River basin for at least 8 @,@ 000 years . Between 2 @,@ 000 and 1 @,@ 000 years ago , the river and its tributaries fostered large agricultural civilizations , which may have been some of the most sophisticated indigenous cultures in North America . These societies are believed to have collapsed because of a combination of severe drought and poor land use practices . Most native peoples that inhabit the basin today are descended from other groups that settled in the region beginning about 1 @,@ 000 years ago . Europeans first entered the Colorado Basin in the 16th century , when explorers from Spain began mapping and claiming the area , which later became part of Mexico upon its independence in 1821 . Early contact between foreigners and natives was generally limited to the fur trade in the headwaters and sporadic trade interactions along the lower river . 
 After the greater Colorado River basin became part of the U.S. in 1846 , the bulk of the river 's course was still largely the subject of myths and speculation . Several expeditions charted the Colorado in the mid @-@ 19th century , one of which , led by John Wesley Powell in 1869 , was the first to run the rapids of the Grand Canyon . American explorers collected valuable information that would later be used to develop the river for navigation and water supply . Large @-@ scale settlement of the lower basin began in the mid- to late @-@ 19th century , with steamboats providing transportation from the Gulf of California to landings along the Colorado River that linked to wagon roads into the interior of New Mexico Territory . Lesser numbers settled in the upper basin , which was the scene of major gold strikes in the 1860s and 1870s . 
 Major engineering of the river basin began around the start of the 20th century , with many guidelines established in a series of domestic and international treaties known as the " Law of the River " . The U.S. federal government was the main driving force behind the construction of hydraulic engineering projects in the river system , although many state and local water agencies were also involved . Most of the major dams in the river basin were built between 1910 and 1970 , and the system keystone , Hoover Dam , was completed in 1935 . The Colorado is now considered among the most controlled and litigated rivers in the world , with every drop of its water fully allocated . 
 The damming and diversion of the Colorado River system have been opposed by the environmental movement in the American Southwest because of the detrimental effect on the ecology and natural beauty of the river and its tributaries . During the construction of Glen Canyon Dam , environmental organizations vowed to block any further development of the river , and a number of later dam and aqueduct proposals were defeated by citizen opposition . As demands for Colorado River water continue to rise , the level of human development and control of the river continues to generate controversy . 
 = = Course = = 
 The Colorado begins at La Poudre Pass in the Southern Rocky Mountains of Colorado , at just under 2 miles ( 3 km ) above sea level . After a short run south , the river turns west below Grand Lake , the largest natural lake in the state . For the first 250 miles ( 400 km ) of its course , the Colorado carves its way through the mountainous Western Slope , a sparsely populated region defined by the portion of the state west of the Continental Divide . As it flows southwest , it gains strength from many small tributaries , as well as larger ones including the Blue , Eagle and Roaring Fork rivers . After passing through De <unk> Canyon , the Colorado emerges from the Rockies into the Grand Valley , a major farming and ranching region where it meets one of its largest tributaries , the Gunnison River , at Grand Junction . Most of the upper river is a swift whitewater stream ranging from 200 to 500 feet ( 60 to 150 m ) wide , the depth ranging from 6 to 30 feet ( 2 to 9 m ) , with a few notable exceptions , such as the <unk> reach where the river is nearly 100 feet ( 30 m ) deep . In a few areas , such as the marshy <unk> Valley near the headwaters and the Grand Valley , it exhibits braided characteristics . 
 <unk> northwest , the Colorado begins to cut across the eponymous Colorado Plateau , a vast area of high desert centered at the Four Corners of the southwestern United States . Here , the climate becomes significantly drier than that in the Rocky Mountains , and the river becomes entrenched in progressively deeper gorges of bare rock , beginning with Ruby Canyon and then Westwater Canyon as it enters Utah , now once again heading southwest . Farther downstream it receives the Dolores River and defines the southern border of Arches National Park , before passing Moab and flowing through " The Portal " , where it exits the Moab Valley between a pair of 1 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 300 m ) sandstone cliffs . 
 In Utah , the Colorado flows primarily through the " <unk> " country , which is characterized by its narrow canyons and unique " folds " created by the tilting of sedimentary rock layers along faults . This is one of the most inaccessible regions of the continental United States . Below the confluence with the Green River , its largest tributary , in Canyonlands National Park , the Colorado enters Cataract Canyon , named for its dangerous rapids , and then Glen Canyon , known for its arches and erosion @-@ sculpted Navajo sandstone formations . Here , the San Juan River , carrying runoff from the southern slope of Colorado 's San Juan Mountains , joins the Colorado from the east . The Colorado then enters northern Arizona , where since the 1960s Glen Canyon Dam near Page has flooded the Glen Canyon reach of the river , forming Lake Powell for water supply and hydroelectricity generation . 
 In Arizona , the river passes Lee 's Ferry , an important crossing for early explorers and settlers and since the early 20th century the principal point where Colorado River flows are measured for apportionment to the seven U.S. and two Mexican states in the basin . Downstream , the river enters Marble Canyon , the beginning of the Grand Canyon , passing under the Navajo Bridges on a now southward course . Below the confluence with the Little Colorado River , the river swings west into Granite Gorge , the most dramatic portion of the Grand Canyon , where the river cuts up to one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) into the Colorado Plateau , exposing some of the oldest visible rocks on Earth , dating as long ago as 2 billion years . The 277 miles ( 446 km ) of the river that flow through the Grand Canyon are largely encompassed by Grand Canyon National Park and are known for their difficult whitewater , separated by pools that reach up to 110 feet ( 34 m ) in depth . 
 At the lower end of Grand Canyon , the Colorado widens into Lake Mead , the largest reservoir in the continental United States , formed by Hoover Dam on the border of Arizona and Nevada . Situated southeast of metropolitan Las Vegas , the dam is an integral component for management of the Colorado River , controlling floods and storing water for farms and cities in the lower Colorado River basin . Below the dam the river passes under the Mike O 'Callaghan – Pat Tillman Memorial Bridge – which at nearly 900 feet ( 270 m ) above the water is the highest concrete arch bridge in the Western Hemisphere – and then turns due south towards Mexico , defining the Arizona – Nevada and Arizona – California borders . 
 After leaving the confines of the Black Canyon , the river emerges from the Colorado Plateau into the Lower Colorado River Valley ( <unk> ) , a desert region dependent on irrigation agriculture and tourism and also home to several major Indian reservations . The river widens here to a broad , moderately deep waterway averaging 500 to 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 150 to 300 m ) wide and reaching up to 1 ⁄ 4 mile ( 400 m ) across , with depths ranging from 8 to 60 feet ( 2 to 20 m ) . Before channelization of the Colorado in the 20th century , the lower river was subject to frequent course changes caused by seasonal flow variations . Joseph C. Ives , who surveyed the lower river in 1861 , wrote that " the shifting of the channel , the banks , the islands , the bars is so continual and rapid that a detailed description , derived from the experiences of one trip , would be found incorrect , not only during the subsequent year , but perhaps in the course of a week , or even a day . " 
 The <unk> is one of the most densely populated areas along the river , and there are numerous towns including Bullhead City , Arizona , Needles , California , and Lake Havasu City , Arizona . Here , many diversions draw from the river , providing water for both local uses and distant regions including the Salt River Valley of Arizona and metropolitan Southern California . The last major U.S. diversion is at Imperial Dam , where over 90 percent of the river 's remaining flow is moved into the All @-@ American Canal to irrigate California 's Imperial Valley , the most productive winter agricultural region in the United States . 
 Below Imperial Dam , only a small portion of the Colorado River makes it beyond Yuma , Arizona , and the confluence with the intermittent Gila River – which carries runoff from western New Mexico and most of Arizona – before defining about 24 miles ( 39 km ) of the Mexico – United States border . At Morelos Dam , the entire remaining flow of the Colorado is diverted to irrigate the Mexicali Valley , among Mexico 's most fertile agricultural lands . Below San Luis Río Colorado , the Colorado passes entirely into Mexico , defining the Baja California – Sonora border ; in most years , the stretch of the Colorado between here and the Gulf of California is dry or a trickle formed by irrigation return flows . The Hardy River provides most of the flow into the Colorado River Delta , a vast alluvial floodplain covering about 3 @,@ 000 square miles ( 7 @,@ 800 km2 ) of northwestern Mexico . A large estuary is formed here before the Colorado empties into the Gulf about 75 miles ( 120 km ) south of Yuma . Before 20th @-@ century development dewatered the lower Colorado , a major tidal bore was present in the delta and estuary ; the first historical record was made by the Croatian missionary in Spanish service Father Ferdinand <unk> on July 18 , 1746 . During spring tide conditions , the tidal bore – locally called El Burro – formed in the estuary about Montague Island in Baja California and propagated upstream . 
 = = = Major tributaries = = = 
 The Colorado is joined by over 25 significant tributaries , of which the Green River is the largest by both length and discharge . The Green takes drainage from the Wind River Range of west @-@ central Wyoming , from Utah 's Uinta Mountains , and from the Rockies of northwestern Colorado . The Gila River is the second longest and drains a greater area than the Green , but has a significantly lower flow because of a more arid climate and larger diversions for irrigation and cities . Both the Gunnison and San Juan rivers , which derive most of their water from Rocky Mountains snowmelt , contribute more water than the Gila did naturally . 
 = = Discharge = = 
 In its natural state , the Colorado River poured about 16 @.@ 3 million acre feet ( 20 @.@ 1 km3 ) into the Gulf of California each year , amounting to an average flow rate of 22 @,@ 500 cubic feet per second ( 640 m3 / s ) . Its flow regime was not at all steady – indeed , " prior to the construction of federal dams and reservoirs , the Colorado was a river of extremes like no other in the United States . " Once , the river reached peaks of more than 100 @,@ 000 cubic feet per second ( 2 @,@ 800 m3 / s ) in the summer and low flows of less than 2 @,@ 500 cubic feet per second ( 71 m3 / s ) in the winter annually . At Topock , Arizona , about 300 miles ( 480 km ) upstream from the Gulf , a maximum historical discharge of 384 @,@ 000 cubic feet per second ( 10 @,@ 900 m3 / s ) was recorded in 1884 and a minimum of 422 cubic feet per second ( 11 @.@ 9 m3 / s ) was recorded in 1935 . In contrast , the regulated discharge rates on the lower Colorado below Hoover Dam rarely exceed 35 @,@ 000 cubic feet per second ( 990 m3 / s ) or drop below 4 @,@ 000 cubic feet per second ( 110 m3 / s ) . Annual runoff volume has ranged from a high of 22 @.@ 2 million acre feet ( 27 @.@ 4 km3 ) in 1984 to a low of 3 @.@ 8 million acre feet ( 4 @.@ 7 km3 ) in 2002 , although in most years only a small portion of this flow , if any , reaches the Gulf . 
 Between 85 and 90 percent of the Colorado River 's discharge originates in snowmelt , mostly from the Rocky Mountains of Colorado and Wyoming . The three major upper tributaries of the Colorado – the Gunnison , Green , and San Juan – alone deliver almost 9 million acre feet ( 11 km3 ) per year to the main stem , mostly from snowmelt . The remaining 10 to 15 percent comes from a variety of sources , principally groundwater base flow and summer monsoon storms . The latter often produces heavy , highly localized floods on lower tributaries of the river , but does not often contribute significant volumes of runoff . Most of the annual runoff in the basin occurs with the melting of Rocky Mountains snowpack , which begins in April and peaks during May and June before exhausting in late July or early August . 
 Flows at the mouth have steadily declined since the beginning of the 20th century , and in most years after 1960 the Colorado River has run dry before reaching the sea . Irrigation , industrial , and municipal diversions , evaporation from reservoirs , natural runoff , and likely climate change have all contributed to this substantial reduction in flow , threatening the future water supply . For example , the Gila River – formerly one of the Colorado 's largest tributaries – contributes little more than a trickle in most years due to use of its water by cities and farms in central Arizona . The average flow rate of the Colorado at the northernmost point of the Mexico – United States border ( NIB , or Northerly International Boundary ) is about 2 @,@ 060 cubic feet per second ( 58 m3 / s ) , 1 @.@ 49 million acre feet ( 1 @.@ 84 km3 ) per year – less than a 10th of the natural flow – due to upstream water use . Below here , all of the remaining flow is diverted to irrigate the Mexicali Valley , leaving a dry riverbed from Morelos Dam to the sea that is supplemented by intermittent flows of irrigation drainage water . There have been exceptions , however , namely in the early to mid @-@ 1980s , when the Colorado once again reached the sea during several consecutive years of record @-@ breaking precipitation and snowmelt . In 1984 , so much excess runoff occurred that some 16 @.@ 5 million acre feet ( 20 @.@ 4 km3 ) , or 22 @,@ 860 cubic feet per second ( 647 m3 / s ) , poured into the sea . 
 The United States Geological Survey ( USGS ) operates or has operated 46 stream gauges to measure the discharge of the Colorado River , ranging from the headwaters near Grand Lake to the Mexico – U.S. border . The tables at right list data associated with eight of these gauges . River flows as gauged at Lee 's Ferry , Arizona , about halfway along the length of the Colorado and 16 miles ( 26 km ) below Glen Canyon Dam , are used to determine water allocations in the Colorado River basin . The average discharge recorded there was approximately 14 @,@ 800 cubic feet per second ( 420 m3 / s ) , 10 @.@ 72 million acre feet ( 13 @.@ 22 km3 ) per year , from 1921 to 2010 . This figure has been heavily affected by upstream diversions and reservoir evaporation , especially after the completion of the Colorado River Storage Project in the 1970s . Prior to the completion of Glen Canyon Dam in 1964 , the average discharge recorded between 1912 and 1962 was 17 @,@ 850 cubic feet per second ( 505 m3 / s ) , 12 @.@ 93 million acre feet ( 15 @.@ 95 km3 ) per year . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 The drainage basin or watershed of the Colorado River encompasses 246 @,@ 000 square miles ( 640 @,@ 000 km2 ) of southwestern North America , making it the seventh largest on the continent . About 238 @,@ 600 square miles ( 618 @,@ 000 km2 ) , or 97 percent of the watershed , is in the United States . The river and its tributaries drain most of western Colorado and New Mexico , southwestern Wyoming , eastern and southern Utah , southeastern Nevada and California , and nearly all of Arizona . The areas drained within Baja California and Sonora are very small and do not contribute measurable runoff . Most of the basin is arid , defined by the Sonoran and Mojave deserts and the expanse of the Colorado Plateau , although significant expanses of forest are found in the Rocky Mountains ; the Kaibab , Aquarius , and Markagunt plateaus in southern Utah and northern Arizona ; the Mogollon Rim through central Arizona ; and other smaller mountain ranges and sky islands . Elevations range from sea level at the Gulf of California to 14 @,@ 321 feet ( 4 @,@ 365 m ) at the summit of Uncompahgre Peak in Colorado , with an average of 5 @,@ 500 feet ( 1 @,@ 700 m ) across the entire basin . 
 Climate varies widely across the watershed . Mean monthly high temperatures are 25 @.@ 3 ° C ( 77 @.@ 5 ° F ) in the upper basin and 33 @.@ 4 ° C ( 92 @.@ 1 ° F ) in the lower basin , and lows average − 3 @.@ 6 and 8 @.@ 9 ° C ( 25 @.@ 5 and 48 @.@ 0 ° F ) , respectively . Annual precipitation averages 6 @.@ 5 inches ( 164 mm ) , ranging from over 40 inches ( 1 @,@ 000 mm ) in some areas of the Rockies to just 0 @.@ 6 inches ( 15 mm ) along the Mexican reach of the river . The upper basin generally receives snow and rain during the winter and early spring , while precipitation in the lower basin falls mainly during intense but infrequent summer thunderstorms brought on by the North American Monsoon . 
 As of 2010 , approximately 12 @.@ 7 million people lived in the Colorado River basin . Phoenix in Arizona and Las Vegas in Nevada are the largest metropolitan areas in the watershed . Population densities are also high along the lower Colorado River below Davis Dam , which includes Bullhead City , Lake Havasu City , and Yuma . Other significant population centers in the basin include Tucson , Arizona ; St. George , Utah ; and Grand Junction , Colorado . Colorado River basin states are among the fastest @-@ growing in the U.S. ; the population of Nevada alone increased by about 66 percent between 1990 and 2000 as Arizona grew by some 40 percent . 
 The Colorado River basin shares drainage boundaries with many other major watersheds of North America . The Continental Divide of the Americas forms a large portion of the eastern boundary of the watershed , separating it from the basins of the Yellowstone River and the Platte River – both tributaries of the Missouri River – on the northeast , and from the headwaters of the Arkansas River on the east . Both the Missouri and Arkansas rivers are part of the Mississippi River system . Further south , the Colorado River basin borders on the Rio Grande drainage , which along with the Mississippi flows to the Gulf of Mexico , as well as a series of endorheic ( closed ) drainage basins in southwestern New Mexico and extreme southeastern Arizona . 
 For a short stretch , the Colorado watershed meets the drainage basin of the Snake River , a tributary of the Columbia River , in the Wind River Range of western Wyoming . Southwest of there , the northern divide of the Colorado watershed skirts the edge of the Great Basin , bordering on the closed drainage basins of the Great Salt Lake and the Sevier River in central Utah , and other closed basins in southern Utah and Nevada . To the west in California , the Colorado River watershed borders on those of small closed basins in the Mojave Desert , the largest of which is the Salton Sea drainage north of the Colorado River Delta . On the south , the watersheds of the <unk> , Concepción , and Yaqui rivers , all of which drain to the Gulf of California , border that of the Colorado . 
 = = Geology = = 
 As recently as the Cretaceous period 100 million years ago , much of western North America was still part of the Pacific Ocean . Tectonic forces from the collision of the Farallon Plate with the North American Plate pushed up the Rocky Mountains between 75 and 50 million years ago in a mountain @-@ building episode known as the Laramide orogeny . The Colorado first formed as a west @-@ flowing stream draining the southwestern portion of the range , and the uplift also diverted the Green River from its original course to the Mississippi River west towards the Colorado . About 30 to 20 million years ago , volcanic activity related to the orogeny led to the Mid @-@ Tertiary ignimbrite flare @-@ up , which created smaller formations such as the Chiricahua Mountains in Arizona and deposited massive amounts of volcanic ash and debris over the watershed . The Colorado Plateau first began to rise during the Eocene , between about 55 and 34 million years ago , but did not attain its present height until about 5 million years ago , about when the Colorado River established its present course into the Gulf of California . 
 The time scale and sequence over which the river 's present course and the Grand Canyon were formed is uncertain . Before the Gulf of California was formed around 12 to 5 million years ago by faulting processes along the boundary of the North American and Pacific plates , the Colorado flowed west to an outlet on the Pacific Ocean – possibly Monterey Bay on the Central California coast , forming the Monterey submarine canyon . The uplift of the Sierra Nevada mountains began about 4 @.@ 5 million years ago , diverting the Colorado southwards towards the Gulf . As the Colorado Plateau continued to rise between 5 and 2 @.@ 5 million years ago , the river maintained its ancestral course ( as an antecedent stream ) and began to cut the Grand Canyon . <unk> played a major part in shaping other peculiar geographic features in the watershed , including the Dolores River 's bisection of Paradox Valley in Colorado and the Green River 's cut through the Uinta Mountains in Utah . 
 Sediments carried from the plateau by the Colorado River created a vast delta made of more than 10 @,@ 000 cubic miles ( 42 @,@ 000 km3 ) of material that walled off the northernmost part of the gulf in approximately 1 million years . Cut off from the ocean , the portion of the gulf north of the delta eventually evaporated and formed the Salton Sink , which reached about 260 feet ( 79 m ) below sea level . Since then the river has changed course into the Salton Sink at least three times , transforming it into Lake Cahuilla , which at maximum size flooded up the valley to present @-@ day Indio , California . The lake took about 50 years to evaporate after the Colorado resumed flowing to the Gulf . The present @-@ day Salton Sea can be considered the most recent incarnation of Lake Cahuilla , though on a much smaller scale . 
 Between 1 @.@ 8 million and 10 @,@ 000 years ago , massive flows of basalt from the <unk> volcanic field in northern Arizona dammed the Colorado River within the Grand Canyon . At least 13 lava dams were formed , the largest of which was more than 2 @,@ 300 feet ( 700 m ) high , backing the river up for nearly 500 miles ( 800 km ) to present @-@ day Moab , Utah . The lack of associated sediment deposits along this stretch of the Colorado River , which would have accumulated in the impounded lakes over time , suggests that most of these dams did not survive for more than a few decades before collapsing or being washed away . Failure of the lava dams caused by erosion , leaks and cavitation caused catastrophic floods , which may have been some of the largest ever to occur in North America , rivaling the late @-@ Pleistocene Missoula Floods of the northwestern United States . Mapping of flood deposits indicate that crests as high as 700 feet ( 210 m ) passed through the Grand Canyon , reaching peak discharges as great as 17 million cubic feet per second ( 480 @,@ 000 m3 / s ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Indigenous peoples = = = 
 The first humans of the Colorado River basin were likely Paleo @-@ Indians of the Clovis and Folsom cultures , who first arrived on the Colorado Plateau about 12 @,@ 000 years ago . Very little human activity occurred in the watershed until the rise of the Desert Archaic Culture , which from 8 @,@ 000 to 2 @,@ 000 years ago constituted most of the region 's human population . These prehistoric inhabitants led a generally nomadic lifestyle , gathering plants and hunting small animals ( though some of the earliest peoples hunted larger mammals that became extinct in North America after the end of the Pleistocene epoch ) . Another notable early group was the Fremont culture , whose peoples inhabited the Colorado Plateau from 2 @,@ 000 to 700 years ago . The Fremont were likely the first peoples of the Colorado River basin to domesticate crops and construct masonry dwellings ; they also left behind a large amount of rock art and petroglyphs , many of which have survived to the present day . 
 Beginning in the early centuries A.D. , Colorado River basin peoples began to form large agriculture @-@ based societies , some of which lasted hundreds of years and grew into well @-@ organized civilizations encompassing tens of thousands of inhabitants . The Ancient Puebloan ( also known as Anasazi or <unk> ) people of the Four Corners region were descended from the Desert Archaic culture . The Anasazi people developed a complex distribution system to supply drinking and irrigation water in Chaco Canyon in northwestern New Mexico . 
 The Puebloans dominated the basin of the San Juan River , and the center of their civilization was in Chaco Canyon . In Chaco Canyon and the surrounding lands , they built more than 150 multi @-@ story pueblos or " great houses " , the largest of which , Pueblo Bonito , is composed of more than 600 rooms . The Hohokam culture was present along the middle Gila River beginning around 1 A.D. Between 600 and 700 A.D. they began to employ irrigation on a large scale , and did so more prolifically than any other native group in the Colorado River basin . An extensive system of irrigation canals was constructed on the Gila and Salt rivers , with various estimates of a total length ranging from 180 to 300 miles ( 290 to 480 km ) and capable of irrigating 25 @,@ 000 to 250 @,@ 000 acres ( 10 @,@ 000 to 101 @,@ 000 ha ) . Both civilizations supported large populations at their height ; the Chaco Canyon Puebloans numbered between 6 @,@ 000 and 15 @,@ 000 and estimates for the Hohokam range between 30 @,@ 000 and 200 @,@ 000 . 
 These sedentary peoples heavily exploited their surroundings , practicing logging and harvesting of other resources on a large scale . The construction of irrigation canals may have led to a significant change in the morphology of many waterways in the Colorado River basin . Prior to human contact , rivers such as the Gila , Salt and Chaco were shallow perennial streams with low , vegetated banks and large floodplains . In time , flash floods caused significant downcutting on irrigation canals , which in turn led to the entrenchment of the original streams into arroyos , making agriculture difficult . A variety of methods were employed to combat these problems , including the construction of large dams , but when a <unk> hit the region in the 14th century A.D. the ancient civilizations of the Colorado River basin abruptly collapsed . Some Puebloans migrated to the Rio Grande Valley of central New Mexico and south @-@ central Colorado , becoming the predecessors of the Hopi , Zuni , Laguna and <unk> people in western New Mexico . Many of the tribes that inhabited the Colorado River basin at the time of European contact were descended from Puebloan and Hohokam survivors , while others already had a long history of living in the region or migrated in from bordering lands . 
 The Navajo were an Athabaskan people who migrated from the north into the Colorado River basin around 1025 A.D. They soon established themselves as the dominant Native American tribe in the Colorado River basin , and their territory stretched over parts of present @-@ day Arizona , New Mexico , Utah and Colorado – in the original homelands of the Puebloans . In fact , the Navajo acquired agricultural skills from the Puebloans before the collapse of the Pueblo civilization in the 14th century . A profusion of other tribes have made a continued , lasting presence along the Colorado River . The Mohave have lived along the rich bottomlands of the lower Colorado below Black Canyon since 1200 A.D. They were fishermen – navigating the river on rafts made of reeds to catch Gila trout and Colorado pikeminnow – and farmers , relying on the annual floods of the river rather than irrigation to water their crops . Ute peoples have inhabited the northern Colorado River basin , mainly in present @-@ day Colorado , Wyoming and Utah , for at least 2 @,@ 000 years , but did not become well established in the Four Corners area until 1500 A.D. The Apache , Maricopa , Pima , Havasupai and Hualapai are among many other groups that lived along or had territories bordering on the Colorado River and its tributaries . 
 Beginning in the 17th century , contact with Europeans brought significant changes to the lifestyles of Native Americans in the Colorado River basin . Missionaries sought to convert indigenous peoples to Christianity – an effort sometimes successful , such as in Father Eusebio Francisco Kino 's 1694 encounter with the " docile <unk> of the Gila Valley [ who ] readily accepted Father Kino and his Christian teachings " . The Spanish introduced sheep and goats to the Navajo , who came to rely heavily on them for meat , milk and wool . By the mid @-@ 16th century , the Utes , having acquired horses from the Spanish , introduced them to the Colorado River basin . The use of horses spread through the basin via trade between the various tribes and greatly facilitated hunting , communications and travel for indigenous peoples . More warlike groups such as the Utes and Navajos often used horses to their advantage in raids against tribes that were slower to adopt them , such as the Goshutes and Southern Paiutes . 
 The gradual influx of European and American explorers , fortune seekers and settlers into the region eventually led to conflicts that forced many Native Americans off their traditional lands . After the acquisition of the Colorado River basin from Mexico in the Mexican – American War in 1846 , U.S. military forces commanded by Kit Carson forced more than 8 @,@ 000 Navajo men , women and children from their homes after a series of unsuccessful attempts to confine their territory , many of which were met with violent resistance . In what is now known as the Long Walk of the Navajo , the captives were marched from Arizona to Fort Sumner in New Mexico , and many died along the route . Four years later , the Navajo signed a treaty that moved them onto a reservation in the Four Corners region that is now known as the Navajo Nation . It is the largest Native American reservation in the United States , encompassing 27 @,@ 000 square miles ( 70 @,@ 000 km2 ) with a population of over 180 @,@ 000 as of 2000 . 
 The Mohave were expelled from their territory after a series of minor skirmishes and raids on wagon trains passing through the area in the late 1850s , culminating in an 1859 battle with American forces that concluded the Mohave War . In 1870 , the Mohave were relocated to a reservation at Fort Mojave , which spans the borders of Arizona , California and Nevada . Some Mohave were also moved to the 432 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 1 @,@ 120 km2 ) Colorado River Indian Reservation on the Arizona – California border , originally established for the Mohave and Chemehuevi people in 1865 . In the 1940s , some Hopi and Navajo people were also relocated to this reservation . The four tribes now form a geopolitical body known as the Colorado River Indian Tribes . 
 Water rights of Native Americans in the Colorado River basin were largely ignored during the extensive water resources development carried out on the river and its tributaries in the 19th and 20th centuries . The construction of dams has often had negative impacts on tribal peoples , such as the Chemehuevi when their riverside lands were flooded after the completion of Parker Dam in 1938 . Ten Native American tribes in the basin now hold or continue to claim water rights to the Colorado River . The U.S. government has taken some actions to help quantify and develop the water resources of Native American reservations . The first federally funded irrigation project in the U.S. was the construction of an irrigation canal on the Colorado River Indian Reservation in 1867 . Other water projects include the Navajo Indian Irrigation Project , authorized in 1962 for the irrigation of lands in part of the Navajo Nation in north @-@ central New Mexico . The Navajo continue to seek expansion of their water rights because of difficulties with the water supply on their reservation ; about 40 percent of its inhabitants must haul water by truck many miles to their homes . In the 21st century , they have filed legal claims against the governments of Arizona , New Mexico and Utah for increased water rights . Some of these claims have been successful for the Navajo , such as a 2004 settlement in which they received a 326 @,@ 000 @-@ acre @-@ foot ( 402 @,@ 000 ML ) allotment from New Mexico . 
 = = = Early explorers = = = 
 During the 16th century , the Spanish began to explore and colonize western North America . An early motive was the search for the Seven Cities of Gold , or " Cibola " , rumored to have been built by Native Americans somewhere in the desert Southwest . According to a United States Geological Survey publication , it is likely that Francisco de Ulloa was the first European to see the Colorado River when in 1536 he sailed to the head of the Gulf of California . Francisco Vásquez de Coronado 's 1540 – 1542 expedition began as a search for the fabled Cities of Gold , but after learning from natives in New Mexico of a large river to the west , he sent García López de Cárdenas to lead a small contingent to find it . With the guidance of Hopi Indians , Cárdenas and his men became the first outsiders to see the Grand Canyon . Cárdenas was reportedly unimpressed with the canyon , assuming the width of the Colorado River at 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) and estimating 300 @-@ foot ( 91 m ) -tall rock formations to be the size of a man . After failing at an attempt to descend to the river , they left the area , defeated by the difficult terrain and torrid weather . 
 In 1540 , Hernando de Alarcón and his fleet reached the mouth of the river , intending to provide additional supplies to Coronado 's expedition . Alarcón may have sailed the Colorado as far upstream as the present @-@ day California – Arizona border . Coronado never reached the Gulf of California , and Alarcón eventually gave up and left . Melchior Díaz reached the delta in the same year , intending to establish contact with Alarcón , but the latter was already gone by the time of Díaz 's arrival . Díaz named the Colorado River Rio del <unk> ( " Firebrand River " ) after seeing a practice used by the local natives for warming themselves . The name <unk> lasted for the next 200 years , while the name Rio Colorado ( " Red River " ) was first applied to a tributary of the Gila River , possibly the Verde River , circa 1720 . The first known map to label the main stem as the Colorado was drawn by French cartographer Jacques @-@ Nicolas <unk> in 1743 . 
 During the 18th and early 19th centuries , many Americans and Spanish believed in the existence of the Buenaventura River , purported to run from the Rocky Mountains in Utah or Colorado to the Pacific Ocean . The name Buenaventura was given to the Green River by Silvestre Vélez de Escalante as early as 1776 , but Escalante did not know that the Green drained to the Colorado . Many later maps showed the headwaters of the Green and Colorado rivers connecting with the Sevier River ( Rio San Ysabel ) and Utah Lake ( Lake Timpanogos ) before flowing west through the Sierra Nevada into California . Mountain man Jedediah Smith reached the lower Colorado by way of the Virgin River canyon in 1826 . Smith called the Colorado the " <unk> " , as the Green River in Wyoming was known to fur trappers , correctly believing it to be a continuation of the Green and not a separate river as others believed under the Buenaventura myth . John C. Frémont 's 1843 Great Basin expedition proved that no river traversed the Great Basin and Sierra Nevada , officially debunking the Buenaventura myth . 
 In 1857 , Lieutenant Joseph C. Ives led an expedition to explore the feasibility of using the Colorado River as a navigation route in the Southwest . Ives and his men used a specially built steamboat , the shallow @-@ draft U.S.S. Explorer , and traveled up the river as far as Black Canyon on what is now the Arizona – Nevada border . After experiencing numerous groundings and accidents and having been inhibited by low water in the river , Ives declared : " Ours has been the first , and will doubtless be the last , party of whites to visit this profitless locality . It seems intended by nature that the Colorado River , along the greater portion of its lonely and majestic way , shall be forever unvisited and undisturbed . " 
 Up until the mid @-@ 19th century , long stretches of the Colorado and Green rivers between Wyoming and Nevada remained largely unexplored due to their remote location and dangers of navigation . Because of the dramatic drop in elevation of the two rivers , there were rumors of huge waterfalls and violent rapids , and Native American tales strengthened their credibility . In 1869 , one @-@ armed Civil War veteran John Wesley Powell led an expedition from Green River Station in Wyoming , aiming to run the two rivers all the way down to St. Thomas , Nevada , near present @-@ day Hoover Dam . Powell and nine men – none of whom had prior whitewater experience – set out in May . After braving the rapids of the Gates of Lodore , Cataract Canyon and other gorges along the Colorado , the party arrived at the mouth of the Little Colorado River , where Powell noted down arguably the most famous words ever written about the Grand Canyon of the Colorado : 
 We are now ready to start on our way down the Great Unknown . Our boats , tied to a common stake , are chafing each other , as they are tossed by the fretful river . They ride high and buoyant , for their loads are lighter than we could desire . We have but a month 's rations remaining . The flour has been re @-@ sifted through the mosquito net sieve ; the spoiled bacon has been dried , and the worst of it boiled ; the few pounds of dried apples have been spread in the sun , and re @-@ shrunken to their normal bulk ; the sugar has all melted , and gone on its way down the river ; but we have a large sack of coffee . The lighting of the boats has this advantage : they will ride the waves better , and we shall have little to carry when we make a portage . 
 We are three @-@ quarters of a mile in the depths of the earth , and the great river shrinks into insignificance , as it dashes its angry waves against the walls and cliffs , that rise to the world above ; they are but puny ripples , and we but <unk> , running up and down the sands , or lost among the boulders . 
 We have an unknown distance yet to run ; an unknown river yet to explore . What falls there are , we know not ; what rocks beset the channel , we know not ; what walls rise over the river , we know not ; Ah , well ! we may conjecture many things . The men talk as cheerfully as ever ; jests are bandied about freely this morning ; but to me the cheer is somber and the jests are ghastly . 
 On August 28 , 1869 , three men deserted the expedition , convinced that they could not possibly survive the trip through the Grand Canyon . They were killed by either Native Americans or Mormon settlers after making it to the rim of the canyon ; two days later , the expedition ran the last of the Grand Canyon rapids and reached St. Thomas . Powell led a second expedition in 1871 , this time with financial backing from the U.S. government . The explorers named many features along the Colorado and Green rivers , including Glen Canyon , the Dirty Devil River , Flaming Gorge , and the Gates of Lodore . In what is perhaps a twist of irony , modern @-@ day Lake Powell , which floods Glen Canyon , is also named for their leader . 
 = = = American settlement = = = 
 During the Manifest Destiny era of the mid @-@ 19th century , American pioneers settled many western states but generally avoided the Colorado River basin until the 1850s . Under Brigham Young 's grand vision for a " vast empire in the desert " , ( the State of Deseret ) Mormon settlers were among the first whites to establish a permanent presence in the watershed , Fort Clara or Fort Santa Clara , in the winter of 1855 @-@ 1856 along the Santa Clara River , tributary of the Virgin River . In 1860 , anticipating the American Civil War , the Mormons established a number of settlements to grow cotton along the Virgin River in Washington County , Utah . From 1863 to 1865 , Mormon colonists founded St. Thomas and other colonies on the Muddy and Virgin rivers in northwestern Arizona Territory , ( now Clark County , Nevada ) . Stone 's Ferry was established by these colonists on the Colorado at the mouth of the Virgin River to carry their produce on a wagon road to the mining districts of Mohave County , Arizona to the south . Also , in 1866 , a steamboat landing was established at <unk> , intended as an outlet to the Pacific Ocean via the Colorado River , for Mormon settlements in the Great Basin . These settlements reached a peak population of about 600 before being abandoned in 1871 , and for nearly a decade these valleys became a haven for outlaws and cattle rustlers . One Mormon settler Daniel Bonelli , remained , operating the ferry and began mining salt in nearby mines , bring it in barges , down river to El Dorado Canyon where it was used to process silver ore . From 1879 to 1887 , Colorado Steam Navigation Company steamboats carried the salt , operating up river in the high spring flood waters , through Boulder Canyon , to the landing at <unk> at the mouth of the Virgin River . From 1879 to 1882 the Southwestern Mining Company , largest in El Dorado Canyon , brought in a 56 @-@ foot sloop the <unk> <unk> that sailed up and down river carrying the salt in the low water time of year until it was wrecked in the Quick and Dirty Rapids of Black Canyon . 
 Mormons founded the settlement of Vernal along the Green River in Utah in 1878 , and populated the Little Colorado River valley later in the century , creating towns such as St. Johns , Arizona . They also established settlements along the Gila River in central Arizona beginning in 1871 . These early settlers were impressed by the extensive ruins of the Hohokam civilization that previously occupied the Gila River valley , and are said to have " envisioned their new agricultural civilization rising as the mythical phoenix bird from the ashes of Hohokam society " . The Mormons were the first whites to develop the water resources of the basin on a large scale , and built complex networks of dams and canals to irrigate wheat , oats and barley in addition to establishing extensive sheep and cattle ranches . 
 One of the main reasons the Mormons were able to colonize Arizona was the existence of Jacob Hamblin 's ferry across the Colorado at Lee 's Ferry ( then known as <unk> Crossing ) , which began running in March 1864 . This location was the only section of river for hundreds of miles in both directions where the canyon walls dropped away , allowing for the development of a transport route . John Doyle Lee established a more permanent ferry system at the site in 1870 . One reason Lee chose to run the ferry was to flee from Mormon leaders who held him responsible for the Mountain Meadows Massacre , in which 120 emigrants in a wagon train were killed by a local militia disguised as Native Americans . Even though it was located along a major travel route , Lee 's Ferry was very isolated , and there Lee and his family established the aptly named Lonely Dell Ranch . In 1928 , the ferry sank , resulting in the deaths of three men . Later that year , the Navajo Bridge was completed at a point 5 miles ( 8 km ) downstream , rendering the ferry obsolete . 
 Gold strikes from the mid @-@ 19th to early 20th centuries played a major role in attracting settlers to the upper Colorado River basin . In 1859 , a group of adventurers from Georgia discovered gold along the Blue River in Colorado and established the mining boomtown of Breckenridge . During 1875 , even bigger strikes were made along the Uncompahgre and San Miguel rivers , also in Colorado , and these led to the creation of <unk> and Telluride , respectively . Because most gold deposits along the upper Colorado River and its tributaries occur in lode deposits , extensive mining systems and heavy machinery were required to extract them . Mining remains a substantial contributor to the economy of the upper basin and has led to acid mine drainage problems in some regional streams and rivers . 
 Starting in the latter half of the 19th century , the lower Colorado below Black Canyon became an important waterway for steamboat commerce . In 1852 , the Uncle Sam was launched to provide supplies to the U.S. Army outpost at Fort Yuma . Although this vessel accidentally foundered and sank early in its career , commercial traffic quickly proliferated because river transport was much cheaper than hauling freight over land . Navigation on the Colorado River was dangerous because of the shallow channel and flow variations , so the first sternwheeler on the river , the Colorado of 1855 , was designed to carry 60 short tons ( 54 t ) while drawing less than 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 6 m ) of water . The tidal bore of the lower Colorado also presented a major hazard ; in 1922 , a 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) -high wave swamped a ship bound for Yuma , killing between 86 and 130 people . Steamboats quickly became the principal source of communication and trade along the river until competition from railroads began in the 1870s , and finally the construction of dams along the lower river , none of which had locks to allow the passage of ships . 
 = = = = Naming of the upper Colorado River and controversy = = = = 
 Prior to 1921 , the upper Colorado River above the confluence with the Green River in Utah had assumed various names . Fathers Dominguez and Escalante named it Rio San Rafael in 1776 . Through the mid @-@ 1800s , the river between Green River and the Gunnison River was most commonly known as the Grand River . The river above the junction with the Gunnison River , however , was known variously as the <unk> River , the North Fork of the Grand River , the Blue River , and the Grand River . The latter name did not become consistently applied until the 1870s . 
 In 1921 , U.S. Representative Edward T. Taylor of Colorado petitioned the Congressional Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce to rename the Grand River as the Colorado River . Taylor saw the fact that the Colorado River started outside the border of his state as an " abomination " . On July 25 , the name change was made official in House Joint Resolution 460 of the 66th Congress , over the objections of representatives from Wyoming , Utah , and the USGS , which noted that the Green River was much longer and had a larger drainage basin above its confluence with the Grand River , although the Grand contributed a greater flow of water . 
 = = Engineering and development = = 
 36 to 40 million people depend on its water for agricultural , industrial and domestic needs . Southern Nevada Water Authority called the Colorado River one of the " most controlled , controversial and litigated rivers in the world " . Over 29 major dams and hundreds of miles of canals serve to supply thirsty cities , provide irrigation water to some 4 million acres ( 1 @.@ 6 million hectares ) , and meet peaking power demands in the Southwest , generating more than 12 billion kWh of hydroelectricity each year . Often called " America 's Nile " , the Colorado is so carefully managed – with basin reservoirs capable of holding four times the river 's annual flow – that each drop of its water is used an average of 17 times in a single year . 
 One of the earliest water projects in the Colorado River basin was the Grand Ditch , a 16 @-@ mile ( 26 km ) diversion canal that sends water from the Never Summer Mountains , which would naturally have drained into the headwaters of the Colorado River , to bolster supplies in Colorado 's Front Range Urban Corridor . Constructed primarily by Japanese and Mexican laborers , the ditch was considered an engineering marvel when completed in 1890 , delivering 17 @,@ 700 acre feet ( 21 @,@ 800 ML ) across the Continental Divide each year . Because roughly 75 percent of Colorado 's precipitation falls west of the Rocky Mountains while 80 percent of the population lives east of the range , more of these <unk> water transfers , locally known as <unk> diversions , followed . While first envisioned in the late 19th century , construction on the Colorado @-@ Big Thompson Project ( C @-@ BT ) did not begin until the 1930s . The C @-@ BT now delivers more than 11 times the Grand Ditch 's flow from the Colorado River watershed to cities along the Front Range . 
 Meanwhile , large @-@ scale development was also beginning on the opposite end of the Colorado River . In 1900 , entrepreneurs of the California Development Company ( CDC ) looked to the Imperial Valley of southern California as an excellent location to develop agriculture irrigated by the waters of the river . Engineer George Chaffey was hired to design the Alamo Canal , which split off from the Colorado River near Pilot Knob , curved south into Mexico , and dumped into the Alamo River , a dry arroyo which had historically carried flood flows of the Colorado into the Salton Sink . With a stable year @-@ round flow in the Alamo River , irrigators in the Imperial Valley were able to begin large @-@ scale farming , and small towns in the region started to expand with the influx of job @-@ seeking migrants . By 1903 , more than 100 @,@ 000 acres ( 40 @,@ 000 ha ) in the valley were under cultivation , supporting a growing population of 4 @,@ 000 . 
 It was not long before the Colorado River began to wreak havoc with its erratic flows . In autumn , the river would drop below the level of the canal inlet , and temporary brush diversion dams had to be constructed . In early 1905 , heavy floods destroyed the headworks of the canal , and water began to flow uncontrolled down the canal towards the Salton Sink . On August 9 , the entire flow of the Colorado swerved into the canal and began to flood the bottom of the Imperial Valley . In a desperate gamble to close the breach , crews of the Southern Pacific Railroad , whose tracks ran through the valley , attempted to dam the Colorado above the canal , only to see their work demolished by a flash flood . It took seven attempts , more than $ 3 million , and two years for the railroad , the CDC , and the federal government to permanently block the breach and send the Colorado on its natural course to the gulf – but not before part of the Imperial Valley was flooded under a 45 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 72 km ) lake , today 's Salton Sea . After the immediate flooding threat passed , it was realized that a more permanent solution would be needed to rein in the Colorado . 
 = = = Lower Basin development , 1930s @-@ 50s = = = 
 In 1922 , six U.S. states in the Colorado River basin signed the Colorado River Compact , which divided half of the river 's flow to both the Upper Basin ( the drainage area above Lee 's Ferry , comprising parts of Colorado , New Mexico , Utah , and Wyoming and a small portion of Arizona ) and the Lower Basin ( Arizona , California , Nevada , and parts of New Mexico and Utah ) . Each was given rights to 7 @.@ 5 million acre feet ( 9 @.@ 3 km3 ) of water per year , a figure believed to represent half of the river 's minimum flow at Lee 's Ferry . This was followed by a U.S. – Mexico treaty in 1944 , allocating 1 @.@ 5 million acre feet ( 1 @.@ 9 km3 ) of Colorado River water to the latter country per annum . Arizona refused to ratify the Colorado River Compact in 1922 because it feared that California would take too much of the lower basin allotment ; in 1944 a compromise was reached in which Arizona would get a firm allocation of 2 @.@ 8 million acre feet ( 3 @.@ 5 km3 ) , but only if California 's 4 @.@ 4 @-@ million @-@ acre @-@ foot ( 5 @.@ 4 km3 ) allocation was prioritized during drought years . These and nine other decisions , compacts , federal acts and agreements made between 1922 and 1973 form what is now known as the Law of the River . 
 On September 30 , 1935 , the United States Bureau of Reclamation ( USBR ) completed Hoover Dam in the Black Canyon of the Colorado River . Behind the dam rose Lake Mead , the largest artificial lake in the U.S. , capable of holding more than two years of the Colorado 's flow . The construction of Hoover was a major step towards stabilizing the lower channel of the Colorado River , storing water for irrigation in times of drought , and providing much @-@ needed flood control as part of a program known as the Boulder Canyon Project . Hoover was the tallest dam in the world at the time of construction and also had the world 's largest hydroelectric power plant . Flow regulation from Hoover Dam opened the doors for rapid development on the lower Colorado River ; Imperial and Parker dams followed in 1938 , and Davis Dam was completed in 1950 . 
 Completed in 1938 some 20 miles ( 32 km ) above Yuma , Imperial Dam diverts nearly all of the Colorado 's flow into two irrigation canals . The All @-@ American Canal , built as a permanent replacement for the Alamo Canal , is so named because it lies completely within the U.S. , unlike its ill – fated predecessor . With a capacity of over 26 @,@ 000 cubic feet per second ( 740 m3 / s ) , the All @-@ American is the largest irrigation canal in the world , supplying water to 500 @,@ 000 acres ( 2 @,@ 000 km2 ) of California 's Imperial Valley . Because the valley 's warm and sunny climate lends to a year @-@ round growing season in addition to the large water supply furnished by the Colorado , the Imperial Valley is now one of the most productive agricultural regions in North America . In 1957 , the USBR completed a second canal , the Gila Gravity Main Canal , to irrigate about 110 @,@ 000 acres ( 450 km2 ) in southwestern Arizona with Colorado River water as part of the Gila Project . 
 The Lower Basin states also sought to develop the Colorado for municipal supplies . Central Arizona initially relied on the Gila River and its tributaries through projects such as the Theodore Roosevelt and Coolidge Dams – completed in 1924 and 1928 , respectively . Roosevelt was the first large dam constructed by the USBR and provided the water needed to start large @-@ scale agricultural and urban development in the region . The Colorado River Aqueduct , which delivers water nearly 250 miles ( 400 km ) from near Parker Dam to 10 million people in the Los Angeles metropolitan area , was completed in 1941 . The San Diego Aqueduct branch , whose initial phase was complete by 1947 , furnishes water to nearly 3 million people in San Diego and its suburbs . The Las Vegas Valley of Nevada experienced rapid growth in part due to Hoover Dam construction , and Las Vegas had tapped a pipeline into Lake Mead by 1937 . Nevada officials , believing that groundwater resources in the southern part of the state were sufficient for future growth , were more concerned with securing a large amount of the dam 's power supply than water from the Colorado ; thus they settled for the smallest allocation of all the states in the Colorado River Compact . 
 = = = Upper Basin development , 1950s @-@ 1970s = = = 
 Through the early decades of the 20th century , the Upper Basin states , with the exception of Colorado , remained relatively undeveloped and used little of the water allowed to them under the Colorado River Compact . Water use had increased significantly by the 1950s , and more water was being diverted out of the Colorado River basin to the Front Range corridor , the Salt Lake City area in Utah , and the Rio Grande basin in New Mexico . Such projects included the Roberts Tunnel , completed in 1956 , which diverts 63 @,@ 000 acre feet ( 78 @,@ 000 ML ) per year from the Blue River to the city of Denver , and the Fryingpan @-@ Arkansas Project , which delivers 69 @,@ 200 acre feet ( 85 @,@ 400 ML ) from the Fryingpan River to the Arkansas River basin each year . Without the addition of surface water storage in the upper basin , there was no guarantee that the upper basin states would be able to use the full amount of water given to them by the compact . There was also the concern that drought could impair the upper basin 's ability to deliver the required 7 @.@ 5 million acre feet ( 9 @.@ 3 × 109 m3 ) past Lee 's Ferry per year as stipulated by the compact . A 1956 act of Congress cleared the way for the USBR 's Colorado River Storage Project ( CRSP ) , which entailed the construction of large dams on the Colorado , Green , Gunnison and San Juan Rivers . 
 The initial blueprints for the CRSP included two dams on the Green River within Dinosaur National Monument 's Echo Park Canyon , a move criticized by both the U.S. National Park Service and environmentalist groups such as the Sierra Club . Controversy reached a nationwide scale , and the USBR dropped its plans for the Dinosaur dams in exchange for a dam at Flaming Gorge and a raise to an already @-@ proposed dam at Glen Canyon . The famed opposition to Glen Canyon Dam , the primary feature of the CRSP , did not build momentum until construction was well underway . This was primarily because of Glen Canyon 's remote location and the result that most of the American public did not even know of the existence of the impressive gorge ; the few who had contended that it had much greater scenic value than Echo Park . Sierra Club leader David Brower fought the dam both during the construction and for many years afterwards until his death in 2000 . Brower strongly believed that he was personally responsible for the failure to prevent Glen Canyon 's flooding , calling it his " greatest mistake , greatest sin " . 
 = = = Pacific Southwest Water Plan = = = 
 Agricultural and urban growth in Arizona eventually outstripped the capacity of local rivers ; these concerns were reflected in the creation of a Pacific Southwest Water Plan in the 1950s , which aimed to build a project that would permit Arizona to fully utilize its 2 @.@ 8 @-@ million @-@ acre @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 5 km3 ) allotment of the river . The Pacific Southwest Water Plan was the first major proposal to divert water to the Colorado Basin from other river basins – namely , from the wetter northwestern United States . It was intended to boost supplies for the Lower Basin states of Arizona , California and Nevada as well as Mexico , thus allowing the Upper Basin states to retain native Colorado River flows for their own use . Although there was still a surplus of water in the Colorado Basin during the mid @-@ 20th century , the Bureau of Reclamation predicted , correctly , that eventually population growth would outstrip the available supply and require the transfer of water from other sources . 
 The original version of the plan proposed to divert water from the Trinity River in northern California to reduce Southern California 's dependence on the Colorado , allowing more water to be pumped , by exchange , to central Arizona . Because of the large amount of power that would be required to pump Colorado River water to Arizona , the CAP originally included provisions for hydroelectric dams at Bridge Canyon and Marble Canyon , which would have flooded large portions of the Colorado within the Grand Canyon and dewatered much of the remainder . When these plans were publicized , the environmental movement – still reeling from the Glen Canyon controversy – successfully lobbied against the project . As a result , the Grand Canyon dams were removed from the CAP agenda , the boundaries of Grand Canyon National Park were extended to preclude any further development in the area , and the pumping power was replaced by the building of the coal @-@ fired Navajo Generating Station near Page , Arizona , in 1976 . The resulting Central Arizona Project ( CAP ) irrigates more than 830 @,@ 000 acres ( 3 @,@ 400 km2 ) and provides municipal supplies to over 5 million people from Phoenix to Tucson using water from the Colorado River . 
 = = = Environmental impacts = = = 
 Historically , the Colorado transported from 85 to 100 million short tons ( 77 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 to 91 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 t ) of sediment or silt to the Gulf of California each year – second only to the Mississippi among North American rivers . This sediment nourished wetlands and riparian areas along the river 's lower course , particularly in its 3 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 7 @,@ 800 km2 ) delta , once the largest desert estuary on the continent . Currently , the majority of sediments carried by the Colorado River are deposited at the upper end of Lake Powell , and most of the remainder ends up in Lake Mead . Various estimates place the time it would take for Powell to completely fill with silt at 300 to 700 years . Dams trapping sediment not only pose damage to river habitat but also threaten future operations of the Colorado River reservoir system . 
 Reduction in flow caused by dams , diversions , water for thermoelectric power stations , and evaporation losses from reservoirs – the latter of which consumes more than 15 percent of the river 's natural runoff – has had severe ecological consequences in the Colorado River Delta and the Gulf of California . Historically , the delta with its large freshwater outflow and extensive salt marshes provided an important breeding ground for aquatic species in the Gulf . Today 's desiccated delta , at only a fraction of its former size , no longer provides suitable habitat , and populations of fish , shrimp and sea mammals in the gulf have seen a dramatic decline . Since 1963 , the only times when the Colorado River has reached the ocean have been during El Niño events in the 1980s and 1990s . 
 Reduced flows have led to increases in the concentration of certain substances in the lower river that have impacted water quality . Salinity is one of the major issues . The lower Colorado 's salt content was about 50 parts per million ( ppm ) in its natural state , but by the 1960s , it had increased to well over 2000 ppm . By the early 1970s , there was also serious concern about salinity caused by salts leached from local soils by irrigation drainage water , which were estimated to add 10 million short tons ( 9 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 t ) of excess salt to the river per year . The Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Act was passed in 1974 , mandating conservation practices including the reduction of saline drainage . The program reduced the annual load by about 1 @.@ 2 million short tons ( 1 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 t ) , but salinity remains an ongoing issue . In 1997 , the USBR estimated that saline irrigation water caused crop damages exceeding $ 500 million in the U.S. and $ 100 million in Mexico . Further efforts have been made to combat the salt issue in the lower Colorado , including the construction of a desalination plant at Yuma . In 2011 , the seven U.S. states agreed upon a " Plan of Implementation " , which aims to reduce salinity by 644 @,@ 000 short tons ( 584 @,@ 000 t ) per year by 2030 . 
 Agricultural runoff containing pesticide residues has also been concentrated in the lower river in greater amounts . Toxins derived from pesticides have led to fish kills ; six of these events were recorded between 1964 and 1968 alone . The pesticide issue is even greater in streams and water bodies near agricultural lands irrigated by the Imperial Irrigation District with Colorado River water . In the Imperial Valley , Colorado River water used for irrigation overflows into the New and Alamo rivers and into the Salton Sea . Both rivers and the sea are among the most polluted bodies of water in the United States , posing dangers not only to aquatic life but to contact by humans and migrating birds . Pollution from agricultural runoff is not limited to the lower river ; the issue is also significant in upstream reaches such as Colorado 's Grand Valley , also a major center of irrigated agriculture . 
 Large dams such as Hoover and Glen Canyon typically release water from lower levels of their reservoirs , resulting in stable and relatively cold year @-@ round temperatures in long reaches of the river . The Colorado 's average temperature once ranged from 85 ° F ( 29 ° C ) at the height of summer to near freezing in winter , but modern flows through the Grand Canyon , for example , rarely deviate significantly from 46 ° F ( 8 ° C ) . Changes in temperature regime have caused declines of native fish populations , and stable flows have enabled increased vegetation growth , obstructing riverside habitat . These flow patterns have also made the Colorado more dangerous to recreational boaters ; people are more likely to die of hypothermia in the colder water , and the general lack of flooding allows rockslides to build up , making the river more difficult to navigate . 
 = = = = Minute 319 = = = = 
 In the 21st century , there has been renewed interest in restoring a limited water flow to the delta . In November 2012 , the U.S. and Mexico reached an agreement , known as Minute 319 , permitting Mexico storage of its water allotment in U.S. reservoirs during wet years , thus increasing the efficiency with which the water can be used . In addition to renovating irrigation canals in the Mexicali Valley to reduce leakage , this will make about 45 @,@ 000 acre feet ( 56 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ) per year available for release to the delta on average . The water will be used to provide both an annual base flow and a spring " pulse flow " to mimic the river 's original snowmelt @-@ driven regime . The first pulse flow , an eight @-@ week release of 105 @,@ 000 acre feet ( 130 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ) , was initiated on March 21 , 2014 , with the aim of revitalising 2 @,@ 350 acres ( 950 hectares ) of wetland . This pulse reached the sea on May 16 , 2014 , marking the first time in 16 years that any water from the Colorado flowed into the ocean , and was hailed as " an experiment of historic political and ecological significance " and a landmark in U.S. – Mexican cooperation in conservation . The pulse will be followed by the steady release of 52 @,@ 000 acre feet ( 64 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ) over the following three years , just a small fraction of its average flow before damming . 
 = = = Uncertain future = = = 
 When the Colorado River Compact was drafted in the 1920s , it was based on barely 30 years of streamflow records that suggested an average annual flow of 17 @.@ 5 million acre feet ( 21 @.@ 6 km3 ) past Lee 's Ferry . Modern studies of tree rings revealed that those three decades were probably the wettest in the past 500 to 1 @,@ 200 years and that the natural long @-@ term annual flow past Lee 's Ferry is probably closer to 13 @.@ 5 million acre feet ( 16 @.@ 7 km3 ) , as compared to the natural flow at the mouth of 16 @.@ 3 million acre feet ( 20 @.@ 1 km3 ) . This has resulted in more water being allocated to river users than actually flows through the Colorado . Droughts have exacerbated the issue of water over @-@ allocation , including the Texas drought of the 1950s , which saw several consecutive years of notably low water and has often been used in planning for " a worst @-@ case scenario " . 
 The most severe drought on record began in the early 21st century , in which the river basin produced normal or above @-@ average runoff in only four years between 2000 and 2012 . Major reservoirs in the basin dropped to historic lows , with Lake Powell falling to just one @-@ third of capacity in early 2005 , the lowest level on record since the reservoir was first filling in 1969 . The watershed is experiencing a warming trend , which is accompanied by earlier snowmelt and a general reduction in precipitation . A 2004 study showed that a 1 – 6 percent decrease of precipitation would lead to runoff declining by as much as 18 percent by 2050 . Average reservoir storage declined by at least 32 percent , further crippling the region 's water supply and hydropower generation . A study by the Scripps Research Institute in 2008 predicted that both Lake Mead and Lake Powell stand an even chance of dropping to useless levels or " dead pool " by 2021 if current drying trends and water usage rates continue . 
 In late 2010 , Lake Mead dropped to just 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) above the first " drought trigger " elevation , a level at which Arizona and Nevada would have to begin rationing water as delineated by the Colorado River Compact . Despite above @-@ average runoff in 2011 that raised the immense reservoir more than 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) , record drought conditions returned in 2012 and 2013 . Reservoir levels were low enough at the beginning of water year 2014 that the Bureau of Reclamation cut releases from Lake Powell by 750 @,@ 000 acre feet ( 930 @,@ 000 ML ) – the first such reduction since the 1960s , when Lake Powell was being filled for the first time . This resulted in Lake Mead dropping to its lowest recorded level since 1937 , when it was first being filled . Rapid development and economic growth further complicate the issue of a secure water supply , particularly in the case of California 's senior water rights over those of Nevada and Arizona : in case of a reduction in water supply , Nevada and Arizona would have to endure severe cuts before any reduction in the California allocation , which is also larger than the other two combined . Although stringent water conservation measures have been implemented , the threat of severe shortfalls in the Colorado River basin continues to increase each year . 
 = = Wildlife and plants = = 
 The Colorado River and its tributaries often nourish extensive corridors of riparian growth as they traverse the arid desert regions of the watershed . Although riparian zones represent a relatively small proportion of the basin and have been affected by engineering projects and river diversion in many places , they have the greatest biodiversity of any habitat in the basin . The most prominent riparian zones along the river occur along the lower Colorado below Davis Dam , especially in the Colorado River Delta , where riparian areas support 358 species of birds despite the reduction in freshwater flow and invasive plants such as tamarisk ( salt cedar ) . Reduction of the delta 's size has also threatened animals such as jaguars and the vaquita porpoise , which is endemic to the gulf . Human development of the Colorado River has also helped to create new riparian zones by smoothing the river 's seasonal flow , notably through the Grand Canyon . 
 More than 1 @,@ 600 species of plants grow in the Colorado River watershed , ranging from the creosote bush , saguaro cactus , and Joshua trees of the Sonoran and Mojave Deserts to the forests of the Rocky Mountains and other uplands , composed mainly of ponderosa pine , subalpine fir , Douglas @-@ fir and Engelmann spruce . Before logging in the 19th century , forests were abundant in high elevations as far south as the Mexico – U.S. border , and runoff from these areas nourished abundant grassland communities in river valleys . Some arid regions of the watershed , such as the upper Green River valley in Wyoming , Canyonlands National Park in Utah and the San Pedro River valley in Arizona and Sonora , supported extensive reaches of grassland roamed by large mammals such as buffalo and antelope as late as the 1860s . Near Tucson , Arizona , " where now there is only powder @-@ dry desert , the grass once reached as high as the head of a man on horse back " . 
 Rivers and streams in the Colorado basin were once home to 49 species of native fish , of which 42 were endemic . Engineering projects and river regulation have led to the extinction of four species and severe declines in the populations of 40 species . <unk> chub , razorback sucker , Colorado pikeminnow , and humpback chub are among those considered the most at risk ; all are unique to the Colorado River system and well adapted to the river 's natural silty conditions and flow variations . Clear , cold water released by dams has significantly changed characteristics of habitat for these and other Colorado River basin fishes . A further 40 species that occur in the river today , notably the brown trout , were introduced during the 19th and 20th centuries , mainly for sport fishing . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 Famed for its dramatic rapids and canyons , the Colorado is one of the most desirable whitewater rivers in the United States , and its Grand Canyon section – run by more than 22 @,@ 000 people annually – has been called the " granddaddy of rafting trips " . Grand Canyon trips typically begin at Lee 's Ferry and take out at Diamond Creek or Lake Mead , and range from one to eighteen days for commercial trips and from two to twenty @-@ five days for private trips . Private ( noncommercial ) trips are extremely difficult to arrange because the National Park Service limits river traffic for environmental purposes ; people who desire such a trip often have to wait more than 10 years for the opportunity . 
 Several other sections of the river and its tributaries are popular whitewater runs , and many of these are also served by commercial outfitters . The Colorado 's Cataract Canyon and many reaches in the Colorado headwaters are even more heavily used than the Grand Canyon , and about 60 @,@ 000 boaters run a single 4 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) section above Radium , Colorado , each year . The upper Colorado also includes many of the river 's most challenging rapids , including those in Gore Canyon , which is considered so dangerous that " boating is not recommended " . Another section of the river above Moab , known as the Colorado " Daily " or " Fisher Towers Section " , is the most visited whitewater run in Utah , with more than 77 @,@ 000 visitors in 2011 alone . The rapids of the Green River 's Gray and Desolation Canyons and the less difficult " <unk> " section of the lower San Juan River are also frequently traversed by boaters . 
 Eleven U.S. national parks – Arches , Black Canyon of the Gunnison , Bryce Canyon , Canyonlands , Capitol Reef , Grand Canyon , Mesa Verde , Petrified Forest , Rocky Mountain , Saguaro , and Zion – are in the watershed , in addition to many national forests , state parks and recreation areas . Hiking , backpacking , camping , skiing and fishing are among the multiple recreation opportunities offered by these areas . Fisheries have declined in many streams in the watershed , especially in the Rocky Mountains , because of polluted runoff from mining and agricultural activities . The Colorado 's major reservoirs are also heavily traveled summer destinations . <unk> and water @-@ skiing are popular activities on Lakes Mead , Powell , Havasu and Mojave , as well as Flaming Gorge Reservoir in Utah and Wyoming , and Navajo Reservoir in New Mexico and Colorado . Lake Powell and surrounding Glen Canyon National Recreation Area received more than 2 million visitors per year as of 2007 , while nearly 7 @.@ 9 million people visited Lake Mead and the Lake Mead National Recreation Area in 2008 . Colorado River recreation employs some 250 @,@ 000 people and contributes $ 26 billion each year to the Southwest economy . 
 = Missy Higgins = 
 Melissa " Missy " Morrison Higgins ( born 19 August 1983 ) is an Australian singer @-@ songwriter , musician and actress . Her Australian number @-@ one albums are The Sound of White ( 2004 ) , On a Clear Night ( 2007 ) and The Ol ' Razzle Dazzle ( 2012 ) , and her most popular singles are " Scar " , " The Special Two " , " Steer " and " Where I Stood " . Higgins was nominated for five ARIA Music Awards in 2004 and won ' Best Pop Release ' for " Scar " . In 2005 , she was nominated for seven more awards and won five . Higgins won her seventh ARIA in 2007 . Her third album , The Ol ' Razzle Dazzle , was released in Australia in June 2012 ( July 2012 in the US ) . As of August 2014 , Higgins ' first three studio albums had sold over one million units . 
 Higgins ' fourth studio album , OZ , was released in September 2014 and consists of cover versions of Australian composers , as well as a book of related essays . 
 Alongside her music career , Higgins pursues interests in animal rights and the environment , endeavouring to make her tours carbon neutral . In 2010 she made her acting debut in the feature film Bran Nue Dae and also performed on its soundtrack . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Higgins was born in Melbourne , Victoria , to Christopher Higgins , an English @-@ Australian general practitioner , and Margaret ( née Morrison ) , an Australian childcare centre operator . Her sister , Nicola , is seven years older , and brother , David , is six years older . She learned to play classical piano from age six , following in the footsteps of Christopher and David , but realised she wanted to be a singer at about 12 when she appeared in an Armadale Primary School production of Andrew Lloyd Webber 's musical Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat . Bored with practice , she gave up playing piano at that time . Hoping for more freedom , she urged her parents to send her to Geelong Grammar School , an independent boarding school attended by her siblings . At Geelong she took up the piano again , this time playing jazz including performing with her brother David 's group on weekends . She was introverted and found that piano practice helped her cope with living at boarding school . 
 At 15 , she wrote " All for Believing " for a school music assignment and completed it just hours before the deadline . The assignment earned an A and she performed her song in front of classmates . She approached a Melbourne record company and was told that they wanted more than one song . She wrote more songs and worked with the Kool <unk> project , which enables students to record music . In 2001 , her sister Nicola entered " All for Believing " on Higgins ' behalf into Unearthed , radio station Triple J 's competition for unsigned artists . The song won the competition and was added to the station 's play list . 
 Two record companies showed an interest in Higgins — Sony and Eleven . She signed with Eleven , partly because they agreed that she would not be " made into a pop star " and partly because they were happy for her to take time off for a backpacking holiday . Higgins ' manager is Eleven 's John Watson , who also manages rock band Silverchair . Watson later disclosed that " Missy 's the only time in my career I knew after 90 seconds I really wanted to sign her . " The backpacking trip had been planned with a friend for years and the pair spent most of 2002 in Europe ; while Higgins was travelling , " All for Believing " started to receive airplay on Los Angeles radio station KCRW . Such radio exposure attracted the attention of American record labels and , by year 's end , an international recording deal with Warner Bros. had been negotiated 
 = = = 2003 – 2005 : The Sound of White = = = 
 Higgins was the support act on a 2003 Australian tour by folk rock band The Waifs and rock band <unk> . She travelled to the US to work with John Porter , who produced her first EP , Missy Higgins , which was released in November and entered the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) Singles Chart Top 50 in August 2004 . 
 She toured Australia , supporting Pete Murray and John Butler Trio . Her second four @-@ track EP Scar was released in July . The title track " Scar " , co @-@ written with US songwriter , Kevin Griffin , debuted at No. 1 on the ARIA Charts . Her first album , The Sound of White , was released in September , and debuted at No. 1 on the ARIA Albums Chart . Also produced by Porter , it sold over 500 @,@ 000 copies . She was nominated in five categories at the ARIA Music Awards of 2004 for " Scar " : Best Female Artist ' , ' Single of the Year ' , ' Best Pop Release ' , ' Breakthrough Artist – Single ' and ' Best Video ' ( directed by <unk> Films ) . At the awards ceremony on 17 October she received the award for Best Pop Release , beating Delta Goodrem , The Dissociatives , Kylie Minogue and Pete Murray . This was followed by her first national headline tour . Her second single " Ten Days " was co @-@ written with Jay Clifford ( guitarist in US band Jump , Little Children ) and was inspired by Higgins ' 2002 break @-@ up with her boyfriend before she travelled to Europe . Released in November , it peaked at No. 12 . 
 On 29 January 2005 Higgins performed with other local musicians including Nick Cave and Powderfinger at the WaveAid fundraising concert in the Sydney Cricket Ground . The concert raised A $ 2 @.@ 3 million for four charities supporting the victims of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake . In March Higgins performed at the MTV Australia Awards and won the prize for ' Breakthrough Artist of the Year ' . The following month she released her third single , " The Special Two " , which was a radio hit and reached No. 2 . " The Special Two " was released on an EP which included her cover of the Skyhooks song , " You Just Like Me Cos I 'm Good In Bed " , recorded for Triple J 's 30th anniversary . The song had been the first track played on Triple J when it launched ( as Double J ) in 1975 . In May , Higgins won the ' Song of the Year ' and ' Breakthrough ' awards for " Scar " from the Australasian Performing Right Association ( APRA ) . She continued touring in mid @-@ 2005 and released her fourth single , " The Sound of White " , in August . In September she played a sold out performance at the Vanguard in Sydney with the proceeds going to charity . She was nominated for seven more ARIAs and in October won ' Album of the Year ' , ' Best Pop Release ' , ' Breakthrough Artist – Album ' and ' Highest Selling Album ' ( all for The Sound of White ) and ' Best Female Artist ' ( for " Scar " ) . She teamed up with fellow ARIA award @-@ winning singer Ben Lee in late 2005 for a national tour . 
 = = = 2006 – 2009 : On a Clear Night = = = 
 During 2006 , Higgins lived in Broome , Western Australia for six months , away from the entertainment industry . The relaxed lifestyle helped her focus on writing new material . The landscape made a big impression , " It was the first place I 'd ever felt honestly connected with my country , with the physical land of my country " and inspired her to write " Going North " . She then toured the United States and South Africa , writing more material on the road . In September she based herself in Los Angeles to record her second album , On a Clear Night , with producer Mitchell Froom . " Steer " was released as an EP , followed a fortnight later by its album on 28 April 2007 , both debuted at No. 1 on their respective charts . 
 In February , Higgins had contributed a tribute song to the album , Cannot Buy My Soul , for noted indigenous singer , Kev Carmody , singing " <unk> Woman " with musician Paul Kelly and group Augie March . On 7 July , she participated in the Live Earth concert in Sydney , performing her own set before joining Carmody , Kelly and vocalist John Butler on stage for the song " From Little Things Big Things Grow " . Emily Dunn in The Sydney Morning Herald wrote " [ the song ] could have been the event 's anthem " . Rolling Stone 's Dan Lander pointed out a highlight , when the " whole crowd sung along – all eleven verses . " 
 Higgins returned to Los Angeles to focus on the US market — she spent September and October touring — where she was still relatively unknown . On 26 October , backed by the Sydney Youth Orchestra , she headlined the annual Legs 11 concert , a breast cancer benefit held in The Domain , Royal Botanic Gardens , Sydney . Two days later Higgins performed at the 2007 ARIAs where she was nominated for ' Best Pop Release ' , ' Highest Selling Album ' and ' Highest Selling Single ' ( for " Steer " ) and won ' Best Female Artist ' ( for On a Clear Night ) — her seventh ARIA Music Award . On 31 October , she was a guest at television music channel MAX 's inaugural Concert for the Cure , a private concert for people affected by breast cancer . She sang headline act Powderfinger 's " Sunsets " with front man Bernard Fanning and joined in with the encore of " These Days " . She spent November and December on her For One Night Only Tour , taking in Cairns , Sydney and Perth . You Am I lead singer , Tim Rogers , joined her on some shows . 
 On a Clear Night , was released in the US on 26 February 2008 , supported by a tour in March . Her ten @-@ month stay in Los Angeles during 2008 promoted her songs for films and television shows . Her first US single " Where I Stood " was featured in US series including Grey 's Anatomy , One Tree Hill and So You Think You Can Dance . During 2008 , Higgins supported the Indigo Girls and then Ben Folds on their respective US tours . February and March 2009 saw her co @-@ headlining a US tour with Canadian Justin <unk> . On 31 March she released an EP , More Than This in Australia that features cover versions of " More Than This " by Roxy Music , " ( I 'm ) In Love Again " by Peggy Lee , " Breakdown " by Tom Petty and " Moses " by Patty Griffin . " Moses " had been included on Triple J 's 2005 compilation album Like a Version : Volume One and " More Than This " was recorded as part of Covered , A Revolution in Sound , a Warner Bros. tribute album also released in March 2009 . 
 = = = 2010 – 2013 : The Ol ' Razzle Dazzle = = = 
 Higgins started writing music for her third album in 2009 . After about seven years of touring and recording she took a break from the music industry to pursue other interests . In 2010 she enrolled in a course in indigenous studies at the University of Melbourne . Her acting debut was as Annie in 2010 film Bran Nue Dae directed by Rachel Perkins . The film is an adaptation of the 1990 musical , Bran Nue Dae , " Australia 's first Aboriginal musical " . Although Higgins would consider future acting projects she has no plans to actively pursue it as a career . 
 In July and August 2010 , Higgins played several dates of Sarah McLachlan 's Lilith Fair tour in the US . At Lilith Fair , she met Australian musician Butterfly Boucher and they decided to work together . In 2011 , Higgins travelled to where Boucher was living in Nashville to record her third album , which is co @-@ produced by Boucher and Brad Jones . Titled The Ol ' Razzle Dazzle , the album was released on 1 June 2012 . Its first single , " Unashamed Desire " , co @-@ written with Boucher , was released on 23 April . In November 2011 , at the ARIA Music Awards , Higgins performed a duet of " <unk> " with Geoffrey <unk> <unk> , from his <unk> album . 
 " The Ol ' Razzle Dazzle " album debuted at # 1 on the ARIA Albums Chart the week of 12 June 2012 . It is now Higgins ' 3rd straight number one album . Higgins now ties Delta Goodrem , Olivia Newton @-@ John and Kylie Minogue for the 2nd most Australian number one albums by an Australian female artist . Only Kasey Chambers has done better at 4 number one ARIA albums . 
 = = = 2014 onward : Oz = = = 
 In September 2014 , Higgins released her fourth studio album , Oz , which features cover versions of Australian composers , including The Angels , Slim Dusty , Something For Kate , <unk> Band , Paul Kelly and The Drones . The album is also accompanied by a book of related essays , in which Higgins uses each of the recordings to reflect upon subjects such as music and love . Higgins collaborated with Dan Sultan for the recording of the Slim Dusty song " The Biggest Disappointment " . 
 Higgins explained in an October 2014 interview that she experienced a significant bout of writer 's block following the completion of her second album and someone suggested an album of cover versions at the time , but she only revisited the idea during the conception of Oz . Higgins further explained : 
 I responded to all these songs on an emotional level , when I first heard them . I wanted songs I felt I could tell with my own voice , and interpret them authentically ... But it was important to maintain the emotional integrity and the heart of the song . It was a high priority to keep true to the songs . 
 The album was co @-@ produced by <unk> Bischoff , who previously worked with David Byrne , formerly of Talking Heads , and Amanda Palmer . 
 Oz debuted at number 3 on the ARIA Albums chart and remained in the top five positions until 18 October 2014 . 
 The national Australian tour in support of Oz commenced on 20 September 2014 in Cairns , Queensland , and is scheduled to end in Melbourne in October 2014 . Higgins will be accompanied by Bischoff , and Australian artist Dustin <unk> will appear as a special guest . 
 On 19 February 2016 , Higgins released a new single titled , " Oh Canada " . 
 = = Musical influences and technique = = 
 Higgins grew up in the 1980s and 1990s listening to artists that her older siblings liked — Nicola played Mariah Carey and Whitney Houston , while David favoured Queen and Kiss . Departing for boarding school at age 13 , she was exposed to alternative artists like Nirvana and Courtney Love and started teaching herself guitar and writing her own music . She also began singing with David 's jazz group on weekends . As an adult she prefers Nina Simone and Ray Charles to " poppy dance music " . She has cited Patty Griffin , Ron Sexsmith , Rufus Wainwright , Paul Kelly and Sarah McLachlan as influences . Material from her third album is influenced by ambient music from Low , Jon Hopkins , Icelandic band Sigur Rós and Estonian classical composer Arvo Pärt . 
 Higgins ' song writing grew out of a desire to express her emotions when she was at school and her lyrics describe her feelings about her own life and relationships . The piano was the first instrument she learned to play , and she continues to use it as well as digital pianos including a Roland RD @-@ <unk> , RD @-@ 700 and KR @-@ 15 . She also uses guitars extensively in her music particularly when touring , due to their portable nature and favours the Australian brand , <unk> . On occasion she plays keytar , xylophone and melodica during performances . 
 On 7 September 2012 , Higgins recorded a cover version of Gotye 's " Heart 's A Mess " for the " Like a Version " segment , explaining on @-@ air that the song is her favourite Gotye composition . Higgins had travelled with Gotye previously and referred to him as " an incredible singer " in the interview prior to the rendition . 
 = = Causes = = 
 As a vegetarian , Higgins promoted the health benefits of not eating meat in a 2005 advertising campaign by People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals ( PETA ) ; and has supported their anti @-@ fur stance . She is interested in environmental issues and is involved with the Sierra Club , a grassroots organisation based in California . She has protested against the proposed industrialisation of the Kimberley region of Western Australia and donated the royalties from her 2009 EP More Than This . Since early 2007 , Higgins has tried to make her tours carbon neutral , she purchases green energy to power venues , uses hybrid cars where possible and purchases carbon offsets . 
 On 5 October 2012 , Higgins performed alongside The John Butler Trio and Clare Bowditch at the " Save the Kimberley " concert held at Federation Square in Melbourne , Australia . In relation to the Kimberley region and campaign , Higgins stated : 
 Apparently scientists are still discovering hundreds of new plant and animal species there every year , which goes to show that there is still so much we don 't know about the region . I just fell in love with it ; it gets under your skin . Woodside Petroleum are planning to build one of the world 's biggest LNG ( liquified natural gas ) processing plants on the Kimberley coast , just north of Broome . They would be drilling for the gas out at sea and bringing it onshore at this plant , which would just be devastating for the region . The question everyone is asking is , why not process it offshore or pipe it to one of the mining towns down south that already have the infrastructure in place ? Why ruin the Kimberley if there 's an alternative ? 
 Higgins performed at another concert in support of the Kimberley cause on 24 February 2013 , with John Butler also appearing again , with the event held at The Esplanade in Fremantle , Western Australia . Jarrah Records , the record label that John Butler co @-@ founded with The Waifs and Phil Stevens , worked in partnership with The Wilderness Society to stage the free event that also featured the band Ball Park Music and Dr Bob Brown , former leader of the Australian Greens Party . A march to protest the proposed gas refinery construction at James Price Point accompanied the free concert and campaign supporters were photographed with banners and placards . 
 As of 2012 , Higgins is one of numerous publicly known advocates for the ' Oscar 's Law ' campaign . The campaign , launched in 2010 , protests the existence of " puppy factories " in Australia , whereby animals are factory farmed . One of the campaign 's slogans is " Break the Puppy Trade — Don 't buy puppies from pet shops " and the list of notable advocates includes Paul Dempsey ( musician ) , Kate Ceberano ( singer ) and Mick Molloy ( comedian ) . 
 In response to the proposed dumping of around 3 million cubic metres of dredged seabed onto the Great Barrier Reef , a legal fighting team was formed by World Wide Fund for Nature ( WWF ) <unk> and the Australian Marine Conservation Society ( AMCS ) in late 2013 / early 2014 . The legal team received further support in April 2014 , following the release of the " Sounds For The Reef " musical fundraising project . Produced by <unk> , the digital album features Higgins , in addition to artists such as The Herd , <unk> , John Butler , The Cat Empire , Fat Freddys Drop , The Bamboos ( featuring Kylie <unk> ) and Resin Dogs . Released on 7 April , the album 's 21 songs were sold on the Bandcamp website . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Higgins has been a patron of multiple mental health charities since 2003 . She described her younger self as " a bit of a depressed child " and " introverted " , and that she had " experienced various degrees of depression " . Prescribed antidepressant medication while in high school , she learned to channel low moods into song writing , calling music her " emotional outlet " . In a 2006 interview she said that her songs were " coming from more of a happier place " . While recording her second album she discovered a passion for rock climbing , as a " meditative pursuit " and that , " It 's the first thing I 've had — other than music — that I 'm passionate about . " 
 From 2004 to 2007 , Higgins ' sexual orientation was the subject of media speculation based partly on interpretations of her lyrics and her interviews . In an October 2007 interview with Australian lesbian magazine Cherrie , she was asked if she fell under the moniker of " not @-@ so @-@ straight " girls . She replied " Um , yeah , definitely . ... I think sexuality is a fluid thing and it 's becoming increasingly more acceptable to admit that you 're that way . " In November her Myspace page reported , " I 've been in relationships with both men and women so I guess I fall most easily under the category ' Bisexual ' " . She went on to say that she wanted future interviews to focus on her music rather than her sexuality . In a March 2008 interview with AfterEllen.com , Higgins said that her song " Secret " was written about an ex @-@ girlfriend who was not comfortable , at first , about going public with their relationship ; " I was so head over heels in love with her I kind of wanted to shout it out to the world , so it was just a song about keeping something under the covers ... keeping it away locked in a little room . " 
 In 2013 , Higgins began a relationship with Broome playwright and comedian Dan Lee . In December 2013 , Lee announced the couple 's engagement on his Facebook page . While he remained tight @-@ lipped on the details , Lee said the proposal was low @-@ key : " It was very simple ... Just a thing between us . " On 2 August 2014 , Higgins announced on her Facebook page that she and her fiance were expecting a baby , due in January 2015 . She said , " A new chapter is about to begin , and with it a crazy and wonderful journey , no doubt . " In October 2014 , Higgins announced via Instagram that she is expecting a boy . When asked about her impending parenthood in an October 2014 interview , Higgins replied : 
 I like being home , having my routines , looking after my garden and playing with my dog , but I also love playing . I love being able to do both ... I don 't know what will happen after this . I 've got no plans at the moment . I 'm going to see how this motherhood thing turns out . 
 Higgins gave birth to her son , Samuel Arrow Lee , on 5 January 2015 . 
 = = Discography = = 
 2004 : The Sound of White 
 2007 : On a Clear Night 
 2012 : The Ol ' Razzle Dazzle 
 2014 : Oz 
 = = Filmography = = 
 2010 : Bran Nue Dae as Annie 
 2014 : Unity – Narrator ( Documentary ) 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = = = APRA Awards = = = 
 The APRA Awards are presented annually from 1982 by the Australasian Performing Right Association ( APRA ) . Higgins has won two awards from six nominations . 
 = = = ARIA Awards = = = 
 The ARIA Music Awards are presented annually from 1987 by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . Higgins has won nine awards from twenty @-@ three nominations . 
 = = = Other awards = = = 
 She has won an MTV Australia Video Music Award . 
 2005 MTV Australia Video Music Awards , Breakthrough Artist of the Year 
 = Battle of the Eurymedon = 
 The Battle of the Eurymedon was a double battle , taking place both on water and land , between the Delian League of Athens and her Allies , and the Persian Empire of Xerxes I. It took place in either 469 or 466 BC , in the vicinity of the mouth of the Eurymedon River ( now the <unk> ) in Pamphylia , Asia Minor . It forms part of the Wars of the Delian League , itself part of the larger Greco @-@ Persian Wars . 
 The Delian League had been formed between Athens and many of the city @-@ states of the Aegean to continue the war with Persia , which had begun with the first and second Persian invasions of Greece ( 492 – 490 and 480 – 479 BC , respectively ) . In the aftermath of the Battles of Plataea and Mycale , which had ended the second invasion , the Greek Allies had taken the offensive , besieging the cities of Sestos and Byzantium . The Delian League then took over responsibility for the war , and continued to attack Persian bases in the Aegean throughout the next decade . 
 In either 469 or 466 BC , the Persians began assembling a large army and navy for a major offensive against the Greeks . Gathering near the Eurymedon , it is possible that the expedition aimed to move up the coast of Asia Minor , capturing each city in turn . This would bring the Asiatic Greek regions back under Persian control , and give the Persians naval bases from which to launch further expeditions into the Aegean . Hearing of the Persian preparations , the Athenian general Cimon took 200 triremes and sailed to Phaselis in Pamphylia , which eventually agreed to join the Delian League . This effectively blocked the Persian strategy at its first objective . 
 Cimon then moved to pre @-@ emptively attack the Persian forces near the Eurymedon . Sailing into the mouth of the river , Cimon quickly routed the Persian fleet gathered there . Most of the Persian fleet made land @-@ fall , and the sailors fled to the shelter of the Persian army . Cimon then landed the Greek marines and proceeded to attack the Persian army , which was also routed . The Greeks captured the Persian camp , taking many prisoners , and were able to destroy 200 beached Persian triremes . This stunning double victory seems to have greatly demoralised the Persians , and prevented any further Persian campaigning in the Aegean until at least 451 BC . However , the Delian League do not appear to have pressed home their advantage , probably because of other events in the Greek world that required their attention . 
 = = = Chronology = = = 
 Thucydides provides a succinct list of the main events occurring between the end of the second Persian invasion and the outbreak of the Peloponnesian War , but almost no chronological information . Various attempts have been made to reassemble the chronology , but there is no definitive answer . The assumption central to these attempts is that Thucydides is describing the events in the appropriate chronological order . The one firmly accepted date is 465 BC for the beginning of the Siege of Thasos . This is based on an ancient scholiast 's annotation of a copy of Aeschines 's works . The scholiast notes that the Athenians met disaster at the ' Nine @-@ Ways ' in the archonship of <unk> ( known to be 465 / 464 BC ) . Thucydides mentions this attack on the ' Nine @-@ Ways ' in connection with the beginning of the Siege of Thasos , and since Thucydides says that the siege ended in its third year , the Siege of Thasos therefore dates to <unk> – 463 BC . 
 The Battle of Eurymedon has been dated to 469 BC by Plutarch 's anecdote about the Archon <unk> ( 469 / 468 BC ) choosing Cimon and his fellow generals as judges in a competition . The implication is that Cimon had recently achieved a great victory , and the most likely candidate is Eurymedon . However , since the Battle of Eurymedon seems to have occurred after the Athenian siege of Naxos ( but before the Siege of Thasos ) , the date of Eurymedon is clearly constrained by the date of Naxos . Whilst some accept a date of 469 or earlier for this Naxos , another school of thought places it as late as 467 BC . Since the Battle of Eurymedon seems to have occurred before Thasos , the alternative date for this battle would therefore be 466 BC . Modern historians are split , some supporting 469 BC as the most likely date , and others opting for 466 BC . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Greco @-@ Persian Wars had their roots in the conquest of the Greek cities of Asia Minor , and in particular Ionia , by the Persian Empire of Cyrus the Great shortly after 550 BC . The Persians found the Ionians difficult to rule , eventually settling for sponsoring a tyrant in each Ionian city . While Greek states had in the past often been ruled by tyrants , this was a form of government on the decline . By 500 BC , Ionia appears to have been ripe for rebellion against these Persian place @-@ men . The simmering tension finally broke into open revolt due to the actions of the tyrant of Miletus , Aristagoras . Attempting to save himself after a disastrous Persian @-@ sponsored expedition in 499 BC , Aristagoras chose to declare Miletus a democracy . This triggered similar revolutions across Ionia , and indeed Doris and Aeolis , beginning the Ionian Revolt . 
 The Greek states of Athens and Eretria allowed themselves to be drawn into this conflict by Aristagoras , and during their only campaigning season ( 498 BC ) they contributed to the capture and burning of the Persian regional capital of Sardis . After this , the Ionian Revolt carried on ( without further outside aid ) for a further 5 years , until it was finally completely crushed by the Persians . However , in a decision of great historic significance , the Persian king Darius the Great decided that , despite successfully subduing the revolt , there remained the unfinished business of exacting punishment on Athens and Eretria for supporting the revolt . The Ionian Revolt had severely threatened the stability of Darius 's empire , and the states of mainland Greece would continue to threaten that stability unless dealt with . Darius thus began to contemplate the complete conquest of Greece , beginning with the destruction of Athens and Eretria . 
 In the next two decades there would be two Persian invasions of Greece , including some of the most famous battles in history . During the first invasion , Thrace , Macedon and the Aegean islands were added to the Persian Empire , and Eretria was duly destroyed . However , the invasion ended in 490 BC with the decisive Athenian victory at the Battle of Marathon . Between the two invasions , Darius died , and responsibility for the war passed to his son Xerxes I. Xerxes then led the second invasion personally in 480 BC , taking an enormous ( although oft @-@ exaggerated ) army and navy to Greece . Those Greeks who chose to resist ( the ' Allies ' ) were defeated in the twin battles of Thermopylae and Artemisium on land and at sea respectively . All of Greece except the Peloponnesus thus fell into Persian hands , but then seeking to finally destroy the Allied navy , the Persians suffered a decisive defeat at the Battle of Salamis . The following year , 479 BC , the Allies assembled the largest Greek army yet seen and defeated the Persian invasion force at the Battle of Plataea , ending the invasion and the threat to Greece . 
 According to tradition , on the same day as Plataea , the Allied fleet defeated the demoralised remnants of the Persian fleet in the Battle of Mycale . This action marks the end of the Persian invasion , and the beginning of the next phase in the Greco @-@ Persian wars , the Greek counterattack . After Mycale , the Greek cities of Asia Minor again revolted , with the Persians now powerless to stop them . The Allied fleet then sailed to the Chersonesos , still held by the Persians , and besieged and captured the town of Sestos . The following year , 478 BC , the Allies sent a force to capture the city of Byzantium ( modern day Istanbul ) . The siege was successful , but the behaviour of the Spartan general Pausanias alienated many of the Allies , and resulted in Pausanias 's recall . The siege of Byzantium was the last action of the Hellenic alliance that defeated the Persian invasion . 
 After Byzantium , Sparta was eager to end her involvement in the war . The Spartans were of the view that , with the liberation of mainland Greece , and the Greek cities of Asia Minor , the war 's purpose had already been reached . There was also perhaps a feeling that securing long @-@ term security for the Asian Greeks would prove impossible . The loose alliance of city states that fought against Xerxes 's invasion was dominated by Sparta and the Peloponnesian league . With the Spartan withdrawal , the leadership of the Greeks now explicitly passed to the Athenians . A congress was called on the holy island of Delos to institute a new alliance to continue the fight against the Persians . This alliance , now including many of the Aegean islands , was formally constituted as the ' First Athenian Alliance ' , commonly known as the Delian League . According to Thucydides , the official aim of the League was to " avenge the wrongs they suffered by ravaging the territory of the king . " Forces of the Delian League spent much of the next decade expelling the remaining Persian garrisons from Thrace , and expanding the Aegean territory controlled by the League . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Once the Persian forces in Europe had largely been neutralised , the Athenians seem to have gone about starting to extend the League in Asia Minor . The islands of Samos , Chios and Lesbos seem to have become members of the original Hellenic alliance after Mycale , and presumably were also therefore original members of the Delian League . However , it is unclear exactly when the other Ionian cities , or indeed the other Greek cities of Asia Minor , joined the league , though they certainly did at some point . Thucydides attests the presence of Ionians at Byzantium in 478 BC , so it is possible that at least some of the Ionian cities joined the league in early 478 BC . The Athenian politician Aristides was said to have died in Pontus ( c . 468 BC ) whilst on public business . Given that Aristides was responsible for organising the financial contributions of each League member , this trip may have been connected with expansion of the League into Asia Minor . 
 Cimon 's Eurymedon campaign itself seems to have begun in response to the assembly of a large Persian fleet and army at Aspendos , near the mouth of the Eurymedon River . It is usually argued that the Persians were the would @-@ be aggressors , and that Cimon 's campaign was launched to deal with this new threat . Cawkwell suggests that the Persian build @-@ up was the first concerted attempt to counter the activity of the Greeks since the failure of the second invasion . It is possible that internal strife within the Persian empire had contributed to the length of time it took to launch this campaign . Cawkwell outlines the Persian strategic problems : 
 " Persia was a land power which used its naval forces in close conjunction with its armies , not free ranging in enemy waters . In any case , secure naval bases were necessary . In the Ionian Revolt with land forces already operating in Ionia and elsewhere along the Aegean seaboard , it was easy for a Royal army and navy to deal with the revolt , but in view of the general revolt of the [ Ionian ] cities in 479 BC and the subsequent successes of the Greek navies the only way for Persia must have seemed to be to move along the coast restoring order in city after city , with fleet and army moving together . " 
 The nature of naval warfare in the Ancient world , dependent as it was on large teams of rowers , meant that ships would have to make landfall every few days to resupply with food and water . This severely limited the range of an Ancient fleet , and essentially meant that navies could only operate in the vicinity of secure naval bases . Cawkwell therefore suggests that the Persian forces gathered at Aspendos were aiming to move along the southern coast of Asia Minor , capturing each city , until eventually the Persian navy could begin operating in Ionia again . Alexander the Great would employ this strategy in reverse in winter of 333 BC . Lacking a navy with which to take on the Persians , Alexander settled instead for denying the Persian navy suitable bases , by capturing the ports of southern Asia Minor . 
 Plutarch says that upon hearing that the Persian forces were gathering at Aspendos , Cimon sailed from Cnidus ( in Caria ) with 200 triremes . It is highly likely that Cimon had assembled this force because the Athenians had had some warning of a forthcoming Persian campaign to re @-@ subjugate the Asiatic Greeks . Certainly , no other league business would have required such a great force . Cimon may have been waiting in Caria because he expected the Persians to march straight into Ionia , along the Royal road from Sardis . According to Plutarch , Cimon sailed with these 200 triremes to the Greek city of Phaselis ( in Lycia ) but was refused admittance . He therefore began ravaging the lands of Phaselis , but with the mediation of the Chian contingent of his fleet , the people of Phaselis agreed to join the league . They were to contribute troops to the expedition , and to pay the Athenians ten talents . The fact that Cimon pre @-@ emptively sailed to and captured Phaselis suggests that he anticipated a Persian campaign to capture the coastal cities ( as outlined above ) . The presence of both army and navy at Aspendos may have persuaded him that there was to be no immediate assault on Ionia . By capturing Phaselis , the furthest east Greek city in Asia Minor ( and just to the west of the Eurymedon ) , he effectively blocked the Persian campaign before it had begun , denying them the first naval base they needed to control . Taking further initiative , Cimon then moved to directly attack the Persian fleet at Aspendos . 
 = = Opposing forces = = 
 = = = Greek = = = 
 According to Plutarch , the League fleet consisted of 200 triremes . These were of the sleek Athenian <unk> ( <unk> ) design , originally developed by Themistocles primarily for ramming actions , although they had been modified by Cimon to improve their suitability for boarding actions . 
 The standard complement of a trireme was 200 men , including 14 marines . In the second Persian invasion of Greece , each Persian ship had carried thirty extra marines , and this was probably also true in the first invasion when the whole invasion force was apparently carried in triremes . Furthermore , the Chian ships at the Battle of Lade also carried 40 marines each . This suggests that a trireme could probably carry a maximum of 40 – 45 soldiers — triremes seem to have been easily destabilised by extra weight . There were therefore probably around 5 @,@ 000 hoplite marines with the League fleet . 
 = = = Persian = = = 
 Several different estimates for the size of the Persian fleet are given . Thucydides says that there was a fleet of 200 Phoenician ships , and is generally considered the most reliable source . Plutarch gives numbers of 350 from Ephorus and 600 from <unk> . Furthermore , Plutarch says that the Persian fleet was awaiting 80 Phoenician ships sailing from Cyprus . Although Thucydides 's account is generally to be favoured , there may an element of truth in Plutarch 's assertion that the Persians were awaiting further reinforcements ; this would explain why Cimon was able to launch a pre @-@ emptive assault on them . There are no estimates in the ancient sources for the size of the Persian land army . However , the number of Persian marines accompanying the fleet was presumably in the same range as the number of Greek marines ( c . 5 @,@ 000 ) , since the Persian ships carried the same complement of troops . Plutarch quotes Ephorus as saying that <unk> was commander of the royal fleet , and <unk> of the infantry , but says that Callisthenes named <unk> as overall commander . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Thucydides gives only the barest of details for this battle ; the most reliable detailed account is given by Plutarch . According to Plutarch , the Persian fleet was anchored off the mouth of the Eurymedon , awaiting the arrival of 80 Phoenician ships from Cyprus . Cimon , sailing from Phaselis , made to attack the Persians before the reinforcements arrived , whereupon the Persian fleet , eager to avoid fighting , retreated into the river itself . However , when Cimon continued to bear down on the Persians , they accepted battle . Regardless of their numbers , the Persian battle line was quickly breached , and the Persian ships then turned about , and made for the river bank . Grounding their ships , the crews sought sanctuary with the army waiting nearby . Some ships may have been captured or destroyed during the naval battle , but it seems likely that most were able to land . 
 The Persian army now began to move towards the Greek fleet , which had presumably also grounded itself in order to capture the Persian ships . Despite the weariness of his troops after this first battle , Cimon , seeing " that his men were exalted by the impetus and pride of their victory , and eager to come to close quarters with the Barbarians " , landed the marines and proceeded to attack the Persian army . Initially the Persian line held the Athenian assault , but eventually , as at the Battle of Mycale , the heavily armoured hoplites proved superior , and routed the Persian army . Fleeing back to their camp , the Persians were then captured , along with their camp , by the victorious Greeks . 
 Thucydides says that 200 Phoenician ships were captured and destroyed . It is highly unlikely that this occurred during the apparently brief naval battle , so these were probably grounded ships captured after the battle and destroyed with fire , as has been the case at Mycale . Plutarch says that 200 ships were captured , in addition to those that were destroyed or fled . It is possible that ' destroyed ' in this context means sunk during the battle , since the Greeks would almost certainly have destroyed the ships that they captured as well ( as Thucydides indeed implies ) . Since Thucydides only explicitly gives the number of ships destroyed , it is possible to reconcile Plutarch 's and Thucydides 's numbers , but it is not clear that this is the best approach . There are no estimates in the ancient sources for casualties amongst the troops of either side . 
 Plutarch says that , following his double victory , " though like a powerful athlete he had brought down two contests in one day ... Cimon still went on competing with his own victories . " Cimon supposedly sailed with the Greek fleet as quickly as possible to intercept the fleet of 80 Phoenician ships the Persians had expected . Taking them by surprise , he captured or destroyed the entire fleet . However , Thucydides does not mention this subsidiary action , and some have cast doubt on whether it actually happened . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 According to Plutarch , one tradition had it that the Persian king ( who at the time would still have been Xerxes ) agreed a humiliating peace treaty in the aftermath of the Eurymedon . However , as Plutarch admits , other authors denied that such a peace was made at this time , and the more logical date for any peace treaty would have been after the Cyprus campaign of 450 BC . The alternative suggested by Plutarch is that the Persian king acted as if he had made a humiliating peace with the Greeks , because he was so fearful of engaging in battle with them again . It is generally considered unlikely by modern historians that a peace treaty was made in the aftermath of Eurymedon . 
 The Eurymedon was a highly significant victory for the Delian League , which probably ended once and for all the threat of another Persian invasion of Greece . It also seems to have prevented any Persian attempt to reconquer the Asiatic Greeks until at least 451 BC . The accession of further cities of Asia Minor to the Delian league , particularly from Caria , probably followed Cimon 's campaign there . 
 Despite Cimon 's massive victory , something of a stalemate developed between Persia and the League . The Greeks do not appear to have pressed their advantage home in a meaningful way . If the later date of 466 BC for the Eurymedon campaign is accepted , this might be because the revolt in Thasos meant that resources were diverted away from Asia Minor to prevent the Thasians seceding from the League . Conversely , as Plutarch suggests , the Persians adopted a very defensive strategy in the Aegean for the next decade and a half . The Persian fleet was effectively absent from the Aegean until 451 BC , and Greek ships were able to ply the coasts of Asia Minor with impunity . The next major Delian League campaign against the Persian would only occur in 460 BC , when the Athenians decided to support a revolt in the Egyptian satrapy of the Persian empire . This campaign would last 6 years , before eventually ending in disaster for the Greeks . 
 = Hominid ( novel ) = 
 Hominid is a short novel by Austrian writer Klaus Ebner . Taking place millions of years ago , it is a fictional story of a band of extinct hominids who inhabit Central Africa . Referencing the seven days of biblical Creation , the novel takes place in seven days . As the protagonist Pitar leads his band to civilization , tension arises between the clan leader Costello and his rival Re . Over the course of the story , Pitar invents tools , discovers the use of fire , and falls in love with Maluma . The seventh day marks a turning point in the storyline , as the members of the band separate from one another . 
 The characters ' contemporary language and Pitar 's thorough knowledge of modern @-@ day history , philosophy and science add to the grotesque humor of the novel , while his two friends quote classical Roman literature and Chinese sayings . The book was published by Viennese publisher FZA Verlag in October 2008 . Between 2008 and 2010 , several Austrian and German critics and writers published reviews of the novel . 
 = = Background = = 
 Ebner first considered writing a novel in which prehistoric characters have present @-@ day knowledge and a modern language in 2006 . Believing that this topic would not suffice for a long novel , he initially did not pursue the idea . In February 2008 Ebner won the Wiener Werkstattpreis in the categories of short story and essay — in addition to the prize money the organizer of the award , the Viennese publishing house FZA , offers to the winner to publish a 100 @-@ page book . Hence Ebner wrote and finalized his narrative within four months . The book was published in the October of the same year with the German title Hominide . The publisher introduced the work to the public with a public reading in Vienna . 
 The novel consists of seven chapters , " Day 1 " to " Day 7 " , with the action of each chapter occurring on consecutive days . The chapters refer to the seven days of the biblical Creation . In comparison with other works of Ebner , Hominid is the first to be about a prehistoric subject . The author had already addressed topics of religious faith before , in the short stories “ Der Schreiber von Aram ( The Scribe of Aram ) ” and “ <unk> ( Snapshot ) ” , and frequently used a satirical style for his narratives . 
 = = Plot synopsis = = 
 Hominid takes place several million years ago in the Central African transitional region between rainforest and savanna . The main characters are Australopithecus <unk> , an extinct , mostly tree @-@ dwelling hominid that existed before the use of tools and fire . The story is told through first @-@ person narration by the protagonist , Pitar . In deliberating his social and natural environment , Pitar decides to lead his band to civilization : “ Hence I decided to shed some light on the darkness , to light a candle following the motto Let there be light and so on . ” His linguistic capacity , thoughts and speech correspond to those of modern man , and he also is knowledgeable about history , politics , philosophy and literature . Intermittent comments made by Pitar concerning a particular prospect or artifact that has not been invented or developed yet add to the humor of the grotesque scenario . Pitar 's close friends are Carpediem , who <unk> Latin phrases and quotes the writers of Classical Antiquity , and Lao , who frequently refers to Chinese philosophy . 
 Although it is difficult to convince his fellow Hominidae to follow him , Pitar manages to persuade the patriarchal leader of the clan , Costello , who has taken command from the recently deceased Thorn . The band builds windbreaks to help them descend more often from the trees , thus exposing them to a higher risk of being attacked by predators on the ground . A rivalry emerges between Costello and another band member , Re , who not only questions the leading abilities of the present alpha but also desires Costello 's females . To alleviate the escalating debate of authority , Pitar tries to implement a parliament to settle disputes peacefully . Costello , however , considers the parliament to be a forum in which he can consolidate his power , citing famous speeches by Winston Churchill and Abraham Lincoln ; the other members ruin this noble idea with their lack of discipline and ostentatious indifference . 
 One of the subplots of the novel details the budding love between Pitar and Maluma , a female member of the band . Costello perceives the group of females as his personal harem , but when Maluma falls in love with Pitar she breaks off her relationship with him . On each day , the characters discover new insights and artefacts , but seek rest from their exhaustion by the seventh day . This repose , however , is disrupted by the attack of a saber @-@ toothed cat . Several members of the band are killed , including Costello , thus enabling Re to assume power . Pitar and Maluma decide to leave the band , stating , " We should leave in time , leave Re and his new Reich , which , when I 'm taking into account Thorn 's previous reign , would be the Third over here . " Pitar and Maluma head toward the savanna , an action which alludes to both the expulsion from paradise and the Out of Africa theory . Only odd @-@ numbered chapters narrate the love story , which bookmarks the novel . Writer Karin Gayer mentions in her review that the love story of Pitar and Maluma , and its positioning within the text , offers " a second interpretation of the beginning and the end " . 
 = = Characters = = 
 In a conversation with the Viennese regional leader of publisher <unk> , Ebner revealed the hidden meanings of his characters ' names . 
 Akshaya : The name originates from Hindi ( specifically Sanskrit ) and signifies “ the indomitable ” . Akshaya is a female character with a firm personality , and belongs to the band although she often acts as an <unk> in regard to Costello . In a certain sense she represents the matriarchal form of governance by daring to disagree with the alpha and making her own decisions . 
 Bongo : <unk> from the African people and language and is also used for place names in several African countries , also alluding to Adriano <unk> film Bingo Bongo and a kind of forest antelope . The novel presents Bongo as a clownish , male juvenile who teases the other members of the band but is protected from <unk> by his youth and humor . 
 Carpediem : Latin for " seize the day " , literally meaning " pluck the day " , which stems from a poem by Horace . Carpediem is Pitar 's closest friend and uses Latin quotations and expressions . 
 Costello : English @-@ Italian surname . Costello is the patriarch of the band . Keen on remaining in power , he recognizes that Pitar 's ideas might help him prevail . For this reason he supports Pitar . 
 <unk> : A female character who belongs to Costello 's harem . Her name stems from the Arabic language meaning " the pretty one " . 
 <unk> : A female character who belongs to Costello 's harem . Together with <unk> she woos the clan leader . Her name stems from the Semitic languages meaning " woman " . 
 Konrad : Old High German for " bold or good adviser " . Konrad is a follower of Re and acts as his speaker , also challenging and ridiculing Pitar 's ideas . 
 Lao : Depending on the intonation , the word is Chinese for " firm , solid " or " old " . It is also an allusion to either or both the philosopher Lao @-@ Tzu , author of the Tao Te Ching , or the Lao people who live in Southeast Asia . The character Lao quotes Chinese philosophers and is a friend of Pitar . When he leaves the band after the attack of the sabre @-@ tooth , he goes in the direction of East Africa and Asia . 
 Lucy : An allusion to Lucy , the skeleton of an Australopithecus afarensis specimen discovered in 1974 in Ethiopia . Lucy is the mother of most children in the band . At the end of the book she leaves for East Africa with Lao and Maluma . 
 Maluma : Maluma is an artificial word from synesthesia , representing curvy and smooth shapes . She becomes the loving companion of Pitar . Through Maluma , Pitar discovers the power and the sweets of love . 
 Manisha : This name stems from the Hindi and Sanskrit languages , signifying " the wise " . In Hinduism , Manisha is the goddess of the mind . Among the clan 's women , Manisha has a similar role as Lao has among the men . She easily holds her own in discussions with the males , and her reasoning is witty and logical . 
 Pitar The protagonist 's name stems from Sanskrit and means " father " ; its intonation lies on the second syllable : " <unk> " . Pitar narrates the story of which he is the main character . 
 Re : Italian for " king " , also an allusion to the ancient Egyptian sun god Re or Ra . Re is Costello 's opponent and antagonist . An aggressive character , he perceives Pitar as an enemy because of Pitar 's perceived support for the band 's leader . He repeatedly defies Costello but does not dare to start an open revolt . The attack of the sabre @-@ toothed cat , which kills Costello and some other members of the band , enables Re to become the leader at the end of the novel . 
 Rhododendron : Greek for " rose tree " , a genus of flowering plants in the family Ericaceae . The character Rhododendron is a male member of the band with an ecological attitude . Rhododendron is only a supporting actor in the story . 
 Ruth : Hebrew for " companion " . Ruth is a female band member with a distinctive strength of character . When the band is constructing their first windshield , she pushes a fervent discussion about labor law and commences a strike . 
 Thorn : This name stems from the Germanic languages and is the denomination of the rune <unk> “ Þ ” , pronounced as “ θ ” . Thorn is the eldest of the clan and considered a sage . He appears only in the first two chapters , at the end of which he dies . From a dynastic point of view , he was Costello 's predecessor . 
 = = Major themes = = 
 The novel addresses <unk> from an ironic point of view . Mankind 's evolution from the ape @-@ like Australopithecus <unk> to modern society with history , technology and cultural expression is compressed into only seven days . The strong allusion to faith is contrasted by numerous references to scientific insights . With the evolution of mankind starting in Central Africa , Lucy is the name given to the first skeleton of an <unk> afarensis found . The characters mention that Homo erectus would be the hominid species to tame fire . Orrorin and <unk> represent two of the oldest @-@ known hominin ancestors , while <unk> <unk> is one of the earliest primates . Through scientific references and a distinct ironic tone , Ingrid Reichel makes it clear in her review that the book cannot be taken in by any religion or fundamentalism . 
 While scholars know of patriarchal and matrifocal ancient societies , very little can be said about a society of a species , which is as remote as Australopithecus . On the basis of examples in today 's chimpanzee and bonobo societies , Klaus Ebner introduced both patriarchal and matriarchal characters in the novel , Costello and Akshaya . Some of the female characters are very strong and self @-@ conscious , such as Akshaya , who is so firm that even Costello <unk> from her . While political power is controlled by the males , the social structure seems matrifocal and matrilineal , corresponding to the image of prehistoric societies exhibited by scholars . 
 Another theme is the love story between Pitar and Maluma . While the society of the band is depicted as driven by sexual attraction in a male hierarchy , the relationship between Pitar and Maluma leads them to break away from traditional habitudes . Pitar is not the alpha male , but he starts a love relationship on his own , in which Maluma quits Costello 's harem . The love story demonstrates love as a quite late cultural achievement of mankind . In addition , Karin Gayer emphasizes the significance of Pitar 's and Maluma 's love against the religious component in defining the love story and its positioning within the storyline as another concept " of the beginning and the end " . 
 = = Style = = 
 Hominid is a short novel which contains one single and linear storyline . However , it is subdivided into seven chapters , each standing for a narrated day . The satirical character of the book stems from the underlying grotesque scenario , the speeches of Pitar and his fellow hominids , the mentioning of artifacts which have not yet been invented , and the numerous allusions to world history and literature . 
 Steffen Roye from the German literary magazine <unk> states in the title of his book review that Ebner has the characters of his story " talk as if they were modern @-@ day juveniles " . When it comes to allusions , a number of them consist of quotes , usually from classical Latin writers . 
 Ebner 's writing style is rich in detail , as Ingrid Reichel states , and she pinpoints the " artist of the word " . Similar judgments have been made by other critics when they reviewed the preceding works by Ebner , such as Wolfgang Ratz about Auf der Kippe or Julia Rafael about Lose . 
 = = Reception and criticism = = 
 Heinz <unk> thinks the book is a " history of the awakening of the spirit of mankind " . The author has the events glided " into the playful by his gently irony " . Several reviewers underline the narrative 's ironic and satirical aspect , including the names of the characters , Latin quotations and idioms as well as the parallelism between the seven days of Creation and scientific <unk> . Ingrid Reichel points out the perfect publication date , just in time for the 150th anniversary of Charles Darwin 's theory of evolution . Similarly to other reviewers who had written about Ebner 's earlier books , she highlights the sophisticated use of a detail @-@ rich language which is " steeped in subtle and sensitive humor " . 
 Despite many explicit allusions to several world religions , Ingrid Reichel states that the novel is a book for “ readers with humor , for <unk> ( … ) , for <unk> , on no account for creationists , to a lesser extent for people of faith , but rather for atheists , … and fundamentalists drop out entirely ” . Another aspect is identified by Karin Gayer when pinpointing the parallel evolution of the patriarchal hierarchy in the narrated society and the alluded social matriarchy , the first resembling chimpanzee communities and the second representing those of bonobos . In addition , she points out the strength of the women characters . She declares that at the time of the Australopithecus , neither chimpanzees nor bonobos existed , but " the author is not interested in <unk> <unk> — he is interested in mirroring our society , in exposing human behavior " . She compares Costello with the alpha of a community of chimpanzees and a classical manager , and Akshaya with bonobo females and a modern @-@ day career woman . With regard to these underlying comparisons , Gayer says , " On another level we are struck by the permanent notional commingling of the simian and the human , a composition which leaves us pensive and asks the legitimate question where we , who consider ourselves sapiens in a double sense , should finally classify man . " 
 The multitudinous allusions to well @-@ known and lesser @-@ known books , movies and sayings cause contradicting receptions . While Heinz <unk> and Ingrid Reichel explicitly highlight the comical effect of the insinuations , the German critic Steffen Roye regards them as sometimes " exaggerated " and says , " As the story develops , it becomes more and more like a revue . " The numerous expressions in foreign languages , especially in Latin , remain untranslated in the first edition . In her review , Ingrid Reichel invites the publisher to add a glossary to a new edition . The author subsequently released such a glossary on his own website . 
 = Eisenhower dollar = 
 The Eisenhower dollar is a one @-@ dollar coin issued by the United States Mint from 1971 to 1978 ; it was the first coin of that denomination issued by the Mint since the Peace dollar series ended in 1935 . The coin depicts President Dwight D. Eisenhower on the obverse , with both sides designed by Frank Gasparro . 
 In 1965 , the Mint had begun to strike copper @-@ nickel clad coins instead of silver , due to rises in bullion prices . No dollar coins had been struck in thirty years , and none , initially , were minted in the new metal . Beginning in 1969 , legislators sought to reintroduce a dollar coin into commerce . After Eisenhower died in March of that year , there were a number of proposals to honor Eisenhower with the new coin . While these bills generally commanded wide support , enactment was delayed by a dispute over whether the new coin should be in base metal or 40 % silver . In 1970 , a compromise was reached to strike the Eisenhower dollar in base metal for circulation , and in 40 % silver as a collectible . President Richard Nixon signed legislation authorizing the new coin on December 31 , 1970 . 
 Although the collector 's pieces sold well , the new dollars failed to circulate to any degree , except in and around Nevada casinos , where they took the place of privately issued tokens . There are no dollars dated 1975 ; coins from that year and from 1976 bear a double date 1776 @-@ 1976 , and a special reverse by Dennis R. Williams in honor of the bicentennial of American independence . Beginning in 1977 , the Mint sought to replace the Eisenhower dollar with a smaller @-@ sized piece . Congress authorized the Susan B. Anthony dollar , struck beginning in 1979 , but that piece also failed to circulate . Due to their modest cost and the short length of the series , sets of Eisenhower dollars are becoming more popular among collectors . 
 = = Background = = 
 The silver dollar had never been a popular coin , circulating little except in the West ; it served as a means of monetizing metal and generally sat in bank vaults once struck . The Peace dollar , the last circulating dollar made of silver , was not struck after 1935 , and in most years in the quarter century after that , the bullion value of a silver dollar did not exceed 70 cents . In the early 1960s , though , silver prices rose , and the huge stocks of silver dollars in the hands of banks and the government were obtained by the public through the redemption of silver certificates . This caused shortages of silver dollars in the western states where the pieces circulated , and interests there sought the issuance of more dollars . 
 On August 3 , 1964 , Congress passed legislation providing for the striking of 45 million silver dollars . This legislation was enacted as coins vanished from circulation as the price of silver rose past the $ 1 @.@ 29 per ounce at which silver coins were worth more as bullion than as currency . The new pieces were intended to be used at Nevada casinos and elsewhere in the West where " hard money " was popular . Numismatic periodicals complained that striking the dollars was a waste of resources . The law had been passed at the urging of the Senate Majority Leader , Mike Mansfield ( Democrat – Montana ) , who represented a state that heavily used silver dollars . Despite the efforts of Mint Director Eva Adams and her staff to persuade him , Senator Mansfield refused to consider any cancellation or delay and on May 12 , 1965 , the Denver Mint began striking 1964 @-@ D Peace dollars — the Mint had obtained congressional authorization to continue striking 1964 @-@ dated coins into 1965 . 
 A public announcement of the new pieces was made on May 15 , 1965 , to be met with a storm of objections . Both the public and many congressmen saw the issue as a poor use of Mint resources at a time of severe coin shortages , which would only benefit coin dealers . On May 24 , one day before a hastily called congressional hearing , Adams announced that the pieces were deemed trial strikes , never intended for circulation . The Mint later stated that 316 @,@ 076 pieces had been struck ; all were reported melted amid heavy security . To ensure that there would be no repetition , Congress inserted a provision in the Coinage Act of 1965 forbidding the coinage of silver dollars for five years . That act also removed silver from the dime and quarter , and reduced the silver content of the half dollar to 40 % . 
 = = Inception = = 
 In 1969 , Nixon administration Mint Director Mary Brooks sought the <unk> of the dollar coin . By this time , rising bullion prices threatened the continued use of silver in the Kennedy half dollar , but Brooks hoped to maintain the dollar as a silver coin . Brooks ' proposal for a new silver dollar was opposed by the chairman of the House Banking Committee , Wright Patman , who had been convinced by Nixon 's predecessor , Lyndon Johnson , to support the continued use of silver in the half dollar against his better judgment . 
 On March 28 , 1969 , former president Dwight D. Eisenhower ( nicknamed " Ike " ) , a former World War II general , died . Soon after his death , New Jersey Representative Florence Dwyer , like Eisenhower a Republican , suggested that the proposed dollar coin bear his likeness . She spoke to Democratic Missouri Representative Leonor Sullivan , who agreed that the dollar should bear a portrait of Eisenhower as " equal time " to the half dollar , which bore the likeness of Democratic president Kennedy . A bill was filed by Connecticut Congressman Robert N. Giaimo to authorize an Eisenhower dollar , to be struck without silver content . The Joint Commission on the Coinage , drawing members from the administration and from Congress , including Giaimo , recommended the dollar in spring 1969 . It also called for the elimination of silver from the half dollar , and for the transfer from the Treasury to the General Services Administration ( GSA ) of quantities of rare silver dollars , so they could be sold . Giaimo noted that the coin would be useful in casinos , which were striking their own tokens in the absence of circulating dollar coins , and in the vending industry , which was starting to sell higher @-@ priced items . 
 On October 3 , 1969 , the House Banking Committee passed legislation for a <unk> Eisenhower dollar , with Patman stating that he hoped to have it approved by the full House in time for the late president 's birthday on October 14 . On October 6 , the bill 's sponsors lost a procedural vote which would have allowed for no amendments . While some representatives spoke against the manner in which the legislation was to be considered , Iowa Congressman H. R. Gross objected to the base @-@ metal composition of the proposed coin : " You would be doing the memory of President Eisenhower no favor to mint a dollar made perhaps of scrap metal . " Both houses voted on October 14 , Eisenhower 's birthday . Although the House passed the administration @-@ backed bill for a base metal dollar , the Senate passed the bill as amended by Colorado Senator Peter Dominick , calling for the piece to be minted in 40 % silver . Instrumental in the passage of the Senate amendment was a letter from Mamie Eisenhower , recalling that her husband had liked to give silver dollars as mementoes , and had gone to some effort to obtain coins struck in the year of his birth , 1890 . Idaho Senator James McClure stated , " It is somehow beneath the dignity of a great president like General Eisenhower to withhold silver from the coin . " On October 29 , 1969 , Texas Representative Robert R. Casey introduced legislation to honor both Eisenhower and the recent Apollo XI Moon landing . These provisions would become part of the enacted bill authorizing the Eisenhower dollar . Casey originally wanted the mission theme of Apollo XI , " We came in peace for all mankind " to appear on the coin ; when the Mint informed him there was not room for that inscription , he settled for requiring that the reverse design be emblematic of that theme . 
 In March 1970 , the two houses reached a compromise whereby 150 million dollars would be struck in the 40 % silver alloy for collectors and others . The circulating dollar , though , would have no silver and would be struck in larger quantities . The 47 @.@ 4 million troy ounces of silver needed to strike the collectors ' pieces would come from bullion already held by the government . The compromise was worked out by McClure and other congressional Republicans , with the aid of Brooks , an <unk> . McClure described the deal as " a lot less than the country deserves , but a lot more than it appeared we would get " . The reason for having a collector 's edition with silver was to avoid the hoarding which had driven the Kennedy half dollar from circulation . 
 Although the compromise passed the Senate in March 1970 , it was blocked in the House by Representative Patman , who was determined to end silver in the coinage . The Senate passed the bill again in September , this time attaching it as a rider to a bank holding company bill sought by Patman . The bill , which also included provisions to eliminate silver from the half dollar and to transfer the rare silver dollars to the GSA , was approved by a conference committee and passed both houses . Nixon had intended to let the bill pass into law without his signature . When aides realized that as Congress had adjourned , not signing the bill would pocket veto it , Nixon hastily signed it just before midnight on December 31 , 1970 , only minutes before the deadline . 
 = = Design = = 
 For Mint Chief Engraver Frank Gasparro , the opportunity to put Eisenhower on a coin was the fulfillment of a longtime dream . On June 19 , 1945 , Gasparro had been one of more than 4 million people who gathered in New York to watch a parade in honor of the Allied victory in Europe . Although Gasparro , then an assistant engraver at the Mint , only saw a glimpse of General Eisenhower , he stepped back from the crowd and sketched the general 's features . That sketch served as the basis of his design for the obverse . Gasparro consulted with the late president 's widow , Mamie Eisenhower , as to the designs of both sides of the coin ; the former First Lady was presented with a galvano ( a metallic model used in the coin design process ) by Brooks and Gasparro on January 1 , 1971 . Gasparro wrote in 1991 that he had six weeks to complete the work beginning in mid @-@ November 1970 , that his extensive research into eagles over the years was a great help in creating the reverse , and that his sketches were adopted without change . The chief engraver was not given full freedom of design ; he was instructed to have the layout of the obverse resemble that of the Washington quarter . 
 Before the legislation passed , Gasparro had prepared two reverses , the one actually used , and a reverse with a more formal heraldic eagle , which numismatic historian and coin dealer Q. David Bowers finds reminiscent of pattern coins prepared in the 1870s . At Congress 's insistence , the chief engraver created a design in commemoration of the Apollo XI lunar landing , based on the mission patch conceived by astronaut Michael Collins and others . Bowers deems the choice of the lunar landing " a stroke of genius " , allowing the dollar , which would be little @-@ used in commerce , to be a commemorative both of Eisenhower and of the Moon mission . The reverse depicts an eagle ( representing the lunar lander , Eagle ) swooping low over the Moon 's surface , holding an olive branch , token of peace , in its claws . 
 The use of Collins ' mission patch design had initially been opposed by some government officials because of the fierce expression of the eagle ; Gasparro 's initial concept met similar objections . The Mint Director recalled that Gasparro had gone to the Philadelphia Zoo to look at eagles , and on his return had prepared a design which she felt emphasized the eagle 's predatory nature . Brooks informed Gasparro that the eagle was " too fierce , too warlike , a little too aggressive " and asked that the expression be made friendlier . Gasparro , who reportedly was unhappy at having to change the eagle , described the final version as " pleasant looking " . The State Department also feared that the eagle 's expression might offend , and sought a neutral visage . The distant Earth may be seen above the bird , and there are 13 stars in honor of the original states . 
 Bowers deems the bust of Eisenhower " well modeled " by Gasparro , and notes that the fact that the eagle on the reverse holds only an olive branch , rather than arrows as well ( token of war ) , " meant that the public would like the design " . Nevertheless , he notes that Eisenhower 's stern expression was widely criticized as not typical of a man noted for geniality . Numismatic author David Lange opines that " the Eisenhower dollar is one of the poorest products to emanate from the U.S. Mint " . Lange writes that Gasparro had designed only one side of the coin for the Kennedy half dollar and Lincoln Memorial reverse for the cent , " the Eisenhower dollar was his design alone and should have served as a showcase for his talent . Sadly , it is a mediocre design that reveals his typically unnatural treatment of Ike 's hair and the eagle 's feathers . " Some collectors complained after the release that the Earth was not fully shown , not realizing that Gasparro had carefully followed the mission badge . The chief engraver responded by clarifying the design . 
 = = Release = = 
 Two prototype dollars were struck at the Philadelphia Mint on January 25 , 1971 ; they were subsequently destroyed . Striking such large pieces of tough copper @-@ nickel proved destructive to the Mint 's dies , and Gasparro repeatedly used the Janvier reducing lathe to lower the relief to be used on the circulation strikes and the uncirculated silver clad coins . The chief engraver altered the resulting master die directly to restore at least some of the detail which was lost as the relief was lowered . The proof coins struck at San Francisco , nevertheless , remained in high relief . This meant that in 1971 and for much of 1972 ( until better @-@ quality steel was used in the dies ) , the uncirculated strikes had a lower relief , less detailed surface , compared with the proof coins . Proof coins are struck slowly , and generally multiple times , to bring out the full detail . Striking of Eisenhower dollars for circulation began at Denver on February 3 , apparently without any ceremony ; minting at Philadelphia also began early in the year , although Bowers , in his comprehensive encyclopedia of silver and clad dollar coins , does not record a specific date . The first Eisenhower dollars in 40 % silver , with an uncirculated finish , were struck at the San Francisco Assay Office ( today the San Francisco Mint ) on March 31 , 1971 ; Brooks ceremoniously operated the presses . The first coin struck was for presentation to Mamie Eisenhower ; the second to David Eisenhower ( grandson of Dwight and Mamie Eisenhower ) and the third to David Eisenhower 's father @-@ in @-@ law , President Nixon . 
 On January 29 , 1971 , the Mint announced the prices for the 40 % silver pieces which would be struck at San Francisco : $ 3 for uncirculated specimens and $ 10 for mirror @-@ surfaced proof pieces , with orders to be taken by mail beginning on July 1 , with a limit of five of each per customer . Order forms for the public were shipped to 44 @,@ 000 post offices and 33 @,@ 000 banks , with instructions not to hand them out until June 18 . The Mint returned some orders for being sent in too early . Mint sets of the circulating coinage for 1971 did not include the Eisenhower dollar . 
 The first proof strikes , at San Francisco , took place in July . The proof pieces were sold in a plastic holder inside a brown box with a gold eagle seal ; the uncirculated silver pieces were encased in <unk> inside a blue envelope . These were dubbed " brown Ikes " and " blue Ikes " and are still known by those terms . On July 27 , 1971 , President Nixon presented the first piece to be struck to Mamie Eisenhower at a White House ceremony . Sales of the 40 % silver pieces were ended on October 8 ; the first proof coins were mailed to collectors on October 14 , President Eisenhower 's birthday . 
 The circulation version of the Eisenhower dollar , the largest clad coin ever attempted by the Mint , was released through banks on November 1 , 1971 . Many were obtained by collectors ; there was sufficient demand that many banks imposed a limit of one coin per customer . The clad pieces were struck from coinage strip purchased by the Mint from contractors . Many were not well @-@ struck , causing collectors to search through rolls in search of better specimens . An oil film was found on a large number of specimens ; this was removed by collectors . 
 From the start , the coin failed to circulate . In 1976 , a Treasury study done in conjunction with a private @-@ sector firm found that the Eisenhower dollar had a near @-@ 100 percent attrition rate , that is , almost always , a coin was used in only one transaction , and then stopped circulating . ( by comparison , the attrition rate of the quarter was close to zero ) This was because of the coin 's large size , its weight , and the lack of potential uses for it . Even so , it was successful in replacing private @-@ issue tokens in Nevada casinos . According to numismatist Randy Camper , about 70 % of Eisenhower dollars were used in casinos . Although the vending machine industry lobbied for the Eisenhower dollar , they converted few machines to take the pieces . Lange recalled , " The fact is that these coins never circulated outside of casinos and nearby areas , and I don 't recall ever seeing a vending machine that accepted them . " 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Early years ( 1971 – 1974 ) = = = 
 The Mint struck over 125 million of the Eisenhower dollars in 1971 , more than doubling its largest annual production for a dollar coin . Despite an increased mintage in 1972 to over 170 million , and despite what <unk> magazine termed " near @-@ heroic measures on the part of the Mint " , the piece did not circulate . In a 1974 article for <unk> , numismatist Clement F. Bailey noted , " the circulation value of the coin has been nil " . Many Eisenhower dollars were put aside as souvenirs by non @-@ collectors . Nevertheless , the silver coins sold so well that in October 1971 , Mint Director Brooks warned that orders for 1971 @-@ S proof dollars would not all be filled until well into 1972 . She ascribed the delay to the large public demand and to production difficulties which she indicated had been corrected . More than 11 million of the 1971 @-@ S silver pieces were sold , in proof and uncirculated , with nearly 7 million in proof . In May 1972 , Treasury Secretary John Connally , testifying before a Senate committee , described the profits the Mint had made on the silver version of the Eisenhower dollar as " just unconscionable " , with the average profit on a silver coin at $ 3 @.@ 89 , and expected to increase as production became more efficient . Mint officials felt that reducing the price would anger those who had already purchased the pieces . 
 The 1972 silver pieces were again struck at San Francisco . Sales dropped considerably , to just under 2 @.@ 2 million specimens in uncirculated and 1 @.@ 8 million in proof . The part @-@ silver 1972 @-@ S Eisenhower dollars were available for sale by mail order , with the ordering period from May 1 to July 15 for the proof coins and August 1 to October 16 for the uncirculated version . 
 With ample supplies of Eisenhower dollars , the Federal Reserve had no need to order any in 1973 , and none were struck for circulation . The 1973 and 1973 @-@ D were the first Eisenhower dollars struck for inclusion in mint sets , and were , in theory , only available that way . Many 1973 and 1973 @-@ D are known in circulated condition , leading to speculation that the 230 @,@ 798 pieces which were reported melted after the Mint failed to sell as many mint sets as anticipated , were in fact released into circulation . John Wexler , Bill Crawford , and Kevin Flynn , in their volume on Eisenhower dollars , deny this , citing a 1974 letter from Assistant Director of the Mint for Public Services Roy C. <unk> , which stated that all 1973 Eisenhower dollars from unsold mint sets were melted . The 1973 @-@ S was struck for inclusion in base @-@ metal proof sets , as well as for the regular " blue Ikes " and " brown Ikes " . Sales of the part @-@ silver pieces dipped to a total of just under 2 @.@ 9 million . The coin was struck again for circulation in 1974 , was included in mint sets and proof sets , and was available in proof and uncirculated silver clad from San Francisco . Congress ordered that some of the money from the sale of 1974 @-@ S silver pieces be used to support Eisenhower College in Seneca Falls , New York . Coin collectors felt that this set a bad precedent , but about $ 9 million was paid to the college between 1974 and 1978 , but despite the infusion of money , the college closed its doors in 1982 . 
 = = = Bicentennial issue ( 1975 – 1976 ) = = = 
 The United States had issued commemorative coins between 1892 and 1954 , as a means for fundraising for organizations deemed worthy of federal support . A sponsoring organization would be designated in the authorizing legislation , and was permitted to buy up the issue at face value , selling it to the public at a premium , and pocketing the difference . Various problems with the issues , including mishandling of distributions and complaints that public coins should not be used for private profit , resulted in firm Treasury Department opposition to such issues , and none were struck after 1954 . 
 The American Revolutionary Bicentennial Commission ( ARBC ) was established by Congress in 1966 as an oversight body for the 1976 two @-@ hundredth anniversary of American independence ( the " Bicentennial " ) . In 1970 , its coins and medals advisory committee recommended the issuance of a special half dollar , and subsequently the committee sought the temporary redesign of circulating American coins . Brooks and the Mint initially opposed legislation to effect these proposals , but eventually Brooks supported legislation to redesign the reverses of the quarter , half dollar and dollar coins , and to issue special collector 's sets in silver clad . Legislation to authorize this was signed by President Nixon on October 18 , 1973 . By the terms of this legislation , coins of these denomination minted for delivery after July 4 , 1975 and before December 31 , 1976 would bear special reverses , and also be dated 1776 – 1976 . A total of 15 million sets ( 45 million ) coins in all would be struck in silver clad for sale to the public at a premium . 
 The reverse designs for the three Bicentennial coins were determined by a design competition open to the public . This competition closed in January 1974 , and in March , a design submitted by 22 @-@ year @-@ old art student Dennis R. Williams was selected for the dollar . Williams , the youngest person to that point to design a U.S. coin , had submitted a design depicting the Liberty Bell superimposed against the Moon . Gasparro slightly modified the design , simplifying the features visible on the lunar surface , and altering the lettering and the bell . Williams and the designers of the other denominations operated the presses to strike the first coins on August 12 , 1974 ; a set of these prototypes was later given to the new president , Gerald Ford . Williams ' design was liked by the public but attracted criticism in the numismatic community as the Liberty Bell had been previously used on coinage ( for example , on the Franklin half dollar ) . Fearing that a low @-@ mintage 1975 piece would be hoarded , the Mint obtained legislation in December 1974 allowing it to continue coining 1974 @-@ dated pieces until it began coinage of Bicentennial pieces . 
 The Bicentennial dollars were the first of the three denominations to be struck for distribution to the public ; these were coined beginning in February 1975 . The silver pieces were struck at San Francisco beginning on April 23 , 1975 . The Mint found that the copper nickel dollar was striking indistinctly , a problem not seen with the silver pieces . Brooks called a halt in production to allow Gasparro to modify the dies ; the most noticeable change is that the revised issue , or Type II as it came to be known , have narrower , sharper lettering on the reverse . All silver pieces ( struck only at San Francisco ) are Type I ; all three mints struck both Type I and Type II copper nickel pieces . All dollars included in 1975 proof sets are Type I ; all those included in 1976 proof sets are Type II . The first Bicentennial dollars were released into circulation on October 13 , 1975 . Over 220 million were struck . The Bicentennial design was not used after 1976 ; sets of silver clad Bicentennial coins were sold by the Mint until sales were finally closed at the end of 1986 . 
 One proof Bicentennial coin in silver clad and lacking a mint mark , similar to the dollar in the prototype set given to President Ford , is known . This piece supposedly came from a cash register drawer at the Woodward & Lothrop department store in Washington , D.C. Thomas K. DeLorey , who was then a reporter for Coin World , spoke to the discoverer and was suspicious of the story , thinking it more likely the coin was surreptitiously obtained from the government . He declined to question the origin then , fearing it might be seized and lost to the numismatic community . The piece brought almost $ 30 @,@ 000 by private sale in 1987 . 
 = = = Final years and replacement ( 1977 – 1978 ) = = = 
 By 1975 , the Treasury was concerned about the drain on resources from striking the dollar , which did not circulate . It engaged a private firm to study the six current denominations of U.S. coinage , and make recommendations . The firm concluded in its report that the Eisenhower dollar was too large and heavy to circulate effectively , but if the diameter was reduced by about a third , and the weight by two @-@ thirds , it might be used . That report found that " the Eisenhower dollar has not been widely accepted by the public because of its large size and weight " . In January 1977 , just prior to leaving office , Ford 's Treasury Secretary , William E. Simon , proposed the elimination of the cent and half dollar , and a reduction in size of the dollar . According to Bowers , the Treasury had come to believe that a coin as large as the Eisenhower dollar simply would not circulate in the United States . 
 The Mint struck pattern pieces of the smaller size , with various shapes and compositions . An 11 @-@ sided coin was considered , which would have differentiated it from the quarter , but the patterns would not work in vending machines . Such exotic metals as titanium were considered before the Mint decided on the standard clad composition . Gasparro prepared , for the circulating pieces , a design showing Liberty with flowing hair , similar to early American coins . 
 As the Eisenhower dollar awaited its demise , approximately 50 million per year were struck , using the eagle design for the reverse . In both years , the majority coined were at Denver . No silver collector 's edition was issued ; the blue and brown Ikes ended with 1974 . 
 The new Treasury Secretary , Michael Blumenthal supported Gasparro 's design in testimony before Congress ; Wisconsin Senator William Proxmire dubbed Blumenthal 's position a " cop @-@ out " . Proxmire refused to introduce the bill , which would have left the choice of design up to Blumenthal or his successor , instead introducing his own legislation , to commemorate early women 's rights leader Susan B. Anthony . Many in the new Congress and in the Carter Administration were social progressives , and supported women 's lib . Ohio Representative Mary Rose Oakar also introduced legislation for a Susan B. Anthony dollar in October 1978 ; it proceeded rapidly through Congress and was signed by President Jimmy Carter . Gasparro was given photographs of Anthony and told to reproduce her appearance exactly on the coin . Anthony 's stern expression caused some to dub it the " Susan B. Agony " dollar . The Eisenhower dollar 's reverse was used for the Anthony dollar . Convinced that the public would hoard the new pieces , the Mint Bureau produced half a billion before its official release to the public on July 2 , 1979 . It need not have worried ; the public quickly rejected the new coin as too close in size and weight to the quarter dollar , and production for circulation ceased after 1980 . Mint Director Stella Hackel Sims stated , " people are accustomed to the Eisenhower dollar , but in time , they 'll become accustomed to the Susan " . Attempts were made to give the new smaller dollars out as change in postal transactions , and to force their use by U.S. military personnel in Europe ; both failed . 
 = = Collecting = = 
 Collected by date and mint mark , no Eisenhower dollar is rare , and a complete set may be acquired without difficulty . However , many were badly struck , without full detail , especially in 1971 and 1972 , and the pieces acquired nicks , or " bag marks " from contact with each other soon after striking . Although lower @-@ grade silver coins can be melted , this is not practical for Eisenhower dollars due to the lack of precious metal content , and dealers often try to get any premium they can on face value . Completing a set of highest @-@ grade specimens may be difficult and expensive , especially for the 1971 and 1972 from Philadelphia or Denver , which were not sold in mint sets , and thus only came to collectors through banks . A 1973 @-@ D piece , tied with ten other specimens for the finest known of that date and mint mark in near @-@ pristine MS @-@ 67 condition sold in June 2013 for $ 12 @,@ 925 . According to numismatic writer Steve Reach , " as more people submit modern @-@ era coins like Eisenhower dollars for third @-@ party certification , the true rarity of many issues in top @-@ grades is becoming clear . " 
 Some of the 1971 @-@ D pieces exhibit a variety in which ( among several differences ) the eagle lacks brow lines , these have been dubbed by Eisenhower dollar specialists the " Friendly Eagle Pattern " . The 1972 dollar struck at Philadelphia is broken down into three varieties , which were made as Gasparro adjusted the design to take advantage of better steel being used in the Mint 's dies . A midyear change in the design was announced by Brooks at the American Numismatic Association 's 1972 convention in New Orleans , although she did not state exactly what was being changed . The three varieties may be differentiated by examining the depiction of the Earth on the reverse . Type I dollars show the Earth somewhat flattened , Florida pointing to the southeast , with the islands mostly to the southeast of the tip of the peninsula . The Earth is round and Florida points to the south on the Type II , with a single , large island to the southeast . The Type III is similar to the Type II , except that there are two islands directly to the south of the peninsula . The Type II is from a single reverse die , used in March 1972 , and erroneously placed in service at Philadelphia — it is identical to and should have been used for the silver proof strikes at San Francisco . The Type III was placed in service , replacing the Type I , in September 1972 . The Type I is most common ; the Type III design was used in 1973 and after . The 1972 Type II is expensive in top grades , as is the 1776 – 1976 Type I from Philadelphia , which was only available in mint sets . 
 Some 1971 @-@ S proof pieces ( and a few uncirculated 1971 @-@ S ) have the serifs at the foot of the " R " in " LIBERTY " missing ; this is dubbed the " peg leg " variety . The serifs are missing on all 1972 @-@ S , both uncirculated and proof . After the Mint obtained better steel for dies , the serifs returned for all of the remaining non @-@ Bicentennial coinage , from all mints , though the leg of the R was shortened , and also for the Type II Bicentennial ( the Type I lacks serifs on the R ) . Gasparro was often trying to improve the detail of Eisenhower 's head during the coin 's tenure , and as the R is the letter closest to it , these changes were most likely made in an effort to improve the flow of metal as the coins were struck . 
 In 1974 and again in 1977 , the Denver Mint struck a small number of pieces on silver @-@ clad planchets , or blanks . Both times , these came from planchets which had been shipped from the San Francisco Assay Office to Denver . The first ones in 1974 were found independently by two Las Vegas blackjack dealers . The 1974 planchets were initially intended to be used for " brown Ike " proof strikings ; Mint policy then was that rejected silver proof planchets were to be used for uncirculated " blue Ikes " , but these were placed in the bin for rejected copper @-@ nickel proof planchets , intended to be shipped to be coined for circulation at Denver . The 1977 pieces resulted from pieces rejected for Bicentennial silver proof use , which were again placed in the wrong bin ( they should have been melted , as the Mint was no longer striking silver uncirculated Eisenhower dollars ) . Between 10 and 20 of each date are known . Wexler , Crawford , and Flynn report an even rarer 1776 @-@ 1976 @-@ D dollar in silver , but state that none have been offered at auction or submitted to the major coin grading services . 
 Bowers notes that the Morgan dollar ( struck between 1878 and 1921 ) was not widely collected at the time , only to become very popular later , and suggests that one day , the turn of the Eisenhower dollar will come . Numismatist Charles Morgan said of the Eisenhower dollar in 2012 @,@ 
 It stands today as the greatest achievement in clad coinage in U.S. history . It was the most technically challenging coin ever attempted ... Researching the Eisenhower Dollar is vital for numismatic historians who want to understand what the post @-@ silver era was like . The Eisenhower Dollar was a noble failure . In this respect , it truly is a perfect collectible coin . 
 = = Mintage figures = = 
 = Kitchen Princess = 
 Kitchen Princess ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> no <unk> @-@ sama ) is a shōjo ( targeted towards girls ) cooking , romance manga series , featuring full professional recipes for every dish at the end of each chapter , written by Miyuki Kobayashi and illustrated by Natsumi Andō . Appearing as a serial in the manga magazine Nakayoshi from the September 2004 issue to the October 2008 issue , the forty @-@ seven chapters were compiled into ten bound volumes by Kodansha , and published from February 2005 to November 2008 . The series marked the first time that Ando illustrated a manga that was not also written by her . Set in modern @-@ day Japan , Kitchen Princess follows Najika Kazami , a cheerful thirteen @-@ year @-@ old who searches for her " flan prince , " a boy who rescued her from drowning as a young girl and brought a little happiness to her life after her parents ' death . In March 2008 , Kodansha published a related light novel , Kitchen Princess : Search for the Angel Cake , written by Kobayashi and illustrated by Ando . 
 In 2006 , Del Rey Manga licensed the series for an English @-@ language translation in North America . It published the ten volumes from January 2007 to July 2009 . Following Kodansha 's decision to publish in North America through an imprint , Kodansha Comics USA released a four @-@ volume omnibus edition from June 2012 to June 2013 . The series has been well received by English @-@ language readers , with the appearance of three volumes and one omnibus on various bestseller lists and the series appearing twice on ICv2 's annual list of the top twenty @-@ five manga properties . Critical reception ranged from positive to lukewarm , and the series won the 2006 Kodansha Manga Award for children 's manga . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Set in modern @-@ day Japan , the plot centers on Najika Kazami ( <unk> <unk> , Kazami Najika ) , a cheerful thirteen @-@ year @-@ old with an excellent sense of taste who hopes to become a chef . In her backstory , it is revealed that a mysterious boy rescued her from drowning in Hokkaidō as a young , recently orphaned girl and gave her flan to cheer her up . Before he left , she promised to make him the best @-@ tasting dessert in the world . Now on a journey to find her " flan prince , " as she calls him , Najika attends Seika Academy in Tokyo , after she learned that the silver spoon her flan prince left her is unique to the school . There she befriends Sora Kitazawa ( <unk> 空 , Kitazawa Sora ) , the substitute director of the academy , and his younger brother Daichi Kitazawa ( <unk> <unk> , Kitazawa Daichi ) . Although teen model Akane Kishida ( <unk> <unk> , Kishida Akane ) initially dislikes her , they eventually become friends after Najika heals her eating disorder by making her her grandmother 's recipe . Najika periodically competes in cooking competitions , both formal and informal , while working at the diner run by the skilled , yet lazy chef Fujita ( <unk> ) . 
 Najika falls in love with Sora , after he tells her that he is her flan prince . However , he soon dies after being struck by a truck while on a journey to deliver some ingredients to Najika , and , in his final moments , admits that he lied about being her flan prince , having fallen in love with her . She loses her sense of taste out of sorrow , although she quickly recovers it . After Sora 's death , Daichi is unable to bring himself to act on his love for her , though he gives in to his father 's demands to protect Najika from being kicked out of the school and becomes the student body president to replace Sora . Wealthy and conceited junior pastry chef Seiya Mizuno ( <unk> <unk> , Mizuno Seiya ) also begins to attend the school , where he clashes with Najika , whom he had watched bake as a young girl at the orphanage . Seiya eventually falls in love with her , and tries to romantically pursue her , although he gives up when he realizes that she loves Daichi . After Daichi recovers a repressed memory of his mother 's death during a family trip to Hokkaidō — which Sora attempted to protect him from by lying about being Najika 's flan prince — he remembers that he is actually her flan prince , having given her a flan made by Seiya , and accepts her feelings for him . Joyful , she fulfills her promise to him by making him a crème brûlée . 
 = = Development = = 
 The writer of Kitchen Princess , Miyuki Kobayashi , is a novelist published under Kodansha 's X Bunko Teen Heart label . When deciding on a story , she first creates the names , then the plot : Najika 's name — meaning " seven " , " rainbow " and " fragrance " — was designed to be " ethnically ambiguous " and carry a sense of nature , while Daichi and Sora 's names , meaning " earth " and " sky " respectively , were meant " to match hers " . Akane 's name , which means " deep red , " was intended to evoke the evening sun for the reader . Kitchen Princess marked the first time that manga artist Natsumi Ando illustrated a manga that was not also written by her . Despite this , she did make some changes to the original script ; she suggested to Kobayashi that <unk> , the head of the orphanage , be an elderly woman and Fujita , initially an elderly woman , a " rugged man " . Ando made it a personal rule to have each of the splash pages contain an illustration of food . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 Written by Miyuki Kobayashi and illustrated by Natsumi Ando , the forty @-@ seven chapters appeared as a serial in the shōjo ( targeted towards girls ) manga magazine Nakayoshi from the September 2004 issue to the October 2008 issue . Kodansha collected the chapters into ten bound volumes , and published them from February 4 , 2005 , to November 6 , 2008 . 
 At the 2006 Comic @-@ Con , Del Rey Manga announced that it had licensed Kitchen Princess for an English @-@ language translation in North America . Del Rey published the volumes from January 30 , 2007 , to July 7 , 2009 . Following Kodansha 's decision to publish its titles in North America through an imprint , including those formerly licensed to Del Rey Manga , Kodansha Comics USA later published a four @-@ volume omnibus edition of Kitchen Princess from June 5 , 2012 , to June 18 , 2013 . Digital editions of the series have also been published by Kodansha in the United Kingdom . The series has also been licensed in Hong Kong , Korea , Thailand , and Taiwan . 
 = = = Light novel = = = 
 On March 19 , 2008 , Kodansha published a light novel written by Kobayashi and illustrated by Ando , Kitchen Princess : Search for the Angel Cake ( <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ！ , Nakayoshi Bunko <unk> Kitchin no <unk> @-@ sama Tenshi no <unk> o <unk> ! ) . Comprising four story arcs named after the seasons , the novel follows Najika 's quest to duplicate a recipe for white cake for a classmate 's grandmother . Del Rey published an English @-@ language translation on November 10 , 2009 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Kitchen Princess was well received by English @-@ language readers , with three original volumes and one omnibus volume placing on either BookScan 's list of the top twenty bestselling graphic novels , or The New York Times manga bestseller list . The sixth volume placed eighteenth on BookScan 's list for May 2008 . The seventh volume appeared at the fifteenth spot for BookScan 's list for August 2008 . In 2009 , the tenth volume debuted at the seventh place on The New York Times manga bestseller list for the week of July 5 to 11 ; during the following week , it dropped to the eighth place and remained there for another week . In 2012 , the second volume of the omnibus edition appeared at the ninth place for the week of October 14 – 20 . The series placed nineteenth on ICv2 's top twenty @-@ five manga properties for 2008 , dropping to the twentieth spot a year later . The series also placed seventh on ICv2 's list of the top ten shōjo properties for 2009 , and appeared at the eighth spot of the ten bestselling shōjo series for the first quarter of 2010 . 
 Kitchen Princess won the Kodansha Manga Award for children 's manga in 2006 . The series has received a range of reviews , from positive to lukewarm . Publishers Weekly enjoyed that Najika was not given a magical power and had to keep improving her cooking skills . Although the reviewer for School Library Journal described the series as " a perfectly ordinary romance manga , " he praised Nunzio Defilippis and Christina Weir 's adaptation of the manga . Deb Aoki of About.com listed the manga as one of the best shōjo series . Jason Thompson rated the series 3 @.@ 5 out of 4 stars , describing it as " [ a ] quick , delightful read . " Another reviewer for Publishers Weekly , Johanna Draper Carlsen , wrote that she found the manga reminiscent of the romantic comedy film Simply Irresistible ( 1999 ) and that the manga contained conventional shōjo aspects . In a later review of the second volume , she described the series as " entertaining enough , but it ’ s fluffy and forgettable ( like so many of the mousse items and drinks Najika makes ) . The volumes already feel familiar , even as I ’ m reading them for the first time . " Mania Entertainment 's Sakura Eries expressed her lukewarm feelings towards the first volume , writing that the reader 's suspension of disbelief was vital to enjoying the manga . She disliked the two @-@ dimensional characterization and Ando 's illustrations of the characters , although she felt that the food was well @-@ drawn . Comparing the series to others in the cooking genre , she wrote that it differed in that " cooking is Najika 's expression of self and her means of creating relationships and drawing others to common ground ( like the estranged Kitazawa Brothers ) . " In follow @-@ up reviews of the second and third volumes , she remained lukewarm to the series ; she praised Kobayashi 's portrayal of Akane 's eating disorder , though she disliked how Najika 's quest to find her flan prince seemed to become more of a side @-@ plot . Carlo Santos of Anime News Network praised Najika as a likeable protagonist and the characterizations as believable . He enjoyed the plot and recipes , although he wrote that the character designs lacked creativity , and criticized the plot clichés and the antagonists ' weak characterization . He had mixed feelings about the fourth volume 's emphasis on conventional shōjo romance and plot twists at the cost of its cooking aspect . He found the artwork conventional , though able to convey emotion . He wrote that the fifth volume finally balanced the romance and cooking elements , although he disliked the inclusion of a side story , preferring another chapter instead . In his review of the seventh volume , he concluded : " this series takes the <unk> elements of the romance / drama / cooking genres and still manages to come up with something greater than the sum of its parts . " 
 Reviews of the light novel varied . Draper Carlsen wrote that the characters and premise lacked the strength to make the novel compelling , though she felt that the response of others may differ . Grading the novel a B , Eries wrote that the novel would appeal to fans of the manga , although she found the story arcs varying in quality and content , from junior @-@ high school romance to philosophy on death . 
 = River martin = 
 The river martins form a distinctive subfamily Pseudochelidoninae within the swallow and martin bird family Hirundinidae . The two species are the African river martin Pseudochelidon eurystomina , found in the Congo and Gabon , and the white @-@ eyed river martin Pseudochelidon sirintarae , known only from one site in Thailand . These are medium @-@ sized , largely black swallows that have a light buoyant flight and feed on insects caught in the air . They appear to be more terrestrial than other swallows , frequently walking rather than perching , and the white @-@ eyed may be crepuscular . The African species excavates nest holes in sandy ridges in rivers , while the breeding locations and habits of the Asian bird are unknown . 
 When the African river martin was first discovered in the 19th century , Gustav Hartlaub thought it was a roller , and later authors either placed it in its own family , or with the woodswallows . Study of the anatomy revealed that the species was closest to the swallows and martins , but that it possessed a number of distinctive features , such as its robust legs and feet and stout bill . These indicated that it should be placed in a separate subfamily . The two river martin species are usually considered to belong to a single genus , Pseudochelidon , due to their having a number of structural similarities . However , Brooke proposed that the white @-@ eyed river martin be placed in a separate monotypic genus Eurochelidon . 
 The African river martin has a restricted distribution ; it appears to be locally numerous , although its true status has not been fully investigated . The white @-@ eyed river martin was discovered as recently as 1969 and is only known from specimens and anecdotal evidence – no modern ornithologists have seen the species in the wild , and its breeding grounds are unknown . It may be extinct , although a possible sighting was reported in 2004 . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 When a specimen of the African river martin from Gabon was first formally described by German zoologist Gustav Hartlaub in 1861 , it was not initially identified as a member of the swallow and martin family . Hartlaub placed it with the rollers , and later authors either put it in its own separate family , or with the woodswallows . It was only following study of the anatomy of the species by Lowe that it was determined to be closely related to the swallows and martins , but sufficiently different that it could be placed in a separate subfamily Pseudochelidoninae . The genus name Pseudochelidon comes from the Ancient Greek prefix ψευδο / pseudo , " false " , and <unk> / chelidôn , " swallow " , reflecting its distinctiveness from the " true " swallows . 
 For many years the African river martin was the sole member of its genus and subfamily until the discovery of the white @-@ eyed river martin , Pseudochelidon eurystomina , by Thai ornithologist Kitti Thonglongya in 1968 . Although some authorities follow Brooke in placing that species in a separate genus Eurochelidon due to its significant differences from the African species , it remains a member of the same subfamily . Genetic studies confirmed that the two river martins form a distinct clade from the typical swallows in the Hirundininae subfamily . 
 The river martins are in some ways intermediate between typical swallows and other passerines : they have stout bills , large feet and relatively strong legs , which is unusual in aerial feeders . They also have a large syrinx ( vocal organ ) and a different bronchial structure . The extent of their differences from other swallows and the wide geographical separation of these two martins suggest that they are relict populations of a group of species that diverged from the main swallow lineage early in its evolutionary history , and they may be the most primitive of the swallows . Like other early hirundine lineages , they nest in burrows , rather than adopted nest holes or mud nests . 
 = = Description = = 
 Both species are medium @-@ sized ( 14 – 18 cm or 5 @.@ 5 – 7 @.@ 1 in ) , mainly black @-@ plumaged swallows , unlikely to be confused with any other hirundine in their respective ranges . Adults of both species have large , blue @-@ glossed heads , a green tinge to the body plumage , and brown wings . The sexes are similar in plumage . The white @-@ eyed has elongated outer tail feathers , a whitish rump , a white eye and eye @-@ ring , and a yellow bill . The African has a red eye @-@ ring and bill and lacks a contrasting rump patch or tail streamers . The juveniles of both species are similar to the adults , but with brown heads , and young white @-@ <unk> lack the long tail streamers of the adults . 
 The African river martin has a chee chee or cheer @-@ cheer @-@ cheer call when it is flying in flocks . It is very vocal during migration , giving harsh gull @-@ like calls , and appears to have a jingling courtship song . No calls have been described for the white @-@ eyed river martin . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The two members of the subfamily have geographically separate ranges . The African river martin breeds along the Congo and Ubangi rivers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo . It is migratory , wintering in coastal savannah in southern Gabon and the Republic of Congo ; it has recently been discovered to nest in beach ridges and grassland in its coastal wintering areas . The white @-@ eyed river martin is known only from its wintering site at Bueng Boraphet lake in Thailand , where it was seen between the months of November and February . It may be migratory , but its breeding grounds and habitat are unknown , although river valleys in Northern Thailand or south @-@ western China are possibilities , as are Cambodia and Myanmar . However , doubts have been cast on whether it is actually migratory at all . 
 The African species ' breeding habitat consists of forested rivers with islands with sandy shores for breeding . The nesting grounds of the white @-@ eyed river martin are unknown , but if the breeding habitat resembles that of its relative , it is likely to be the forested valleys of large rivers , which can provide sandbars and islands for nesting , and woodland over which the birds can catch insect prey . The African river martin uses coastal savannah as its winter habitat . Based on its only known wintering site , the non @-@ breeding habitat of the white @-@ eyed is assumed to be in the vicinity of open fresh water for feeding , with reed @-@ beds for the night @-@ time roost . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 Breeding behaviour is known only for the African river martin . It nests in large colonies of up to 800 birds from December to April , when the river levels are low . Each pair excavates a 1 – 2 m ( 39 – 79 in ) long tunnel in the exposed sandbanks . The pocket at the end of the tunnel has a few twigs and leaves to serve as a nest , onto which two to four unspotted white eggs are laid . It has chasing flight displays and will walk on the ground ; it also displays on the ground , but the function of this is uncertain . It rarely perches during the breeding season . Although it has been assumed that the breeding habits of the white @-@ eyed species resemble those of the African species , distinctive differences in foot and toe morphology suggest that it might not use a burrow for nesting . 
 The African river martin feeds in flocks over river and forest , often far from water . It eats insects , mainly taking winged ants . The flight is strong and fast , interspersed with glides . Wintering birds regularly perch on treetops , wires and roofs . The white @-@ eyed river martin feeds on insects , including beetles , which are caught on the wing . Given its size and unusual mouth structure , it may take larger insects than other swallows . This species is described as graceful and buoyant in flight , and , like its African relative , appears reluctant to use perches . This behaviour , together with its unusual toe @-@ shape and the fact that mud was found on the toes of one of the first specimens , suggests that this species may be relatively terrestrial . In winter , it roosts with barn swallows in reedbeds . Pamela C. Rasmussen suggested that , given its unusually large eyes , the species might be nocturnal or crepuscular , a factor that could make it highly cryptic and thus partly explain how such a distinctive species remained undetected for so long . Although the fact that the first specimens were supposedly collected roosting at night in reed @-@ beds might be a contraindication , it is possible that the birds might not actually have been caught at the roost ; or they might be crepuscular , feeding at dawn and dusk ; or they might be capable of both diurnal and nocturnal behaviour , depending on the season or local circumstances . 
 = = Status = = 
 The white @-@ eyed river martin was seen in Thailand in 1972 , 1977 and 1980 , but not definitely since . There are unconfirmed sightings from Thailand in 1986 and Cambodia in 2004 . It is classified as critically endangered by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) . This designation means that a species ' numbers have decreased , or will decrease , by 80 % within three generations . This species may be extinct , but the IUCN will not categorise it as such until extensive targeted surveys have been conducted . Despite legal protection under Appendix 1 of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) agreement , it was captured by locals along with other swallows for sale as food or for release by devout Buddhists . Following its discovery by ornithologists , trappers were reported to have caught as many as 120 and sold them to the director of the Nakhon Sawan Fisheries Station who was unable to keep them alive in captivity . The small population may therefore have become non @-@ viable . 
 One factor that reduces the chances of re @-@ discovering the white @-@ eyed martin is the drastic decline in the numbers of swallows wintering at Bueng Boraphet , its only known site , from the hundreds of thousands reported around 1970 to maximum counts of 8 @,@ 000 made in the winter of 1980 – 1981 . It is not certain whether this represents a real decline or a shift in site in response to persecution . Other potential causes for the species ' decline include the disturbance of riverine sand bars , the construction of dams which flood the area upstream and alter the downstream hydrology , deforestation , and increasing conversion of its habitat to agriculture . Very few swallows now roost in the Bueng Boraphet reedbeds , preferring sugarcane plantations , and , despite searching , the white @-@ eyed river martin has not been found in other nearby large swallow roosts . Bueng Boraphet has been declared a non @-@ hunting area in an effort to protect the species , but surveys to find this martin have been unsuccessful . Past surveys include several at Bueng Boraphet , a 1969 survey of the Nan Yom and Wang Rivers of northern Thailand , and a 1996 survey of rivers in northern Laos . A possible unverified sighting was reported in 2004 . 
 The total population size of the African river martin is unknown . In the late 1980s , it appeared to be common , if local , and large numbers were seen on migration in Gabon . However , it is particularly poorly known in the Democratic Republic of the Congo ( DRC ) , and it is unclear if there is any relationship between the birds breeding in the DRC and those breeding in coastal areas of Gabon and the Republic of Congo . A flock of 15 @,@ 000 birds was seen in 1997 , and a mixed flock with rosy bee @-@ eater Merops <unk> was estimated at 100 @,@ 000 birds ; nevertheless , due to the lack of detailed information , the species is classed by the IUCN as Data Deficient . In the 1950s , the species was caught and eaten in large quantities in the DRC by the local population , and this practice could be increasing . Breeding colonies in river sandbars are also liable to flooding , but thousands of birds were breeding on the grasslands east of Gamba as recently as 2005 . 
 = Admiral Hipper @-@ class cruiser = 
 The Admiral Hipper class was a group of five heavy cruisers built by Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine in the mid @-@ 1930s . The class comprised Admiral Hipper , the lead ship , Blücher , Prinz Eugen , Seydlitz , and Lützow . Only the first three ships of the class saw action during World War II . Work on Seydlitz stopped when she was approximately 95 percent complete ; it was decided to convert her into an aircraft carrier , but this was not completed either . Lützow was sold incomplete to the Soviet Union in 1940 . 
 Admiral Hipper and Blücher took part in Operation Weserübung , the invasion of Norway in April 1940 . Blücher was sunk by Norwegian coastal defenses outside Oslo while Admiral Hipper led the attack on Trondheim . She then conducted sorties into the Atlantic to attack Allied merchant shipping . In 1942 , she was deployed to northern Norway to attack shipping to the Soviet Union , culminating in the Battle of the Barents Sea in December 1942 , where she was damaged by British cruisers . Prinz Eugen saw her first action during Operation Rheinübung with the battleship Bismarck . She eventually returned to Germany during the Channel Dash in 1942 , after which she too went to Norway . After being torpedoed by a British submarine , she returned to Germany for repairs . Admiral Hipper while decommissioned after returning to Germany in early 1943 , was partially repaired and recommissioned in the fall of 1944 for a refugee transport mission in 1945 . Only Prinz Eugen continued to serve in full commission and stayed in the Baltic until the end of the war . 
 Admiral Hipper was scuttled in Kiel in May 1945 , leaving Prinz Eugen as the only member of the class to survive the war . She was ceded to the US Navy , which ultimately expended the ship in the Operation Crossroads nuclear tests in 1946 . Seydlitz was towed to Königsberg and scuttled before the advancing Soviet Army could seize the ship . She was ultimately raised and broken up for scrap . Lützow , renamed Petropavlovsk , remained unfinished when the Germans invaded the Soviet Union . The ship provided artillery support against advancing German forces until she was sunk in September 1941 . She was raised a year later and repaired enough to participate in the campaign to relieve the Siege of Leningrad in 1944 . She served on in secondary roles until the 1950s , when she was broken up . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Article 181 of the Treaty of Versailles limited the German Reichsmarine to six battleships of the " Deutschland or Lothringen types " and six old light cruisers . These obsolete ships could not be replaced until they were at least twenty years old , and their replacements could displace no more than 10 @,@ 000 long tons ( 10 @,@ 000 t ) and 6 @,@ 000 long tons ( 6 @,@ 100 t ) , respectively . In February 1922 , the major naval powers signed the Washington Naval Treaty ; Germany was not invited to attend , but she would be held to the same qualitative limitations as the signatories . By the early 1920s , the cruisers of the Reichsmarine were old enough to permit replacement ; the three Königsberg @-@ class cruisers and Leipzig were built in the middle of the decade . 
 The 1930 London Naval Treaty formally divided cruiser types into two categories : heavy cruisers , armed with 20 @.@ 3 cm ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) guns , and light cruisers , armed with 15 @.@ 5 cm ( 6 @.@ 1 in ) guns . The Treaty of Versailles still prohibited Germany from building heavy cruisers , but the rise of Adolf Hitler 's Nazi Party to power in 1933 led to the formal rejection of the Treaty of Versailles . After pulling out of the Geneva Conference in 1933 , Hitler argued that if the other European powers did not disarm to parity with Germany , they should accept German rearmament . The German navy , renamed the Kriegsmarine on 21 May 1935 , was now free to pursue rearmament . Germany concluded the Anglo @-@ German Naval Agreement with Great Britain , which set German naval strength at 35 % of the size of the Royal Navy . This permitted Germany to build 50 @,@ 000 long tons ( 51 @,@ 000 t ) of heavy cruisers , enough for five 10 @,@ 000 @-@ ton ships . 
 The design for the first three of the five Admiral Hipper @-@ class ships was prepared in 1934 – 1935 . Seydlitz and Lützow were initially designed as light cruisers ; their design was prepared in 1934 – 1936 . These last two ships were to be armed with four triple turrets housing 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) guns , as opposed to the four twin 20 @.@ 3 cm ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) guns on the first three ships . The " light cruisers " were otherwise planned to follow the same particulars as their three " heavy " half @-@ sisters . On 14 November 1936 , the Navy decided to complete the final two ships identically to the other members of the class . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The ships of the Admiral Hipper class varied slightly in size . Admiral Hipper was 195 @.@ 5 meters ( 641 ft ) long at the waterline and 202 @.@ 8 m ( 665 ft ) overall . After the installation of a clipper bow during fitting out , her overall length increased to 205 m ( 673 ft ) . The ship had a beam of 21 @.@ 3 m ( 70 ft ) . Blücher was 195 m ( 640 ft ) long at the waterline and 203 @.@ 2 m ( 667 ft ) overall ; with the clipper bow , her overall length was 205 @.@ 9 m ( 676 ft ) . Her beam was 22 m ( 72 ft ) . Both ships had a designed draft of 6 @.@ 5 m ( 21 ft ) and a full load draft of 7 @.@ 2 m ( 24 ft ) . Prinz Eugen was 199 @.@ 5 m ( 655 ft ) at the waterline and 207 @.@ 7 m ( 681 ft ) long overall ; with the clipper bow , her overall length was 212 @.@ 5 m ( 697 ft ) . Her beam was 21 @.@ 7 m ( 71 ft ) and a draft of 6 @.@ 6 m ( 22 ft ) standard and 7 @.@ 2 m at full load . Seydlitz and Lützow were 210 m ( 690 ft ) long overall , with beams of 21 @.@ 8 m ( 72 ft ) and drafts of 6 @.@ 9 m ( 23 ft ) standard and 7 @.@ 9 m ( 26 ft ) at full load . Admiral Hipper and Blücher had a designed displacement of 16 @,@ 170 metric tons ( 15 @,@ 910 long tons ; 17 @,@ 820 short tons ) and a full load displacement of 18 @,@ 200 long tons ( 18 @,@ 500 t ) . Prinz Eugen 's displacement increased slightly , to 16 @,@ 970 t ( 16 @,@ 700 long tons ; 18 @,@ 710 short tons ) designed and 18 @,@ 750 long tons ( 19 @,@ 050 t ) full load . Seydlitz and Lützow grew heavier still , at 17 @,@ 600 t ( 17 @,@ 300 long tons ; 19 @,@ 400 short tons ) designed and 19 @,@ 800 long tons ( 20 @,@ 100 t ) full load . 
 The ships ' hulls were constructed from longitudinal steel frames . The hulls were divided into fourteen watertight compartments and a double bottom that extended for 72 percent of the length of the keel . The Kriegsmarine regarded the ships as good sea boats , with gentle motion . At low speed , however , they were affected unpredictably by wind and currents . The ships heeled up to fourteen degrees and lost up to 50 % speed with the rudder hard over at high speed . The ships had a standard complement of 42 officers and 1 @,@ 340 enlisted men . Wartime modifications increased the crew to 51 officers and 1 @,@ 548 sailors . The ships carried several smaller vessels , including two picket boats , two barges , one launch , one pinnace , and two dinghies . 
 = = = Machinery = = = 
 The Admiral Hipper @-@ class ships were powered by three sets of geared steam turbines . Admiral Hipper 's and Blücher 's engines were built by Blohm & Voss , while Prinz Eugen 's turbines were built by Germaniawerft . The turbines installed on Seydlitz 's and Lützow 's engines were manufactured by Deschimag . Steam was provided in the first three ships by twelve ultra @-@ high pressure boilers . Seydlitz and Lützow were equipped with nine double @-@ ended high @-@ pressure boilers . Admiral Hipper 's and Prinz Eugen 's boilers were manufactured by Wagner , while the boilers for the other three ships were built by La Mont . 
 Each turbine drove a three @-@ bladed screw 4 @.@ 1 m ( 13 ft ) in diameter . The ships ' engines were rated at 132 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 98 @,@ 000 kW ) for a top speed of 32 knots ( 59 km / h ; 37 mph ) . They carried 1 @,@ 420 to 1 @,@ 460 t ( 1 @,@ 400 to 1 @,@ 440 long tons ; 1 @,@ 570 to 1 @,@ 610 short tons ) of fuel oil as designed , though the ships could carry up to 3 @,@ 050 to 3 @,@ 250 t ( 3 @,@ 000 to 3 @,@ 200 long tons ; 3 @,@ 360 to 3 @,@ 580 short tons ) . At a cruising speed of 20 kn ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) , the ships had a maximum range of 6 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 12 @,@ 600 km ; 7 @,@ 800 mi ) . 
 Steering was controlled by a single rudder . Admiral Hipper and Blücher were equipped with three electricity plants with four diesel generators and six turbo @-@ generators each ; the diesel generators supplied 150 kW apiece , four of the six turbo @-@ generators provided 460 kW , and the final pair provided 230 kW . Total electrical output was 2900 kW . Prinz Eugen , Seydlitz , and Lützow were equipped with three 150 kW diesel generators , four 460 kW turbo @-@ generators , one 230 kW turbo @-@ generator , and one 150 kW AC generator , for a total of <unk> kW . All five ships ' electrical plants operated at 220 volts . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The three completed ships were armed with eight 20 @.@ 3 cm ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) SK C / 34 guns in four twin turrets . The ships were supplied with between 960 and 1 @,@ 280 rounds of ammunition , or 120 to 160 rounds per gun . The guns were mounted in Drh LC / 34 turrets , which enabled depression to − 10 ° and elevation to 37 ° . At maximum elevation , the gun could reach out to 33 @,@ 540 m ( 110 @,@ 040 ft ) . It fired a 122 kg ( 269 lb ) projectile at a muzzle velocity of 925 meters per second ( 3 @,@ 030 ft / s ) . The projectiles included armor @-@ piercing shells , base @-@ fuzed and nose @-@ fuzed high @-@ explosive ( HE ) warheads . Each ship was also supplied with 40 illumination rounds that weighed 103 kg ( 227 lb ) and had a muzzle velocity of 700 m / s ( 2 @,@ 300 ft / s ) . The four gun turrets built for Seydlitz were emplaced as coastal artillery pieces in the Atlantic Wall . Only the two forward turrets had been installed on Lützow when she was delivered to the Soviet Union . 
 The ships ' heavy anti @-@ aircraft battery consisted of twelve 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) SK C / 33 guns in twin mountings . These guns were supplied with a total of 4 @,@ 800 rounds of ammunition . The mounts were the Dopp LC / 31 type , originally designed for earlier 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) SK C / 31 guns . The LC / 31 mounting was triaxially @-@ stabilized and capable of elevating to 80 ° . This enabled the guns to engage targets up to a ceiling of 12 @,@ 500 m ( 41 @,@ 000 ft ) . Against surface targets , the guns had a maximum range of 17 @,@ 700 m ( 58 @,@ 100 ft ) . The guns fired fixed ammunition weighing 15 @.@ 1 kg ( 33 lb ) ; the guns could fire HE and HE incendiary rounds , as well as illumination shells . 
 Close @-@ range anti @-@ aircraft weaponry initially consisted of twelve 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) SK C / 30 guns and eight 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) Flak 38 guns . The 3 @.@ 7 cm gun was a single @-@ shot gun , with a rate of fire of around 30 rounds per minute . At its maximum elevation of 85 ° , the gun had a ceiling of 6 @,@ 800 m ( 22 @,@ 300 ft ) . The 2 cm gun was a magazine @-@ fed automatic weapon , firing at up to 500 rounds per minute . Twenty and forty @-@ round magazines were supplied for the guns ; The guns were supplied with 16 @,@ 000 rounds of ammunition . Later in the war , the light anti @-@ aircraft batteries for Admiral Hipper and Prinz Eugen were modified . Four 3 @.@ 7 cm guns were removed and the number of 2 cm guns had increased to twenty @-@ eight . In 1944 , Prinz Eugen 's 3 @.@ 7 cm guns were replaced by fifteen 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) Flak 28 guns . By 1945 , the ship 's light anti @-@ aircraft battery comprised twenty 4 cm guns and eighteen 2 cm guns ; Admiral Hipper mounted sixteen 4 cm guns and fourteen 2 cm guns . 
 The ships ' armament was rounded out by twelve torpedo tubes ; they were mounted in four triple launchers on the ships ' main deck . The ships carried twenty @-@ four G7a torpedoes , twelve loaded in the tubes and one reload for each . The G7a torpedo carried a 300 kg ( 660 lb ) warhead . It had three speed settings ; in 1939 , it could reach 12 @,@ 500 m ( 41 @,@ 000 ft ) at 30 kn ( 56 km / h ; 35 mph ) , 7 @,@ 500 m ( 24 @,@ 600 ft ) at 40 kn ( 74 km / h ; 46 mph ) , and 5 @,@ 000 m ( 16 @,@ 000 ft ) at 44 kn ( 81 km / h ; 51 mph ) , its maximum speed setting . The 340 horsepower ( 250 kW ) radial engine was improved during the war , which improved performance . The ranges increased to 14 @,@ 000 m ( 46 @,@ 000 ft ) , 8 @,@ 000 m ( 26 @,@ 000 ft ) , and 6 @,@ 000 m ( 20 @,@ 000 ft ) , respectively . Admiral Hipper also carried 96 EMC mines ; these mines were contact mines and had a 300 kg explosive charge . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The five Admiral Hipper @-@ class ships were protected by Krupp steel armor , of both Wotan Hart and Wotan Weich types . The ships had two armored decks to protect the ship from vertical attacks . The upper deck was 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick amidships to protect the ships ' vitals . At either end , the deck was reduced to 12 mm ( 0 @.@ 47 in ) thickness . The bow and stern was not protected by deck armor . The main armored deck was 20 to 50 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 to 1 @.@ 97 in ) thick . Both decks were Wotan Hart steel . The main armored belt was 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick amidships and reduced to 70 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) thick aft . An interior 20 mm thick torpedo bulkhead protected the ships ' vitals from underwater attack . 
 The ships ' main battery turrets were protected with 105 mm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) thick faces and 70 mm thick sides . Their roofs were also 70 mm thick . The 10 @.@ 5 cm guns were equipped with 10 to 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 39 to 0 @.@ 59 in ) thick gun shields . The forward conning tower had 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides and a 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick roof . The rear conning tower was significantly less well armored , with only splinter protection . Their sides were 30 mm thick with a 20 mm thick roof . The anti @-@ aircraft fire directors were also given splinter protection , with 17 mm ( 0 @.@ 67 in ) thick shields . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Admiral Hipper ordered as " H " , as a replacement for the light cruiser Hamburg . She was laid down at the Blohm & Voss shipyard in Hamburg under construction number 501 , on 6 July 1935 . She was launched on 6 February 1937 and fitting out work was completed two years later in April 1939 ; the ship was commissioned into the Kriegsmarine on 29 April 1939 . Blücher , ordered as " G " to replace Berlin , was built by the Deutsche Werke shipyard in Kiel , under construction number 246 . Her keel was laid on 15 August 1936 and launched 8 June 1937 . Work on the ship was finished by 20 September 1939 , the day she was commissioned into the Kriegsmarine . Prinz Eugen , the last ship of the class to be completed , was ordered from the Germaniawerft shipyard in Kiel as " J " under construction number 564 . She was laid down on 23 April 1936 and launched on 22 August 1938 . She was commissioned into the Kriegsmarine on 1 August 1940 . 
 Seydlitz and Lützow were both built by the Deutsche <unk> und Maschinenbau shipyard in Bremen ; Seydlitz was ordered as " K " , under construction number 940 , and Lützow was ordered as " L " under construction number 941 . Seydlitz was laid down on 29 December 1936 and Lützow followed her on 2 August 1937 . The ships were launched on 19 January 1939 and 1 July 1939 , respectively . Work ceased on Seydlitz when she was approximately 95 percent complete . In October 1939 , the Soviet Union approached Germany with a request to purchase the then unfinished Prinz Eugen , Seydlitz , and Lützow , along with plans for German capital ships , naval artillery , and other naval technology . The Kriegsmarine denied the request for Seydlitz and Prinz Eugen , but agreed to sell Lützow . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Admiral Hipper = = = 
 Admiral Hipper led the assault on Trondheim during Operation Weserübung ; while en route to her objective , she sank the British destroyer HMS Glowworm . In December 1940 , she broke out into the Atlantic Ocean to operate against Allied merchant shipping , though this operation ended without significant success . In February 1941 , Admiral Hipper sortied again , sinking several merchant vessels before eventually returning to Germany via the Denmark Strait . The ship was then transferred to northern Norway to participate in operations against convoys to the Soviet Union , culminating in the Battle of the Barents Sea on 31 December 1942 , where she was damaged and forced to withdraw by the light cruisers HMS Sheffield and HMS Jamaica . 
 Enraged by the defeat at the battle , Adolf Hitler ordered the majority of the surface warships scrapped , though Admiral Karl Dönitz was able to convince Hitler to retain the surface fleet . As a result , Admiral Hipper was returned to Germany and decommissioned for repairs . The ship was never restored to operational status , however , and on 3 May 1945 , Royal Air Force bombers severely damaged Admiral Hipper while she was in Kiel . Her crew scuttled the ship at her moorings , and in July 1945 , she was raised and towed to Heikendorfer Bay . She was ultimately broken up for scrap in 1948 – 1952 ; her bell resides in the National Maritime Museum in Greenwich . 
 = = = Blücher = = = 
 Following her commissioning in November 1939 , Blücher conducted a series of sea trials and training exercises in the Baltic , which lasted until March 1940 . She was pronounced ready for service with the fleet on 5 April 1940 . Assigned to Group 5 during the invasion of Norway in April 1940 , the ship served as Konteradmiral Oskar Kummetz 's flagship . The ship led the flotilla of warships into the Oslofjord on the night of 8 April , to seize Oslo , the capital of Norway . Two old 28 cm ( 11 in ) coastal guns in the Oscarsborg Fortress engaged the ship at very close range , scoring two damaging hits . Two torpedoes fired by land @-@ based torpedo batteries struck the ship , causing serious damage . A major fire broke out aboard Blücher , which could not be contained . After a magazine explosion , the ship slowly capsized and sank , with major loss of life . 
 The wreck remains on the bottom of the Oslofjord ; several salvage attempts were considered after 1963 , but none were carried out . The ship 's screws were removed in 1953 and divers removed over 1 @,@ 000 t ( 980 long tons ; 1 @,@ 100 short tons ) of fuel oil from the ship 's bunkers in 1994 , though oil from <unk> fuel tanks is still leaking from the sunken ship . At the time the divers removed the oil , they also recovered one of her Ar 196 floatplanes , which is preserved in Stavanger . 
 = = = Prinz Eugen = = = 
 Prinz Eugen saw extensive action during Operation Rheinübung , an attempted breakout into the Atlantic Ocean with the battleship Bismarck in May 1941 . The two ships engaged the British battlecruiser Hood and battleship Prince of Wales in the Battle of Denmark Strait , during which Hood was destroyed and Prince of Wales was severely damaged . Prinz Eugen was detached from Bismarck during the operation to raid Allied merchant shipping , but this was cut short due to engine troubles . After putting into occupied France and undergoing repairs , the ship participated in Operation Cerberus , a daring daylight dash through the English Channel back to Germany . In February 1942 , Prinz Eugen was deployed to Norway , although her time stationed there was cut short when she was torpedoed by the British submarine Trident days after arriving in Norwegian waters . The torpedo severely damaged the ship 's stern , which necessitated repairs in Germany . 
 Upon returning to active service , the ship spent several months training new officer cadets in the Baltic before serving as artillery support to the retreating German Army on the Eastern Front . After the German collapse in May 1945 , the ship was surrendered to the British Royal Navy before being transferred to the US Navy as a war prize . After examining the ship in the United States , the US Navy assigned the cruiser to the Operation Crossroads nuclear tests in the Bikini Atoll . After surviving both atomic blasts , Prinz Eugen was towed to Kwajalein Atoll where she ultimately capsized and sank in December 1946 . The wreck remains partially visible above the water ; one of her screws was salvaged and is on display at the Laboe Naval Memorial in Germany . 
 = = = Seydlitz = = = 
 At the time construction on Seydlitz was halted , she was approximately 95 percent complete . The unfinished ship remained inactive until March 1942 , when the Kriegsmarine decided to pursue aircraft carriers over surface combatants . Seydlitz was among the vessels chosen for conversion into auxiliary aircraft carriers . Renamed Weser , conversion work began on the ship in May 1942 . The majority of the superstructure was cut away , with the exception of the funnel , to prepare for the installation of a flight deck and an aircraft hangar . In total , approximately 2 @,@ 400 t ( 2 @,@ 400 long tons ; 2 @,@ 600 short tons ) of material from the ship was removed . 
 As a carrier , the ship was to have had a complement of ten Bf 109 fighters and ten Ju 87 dive @-@ bombers . She would have been armed with an anti @-@ aircraft battery of ten 10 @.@ 5 cm SK C / 33 guns in dual mounts , ten 3 @.@ 7 cm SK C / 30 guns in dual mounts , and twenty @-@ four 2 cm Flak 38 guns in quadruple mounts . Conversion work was halted in June 1943 , however , and the incomplete vessel was towed to Königsberg where she was eventually scuttled on 29 January 1945 . The ship was seized by the advancing Soviet Army and was briefly considered for cannibalization for spare parts to complete her sister ship Lützow , which had been purchased by the Soviet Navy before the war . This plan was also abandoned , and the ship was broken up for scrap . 
 = = = Lützow = = = 
 In October 1939 , the Soviet Union requested the purchase of the incomplete Lützow . After a series of negotiations , the Kriegsmarine agreed to the sale in February 1940 , at the price of 150 million Reichsmarks . The transfer was completed on 15 April . The vessel was still incomplete when sold to the Soviet Union , with only half of her main battery of eight 20 @.@ 3 cm ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) guns installed and much of the superstructure missing . Renamed Petropavlovsk in September 1940 , work on the ship was effected by a German @-@ advised Soviet shipyard in Leningrad . Still unfinished when Germany invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941 , the ship briefly took part in the defense of Leningrad by providing artillery support to the Soviet defenders . She was sunk by German artillery in September 1941 and raised a year later in September 1942 . After repairs were effected , the ship was renamed Tallinn and used in the Soviet counter @-@ offensive that relieved Leningrad in 1944 . After the end of the war , the ship was used as a stationary training platform and as a floating barracks before being broken up for scrap sometime between 1953 and 1960 . 
 = = See Also = = 
 List of ships of the Second World War 
 List of ship classes of the Second World War 
 = 1st Filipino Infantry Regiment = 
 The 1st Filipino Infantry Regiment was a segregated United States Army infantry regiment made up of Filipino Americans from the continental United States and a few veterans of the Battle of the Philippines that saw combat during World War II . It was formed and activated at Camp San Luis Obispo , California , under the auspices of the California National Guard . Originally created as a battalion , it was declared a regiment on 13 July 1942 . Deployed initially to New Guinea in 1944 , it became a source of manpower for special forces and units that would serve in occupied territories . In 1945 , it deployed to the Philippines , where it first saw combat as a unit . After major combat operations , it remained in the Philippines until it returned to California and was deactivated in 1946 at Camp Stoneman . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1898 , the Philippines was ceded by Spain to the United States and , after a conflict between Philippine independence forces and the United States , Filipinos were allowed to immigrate freely to the United States as U.S. nationals . Most immigrants chose to settle in the Territory of Hawaii and the West coast . In 1934 , U.S. policy changed and their status as nationals was revoked . 
 In 1941 , the Imperial Japanese Navy attacked Pearl Harbor , while other Japanese forces attacked the Philippines . Filipino Americans , like other Americans , attempted to volunteer for military service , but were not allowed to enlist since they were neither citizens nor resident aliens . Following a change in legislation it was announced on 3 January 1942 , the day after Manila fell , that Filipinos would be permitted to volunteer , and could be drafted , for military service ; in California , almost half of the male Filipino American population enlisted . Some who volunteered to serve were refused due to their age ; other older volunteers were refused due to the need for agricultural labor . Filipinos were strongly encouraged to volunteer for the Regiment , and only those who did so were assigned to it . Those who did not volunteer to serve in the Regiment served in regular ( white ) units in various theaters of operation . One example was PFC Ramon S. <unk> , who was awarded the Silver Star for actions in Germany . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Stateside = = = 
 Constituted in March 1942 , the 1st Filipino Infantry Battalion was activated in April at Camp San Luis Obispo , to liberate the Philippines . Colonel Robert Offley was selected as the unit 's commanding officer , as he spoke Tagalog and had spent time on Mindoro in his youth . During the following months , Filipino Americans continued to volunteer and the unit grew . Philippine Army personnel who were in the United States and Filipino military personnel who had escaped the fall of the Philippines and were recuperating in the United States were also instructed to report to the unit . In July 1942 , the battalion was elevated to a regiment at the California Rodeo Grounds in Salinas , California . The Regiment was made up of three battalions , each consisting of a headquarters company and four infantry companies . The Regiment had a separate regimental headquarters company , a service company , an anti @-@ tank company , a medical detachment , and a band . 
 The Regiment continued to train and grow , leading to the activation of the 2nd Filipino Infantry Regiment at Fort Ord in November 1942 . The 2nd Regiment was assigned to Camp Cooke and the 1st to Camp Beale . Eventually , more than 7 @,@ 000 soldiers would be assigned to the Filipino Infantry Regiments . While at Camp Beale , there was a mass naturalization ceremony of 1 @,@ 200 soldiers of the Regiment . As members of the armed forces they were able to become citizens ; in 1924 naturalization of Filipino Americans had been barred , as it was determined that only aliens could be naturalized and Filipinos at the time were nationals . In November 1943 , it paraded through Los Angeles , with Carlos Bulosan , the influential Filipino author of America Is in the Heart , there to witness it . 
 Members of the Regiment faced discrimination during this period . The anti @-@ miscegenation laws in California meant that the soldiers were banned from marrying non @-@ Filipino women ; those soldiers who wished to marry in this way were transported to Gallup , New Mexico , as New Mexico had repealed its anti @-@ miscegenation law after the Civil War . Soldiers of the Regiment faced discrimination in Marysville while visiting from neighboring Camp Beale , as the local businesses refused to serve Filipinos . This was later remedied by the Regiment 's commander , who informed the Chamber of Commerce that they were failing to cooperate with the Army , at which point they changed their business practices . Further instances of discrimination against soldiers of the Regiment were also reported in Sacramento and San Francisco , where they were mistaken for Japanese Americans . 
 = = = Deployment = = = 
 In April 1944 , the Regiment departed California aboard the USS General John Pope for Oro Bay , New Guinea . On the way to New Guinea the Regiment spent part of June in Australia . Upon arriving at Oro Bay , it was assigned to the 31st Infantry Division , 8th Army to provide area security and continue training . Some soldiers were then assigned to the Alamo Scouts , the <unk> Reconnaissance Battalion , and to the Philippine Regional Section of Allied Intelligence Bureau . One example was Second Lieutenant Rafael <unk> , a future Vice Chief of Staff in the Philippines , who led a team in the Alamo Scouts . Due to the reassignment of these soldiers , both Filipino Infantry Regiments became smaller than authorized . In response , the 2nd Filipino Infantry Regiment was disbanded and used to bring the 1st Filipino Infantry Regiment to 125 % of its standard allocated size . The remaining soldiers of the 2nd Filipino Infantry Regiment who did not join the Regiment formed the 2nd Filipino Infantry Battalion ( Separate ) . During its time at Oro Bay the Regiment was reinforced with Filipinos from Hawaii . These men had not been able to enlist in the Army until 1943 as the Hawaiian Sugar Planters ' Association had successfully argued that their labor was needed in the sugar industry . 
 In February 1945 , the Regiment was sent to Leyte and was assigned to the Americal Division , 10th Corps . It would later be reassigned back to the 8th Army , in May 1945 , along with the Americal Division . Finally in the Philippines , it conducted " mopping up " operations on Leyte , Samar , and other islands in the Visayan islands group . In addition , some of the companies of the Regiment provided security for 8th Army General Headquarters , Far East Air Force , two airstrips at <unk> and Tacloban , and Seventh Fleet Headquarters . Other soldiers would also participate in the Luzon Campaign , fighting on the Bataan Peninsula , and the recapture of former Fort Mills ; the Regiment was not awarded formal campaign participation for these individual actions . 
 = = = Post @-@ combat = = = 
 By August 1945 , operations came to a close due to the Japanese Emperor 's decision to end the war following the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . Soldiers of the Regiment who had been detached to the Alamo Scouts , <unk> Reconnaissance Battalion , and other units were reassigned back to it . During the period between the close of operations and their return to the United States , and without the Imperial Japanese Army to fight , the men of the Regiment clashed with soldiers of the Philippine Commonwealth Army and Philippine Constabulary over differences in pay , culture and local women . Others married women under the War Brides Act , which allowed spouses and adopted children of United States military personnel to enter the U.S. For these newly married couples , a " tent city " was established by Colonel William Hamby , who had succeeded Offley as the Regiment Commander . Many younger soldiers connected to a culture to which they had previously only had a distant relationship , learning language and customs that were not used or practiced in the United States . 
 Soldiers of the Regiment who did either not qualify to return to the U.S. , either due to having insufficient service points or their being otherwise ineligible , and those who chose to remain in the Philippines , were transferred to 2nd Filipino Infantry Battalion ( Separate ) in Quezon City . Returning to the United States aboard the USS General Calan on 8 April 1946 , the rest of the Regiment was sent to Camp Stoneman , near Pittsburgh , California , where it was deactivated on 10 April 1946 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 During the war the efforts of Filipino and American defenders during the Battle of Bataan were widely covered by the press , as were the actions of the 100th and 442nd Infantry . After the war , the efforts of the 442nd continued to be lauded , with the 1951 film Go for Broke ! portraying their endeavors . By contrast , the activities of the Filipino Infantry Regiment and her sister units were largely unpublicized ; it was not until the documentaries Unsung Heroes and An <unk> Triumph that any significant visual media covered the history of the Regiment . In 1984 an association of veterans of the Regiment erected a marker in Salinas in honor of their former unit . 
 The War Brides Act of 1945 , and subsequent Alien <unk> and <unk> Act of 1946 , continued to apply until the end of 1953 , allowing veterans of the Regiment , and other Filipino American veterans , to return to the Philippines to bring back <unk> , wives , and children . In the years following the war , some sixteen thousand Filipinas entered the United States as war brides . These new Filipino American families formed a second generation of Filipino Americans , significantly expanding the Filipino American community . 
 = City and South London Railway = 
 The City and South London Railway ( C & SLR ) was the first deep @-@ level underground " tube " railway in the world , and the first major railway to use electric traction . The railway was originally intended for cable @-@ hauled trains , but owing to the bankruptcy of the cable contractor during construction , a system of electric traction using electric locomotives — an experimental technology at the time — was chosen instead . 
 When opened in 1890 , the line had six stations and ran for 3 @.@ 2 miles ( 5 @.@ 1 km ) in a pair of tunnels between the City of London and Stockwell , passing under the River Thames . The diameter of the tunnels restricted the size of the trains , and the small carriages with their high @-@ backed seating were nicknamed padded cells . The railway was extended several times north and south , eventually serving 22 stations over a distance of 13 @.@ 5 miles ( 21 @.@ 7 km ) from Camden Town in north London to Morden in Surrey . 
 Although the C & SLR was well used , low ticket prices and the construction cost of the extensions placed a strain on the company 's finances . In 1913 , the C & SLR became part of the Underground Group of railways and , in the 1920s , it underwent major reconstruction works before its merger with another of the Group 's railways , the Charing Cross , Euston & Hampstead Railway , forming a single London Underground line called the Morden @-@ Edgware line . In 1933 , the C & SLR and the rest of the Underground Group was taken into public ownership . Today , its tunnels and stations form the Bank Branch of the Northern Line from Camden Town to Kennington and the southern leg of the line from Kennington to Morden . 
 = = Establishment = = 
 In November 1883 , notice was given that a private bill was to be presented to Parliament for the construction of the City of London & Southwark Subway ( CL & SS ) . The promoter of the bill , and engineer of the proposed railway , was James Henry Greathead , who had , in 1869 – 70 , constructed the Tower Subway using the same tunnelling shield / segmented cast iron tube method proposed for the CL & SS . The railway was to run from Elephant and Castle , in Southwark , south London , under the River Thames to King William Street in the City of London . The tracks were to be in twin tunnels 10 ft 2 in ( 3 @.@ 1 metres ) in diameter , running for a distance of 1 @.@ 25 miles ( 2 @.@ 01 km ) . 
 The bill received royal assent as the City of London and Southwark Subway Act , 1884 on 28 July 1884 . Section 5 of the Act stated : 
 The works authorised by this Act are as follows : 
 A subway commencing ... near ... Short Street at the ... junction ... with Newington Butts and terminating at King William Street ... 
 The subway shall consist of two tubes for separate up and down traffic and shall be approached by means of staircases and by hydraulic lifts . 
 In 1886 , a further bill was submitted to Parliament to extend the tunnels south from Elephant and Castle to Kennington and Stockwell . This received assent on 12 July 1887 as the City of London and Southwark Subway ( Kennington Extensions , & c . ) Act , 1887 , allowing the construction of the extension to be added to the work on the original route , which had begun in 1886 . The tunnels on this section were of a slightly larger diameter – 10 ft 6 in ( 3 @.@ 2 m ) and extended the line by a further 1 @.@ 75 miles ( 2 @.@ 82 km ) . Before the railway opened , a further bill received assent , granting permission to continue the line south to Clapham Common . The act was published on 25 July 1890 as the City and South London Railway Act , 1890 , also effecting a change of the company 's name . 
 = = <unk> and infrastructure = = 
 Given the small dimension of the tunnels as well as the difficulty of providing sufficient ventilation , steam power , as used on London 's other underground railways , was not feasible for a deep tube railway . Like Greathead 's earlier Tower Subway , the CL & SS was intended to be operated by cable haulage with a static engine pulling the cable through the tunnels at a steady speed . Section 5 of the 1884 Act specified that : 
 The traffic of the subway shall be worked by ... the system of the Patent Cable Tramway Corporation Limited or by such means other than steam locomotives as the Board of Trade may from time to time approve . 
 The Patent Cable Tramway Corporation owned the rights to the <unk> cable @-@ car system first invented and used in San Francisco in 1873 ; trains were attached to the cable with clamps , which would be opened and closed at stations , allowing the carriages to disconnect and reconnect without needing to stop the cable or to interfere with other trains sharing the cable . There were to be two independent endless cables , one between City station and Elephant and Castle moving at 10 mph , and the other between Elephant and Castle and Stockwell , where the gradient was less , at 12 mph . However , the additional length of tunnel permitted by the supplementary acts challenged the practicality of the cable system . 
 It is reported that this problem with the CL & SS contributed to the bankruptcy of the cable company in 1888 . However , electric motor traction had been considered all along , and much engineering progress had been made since the tunnel 's construction had begun in 1886 . So , CL & SS chairman Charles Grey Mott decided to switch to electric traction . Other cable @-@ operated systems using the <unk> patents continued to be designed , such as the Glasgow Subway which opened in 1896 . 
 The solution adopted was electrical power , provided via a third rail beneath the train , but offset to the west of centre for clearance reasons . Although the use of electricity to power trains had been experimented with during the previous decade , and small @-@ scale operations had been implemented , the C & SLR was the first major railway in the world to adopt it as a means of motive power . The system operated using electric locomotives built by Mather & Platt collecting a voltage of 500 volts ( actually + 500 volts in the northbound tunnel and − 500 volts in the southbound ) from the third rail and pulling several carriages . A depot and generating station were constructed at Stockwell . Owing to the limited capacity of the generators , the stations were originally illuminated by gas . The depot was on the surface , and trains requiring maintenance were initially hauled up via a ramp although , following a runaway accident , a lift was soon installed . In practice , most rolling stock and locomotives went to the surface only for major maintenance . 
 To avoid the need to purchase agreements for running under surface buildings , the tunnels were bored below roadways , where construction could be carried out without charge . At the northern end of the railway , the need to pass deep beneath the bed of the River Thames and the medieval street pattern of the City of London constrained the arrangement of the tunnels on the approach to King William Street station . Because of the proximity of the station to the river , steeply inclined tunnels were required to the west of the station . Because of the narrow street under which they ran , they were bored one above the other rather than side by side as elsewhere . The outbound tunnel was the lower and steeper of the two . The tunnels converged immediately before the station , which was in one large tunnel and comprised a single track with platforms either side . The other terminus at Stockwell was also constructed in a single tunnel but with tracks on either side of a central platform . 
 = = Opening = = 
 The railway was opened officially by Edward , Prince of Wales ( later Edward VII ) on 4 November 1890 . It was opened to the public on 18 December 1890 . Initially , it had stations at : 
 Stockwell 
 The Oval ( now Oval ) 
 Kennington 
 Elephant & Castle 
 Borough 
 King William Street 
 The original service was operated by trains composed of an engine and three carriages . Thirty @-@ two passengers could be accommodated in each carriage , which had longitudinal bench seating and sliding doors at the ends , leading onto a platform for boarding and alighting . It was reasoned that there was nothing to look at in the tunnels , so the only windows were in a narrow band high up in the carriage sides . Gate @-@ men rode on the carriage platforms to operate the lattice gates and announce the station names to the passengers . Because of their claustrophobic interiors , the carriages soon became known as padded cells . Unlike other railways , the C & SLR had no ticket classes or paper tickets ; when the railway began operations , a flat fare of two pence , collected at a turnstile , was charged . Despite the cramped carriages and competition from bus and tram services , the railway attracted 5 @.@ 1 million passengers in 1891 , its first year of operation . To alleviate overcrowding , the fleet of rolling stock was enlarged . 
 = = Extensions to Clapham Common and Angel , 1890 – 1901 = = 
 Shortly before it opened to the public , the C & SLR gave notice of its intention to submit another private bill to Parliament , to construct a new line from its northern terminus at King William Street towards Islington . Because of the awkward arrangement of King William Street station , the extension was not to be connected directly to the existing running tunnels but was to be linked via a pedestrian subway through which passengers could make interchanges between the separate lines . The bill was rejected on the grounds that the extension failed to make a connection to the existing line . In November 1891 , the C & SLR published details of a revised bill for the extension to Islington . The company had recognised the deficiencies of its King William Street station and , just a year after the line had opened , planned to construct a new pair of tunnels to bypass the problematic northern section . 
 Near Borough station the new tunnels would branch off via a new station to form an interchange with the SE & CR and the LB & SCR at London Bridge mainline station . The tunnels would then pass to the east of London Bridge , north through the City of London to Angel . Following a delay , during which a Joint Select Committee reviewed the proposals of several new underground railways , the City and South London Railway Act , 1893 received royal assent on 24 August 1893 . The Act also incorporated another bill of 1893 to grant an extension of time to build the southern extension to Clapham . 
 Construction of the two authorised extensions was delayed while funds were raised and plans were finalised . Between 1895 and 1898 , three further bills were put before Parliament to keep the permissions alive and obtain additional approvals : 
 1895 : an extension of time for the 1890 Act and to allow for a new approach tunnel to be built into King William Street station . Approved as the City and South London Railway Act , 1895 on 14 April 1895 . 
 1896 : an extension of time for the 1893 Act and changes to the construction of Bank station . Approved as the City and South London Railway Act , 1896 on 14 August 1896 . 
 1898 : an extension of time for the 1896 Act , plans to add sidings to the southern extension at Clapham Common and plans to sell King William Street station and its approach tunnels to the newly proposed City and Brixton Railway ( C & BR ) . Approved as the City and South London Railway Act , 1898 on 23 May 1898 . 
 The new tunnels permitted by the 1895 Act enabled the track layout at King William Street station to be modified to a single central platform with a track each side . This was opened as a temporary measure while funds for the extensions were raised . Finance was eventually obtained and construction proceeded so that the King William Street section closed and the first section of the northern extension opened on 25 February 1900 , with stations at : 
 London Bridge 
 Bank 
 Moorgate Street 
 The southern extension opened on 3 June 1900 , with stations at : 
 Clapham Road 
 Clapham Common 
 Like the original Stockwell station and the rearranged King William Street , Clapham Road and Clapham Common were constructed with a single station tunnel , with a central platform served by tracks on each side . 
 Work continued on the rest of the northern extension . The City and South London Railway Act , 1900 , approved on 25 May 1900 , gave permission to enlarge the station tunnel at Angel to a diameter of 9 @.@ 2 m ( 30 ft ) and the rest of the extension opened on 17 November 1901 , with stations at : 
 Old Street 
 City Road ( closed 1922 ) 
 Angel 
 = = Extension to Euston , 1901 – 1907 = = 
 Despite the technical innovations of the railway and the large passenger demand , the C & SLR was not particularly profitable and the rapid series of extensions aimed at improving profits had placed a strain on the finances . The dividends were low and declining ( 2 ⅛ % in 1898 , 1 ⅞ % in 1899 and 1 ¼ % in 1900 ) and the company had been accused of extravagance for the abandonment of King William Street station . In an attempt to work around this poor reputation and make it easier to raise funds , the next bill for an extension of the line was submitted in November 1900 by a notionally separate company , the Islington and Euston Railway ( I & ER ) , albeit one that shared its chairman with the C & SLR . The proposed railway was to run from the as yet unfinished C & SLR station at Angel to the main @-@ line stations at King 's Cross , St Pancras and Euston . The I & ER bill coincided with a rash of other railway bills encouraged by the successful opening of the Central London Railway ( CLR ) in 1900 and was considered alongside these by another Parliamentary Joint Committee in 1901 . The bill was approved , but the time taken for the committee 's review meant that it had to be resubmitted for the 1902 Parliamentary session . 
 In the 1902 session , the bill was considered again but was subject to opposition from one of London 's other underground railways , the Metropolitan Railway ( MR ) , which considered the proposed extension to be a threat to its service between King 's Cross and Moorgate . The I & ER also submitted a petition to allow the C & SLR to take over the powers of the railway if approved . The committee reversed its earlier decision and rejected the bill . In November 1902 , the C & SLR submitted a bill in its own name for the Euston extension as well as the authority to take over the dormant powers of the C & BR . At Euston , the railway would have an interchange with the planned but not yet built Charing Cross , Euston & Hampstead Railway ( CCE & HR ) . The intention for C & BR powers was to adapt them to provide a new station at King William Street , which would have pedestrian subway connections to the C & SLR 's Bank station and the District Railway 's ( DR 's ) Monument station . A third pair of tunnels would be constructed under the Thames to connect with the original abandoned tunnels north of Borough station and then the C & BR route would be constructed as previously approved with connections to the existing C & SLR route at London Bridge and Oval . This time , the bill was approved and received royal assent as the City and South London Railway Act , 1903 on 11 August 1903 . Although the C & BR proposals were never implemented , the Euston extension was quickly built and opened on 12 May 1907 , with stations at : 
 King 's Cross 
 Euston 
 = = Cooperation and consolidation , 1907 – 1919 = = 
 By 1907 , Londoners had seen the network of deep tube underground railways expand from the original C & SLR line of 1890 with its six stations to a network of seven lines serving more than 70 stations . These companies , along with the sub @-@ surface Metropolitan Railway and District Railway , criss @-@ crossed beneath the city streets , competing with one another for passengers as well as with the new electric trams and motor buses . In several cases pre @-@ opening predictions of passenger numbers had proven to be over optimistic . The reduced revenues generated from the lower numbers of passengers using the lines made it difficult for the operators to pay back the capital borrowed and pay dividends to shareholders . 
 In an effort to improve their collective situations , most of the underground railways in London : the C & SLR , the CLR , the Great Northern & City Railway and the Underground Electric Railways Company of London ( UERL , which operated the Baker Street & Waterloo Railway ( BS & WR ) , the Great Northern , Piccadilly & Brompton Railway ( GNP & BR ) , the CCE & HR and the DR ) began , from 1907 , to introduce fare agreements . From 1908 , they began to present themselves through common branding as the Underground . The Waterloo & City Railway , operated by the main @-@ line London and South Western Railway , was the only tube railway that did not participate in the arrangement . 
 In 1912 , the C & SLR submitted another bill for Parliamentary consideration seeking to increase its capacity by enlarging its tunnels to the larger diameter used for the tunnels of the more recently built railways to allow larger , more modern rolling stock to be used . A separate bill was published at the same time by the London Electric Railway ( LER , a company formed by the UERL in 1910 through a merger of the BS & WR , GNP & BR and CCE & HR ) , which included plans to construct tunnels to connect the C & SLR at Euston to the CCE & HR 's station at Camden Town . Together , the works proposed in these bills would enable the CCE & HR 's trains to run over the C & SLR 's route and vice versa , effectively combining the two separate railways . 
 On 1 January 1913 the UERL purchased the C & SLR , paying two shares of its own stock for three of the C & SLR 's , a discount reflecting the struggling financial position of the older company . Both bills were enacted on 15 August 1913 , as the City and South London Railway Act , 1913 and the London Electric Railway Act , 1913 . 
 The proposed extension and tunnel enlargement works were delayed by World War I and it was not until after the war that works could begin . 
 = = Reconstruction , connections and extension , 1919 – 1926 = = 
 In February 1919 , with the war over , the C & SLR submitted a new bill that included provisions for an extension of time for the tunnel enlargement works approved in the act of 1913 . The resulting act was passed on 19 August 1919 as the City and South London Railway Act , 1919 . In 1920 , under special wartime provisions , the LER was granted an extension of time to carry out the works for its own 1913 act . Although the permissions to carry out the works had been renewed , the Underground companies were not in a position to raise the funds needed to pay for the works . Construction costs had increased considerably during the war years and the returns produced by the companies could not cover the cost of repaying borrowed capital . 
 The projects were made possible when the government introduced the Trade Facilities Act , 1921 by which the Treasury underwrote loans for public works as a means of alleviating unemployment . With this support , the Underground companies were able to obtain the funds and work began on enlarging the tunnels of the C & SLR . 
 The tunnels were enlarged by removing several of the cast iron segments from each tunnel ring , excavating a void behind to the required new diameter and reinstalling the segments with additional packing spacers . The northern section of the C & SLR between Euston and Moorgate was closed from 8 August 1922 , but the rest of the line remained open with enlargement works taking place at night . A collapse on 27 November 1923 caused when a train hit temporary shoring on the incomplete excavations near Elephant & Castle station filled the tunnel with soil . The line was briefly operated in two parts , but was completely closed on 28 November 1923 . 
 The Euston to Moorgate section reopened on 20 April 1924 , along with the new tunnels linking Euston to Camden Town . The rest of the line to Clapham Common reopened on 1 December 1924 . At the same time as the tunnels were being enlarged , the stations were modernised , with longer platforms , a new tiling scheme on platform and passageway walls and new frontages to the surface buildings . Some stations also received escalators to replace the original lifts . 
 While the reconstruction works were underway , the C & SLR submitted a bill in 1922 that contained proposals to extend the line south from Clapham Common through Balham and Tooting to Morden in tunnel . From Morden , the line was to continue on the surface to Sutton sharing part of the route of an unbuilt railway planned from Wimbledon to Sutton ( see Wimbledon and Sutton Railway for full details ) . 
 The bill was enacted as the City and South London Railway Act , 1923 on 2 August 1923 . Parallel negotiations with the Southern Railway over the proposals curtailed the extension at Morden , where a large new depot was constructed . The Morden extension opened on 13 September 1926 , with stations designed by Charles Holden at : 
 Clapham South 
 Balham ( opened on 6 December 1926 ) 
 Tooting Bec ( originally Trinity Road ) 
 Tooting Broadway 
 Colliers Wood 
 South Wimbledon 
 Morden 
 Also on 13 September 1926 a further connection between the CCE & HR and the C & SLR was opened when tunnels were brought into service from the CCE & HR 's Charing Cross station ( now Embankment ) to Kennington station rebuilt with four platforms . An intermediate station was constructed at Waterloo . Thus fully integrated , combined services operated over the C & SLR and CCE & HR routes using new Standard Stock trains . On tube maps the combined lines were shown in a single colour , although the separate names continued in use into the 1930s . " Edgware , Highgate and Morden line " and " Morden @-@ Edgware line " were used in the mid 1930s before the adoption of " Northern line " on 28 August 1937 . 
 = = Move to public ownership , 1924 – 1933 = = 
 Despite the modernisation of the C & SLR and other improvements made to other parts of the network , the Underground railways were still struggling to make a profit . The Underground Group 's ownership of the highly profitable London General Omnibus Company ( LGOC ) since 1912 had enabled the Group , through the pooling of revenues , to use profits from the bus company to subsidise the less profitable railways . However , competition from numerous small bus companies during the early years of the 1920s eroded the profitability of the LGOC and had a negative impact on the profitability of the whole Group . 
 In an effort to protect the Group 's income , its Managing Director / Chairman , Lord Ashfield , lobbied the government for regulation of transport services in the London area . During the 1920s , a series of legislative initiatives was made in this direction , with Ashfield and Labour London County Councillor ( later MP ) Herbert Morrison , at the forefront of debates as to the level of regulation and public control under which transport services should be brought . Ashfield aimed for regulation that would give the existing Group protection from competition and allow it to take substantive control of the LCC 's tram system ; Morrison preferred full public ownership . Eventually , after several years of false starts , a bill was announced at the end of 1930 for the formation of the London Passenger Transport Board , a public corporation that would take control of the Underground Group , the Metropolitan Railway as well as all buses and trams within an area designated as the London Passenger Transport Area . The Board was a compromise – public ownership but not full nationalisation – and came into existence on 1 July 1933 . On this date , the C & SLR and the other Underground companies were liquidated . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The technologies of deep tube tunnelling and electric traction pioneered and proved by the C & SLR shaped the direction of subsequent underground railways built in London . The C & SLR demonstrated that an underground railway could be constructed without the need to purchase large and expensive tracts of land for the shallow cuttings of sub @-@ surface steam operated railways . Instead , it became possible to construct a tunnel at deep level without adversely affecting conditions on the surface . The C & SLR thus encouraged the construction of a network of underground railways in London , far larger than might have been the case otherwise . The size and depth of the tunnels used on the deep tube lines , including the Northern line , does have drawbacks : the tunnels have a limited loading gauge and the lines suffer from overheating in the summer . 
 During World War II , the disused tunnels between Borough and King William Street stations were converted for use as an air @-@ raid shelter , with entrances to the shelter at King William Street and at six sites south of the Thames ( of nine planned ) . In the 1960s the disused tunnels were used to assist the ventilation of London Bridge station and all the entrances bar that at 9 London Bridge Street were infilled with concrete . It is now only possible to access the tunnels from Three Castles House or a passage from the Jubilee line at London Bridge . Most of the C & SLR 's six original station buildings were rebuilt or modified during the improvements to the line in the 1920s or during more recent modernisations . Only the building at Kennington retains its original exterior and the dome over the lift shaft , a feature of all the original stations . 
 = = Rolling stock = = 
 = = = Locomotives = = = 
 See City & South London Railway locomotives for more information 
 = = = Carriages = = = 
 = = = Preserved stock = = = 
 A number of the C & SLR 's vehicles have been preserved . 
 Locomotive 35 had been placed on display on a pedestal at the Metropolitan line 's Moorgate station following the C & SLR 's reconstruction . It was badly damaged during an air raid , and was eventually removed . Carriage number 39 survived for over two decades after withdrawal as a summer house at <unk> , Oxfordshire . 
 = 1990 – 91 South Pacific cyclone season = 
 The 1990 – 91 South Pacific cyclone season was one of the least active cyclone seasons , with only three tropical cyclones occurring within the South Pacific basin which is to the east of 160 ° E. The season officially ran from November 1 , 1990 , to April 30 , 1991 with the first disturbance of the season forming on November 23 and the last disturbance dissipating on May 19 . This is the period of the year when most tropical cyclones form within the South Pacific Ocean . During the season there was no deaths recorded from any of the tropical cyclones while they were within the basin . However six people were killed by Cyclone Joy , when it made landfall on Australia . As a result of the impacts caused by Joy and Sina , the names were retired from the tropical cyclone naming lists . 
 During the season , tropical cyclones were monitored by the Tropical Cyclone Warning Centers ( TCWC ) in Nadi , Fiji , and in Wellington , New Zealand . Whilst tropical cyclones that moved to the west of 160 ° E were monitored as a part of the Australian region . Both the United States Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) and the Naval Western Oceanography Center ( NWOC ) issued unofficial warnings within the southern Pacific . The JTWC issued warnings between 160 ° E and the International Date Line whilst the NWOC issued warnings for tropical cyclones forming between the International Date Line and the coasts of the Americas . Both the JTWC and the NWOC designated tropical cyclones with a number and a P suffix with numbers assigned in order to tropical cyclones developing within the whole of the Southern Hemisphere . TCWC Nadi , TCWC Wellington and TCWC Brisbane all use the Australian Tropical Cyclone Intensity Scale and estimate wind speeds over a ten @-@ minute period , while the JTWC estimates sustained winds over a one @-@ minute period , which are subsequently compared to the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale ( SSHWS ) . 
 = = Seasonal summary = = 
 As a result of the South Pacific Convergence Zone being both weaker and located further to the north than in previous seasons and the Madden – Julian oscillations being weaker and less regular defined than in previous tropical cyclone seasons . As a result , only three tropical cyclones occurred within the South Pacific basin between 160 ° E and 120 ° W , which made the season one of the least active on record . The first tropical cyclone was first noted as a shallow depression on November 20 before it was named Sina on November 24 after it had intensified into a tropical cyclone . After peaking as a category three severe tropical cyclone on the Australian tropical cyclone intensity scale , Sina affected Fiji , Tonga , Niue and the Southern Cook Islands with total damage estimated at over 18 @.@ 5 million before it was last noted on December 4 , as it was absorbed by an advancing trough of low pressure near 50 ° S. During December 15 , the precursor tropical low to Cyclone Joy developed near the Solomon Islands . Over the next two days the system moved westwards , before it moved into the Australian region during December 17 . The system was subsequently named Joy on December 19 , before it made landfall on Queensland during December 26 . 
 The basin then remained quiet until March when three significant tropical depressions including 15 and 16P were observed within the Coral Sea / Australian region , which did not develop into tropical cyclones but were subject to gale warnings . 15P was first noted on March 3 , while it was located about 900 km ( 560 mi ) to the east of the Solomon Islands and over the next couple of days subsequently moved south @-@ westwards and out of the South Pacific basin during the next day . 16P was first noted on March 14 , while located about 300 km ( 185 mi ) to the southeast of Honiara in the Solomon Islands . Over the next couple of days the system moved towards the south @-@ east before the JTWC designated the system 16P and initiated advisories on it during March 18 after it had moved into the South Pacific basin . Over the next couple of days the system , moved towards the south @-@ southeast before it turned towards the southwest and passed over New Caledonia on March 20 , before it was last noted during the next day moving out of the basin . The final tropical cyclone of the season , Lisa , moved into the Southern Pacific on May 11 at its peak intensity of 110 km / h ( 75 mph ) . During the next day as the storm moved towards the subtropical jet , Lisa rapidly weakened into a tropical depression before passing over Anatom Island without causing any significant damage . After the season both the names Sina and Joy were retired from the naming lists for the region , while it was determined that a weak gale force tropical cyclone had affected Tonga between December 14 – 17 . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Severe Tropical Cyclone Sina = = = 
 On November 20 , the FMS started to monitor a shallow tropical depression that had developed within the South Pacific Convergence Zone to the west of Wallis Island . Over the next three days the system moved towards the west @-@ northwest and the Fijian dependency of Rotuma , before the JTWC initiated advisories and classified the depression as Tropical Cyclone 03P during November 24 . TCWC Nadi subsequently named the system Sina after the depression had developed into a category 1 tropical cyclone on the Australian scale , while it was located about 425 km ( 265 mi ) to the northwest of Rotuma . During the next day the cyclone continued to intensify and developed an eye as it moved erratically towards the west @-@ southwest and performed a small clockwise loop . During that day Sina 's eye became very distinct on satellite imagery , as it intensified and the upper level steering flow which resulted in Sina moving erratically towards the southeast and Fiji . Later that day TCWC Nadi reported that the system had peaked as a category 3 severe tropical cyclone , with 10 @-@ minute sustained wind speeds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) . 
 The JTWC subsequently reported early the next day that Sina had peaked with 1 @-@ minute sustained wind speeds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) , which made it equivalent to a category 4 hurricane on the SSHWS . Sina remained at its peak intensity for most of that day , before it started to gradually weaken as it passed about 40 km ( 25 mi ) to the south of Viti Levu before it passed over the island groups of Vatulele and Moala and the Southern Lau Islands during November 28 . Early on November 29 , Sina weakened into a category two tropical cyclone on the Australian scale just before it passed to the north of Tongatapu in Tonga . During that day the system moved eastwards towards the Southern Cook Islands and gradually weakened further . Early the next day , the system passed about 160 km ( 100 mi ) to the south of Niue , before it recurved sharply towards the south @-@ southeast later that day as it approached the Southern Cook Islands . The system subsequently rapidly weakened and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone under the influence of strong vertical wind shear and cooler sea surface temperatures . Over the next couple of days Sina 's extratropical remnants maintained a southeastward track , before it was absorbed by an advancing trough of low pressure near 50 ° S on December 4 . 
 The cyclone caused no deaths and over US $ 18 @.@ 5 million in damages , as it affected Fiji , Tonga , Niue and the Southern Cook Islands . Ahead of the system affecting Fiji , hundreds of holiday makers were evacuated from Fiji 's outer island resorts to hotels on the mainland . High winds and heavy rain forced the closure of several local airports and the main Nadi International Airport . As Sina moved through the archipelago , the system destroyed or damaged houses and other building structures , while bringing down electric and telephone lines and uprooting trees . The system also washed away a railway bridge on Vanua Levu that was used to take sugar cane to Labasa 's mills , growers had no choice but to go through the village of Korowiri . However , the workers refused to go into their fields unless they had police protection to go through the village , after Methodists from the local church attacked a group of growers for working on Sundays in defiance of Fiji 's Sunday Observance Decree . Within Tonga only minor damage to weak structures , trees , banana plantations , electric and telephone lines was recorded . Within both Niue and the Southern Cook Islands only minor damage to crops and structures was reported . 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Lisa = = = 
 Tropical Cyclone Lisa moved into the South Pacific from the Australian region during May 11 , while it was a Category 2 tropical cyclone with sustained wind speeds of 110 km / h ( 75 mph ) . Over the next couple of days , Lisa moved south @-@ eastwards and passed in between the Vanuatuan islands of Tanna and Anatom as it gradually weakened and lost its tropical cyclone characteristics . Lisa 's remnants subsequently started to deepen during May 14 , under the influence of an upper level mid latitude trough and reached a secondary peak intensity of 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) . Over the next few days the system continued to move towards the southeast while slowly weakening until it was last noted dissipating about 2 @,@ 600 km ( 1 @,@ 615 mi ) to the east of Wellington , New Zealand . There were no reports of any significant damage associated with Lisa in Papua New Guinea , Vanuatu or the Solomon Islands . 
 = = = Other systems = = = 
 On December 15 , in response to the formation of Typhoon Russ , in the North @-@ Western Pacific Ocean , a tropical low developed about 500 km ( 310 mi ) to the south @-@ east of Honiara in the Solomon Islands . Over the next two days the moved westwards before it moved into the Australian basin during December 17 , where it was later named Joy . A weak gale force tropical cyclone affected Tonga between December 14 – 17 . 
 During March , three significant tropical depressions including 15 and 16P were observed within the Coral Sea / Australian region , which did not become tropical cyclones on the Australian scale but were subject to gale warnings . 15P was first noted on March 3 , while it was located about 900 km ( 560 mi ) to the east of the Solomon Islands and over the next couple of days subsequently moved south @-@ westwards and out of the South Pacific basin during the next day . 16P was first noted on March 14 , while located about 300 km ( 185 mi ) to the southeast of Honiara in the Solomon Islands . Over the next couple of days the system moved towards the south @-@ east before the JTWC designated the system 16P and initiated advisories on it during March 18 after it had moved into the South Pacific basin . Over the next couple of days the system moved towards the south @-@ southeast before it turned towards the southwest and passed over New Caledonia on March 20 , before it was last noted during the next day as it moved back into the Australian region . 
 = = Season effects = = 
 This table lists all the storms that developed in the South Pacific to the east of longitude 160 ° E during the 1990 – 91 season . It includes their intensity on the Australian tropical cyclone intensity scale , duration , name , landfalls , deaths , and damages . All data is taken from the warning centers from the region unless otherwise noted . 
 = Al Costello = 
 Giacomo Costa ( 14 December 1919 – 22 January 2000 ) was an Italian Australian professional wrestler best known by his ring name , Al Costello . Costello was the first professional wrestler to be nicknamed " The Man of a Thousand Holds " because of his innovative and very technical style . 
 Costello was the creator and original member of the tag team The Fabulous Kangaroos , whose " Ultra Australian " gimmick complete with boomerangs , bush hats and the song " Waltzing Matilda " as their entrance music , existed in various forms from 1957 until 1983 . Costello was either an active wrestler , or a manager in all versions of The Fabulous Kangaroos . He and Roy Heffernan are arguably the most famous version of The Kangaroos , regarded as one of the top tag teams to ever compete in professional wrestling , and are often credited with popularizing tag team wrestling in the late 1950s and 1960s . 
 Costello later formed other versions of The Fabulous Kangaroos with Ray St. Clair , Don Kent and Tony Charles . He also managed the team of Don Kent & Bruno Bekkar and later on " Johnny Heffernan " under The Fabulous Kangaroos name . 
 Costello officially retired from wrestling in 1983 but still made a few brief returns to the ring after that . In 1993 , he managed The New Fabulous Kangaroos ( Denny Kass and Al Snow ) before retiring completely from the wrestling business . Both Costello and his tag team partner Heffernan died before Kangaroos were honored as the first tag team to ever be inducted into the Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame in 2003 , which started a tradition of inducting a new team every year . 
 = = Growing up = = 
 Costa was born in <unk> di Salina , Italy , near Sicily , and lived there until his family immigrated to Australia when he was six years old . The family settled in Rockdale , New South Wales , where Costa helped out in his father ’ s fruit store . He excelled at school sports , and became interested in weightlifting at an early age . At age 16 , Costa took up amateur boxing despite his father ’ s wishes that he should become an opera singer . Costa was approached by Australian middleweight wrestling champion " Basher Bonas " , who convinced him to try wrestling . Costa made his debut under an assumed name ; his father still had hopes of him becoming an opera singer , and he did not want his parents to find out that he was wrestling . He came up with the name " Al Costello " , thinking it sounded tough like a portmanteau of Al Capone and Frank Costello . 
 = = Wrestling career = = 
 Al Costello made his professional wrestling debut in 1938 , but the man that would be known as " The Man of a Thousand Holds " 20 years later , found little success early in his career . The general belief in Australian professional wrestling at the time was that a wrestler had to go to North America and learn how to be a pro before the bookers would even consider pushing them up the card . Costello travelled across Asia , where he did see some success ; he won the Malaysian Heavyweight title in 1939 , as well as the South Africa trophy in 1949 . During the 1950s , Costello finally started to turn heads at home by winning the Australasian title . In 1952 , Costello began wrestling in America , hoping to finally break through and make a big name of himself . 
 = = = Fabulous Kangaroos = = = 
 For years , Al Costello had been working on an idea for a new tag team ; he even knew who he wanted for a partner : a wrestler he had worked with some years ago named Roy Heffernan . Because Costello and Heffernan had lost touch over the years , the idea remained dormant until Costello toured Hawaii in 1956 . Costello mentioned his idea of an " Ultra Australian " tag team to fellow wrestler , and future promoter , Joe Blanchard . Blanchard happened to be a good friend of Roy Heffernan and knew he was working in Stampede Wrestling at the time . Blanchard put the two in touch with each other , and Costello was soon off to Calgary , Alberta , Canada to join Heffernan and finally make his tag team a reality . Costello and Heffernan debuted as " The Fabulous Kangaroos " on 3 May 1957 for Stu Hart ’ s Stampede Wrestling promotion in a match against Maurice <unk> and Tony Baillargeon . Only weeks after that first match , The Kangaroos were working with the top tag teams in the promotion . 
 After working in Stampede for a while , The Fabulous Kangaroos started to travel across the United States , headlining shows wherever they went due to their ability to rile up crowds with their heel ( bad guy ) tactics . On one occasion in August 1958 , The Kangaroos , or " Kangaroo Men " as they were billed , nearly caused a riot in Madison Square Garden during a match against Antonino Rocca and Miguel Pérez ; the fans began to throw fruit and stones at them . After the match ended without a decisive winner , the promoters stepped in , turned up the arena lights , and played the National Anthem to stop a potential riot . This was a common tactic used at the time by the New York promoters in order to prevent riots and help the heels leave the arena unharmed . Later that year , Costello and Heffernan started working for Dory Funk ’ s NWA Western States promotion based in Amarillo , Texas . Here , The Kangaroos won their first title as a team when they defeated Pepper Gomez and El Medico to win the Texas version of the NWA World Tag Team Championship on 17 November 1958 . Their first title reign was short lived , however , as Gomez and Rito Romero defeated them to regain the titles two weeks later . 
 Between 1957 and 1965 , The Kangaroos wrestled in the United States , Canada , Asia and select tours of Australia and New Zealand . They worked for such companies as Capitol Wrestling Corporation ( the future World Wrestling Entertainment ) , Championship Wrestling from Florida , NWA Ohio , the Japan Wrestling Association and the World Wrestling Association in Los Angeles , California . 
 The Kangaroos never forgot their roots and continued to work in Canada off and on through the years ; in addition to Stampede Wrestling , the team also worked for NWA All @-@ Star Wrestling based in Vancouver , British Columbia . Costello featured in a National Film Board of Canada short subject La Lotta / Wrestling / Le Catch . Their stint in NWA All @-@ Star Wrestling was the last time Costello and Heffernan teamed together . In June 1965 , The Kangaroos lost to Don Leo Jonathan and Jim Hardy and then split up . Heffernan had left Australia to tour the world in 1953 and wanted to return to his homeland , while Costello was determined to remain in the United States for a while longer . 
 = = = Between Kangaroos = = = 
 Heffernan returned to Australia and began working for World Championship Wrestling ( the Australian version , not the North American wrestling federation ) under booker Jim Barnett as a singles wrestler . Costello was originally supposed to return to Australia as well and work for WCW , but those plans never came through . Instead , Costello remained in the United States and kept working in the tag team division , never seeking a career as a singles wrestler . Costello began wrestling for Georgia Championship Wrestling , where he teamed up with Louis Tillet to form a tag team known as " The Globetrotters " ; a name that played off Costello ’ s Australian and Tillet ’ s French heritage . The Globetrotters defeated the Mysterious Medics in the finals of the Georgia NWA World Tag Team Championship championship but only held the titles for a week before losing them to Kurt and Karl Von Brauner on 4 February 1966 . After this , the Globetrotters broke up due to differences in their approach to tag teaming . 
 Costello then moved to the NWA Mid @-@ America territory near Nashville , Tennessee . In Mid @-@ American , Costello teamed with Herb Welch to win the Mid @-@ American version of the NWA World Tag Team Championship , which they held for just over 2 months . While still working in Mid @-@ America , Costello began to team with Karl Von Brauner , who used a " German Nazi " gimmick despite being American . Under the management of " Playboy " Gary Hart , Costello and Von Brauner were billed as " The Internationals " ; the team was later managed by George " Crybaby " Cannon . The Internationals worked mainly in Tennessee and Texas for NWA Western States . In Texas , Costello and Von Brauner won the Texas version of the NWA World Tag Team Championship , a title Costello and Heffernan had held in 1958 . The team was also billed as the first NWA American Tag Team Champions , titles that were also recognized by World Class Championship Wrestling in addition to the Western States promotion . The Internationals lost the American Tag Team title to Fritz and Waldo Von Erich on 21 February 1967 . Kurt then decided to go back to teaming with his storyline brother , Karl Von Brauner . 
 After the Internationals broke up , Costello returned to Australia to visit friends and relatives and to recuperate after many years on the road . On his way back to the United States , Costello had a stop over in Detroit , Michigan , where he met Cleo Williams . The two fell in love and married shortly afterwards , remaining together for the rest of Costello ’ s life . 
 = = = Kangaroos once more = = = 
 In 1967 , Al Costello reformed The Fabulous Kangaroos , this time teaming up with Ray St. Clair . The team had been touring non @-@ stop for about six months when St. Clair was forced to retire due to knee problems . A few months after St. Clair retired , Costello found a new man to don the bush hat : Don Kent . Kent , who was from Michigan , adopted the Ultra @-@ Australian gimmick ( but retained his American accent ) and the two formed the third overall and second most well @-@ known version of The Fabulous Kangaroos . Costello and Kent teamed together on a regular basis from 1968 until 1974 , approximately the same amount of time that Costello spent teaming with his original partner , Roy Heffernan . Costello and Kent continued in a tradition that was reminiscent of the original Kangaroos ; when a federation needed a new tag team title , The Kangaroos were brought in and acknowledged as champions upon arrival instead of holding a tournament to determine the champions . In 1967 , the Japanese federation " International Wrestling Enterprise " ( IWE ) brought The Kangaroos in as the first Trans @-@ World Wrestling Alliance World Tag Team Champions . They held this title until 10 January 1968 when IWE mainstays <unk> and Thunder Sugiyama beat them for the gold . Over the years , many more title reigns came from various promotions all over the globe . In Canada , The Kangaroos were the first Eastern Sports Association International Tag Team Champions . In the World Wrestling Association of Indianapolis , they held the WWA World Tag Team Championship twice . In addition to winning titles all over North America , Costello and Kent also made appearances for the World Wide Wrestling Federation ( now known as WWE ) . 
 The Kangaroos frequented NWA Detroit , where they held the Detroit version of the NWA World Tag Team Championship for most of 1971 . By the end of 1972 , The Kangaroos began working for Nick Gulas ’ NWA Mid @-@ America . In Mid @-@ America , they held the local version of the NWA World Tag Team Championship , the Mid @-@ America version , on three occasions . 
 After a match at Cincinnati Gardens , an enraged fan took a fire extinguisher off the wall and threw it at Costello and Kent from the balcony of the Gardens . The extinguisher hit Costello in the hip , damaging it so much that he needed hip replacement surgery later that year . The fan was arrested , served 15 days in jail , and fined fifty dollars for damaging the fire extinguisher . The hip injury left Costello unable to wrestle , and The Fabulous Kangaroos split up once again . Costello had a full hip replacement and was forced to retire from active competition . 
 = = = Managing = = = 
 In 1975 , Costello surprised everyone by returning to professional wrestling as the manager of the team known as " The Love Brothers " ( Hartford and Reggie Love ) . He actually stepped into the ring on occasion as part of special six @-@ man tag team matches . 
 After recovering from his hip surgery , Costello returned to active competition at age 56 . The fact that he was able to recover from such a major injury is credited to his almost @-@ fanatical style of healthy living . As a devout vegan , Costello credited his meat @-@ free diet with his recovery , as well as the remarkable shape he was in for a man of his age . 
 Costello reformed The Fabulous Kangaroos once more , this time teaming up with wrestler Tony Charles . The team defeated Dominic DeNucci and Chris Markoff to win Detroit 's version of the NWA World Tag Team title , the same title that Costello and Kent had previously held . The Kangaroos title run was short , however , and they lost their gold to " Crazy " Luke Graham and Ripper Collins . 
 In 1977 , Tony Charles was replaced by Don Kent and the two reunited for a tour of Puerto Rico with the World Wrestling Council ( WWC ) . In Puerto Rico , The Kangaroos arrived billed as the WWC World Tag Team Champions , once more to give a newly created title legitimacy . They dropped the titles to Carlos Colón and Jose Rivera on 12 March 1977 and remained in the WWC until 1978 chasing , but never regaining , the WWC World Tag Team Championship . After their tour in Puerto Rico ended , Don Kent returned to singles wrestling , and Costello refocused on managing . 
 = = = Still a Kangaroo = = = 
 In 1981 , Costello convinced Kent to once again don the bush hat and pick up the boomerang . Costello got Kent to team up with Bruno Bekkar , who was mostly known from working in his native New Zealand and Australia . Kent and Bekkar worked a tour for the WWC , while Costello served as their manager . The team won the WWC North American Tag Team titles from Jack and Jerry Brisco on 22 October 1981 . They then lost the titles to Invader I and Super Gladiator but quickly gained them back before dropping the titles for good to Invader and Gladiator on 26 January 1982 . The Kent and Bekkar team only lasted through one tour of the Caribbean , after which Bruno Bekkar returned to Australia and New Zealand to work for the local promotions there . 
 Bekkar was replaced with Johnny Heffernan ( Canadian wrestler Bob Della Serra ) , a storyline cousin of Roy Heffernan , for what was the final version of The Fabulous Kangaroos . The team ended Terry and Dory Funk , Jr . ' s year and a half run with the WWC World Tag Team championship on 1 May 1982 . Kent and Heffernan held the gold for less than two months before losing the WWC World Tag Team titles to Invader I and Pierre Martel . After a tour in Puerto Rico , Costello , Kent and Heffernan returned to work for Championship Wrestling from Florida ( CWF ) , a promotion The Kangaroos last worked for in 1962 . In Florida , The Kangaroos won the NWA Florida Global Tag Team Championship four times . The final storyline involving The Fabulous Kangaroos saw Al Costello bring in J.J. Dillon to act as his short term replacement while he was " away on business " . When Costello returned from his business trip , Dillon kayfabe refused to give up The Kangaroos ' contracts and was backed up by both Kent and Heffernan . This angle was designed to write Al Costello out of The Fabulous Kangaroos ' storyline and allow him to retire from wrestling altogether . Not long after Costello retired , Kent and Johnny Heffernan went their separate ways . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 After retiring from wrestling , Al Costello became the head of security at College Harbor , Florida . In 1992 , at the age of 71 , Costello retired from his job in Florida and began teaching wrestling . He also started to manage The New Fabulous Kangaroos in 1993 , a team consisting of Mickey Doyle and Denny Kass who worked for " Motor City Wrestling " ( MCW ) . By the fall of 1993 , Mickey Doyle had been replaced by a young wrestler by the name of Al Snow ; with Costello ’ s help The New Fabulous Kangaroos defeated " Canadian Lighting " ( Otis Apollo and " Irish " Bobby Clancy ) , on 29 December 1993 , to win the MCW Tag Team Championship . On 14 May 1994 , Kass and Snow defeated Canadian Lighting again to win the Border City Wrestling ( BCW ) Can @-@ Am Tag Team Championship , unifying the two tag team championships . A week later , The New Fabulous Kangaroos lost both sets of titles to Scott D 'Amore and " Irish " Bobby Clancy . After losing the unified MCW / BCW Tag Team championships , The New Kangaroos split up ; Snow focused on his World Wrestling Federation career while Costello retired for good , never making another wrestling related appearance . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 On 22 January 2000 , Costello died from a combination of pneumonia and heart problems . In 2003 , Al Costello and Roy Heffernan became the first tag team to ever be inducted into the Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame . Since that time , the Hall of Fame has honored other tag teams , but The Fabulous Kangaroos were given the honor of being the first . In the tradition of the Kangaroos , they were " billed as champions on arrival " one last time . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Managers 
 " Wild " Red Berry 
 George " Crybaby " Cannon 
 " Sir " Dudley Clement 
 Wrestlers Managed by Costello 
 Don Kent 
 Bruno Bekkar 
 Johnny Heffernan 
 Al Snow 
 Mickey Doyle 
 Denny Kass 
 The Love Brothers ( Reginald and Hartford ) 
 Kurt Von Hess 
 Dennis Condrey 
 Phil Hickerson 
 David St. <unk> 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Alex Turk Promotions ( Winnipeg ) 
 International Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) - with Roy Heffernan 
 Capitol Wrestling Corporation 
 NWA United States Tag Team Championship ( Northeast version ) ( 3 times ) - with Roy Heffernan 
 Cauliflower Alley Club 
 Other honoree ( 1994 ) 
 Championship Wrestling from Florida 
 NWA United States Tag Team Championship ( Florida version ) ( 1 time ) - with Roy Heffernan 
 NWA World Tag Team Championship ( Florida version ) ( 1 time ) - with Roy Heffernan 
 Eastern Sports Association 
 ESA International Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) - with Don Kent 
 Georgia Championship Wrestling 
 NWA World Tag Team Championship ( Georgia version ) 1 time – with Louie Tillet 
 International Wrestling Enterprise 
 Trans @-@ World Wrestling Alliance World Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) - with Don Kent 
 Japan Wrestling Association 
 NWA International Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) - with Roy Heffernan 
 Midwest Wrestling Association 
 NWA United States Tag Team Championship ( Ohio version ) ( 1 time ) - with Roy Heffernan 
 Mike London Promotions 
 Rocky Mountain Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) - with Roy Heffernan 
 National Wrestling Alliance 
 NWA Hall of Fame ( Class of 2013 ) 
 NWA All @-@ Star Wrestling 
 NWA Canadian Tag Team Championship ( Vancouver version ) ( 4 times ) - with Roy Heffernan 
 NWA Big Time Wrestling 
 NWA American Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) - with Karl Von Brauner 
 NWA World Tag Team Championship ( Texas version ) ( 2 times ) - with Roy Heffernan ( 1 ) , Karl Von Brauner ( 1 ) 
 NWA Detroit 
 NWA World Tag Team Championship ( Detroit version ) ( 3 times ) - with Roy Heffernan ( 2 ) , Ray St. Clair ( 1 ) 
 NWA Mid @-@ America 
 NWA Southern Junior Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 NWA World Tag Team Championship ( Mid @-@ America version ) 4 times ) - with Don Kent ( 3 ) , Herb Welch ( 1 ) 
 NWA Western States Sports 
 NWA International Tag Team Championship ( Texas version ) ( 1 time ) - with Roy <unk> 
 New Zealand Wrestling Union 
 NWA Australasian Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame 
 Class of 2003 - with Roy Heffernan 
 World Wrestling Association 
 WWA World Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) - with Don Kent 
 Worldwide Wrestling Associates 
 WWA World Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) - with Roy Heffernan 
 WWA International Television Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) - with Roy Heffernan 
 World Wrestling Council 
 WWC World Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) - with Don Kent 
 Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards 
 Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame ( Class of 1996 ) - with Roy Heffernan 
 = Battle of Mont Sorrel = 
 The Battle of Mont Sorrel ( Battle of Mount Sorrel , Battle of Hill 62 ) was a local operation in World War I by three divisions of the British Second Army and three divisions of the German Fourth Army in the Ypres Salient , near Ypres , Belgium , from 2 to 14 June 1916 . 
 In an effort to pull British resources from the observed build @-@ up in the Somme , the XIII ( Royal Württemberg ) Corps and the 117th Infantry Division attacked an arc of high ground positions , defended by the Canadian Corps . The German forces initially captured the heights at Mount Sorrel and Tor Top before entrenching on the far slope of the ridge . Following a number attacks and counterattacks , two divisions of the Canadian Corps , supported by the 20th Light Division and Second Army siege and howitzer battery groups , recaptured the majority of their former positions . 
 = = Background = = 
 Located in the Ypres Salient , 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) east of Ypres , Belgium , the Battle of Mount Sorrel took place along a ridge between Hooge and <unk> . The crest line of Mount Sorrel , nearby Tor Top ( Hill 62 ) and Hill 61 rose approximately 30 metres ( 98 ft ) higher than the shallow ground at Zillebeke , affording the occupying force excellent observation over the salient , the town of Ypres and approach routes . The peaks were the only portion of the crest of the Ypres ridge which remained in Allied hands . 
 In northern France , men and resources were being marshalled in preparation for the large British @-@ French Somme Offensive . The build @-@ up in the Somme did not go unnoticed by the German Supreme Army Command . The German Second Army , which was holding the sector north of the Somme , had observed preparations for an offensive since the end of February 1916 . Short of resources due to operations at Verdun , the Germans could only mount local operations in an effort to divert British resources from the Somme . 
 On 28 May 1916 , in an abrupt change of command , Lieutenant @-@ General Edwin Alderson was appointed to the largely ceremonial post of Inspector General of Canadian Forces in England and was succeeded by Lieutenant @-@ General Julian Byng as commander of the Canadian Corps . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = German offensive = = = 
 Byng inspected the Canadian Corps positions and noted that the Canadian troops were overlooked by German positions and under constant danger of enemy fire . He assigned 3rd Canadian Division commander , Major @-@ General Malcolm Mercer to draw up a plan to overrun the more dangerous German positions in a local attack . 
 As the Canadians began preparations for an assault , the Germans were in the process of executing an assault plan of their own . The XIII ( Royal Württemberg ) Corps spent six weeks planning and carefully preparing their attack on the Mount Sorrel , Tor Top ( Hill 62 ) and Hill 61 peaks . Their objective was to take control of the observation positions east of Ypres and keep as many British units as possible pinned down in the area , to avoid them transferring to the Somme front and assisting with the observed build @-@ up in that area . The Germans constructed practice trenches resembling the Canadian positions near Tor Top to rehearse the assault , well behind their own lines . 
 In mid @-@ May , aerial reconnaissance near Mont Sorrel indicated that German forces were preparing an attack . Royal Flying Corps ( RFC ) observers had noted the existence of works curiously resembling the Canadian positions , well behind the German lines . The Germans were also observed digging new sap trenches which implied that an assault was intended . The Canadian Corps had just begun developing plans to overrun the more dangerous German positions , when the Germans executed an assault of their own . 
 On the morning of 2 June , the German XIII Corps began a massive heavy artillery bombardment against the Canadian positions . Nine @-@ tenths of the Canadian forward reconnaissance battalion became casualties during the bombardment . 3rd Canadian Division commander Major @-@ General Malcolm Mercer and 8th Canadian Brigade commander Brigadier @-@ General Arthur Victor Seymour Williams had been conducting an inspection of the front line , when the shelling began . Mercer was wounded three times and died early on June 3 ; Williams was wounded in the face and head and taken prisoner . 
 At 1 : 00pm , German pioneers detonated four mines near the Canadian forward trenches , before the Germans attacked with six battalions , five more battalions in support and an additional six in reserve . When the German forces attacked , mainly against positions held by the 8th Canadian Brigade , resistance at the front lines was " minimal " . For several critical hours both the 3rd Canadian Division and the 8th Canadian Brigade were leaderless and their level of defence suffered accordingly . Brigadier @-@ General Edward Spencer Hoare Nairne , of the Lahore Divisional Artillery , eventually assumed temporary command of the 3rd Canadian Division . However , German forces were still able to capture Mont Sorrel and Hill 61 . After advancing up to 1 @,@ 100 metres ( 1 @,@ 200 yd ) , the XIII Corps troops dug in . Although the road to Ypres was open and undefended , no German officer took the initiative to exceed instructions and capitalize on the success experienced by the German forces . 
 = = = Failed counterattack = = = 
 Lieutenant @-@ General Byng assembled a hastily organized counterattack in the early hours of 3 June . Owing to the 3rd Canadian Division ’ s heavy losses , two brigades of the 1st Canadian Division were temporarily placed under the control of Brigadier @-@ General Hoare Nairne , who had assumed control of 3rd Canadian Division . The counterattack was scheduled to begin at 2 : 00 am on 3 June 1916 . Due to the distances that had to be covered by incoming units , the difficulties in communications and ever present enemy fire , the time allowed for assembly proved inadequate and the attack was postponed until 7 : 00 am . The signal to attack was to be six simultaneous green rockets . Some rockets misfired and did not burst , resulting in an uneven assault whereby each unit moved from their start lines at different times . The four attacking battalions suffered heavy losses as they advanced over open ground in broad daylight . The attackers failed to regain any lost territory but managed to close a 550 metres ( 600 yd ) gap in the line and advance the Canadian front about 910 metres ( 1 @,@ 000 yd ) from the positions it had retreated to after the German assault . 
 = = = British reinforcements and second German attack = = = 
 British Expeditionary Force commander General Douglas Haig and Second Army commander General Herbert Plumer both believed it necessary to expel the Germans from the captured positions . In view of the preparations for the Somme offensive , Haig did not wish to divert more forces than were necessary . Support was limited to a number of additional artillery units and an infantry brigade from the 20th Light Division . It was suggested that the next counterattack be carried out with the infantry available , with a particularly large emphasis placed on artillery . 
 The additional artillery units immediately went to work hampering German consolidation , by shelling their front and support lines and seeking out hostile batteries . The Germans sprung a surprise on the Canadians by exploding four large mines under trenches of the 2nd Canadian Division covering the spur at the eastern outskirts of the ruins of Hooge and a company of the Canadian 28th ( North West ) Battalion was wiped out in the explosions . The Canadians managed to hold their position and prevent the Germans from reaching their support line but Byng ultimately decided to leave the Hooge trenches in German hands and to concentrate on regaining Mount Sorrel and Tor Top . To dissuade the Germans from more attacks on the left flank of the Canadian Corps , the dismounted British 2nd Cavalry Brigade came on loan to the Canadian Corps as a counter @-@ attack force . 
 = = = Return to original lines = = = 
 Byng ordered 1st Canadian Division commander Major @-@ General Arthur Currie to organize a careful attack against the German positions at Mont Sorrel and Tor Top . Due to the casualties suffered during the unsuccessful counterattack of 3 June , Currie regrouped his stronger battalions into two composite brigades . Four intense bombardments of thirty minutes each were carried out between 9 and 12 June in an effort to deceive the Germans into expecting immediate attacks , which did not transpire . For ten hours on 12 June all the German positions between Hill 60 and Sanctuary Wood were shelled unremittingly . Particular attention was given to the Canadian Corps flanks , from which enfilade machine @-@ gun fire might be expected . The following morning , the Germans were subjected to an additional 45 minutes of heavy artillery bombardment , before the assaulting troops advanced behind a generated smoke screen . The Germans are believed to have been taken largely by surprise as they offered little resistance and the Canadians were able to take approximately 200 prisoners . With the exception of the trenches at Hooge , the Germans fell back to their original lines and in a little over an hour the assault was over . On 14 June , the Germans launched two counterattacks which were repulsed , after which they advanced their trench to within 150 metres ( 490 ft ) of the Canadians but made no further assaults . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Canadian Corps remained in the Ypres Salient in a stationary yet aggressive status until the beginning of September when the corps was transferred to the Somme . In the aftermath of the battle and in the wake of the death of Major @-@ General M.S. Mercer , Canadian Corps commander Julian Byng was forced to address the politically sensitive topic of appointing a new 3rd Canadian Division commander . Canadian Minister of Militia and Defence Sam Hughes telegraphed Byng and insisted that his son , 1st Canadian Brigade commander Brigadier @-@ General Garnet Hughes , be given command of the 3rd Canadian Division . To the fury of the minister , Byng instead promoted 2nd Canadian Brigade commander Brigadier @-@ General Louis Lipsett , a highly regarded pre @-@ war British regular , to the post . The minister protested and confronted Byng in August 1916 but he did not relent , insisting that " he had nothing against Garnet Hughes there was simply a better man for the post " . The change in command between Lieutenant @-@ General Edwin Alderson and Julian Byng was also used as an opportunity to make additional changes . Much to the displeasure of Minister Hughes and delight of the Canadian troops , the unreliable Canadian Ross Rifle began to be replaced with the British Lee – Enfield and the Colt machine gun with the Vickers and Lewis machine guns . 
 = = Commemoration = = 
 For the Canadian Corps , participation in the Battle of Mount Sorrel is commemorated with the Hill 62 ( Sanctuary Wood ) Memorial . The nearby Sanctuary Wood Museum Hill 62 contains a preserved / simulated section of front line trenches occupied by the British and Canadians between 1916 and 1917 . Allied soldiers killed during the battle are buried in the nearby Sanctuary Wood Commonwealth War Graves Commission Cemetery , Hooge Crater Commonwealth War Graves Commission Cemetery , Maple Copse Commonwealth War Graves Commission Cemetery and Lijssenthoek Military Cemetery . Those killed during the battle with no known resting place are commemorated on the Menin Gate in Ypres , Belgium . The Royal Regiment of Canada conducts a Sorrel Day parade , open to the public , at the Fort York Armoury every year on the second Sunday in June . 
 = Music of Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 = 
 The music of the video game Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 was composed by Noriko Matsueda and Takahito Eguchi . Regular series composer Nobuo Uematsu did not contribute any of the music , despite having composed the majority of the soundtrack for the first game , Final Fantasy X. The Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 Original Soundtrack was released on two Compact Discs in 2003 by Avex . After the release of Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 International + Last Mission , an album entitled Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 International + Last Mission Original Soundtrack composed of the songs added to the soundtrack for that game was released in 2003 by Avex . Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 Piano Collection , a collection of piano arrangements of the original soundtracks by Noriko Matsueda , Takahito Eguchi , Hiroko <unk> , Masahiro Sayama , and Febian Reza Pane , was released by Avex in 2004 . 
 A single by Koda Kumi entitled real Emotion / 1000 no Kotoba , based on the theme song for the game and the ending credits song , was published by Rhythm Zone prior to the game 's release in 2003 . Another single , titled Eternity ~ Memories of Waves and Light ~ Music from Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 , was released by Avex in 2003 along with the original soundtrack . It consisted of live arrangements of several of the game 's songs , composed and arranged by Noriko Matsueda and Takahito Eguchi . A set of three singles entitled Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 Vocal Collection- Paine , Rikku , and Yuna was published by Avex in 2003 , with each single including vocal arrangements of songs from the game , sung by the respective character 's voice actress . 
 The soundtrack received mixed reviews from critics ; while several felt that the music was good and keeping in tone with the game , others found it to be odd and shallow . Several reviewers attributed the change to the lack of participation by Uematsu . Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 International + Last Mission Original Soundtrack and Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 Piano Collection , on the other hand , were very well received by critics , who felt that they were far superior to the original soundtrack . The singles for the soundtrack were poorly received by critics , who found a few of the songs to be enjoyable but all of the singles to be overpriced . 
 = = Concept and creation = = 
 Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 marks the first soundtrack where former Square composer Nobuo Uematsu did not contribute a single piece , despite having composed the majority of the soundtrack for the predecessor , Final Fantasy X , as he was already busy with other projects . None of the pieces from the Final Fantasy X soundtrack were re @-@ used in X @-@ 2 . Noriko Matsueda and Takahito Eguchi were brought on board to compose the music for the game , as the developers felt they were the " perfect fit " to incorporate a " pop " style into the music . The game includes two songs with vocalized elements , one of which , the J @-@ Pop song " Real Emotion " , was written by Ken Kato and composed by Kazuhiro Hara . The other , J @-@ Pop ballad " 1000 Words " , was written by scenario writers Kazushige Nojima and Daisuke Watanabe . Matsueda and Eguchi composed and arranged the track . Both songs were sung by Jade Villalon from Sweetbox in the English version of the game , and are available as bonus tracks on the Japanese release of her album Adagio . In the Japanese version of the game both the songs were sung by Koda Kumi , and were released as a single entitled real Emotion / 1000 no Kotoba . Kumi also released her own English versions of the songs on her CD single Come with Me , with slightly different versions of the lyrics than Jade . 
 = = Albums = = 
 = = = Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 Original Soundtrack = = = 
 Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 Original Soundtrack is a soundtrack album of music from Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 composed , arranged and produced by Noriko Matsueda and Takahito Eguchi . The album spans two discs and 61 tracks , covering a duration of 2 : 18 : 00 . It was released on March 31 , 2003 in Japan by Avex bearing the catalog number AVCD @-@ <unk> . It included a booklet filled with printed images , providing more information about the soundtrack . 
 Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 Original Soundtrack sold 82 @,@ 000 copies as of January 2010 ; it reached position # 5 on the Japanese Oricon charts and remained on the charts for 12 weeks . The game 's soundtrack was met with mixed feelings from critics , because Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 's score was the first in the series without input from Nobuo Uematsu , composer of all previous games in the main series , and because of the change to a distinct J @-@ pop atmosphere . While IGN commented that the music provided an " appropriately fitting backdrop " and 1UP.com suggested that it " certainly is in keeping with the new flavor " , others , such as Electronic Gaming Monthly , regarded it as " too bubbly " . One staff member at RPGamer suggested that " the absence of Uematsu proves deafening " and " the soundtrack that accompanies this nonsensical adventure manages to encapsulate the shallow nature of the game perfectly " . Ben Schweitzer of RPGFan found that the Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 Original Soundtrack album was unique and enjoyable , but " ultimately forgettable . " Liz Maas of RPGFan agreed , finding the album to be simultaneously " refreshing " and " odd " . Chris Heit of Soundtrack Central , however , found that the album had " good , original music " , although altogether different than previous Final Fantasy soundtracks . 
 Tracklist 
 = = = Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 International + Last Mission Original Soundtrack = = = 
 Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 International + Last Mission Original Soundtrack is a soundtrack album of music from Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 International + Last Mission composed , arranged and produced by Noriko Matsueda , Takahito Eguchi and Kazuhiro Hara . The album spans 10 tracks , covering a duration of 45 : 21 . It includes the English versions of " real Emotion " and " 1000 Words " , performed by Jade Villalon of Sweetbox , as well as the eight tracks added for the International version of Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 , released in Japan on February 19 , 2004 . The album was released on July 16 , 2003 in Japan by Avex bearing the catalog number AVCD @-@ <unk> . 
 The album was better received than the original soundtrack , with Patrick Gann finding several of the tracks to be " beautiful " and the album as a whole " a sure step up from the X @-@ 2 OST " . He concluded that " if you owned and kept the X @-@ 2 OST , you 're a fool not to add this CD to your collection . " Chris of Square Enix Music Online had similar feelings for the album , terming it a " high @-@ quality and surprising effort " and " an incredible improvement " over the original soundtrack . The album reached # 42 on the Oricon charts and remained on the charts for four weeks . 
 = = = Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 Piano Collection = = = 
 Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 Piano Collection is a collection of music from the game 's soundtrack composed by Noriko Matsueda and Takahito Eguchi and arranged for the piano . The tracks were arranged by Noriko Matsueda , Takahito Eguchi , Hiroko <unk> , Masahiro Sayama , and Febian Reza Pane . Matsueda and Eguchi 's tracks were performed by Shinko Ogata , while the other arrangers performed their own works . The album spans 12 tracks and covers a duration of 47 : 38 . It was released on March 31 , 2004 by Avex with catalog number AVCD @-@ <unk> . 
 The album was very well received , with Patrick Gann claiming that it " shines as a light in the darkness " compared to the original soundtrack and that he was " extremely pleased " with the album . Chris from Square Enix Music Online agreed , calling the album " nothing short of fantastic " and saying that the pianists did " a flawless job executing each arrangement " . Jillian of Square Enix Music Online agreed , finding it to be the best Final Fantasy piano arrangement album to date . 
 = = Singles = = 
 = = = Real Emotion / 1000 no Kotoba = = = 
 " real Emotion / 1000 no Kotoba " ( real Emotion / <unk> , <unk> <unk> / Sen no Kotoba ) is a double A @-@ side by Koda Kumi , consisting of the songs " Real Emotion " and " 1000 no Kotoba " ( lit . " 1000 words " ) , which are used as the opening and closing themes respectively of Square Enix 's game Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 , which was used in a cut @-@ scene in the game as well as its ending credits . 
 " 1000 no Kotoba " was arranged by Takahito Eguchi and Noriko Matsueda . The CD contains the two songs in addition to their instrumental versions , covering a duration of 20 : 02 . It was published by Rhythm Zone on March 5 , 2003 with the catalog number <unk> @-@ <unk> . 
 Real Emotion / 1000 Words was poorly received by critics , with Patrick Gann declaring himself to be " not too impressed " . 
 = = = Eternity ~ Memories of Waves and Light ~ Music from Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 = = = 
 Eternity ~ Memories of Waves and Light ~ Music from Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 is an arranged single consisting of the songs from the game " Eternity ~ Memory of <unk> " , " Besaid " , and " Yuna 's Ballad " , composed and arranged by Noriko Matsueda and Takahito Eguchi . The songs feature live instruments , and are the only arranged tracks released from the Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 OST to date . The album was released by Avex on March 31 , 2003 . It covers a duration of 9 : 37 and has a catalog number of AVCD @-@ <unk> . 
 Gann was more receptive to the album than to " Real Emotion " , feeling that the tracks were three of the best tracks from the soundtrack , and that the single was worth purchasing if only because it was the only release of arranged music from the game to date . However , he felt that for the length , the single was overpriced . Chris of Square Enix Music Online also felt the single was overpriced , but additionally felt that the arrangements were " unremarkable musically " and that the album as a whole was " a cheap production . " Memories of Waves and Light reached # 32 on the Oricon charts and stayed on the charts for eight weeks . 
 = = = Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 Vocal Collection = = = 
 Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 Vocal Collection was a set of three singles , each consisting of two tracks sung by the voice actress for one of the main characters of the game and two instrumental tracks . The singles , Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 Vocal Collection- Paine , Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 Vocal Collection- Rikku , and Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 Vocal Collection- Yuna , were released by Avex on July 16 , 2003 . The songs were composed and arranged by Noriko Matsueda and Takahito Eguchi . Paine was voiced by Megumi Toyoguchi , Rikku by Marika Matsumoto , and Yuna by Mayuko Aoki . Each single was produced with an accompanying DVD which included a music video , an interview with the voice actress , and a montage of scenes from the game . Paine covered a duration of 16 : 19 and had a catalog number of AVCD @-@ <unk> / B , Rikku had a duration of 16 : 09 and a catalog number of AVCD @-@ <unk> / B , while Yuna covered a duration of 18 : 59 and had a catalog number of AVCD @-@ <unk> / B. 
 The Final Fantasy Vocal Collection singles received mixed reviews , with Patrick Gann praising Paine as " sophisticated " and applauding the instrumentation , while also approving of Yuna , terming it " peaceful " and the best of the three . However , he also derided Rikku as " cheesy " and disliked the lyrics of one of the two tracks from Paine . Additionally , he overall found the singles to be very overpriced for the small amount of material included . Paine , Rikku and Yuna reached # 30 , # 25 , and # 21 on the Oricon charts , respectively , and stayed on the charts for four , six , and seven weeks . 
 Track listing 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Unlike the music from the main Final Fantasy series , no songs from Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 have been played at any of the numerous Final Fantasy concerts . Selections of music from the game have appeared on Japanese remix albums , called dojin music , and on English remixing websites . 
