 = N3 @-@ class battleship = 
 The N3 class was a dreadnought battleship class designed for the Royal Navy after World War I , incorporating all the lessons learned from that conflict . They were very similar in design to the G3 @-@ class battlecruiser , but had larger guns and thicker armour . They were never ordered due to signing of the Washington Naval Treaty in 1922 , which limited the size and armament of battleships to 35 @,@ 000 long tons ( 36 @,@ 000 t ) and no gun bigger than 16 inches ( 406 mm ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1916 the US had declared its intention to create a Navy " second to none " ; Congress had authorized the building of a large number of battleships and battlecruisers . In response , the Japanese government also began a large programme of warship building ( the 8 @-@ 8 fleet ) . Two improved Revenge @-@ class hulls were rebuilt into the two Renown @-@ class battlecruisers by the Royal Navy during the war . The only new capital ships laid down during the war were the Admiral @-@ class battlecruisers . Their design had been called into question after the Battle of Jutland in 1916 and three ships of this class were cancelled , leaving only Hood to be completed to a modified design . 
 The US plan had been delayed by the wartime need to build smaller vessels . Nevertheless , estimates by the Admiralty were that by the early 1920s the Royal Navy would be behind in ships . By the beginning of 1920 , the Americans had completed one battleship since the end of World War I and had five more building . Seven more were intended to be laid down in 1920 – 21 , six of these were the very large and powerful South Dakota class , armed with twelve 16 @-@ inch guns . The Japanese had finished one battleship since the end of the war and had three more under construction . To correct this state of affairs , the Admiralty initially planned to build three battleships and one battlecruiser in Fiscal Year ( FY ) 1921 – 22 and again in FY 1922 – 23 , but this was changed to four G3 @-@ class battlecruisers to be built first , presumably to be followed by the same number of battleships the following year . 
 A pair of designs were prepared in June 1920 , derived from the ' ' U @-@ 4 ' ' battleship design of 1914 , of ships with displacements of about 50 @,@ 000 long tons ( 51 @,@ 000 t ) and armed with eight or nine guns , in four twin or three triple gun turrets mounting a new 18 @-@ inch ( 457 mm ) gun then under development . The only limitation of the design was the inability to use British dockyards and pass through the Suez Canal . The most unusual feature of these designs was that none of the turrets were superfiring , presumably to keep the centre of gravity as low as possible and avoid the extra weight required for tall , superfiring barbettes . 
 The designs were revised in October and split into separate battleship and battlecruiser designs . The battleship designs were given letters of the alphabet from L through N , with the use of triple or double gun turrets shown by 3 or 2 respectively . Both ' L2 ' and ' L3 ' had superfiring guns and the armour was reduced to a 15 @-@ inch ( 381 mm ) inclined waterline belt while the main armoured deck was 8 inches ( 203 mm ) thick ( 9 inches ( 229 mm ) where it sloped to meet the belt ) . They both had a designed speed of 25 knots ( 46 km / h ; 29 mph ) and had transom sterns . ' L2 ' displaced 52 @,@ 100 long tons ( 52 @,@ 900 t ) , but ' L3 ' was a thousand tons lighter . ' M2 ' and ' M3 ' followed in November and December and were very different from the earlier designs . 
 <unk> ' and ' M3 ' sacrificed fire directly astern by moving the rear turret ( s ) amidships in order to save weight by shortening the length of the armoured citadel . Compared to the earlier , more conventional , designs , ' M2 ' saved 1 @,@ 540 long tons ( 1 @,@ 560 t ) and ' M3 ' 1 @,@ 740 long tons ( 1 @,@ 770 t ) . More weight was saved by reducing the designed speed to 23 – 23 @.@ 5 knots ( 42 @.@ 6 – 43 @.@ 5 km / h ; 26 @.@ 5 – 27 @.@ 0 mph ) and using only two propeller shafts , although it was thought that this would improve manoeuvering power over four smaller propellers . These changes saved 4 @,@ 350 long tons ( 4 @,@ 420 t ) for ' M2 ' and 5 @,@ 000 long tons ( 5 @,@ 100 t ) for ' M3 ' over their predecessors . A lengthened version of ' M3 ' was chosen for further development as N3 and approved in November 1921 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Most noticeable of the N3 design was the concentration of the main battery forward of the bridge and machinery spaces . A related feature of the design was the tower bridge structure behind the first two gun turrets . This provided a better and more stable foundation for fire @-@ control equipment , greatly improved accommodation and protection from the weather . 
 The N3 battleships were significantly larger than their predecessors of the Revenge class . They had an overall length of 820 feet ( 249 @.@ 9 m ) , a beam of 106 feet ( 32 @.@ 3 m ) , and a draught of 33 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) at deep load . They would have displaced about 48 @,@ 500 long tons ( 49 @,@ 300 t ) , nearly double the displacement of the older ships . They had a complete double bottom 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) deep . 
 The ships would have had two geared steam turbine sets , each of which drove one propeller shaft , in two engine rooms forward of the boiler rooms . This allowed the funnel to be placed further aft and increased the ability of the rear turret to fire to the rear . The turbines would have been powered by small @-@ tube boilers intended to produce a total of 56 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 42 @,@ 000 kW ) . The ships ' maximum speed would have been about 23 knots . 
 Housing the main armament in triple turrets was new to the Royal Navy though British companies had been involved in the production of triple gun turret designs for other navies . The choice of a high muzzle velocity with a relatively lighter shell was taken from the German practice ; it ran counter to previous British guns such as the BL 15 @-@ inch Mark I gun of 42 @-@ calibre length which were lower @-@ muzzle @-@ velocity weapons firing heavy shells . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The N3 design mounted nine 45 @-@ calibre BL 18 @-@ inch guns in three triple gun turrets , designated ' A ' , ' B ' , and ' X ' from front to rear . The guns had a maximum elevation of 40 ° . As none of these guns was ever completed and test @-@ fired , sources differ on their exact specifications . Naval historian John Campbell quotes the projectile weight as 2 @,@ 916 pounds ( 1 @,@ 323 kg ) fired at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 650 ft / s ( 810 m / s ) , but Alan Raven and John Roberts cite a 2 @,@ 837 pounds ( 1 @,@ 287 kg ) fired at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 700 ft / s ( 820 m / s ) . The N3s carried a secondary armament of sixteen BL 6 @-@ inch Mk XXII guns in superfiring twin turrets . Four turrets were sited around the forward superstructure and four at the stern . The guns could elevate between – 5 ° and + 60 ° . They fired 100 @-@ pound ( 45 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 945 ft / s ( 898 m / s ) . Their maximum range was 25 @,@ 800 yd ( 23 @,@ 600 m ) at 45 ° elevation . Their rate of fire was five rounds per minute . 
 An anti @-@ aircraft battery of six QF 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch Mk VIII guns was included . They had a maximum depression of -5 ° and a maximum elevation of 90 ° . They fired a 50 @-@ pound ( 23 kg ) high explosive shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 457 ft / s ( 749 m / s ) at a rate of eight to twelve rounds per minute . The guns had a maximum ceiling of 32 @,@ 000 ft ( 9 @,@ 800 m ) , but an effective range of much less . The ships were intended to carry four 10 @-@ barreled mountings for the 40 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) QF 2 @-@ pounder Mk VIII gun ( commonly known as a pom @-@ pom ) , two abaft the funnels and two at the stern . Each barrel was provided with 1300 rounds of ammunition . The gun fired a 40 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) .91 @-@ pound ( 0 @.@ 41 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 920 ft / s ( 590 m / s ) to a distance of 3 @,@ 800 yards ( 3 @,@ 500 m ) . The gun 's rate of fire was approximately 96 – 98 rounds per minute . 
 Like previous classes of British battlecruisers , a pair of submerged , broadside @-@ firing torpedo tubes were planned for these ships . Their compartment was located just forward of the ' A ' shell room on the platform deck . Six 24 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 620 mm ) torpedoes per tube were to be carried in peace @-@ time , but this would increase to eight in wartime . These Mark I torpedoes had a warhead of 743 pounds ( 337 kg ) of TNT and were powered by oxygen @-@ enriched air . They had two speed settings which governed their range : either 15 @,@ 000 yards ( 13 @,@ 716 m ) at 35 knots ( 65 km / h ; 40 mph ) , or 20 @,@ 000 yards ( 18 @,@ 288 m ) at 30 knots ( 56 km / h ; 35 mph ) . 
 = = = Fire @-@ control = = = 
 The main guns of the battleships could be controlled from any of the two director @-@ control towers ( DCT ) . The primary DCT was mounted at the top of the forward superstructure . Another was mounted on the roof of the conning tower in an armoured hood . Each main gun turret was provided with a 41 @-@ foot ( 12 @.@ 5 m ) coincidence rangefinder in an armoured housing on the turret roof . The secondary armament was primarily controlled by two DCTs mounted on each side of the bridge . The anti @-@ aircraft guns were controlled by a high @-@ angle control system mounted on the mizzenmast . Each pom @-@ pom mount had its own director and there was also a height @-@ finder aft . Two 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) torpedo rangefinders were located on the sides of the funnels . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 A first for any British dreadnought was the use of the all or nothing protection scheme in the N3s and G3s . Medium @-@ thickness armour had proven to be useless in stopping heavy @-@ calibre shells during World War I so the vital areas of the ship were protected by the thickest possible armour and the rest of the ship was left unarmoured . Use of this system was pioneered by contemporary U.S. Navy battleship designs starting with the Nevada class . However , this system of protection required that the armoured citadel should have enough reserve buoyancy to keep the ship stable even if the rest of the hull was riddled by gunfire . 
 The waterline belt of the N3 had a maximum thickness of 15 inches ( 381 mm ) thick with the top of the armour angled outwards . This angle increased the armor 's relative thickness to horizontal , close @-@ range fire , albeit at the cost of reducing its relative height which increased the chance of plunging shellfire going over or under it . It ran some 463 feet ( 141 @.@ 1 m ) , from 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) forward of ' A ' barbette to the rear of the after 6 @-@ inch magazine . For about 115 feet ( 35 @.@ 1 m ) , it reduced to 13 @.@ 5 inches ( 343 mm ) over the engine and boiler rooms . The belt had a height of 14 feet 3 inches ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) , of which 4 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 4 m ) was below the designed waterline . The lower edge of the belt abreast the magazines was continued down another 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) by a 4 inches ( 102 mm ) thickness of high @-@ tensile steel inclined at 36 ° to prevent a shell from reaching the magazines via a wave trough at high speed . The ends of the belt terminated in 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) transverse bulkheads . The 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) armoured deck matched the length of the waterline belt and sloped down to meet the upper edge of the belt . It extended forward over the torpedo compartment which had a separate transverse bulkhead protecting it that was 9 inches ( 229 mm ) thick . The steering gear was protected by a deck and bulkhead 6 inches ( 152 mm ) thick . 
 The turret faces were 18 inches ( 457 mm ) thick while their sides were probably 14 inches ( 356 mm ) in thickness , and the roof was 8 inches thick . The armour of the barbettes and the conning tower was 15 inches thick and the conning tower 's communications tube to the upper deck was 8 inches thick . The fire @-@ control director atop the conning tower was protected by an armoured hood 4 to 6 inches thick . 
 The anti @-@ torpedo bulges of the N3 were internal to the hull and were intended to withstand the explosion of a 750 @-@ pound ( 340 kg ) torpedo warhead . They consisted of an outer air space , an inner buoyancy space and the 2 inches ( 51 mm ) thick torpedo bulkhead . The bulkhead was situated about 16 feet ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) inboard from the side of the ship . Postwar tests done on a replica of this system showed that filling the buoyancy space with water rather than the sealed steel crushing tubes as used in Hood was just as effective and weighed less . 
 = = Cancellation = = 
 The four N3 battleships were never ordered because the Washington Naval Treaty , an arms limitation treaty under negotiation at the time , forbade construction of any ship larger than 35 @,@ 000 tons . Many of the aspects of their design ultimately were incorporated into the two Nelson @-@ class battleships , and they are often described as being a cut @-@ down N3 . Indeed , the Nelsons received the design designation ' O3 ' , marking them as next in the design sequence , although they used the guns intended for the G3 battlecruisers for cost reasons and to comply with the Treaty 's 16 @-@ inch limitation on main armament . 
 = Tropical Storm Andres ( 1997 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Andres was the only tropical cyclone on record to strike El Salvador . The first named storm of the active 1997 Pacific hurricane season , Andres formed on June 1 off the coast of Mexico . It initially moved toward the coast , although a change in steering winds turned the storm toward Mexico and Guatemala . After passing just offshore , Andres again changed direction toward the southeast , gradually weakening in the process . On June 7 , it turned toward and hit El Salvador before dissipating . The storm brought rainfall to coastlines along much of its path , destroying some houses and inflicted damage . Two fishermen were reported missing in Nicaragua due to high seas , and there were four deaths in El Salvador . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Tropical Storm Andres was the first of many storms of the season , with above @-@ average activity due to one of the strongest El Niño events on record . In most of May 1997 , strong westerlies extended across the eastern Pacific Ocean , which inhibited tropical cyclogenesis . Toward the end of the month , however , wind shear decreased in the easternmost portion of the basin , which allowed a low @-@ level circulation to develop ; it is possible the system originated from a tropical wave that traversed the Atlantic Ocean in the previous two weeks . Deep convection increased over the circulation on May 31 , prompting classifications with the Dvorak technique . Based on satellite imagery , it is estimated the system developed into Tropical Depression One @-@ E early on June 1 , about 345 miles ( 555 km ) south of the Gulf of Tehuantepec . 
 The tropical cyclone was never well @-@ organized , and after its formation , the convection became elongated . As the entire system moved northwestward , another circulation developed which eventually became the dominant center , causing the original circulation to dissipate . Midday on June 2 , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Andres . The next day , steering winds forced the storm east @-@ northeastward , and on June 4 , Andres attained peak winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . A trough bypassed the storm to the north and changed the steering flow toward the southeast . This produced a track paralleling the Central America coastline ; such a track was considered " unprecedented " by the National Hurricane Center in the database for all eastern Pacific storms . Initially , the storm was expected to continue moving toward Mexico and Guatemala . 
 Turning southeastward , Tropical Storm Andres passed about 35 miles ( 55 km ) off the coast of Guatemala , before it began weakening due to interaction with the Intertropical Convergence Zone . The convection became amorphous and later shifted to the southeast of the circulation . On June 6 Andres weakened to tropical depression status . It turned northward and moved ashore near San Salvador , El Salvador on June 7 , which was the first recorded landfall in the country . The low @-@ level circulation quickly dissipated over land , although the mid @-@ level circulation persisted across Central America . After the featured reached the western Caribbean Sea , a new surface circulation developed , and initially , tropical cyclone forecast models anticipated the development of a significant storm in the eastern Gulf of Mexico . Instead , the system remained disorganized , bringing rainfall to Cuba , Florida , and the Bahamas before it was absorbed by a weak trough in the Gulf of Mexico . 
 = = Impact and preparations = = 
 When Tropical Storm Andres first turned to the northeast , tropical storm warnings were issued from Punta Galera , Mexico to the Mexico / Guatemala border . A tropical storm warning was later issued from <unk> , Guatemala to the Mexican border . All of the warnings were dropped when Andres turned toward the southeast . Later , a tropical storm watch was issued for Guatemala and El Salvador , but it was quickly canceled . Due to the threat of the storm , officials closed ports along the southern Mexican coastline , and also advised for small boats to excise caution . 
 Throughout its life , Andres produced rainfall along the coast of Mexico , in Guerrero , Oaxaca , and Chiapas , as well as through the Yucatán Peninsula . The highest total in the country was 11 @.@ 42 inches ( 29 cm ) in <unk> , Chiapas . Heavy rainfall and high seas spread across western Central America . In El Salvador and Nicaragua , the storm led to power outages , traffic accidents , and overflown rivers , as well as destroyed bridges and buildings in Nicaragua . Two fishermen were left missing in Nicaragua , and the storm damaged 91 houses and destroyed 82 more , leaving a total of 1 @,@ 259 people homeless . There were 4 deaths in El Salvador where Andres made landfall . The remnants of Andres brought rainfall to Cuba , Florida , and the Bahamas . In Florida , the system produced a daily record precipitation of 5 @.@ 89 inches ( 15 cm ) at the Miami International Airport ; the rainfall led to street flooding , accidents , and housing damage . 
 = The Boat Race 1983 = 
 The 129th Boat Race took place on 2 April 1983 . Held annually , the event is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . The pre @-@ race preparation saw Cambridge threaten to boycott the race for the first time , following the inclusion of Boris Rankov in the Oxford boat . The crews were the two heaviest in the history of the event , and featured ten former Boat Race competitors . Oxford won the race by four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths . 
 Isis won the reserve race , while Cambridge were victorious in the Women 's Boat Race . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 miles ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities and followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Oxford were the reigning champions , having beaten Cambridge by three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter lengths in the previous year 's race . However , Cambridge held the overall lead , with 68 victories to Oxford 's 59 . The race was sponsored by Ladbrokes ; the winner was awarded the Ladbrokes Trophy . 
 On 7 March 1983 , Cambridge issued a statement suggesting that they might boycott the race following a dispute over Oxford 's selection of Boris Rankov as a member of their crew . Veteran of the previous five Boat Races , all of which were Dark Blue victories , Cambridge argued Rankov was ineligible for inclusion as he was a lecturer at the university . Coach David Townsend of the University of London offered the services of his crew to provide an opponent for Oxford , should Cambridge refuse to participate . Rankov himself had offered to withdraw from the race , but the Dark Blues ' committee rejected this . Cambridge finally agreed to race after they reached an agreement with Oxford to discuss and possibly tighten the eligibility criteria . This ultimately led to establishment of the so @-@ called " Rankov Rule " , which states that oarsmen will compete in the race no more than four times as an undergraduate and no more than four times as a graduate . 
 The first Women 's Boat Race took place in 1927 , but did not become an annual fixture until the 1960s . Up until 2014 , the contest was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , but as of the 2015 race , it is held on the River Thames , on the same day as the men 's main and reserve races . The reserve race , contested between Oxford 's Isis boat and Cambridge 's Goldie boat has been held since 1965 . It usually takes place on the Tideway , prior to the main Boat Race . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The two crews were the heaviest in Boat Race history , Oxford averaging 14 stone 8 lbs ( 92 @.@ 3 kg ) per rower , nearly 7 pounds ( 3 @.@ 2 kg ) a man heavier than the Cambridge crew , and were pre @-@ race favourites to win an eighth consecutive race . Cambridge 's crew featured six unsuccessful Blues , while Oxford 's boat contained four Blues with ten Boat Race victories between them . While seven of the Oxford rowers were international post @-@ graduates , Cambridge 's crew included seven undergraduates . The average age of the Oxford crew was 25 , four years more than Cambridge . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station . Oxford , rowing at a higher rate , took an early lead and were clear of Cambridge by the Mile Post . Extending their lead to six seconds by Hammersmith Bridge , Oxford pushed on to lead by nine seconds at Chiswick Steps . Despite trying to keep in touch , Cambridge were four lengths behind at Barnes Bridge and trailed by 13 seconds as Oxford passed the finishing post . Oxford won by four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 19 minutes 7 seconds . 
 This was Oxford 's eighth consecutive victory , and their ninth in ten years , and took the overall record to 68 – 60 in favour of Cambridge . The race was watched by 14 million television viewers . 
 In the reserve race , Oxford 's Isis beat Cambridge 's Goldie by six @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths , while Cambridge won the 38th Women 's Boat Race . 
 = Air mass = 
 In meteorology , an air mass is a volume of air defined by its temperature and water vapor content . Air masses cover many hundreds or thousands of square miles , and adapt to the characteristics of the surface below them . They are classified according to latitude and their continental or maritime source regions . Colder air masses are termed polar or arctic , while warmer air masses are deemed tropical . Continental and superior air masses are dry while maritime and monsoon air masses are moist . Weather fronts separate air masses with different density ( temperature and / or moisture ) characteristics . Once an air mass moves away from its source region , underlying vegetation and water bodies can quickly modify its character . Classification schemes tackle an air mass ' characteristics , and well as modification . 
 = = Classification and notation = = 
 The Bergeron classification is the most widely accepted form of air mass classification , though others have produced more refined versions of this scheme over different regions of the globe . Air mass classification involves three letters . The first letter describes its moisture properties , with c used for continental air masses ( dry ) and m for maritime air masses ( moist ) . The second letter describes the thermal characteristic of its source region : T for Tropical , P for Polar , A for arctic or Antarctic , M for monsoon , E for Equatorial , and S for superior air ( an adiabatically drying and warming air formed by significant downward motion in the atmosphere ) . For instance , an air mass originating over the desert southwest of the United States in summer may be designated " cT " . An air mass originating over northern Siberia in winter may be indicated as " cA " . 
 The stability of an air mass may be shown using a third letter , either " k " ( air mass colder than the surface below it ) or " w " ( air mass warmer than the surface below it ) . An example of this might be a polar air mass blowing over the Gulf Stream , denoted as " <unk> " . Occasionally , one may also encounter the use of an apostrophe or " degree tick " denoting that a given air mass having the same notation as another it is replacing is colder than the replaced air mass ( usually for polar air masses ) . For example , a series of fronts over the Pacific might show an air mass denoted mPk followed by another denoted mPk ' . 
 Another convention utilizing these symbols is the indication of modification or transformation of one type to another . For instance , an Arctic air mass blowing out over the Gulf of Alaska may be shown as " cA @-@ mPk " . Yet another convention indicates the layering of air masses in certain situations . For instance , the overrunning of a polar air mass by an air mass from the Gulf of Mexico over the Central United States might be shown with the notation " mT / <unk> " ( sometimes using a horizontal line as in fraction notation ) . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Arctic , Antarctic , and polar air masses are cold . The qualities of arctic air are developed over ice and snow @-@ covered ground . Arctic air is deeply cold , colder than polar air masses . Arctic air can be shallow in the summer , and rapidly modify as it moves equatorward . Polar air masses develop over higher latitudes over the land or ocean , are very stable , and generally shallower than arctic air . Polar air over the ocean ( maritime ) loses its stability as it gains moisture over warmer ocean waters . 
 Tropical and equatorial air masses are hot as they develop over lower latitudes . Those that develop over land ( continental ) are drier and hotter than those that develop over oceans , and travel poleward on the western periphery of the subtropical ridge . Maritime tropical air masses are sometimes referred to as trade air masses . Monsoon air masses are moist and unstable . Superior air masses are dry , and rarely reach the ground . They normally reside over maritime tropical air masses , forming a warmer and drier layer over the more moderate moist air mass below , forming what is known as a trade wind inversion over the maritime tropical air mass . Continental Polar air masses ( <unk> ) are air masses that are cold and dry due to their continental source region . Continental polar air masses that affect North America form over interior Canada . Continental Tropical air masses ( cT ) are a type of tropical air produced by the subtropical ridge over large areas of land and typically originate from low @-@ latitude deserts such as the Sahara Desert in northern Africa , which is the major source of these air masses . Other less important sources producing cT air masses are the Arabian Peninsula , the central arid / semi @-@ arid part of Australia and deserts lying in the Southwestern United States . Continental tropical air masses are extremely hot and dry . 
 = = Movement and fronts = = 
 A weather front is a boundary separating two masses of air of different densities , and is the principal cause of meteorological phenomena . In surface weather analyses , fronts are depicted using various colored lines and symbols , depending on the type of front . The air masses separated by a front usually differ in temperature and humidity . Cold fronts may feature narrow bands of thunderstorms and severe weather , and may on occasion be preceded by squall lines or dry lines . Warm fronts are usually preceded by stratiform precipitation and fog . The weather usually clears quickly after a front 's passage . Some fronts produce no precipitation and little cloudiness , although there is invariably a wind shift . 
 Cold fronts and occluded fronts generally move from west to east , while warm fronts move poleward . Because of the greater density of air in their wake , cold fronts and cold occlusions move faster than warm fronts and warm occlusions . Mountains and warm bodies of water can slow the movement of fronts . When a front becomes stationary , and the density contrast across the frontal boundary vanishes , the front can degenerate into a line which separates regions of differing wind velocity , known as a shearline . This is most common over the open ocean . 
 = = Modification = = 
 Air masses can be modified in a variety of ways . Surface flux from underlying vegetation , such as forest , acts to moisten the overlying air mass . Heat from underlying warmer waters can significantly modify an air mass over distances as short as 35 kilometres ( 22 mi ) to 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) . For example , southwest of extratropical cyclones , curved cyclonic flow bringing cold air across the relatively warm water bodies can lead to narrow lake @-@ effect snow bands . Those bands bring strong localized precipitation since large water bodies such as lakes efficiently store heat that results in significant temperature differences ( larger than 13 ° C or 23 ° F ) between the water surface and the air above . Because of this temperature difference , warmth and moisture are transported upward , condensing into vertically oriented clouds ( see satellite picture ) which produce snow showers . The temperature decrease with height and cloud depth are directly affected by both the water temperature and the large @-@ scale environment . The stronger the temperature decrease with height , the deeper the clouds get , and the greater the precipitation rate becomes . 
 = The Mad Hermit = 
 The Mad Hermit is a 1910 American silent short drama film produced by the Thanhouser Company . The story focuses on Harry Willard , who becomes a hermit after his wife and daughter leave him . He spends a quarter of a century in isolation , but he stumbles across a runaway carriage and the woman tosses her baby to him . He runs into the wilderness and prepares to kill it , but he stays his hand when he sees the baby 's locket . The parents survive the carriage crash and seek out the hermit , and it is revealed that the baby 's mother is the daughter of Harry Willard . Created by a staff of twenty , it was the first film to be produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film was released in August 9 , 1910 , after the success of the company was ensured , and met with positive reception by critics . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Moving Picture World from August 13 , 1910 . It states : " The story centers on Harry Willard , a plodding farmer . A city gentleman promises Harry 's frivolous wife a life of ease and luxury - and it is the old , old story . She takes her tiny daughter , Agnes , with her , and leaves a note announcing the fact for Harry . The young farmer , who loves his wife and child with an all @-@ consuming love , loses his reason as he reads the announcement of his betrayal . Although without the bare means for his subsistence , he searches for days for his loved ones . Eventually the strain , mental and physical , tells on him - he comes out of it all a maniac . His wrath takes the form of an aversion to all mankind . He wants to forget the world that has treated him so ill - he decides to become a hermit and <unk> himself to a desolate cave , where he spends the years <unk> humanity . A quarter century goes by . Rarely in that time does he venture on beaten paths for fear that he may meet a hated human , but one day he forgets his resolve long enough to cross a carriage drive . He hears the clatter of hooves and sights a horse tearing toward him with a swaying carriage and screaming occupants - runaway ! As the carriage passes by him , a woman flings a bundle to him ; he catches it and finds it a pink and white bit of humanity . Dazed he runs into the wilderness with a baby and makes for his cave . Arrived at the cave the maniac resolves to even his score with society by taking the babe 's life . But his eyes light on the baby 's locket and his hand is stayed . For the locket bears a picture of the child of the wife who betrayed him ! " 
 " The parents of the baby have miraculously escaped death in the crash of their carriage and trace the strange creature who rescued the child to his lair . They arrive as he ponders upon the picture in the locket and tries to recall the original of it . The babe is the daughter of the original and its mother the hermit 's daughter , Agnes - the one @-@ time tot whom the deserting wife took with her . A wife and mother , she is quite a mature woman now - but her features are unchanged . The face appears familiar to the hermit and he tries to place it . Eventually he succeeds . The shock of recognition dazes him - and changes him . The light of sanity returns to his eyes . His reason is restored . He takes to his breast the daughter whom he had lost and found again . She takes him from his forest home and back to the civilization that had tricked him . But the kindly care and love his daughter bestows on him to act in a measure as a recompense for the wrong done him in the long ago , and with the passing years the bitterness passes from his being . The picture touches the heartstrings ; it will please to a certainty . " 
 = = Production = = 
 The Mad Hermit was the first film to be produced by the Thanhouser Company , but the first release was The Actor 's Children . The writer of the scenario is unknown . The film was shot in the autumn of 1909 . Edwin Thanhouser would later describe the production as , " ... a rather lamentable affair . It included everything from murder through robbery and a love story . It boasted enough material for 15 plots . " According to Q. David Bowers , Edwin Thanhouser felt that the production had many amateurish aspects and held off on releasing the film until the reputation of the company was secured . The film was directed by Barry O 'Neil , the stage name of Thomas J. McCarthy . O 'Neil would direct many important Thanhouser pictures , including its first two @-@ reeler , Romeo and Juliet . There are no known credits for the cast , but Anna Rosemond and Frank H. Crane are two possible actors that were prominent players in 1910 . Involved with the company since its beginnings , Anna Rosemond was one of two leading ladies of the Thanhouser company in this era . Frank H. Crane was a leading male actor of the company and also involved since the very beginnings of the Thanhouser Company . Bowers states that most of the credits are fragmentary for 1910 Thanhouser productions . A later statement by Edwin Thanhouser would state that 20 persons , including the director and cameraman , were involved in the production . A surviving film still leaves open the possibility of identifying two characters . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet long , was released on August 9 , 1910 . The film had a wide national release , with advertisements including those in Kansas , California , Arizona , Nebraska , Washington , South Dakota , Pennsylvania , and Texas . An advertisement for the Province Theatre suggests that the film arrived in British Columbia , Canada within days of its release . 
 The film received praise from critics with The Moving Picture World stating , " [ It is a ] picture which touches the heart and arouses the strongest emotions . It can be readily understood how a man might become a maniac under such circumstances . The loss of a wife and daughter is sufficient to overthrow reason . That a man should be a hermit afterward seems not unusual . Then comes the excitement of the runaway , the rescue of the baby and the discovery of his daughter , with returning reason and love to follow during his declining years . The emotions will be strongly aroused by this picture , and that will make it popular . Whatever touches the heart is always popular , and this seems to appeal with unusual power . " The New York Dramatic Mirror offered minor praise for the film for the production and its acting . 
 = Scotland in the Middle Ages = 
 Scotland in the Middle Ages concerns the history of the region that is now Scotland , from the departure of the Romans ( from Britannia ) in the early fifth century , to the adoption of major aspects of the Renaissance in the early sixteenth century . From the fifth century North Britain was divided into a series of petty kingdoms . Of these the four most important to emerge were the Picts , the Scots of Dál Riata , the Britons of Strathclyde and the Anglian kingdom of Bernicia . After the arrival of the Vikings in the late eighth century , Scandinavian rulers and colonies were established along parts of the coasts and in the islands . In the ninth century the Scots and Picts combined under the House of Alpin to form a single Kingdom of Alba , with a Pictish base and dominated by Gaelic culture . After the reign of King David I in the twelfth century , the Scottish monarchs are best described as Scoto @-@ Norman , preferring French culture to native Scottish culture . Alexander II and his son Alexander III , were able to annexe the remainder of the western seaboard , cumulating the Treaty of Perth with Norway in 1266 . Scotland established its independence from England under figures including William Wallace in the late thirteenth century and Robert Bruce in the fourteenth century . In the fifteenth century under the Stewart Dynasty , despite a turbulent political history , the crown gained greater political control at the expense of independent lords and regained most of its lost territory to approximately the modern borders of the country . However , the Auld Alliance with France led to the heavy defeat of a Scottish army at the Battle of Flodden in 1513 and the death of the king James IV , which would be followed by a long minority and a period of political instability . 
 Kingship was the major form of government , growing in sophistication in the late Middle Ages . The scale and nature of war also changed , with larger armies , naval forces and the development of artillery and fortifications . Christianity introduced monasticism and what has been identified as Celtic Christianity . Nevertheless , the church accepted papal authority and from the eleventh century embraced monastic reform , developing a flourishing religious culture that asserted its independence from English control . Scotland grew from a relatively small area in the eastern Lowlands , to approximately its modern borders . The varied and dramatic geography of the land provided a protection against invasion , but limited central control . It also defined the largely pastoral economy , with the first burghs being created from the twelfth century . The population may have grown to a peak of a million before the arrival of the Black Death in 1337 . In the early Middle Ages society was divided between a small aristocracy and larger numbers of freemen and slaves . Serfdom disappeared in the fourteenth century and there was a growth of new social groups . 
 The Pictish and Cumbric languages were replaced by Gaelic , Old English and later Norse , with Gaelic emerging as the major cultural language . From the eleventh century French was adopted in the court and in the late Middle Ages , Scots , derived from Old English , became dominant , with Gaelic largely confined to the Highlands . Christianity brought Latin , written culture and monasteries as centres of learning . From the twelfth century , educational opportunities widened and a growth of lay education cumulated in the Education Act 1496 . Until in the fifteenth century , when Scotland gained three universities , Scots pursuing higher education had to travel to England or the continent , where some gained an international reputation . Literature survives in all the major languages present in the early Middle Ages , with Scots emerging as a major literary language from John Barbour 's Brus ( 1375 ) , developing a culture of poetry by court makars , and later major works of prose . Art from the early Middle Ages survives in carving , in metalwork , and elaborate illuminated books , which contributed to the development of the wider insular style . Much of the finest later work has not survived , but there are a few key examples , particularly of work commissioned in the Netherlands . Scotland had a musical tradition , with secular music composed and performed by bards and from the thirteenth century , church music increasingly influenced by continental and English forms . 
 = = Political history = = 
 = = = Early Middle Ages = = = 
 = = = = Minor kingdoms = = = = 
 In the centuries after the departure of the Romans from Britain , four major circles of influence emerged within the borders of what is now Scotland . In the east were the Picts , whose kingdoms eventually stretched from the river Forth to Shetland . The first identifiable king to have exerted a superior and wide @-@ ranging authority , was Bridei mac Maelchon ( r. c . 550 – 84 ) , whose power was based in the Kingdom of <unk> and his base was at the fort of Craig Phadrig near modern Inverness . After his death leadership seems to have shifted to the Fortriu , whose lands were centred on Strathearn and Menteith and who raided along the eastern coast into modern England . Christian missionaries from Iona appear to have begun the conversion of the Picts to Christianity from 563 . 
 In the west were the Gaelic ( Goidelic ) -speaking people of Dál Riata with their royal fortress at Dunadd in Argyll , with close links with the island of Ireland , from which they brought with them the name Scots . In 563 a mission from Ireland under St. Columba founded the monastery of Iona off the west coast of Scotland and probably began the conversion of the region to Christianity . The kingdom reached its height under Áedán mac Gabráin ( r . 574 – 608 ) , but its expansion was checked at the Battle of Degsastan in 603 by Æthelfrith of Northumbria . 
 In the south was the British ( Brythonic ) Kingdom of Strathclyde , descendants of the peoples of the Roman influenced kingdoms of " The Old North " , often named Alt Clut , the Brythonic name for their capital at Dumbarton Rock . In 642 , they defeated the men of Dál Riata , but the kingdom suffered a number of attacks from the Picts , and later their Northumbrian allies , between 744 and 756 . After this , little is recorded until Alt Clut was burnt and probably destroyed in 780 , although by whom and what in what circumstances is not known . 
 Finally , there were the English or " Angles " , Germanic invaders who had overrun much of southern Britain and held the Kingdom of Bernicia , in the south @-@ east . The first English king in the historical record is Ida , who is said to have obtained the throne and the kingdom about 547 . Ida 's grandson , Æthelfrith , united his kingdom with Deira to the south to form Northumbria around the year 604 . There were changes of dynasty , and the kingdom was divided , but it was re @-@ united under Æthelfrith 's son Oswald ( r . 634 – 42 ) , who had converted to Christianity while in exile in Dál Riata and looked to Iona for missionaries to help convert his kingdom . 
 = = = = Origins of the Kingdom of Alba = = = = 
 This situation was transformed in AD 793 when ferocious Viking raids began on monasteries like Iona and Lindisfarne , creating fear and confusion across the kingdoms of North Britain . Orkney , Shetland and the Western Isles eventually fell to the Norsemen . The King of Fortriu , Eógan mac Óengusa , and the King of Dál Riata Áed mac Boanta , were among the dead in a major defeat at the hands of the Vikings in 839 . A mixture of Viking and Gaelic Irish settlement into south @-@ west Scotland produced the Gall @-@ Gaidel , the Norse Irish , from which the region gets the modern name Galloway . Sometime in the ninth century the beleaguered Kingdom of Dál Riata lost the Hebrides to the Vikings , when Ketil Flatnose is said to have founded the Kingdom of the Isles . 
 These threats may have speeded a long term process of gaelicisation of the Pictish kingdoms , which adopted Gaelic language and customs . There was also a merger of the Gaelic and Pictish crowns , although historians debate whether it was a Pictish takeover of Dál Riata , or the other way around . This culminated in the rise of Cínaed mac Ailpín ( Kenneth MacAlpin ) in the 840s , which brought to power the House of Alpin . In AD 867 the Vikings seized Northumbria , forming the Kingdom of York ; three years later they stormed the Britons ' fortress of Dumbarton and subsequently conquered much of England except for a reduced Kingdom of Wessex , leaving the new combined Pictish and Gaelic kingdom almost encircled . When he died as king of the combined kingdom in 900 , Domnall II ( Donald II ) was the first man to be called rí Alban ( i.e. King of Alba ) . The term Scotia would be increasingly be used to describe the kingdom between North of the Forth and Clyde and eventually the entire area controlled by its kings would be referred to as Scotland . 
 = = = High Middle Ages = = = 
 = = = = Gaelic kings : Constantine II to Alexander I = = = = 
 The long reign ( 900 – 942 / 3 ) of Causantín ( Constantine II ) is often regarded as the key to formation of the Kingdom of Alba . He was later credited with bringing Scottish Christianity into conformity with the Catholic Church . After fighting many battles , his defeat at Brunanburh was followed by his retirement as a Culdee monk at St. Andrews . The period between the accession of his successor Máel Coluim I ( Malcolm I ) and Máel Coluim mac Cináeda ( Malcolm II ) was marked by good relations with the Wessex rulers of England , intense internal dynastic disunity and relatively successful expansionary policies . In 945 , Máel Coluim I annexed Strathclyde , where the kings of Alba had probably exercised some authority since the later ninth century , as part of an agreement with King Edmund of England . This event was offset by loss of control in Moray . The reign of King Donnchad I ( Duncan I ) from 1034 was marred by failed military adventures , and he was defeated and killed by MacBeth , the Mormaer of Moray , who became king in 1040 . MacBeth ruled for 17 years before he was overthrown by Máel Coluim , the son of Donnchad , who some months later defeated MacBeth 's step @-@ son and successor Lulach to become king Máel Coluim III ( Malcolm III ) . 
 It was Máel Coluim III , who acquired the nickname " Canmore " ( Cenn Mór , " Great Chief " ) , which he passed to his successors and who did most to create the Dunkeld dynasty that ruled Scotland for the following two centuries . Particularly important was his second marriage to the Anglo @-@ Hungarian princess Margaret . This marriage , and raids on northern England , prompted William the Conqueror to invade and Máel Coluim submitted to his authority , opening up Scotland to later claims of sovereignty by English kings . When Malcolm died in 1093 , his brother Domnall III ( Donald III ) succeeded him . However , William II of England backed Máel Coluim 's son by his first marriage , Donnchad , as a pretender to the throne and he seized power . His murder within a few months saw Domnall restored with one of Máel Coluim sons by his second marriage , Edmund , as his heir . The two ruled Scotland until two of Edmund 's younger brothers returned from exile in England , again with English military backing . Victorious , Edgar , the oldest of the three , became king in 1097 . Shortly afterwards Edgar and the King of Norway , Magnus Bare Legs concluded a treaty recognising Norwegian authority over the Western Isles . In practice Norse control of the Isles was loose , with local chiefs enjoying a high degree of independence . He was succeeded by his brother Alexander , who reigned 1107 – 24 . 
 = = = = Scoto @-@ Norman kings : David I to Alexander III = = = = 
 When Alexander died in 1124 , the crown passed to Margaret 's fourth son David I , who had spent most of his life as an English baron . His reign saw what has been characterised as a " Davidian Revolution " , by which native institutions and personnel were replaced by English and French ones , underpinning the development of later Medieval Scotland . Members of the Anglo @-@ Norman nobility took up places in the Scottish aristocracy and he introduced a system of feudal land tenure , which produced knight service , castles and an available body of heavily armed body of cavalry . He created an Anglo @-@ Norman style of court , introduced the office of <unk> to oversee justice , and local offices of sheriffs to administer localities . He established the first royal burghs in Scotland , granting rights to particular settlements , which led to the development of the first true Scottish towns and helped facilitate economic development as did the introduction of the first recorded Scottish coinage . He continued a process begun by his mother and brothers , of helping to establish foundations that brought the reformed monasticism based on that at Cluny . He also played a part in the organisation of diocese on lines closer to those in the rest of Western Europe . 
 These reforms were pursued under his successors and grandchildren Malcolm IV of Scotland and William I , with the crown now passing down the main line of descent through primogeniture , leading to the first of a series of minorities . The benefits of greater authority were reaped by William 's son Alexander II and his son Alexander III , who pursued a policy of peace with England to expand their authority in the Highlands and Islands . By the reign of Alexander III , the Scots were in a position to annexe the remainder of the western seaboard , which they did following Haakon Haakonarson 's ill @-@ fated invasion and the stalemate of the Battle of Largs with the Treaty of Perth in 1266 . 
 = = = Late Middle Ages = = = 
 = = = = Wars of Independence : Margaret to David II = = = = 
 The death of King Alexander III in 1286 , and then of his granddaughter and heir Margaret , Maid of Norway in 1290 , left 14 rivals for succession . To prevent civil war the Scottish magnates asked Edward I of England to arbitrate , for which he extracted legal recognition that the realm of Scotland was held as a feudal dependency to the throne of England before choosing John Balliol , the man with the strongest claim , who became king in 1292 . Robert Bruce , 5th Lord of Annandale , the next strongest claimant , accepted this outcome with reluctance . Over the next few years Edward I used the concessions he had gained to systematically undermine both the authority of King John and the independence of Scotland . In 1295 John , on the urgings of his chief councillors , entered into an alliance with France , known as the Auld Alliance . In 1296 Edward invaded Scotland , deposing King John . The following year William Wallace and Andrew de Moray raised forces to resist the occupation and under their joint leadership an English army was defeated at the Battle of Stirling Bridge . For a short time Wallace ruled Scotland in the name of John Balliol as guardian of the realm . Edward came north in person and defeated Wallace at the Battle of Falkirk . The English barons refuted the French @-@ inspired papal claim to Scottish overlordship in the Barons ' Letter , 1301 , claiming it rather as long possessed by English kings . Wallace escaped but probably resigned as Guardian of Scotland . In 1305 he fell into the hands of the English , who executed him for treason despite the fact that he believed he owed no allegiance to England . 
 Rivals John Comyn and Robert the Bruce , grandson of the claimant , were appointed as joint guardians in his place . On 10 February 1306 , Bruce participated in the murder of Comyn , at Greyfriars Kirk in Dumfries . Less than seven weeks later , on 25 March , Bruce was crowned as king . However , Edward 's forces overran the country after defeating Bruce 's small army at the Battle of Methven . Despite the excommunication of Bruce and his followers by Pope Clement V , his support slowly strengthened ; and by 1314 with the help of leading nobles such as Sir James Douglas and Thomas Randolph only the castles at Bothwell and Stirling remained under English control . Edward I had died in 1307 . His heir Edward II moved an army north to break the siege of Stirling Castle and reassert control . Robert defeated that army at the Battle of Bannockburn in 1314 , securing de facto independence . In 1320 the Declaration of Arbroath , a remonstrance to the pope from the nobles of Scotland , helped convince Pope John XXII to overturn the earlier excommunication and nullify the various acts of submission by Scottish kings to English ones so that Scotland 's sovereignty could be recognised by the major European dynasties . The declaration has also been seen as one of the most important documents in the development of a Scottish national identity . 
 In 1328 , Edward III signed the Treaty of Northampton acknowledging Scottish independence under the rule of Robert the Bruce . However , four years after Robert 's death in 1329 , England once more invaded on the pretext of restoring Edward Balliol , son of John Balliol , to the Scottish throne , thus starting the Second War of Independence . Despite victories at Dupplin Moor and Halidon Hill , in the face of tough Scottish resistance led by Sir Andrew Murray , the son of Wallace 's comrade in arms , successive attempts to secure Balliol on the throne failed . Edward III lost interest in the fate of his protege after the outbreak of the Hundred Years ' War with France . In 1341 David II , King Robert 's son and heir , was able to return from temporary exile in France . Balliol finally resigned his claim to the throne to Edward in 1356 , before retiring to Yorkshire , where he died in 1364 . 
 = = = = The Stewarts : Robert II to James IV = = = = 
 After David II 's death , Robert II , the first of the Stewart kings , came to the throne in 1371 . He was followed in 1390 by his ailing son John , who took the regnal name Robert III . During Robert III 's reign ( 1390 – 1406 ) , actual power rested largely in the hands of his brother , Robert Stewart , Duke of Albany . After the suspicious death ( possibly on the orders of the Duke of Albany ) of his elder son , David , Duke of Rothesay in 1402 , Robert , fearful for the safety of his younger son , the future James I , sent him to France in 1406 . However , the English captured him en route and he spent the next 18 years as a prisoner held for ransom . As a result , after the death of Robert III , regents ruled Scotland : first , the Duke of Albany ; and later his son Murdoch . 
 When Scotland finally paid the ransom in 1424 , James , aged 32 , returned with his English bride determined to assert this authority . Several members of the Albany family were executed , and he succeeded in centralising control in the hands of the crown , but at the cost of increasingly unpopularity and he was assassinated in 1437 . His son James II when he came of age in 1449 , continued his father 's policy of weakening the great noble families , most notably taking on the powerful Black Douglas family that had come to prominence at the time of Robert I. His attempt to take Roxburgh from the English in 1460 succeeded , but at the cost of his life as he was killed by an exploding artillery piece . 
 His young son came to the throne as James III , resulting in another minority , with Robert , Lord Boyd emerging as the most important figure . In 1468 James married Margaret of Denmark , receiving the Orkney and the Shetland Islands in payment of her dowry . In 1469 the King asserted his control , executing members of the Boyd family and his brothers , Alexander , Duke of Albany and John , Earl of Mar , resulting in Albany leading an English backed invasion and becoming effective ruler . The English retreated , having taken Berwick for the last time in 1482 , and James was able to regain power . However , the King managed to alienate the barons , former supporters , his wife and his son James . He was defeated at the Battle of <unk> and killed in 1488 . 
 His successor James IV successfully ended the quasi @-@ independent rule of the Lord of the Isles , bringing the Western Isles under effective Royal control for the first time . In 1503 , he married Margaret Tudor , daughter of Henry VII of England , thus laying the foundation for the seventeenth century Union of the Crowns . However , in 1512 the Auld Alliance was renewed and under its terms , when the French were attacked by the English under Henry VIII the next year , James IV invaded England in support . The invasion was stopped decisively at the Battle of Flodden during which the King , many of his nobles , and a large number of ordinary troops were killed . Once again Scotland 's government lay in the hands of regents in the name of the infant James V. 
 = = Government = = 
 Kingship was the major form of political organisation in the Early Middle Ages , with competing minor kingdoms and fluid relationships of over and under kingdoms . The primary function of these kings was as war leaders , but there were also ritual elements to kingship , evident in ceremonies of <unk> unification of the Scots and Picts from the tenth century that produced the Kingdom of Alba , retained some of these ritual aspects in the coronation at Scone . While the Scottish monarchy remained a largely itinerant institution , Scone remained one of its most important locations , with Royal castles at Stirling and Perth becoming significant in the later Middle Ages before Edinburgh developed as a capital in the second half of the fifteenth century . The Scottish crown grew in prestige throughout the era and adopted the conventional offices of Western European courts and later elements of their ritual and grandeur . 
 In the early period the kings of the Scots depended on the great lords of the mormaers ( later earls ) and <unk> ( later thanes ) , but from the reign of David I sheriffdoms were introduced , which allowed more direct control and gradually limited the power of the major lordships . While knowledge of early systems of law is limited , justice can be seen as developing from the twelfth century onwards with local sheriff , burgh , manorial and ecclesiastical courts and offices of the <unk> to oversee administration . The Scots common law began to develop in this period and there were attempts to <unk> and codify the law and the beginnings of an educated professional body of lawyers . In the Late Middle Ages major institutions of government , including the privy council and parliament developed . The council emerged as a full @-@ time body in the fifteenth century , increasingly dominated by laymen and critical to the administration of justice . Parliament also emerged as a major legal institution , gaining an oversight of taxation and policy . By the end of the era it was sitting almost every year , partly because of the frequent minorities and regencies of the period , which may have prevented it from being sidelined by the monarchy . 
 = = Warfare = = 
 In the Early Middle Ages , war on land was characterised by the use of small war @-@ bands of household troops often engaging in raids and low level warfare . The arrival of the Vikings brought a new scale of naval warfare , with rapid movement based around the Viking longship . The birlinn , which developed form the longship , became a major factor in warfare in the Highlands and Islands . By the High Middle Ages , the kings of Scotland could command forces of tens of thousands of men for short periods as part of the " common army " , mainly of poorly armoured spear and bowmen . After the introduction of feudalism to Scotland , these forces were augmented by small numbers of mounted and heavily armoured knights . Feudalism also introduced castles into the country , originally simple wooden motte @-@ and @-@ bailey constructions , but these were replaced in the thirteenth century with more formidable stone " enceinte " castles , with high encircling walls . In the thirteenth century the threat of Scandinavian naval power subsided and the kings of Scotland were able to use naval forces to help subdue the Highlands and Islands . 
 Scottish field armies rarely managed to stand up to the usually larger and more professional armies produced by England , but they were used to good effect by Robert I at Bannockburn in 1314 to secure Scottish independence . He also made use of naval power to support his forces and began to develop a royal Scottish naval force . Under the Stewart kings these forces were further augmented by specialist troops , particularly men @-@ at @-@ arms and archers , hired by bonds of manrent , similar to English indentures of the same period . New " livery and maintenance " castles were built to house these troops and castles began to be adapted to accommodate gunpowder weapons . The Stewarts also adopted major innovations in continental warfare , such as longer pikes and the extensive use of artillery , and they built up a formidable navy . However , in the early fifteenth century one of the best armed and largest Scottish armies ever assembled still met with defeat at the hands of an English army at the Battle of Flodden in 1513 , which saw the destruction of a large number of ordinary troops , a large section of the nobility and the king , James IV . 
 = = Religion = = 
 Christianity was probably introduced to what is now lowland Scotland from Roman soldiers stationed in the north of the province of Britannia . It is presumed to have survived among the Brythonic enclaves in the south of modern Scotland , but retreated as the pagan Anglo @-@ Saxons advanced . Scotland was largely converted by Irish @-@ Scots missions associated with figures such as St Columba from the fifth to the seventh centuries . These missions tended to found monastic institutions and collegiate churches that served large areas . Partly as a result of these factors , some scholars have identified a distinctive form of Celtic Christianity , in which abbots were more significant than bishops , attitudes to clerical celibacy were more relaxed and there was some significant differences in practice with Roman Christianity , particularly the form of tonsure and the method of calculating Easter , although most of these issues had been resolved by the mid @-@ seventh century . After the reconversion of Scandinavian Scotland from the tenth century , Christianity under papal authority was the dominant religion of the kingdom . 
 In the Norman period the Scottish church underwent a series of reforms and transformations . With royal and lay patronage , a clearer parochial structure based around local churches was developed . Large numbers of new foundations , which followed continental forms of reformed monasticism , began to predominate and the Scottish church established its independence from England , developed a clearer diocesan structure , becoming a " special daughter of the see of Rome " , but lacking leadership in the form of archbishops . In the Late Middle Ages the problems of schism in the Catholic Church allowed the Scottish Crown to gain greater influence over senior appointments and two archbishoprics had been established by the end of the fifteenth century . While some historians have discerned a decline of monasticism in the Late Middle Ages , the mendicant orders of friars grew , particularly in the expanding burghs , to meet the spiritual needs of the population . New saints and cults of devotion also proliferated . Despite problems over the number and quality of clergy after the Black Death in the fourteenth century , and some evidence of heresy in this period , the church in Scotland remained relatively stable before the Reformation in the sixteenth century . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Modern Scotland is half the size England and Wales in area , but with its many inlets , islands and inland lochs , it has roughly the same amount of coastline at 4 @,@ 000 miles . Only a fifth of Scotland is less than 60 metres above sea level . Its east Atlantic position means that it has very heavy rainfall : today about 700 cm per year in the east and over 1 @,@ 000 cm in the west . This encouraged the spread of blanket peat bog , the acidity of which , combined with high level of wind and salt spray , made most of the islands treeless . The existence of hills , mountains , quicksands and marshes made internal communication and conquest extremely difficult and may have contributed to the fragmented nature of political power . 
 The defining factor in the geography of Scotland is the distinction between the Highlands and Islands in the north and west and the Lowlands in the south and east . The highlands are further divided into the Northwest Highlands and the Grampian Mountains by the fault line of the Great Glen . The lowlands are divided into the fertile belt of the Central Lowlands and the higher terrain of the Southern Uplands , which included the Cheviot hills , over which the border with England came to run by the end of the period . Some of these were further divided by mountains , major rivers and marshes . The Central Lowland belt averages about 50 miles in width and , because it contains most of the good quality agricultural land and has easier communications , could support most of the urbanisation and elements of conventional Medieval government . However , the Southern Uplands , and particularly the Highlands were economically less productive and much more difficult to govern . This provided Scotland with a form of protection , as minor English incursions had to cross the difficult southern uplands and the two major attempts at conquest by the English , under Edward I and then Edward III , were unable to penetrate the highlands , from which area potential resistance could reconquer the Lowlands . However , it also made those areas problematic to govern for Scottish kings and much of the political history of the era after the wars of independence circulated around attempts to resolve problems of entrenched localism in these regions . 
 Until the thirteenth century the borders with England were very fluid , with Northumbria being annexed to Scotland by David I , but lost under his grandson and successor Malcolm IV in 1157 . By the late thirteenth century when the Treaty of York ( 1237 ) and Treaty of Perth ( 1266 ) had fixed the boundaries with the Kingdom of the Scots with England and Norway respectively , its borders were close to the modern boundaries . The Isle of Man fell under English control in the fourteenth century , despite several attempts to restore Scottish authority . The English were able to annexe a large slice of the Lowlands under Edward III , but these losses were gradually regained , particularly while England was preoccupied with the Wars of the Roses ( 1455 – 85 ) . The dowry of the Orkney and Shetland Islands in 1468 was the last great land acquisition for the kingdom . However , in 1482 Berwick , a border fortress and the largest port in Medieval Scotland , fell to the English once again , for what was to be the final change of hands . 
 = = Economy and society = = 
 = = = Economy = = = 
 Having between a fifth or sixth of the arable or good pastoral land and roughly the same amount of coastline as England and Wales , marginal pastoral agriculture and fishing were two of the most important aspects of the Medieval Scottish economy . With poor communications , in the Early Middle Ages most settlements needed to achieve a degree of self @-@ sufficiency in agriculture . Most farms were based around a family unit and used an infield and outfield system . Arable farming grew in the High Middle Ages and agriculture entered a period of relative boom between the thirteenth century and late fifteenth century . 
 Unlike England , Scotland had no towns dating from Roman occupation . From the twelfth century there are records of burghs , chartered towns , which became major centres of crafts and <unk> and there is evidence of 55 burghs by 1296 . There are also Scottish coins , although English coinage probably remained more significant in trade and until the end of the period barter was probably the most common form of exchange . Nevertheless , craft and industry remained relatively undeveloped before the end of the Middle Ages and , although there were extensive trading networks based in Scotland , while the Scots exported largely raw materials , they imported increasing quantities of luxury goods , resulting in a bullion shortage and perhaps helping to create a financial crisis in the fifteenth century . 
 = = = Demography = = = 
 There are almost no written sources from which to re @-@ construct the demography of early Medieval Scotland . Estimates have been made of a population of 10 @,@ 000 inhabitants in Dál Riata and 80 – 100 @,@ 000 for Pictland . It is likely that the 5th and 6th centuries saw higher mortality rates due to the appearance of bubonic plague , which may have reduced net population . The examination of burial sites for this period like that at Hallowhill , St Andrews indicate a life expectancy of only 26 @-@ 9 . The known conditions have been taken to suggest it was a high fertility , high mortality society , similar to many developing countries in the modern world , with a relatively young demographic profile , and perhaps early childbearing , and large numbers of children for women . This would have meant that there were a relatively small proportion of available workers to the number of mouths to feed . This have made it difficult to produce a surplus that would allow demographic growth and more complex societies to develop . From the formation of the Kingdom of Alba in the tenth century , to before the Black Death reached the country in 1349 , estimates based on the amount of farmable land , suggest that population may have grown from half a million to a million . Although there is no reliable documentation on the impact of the plague , there are many anecdotal references to abandoned land in the following decades . If the pattern followed that in England , then the population may have fallen to as low as half a million by the end of the fifteenth century . Compared with the situation after the redistribution of population in the later clearances and the industrial revolution , these numbers would have been relatively evenly spread over the kingdom , with roughly half living north of the Tay . Perhaps ten per cent of the population lived in one of many burghs that grew up in the later Medieval period , mainly in the east and south . It has been suggested that they would have had a mean population of about 2 @,@ 000 , but many would be much smaller than 1 @,@ 000 and the largest , Edinburgh , probably had a population of over 10 @,@ 000 by the end of the era . 
 = = = Social structure = = = 
 The organisation of society is obscure in the early part of the period , for which there are few documentary sources . Kinship probably provided the primary unit of organisation and society was divided between a small aristocracy , whose rationale was based around warfare , a wider group of freemen , who had the right to bear arms and were represented in law codes , above a relatively large body of slaves , who may have lived beside and become clients of their owners . By the thirteenth century there are have sources that allow greater stratification in society to be seen , with layers including the king and a small elite of mormaers above lesser ranks of freemen and what was probably a large group of serfs , particularly in central Scotland . In this period the feudalism introduced under David I meant that baronial lordships began to overlay this system , the English terms earl and thane became widespread . Below the noble ranks were husbandmen with small farms and growing numbers of cottars and <unk> with more modest landholdings . 
 The combination of agnatic kinship and feudal obligations has been seen as creating the system of clans in the Highlands in this era . Scottish society adopted theories of the three estates to describe its society and English terminology to differentiate ranks . Serfdom disappeared from the records in the fourteenth century and new social groups of labourers , craftsmen and merchants , became important in the developing burghs . This led to increasing social tensions in urban society , but , in contrast to England and France , there was a lack of major unrest in Scottish rural society , where there was relatively little economic change . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Language and culture = = = 
 Modern linguists divide Celtic languages into two major groups , the P @-@ Celtic , from which the Brythonic languages : Welsh , Breton , Cornish and Cumbric derive , and the Q @-@ Celtic , from which come the Goidelic languages : Irish , Manx and Gaelic . The Pictish language remains enigmatic , since the Picts had no written script of their own and all that survives are place names and some isolated inscriptions in Irish ogham script . Most modern linguists accept that , although the nature and unity of Pictish language is unclear , it belonged to the former group . Historical sources , as well as place name evidence , indicate the ways in which the Pictish language in the north and Cumbric languages in the south were overlaid and replaced by Gaelic , Old English and later Norse in this period . By the High Middle Ages the majority of people within Scotland spoke the Gaelic language , then simply called Scottish , or in Latin , lingua Scotica . The Kingdom of Alba was overwhelmingly an oral society dominated by Gaelic culture . Our fuller sources for Ireland of the same period suggest that there would have been filidh , who acted as poets , musicians and historians , often attached to the court of a lord or king , and passed on their knowledge and culture in Gaelic to the next generation . 
 In the Northern Isles the Norse language brought by Scandinavian occupiers and settlers evolved into the local Norn , which lingered until the end of the eighteenth century and Norse may also have survived as a spoken language until the sixteenth century in the Outer Hebrides . French , Flemish and particularly English became the main language of Scottish burghs , most of which were located in the south and east , an area to which Anglian settlers had already brought a form of Old English . In the later part of the twelfth century , the writer Adam of Dryburgh described lowland Lothian as " the Land of the English in the Kingdom of the Scots " . At least from the accession of David I , Gaelic ceased to be the main language of the royal court and was probably replaced by French , as evidenced by reports from contemporary chronicles , literature and translations of administrative documents into the French language . After this " de @-@ <unk> " of the Scottish court , a less highly regarded order of bards took over the functions of the filidh and they would continue to act in a similar role in the Highlands and Islands into the eighteenth century . They often trained in bardic schools , of which a few , like the one run by the MacMhuirich dynasty , who were bards to the Lord of the Isles , existed in Scotland and a larger number in Ireland , until they were suppressed from the seventeenth century . Members of bardic schools were trained in the complex rules and forms of Gaelic poetry . Much of their work was never written down and what survives was only recorded from the sixteenth century . 
 In the late Middle Ages , Middle Scots , often simply called English , became the dominant language of the country . It was derived largely from Old English , with the addition of elements from Gaelic and French . Although resembling the language spoken in northern England , it became a distinct dialect from the late fourteenth century onwards . It began to be adopted by the ruling elite as they gradually abandoned French . By the fifteenth century it was the language of government , with acts of parliament , council records and treasurer 's accounts almost all using it from the reign of James I onwards . As a result , Gaelic , once dominant north of the Tay , began a steady decline . Lowland writers began to treat Gaelic as a second class , rustic and even amusing language , helping to frame attitudes towards the highlands and to create a cultural gulf with the lowlands . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 The establishment of Christianity brought Latin to Scotland as a scholarly and written language . Monasteries served as major repositories of knowledge and education , often running schools and providing a small educated elite , who were essential to create and read documents in a largely illiterate society . In the High Middle Ages new sources of education arose , with song and grammar schools . These were usually attached to cathedrals or a collegiate church and were most common in the developing burghs . By the end of the Middle Ages grammar schools could be found in all the main burghs and some small towns . Early examples including the High School of Glasgow in 1124 and the High School of Dundee in 1239 . There were also petty schools , more common in rural areas and providing an elementary education . Some monasteries , like the Cistercian abbey at Kinloss , opened their doors to a wider range of students . The number and size of these schools seems to have expanded rapidly from the 1380s . They were almost exclusively aimed at boys , but by the end of the fifteenth century , Edinburgh also had schools for girls , sometimes described as " sewing schools " , and probably taught by lay women or nuns . There was also the development of private tuition in the families of lords and wealthy burghers . The growing emphasis on education cumulated with the passing of the Education Act 1496 , which decreed that all sons of barons and freeholders of substance should attend grammar schools to learn " perfyct Latyne " . All this resulted in an increase in literacy , but which was largely concentrated among a male and wealthy elite , with perhaps 60 per cent of the nobility being literate by the end of the period . 
 Until the fifteenth century , those who wished to attend university had to travel to England or the continent , and just over a 1 @,@ 000 have been identified as doing so between the twelfth century and 1410 . Among these the most important intellectual figure was John Duns Scotus , who studied at Oxford , Cambridge and Paris and probably died at Cologne in 1308 , becoming a major influence on late Medieval religious thought . After the outbreak of the Wars of Independence , with occasional exceptions under safe conduct , English universities were closed to Scots and continental universities became more significant . Some Scottish scholars became teachers in continental universities . At Paris this included John De Rate and Walter Wardlaw in the 1340s and 1350s , William de Tredbrum in the 1380s and Laurence de Lindores in the early 1500s . This situation was transformed by the founding of the University of St Andrews in 1413 , the University of Glasgow in 1450 and the University of Aberdeen in 1495 . Initially these institutions were designed for the training of clerics , but they would increasingly be used by laymen who would begin to challenge the clerical monopoly of administrative post in the government and law . Those wanting to study for second degrees still needed to go elsewhere and Scottish scholars continued to visit the continent and English universities reopened to Scots in the late fifteenth century . The continued movement to other universities produced a school of Scottish nominalists at Paris in the early sixteenth century , of which John Mair was probably the most important figure . He had probably studied at a Scottish grammar school , then Cambridge , before moving to Paris , where he matriculated in 1493 . By 1497 the humanist and historian Hector Boece , born in Dundee and who had studied at Paris , returned to become the first principal at the new university of Aberdeen . These international contacts helped integrate Scotland into a wider European scholarly world and would be one of the most important ways in which the new ideas of humanism were brought into Scottish intellectual life . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 Much of the earliest Welsh literature was actually composed in or near the country now called Scotland , in the Brythonic speech , from which Welsh would be derived , include The Gododdin and the Battle of Gwen Ystrad . There are also religious works in Gaelic including the Elegy for St Columba by <unk> Forgaill , c . 597 and " In Praise of St Columba " by Beccan mac <unk> of Rum , c . 677 . In Latin they include a " Prayer for Protection " ( attributed to St <unk> ) , c. mid @-@ sixth century and Altus <unk> ( " The High Creator " , attributed to St Columba ) , c . 597 . In Old English there is The Dream of the Rood , from which lines are found on the Ruthwell Cross , making it the only surviving fragment of Northumbrian Old English from early Medieval Scotland . Before the reign of David I , the Scots possessed a flourishing literary elite that produced texts in both Gaelic and Latin , a tradition that survived in the Highlands into the thirteenth century . It is possible that more Middle Irish literature was written in Medieval Scotland than is often thought , but has not survived because the Gaelic literary establishment of eastern Scotland died out before the fourteenth century . In the thirteenth century , French flourished as a literary language , and produced the Roman de Fergus , the earliest piece of non @-@ Celtic vernacular literature to survive from Scotland . 
 The first surviving major text in Early Scots literature is John Barbour 's Brus ( 1375 ) , composed under the patronage of Robert II and telling the story in epic poetry of Robert I 's actions before the English invasion till the end of the war of independence . Much Middle Scots literature was produced by makars , poets with links to the royal court , which included James I ( who wrote The Kingis Quair ) . Many of the makars had a university education and so were also connected with the Kirk . However , Dunbar 's Lament for the Makaris ( <unk> ) provides evidence of a wider tradition of secular writing outside of Court and Kirk , now largely lost . Before the advent of printing in Scotland , writers such as Robert Henryson , William Dunbar , Walter Kennedy and Gavin Douglas have been seen as leading a golden age in Scottish poetry . In the late fifteenth century , Scots prose also began to develop as a genre . Although there are earlier fragments of original Scots prose , such as the Auchinleck Chronicle , the first complete surviving work includes John Ireland 's The Meroure of Wyssdome ( 1490 ) . There were also prose translations of French books of chivalry that survive from the 1450s , including The Book of the Law of Armys and the Order of Knychthode and the treatise Secreta Secetorum , an Arabic work believed to be Aristotle 's advice to Alexander the Great . The landmark work in the reign of James IV was Gavin Douglas 's version of Virgil 's Aeneid , the Eneados , which was the first complete translation of a major classical text in an Anglian language , finished in 1513 , but overshadowed by the disaster at Flodden . 
 = = = Art = = = 
 In the early middles ages , there were distinct material cultures evident in the different linguistic groups , federations and kingdoms within what is now Scotland . Pictish art can be seen in the extensive survival of carved stones , particularly in the north and east of the country , which hold a variety of recurring images and patterns , as at Dunrobin ( Sutherland ) and Aberlemno stones ( Angus ) . It can also be seen in elaborate metal work that largely survives in buried hordes like the St Ninian 's Isle Treasure . Irish @-@ Scots art from the Kingdom of Dál Riata is much more difficult to identify , but may include items like the Hunterston brooch , which with other items like the Monymusk Reliquary , suggest that Dál Riata was one of the places , as a crossroads between cultures , where the Insular style developed . Insular art is the name given to the common style that developed in Britain and Ireland after the conversion of the Picts and the cultural assimilation of Pictish culture into that of the Scots and Angles , and which became highly influential in continental Europe , contributing to the development of Romanesque and Gothic styles . It can be seen in elaborate jewellery , often making extensive use of semi @-@ precious stones , in the heavily carved High crosses found most frequently in the Highlands and Islands , but distributed across the country and particularly in the highly decorated illustrated manuscripts such as the Book of Kells , which may have been begun , or wholly created on Iona . The finest era of the style was brought to an end by the disruption to monastic centres and aristocratic life of the Viking raids in the late eighth century . 
 Scotland adopted the Romanesque in the late twelfth century , retaining and reviving elements of its style after the Gothic had become dominant elsewhere from the thirteenth century . Much of the best Scottish artwork of the High and Late Middle Ages was either religious in nature or realised in metal and woodwork , and has not survived the impact of time and of the Reformation . However , examples of sculpture are extant as part of church architecture , including evidence of elaborate church interiors like the sacrament houses at Deskford and Kinkell and the carvings of the seven deadly sins at Rosslyn Chapel . From the thirteenth century , there are relatively large numbers of monumental effigies like the elaborate Douglas tombs in the town of Douglas . Native craftsmanship can be seen in items like the Bute mazer and the Savernake Horn , and more widely in the large number of high quality seals that survive from the mid thirteenth century onwards . Visual illustration can be seen in the illumination of charters , and occasional survivals like the fifteenth century Doom painting at Guthrie . Surviving copies of individual portraits are relatively crude , but more impressive are the works or artists commissioned from the continent , particularly the Netherlands , including Hugo van Der Goes 's altarpiece for the Trinity College Church in Edinburgh and the Hours of James IV of Scotland . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 Medieval vernacular architecture utilised local building materials , including cruck constructed houses , turf walls and clay , with a heavy reliance on stone . As burghs developed there were more sophisticated houses for the nobles , burgesses and other inhabitants . By the end of the period some were stone built with slate roofs or tiles . Medieval parish church architecture was typically simpler than in England , with many churches remaining simple oblongs , without transepts and aisles , and often without towers . From the eleventh century there were influences from English and continental European designs and grander ecclesiastical buildings were built in the Romanesque style , as can be seen at Dunfermline Abbey and Elgin Cathedral , and later the Gothic style as at Glasgow Cathedral and in the rebuilding of Melrose Abbey . From the early fifteenth century the introduction of Renaissance styles included the selective return of Romanesque forms , as in the nave of Dunkeld Cathedral and in the chapel of Bishop Elphinstone 's Kings College , Aberdeen ( 1500 – 09 ) . Many of the motte and bailey castles introduced into Scotland with feudalism in the twelfth century and the castles " enceinte " , with a high embattled curtain wall that replaced those still in occupation , were slighted during the Wars of Independence . In the late Middle Ages new castles were built , some on a grander scale as " livery and maintenance " castles , to house retained troops . Gunpowder weaponry fundamentally altered the nature of castle architecture , with existing castles being adapted to allow the use of gunpowder weapons by the incorporation of " keyhole " gun ports , platforms to mount guns and walls being adapted to resist bombardment . Ravenscraig , Kirkcaldy , begun about 1460 , is probably the first castle in the British Isles to be built as an artillery fort , incorporating " D @-@ shape " bastions that would better resist cannon fire and on which artillery could be mounted . The largest number of late medieval fortifications in Scotland built by nobles were of the tower house <unk> primarily aimed to provide protection against smaller raiding parties , rather than a major siege . Extensive building and rebuilding of royal palaces in the Renaissance style probably began under James III and accelerated under James IV . Linlithgow was first constructed under James I , under the direction of master of work John de Waltoun and was referred to as a palace , apparently the first use of this term in the country , from 1429 . This was extended under James III and began to correspond to a fashionable quadrangular , corner @-@ towered Italian signorial palace , combining classical symmetry with neo @-@ chivalric imagery . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 In the late twelfth century , Giraldus Cambrensis noted that " in the opinion of many , Scotland not only equals its teacher , Ireland , but indeed greatly outdoes it and excels her in musical skill " . He identified the Scots as using the cithara , tympanum and chorus , although what exactly these instruments were is unclear . Bards probably accompanied their poetry on the harp , and can also be seen in records of the Scottish courts throughout the Medieval period . Scottish church music from the thirteenth century was increasingly influenced by continental developments , with figures like the musical theorist Simon <unk> studying in Paris , before returned to Scotland where he introduced several reforms of church music . Scottish collections of music like the thirteenth century ' Wolfenbüttel 677 ' , which is associated with St Andrews , contain mostly French compositions , but with some distinctive local styles . The captivity of James I in England from 1406 to 1423 , where he earned a reputation as a poet and composer , may have led him to take English and continental styles and musicians back to the Scottish court on his release . In the late fifteenth century a series of Scottish musicians trained in the Netherlands before returning home , including John Broune , Thomas Inglis and John Fety , the last of whom became master of the song school in Aberdeen and then Edinburgh , introducing the new five @-@ fingered organ playing technique . In 1501 James IV refounded the Chapel Royal within Stirling Castle , with a new and enlarged choir and it became the focus of Scottish liturgical music . Burgundian and English influences were probably reinforced when Henry VII 's daughter Margaret Tudor married James IV in 1503 . 
 = = National identity = = 
 In the High Middle Ages the word " Scot " was only used by Scots to describe themselves to foreigners , amongst whom it was the most common word . They called themselves Albanach or simply Gaidel . Both " Scot " and Gaidel were ethnic terms that connected them to the majority of the inhabitants of Ireland . At the beginning of the thirteenth century , the author of De Situ Albanie noted that : " The name <unk> [ Argyll ] means margin of the Scots or Irish , because all Scots and Irish are generally called ' <unk> ' . " Scotland came to possess a unity which transcended Gaelic , French and Germanic ethnic differences and by the end of the period , the Latin , French and English word " Scot " could be used for any subject of the Scottish king . Scotland 's multilingual Scoto @-@ Norman monarchs and mixed Gaelic and Scoto @-@ Norman aristocracy all became part of the " Community of the Realm " , in which ethnic differences were less divisive than in Ireland and Wales . This identity was defined in opposition to English attempts to annexe the country and as a result of social and cultural changes . The resulting antipathy towards England dominated Scottish foreign policy well into the fifteenth century , making it extremely difficult for Scottish kings like James III and James IV to pursue policies of peace towards their southern neighbour . In particular the Declaration of Arbroath asserted the ancient distinctiveness of Scotland in the face of English aggression , arguing that it was the role of the king to defend the independence of the community of Scotland . This document has been seen as the first " nationalist theory of sovereignty " . 
 The adoption of Middle Scots by the aristocracy has been seen as building a shared sense of national solidarity and culture between rulers and ruled , although the fact that north of the Tay Gaelic still dominated may have helped widen the cultural divide between highlands and lowlands . The national literature of Scotland created in the late medieval period employed legend and history in the service of the crown and nationalism , helping to foster a sense of national identity , at least within its elite audience . The epic poetic history of the Brus and Wallace helped outline a narrative of united struggle against the English enemy . Arthurian literature differed from conventional versions of the legend by treating Arthur as a villain and Mordred , the son of the king of the Picts , as a hero . The origin myth of the Scots , systematised by John of Fordun ( c . 1320 @-@ c . 1384 ) , traced their beginnings from the Greek prince <unk> and his Egyptian wife <unk> , allowing them to argue superiority over the English , who claimed their descent from the Trojans , who had been defeated by the Greeks . The image of St. Andrew , martyred while bound to an X @-@ shaped cross , first appeared in the Scotland during the reign of William I and was again depicted on seals used during the late thirteenth century ; including on one particular example used by the Guardians of Scotland , dated 1286 . Use of a simplified symbol associated with Saint Andrew , the saltire , has its origins in the late fourteenth century ; the Parliament of Scotland decreed in 1385 that Scottish soldiers should wear a white Saint Andrew 's Cross on their person , both in front and behind , for the purpose of identification . Use of a blue background for the Saint Andrew 's Cross is said to date from at least the fifteenth century . The earliest reference to the Saint Andrew 's Cross as a flag is to be found in the Vienna Book of Hours , circa 1503 . 
 = Rhys Williams ( Torchwood ) = 
 Rhys Alun Williams , portrayed by Kai Owen , is a fictional character in the BBC television programme Torchwood , a spin @-@ off from the long @-@ running series Doctor Who . The character is introduced in the premiere episode as the co @-@ habiting boyfriend of principal character Gwen Cooper . Initially a recurring character , Rhys ' role is increased after the second series ; actor Kai Owen is given star billing from the show 's third series — a five @-@ part serial subtitled Torchwood : Children of Earth — onwards . The character has gone on to appear in expanded universe material such as the Torchwood novels and audiobooks , comic books and radio plays . 
 Throughout the first series ( 2006 ) , Rhys is initially unaware of Gwen 's vocation as a Torchwood agent , believing her to work in generic special forces . Gwen 's relationship with Rhys languishes while she is unable to communicate fully with him , but in the early part of series two ( 2008 ) he discovers the truth , and from thereon in their relationship is revitalised ; the two enter a marriage based on honesty later in the series . In the third series ( 2009 ) Rhys becomes directly involved in assisting the Torchwood team in lieu of a fourth team member . In the show 's fourth series — a 2011 BBC / Starz co @-@ production — Rhys again finds himself having to assist Torchwood , though he would rather live a domestic life with Gwen and their daughter Anwen . 
 The original intention of the writers had been to kill off Rhys at the end of the first series , but series creator Russell T Davies found it necessary to keep the show grounded through Rhys as Gwen evolved as a character . Producer Richard Stokes stated that " without him , it simply becomes a sci @-@ fi show about sci @-@ fi people , running around and hunting aliens . " Following from the first series the production team decided to make Rhys less of a " sap " whilst continuing to use him as a contrast to Torchwood 's activities and its charismatic leader Jack Harkness . Whilst early response to the character was mixed — the character was parodied as " Barry Backstory " — subsequent reviews praised the character 's larger role in later episodes . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 Rhys is introduced in the first episode of the series ( 2006 ) as the unspectacular boyfriend of police constable Gwen Cooper ( Eve Myles ) . When Gwen takes a new job with the Torchwood Institute 's Cardiff branch as an alien hunter , she is forced to keep it a secret . Over the course of the first series Rhys shows increasing irritation with Gwen 's evasiveness and long hours , and her ease and readiness to lie to him . Unknown to Rhys , Gwen establishes a sexual relationship with Owen Harper ( Burn Gorman ) to help herself deal with her secret double @-@ life . She confesses the affair after it ends in " Combat " but drugs Rhys with an amnesia pill so he will not remember her confession . Rhys is murdered by Bilis Manger ( Murray Melvin ) in " End of Days " , but this event is erased from history after the Torchwood team reset time by opening the space @-@ time rift located in Cardiff . 
 The series two premiere ( 2008 ) establishes that Rhys became engaged to Gwen between the first and second series . After Rhys becomes suspicious of her behaviour and her friendship with her boss Captain Jack ( John Barrowman ) in " Meat " , Gwen reveals to him the truth about her responsibilities with Torchwood . Rhys then becomes involved in a mission to uncover and destroy an alien meat @-@ trading racket , and ends up taking a bullet to protect Gwen 's life . Because she enjoys finally being able to be honest with Rhys , Gwen cannot bring herself to drug him for a second time , and so demands that Jack allow Rhys keep his memories of Torchwood . Rhys and Gwen marry in the episode " Something Borrowed " . Following the wedding , in the episode " Adrift " , Rhys brings up the issue of starting a family with Gwen , though she dismisses the idea , arguing that it would be impossible to have children with her job . During the events of " Fragments " and series finale " Exit Wounds " , Rhys plays a particular role in the team 's campaign against the returned Captain John Hart ( James Marsters ) and the insane Gray ( Lachlan Nieboer ) , helping Gwen rescue the others after they are caught in an exploding building and subsequently working with Gwen 's former colleague Andy Davidson ( Tom Price ) to help keep the attacking alien Weevils out of the police station . 
 Rhys is referenced , but does not appear onscreen , in the Doctor Who crossover episode " The Stolen Earth " ( 2008 ) ; Gwen speaks to him over the phone during a global emergency . Rhys becomes a main character in the third series of Torchwood , a five @-@ part miniseries called Children of Earth airing in 2009 . When aliens called the 456 announce their plans to visit to Earth , the government attempts to assassinate Torchwood to cover up a conspiracy . Rhys becomes a fugitive from the government because of his marriage to Gwen . The pair flee to London via cargo lorry and Rhys is delighted to discover Gwen is pregnant . He is with the Torchwood team when they relocate to a London warehouse and takes a role in their mission , hiding with the recordings showing corruption within Downing Street . In the last episode of the series he returns to Cardiff with Gwen , and helps Gwen do one last favour for her deceased coworker Ianto ( Gareth David @-@ Lloyd ) by helping his niece and nephew evade capture , and with them many other neighbourhood children . The series ' dénouement , set six months later , shows Rhys still at Gwen 's side , awaiting the arrival of their child . 
 Series four , Miracle Day ( 2011 ) , begins by showing Rhys living in seclusion alongside Gwen and their daughter , Anwen . His rural idyll is shattered when CIA agent Rex Matheson ( Mekhi Phifer ) <unk> Jack and Gwen to America — believing them to be connected to a phenomenon where humans can no longer die — whilst forcing Rhys to stay in Wales . With the aid of computer expert Esther Drummond ( Alexa Havins ) , Gwen is able to establish communications with Rhys in the episode " Dead of Night " . Whilst on a mission in Los Angeles , Gwen asks Rhys to remove her father Geraint ( William Thomas ) from a hospital which she believes to be unsafe . Rhys subsequently has Geraint sent to an " overflow camp " , unaware that it contains a facility for burning the severely injured alive , and in " The Categories of Life " and " The Middle Men " has to go undercover to help rescue his father @-@ in @-@ law . After escaping from the facility with Geraint , Rhys is briefly held hostage in an attempt to force Gwen to surrender Jack Harkness , but is rescued by Andy and his team . In " The Gathering " , Rhys figures out the antipodal connection between Buenos Aires and Shanghai , which directs the Torchwood team to their final mission . Because of Rhys ' violent disposition towards murderer @-@ paedophile Oswald Danes ( Bill Pullman ) , Gwen fears that he may enact vigilante justice and so takes the latter to Shanghai to protect her husband . In the series finale , Rhys gains entry to the overflow camp where Geraint has been recaptured in order to sit by his side as " Miracle Day " ends and death is restored . After Esther 's funeral , he is hopeful that Jack will not reform Torchwood . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 Rhys appears in all three Torchwood novels in the first wave published by BBC Books in January 2007 , set between episodes of Torchwood series one . These novels expand on the difficult period in Gwen and Rhys ' relationship — whilst his appearances in Another Life , and Border Princes , are relatively minor , he has a more significant role in Slow Decay , where he unwittingly brings himself into danger by taking an alien diet pill . Reviewer Patrick Holm feels that the success of these novels lies in the fact that they help readers empathise with characters such as Rhys . Rhys makes cameo appearances in Something in the Water ( set between " Kiss Kiss Bang Bang " and " Meat " ) and Trace Memory , and has a significant role in The Twilight Streets , ( released March 2008 ) which depicts an alternate future where Gwen and Rhys start a new Torchwood to make a safe world for their son after the Torchwood Team are destroyed fighting sentient particles known as the dark . Three more Torchwood books were released in October 2008 in which Rhys has an involved role . In Pack Animals Rhys assists Gwen in her investigation and becomes part of a car chase , SkyPoint sees them inadvertently discover an alien presence whilst <unk> and Almost Perfect , the first novel set after " Exit Wounds " , depicts Rhys speed dating undercover . Rhys makes further appearances in later Torchwood novels Bay of the Dead , The House that Jack Built , and Consequences , all set between " Exit Wounds " and Children of Earth . 
 Rhys appeared occasionally in the Torchwood Magazine comic strip during its publication between January 2008 and December 2010 . In part three of the serialised ten part comic Rift War he aids Gwen in her Torchwood duties by helping care for an infant alien left stranded in Cardiff . A scene in Gareth David @-@ Lloyd 's comic " Shrouded " , published in May 2010 , includes a scene set after Children in Earth which shows Gwen cradling her young child ; as Gwen is busy , Rhys is required to team up with Captain John Hart to save the timeline . Non @-@ fiction tie @-@ in The Torchwood Archives gives an " insider 's look " into the Torchwood world , including Gwen 's domestic life with Rhys . The book includes unpublished photographs of Gwen and Rhys used as set dressing in the TV series and also provides some background information on Rhys ' friends and his working life . 
 = = = Audio drama = = = 
 Rhys makes an appearance in the Torchwood radio play " The Dead Line " ( 2009 ) , where he assists Gwen with her investigations into the phone @-@ line induced comas . He also has a central role investigating a mystery in the audio book Ghost Train ( 2011 ) , read by Kai Owen . With Gwen dead and Jack missing Rhys is left alone to figure out the strange goings on involving cargo trains . Rhys also appears in " The Devil and Miss Carew " ( 2011 ) , one of three additional radio plays set between " Exit Wounds " and Children of Earth , which shows his reaction to the death of his elderly Uncle Bryn . In this play Rhys rescues Gwen from a woman under the influence of a malevolent devil like entity . 
 = = Characterisation = = 
 Rhys is a " down to earth trucker " , who functions as Gwen Cooper 's normality base . At the start of the series he believes alien interference to be a result of hallucinations induced by psychotropic drugs in the water supply and that his girlfriend 's job is nothing more unusual than generic " special ops " . Writer Stephen James Walker feels that Rhys " originally didn 't look to have much to him initially but really came into his own as Series One progressed " , attributing this to the " spot @-@ on performance of the perfectly cast Kai Owen . " The original intention of the writers had been for Rhys to die at the end of series one , but Richard Stokes explains that it was overruled by show creator Russell T Davies , who felt that without Rhys , the show 's main link to the real world would be lost . Executive Producer Julie Gardner expands on this by stating that " It 's a show where you 've got to contrast the ordinary everyday with the extraordinary and ( with ) Gwen going home to Rhys and then going to work in an underground secret base ... it 's right to have that balance . " Actor Kai Owen attributes part of his character 's success to his on @-@ screen rapport with actress Eve Myles . 
 After reprisal from death , Davies felt further development was necessary for the character to continue as part of the drama ; one of the first decisions the production team made was that " we can 't make this guy look like a sap any longer . He 's got to be made aware of what 's going on . " The events of the episode " Meat " , in which Rhys learns the real nature of Gwen 's job , are seen by Davies as a " rite of passage " for the couple . Director Colin Teague highlights Rhys ' patience in relation to Gwen noting that " he puts up with an awful lot from his wife to be " . The second series also explores Rhys 's insecurities and jealousies towards series protagonist Captain Jack Harkness , for whom a mutual sexual tension with Gwen was evident in the first series . Both Stephen James Walker and episode writer Catherine Tregenna felt that " the triangle of relationships between Rhys , Gwen and Jack " comprise " the most interesting narrative territory explored in ' Meat ' " . Although actor Kai Owen feels that " Rhys will always have a little bit of a gripe about Jack " , he concedes that " he respects him and he 'll like him for looking after Gwen " . Walker comments favourably on the interaction between Jack and Rhys in " Meat " in both its antagonistic and comedic forms , citing the scene in the truck where Rhys questions Jack as particularly effective . The two function as unusual literary foils for one another , insofar as their relationships with Gwen are concerned . In her critical essay Gwen 's Evil Stepmother : Concerning Gloves and Magic Slippers , Valerie Estelle Frankel compares Rhys to Jack , likening the former to a " sweet , kind handsome prince " and the latter to a " compelling trickster . " Whilst Eve Myles feels that " Jack highlights how ordinary Rhys is " , she states that it is precisely this ordinariness which makes Rhys a benefit to Gwen 's strength of character . 
 The plot of Children of Earth results in Rhys becoming more directly involved with the Torchwood team 's activities , and actor Kai Owen also receives star billing for the first time . Whilst Gwen by the third series has become a more militant character , Rhys retains his everyman status and takes on the role of audience surrogate ; press material describes him as " the ordinary guy in the street " and " the normal person 's eyes and ears " who " says what he thinks about the situations Torchwood find themselves in , bringing the reality back to them " . Paul Collins comments of the significance of Rhys having the first dialogue in the serial , remarking that this is Torchwood 's " determination to establish its domestic credentials before subverting them " . Rhys becomes a reluctant hero ; Kai Owen states that he " would rather not get involved if he had the choice " , but when faced with the life @-@ or @-@ death situations in the serial " he doesn 't run away from it " because the character has " seen so many things " . This , in Owen 's eyes , makes the Rhys seen in Children of Earth a " very brave hero who has grown in stature " . Rhys retains core character status for the fourth series , Torchwood : Miracle Day . Whilst Kai Owen explains that Rhys will always be at the forefront of " Gwen 's troubles or fights or adventures " because of his concern for her , he remains unafraid to tell her when she has become too consumed by her job . Davies links the relationship between Gwen and Rhys in the fourth series to the show 's continued exploration of human sexuality , stating that " open sexuality has to include everything " including " a husband / wife great big crime @-@ fighting team ... happily in love " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Rhys ' incidental role in the series was initially mocked in The Register 's 2006 one @-@ off Torchwood parody Under Torch Wood ( in the style of Dylan Thomas ' Under Milk Wood ) , in which he is described as " Barry Backstory , who is dreaming of future episodes where he gets a bigger part . " However , as the character has been developed on screen and given a bigger role , he has attracted more positive commentary from reviewers . Ben Rawson @-@ Jones of Digital Spy describes his role in the episode " Meat " as " forming a clever contrast with the activities of Torchwood " . He praised the verisimilitude of Rhys ' relationship with Gwen , describing their domestic argument as " a unique spin on the kitchen sink melodrama usually seen in EastEnders " which delivers " a real impact and emotional honesty due to the wonderfully earnest performances from Kai Owen and Eve Myles " . Jack Kibble @-@ White of Den of Geek states that " in the main having Rhys run alongside Captain Jack and the rest worked well " and he cites the character 's wedding to Gwen as a series highlight . TV Squad 's Jason Hughes feels that the character 's marriage to Gwen is " handled in a painfully honest way " and serves as " a true definition of " love " written with subtlety and perfection " . Alan Stanley Blair enjoyed the rapport between Owen and Price ( PC Andy ) in the episode " Exit Wounds " stating , that it " was also an interesting dynamic " and that the two " could potentially carry their own sitcom " , a view corroborated by AfterElton 's Steven Frank . 
 Dan Martin of The Guardian singles out the scene where Gwen and Rhys become stowaways in Children of Earth as " just lovely " and " a credit to both actors , particularly Kai Owen , who has finally made Rhys likable " , whilst IGN writer Asham Haque also feels that Rhys ' " meatier role " provides " some great sequences " for the couple . Rawson @-@ Jones speaks favourably on Owen 's role in the overall ensemble opining that he , along with Barrowman , Myles and David @-@ Lloyd managed to guide the audience through the serial with " panache and verve " . The Chicago Tribune 's Maureen Ryan feels that the initiated Rhys is key to the show , and is a " very enjoyable character " , describing his appeal to government PA Lois Habiba to pay for his and Gwen 's dinner as " priceless " . Speaking of the show 's fourth series premiere , Simon Brew highlights the central returning trio of Barrowman , Myles and Owen as the show 's most engaging actors , and further describes Owen 's performance as mixing " humour with an earnest , and a real sense of drive " . 
 = Willard Libby = 
 Willard Frank Libby ( December 17 , 1908 – September 8 , 1980 ) was an American physical chemist noted for his role in the 1949 development of radiocarbon dating , a process which revolutionized archaeology and palaeontology . For his contributions to the team that developed this process , Libby was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1960 . 
 A 1927 chemistry graduate of the University of California at Berkeley , from which he received his doctorate in 1933 , he studied radioactive elements and developed sensitive Geiger counters to measure weak natural and artificial radioactivity . During World War II he worked in the Manhattan Project 's Substitute Alloy Materials ( SAM ) Laboratories at Columbia University , developing the gaseous diffusion process for uranium enrichment . 
 After the war , Libby accepted professorship at the University of Chicago 's Institute for Nuclear Studies , where he developed the technique for dating organic compounds using carbon @-@ 14 . He also discovered that tritium similarly could be used for dating water , and therefore wine . In 1950 , he became a member of the General Advisory Committee ( GAC ) of the Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) . He was appointed a commissioner in 1954 , becoming its sole scientist . He sided with Edward Teller on pursuing a crash program to develop the hydrogen bomb , participated in the Atoms for Peace program , and defended the administration 's atmospheric nuclear testing . 
 Libby resigned from the AEC in 1959 to become Professor of Chemistry at University of California , Los Angeles ( UCLA ) , a position he held until his retirement in 1976 . In 1962 , he became the Director of the University of California statewide Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics ( <unk> ) . He started the first Environmental Engineering program at UCLA in 1972 , and as a member of the California Air Resources Board , he worked to develop and improve California 's air pollution standards . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Willard Frank Libby was born in Grand Valley , Colorado , on December 17 , 1908 , the son of farmers Ora Edward Libby and his wife Eva May ( née Rivers ) . He had two brothers , Elmer and Raymond , and two sisters , Eva and Evelyn . Libby began his education in a two @-@ room Colorado schoolhouse . When he was five , Libby 's parents moved to Santa Rosa , California . He attended <unk> High School , near Sebastopol , from which he graduated in 1926 . Libby , who grew to be 6 feet 2 inches ( 188 cm ) tall , played tackle on the high school football team . 
 In 1927 he entered the University of California at Berkeley , where he received his B.S. in 1931 , and his Ph.D. in 1933 , writing his doctoral thesis on the " Radioactivity of ordinary elements , especially samarium and neodymium : method of detection " under the supervision of Wendell Mitchell Latimer . Independently of the work of George de Hevesy and Max Pahl , he discovered that the natural long @-@ lived isotopes of samarium primarily decay by emission of alpha particles . 
 Libby was appointed Instructor in the Department of Chemistry at the University of California , in 1933 . He became an assistant professor of Chemistry there in 1938 . He spent the 1930s building sensitive Geiger counters to measure weak natural and artificial radioactivity . In 1940 , Libby married Leonor Hickey , a physical education teacher . They had twin daughters , Janet Eva and Susan Charlotte , who were born in 1945 . He joined Berkeley 's chapter of Alpha Chi Sigma in 1941 . That year he was awarded a Guggenheim Fellowship , and elected to work at Princeton University . 
 = = Manhattan Project = = 
 On December 8 , 1941 , the day after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor brought the United States into World War II , Libby volunteered his services to Nobel Prize laureate Harold Urey . Urey arranged for Libby to be given leave from the University of California and to join him at Columbia University to work on the Manhattan Project , the wartime project to develop atomic bombs , at what became its Substitute Alloy Materials ( SAM ) Laboratories . During his time in the New York City area , Libby was a resident of Leonia , New Jersey . 
 Over the next three years , Libby worked on the gaseous diffusion process for uranium enrichment . An atomic bomb required fissile material , and the fissile uranium @-@ 235 made up only 0 @.@ 7 percent of natural uranium . The SAM Laboratories therefore had to find a way of separating kilograms of it from the more abundant uranium @-@ 238 . Gaseous diffusion worked on the principle that a lighter gas diffuses through a barrier faster than a heavier one at a rate inversely proportional to its molecular weight . But the only known gas containing uranium was the highly corrosive uranium hexafluoride , and a suitable barrier was hard to find . 
 Through 1942 , Libby and his team studied different barriers and the means to protect them from corrosion from the uranium hexafluoride . The most promising type was a barrier made of powdered nickel developed by Edward O. Norris of the <unk> Manufacturing Corporation and Edward Adler from the City College of New York , which became known as the " Norris @-@ Adler " barrier by late 1942 . 
 In addition to developing a suitable barrier , the SAM Laboratories also had to assist in the design of a gaseous separation plant , which became known as K @-@ 25 . Libby helped with the engineers from Kellex to produce a workable design for a pilot plant . Libby conducted a series of tests that indicated that the Norris @-@ Adler barrier would work , and he remained confident that with an all @-@ out effort , the remaining problems with it could be solved . Although doubts remained , construction work began on the K @-@ 25 full @-@ scale production plant in September 1943 . 
 As 1943 gave way to 1944 , many problems remained . Tests began on the machinery at K @-@ 25 in April 1944 without a barrier . Attention turned to a new process developed by Kellex . Finally , in July 1944 , Kellex barriers began to be installed in K @-@ 25 . K @-@ 25 commenced operation in February 1945 , and as cascade after cascade came online , the quality of the product increased . By April 1945 , K @-@ 25 had attained a 1 @.@ 1 % enrichment . Uranium partially enriched in K @-@ 25 was fed into the calutrons at Y @-@ 12 to complete the enrichment process . 
 Construction of the upper stages of the K @-@ 25 plant was cancelled , and Kellex was directed to instead design and build a 540 @-@ stage side feed unit , which became known as K @-@ 27 . The last of K @-@ 25 's 2 @,@ 892 stages commenced operation in August 1945 . On August 5 , K @-@ 25 starting producing feed enriched to 23 percent uranium @-@ 235 . K @-@ 25 and K @-@ 27 achieved their full potential only in the early postwar period , when they eclipsed the other production plants and became the prototypes for a new generation of plants . Enriched uranium was used in the Little Boy bomb employed in the bombing of Hiroshima on August 6 , 1945 . Libby brought home a stack of newspapers and told his wife , " This is what I 've been doing . " 
 = = Radiocarbon dating = = 
 With the war over , Libby accepted an offer from the University of Chicago of a professorship in the Chemistry Department at the new Institute for Nuclear Studies . He returned to his pre @-@ war studies of radioactivity . In 1939 , Serge Korff had discovered that cosmic rays generated neutrons in the upper atmosphere . These interact with nitrogen @-@ 14 in the air to produce carbon @-@ 14 : 
 1n + 14N → 14C + 1p 
 The half @-@ life of carbon @-@ 14 is 5 @,@ 730 ± 40 years . Libby realized that when plants and animals die they cease to ingest fresh carbon @-@ 14 , thereby giving any organic compound a built @-@ in nuclear clock . He published his theory in 1946 , and expanded on it in his monograph Radiocarbon Dating in 1955 . He also developed sensitive radiation detectors that could use the technique . Tests against sequoia with known dates from their tree rings showed radiocarbon dating to be reliable and accurate . The technique revolutionised archaeology , palaeontology and other disciplines that dealt with ancient artefacts . In 1960 , he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry " for his method to use carbon @-@ 14 for age determination in archaeology , geology , geophysics , and other branches of science " . He also discovered that tritium similarly could be used for dating water , and therefore wine . 
 = = Atomic Energy Commission = = 
 Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) Chairman Gordon Dean appointed Libby to its influential General Advisory Committee ( GAC ) in 1950 . In 1954 , he was appointed an AEC commissioner by President Dwight D. Eisenhower on the recommendation of Dean 's successor , Lewis Strauss . Libby and his family moved from Chicago to Washington , D.C. He brought with him a truckload of scientific equipment , which he used to establish a laboratory at the Carnegie Institution there to continue his studies of amino acids . <unk> conservative politically , he was one of the few scientists who sided with Edward Teller rather than Robert Oppenheimer during the debate on whether it was wise to pursue a crash program to develop the hydrogen bomb . As a commissioner , Libby played an important role in promoting Eisenhower 's Atoms for Peace program , and was part of the United States delegation at the Geneva Conferences on Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy in 1955 and 1958 . 
 As the only scientist among the five AEC commissioners , it fell to Libby to defend the Eisenhower administration 's stance on atmospheric nuclear testing . He argued that the dangers of radiation from nuclear tests were less than that from chest X @-@ rays , and therefore less important than the risk of having an inadequate nuclear arsenal , but his arguments failed to convince the scientific community or reassure the public . In January 1956 , he publicly revealed the existence of Project Sunshine , a series of research studies to ascertain the impact of radioactive fallout on the world 's population that he had initiated in 1953 while serving on the GAC . By 1958 , even Libby and Teller were supporting limits on atmospheric nuclear testing . 
 = = UCLA = = 
 Libby resigned from the AEC in 1959 , he became Professor of Chemistry at University of California , Los Angeles ( UCLA ) , a position he held until his retirement in 1976 . He taught honors freshman chemistry . In 1962 , he became the Director of the University of California statewide Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics ( <unk> ) , a position he also held until 1976 . His time as director encompassed the Apollo space program and the lunar landings . In 1966 he divorced Leonor and married Leona Woods Marshall , a distinguished nuclear physicist who was one of the original builders of Chicago Pile @-@ 1 , the world 's first nuclear reactor . She joined him at UCLA as a professor of environmental engineering in 1973 . Through this second marriage he acquired two stepsons , the children of her first marriage . He started the first Environmental Engineering program at UCLA in 1972 . As a member of the California Air Resources Board , he worked to develop and improve California 's air pollution standards . He established a research program to investigate heterogeneous catalysis with the idea of reducing emissions from motor vehicles through more complete fuel combustion . The election of Richard Nixon as president in 1968 generated speculation that Libby might be appointed as Presidential Science Advisor . There was a storm of protest from scientists who felt that Libby was too conservative , and the offer was not made . 
 Although Libby retired and became a professor emeritus in 1976 , he remained professionally active as a member of the National Academy of Sciences , American Academy of Arts and Sciences , and the American Philosophical Society , until his death in 1980 . In addition to the Nobel Prize , he received numerous honours and awards , including Columbia University 's Chandler Medal in 1954 , the Remsen Memorial Lecture Award in 1955 , the Bicentennial Lecture Award from the City College of New York and the Nuclear Applications in Chemistry Award in 1956 , the Franklin Institute 's Elliott Cresson Medal in 1957 , the American Chemical Society 's Willard Gibbs Award in 1958 , the Priestley Medal from Dickinson College and the Albert Einstein Medal in 1959 , the Geological Society of America 's Arthur L. Day Medal in 1961 , the Gold Medal of the American Institute of Chemists in 1970 , and the Lehman Award from the New York Academy of Sciences in 1971 . He was elected a member of the National Academy of Sciences in 1950 . <unk> High School library has a mural of Libby , and a Sebastopol city park and a nearby highway are named in his honor . 
 Libby died at the UCLA Medical Center in Los Angeles on September 8 , 1980 , from a blood clot in his lung complicated by pneumonia . His papers are in the Charles E. Young Research Library at the UCLA . Seven volumes of his papers were edited by Leona and Rainer Berger and published in 1981 . 
 = Clement of Alexandria = 
 Titus Flavius Clemens ( Greek : <unk> ὁ <unk> ; c . 150 – c . 215 ) , known as Clement of Alexandria to distinguish him from the earlier Clement of Rome , was a Christian theologian who taught at the Catechetical School of Alexandria . A convert to Christianity , he was an educated man who was familiar with classical Greek philosophy and literature . As his three major works demonstrate , Clement was influenced by Hellenistic philosophy to a greater extent than any other Christian thinker of his time , and in particular by Plato and the Stoics . His secret works , which exist only in fragments , suggest that he was also familiar with pre @-@ Christian Jewish esotericism and Gnosticism . In one of his works he argued that Greek philosophy had its origin among non @-@ Greeks , claiming that both Plato and Pythagoras were taught by Egyptian scholars . Among his pupils were Origen and Alexander of Jerusalem . 
 Clement is regarded as a Church Father , like Origen . He is venerated as a saint in Coptic Christianity , Ethiopian Christianity and Anglicanism . He was previously revered in the Roman Catholic Church , but his name was removed from the Roman Martyrology in 1586 by Pope Sixtus V on the advice of Baronius . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Neither Clement 's birthdate or birthplace is known with any degree of certainty . It is conjectured that he was born in around 150 . According to Epiphanius Scholasticus , he was born in Athens , but there is also a tradition of an Alexandrian birth . 
 His parents were pagans , and Clement was a convert to Christianity . In the Protrepticus he displays an extensive knowledge of Greek mythology and mystery religions , which could only have arisen from the practice of his family 's religion . 
 Having rejected paganism as a young man due to its perceived moral corruption , he travelled in Greece , Asia Minor , Palestine and Egypt . Clement 's journeys were primarily a religious undertaking . In Greece , he encountered an Ionian theologian , who has been identified as <unk> of Athens ; while in the east , he was taught by an Assyrian , sometimes identified with <unk> , and a Jew , who was possibly Theophilus of Caesarea . 
 In around 180 , Clement reached Alexandria , where he met Pantaenus , who taught at the Catechetical School of Alexandria . Eusebius suggests that Pantaenus was the head of the school , but it is controversial whether the institutions of the school were formalized in this way before the time of Origen . Clement studied under Pantaenus , and was ordained to the priesthood by Pope Julian before 189 . Otherwise , virtually nothing is known of Clement 's life in Alexandria . He may have been married , a conjecture supported by his writings . 
 During the <unk> persecutions of 202 – 203 , Clement left Alexandria . In 211 , Alexander of Jerusalem wrote a letter commending him to the Church of Antioch , which may imply that Clement was living in Cappadocia or Jerusalem at that time . The date and location of his death are unknown . 
 = = Theological works = = 
 = = = Trilogy = = = 
 Three of Clement 's major works have survived in full , and they are collectively referred to as the trilogy : 
 the Protrepticus ( Exhortation ) – written c . 195 . 
 the Paedagogus ( Tutor ) – written c . 198 . 
 the Stromata ( Miscellanies ) – written c . 198 – c . 203 . 
 = = = = Protrepticus = = = = 
 The Protrepticus is , as its title suggests , an exhortation to the pagans of Greece to adopt Christianity , and within it Clement demonstrates his extensive knowledge of pagan mythology and theology . It is chiefly important due to Clement 's exposition of religion as an anthropological phenomenon . After a short philosophical discussion , it opens with a history of Greek religion in seven stages . Clement suggests that at first , men mistakenly believed the Sun , the Moon and other heavenly bodies to be gods . The next development was the worship of the products of agriculture , from which he contends the cults of Demeter and Dionysus arose . Man then paid reverence to revenge , and deified human feelings of love and fear , among others . In the following stage , the poets Hesiod and Homer attempt to enumerate the Gods ; Hesiod 's Theogony giving the number of twelve . Finally , men proclaimed other men , such as Asclepius and Heracles , deities . Discussing idolatry , Clement contends that the objects of primitive religion were unshaped wood and stone , and idols thus arose when such natural items were carved . Following Plato , Clement is critical of all forms of visual art , suggesting that artworks are but illusions and " deadly toys " . 
 Clement criticizes Greek paganism in the Protrepticus on the basis that its deities are both false and poor moral examples , and he attacks the mystery religions for their obscurantism and trivial rituals . In particular , the worshippers of Dionysus are ridiculed for their ritual use of children 's toys . He suggests at some points that the pagan deities are based on humans , but at others that they are misanthropic demons , and he cites several classical sources in support of this second hypothesis . Clement , like many pre @-@ Nicene fathers , writes favourably about Euhemerus and other rationalist philosophers , on the grounds that they at least saw the flaws in paganism . However , his greatest praise is reserved for Plato , whose apophatic views of God prefigure Christianity . 
 The figure of Orpheus is prominent throughout the narrative , and Clement contrasts his song , representing pagan superstition , with the divine Logos of Christ . According to Clement , through conversion to Christianity alone can man fully participate in the Logos , which is universal truth . 
 = = = = Paedagogus = = = = 
 This work 's title , translatable as " tutor " , refers to Christ as the teacher of all mankind , and it features an extended metaphor of Christians as children . It is not simply instructional : the author intends to show how the Christian should respond to the Love of God authentically . Clement , following Plato ( Republic 4 : 441 ) , divides life into three elements : character , actions and passions . The first having been dealt with in the Protrepticus , he devotes the Paedagogus to reflections on Christ 's role in teaching us to act morally and to control our passions . Despite its explicitly Christian nature , Clement 's work draws on Stoic philosophy and pagan literature ; Homer alone is cited over sixty times in the work . 
 Although Christ , like man , is made in the image of God , he alone shares the likeness of God the Father . Christ is both sinless and apathetic , and thus by striving to imitate Christ , man can achieve salvation . To Clement , sin is involuntary , and thus irrational [ <unk> ] , removed only through the wisdom of the Logos . God 's guidance of us away from sin is thus a manifestation of God 's universal love for mankind . The word play on λόγος and <unk> is characteristic of Clement 's writing , and may be rooted in the Epicurean belief that relationships between words are deeply reflective of relationships between the objects they signify . 
 Clement argues for the equality of sexes , on the grounds that salvation is extended to all of mankind equally . Unusually , he suggests that Christ is neither male or female , and that God the Father has both male and female aspects : the eucharist is described as milk from the breast ( Christ ) of the Father . He is supportive of women playing an active role in the leadership of the church , and provides a list of women he considers inspirational , which includes both Biblical and Classical Greek figures . It has been suggested that Clement 's progressive views on gender as set out in the Paedagogus were influenced by Gnosticism . However , later in the work , he argues against the Gnostics that faith , not esoteric knowledge [ γνῶσις ] , is required for salvation . According to Clement , it is through faith in Christ that we are enlightened and come to know God . 
 In the second book , Clement provides practical rules on living a Christian life . He argues against overindulgence in food and in favour of good table manners . While prohibiting drunkenness , he promotes the drinking of alcohol in moderation following 1 Timothy 5 : 23 . Clement argues for a simple way of life in accordance with the innate simplicity of Christian monotheism . He condemns elaborate and expensive furnishings and clothing , and argues against overly passionate music and perfumes . But Clement does not believe in the abandoning of worldly pleasures and argues that the Christian should be able to express his joy in God 's creation through gaiety and partying . He opposes the wearing of garlands , because the picking of the flowers ultimately kills a beautiful creation of God , and the garland resembles the crown of thorns . Clement treats sex at some length . He argues that both promiscuity and sexual abstinence are unnatural , and that the main goal of human sexuality is procreation . Homosexuality , prostitution , concubinage , adultery and coitus with pregnant women should all be avoided as they will not act towards the generation of legitimate offspring . 
 The third book continues along a similar vein , condemning cosmetics on the grounds that it is our souls , not our bodies , that we should seek to beautify . Clement also opposes the dyeing of men 's hair and male <unk> as effeminacy . He advises choosing one 's company carefully , to avoid being corrupted by immoral people , and while arguing that material wealth is no sin in itself , it is too likely to distract one from the infinitely more important spiritual wealth which is found in Christ . The work finishes with selections of scripture supporting Clement 's argument , and following a prayer , the lyrics of a hymn . 
 = = = = Stromata = = = = 
 The contents of the Stromata , as its title suggests , are miscellaneous . Its place in the trilogy is disputed – Clement initially intended to write the <unk> , a work which would complement the practical guidance of the Paedagogus with a more intellectual schooling in theology . The Stromata is less systematic and ordered than Clement 's other works , and it has been theorized by André <unk> that it was intended for a limited , esoteric readership . Although Eusebius wrote of eight books of the work , only seven undoubtably survive . Photius , writing in the 9th century , found various text appended to manuscripts of the seven canonical books , which lead Daniel Heinsius to suggest that the original eighth book is lost , and he identified the text purported to be from the eighth book as fragments of the <unk> . 
 The first book starts on the topic of Greek philosophy . Consistent with his other writing , Clement affirms that philosophy had a <unk> role for the Greek , similar to the function of the law for the Jews . He then embarks on a discussion of the origins of Greek culture and technology , arguing that most of the important figures in the Greek world were foreigners , and ( erroneously ) that Jewish culture was the most significant influence on Greece . In an attempt to demonstrate the primacy of Moses , Clement gives an extended chronology of the world , wherein he dates the birth of Christ to 25 April or May , 4 @-@ 2 B.C. , and the creation of the world to <unk> B.C. The books ends with a discussion on the origin of languages and the possibility of a Jewish influence on Plato . 
 The second book is largely devoted to the respective roles of faith and philosophical argument . Clement contends that while both are important , the fear of God is foremost , because through faith one receives divine wisdom . To Clement , scripture is an innately true primitive philosophy which is complemented by human reason through the Logos . Faith is voluntary , and the decision to believe is a crucial fundamental step in becoming closer to God . It is never irrational , as it is founded on the knowledge of the truth of the Logos , but all knowledge proceeds from faith , as first principles are unprovable outside a systematic structure . 
 The third book covers asceticism . He discusses marriage , which is treated similarly in the Paedagogus . Clement rejects the Gnostic opposition to marriage , arguing that only men who are uninterested in women should remain celibate , and that sex is a positive good if performed within marriage for the purposes of procreation . However it has not always been so : the Fall occurred because Adam and Eve succumbed to their desire for each other , and copulated before the allotted time . He argues against the idea that Christians should reject their family for an ascetic life , which stems from Luke 14 : 25 – 27 , contending that Jesus would not have contradicted the precept to " Honour thy Father and thy Mother " ( Exodus 20 : 12 ) , one of the Ten Commandments . Clement concludes that asceticism will only be rewarded if the motivation is Christian in nature , and thus the asceticism of non @-@ Christians such as the gymnosophists is pointless . 
 Clement begins the fourth book with a belated explanation of the disorganized nature of the work , and gives a brief description of his aims for the remaining three or four books . The fourth book focuses on martyrdom . While all good Christians should be unafraid of death , Clement condemns those who actively seek out a martyr 's death , arguing that they do not have sufficient respect for God 's gift of life . He is ambivalent whether any believing Christian can become a martyr by virtue of the manner of their death , or whether martyrdom is reserved for those who have lived exceptional lives . <unk> cannot become martyrs , because they do not believe in the divinity of God the Father – their sufferings are in vain . There is then a digression to the subject of theological epistemology . According to Clement , there is no way of empirically testing the existence of God the Father , because the Logos has revelatory , not analysable meaning , although Christ was an object of the senses . God had no beginning , and is the universal first principle . 
 The fifth book returns to the subject of faith . Clement argues that truth , justice and goodness can be seen only by the mind , not the eye ; faith is a way of accessing the <unk> . He stresses that knowledge of God can only be achieved through faith once ones moral faults have been corrected . This parallels Clement 's earlier insistence that martyrdom can only be achieved by those who practice their faith in Christ through good deeds , not those who simply profess their faith . God transcends matter entirely , and thus the materialist cannot truly come to know God . Although Christ was God incarnate , it is our spiritual , not physical comprehension of him which is important . 
 In the beginning of the sixth book , Clement intends to demonstrate that the works of Greek poets were derived from the prophetic books of the Bible . In order to reinforce his position that the Greeks were inclined towards plagiarism , he cites numerous instances of such inappropriate appropriation by classical Greek writers , reported second @-@ hand from On Plagiarism , an anonymous 3rd century BC work sometimes ascribed to <unk> . Clement then digresses to the subject of sin and hell , arguing that Adam was not perfect when created , but given the potential to achieve perfection . He espouses broadly universalist doctrine , holding that Christ 's promise of salvation is available to all , even those condemned to hell . 
 The final extant book begins with a description of the nature of Christ , and that of the true Christian , who aims to be as similar as possible to both the Father and the Son . Clement then criticizes the simplistic anthropomorphism of most ancient religions , quoting Xenophanes ' famous description of African , Thracian and Egyptian deities . The Greek gods may also have had their origins in the personification of material objects : Ares representing iron , and Dionysus wine . Prayer , and the relationship between love and knowledge are then discussed . 1 Corinthians 13 : 8 seems to contradict the characterization of the true Christian as one who knows ; but to Clement knowledge vanishes only in that it is subsumed by the universal love expressed by the Christian in his reverence for his Creator . Following Socrates , he argues that vice arises from a state of ignorance , not from intention . The Christian is a " labourer in God 's vineyard " , responsible both for his own path to salvation and that of his neighbor . The work ends with an extended passage against the contemporary divisions and heresies within the church . 
 = = = Other works = = = 
 Besides the great trilogy , Clement 's only other extant work is the treatise Salvation for the rich , also known as Who is the Rich Man who is Saved ? . Having begun with a scathing criticism of the corrupting effects of money and misguided servile attitudes towards the wealthy , Clement discusses the implications of Mark 10 : 25 . The rich are either unconvinced by the promise of eternal life , or unaware of the conflict between the possession of material and spiritual wealth , and the good Christian has a duty to guide them towards a better life through the Gospel . Jesus ' words are not to be taken literally – we should seek the <unk> [ <unk> ] meaning in which the true route to salvation is revealed . The holding of material wealth in itself is not a wrong , as long as it is used charitably , but men should be careful not to let their wealth dominate their spirit . It is more important to give up sinful passions than external wealth . If the rich man is to be saved , all he must do is to follow the two commandments , and while material wealth is of no value to God , it can be used to alleviate the suffering of our neighbor . 
 Other known works exist in fragments alone , including the four eschatological works in the secret tradition : <unk> , <unk> ex <unk> , Eclogae <unk> and the <unk> . These cover Clement 's celestial hierarchy , a complex schema in which the universe is headed by the Face of God , below which lie seven protoctists , followed by archangels , angels and humans . According to Jean Daniélou , this schema is inherited from a Judaeo @-@ Christian esotericism , followed by the Apostles , which was only imparted orally to those Christians who could be trusted which such mysteries . The <unk> are the first beings created by God , and act as priests to the archangels . Clement identifies them both as the " Eyes of the Lord " and with the Thrones . Clement characterizes the celestial forms as entirely different from anything earthly , although he argues that members of each order only seem <unk> to those of lower orders . According to the Eclogae <unk> , every thousand years every member of each order moves up a degree , and thus men can become angels . Even the protoctists can be elevated , although their new position in the hierarchy is not clearly defined . The apparent contradiction between the fact that there can be only seven protoctists but also a vast number of archangels to be promoted to their order is problematic . The commonest modern explanation is that the number seven is not meant to be taken literally , but has a principally numerological significance . 
 We know the titles of several lost works because of a list in Eusebius ' Ecclesiastical History , 6 @.@ 13 @.@ 1 @-@ 3 . They include the Outlines , in eight books , and Against Judaizers . Others are known only from mentions in Clement 's own writings , including On Marriage and On Prophecy , although few are attested by other writers and it is difficult to separate works which he intended to write from those which were actually completed . 
 The Mar Saba letter was attributed to Clement by Morton Smith , but there remains much debate today over whether it is an authentic letter from Clement , an ancient <unk> or a modern forgery . If authentic , its main significance would be in its relating that the apostle Mark came to Alexandria from Rome and there wrote a more spiritual gospel , which he entrusted to the church in Alexandria on his death : if genuine , the letter pushes back the tradition related by Eusebius connecting Mark with Alexandria by a century . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Eusebius is the first writer to provide an account of Clement 's life and works , in the Church History . There are two separate sections of the work dedicated to Clement ( 5 @.@ 11 and 6 @.@ 11 ) , the latter of which seems decidedly out of place , and <unk> argued that this was evidence that Eusebius never revised his work . Eusebius provides a list of Clement 's works , biographical information , and an extended quotation from the Stromata . 
 Photios I of Constantinople writes against Clement 's theology in the Bibliotheca , although he is appreciative of Clement 's learning and the literary merits of his work . In particular , he is highly critical of the <unk> , a work of biblical exegesis of which only a few fragments have survived . Photius compared Clement 's treatise , which like his other works was highly syncretic , featuring ideas of Hellenistic , Jewish and Gnostic origin , unfavourably against the prevailing orthodoxy of the 9th century . Among the particular ideas Photius deemed heretical were : 
 His belief that matter and thought are eternal , and thus did not originate from God , contradicting the doctrine of <unk> ex nihilo . 
 His belief in cosmic cycles predating the creation of the world , following Heraclitus , which is extra @-@ Biblical in origin . 
 His belief that Christ , as Logos , was in some sense created , contrary to John 1 but following Philo . 
 His ambivalence towards <unk> , the heretical doctrine that Christ 's earthly body was an illusion . 
 His belief that Eve was created from Adam 's sperm after he ejaculated during the night . 
 His belief that Genesis 6 : 2 implies that angels indulged in coitus with human women . In Orthodox Catholic theology , angels are considered sexless . 
 Down to the seventeenth century he was venerated as a saint in Catholicism . His name was to be found in the <unk> , and his feast fell on the fourth of December . But when the Roman Martyrology was revised by Pope Clement VIII his name was dropped from the calendar on the advice of Cardinal Baronius . Benedict XIV maintained this decision of his predecessor on the grounds that Clement 's life was little known , that he had never obtained public cultus in the Church , and that some of his doctrines were , if not erroneous , at least suspect . Thus Clement is not revered as a saint in contemporary Roman Catholicism , nor is he considered a saint in much of Eastern Orthodox Christianity . Clement 's veneration is somewhat limited ; he is commemorated nonetheless in Anglicanism . As well , the Universal Catholic Church 's cathedral in Dallas is dedicated to him . 
 As one of the earliest of the Church fathers whose works have survived , he is the subject of a significant amount of recent academic work , mainly focusing on the relationship between his thought and non @-@ Christian philosophy and his influence on Origen . 
 = W. H. Auden = 
 <unk> Hugh Auden ( / <unk> <unk> <unk> / ; 21 February 1907 – 29 September 1973 ) was an English poet , who later became an American citizen . He is best known for love poems such as " Funeral Blues , " poems on political and social themes such as " September 1 , 1939 " and " The Shield of Achilles , " poems on cultural and psychological themes such as The Age of Anxiety , and poems on religious themes such as " For the Time Being " and " Horae <unk> . " He was born in York , grew up in and near Birmingham in a professional middle @-@ class family . He attended English independent ( or public ) schools and studied English at Christ Church , Oxford . After a few months in Berlin in 1928 – 29 he spent five years ( 1930 – 35 ) teaching in English public schools , then travelled to Iceland and China in order to write books about his journeys . In 1939 he moved to the United States and became an American citizen in 1946 . He taught from 1941 to 1945 in American universities , followed by occasional visiting professorships in the 1950s . From 1947 to 1957 he wintered in New York and summered in Ischia ; from 1958 until the end of his life he wintered in New York ( in Oxford in 1972 – 73 ) and summered in Kirchstetten , Austria . 
 Auden 's poetry was noted for its stylistic and technical achievement , its engagement with politics , morals , love , and religion , and its variety in tone , form and content . He came to wide public attention at the age of twenty @-@ three , in 1930 , with his first book , Poems , followed in 1932 by The Orators . Three plays written in collaboration with Christopher Isherwood in 1935 – 38 built his reputation as a left @-@ wing political writer . Auden moved to the United States partly to escape this reputation , and his work in the 1940s , including the long poems " For the Time Being " and " The Sea and the Mirror , " focused on religious themes . He won the Pulitzer Prize in Poetry for his 1947 long poem The Age of Anxiety , the title of which became a popular phrase describing the modern era . In 1956 – 61 he was Professor of Poetry at Oxford ; his lectures were popular with students and faculty and served as the basis of his 1962 prose collection The Dyer 's Hand . 
 From around 1927 to 1939 Auden and Isherwood maintained a lasting but intermittent sexual friendship while both had briefer but more intense relations with other men . In 1939 Auden fell in love with Chester Kallman and regarded their relation as a marriage ; this ended in 1941 when Kallman refused to accept the faithful relation that Auden demanded , but the two maintained their friendship , and from 1947 until Auden 's death they lived in the same house or apartment in a non @-@ sexual relation , often collaborating on opera libretti such as The Rake 's Progress , for music by Igor Stravinsky . 
 Auden was a prolific writer of prose essays and reviews on literary , political , psychological and religious subjects , and he worked at various times on documentary films , poetic plays , and other forms of performance . Throughout his career he was both controversial and influential , and critical views on his work ranged from sharply dismissive , treating him as a lesser follower of W. B. Yeats and T. S. Eliot , to strongly affirmative , as in Joseph Brodsky 's claim that he had " the greatest mind of the twentieth century " . After his death , some of his poems , notably " Funeral Blues " , " Musée des Beaux Arts " , " Refugee Blues " , " The Unknown Citizen " , and " September 1 , 1939 " , became known to a much wider public than during his lifetime through films , broadcasts , and popular media . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 Auden was born in York , England , to George Augustus Auden , a physician , and Constance Rosalie Auden , née Bicknell , who had trained ( but never served ) as a missionary nurse . He was the third of three sons ; the eldest , George Bernard Auden , became a farmer , while the second , John Bicknell Auden , became a geologist . Auden , whose grandfathers were both Church of England clergymen , grew up in an Anglo @-@ Catholic household that followed a " High " form of Anglicanism with doctrine and ritual resembling those of Roman Catholicism . He traced his love of music and language partly to the church services of his childhood . He believed he was of Icelandic descent , and his lifelong fascination with Icelandic legends and Old Norse sagas is evident in his work . 
 In 1908 his family moved to Homer Road , Solihull , near Birmingham , where his father had been appointed the School Medical Officer and Lecturer ( later Professor ) of Public Health . Auden 's lifelong psychoanalytic interests began in his father 's library . From the age of eight he attended boarding schools , returning home for holidays . His visits to the Pennine landscape and its declining lead @-@ mining industry figure in many of his poems ; the remote decaying mining village of <unk> was for him a " sacred landscape " , evoked in a late poem , " Amor Loci " . Until he was fifteen he expected to become a mining engineer , but his passion for words had already begun . He wrote later : " words so excite me that a pornographic story , for example , excites me sexually more than a living person can do . " 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Auden attended St Edmund 's School , Hindhead , Surrey , where he met Christopher Isherwood , later famous in his own right as a novelist . At thirteen he went to Gresham 's School in Norfolk ; there , in 1922 , when his friend Robert Medley asked him if he wrote poetry , Auden first realised his vocation was to be a poet . Soon after , he " discover ( ed ) that he ( had ) lost his faith " ( through a gradual realisation that he had lost interest in religion , not through any decisive change of views ) . In school productions of Shakespeare , he played Katherina in The Taming of the Shrew in 1922 , and Caliban in The Tempest in 1925 , his last year at Gresham 's . His first published poems appeared in the school magazine in 1923 . Auden later wrote a chapter on Gresham 's for Graham Greene 's The Old School : Essays by Divers Hands ( 1934 ) . 
 In 1925 he went up to Christ Church , Oxford , with a scholarship in biology ; he switched to English by his second year . Friends he met at Oxford include Cecil Day @-@ Lewis , Louis MacNeice , and Stephen Spender ; these four were commonly though misleadingly identified in the 1930s as the " Auden Group " for their shared ( but not identical ) left @-@ wing views . Auden left Oxford in 1928 with a third @-@ class degree . 
 Auden was reintroduced to Christopher Isherwood in 1925 by his fellow student A. S. T. Fisher . For the next few years Auden sent poems to Isherwood for comments and criticism ; the two maintained a sexual friendship in intervals between their relations with others . In 1935 – 39 they collaborated on three plays and a travel book . 
 From his Oxford years onward , Auden 's friends uniformly described him as funny , extravagant , sympathetic , generous , and , partly by his own choice , lonely . In groups he was often dogmatic and overbearing in a comic way ; in more private settings he was diffident and shy except when certain of his welcome . He was punctual in his habits , and obsessive about meeting deadlines , while choosing to live amidst physical disorder . 
 = = = Britain and Europe , 1928 – 38 = = = 
 In late 1928 , Auden left Britain for nine months , going to Berlin , partly to rebel against English <unk> . In Berlin , he first experienced the political and economic unrest that became one of his central subjects . 
 On returning to Britain in 1929 , he worked briefly as a tutor . In 1930 his first published book , Poems ( 1930 ) , was accepted by T. S. Eliot for Faber and Faber , and the same firm remained the British publisher of all the books he published thereafter . In 1930 he began five years as a schoolmaster in boys ' schools : two years at the <unk> Academy in Helensburgh , Scotland , then three years at the Downs School in the Malvern Hills , where he was a much @-@ loved teacher . At the Downs , in June 1933 , he experienced what he later described as a " Vision of Agape " , while sitting with three fellow @-@ teachers at the school , when he suddenly found that he loved them for themselves , that their existence had infinite value for him ; this experience , he said , later influenced his decision to return to the Anglican Church in 1940 . 
 During these years , Auden 's erotic interests focused , as he later said , on an idealised " Alter Ego " rather than on individual persons . His relationships ( and his unsuccessful courtships ) tended to be unequal either in age or intelligence ; his sexual relations were transient , although some evolved into long friendships . He contrasted these relationships with what he later regarded as the " marriage " ( his word ) of equals that he began with Chester Kallman in 1939 , based on the unique individuality of both partners . 
 From 1935 until he left Britain early in 1939 , Auden worked as freelance reviewer , essayist , and lecturer , first with the G.P.O. Film Unit , a documentary film @-@ making branch of the post office , headed by John Grierson . Through his work for the Film Unit in 1935 he met and collaborated with Benjamin Britten , with whom he also worked on plays , song cycles , and a libretto . Auden 's plays in the 1930s were performed by the Group Theatre , in productions that he supervised to varying degrees . 
 His work now reflected his belief that any good artist must be " more than a bit of a reporting journalist " . In 1936 , Auden spent three months in Iceland where he gathered material for a travel book Letters from Iceland ( 1937 ) , written in collaboration with Louis MacNeice . In 1937 he went to Spain intending to drive an ambulance for the Republic in the Spanish Civil War , but was put to work broadcasting propaganda , a job he left to visit the front . His seven @-@ week visit to Spain affected him deeply , and his social views grew more complex as he found political realities to be more ambiguous and troubling than he had imagined . Again attempting to combine reportage and art , he and Isherwood spent six months in 1938 visiting China amid the Sino @-@ Japanese War , working on their book Journey to a War ( 1939 ) . On their way back to England they stayed briefly in New York and decided to move to the United States . Auden spent late 1938 partly in England , partly in Brussels . 
 Many of Auden 's poems during the 1930s and after were inspired by unconsummated love , and in the 1950s he summarised his emotional life in a famous couplet : " If equal affection cannot be / Let the more loving one be me " ( " The More Loving One " ) . He had a gift for friendship and , starting in the late 1930s , a strong wish for the stability of marriage ; in a letter to his friend James Stern he called marriage " the only subject . " Throughout his life , Auden performed charitable acts , sometimes in public ( as in his 1935 marriage of convenience to Erika Mann that provided her with a British passport to escape the Nazis ) , but , especially in later years , more often in private . He was embarrassed if they were publicly revealed , as when his gift to his friend Dorothy Day for the Catholic Worker movement was reported on the front page of The New York Times in 1956 . 
 = = = United States and Europe , 1939 – 73 = = = 
 Auden and Isherwood sailed to New York City in January 1939 , entering on temporary visas . Their departure from Britain was later seen by many as a betrayal , and Auden 's reputation suffered . In April 1939 , Isherwood moved to California , and he and Auden saw each other only intermittently in later years . Around this time , Auden met the poet Chester Kallman , who became his lover for the next two years ( Auden described their relation as a " marriage " that began with a cross @-@ country " honeymoon " journey ) . In 1941 Kallman ended their sexual relationship because he could not accept Auden 's insistence on mutual fidelity , but he and Auden remained companions for the rest of Auden 's life , sharing houses and apartments from 1953 until Auden 's death . Auden dedicated both editions of his collected poetry ( 1945 / 50 and 1966 ) to Isherwood and Kallman . 
 In 1940 – 41 , Auden lived in a house at 7 <unk> Street in Brooklyn Heights , that he shared with Carson McCullers , Benjamin Britten , and others , which became a famous centre of artistic life , nicknamed " February House " . In 1940 , Auden joined the Episcopal Church , returning to the Anglican Communion he had abandoned at thirteen . His reconversion was influenced partly by what he called the " sainthood " of Charles Williams , whom he had met in 1937 , and partly by reading Søren Kierkegaard and Reinhold Niebuhr ; his existential , this @-@ worldly Christianity became a central element in his life . 
 After Britain declared war on Germany in September 1939 , Auden told the British embassy in Washington that he would return to the UK if needed . He was told that , among those his age ( 32 ) , only qualified personnel were needed . In 1941 – 42 he taught English at the University of Michigan . He was called for the draft in the United States Army in August 1942 , but was rejected on medical grounds . He had been awarded a Guggenheim Fellowship for 1942 – 43 but did not use it , choosing instead to teach at Swarthmore College in 1942 – 45 . In mid @-@ 1945 , after the end of World War II in Europe , he was in Germany with the U. S. Strategic Bombing Survey , studying the effects of Allied bombing on German morale , an experience that affected his postwar work as his visit to Spain had affected him earlier . On his return , he settled in Manhattan , working as a freelance writer , a lecturer at The New School for Social Research , and a visiting professor at Bennington , Smith , and other American colleges . In 1946 he became a naturalised citizen of the US . 
 Auden began summering in Europe in 1948 , first in Ischia , Italy , where he rented a house , then , starting in 1958 , in Kirchstetten , Austria , where he bought a farmhouse , and , he said , shed tears of joy at owning a home for the first time . In 1956 – 61 , Auden was Professor of Poetry at Oxford University where he was required to give three lectures each year . This fairly light workload allowed him to continue to winter in New York , where he now lived at 77 St. Mark 's Place in Manhattan 's East Village , and to summer in Europe , spending only three weeks each year lecturing in Oxford . He now earned his income mostly from readings and lecture tours , and by writing for The New Yorker , The New York Review of Books , and other magazines . In 1972 , Auden moved his winter home from New York to Oxford , where his old college , Christ Church , offered him a cottage , while he continued to summer in Austria . He died in Vienna in 1973 and was buried in Kirchstetten . 
 = = Work = = 
 Auden published about four hundred poems , including seven long poems ( two of them book @-@ length ) . His poetry was encyclopaedic in scope and method , ranging in style from obscure twentieth @-@ century modernism to the lucid traditional forms such as ballads and limericks , from doggerel through haiku and villanelles to a " Christmas Oratorio " and a baroque eclogue in Anglo @-@ Saxon meters . The tone and content of his poems ranged from pop @-@ song clichés to complex philosophical meditations , from the <unk> on his toes to atoms and stars , from contemporary crises to the evolution of society . 
 He also wrote more than four hundred essays and reviews about literature , history , politics , music , religion , and many other subjects . He collaborated on plays with Christopher Isherwood and on opera libretti with Chester Kallman , and worked with a group of artists and filmmakers on documentary films in the 1930s and with the New York Pro Musica early music group in the 1950s and 1960s . About collaboration he wrote in 1964 : " collaboration has brought me greater erotic joy . . . than any sexual relations I have had . " 
 Auden controversially rewrote or discarded some of his most famous poems when he prepared his later collected editions . He wrote that he rejected poems that he found " boring " or " dishonest " in the sense that they expressed views he had never held but had used only because he felt they would be rhetorically effective . His rejected poems include " Spain " and " September 1 , 1939 " . His literary executor , Edward Mendelson , argues in his introduction to Selected Poems that Auden 's practice reflected his sense of the persuasive power of poetry and his reluctance to misuse it . ( Selected Poems includes some poems that Auden rejected and early texts of poems that he revised . ) 
 = = = Early work , 1922 – 39 = = = 
 = = = = Up to 1930 = = = = 
 Auden began writing poems at thirteen , mostly in the styles of 19th @-@ century romantic poets , especially Wordsworth , and later poets with rural interests , especially Thomas Hardy . At eighteen he discovered T. S. Eliot and adopted an extreme version of Eliot 's style . He found his own voice at twenty when he wrote the first poem later included in his collected work , " From the very first coming down " . This and other poems of the late 1920s tended to be in a clipped , elusive style that alluded to , but did not directly state , their themes of loneliness and loss . Twenty of these poems appeared in his first book Poems ( 1928 ) , a pamphlet hand @-@ printed by Stephen Spender . 
 In 1928 he wrote his first dramatic work , Paid on Both Sides , subtitled " A Charade " , which combined style and content from the Icelandic sagas with jokes from English school life . This mixture of tragedy and farce , with a dream play @-@ within @-@ a @-@ play , introduced the mixed styles and content of much of his later work . This drama and thirty short poems appeared in his first published book Poems ( 1930 , 2nd edition with seven poems replaced , 1933 ) ; the poems in the book were mostly lyrical and gnomic mediations on hoped @-@ for or unconsummated love and on themes of personal , social , and seasonal renewal ; among these poems were " It was Easter as I walked , " " Doom is dark , " " Sir , no man 's enemy , " and " This lunar beauty . " 
 A recurrent theme in these early poems is the effect of " family ghosts " , Auden 's term for the powerful , unseen psychological effects of preceding generations on any individual life ( and the title of a poem ) . A parallel theme , present throughout his work , is the contrast between biological evolution ( <unk> and involuntary ) and the psychological evolution of cultures and individuals ( voluntary and deliberate even in its subconscious aspects ) . 
 = = = = 1931 – 35 = = = = 
 Auden 's next large @-@ scale work was The Orators : An English Study ( 1932 ; revised editions , 1934 , 1966 ) , in verse and prose , largely about hero @-@ worship in personal and political life . In his shorter poems , his style became more open and accessible , and the exuberant " Six Odes " in The Orators reflect his new interest in Robert Burns . During the next few years , many of his poems took their form and style from traditional ballads and popular songs , and also from expansive classical forms like the Odes of Horace , which he seems to have discovered through the German poet Hölderlin . Around this time his main influences were Dante , William Langland , and Alexander Pope . 
 During these years , much of his work expressed left @-@ wing views , and he became widely known as a political poet although he was privately more ambivalent about revolutionary politics than many reviewers recognised , and Mendelson argues that he expounded political views partly out of a sense of moral duty and partly because it enhanced his reputation , and that he later regretted having done so . He generally wrote about revolutionary change in terms of a " change of heart " , a transformation of a society from a closed @-@ off psychology of fear to an open psychology of love . 
 His verse drama The Dance of Death ( 1933 ) was a political extravaganza in the style of a theatrical revue , which Auden later called " a nihilistic leg @-@ pull . " His next play The Dog Beneath the Skin ( 1935 ) , written in collaboration with Isherwood , was similarly a quasi @-@ Marxist updating of Gilbert and Sullivan in which the general idea of social transformation was more prominent than any specific political action or structure . 
 The Ascent of F6 ( 1937 ) , another play written with Isherwood , was partly an anti @-@ imperialist satire , partly ( in the character of the self @-@ destroying climber Michael Ransom ) an examination of Auden 's own motives in taking on a public role as a political poet . This play included the first version of " Funeral Blues " ( " Stop all the clocks " ) , written as a satiric eulogy for a politician ; Auden later rewrote the poem as a " Cabaret Song " about lost love ( written to be sung by the soprano <unk> Anderson , for whom he wrote many lyrics in the 1930s ) . In 1935 , he worked briefly on documentary films with the G.P.O. Film Unit , writing his famous verse commentary for Night Mail and lyrics for other films that were among his attempts in the 1930s to create a widely accessible , socially conscious art . 
 = = = = 1936 – 39 = = = = 
 In 1936 Auden 's publisher chose the title Look , Stranger ! for a collection of political odes , love poems , comic songs , meditative lyrics , and a variety of intellectually intense but emotionally accessible verse ; Auden hated the title and retitled the collection for the 1937 US edition On This Island ) . Among the poems included in the book are " Hearing of harvests " , " Out on the lawn I lie in bed " , " O what is that sound " , " Look , stranger , on this island now " ( later revised versions change " on " to " at " ) , and " Our hunting fathers " . 
 Auden was now arguing that an artist should be a kind of journalist , and he put this view into practice in Letters from Iceland ( 1937 ) a travel book in prose and verse written with Louis MacNeice , which included his long social , literary , and autobiographical commentary " Letter to Lord Byron " . In 1937 , after observing the Spanish Civil War he wrote a politically engaged pamphlet poem Spain ( 1937 ) ; he later discarded it from his collected works . Journey to a War ( 1939 ) a travel book in prose and verse , was written with Isherwood after their visit to the Sino @-@ Japanese War . Auden 's last collaboration with Isherwood was their third play , On the Frontier , an anti @-@ war satire written in Broadway and West End styles . 
 Auden 's shorter poems now engaged with the fragility and transience of personal love ( " Danse Macabre " , " The Dream " , " Lay your sleeping head " ) , a subject he treated with ironic wit in his " Four Cabaret Songs for Miss <unk> Anderson " ( which included " Tell Me the Truth About Love " and the revised version of " Funeral Blues " ) , and also the corrupting effect of public and official culture on individual lives ( " Casino " , " School Children " , " Dover " ) . In 1938 he wrote a series of dark , ironic ballads about individual failure ( " Miss Gee " , " James Honeyman " , " Victor " ) . All these appeared in Another Time ( 1940 ) , together with poems including " Dover " , " As He Is " , and " Musée des Beaux Arts " ( all written before he moved to America in 1939 ) , and " In Memory of W. B. Yeats " , " The Unknown Citizen " , " Law Like Love " , " September 1 , 1939 " , and " In Memory of Sigmund Freud " ( written in America ) . The elegies for Yeats and Freud are partly anti @-@ heroic statements , in which great deeds are performed , not by unique geniuses whom others cannot hope to imitate , but by otherwise ordinary individuals who were " silly like us " ( Yeats ) or of whom it could be said " he wasn 't clever at all " ( Freud ) , and who became teachers of others , not awe @-@ inspiring heroes . 
 = = = Middle period , 1940 – 57 = = = 
 = = = = 1940 – 46 = = = = 
 In 1940 Auden wrote a long philosophical poem " New Year Letter " , which appeared with miscellaneous notes and other poems in The Double Man ( 1941 ) . At the time of his return to the Anglican Communion he began writing abstract verse on theological themes , such as " Canzone " and " <unk> and Logos " . Around 1942 , as he became more comfortable with religious themes , his verse became more open and relaxed , and he increasingly used the syllabic verse he had learned from the poetry of Marianne Moore . 
 Auden 's work in this era addresses the artist 's temptation to use other persons as material for his art rather than valuing them for themselves ( " Prospero to Ariel " ) and the corresponding moral obligation to make and keep commitments while recognising the temptation to break them ( " In Sickness and Health " ) . From 1942 through 1947 he worked mostly on three long poems in dramatic form , each differing from the others in form and content : " For the Time Being : A Christmas Oratorio " , " The Sea and the Mirror : A Commentary on Shakespeare 's The Tempest " ( both published in For the Time Being , 1944 ) , and The Age of Anxiety : A Baroque Eclogue ( published separately in 1947 ) . The first two , with Auden 's other new poems from 1940 to 1944 , were included in his first collected edition , The Collected Poetry of W. H. Auden ( 1945 ) , with most of his earlier poems , many in revised versions . 
 = = = = 1947 – 57 = = = = 
 After completing The Age of Anxiety in 1946 he focused again on shorter poems , notably " A Walk After Dark " , " The Love Feast " , and " The Fall of Rome " . Many of these evoked the Italian village where he summered in 1948 – 57 , and his next book , Nones ( 1951 ) , had a Mediterranean atmosphere new to his work . A new theme was the " sacred importance " of the human body in its ordinary aspect ( breathing , sleeping , eating ) and the continuity with nature that the body made possible ( in contrast to the division between humanity and nature that he had emphasised in the 1930s ) ; his poems on these themes included " In Praise of Limestone " ( 1948 ) and " Memorial for the City " ( 1949 ) . In 1949 Auden and Kallman wrote the libretto for Igor Stravinsky 's opera The Rake 's Progress , and later collaborated on two libretti for operas by Hans Werner Henze . 
 Auden 's first separate prose book was The <unk> Flood : The Romantic Iconography of the Sea ( 1950 ) , based on a series of lectures on the image of the sea in romantic literature . Between 1949 and 1954 he worked on a sequence of seven Good Friday poems , titled " Horae <unk> " , an encyclopaedic survey of geological , biological , cultural , and personal history , focused on the irreversible act of murder ; the poem was also a study in cyclical and linear ideas of time . While writing this , he also wrote " <unk> , " a sequence of seven poems about man 's relation to nature . Both sequences appeared in his next book , The Shield of Achilles ( 1955 ) , with other short poems , including the book 's title poem , " Fleet Visit " , and " Epitaph for the Unknown Soldier " . 
 In 1955 – 56 Auden wrote a group of poems about " history " , the term he used to mean the set of unique events made by human choices , as opposed to " nature " , the set of involuntary events created by natural processes , statistics , and anonymous forces such as crowds . These poems included " T the Great " , " The Maker " , and the title poem of his next collection Homage to Clio ( 1960 ) . 
 = = = Later work , 1958 – 73 = = = 
 In the late 1950s Auden 's style became less rhetorical while its range of styles increased . In 1958 , having moved his summer home from Italy to Austria , he wrote " Good @-@ bye to the Mezzogiorno " ; other poems from this period include " Dichtung und Wahrheit : An Unwritten Poem " , a prose poem about the relation between love and personal and poetic language , and the contrasting " Dame Kind " , about the anonymous impersonal reproductive instinct . These and other poems , including his 1955 – 66 poems about history , appeared in Homage to Clio ( 1960 ) . His prose book The Dyer 's Hand ( 1962 ) gathered many of the lectures he gave in Oxford as Professor of Poetry in 1956 – 61 , together with revised versions of essays and notes written since the mid @-@ 1940s . 
 Among the new styles and forms in Auden 's later work were the haiku and tanka that he began writing after translating the haiku and other verse in Dag Hammarskjöld 's Markings . A sequence of fifteen poems about his house in Austria , " Thanksgiving for a Habitat " ( written in various styles that included an imitation of William Carlos Williams ) appeared in About the House ( 1965 ) , together with other poems that included his reflection on his lecture tours , " On the Circuit " . In the late 1960s he wrote some of his most vigorous poems , including " River Profile " and two poems that looked back over his life , " Prologue at Sixty " and " Forty Years On " . All these appeared in City Without Walls ( 1969 ) . His lifelong passion for Icelandic legend culminated in his verse translation of The Elder Edda ( 1969 ) . Among his later themes was the " <unk> Christianity " he learned partly from Dietrich Bonhoeffer , the dedicatee of his poem " Friday 's Child . " 
 A Certain World : A Commonplace Book ( 1970 ) was a kind of self @-@ portrait made up of favourite quotations with commentary , arranged in alphabetical order by subject . His last prose book was a selection of essays and reviews , Forewords and Afterwords ( 1973 ) . His last books of verse , Epistle to a Godson ( 1972 ) and the unfinished Thank You , Fog ( published posthumously , 1974 ) include reflective poems about language ( " Natural Linguistics " ) and about his own ageing ( " A New Year Greeting " , " Talking to Myself " , " A Lullaby " [ " The din of work is subdued " ] ) . His last completed poem was " Archaeology " , about ritual and timelessness , two recurring themes in his later years . 
 = = = Reputation and influence = = = 
 Auden 's stature in modern literature has been contested . Probably the most common critical view from the 1930s onward ranked him as the last and least of the three major twentieth @-@ century British poets , Yeats , Eliot , Auden , while a minority view , more prominent in recent years , ranks him as the highest of the three . Opinions have ranged from those of Hugh MacDiarmid , who called him " a complete wash @-@ out , " F. R. Leavis who wrote that Auden 's ironic style was " self @-@ defensive , self @-@ indulgent or merely irresponsible " , and Harold Bloom who wrote " Close thy Auden , open thy [ Wallace ] Stevens , " to the obituarist in The Times ( London ) , who wrote : " W. H. Auden , for long the enfant terrible of English poetry . . . emerges as its undisputed master . " 
 Critical estimates were divided from the start . Reviewing Auden 's first book , Poems ( 1930 ) , Naomi Mitchison wrote " If this is really only the beginning , we have perhaps a master to look forward to . " But John Sparrow , recalling Mitchison 's comment in 1934 , dismissed Auden 's early work as " a monument to the misguided aims that prevail among contemporary poets , and the fact that ... he is being hailed as ' a master ' shows how criticism is helping poetry on the downward path . " 
 Auden 's clipped , satiric , and ironic style in the 1930s was widely imitated by younger poets such as Charles Madge , who wrote in a poem " there waited for me in the summer morning / Auden fiercely . I read , shuddered , and knew . " He was widely described as the leader of an " Auden group " that comprised his friends Stephen Spender , Cecil Day @-@ Lewis , and Louis MacNeice . The four were mocked by the poet Roy Campbell as if they were a single undifferentiated poet named " <unk> . " Auden 's propagandistic poetic plays , including The Dog Beneath the Skin and The Ascent of F6 , and his political poems such as " Spain " gave him the reputation as a political poet writing in a progressive and accessible voice , in contrast to Eliot ; but this political stance provoked opposing opinions , such as that of Austin Clarke who called Auden 's work " liberal , democratic , and humane " , and John Drummond , who wrote that Auden misused a " characteristic and popularizing trick , the generalized image " , to present ostensibly left @-@ wing views that were in fact " confined to bourgeois experience . " 
 Auden 's departure for America in 1939 was debated in Britain ( once even in Parliament ) , with some seeing his emigration as a betrayal . Defenders of Auden such as Geoffrey Grigson , in an introduction to a 1949 anthology of modern poetry , wrote that Auden " arches over all " . His stature was suggested by book titles such as Auden and After by Francis Scarfe ( 1942 ) and The Auden Generation by Samuel Hynes ( 1977 ) . 
 In the US , starting in the late 1930s , the detached , ironic tone of Auden 's regular stanzas became influential ; John Ashbery recalled that in the 1940s Auden " was the modern poet " . Auden 's formal influences were so pervasive in American poetry that the ecstatic style of the Beat Generation was partly a reaction against his influence . From the 1940s through the 1960s , many critics lamented that Auden 's work had declined from its earlier promise ; Randall Jarrell wrote a series of essays making a case against Auden 's later work , and Philip Larkin 's " What 's Become of <unk> ? " ( 1960 ) had a wide impact . 
 The first full @-@ length study of Auden was Richard Hoggart 's Auden : An Introductory Essay ( 1951 ) , which concluded that " Auden 's work , then , is a civilising force . " It was followed by Joseph Warren Beach 's The Making of the Auden Canon ( 1957 ) , a disapproving account of Auden 's revisions of his earlier work . The first systematic critical account was Monroe K. Spears ' The Poetry of W. H. Auden : The Disenchanted Island ( 1963 ) , " written out of the conviction that Auden 's poetry can offer the reader entertainment , instruction , intellectual excitement , and a prodigal variety of aesthetic pleasures , all in a generous abundance that is unique in our time . " 
 Auden was one of three candidates recommended by the Nobel Committee to the Swedish Academy for the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1963 and six recommended for the 1964 prize . By the time of his death in 1973 he had attained the status of a respected elder statesman , and a memorial stone for him was placed in Poets ' Corner in Westminster Abbey in 1974 . The Encyclopaedia Britannica writes that " by the time of Eliot 's death in 1965 ... a convincing case could be made for the assertion that Auden was indeed Eliot 's successor , as Eliot had inherited sole claim to supremacy when Yeats died in 1939 . " With some exceptions , British critics tended to treat his early work as his best , while American critics tended to favour his middle and later work . 
 Another group of critics and poets has maintained that unlike other modern poets , Auden 's reputation did not decline after his death , and the influence of his later writing was especially strong on younger American poets including John Ashbery , James Merrill , Anthony Hecht , and Maxine <unk> . Typical later evaluations describe him as " arguably the [ 20th ] century 's greatest poet " ( Peter Parker and Frank Kermode ) , who " now clearly seems the greatest poet in English since Tennyson " ( Philip Hensher ) . 
 Public recognition of Auden 's work sharply increased after his " Funeral Blues " ( " Stop all the clocks " ) was read aloud in the film Four Weddings and a Funeral ( 1994 ) ; subsequently , a pamphlet edition of ten of his poems , Tell Me the Truth About Love , sold more than 275 @,@ 000 copies . After 11 September 2001 his 1939 poem " September 1 , 1939 " was widely circulated and frequently broadcast . Public readings and broadcast tributes in the UK and US in 2007 marked his centenary year . 
 = = Published works = = 
 The following list includes only the books of poems and essays that Auden prepared during his lifetime ; for a more complete list , including other works and posthumous editions , see W. H. Auden bibliography . 
 In the list below , works reprinted in the Complete Works of W. H. Auden are indicated by footnote references . 
 Books 
 Poems ( London , 1930 ; second edn . , seven poems substituted , London , 1933 ; includes poems and Paid on Both Sides : A Charade ) ( dedicated to Christopher Isherwood ) . 
 The Orators : An English Study ( London , 1932 , verse and prose ; slightly revised edn . , London , 1934 ; revised <unk> with new preface , London , 1966 ; New York 1967 ) ( dedicated to Stephen Spender ) . 
 The Dance of Death ( London , 1933 , play ) ( dedicated to Robert Medley and Rupert Doone ) . 
 Poems ( New York , 1934 ; contains Poems [ 1933 edition ] , The Orators [ 1932 edition ] , and The Dance of Death ) . 
 The Dog Beneath the Skin ( London , New York , 1935 ; play , with Christopher Isherwood ) ( dedicated to Robert Moody ) . 
 The Ascent of F6 ( London , 1936 ; 2nd edn . , 1937 ; New York , 1937 ; play , with Christopher Isherwood ) ( dedicated to John Bicknell Auden ) . 
 Look , Stranger ! ( London , 1936 , poems ; US edn . , On This Island , New York , 1937 ) ( dedicated to Erika Mann ) 
 Letters from Iceland ( London , New York , 1937 ; verse and prose , with Louis MacNeice ) ( dedicated to George Augustus Auden ) . 
 On the Frontier ( London , 1938 ; New York 1939 ; play , with Christopher Isherwood ) ( dedicated to Benjamin Britten ) . 
 Journey to a War ( London , New York , 1939 ; verse and prose , with Christopher Isherwood ) ( dedicated to E. M. Forster ) . 
 Another Time ( London , New York 1940 ; poetry ) ( dedicated to Chester Kallman ) . 
 The Double Man ( New York , 1941 , poems ; UK edn . , New Year Letter , London , 1941 ) ( Dedicated to Elizabeth Mayer ) . 
 For the Time Being ( New York , 1944 ; London , 1945 ; two long poems : " The Sea and the Mirror : A Commentary on Shakespeare 's The Tempest " , dedicated to James and Tania Stern , and " For the Time Being : A Christmas Oratorio " , in memoriam Constance Rosalie Auden [ Auden 's mother ] ) . 
 The Collected Poetry of W. H. Auden ( New York , 1945 ; includes new poems ) ( dedicated to Christopher Isherwood and Chester Kallman ) . 
 The Age of Anxiety : A Baroque Eclogue ( New York , 1947 ; London , 1948 ; verse ; won the 1948 Pulitzer Prize for Poetry ) ( dedicated to John Betjeman ) . 
 Collected Shorter Poems , 1930 – 1944 ( London , 1950 ; similar to 1945 Collected Poetry ) ( dedicated to Christopher Isherwood and Chester Kallman ) . 
 The <unk> Flood ( New York , 1950 ; London , 1951 ; prose ) ( dedicated to Alan Ansen ) . 
 Nones ( New York , 1951 ; London , 1952 ; poems ) ( dedicated to Reinhold and Ursula Niebuhr ) 
 The Shield of Achilles ( New York , London , 1955 ; poems ) ( won the 1956 National Book Award for Poetry ) ( dedicated to Lincoln and <unk> Kirstein ) . 
 Homage to Clio ( New York , London , 1960 ; poems ) ( dedicated to E. R. and A. E. Dodds ) . 
 The Dyer 's Hand ( New York , 1962 ; London , 1963 ; essays ) ( dedicated to Nevill Coghill ) . 
 About the House ( New York , London , 1965 ; poems ) ( dedicated to Edmund and Elena Wilson ) . 
 Collected Shorter Poems 1927 – 1957 ( London , 1966 ; New York , 1967 ) ( dedicated to Christopher Isherwood and Chester Kallman ) . 
 Collected Longer Poems ( London , 1968 ; New York , 1969 ) . 
 Secondary Worlds ( London , New York , 1969 ; prose ) ( dedicated to Valerie Eliot ) . 
 City Without Walls and Other Poems ( London , New York , 1969 ) ( dedicated to Peter Heyworth ) . 
 A Certain World : A Commonplace Book ( New York , London , 1970 ; quotations with commentary ) ( dedicated to Geoffrey Grigson ) . 
 Epistle to a Godson and Other Poems ( London , New York , 1972 ) ( dedicated to Orlan Fox ) . 
 Forewords and Afterwords ( New York , London , 1973 ; essays ) ( dedicated to Hannah Arendt ) . 
 Thank You , Fog : Last Poems ( London , New York , 1974 ) ( dedicated to Michael and <unk> Yates ) . 
 Film scripts and opera libretti 
 Coal Face ( 1935 , closing chorus for GPO Film Unit documentary ) . 
 Night Mail ( 1936 , narrative for GPO Film Unit documentary , not published separately except as a program note ) . 
 Paul Bunyan ( 1941 , libretto for operetta by Benjamin Britten ; not published until 1976 ) . 
 The Rake 's Progress ( 1951 , with Chester Kallman , libretto for an opera by Igor Stravinsky ) . 
 Elegy for Young Lovers ( 1956 , with Chester Kallman , libretto for an opera by Hans Werner Henze ) . 
 The <unk> ( 1961 , with Chester Kallman , libretto for an opera by Hans Werner Henze based on The Bacchae of Euripides ) . 
 Runner ( 1962 , documentary film narrative for National Film Board of Canada ) 
 Love 's Labour 's Lost ( 1973 , with Chester Kallman , libretto for an opera by Nicolas Nabokov , based on Shakespeare 's play ) . 
 Musical collaborations 
 Our Hunting Fathers ( 1936 , song cycle written for Benjamin Britten ) 
 An Evening of Elizabethan Verse and its Music ( 1954 recording with the New York Pro Musica Antiqua , director Noah Greenberg ; Auden spoke the verse texts ) 
 The Play of Daniel ( 1958 , verse narration for a production by the New York Pro Musica Antiqua , director Noah Greenberg ) 
 = There 's a Riot Goin ' On = 
 There 's a Riot Goin ' On is the fifth studio album by American band Sly and the Family Stone , released on November 20 , 1971 , by Epic Records . It was recorded during 1970 and 1971 at Record Plant Studios in Sausalito , California , with sessions dominated by band frontman Sly Stone during a period of drug use and inter @-@ group tension . The album embraced a darker and more challenging sound than the psychedelic soul style of the group 's previous records , making use of hard funk rhythms , primitive drum machines , and a unconventional mixing techniques . Originally intended to be issued as Africa Talks to You , the record was retitled There 's a Riot Goin ' On in response to Marvin Gaye 's album What 's Going On ( 1971 ) , released five months before . 
 There 's a Riot Goin ' On entered the Billboard Pop Album and Soul Album charts at number one upon its release , while the album 's lead single , " Family Affair " ( 1971 ) , topped the Pop Singles chart . By 2001 , it had sold one million copies and been certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . Received with ambivalence upon its release , the album is now praised as one of the greatest and most influential recordings of all @-@ time , and ranked at or near the top of many publications ' " best album " lists . In 2003 it was ranked number 99 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . 
 = = Background = = 
 Having achieved great success with their 1969 album Stand ! and performance at Woodstock , Sly & the Family Stone were due to have submitted an album of new recordings to Epic Records by 1970 . However , Sly Stone , the group 's creative head and multi @-@ instrumentalist , missed several recording deadlines , worrying CBS executive Clive Davis , and a Greatest Hits album was released in an eighteen @-@ month stretch during which the band released no new material . Relationships within the band were deteriorating , with friction between the Stone brothers and bassist Larry Graham . Epic executives requested more product , and the Black Panther Party , with which Stone had become associated , was demanding he make his music more militant and reflective of the black power movement , that he replace Greg Errico and Jerry Martini with black instrumentalists , and replace manager David <unk> . After moving to Los Angeles , California in late 1969 Stone and his bandmates began to use cocaine and PCP heavily rather than recording music . During this time Sly & the Family Stone released only one single , " Thank You ( Falettinme Be Mice Elf Agin ) " / " Everybody Is a Star " , issued in December 1969 . Although " Star " was a positive song in the vein of their previous hit " Everyday People " ( 1968 ) , " Thank You " featured a darker political theme . 
 By 1970 Stone had become erratic and moody , missing nearly a third of the band 's concert dates . He hired streetwise friends Hamp " Bubba " Banks and J.B. Brown as his personal managers , and these enlisted gangsters Edward " Eddie Chin " Elliott and Mafioso J.R. <unk> as his bodyguards . Stone assigned these individuals to handle his business dealings , find drugs and protect him from those he considered enemies , among them his own bandmates and staff . A rift developed between Sly and the rest of the band , which led to drummer Gregg Errico 's departure in early 1971 . 
 Speculation arose as to the release of new studio material . In a December 24 , 1970 article for Rolling Stone magazine , journalist Jon Landau wrote ; 
 Stone 's intention of a darker , more conceptual work was influenced by drug use and the events that writer Miles Marshall Lewis called " the death of the sixties " ; political assassinations , police brutality , the decline of the civil rights movement and social disillusionment . According to The Austin Chronicle , " slowed down , [ Sly 's ] quest for post @-@ stardom identity mirrored black America 's quest for post @-@ Sixties purpose . " 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Sly Stone mostly worked on There 's a Riot Goin ' On alone in a studio that he had built for himself at The Plant Studios , also known as The Record Plant , in Sausalito , California , or at his home studio in the loft of his Bel Air mansion . He would often lie down in the bed and record his vocals with a wireless microphone system . According to the other Family Stone members , most of the album was performed by him alone , overdubbing and sometimes using a drum machine . Other band members contributed by overdubbing alone with Sly instead of playing together as before . For " Family Affair " and some other selections Stone enlisted several other musicians including Billy Preston , Ike Turner , and Bobby Womack instead of his bandmates , and several female vocalists mostly omitted from the final mix . 
 The album 's muddy , gritty sound was due in part to this overdubbing and erasing and mixing techniques nearly drowned out undubbed sounds . Miles Marshall Lewis stated " Never before on a Sly and the Family Stone album were songs open to so much interpretation , and even more so , dripping with cynicism . On the other hand you can hardly hear what he 's saying for most of the album . Like Radiohead 's Kid A or even the Rolling Stones ' Exile on Main St. more recent to the time , a murkiness in the mix of the record inhibits complete comprehension of the words . " Stone felt that the rhythm box made unrealistic sounds if used as designed , so he resorted to overdubbing the drum sounds manually , again contributing to the difficult mix . 
 In the fall of 1971 Stone delivered the final mixes to the CBS Records offices , relieving the worried Clive Davis . CBS issued " Family Affair " as the first single , the band 's first in nearly two years . It became their fourth and final number @-@ one pop hit . A somber , electric piano @-@ based record , sung by Sly and sister Rose Stone , Sly delivering his part in a low , relaxed tone . It is one of the earliest hit recordings to use a drum machine - the first was probably another Sly Stone production , Little Sister 's " Somebody 's Watching You " . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Stone reworked 1969 's " Thank You " single as a slower , closing track , " Thank You For Talking to Me Africa " which , according to Allmusic 's Matthew Greenwald was a blues and gospel influenced examination of urban tension and the end of the 1960s , " perhaps the most frightening recording from the dawn of the 1970s , capturing all of the drama , ennui , and hedonism of the decade to come with almost a clairvoyant feel . " " Africa Talks to You " is a nine @-@ minute funk jam written in response to Sly Stone 's backlash from estranged fans and friends , record industry associates , and the media . According to biographer Eddie Santiago , the lyrics cynically portray " fame and its cold retrogression into perceived insanity " , with a chorus that reflects " Sly 's feelings on being cut down in his prime like a tree in the forest . " 
 " Smilin ' " is a hymn to getting high , introduced by a " slow , wispy soul that sounds like it 's drifting in from a distant radio somewhere " . Jurek wrote , " Sister Rose 's voice is all sweet , and at first so is Sly 's , but as the horns and bassline come stepping in , Sly 's voice gets heavy and is distorting in places deliberately . The delicate keyboard lines , luxuriant and in the pocket as they are , cannot keep the voice contained . There 's a minimal instrumental break in the tune and it suddenly fades just as it emerged . " 
 The album 's title track is silent and listed as zero minutes and zero seconds long . For many years it was speculated that this cryptic track listing and the title of the album referred to a July 27 , 1970 riot in Chicago , Illinois for which Sly & the Family Stone had been blamed . The band was to play a free show in Grant Park ( Chicago ) but the crowd became restless before the band began and started rioting . Over a hundred people were injured , including several police officers , and the reason given to the press was that the band was late and / or refused to perform . The original LP jacket featured a photo collage with a picture of the band @-@ shell in Grant Park overlaid with a photo of a police car . However in 1997 Sly Stone said that the " There 's a Riot Goin ' On " track had no running time simply because " I felt there should be no riots . " 
 = = Artwork = = 
 The original cover art for Riot featured a red , white , and black American flag with suns in place of the stars . No other text or titles appear on the cover , although Epic executives added a " Featuring the Hit Single ' Family Affair ' " sticker to the LP for commercial viability and identification purposes . Family Stone A & R director Steve Paley took the photograph . Three of the custom flags were created : one for Sly , one for Epic Records , and one for Paley . The album was later reissued with a more conventional cover featuring a photograph of Sly in concert , titles and text . 
 In an interview with Jonathan <unk> Stone explained the album cover 's concept , stating " I wanted the flag to truly represent people of all colors . I wanted the color black because it is the absence of color . I wanted the color white because it is the combination of all colors . And I wanted the color red because it represents the one thing that all people have in common : blood . I wanted suns instead of stars because stars to me imply searching , like you search for your star . And there are already too many stars in this world . But the sun , that 's something that is always there , looking right at you . Betsy Ross did the best she could with what she had . I thought I could do better . " 
 The outer album sleeve features a photo collage , by artist Lynn Ames , depicting American cultural images of the early 1970s . Featured on this collage were color photos and black & whites of the Family Stone , the Capitol , a grinning boy in plaid pants , the American flag with a peace sign in place of the stars , the Marina City twin towers of Chicago , a Department of Public Works caution sign , a piece of the Gettysburg Address , the tail end of a gas guzzler , drummer Buddy Miles , the Lincoln Memorial , soul musician Bobby Womack , a bulldog , several anonymous smiling faces , and Sly 's pit bull , Gun . 
 = = Reception = = 
 There 's a Riot Goin ' On was met with divided reaction from fans and music critics who were not used to the album 's sound and lyrical content . Los Angeles Times writer Robert Hilburn expressed a mixed response towards the band 's stylistic change from " <unk> " songs such as " Everyday People " and " Hot Fun in the Summertime " , stating " there is little on the album that is worth your attention " . Other major music publications praised this new direction : in his review for Rolling Stone magazine , music journalist Vince Aletti wrote that " At first I hated it for its weakness and its lack of energy and I still dislike these qualities . But then I began to respect the album 's honesty " . Aletti cited it as " one of the most important fucking albums this year " and " the new urban music ... not about dancing to the music , in the streets . It 's about disintegration , getting fucked up , nodding , maybe dying . There are flashes of euphoria , ironic laughter , even some bright stretches but mostly it 's just junkie death , oddly <unk> and almost attractive in its effortlessness " . A columnist for Hit Parader magazine gave Riot a favorable review , and stated that the album has " a lot that makes Sly the in @-@ person rave that he is . " 
 In his consumer guide for The Village Voice , critic Robert Christgau gave There 's a Riot Goin ' On an " A- " , which he later revised to " A + " , Christgau noted that " what 's expressed is the bitterest ghetto pessimism " and complimented its " subtle production techniques and jarring song compositions " , while citing it as " one of those rare albums whose whole actually does exceed the sum of its parts " . There 's a Riot Goin ' On was included on several music publications ' " End of the Year " lists and critics ' polls , including The Village Voice 's Pazz & Jop albums list at number seven . The album achieved commercial success with two hit singles and debuting at number @-@ one on the Billboard Pop Albums and Soul Albums chart . In his book Mystery Train : Images of America in Rock ' n ' Roll Music , published four years following the album 's release , music critic and writer Greil Marcus called There 's a Riot Goin ' On " Muzak with its finger on the trigger . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 There 's a Riot Goin ' On has since been viewed by critics as one of the greatest and most influential albums . Christgau wrote in 2007 : " Sly Stone had ' Made It ' . But its temptations and contradictions ate him up . The result was the prophetic 1971 There 's a Riot Goin ' On , recorded in anarchic , druggy torpor over a year , or was it two , Stone didn 't know the difference . Its taped @-@ over murk presaging Exile on Main St. , its drum @-@ machine beats throwing knuckleballs at Miles and JB , it was darker than the Velvet Underground and Nico and funkier than shit , yet somehow it produced two smash hits , including the stark , deep " Family Affair " . In a retrospective review , Zeth Lundy of PopMatters called There 's a Riot Goin ' On " a challenging listen , at times rambling , incoherent , dissonant , and just plain uncomfortable " with " some episodic moments of pop greatness to be found " and viewed it as a radical departure from the band 's previous work : 
 In 1994 There 's a Riot Going On was ranked number 14 in Colin Larkin 's Top 50 Soul Albums . Larkin described the album as " unlike anything heard before in black music " . A 2003 article for Rolling Stone commented ; " Sly and the Family Stone created a musical utopia : an interracial group of men and women who blended funk , rock and positive vibes ... Sly Stone ultimately discovered that his utopia had a ghetto , and he brilliantly tore the whole thing down on There 's a Riot Goin ' On , which does not refute the joy of his earlier music . " In addition to being featured near the top of several major publications ' " best album " lists , There 's a Riot Goin ' On was also ranked at number 99 on Rolling Stone 's 2003 list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time , one of four Sly & the Family Stone entries to be included on the list ; it is the second highest of the band 's entries , preceded by Greatest Hits ( # 60 ) , and followed by Stand ! ( # 118 ) and Fresh ( # 186 ) . Pitchfork Media named it the fourth best album of the 1970s 
 = = Influence = = 
 Along with its critical recognition , There 's a Riot Goin ' On is considered one of the first instances of the funk music later popularized by George Clinton and Funkadelic , the Ohio Players , and similar acts . There 's a Riot Goin ' On , as well as the follow @-@ ups Fresh and Small Talk , are considered among the first and best examples of the matured version of funk music , after prototypical instances of the sound in Sly & the Family Stone 's 1960s work . The album 's sound also influenced Miles Davis and Herbie Hancock to crossover to jazz @-@ funk . Riot 's songs have been extensively covered and sampled . Artists who have covered or reworked songs from Riot include Iggy Pop , John Legend , <unk> Hathaway , Ultramagnetic MC 's , De La Soul , Beastie Boys and Gwen Guthrie . Funk music genre in general had great influence on pioneering hip hop acts such as Afrika Bambaataa , DJ Kool Herc and many others . 
 Dave Rosen of Ink Blot magazine said that the album sounds unique , ironically in view of its vast influence ; " Sly employed the unconventional ( and possibly entirely original ) technique of mixing live drums with what was at the time a primitive drum machine ... The introspective , yet political lyrics , the hard and dirty funk grooves , the inspirational , yet depressing songs — all of these elements would come to influence not only peers like Marvin Gaye and James Brown , but two generations of rappers and <unk> who paid homage to Sly 's vision by making his samples and beats an essential backbone of their own innovations . Sly 's Riot is still goin ' on . " In his book There 's a Riot Goin ' On , author Miles Marshall Lewis described There 's a Riot Goin ' On in retrospect as " one of the most powerful and haunting albums to inspire the hip hop movement . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Original LP = = = 
 All songs written , produced and arranged by Sylvester Stewart for Stone Flower Productions . 
 Side one 
 " Luv n ' Haight " – 4 : 01 
 " Just Like a Baby " – 5 : 12 
 " Poet " – 3 : 01 
 " Family Affair " – 3 : 06 
 " Africa Talks to You ' The Asphalt Jungle ' " – 8 : 45 
 " There 's a Riot Goin ' On " – 0 : 00 
 Side two 
 " Brave & Strong " – 3 : 28 
 " ( You Caught Me ) Smilin ' " – 2 : 53 
 " Time " – 3 : 03 
 " Spaced Cowboy " – 3 : 57 
 " Runnin ' Away " – 2 : 51 
 " Thank You for Talkin ' to Me Africa " – 7 : 14 
 = = = CD reissue = = = 
 Bonus tracks for 2007 Epic / Legacy limited edition compact disc reissue . The title track , which was originally no time , was placed at four seconds for the reissue and was accompanied by previously unreleased bonus material . 
 " Runnin ' Away " ( mono single version ) – 2 : 44 
 " My Gorilla Is My Butler " ( instrumental ) – 3 : 11 
 " Do You Know What ? " ( instrumental ) – 7 : 16 
 " That 's Pretty Clean " ( instrumental ) – 4 : 12 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Musicians = = = 
 Larry Graham – bass , backing vocals 
 Greg Errico – drums 
 Gerry Gibson – drums 
 Bobby Womack – guitar 
 Freddie Stone – guitar 
 Ike Turner – guitar 
 Sly Stone – arrangements , drums , drum programming , keyboard programming , synthesizers , guitar , bass , keyboards , vocals 
 Billy Preston – keyboards 
 Jerry Martini – tenor saxophone 
 Cynthia Robinson – trumpet 
 Rose Stone – vocals , keyboards 
 Little Sister – backing vocals 
 = = = Production = = = 
 = 31st / 51st Battalion ( Australia ) = 
 The 31st / 51st Battalion was an infantry battalion of the Australian Army , which served during World War II . Raised for service as part of the Militia in 1943 through the amalgamation of two previously existing battalions , the 31st / 51st Battalion undertook garrison duties in Dutch New Guinea in 1943 – 44 before taking part in the Bougainville Campaign in 1944 – 45 . Following the end of the war , the battalion served in the Pacific overseeing the transfer of Japanese prisoners of war and re @-@ establishing law and order until mid @-@ 1946 when it returned to Australia and was disbanded . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 The 31st / 51st Battalion was formed on 12 April 1943 at <unk> , near Cairns , Queensland , by the amalgamation of two previously existing Queensland @-@ based Militia infantry battalions : the 31st and 51st Battalions . Upon establishment , the battalion adopted the territorial title of the " Kennedy / Far North Queensland Regiment " , in order to perpetuate the designations of its two predecessor units . Although the battalion officially adopted the brown and yellow rectangular Unit Colour Patch of the 31st Battalion , members of the new battalion that had previously served with the 51st were authorised to wear its brown over light blue circular colour patch . Reinforcements to the unit were allocated the colour patch based upon the territorial area from which they had been recruited . 
 The amalgamation came about due to a shortage of manpower in the Australian economy which had occurred as a result of an over mobilisation of Australia 's military forces in the early years of the war . In an attempt to rectify this situation , the Australian government made the decision to release Militia personnel who had previously been employed in " essential industries " back into the civilian workforce . As a result of this , both the 31st and 51st Battalions , which had large numbers of personnel drawn from the agricultural sector , were well below their authorised establishments , and so it was decided that they would be merged to form a complete battalion . 
 = = = Merauke = = = 
 Assigned to the 11th Brigade , 3rd Division , in May the newly formed battalion undertook amphibious training and intensive physical activities such as route marches around <unk> Knob , Queensland , in preparation for deployment overseas . In June – July 1943 , under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Geoffrey Brock , the battalion was deployed to Merauke , in Dutch New Guinea as part of Merauke Force . They departed from Cairns on board the TSS Canberra on 20 June , arriving at Thursday Island on 24 June . From there they were transferred to Horn Island before boarding the MV Van de <unk> and arriving at Merauke on 16 July 1943 . 
 From July 1943 until August 1944 the battalion undertook long range patrols in the surrounding area and established outposts along the coast to the north @-@ west . During this time the patrols from the 31st / 51st were involved in two major actions against the Japanese . The first came on 22 December 1943 near <unk> , when a small patrol of nine men on board the Rosemary , a small diesel trawler , surprised a Japanese patrol consisting of two 40 @-@ foot ( 12 m ) barges . In the fighting that followed , between 20 to 30 Japanese were killed for the loss of one Australian killed and five wounded . The second action came on 30 January 1944 when a waterborne force of about 200 Japanese was contacted and engaged by a 14 @-@ man detachment at an outpost near the start of the <unk> River , about 250 miles ( 400 km ) from Merauke . Anchoring about 150 yards ( 140 m ) from the outpost , the Japanese were engaged with fire from Bren light machine @-@ guns , small arms and anti @-@ tank rifles . Initially taken by surprise , the Japanese lost about men 60 killed before withdrawing about 400 yards ( 370 m ) out to sea and engaging the outpost with heavy machine @-@ guns and mortars . Nevertheless , only three Australians were slightly injured as a result of the contact , receiving burns to their hands from their overheated Bren guns . 
 On 24 July 1944 , the battalion was gazetted as an Australian Imperial Force unit , meaning that it could be sent outside of the bounds imposed upon Militia units as set out in the Defence Act ( 1903 ) . Shortly afterwards , they received orders that they would be withdrawn back to Australia in preparation for employment in combat elsewhere in the Pacific theatre . In early August 1944 , Lieutenant Colonel Philip <unk> took over command of the battalion , relieving Major Bernard Callinan who had been acting in the role after Brock was taken ill and later died in December 1943 . On 8 August the battalion embarked to return to Australia . Upon arrival , the men were given a brief period of leave before the battalion concentrated at Strathpine , Queensland , where they received reinforcements and undertook further training . They remained there for four months before departing for Bougainville on 6 December 1944 , under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Joseph Kelly . 
 = = = Bougainville = = = 
 The 31st / 51st Battalion arrived at Torokina on Bougainville four days later and , along with the rest of the 11th Brigade , they began an offensive campaign which saw them involved in heavy combat with the Japanese . They were committed to the fighting in three periods . The first , between December 1944 and February 1945 , saw the battalion take Tsimba Ridge , cross the Genga River and capture Downs Ridge . Later , in March and April 1945 , they undertook long range patrols in the central sector of the island in the vicinity of the Numa Numa Trail . Their final commitment came between May and July 1945 when the battalion was switched to the northern sector , where they took part in the fighting around the Bonis Peninsula . As a part of this phase , the battalion fought along the Ratsua front and undertook a disastrous amphibious landing at Porton Plantation . 
 Conceived as a company @-@ level effort to outflank the significant Japanese defences that were holding up the advance from Ratsua , the operation was plagued by poor planning , inadequate resources , intelligence failures and strategic and tactical errors at all levels . After landing at the wrong beach on 8 June , and finding themselves caught in a tight box of Japanese defensive positions , the 190 men from ' A ' and ' C ' Companies , under Captain Henry Downs , were unable to advance inland . One of the landing craft ran aground and supplies began to dwindle . In an effort to link up with the beleaguered company , ' D ' Company , which was holding the line along the Ratsua front , attempted to breakthrough the Japanese lines . Although some patrols were able to penetrate to within 500 yards ( 460 m ) of Porton , they were unable to get any closer . 
 Eventually the order to withdraw was given from 11th Brigade headquarters . During the subsequent evacuation , two more landing craft ran aground and although one managed to float free , the other remained stuck hard on a reef . Over the course of the next couple of days , the men in the landing craft were subjected to heavy Japanese attack and it was not until 11 June that rescue efforts were completed . The battalion lost 23 men killed or missing , presumed dead , while a further 106 were wounded in the operation . 
 Following the failure of the landing at Porton Plantation , the planned Australian advance into the Bonis Peninsula was called off , and the Australians focused their main effort on Bougainville towards the capture of Buin in the south . The effort in the north was reduced to that of a holding action as further resources were transferred out of the sector . Nevertheless , the 31st / 51st Battalion continued to undertake patrols along the Ratsua front , during which they suffered further casualties , until they were withdrawn from combat operations on 28 June . They were subsequently moved back to Torokina . 
 = = = Disbandment = = = 
 Following the cessation of hostilities on 15 August 1945 , the battalion undertook garrison duties on Nauru and Ocean Island . In this role they helped to maintain law and order and investigate war crimes , oversaw the transfer of over 4 @,@ 000 Japanese prisoners of war to Bougainville and maintained a military administration until 1 November 1945 when civil control was re @-@ established . A short time later , the detachment on Ocean Island was withdrawn back to Nauru . 
 In December 1945 , most of the battalion ( except one platoon ) was withdrawn to New Britain to rejoin the 11th Brigade . In February 1946 , the platoon that had remained on Nauru arrived in Rabaul . As the demobilisation process began , the 31st / 51st stayed on New Britain until May when they received orders to return to Australia . On 15 April Lieutenant Colonel Donald Lamb took over as battalion commander . As personnel were discharged or transferred to other units for further service , the battalion 's numbers declined until eventually , on 4 July 1946 , the battalion was disbanded . 
 Throughout the course of the war , the 31st / 51st Battalion lost 61 men killed and 168 wounded . The majority of these came during the fighting on Bougainville where 41 men were killed in action , seven were posted as missing in action ( presumed killed ) and 12 died of wounds . Members of the battalion received the following decorations : one Distinguished Service Order , one Distinguished Conduct Medal , three Military Crosses , 10 Military Medals , one British Empire Medal and 27 Mentions in Despatches . 
 Both the 31st and 51st Battalions were later re @-@ raised as separate units when Australia 's part @-@ time military was re @-@ raised in 1948 under the guise of the Citizen Military Forces . Later , they became company @-@ level formations of the Pentropic 2nd Battalion , Royal Queensland Regiment , in 1960 . A further re @-@ organisation saw the units split again in 1965 and re @-@ raised as battalion @-@ level formations under their old numerical designations . They have remained separate since then . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 For their involvement in World War II , the 31st / 51st Battalion received the following battle honours : 
 Tsimba Ridge , Bonis – Porton , South @-@ West Pacific 1943 – 45 , Liberation of Australian New Guinea . 
 = = Commanding officers = = 
 The following officers served as commanding officer of the 31st / 51st Battalion : 
 Lieutenant Colonel Geoffrey Brock ( 1943 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Philip <unk> ( 1944 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Joseph Kelly ( 1944 – 1946 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Donald Lamb ( 1946 ) . 
 = Briton @-@ class corvette = 
 The Briton class was a group of three wooden screw corvettes built for the Royal Navy in the late 1860s . All three ships of the class only served overseas during their brief service lives . Between them , they were assigned to the China , East Indies , African , North American , and the Pacific Stations . All three were regarded as obsolete 15 years after they were completed , and they were sold in 1886 – 87 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Briton @-@ class corvettes were designed by Sir Edward Reed , the Director of Naval Construction , as lengthened versions of the Eclipse @-@ class sloops . Like the smaller ships , they had a ram @-@ style bow to reduce weight forward by elimination of the knee above the stem . Similarly , he shortened the counter at the stern to save weight . 
 The ships were 220 feet ( 67 @.@ 1 m ) long between perpendiculars and had a beam of 36 feet ( 11 @.@ 0 m ) . Forward , the ships had a draught of 12 feet 9 inches ( 3 @.@ 9 m ) , but aft they drew 16 ft 3 in ( 5 @.@ 0 m ) . They displaced from 1 @,@ 730 to 1 @,@ 860 long tons ( 1 @,@ 760 to 1 @,@ 890 t ) and had a burthen of 1 @,@ 322 tons . The hull was built entirely from wood except for iron crossbeams . Their crew consisted of 220 officers and enlisted men . 
 Two different types of engines and boilers were used with this class . HMS Druid , the first ship completed , had a two @-@ cylinder horizontal steam engine driving a single 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) propeller . Four rectangular boilers provided steam to the engine at a working pressure of 30 psi ( 207 kPa ; 2 kgf / cm2 ) . The engine produced a total of 2 @,@ 272 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 694 kW ) which gave her a maximum speed of about 13 @.@ 066 knots ( 24 @.@ 198 km / h ; 15 @.@ 036 mph ) during sea trials . In contrast , the two later ships had a two @-@ cylinder horizontal compound expansion steam engine , driving a single 15 @-@ foot or 14 @-@ foot @-@ 9 @-@ inch ( 4 @.@ 50 m ) propeller . Six cylindrical boilers provided steam to the engines at a working pressure of 60 – 64 psi ( 414 – 441 kPa ; 4 – 4 kgf / cm2 ) . The engines produced between 2 @,@ 149 and 2 @,@ 275 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 603 and 1 @,@ 696 kW ) which gave the two ships a maximum speed over 13 knots ( 24 km / h ; 15 mph ) . Briton and Thetis carried 255 long tons ( 259 t ) of coal , while Druid carried an additional 30 long tons ( 30 t ) . Although no information is available on their range , Admiral G. A. Ballard estimated that Druid had only about two @-@ thirds the range of her sisters , despite the additional coal that she carried , due to the greater efficiency of the compound expansion engines . 
 The class was ship rigged and had a sail area of 15 @,@ 000 square feet ( 1 @,@ 394 m2 ) . The lower masts were made of iron , but the other masts were wood . The ships were poor sailors and their best speed under sail alone was about 11 knots ( 20 km / h ; 13 mph ) . Ballard attributed their poor performance under sail to the drag of the propeller , which could neither be hoisted out of the water , nor feathered . He also attributed their sluggish steering under sail to interference with the flow of water to the rudder by the fixed propeller . The first two ships were re @-@ rigged as barques after their first commission . 
 The first two ships were initially armed with a mix of 7 @-@ inch and 64 @-@ pounder 71 cwt rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns . The eight 64 @-@ pounder guns were mounted on the broadside while the two 7 @-@ inch ( 178 mm ) guns were mounted on the forecastle and poop as chase guns . The 16 @-@ calibre 7 @-@ inch gun weighed 6 @.@ 5 long tons ( 6 @.@ 6 t ) and fired a 112 @-@ pound ( 50 @.@ 8 kg ) shell . It was credited with the nominal ability to penetrate 7 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 196 mm ) armour . After the completion of their first commissions , the two ships were rearmed with a total of fourteen lighter 64 @-@ cwt 64 @-@ pounder guns , two of which replaced the 7 @-@ inch guns as chase guns . Thetis , the last ship completed , was given this armament from the beginning . 
 = = Ships = = 
 Druid was the last ship to be built at Deptford Dockyard . The ship was initially assigned to the Cape of Good Hope Station , where she remained for two years before being transferred to the North America and West Indies Station . Druid was refitted upon her return home in December 1876 , which included rearmament . The ship recommissioned in February 1879 and returned to the North American Station . She returned home in September 1882 and was paid off . Druid was laid up in the Medway until she was sold for scrap in 1886 . 
 Briton was the first of the trio to be commissioned and was assigned to the East Indies Station in 1871 . She remained there for four and a half years , mostly engaged on the suppression of the slave trade . The ship was refitted and rearmed upon her return home and Briton remained in reserve until recommissioned in 1881 for service on the Cape Station . She was transferred back to the East Indies after two years on the Cape . Her crew was relieved in 1884 by another sent out from Britain and the ship remained on station until she was sold , less her armament , in Bombay in 1887 . 
 The construction of Thetis followed her sisters after a two @-@ year delay and she was initially assigned to the China Station in 1873 . She was transferred to the East Indies after a year on station and returned home in 1877 where she was refitted . Two years later , the ship was assigned to the Pacific Station until she was ordered home in 1883 . Thetis was paid off after her arrival and was sold in 1887 . 
 = Enamorada de Ti = 
 Enamorada de Ti ( English : In Love with You ) is the second remix album by American Tejano singer Selena . It was released posthumously on 3 April 2012 through Capitol Latin and Q @-@ Productions . Enamorada de Ti was produced by Sergio Lopes , Leslie Ahrens , Andres Castro , <unk> <unk> , Cesar Lemons and Chilean record producer Humberto Gatica . Gatica had the idea of modernizing songs recorded by Selena into today 's popular music genres . Selena 's family had already been working on a similar idea , but they set it aside in favor of Enamorada de Ti , which had gained the approval of Capitol Latin . The selection of artists to sing duets with Selena began in late summer 2011 . Gatica and Selena 's family chose American singer and actress Selena Gomez , Puerto Rican singer Don Omar , Samuel " Samo " Parra from the Mexican rock band Camila , Mexican singer Cristian Castro , Spanish DJ mixer Juan Magan , and the Carlos Santana band , while the remaining songs selected were remixed . 
 Recording sessions began shortly after the selected artists had been chosen . Once Selena 's family released confirmation of a duets album in January 2012 , it quickly caught media attention . Gomez used her Twitter account to promote the album 's release , a move that Gatica praised . Castro and Samo performed their respective duets from the album during the 2012 Latin Billboard Music Awards . The duet version of " Amor Prohibido " was released digitally on iTunes on 7 February 2012 . It peaked at number eight on the US Billboard Latin Pop Airplay chart . Other songs on the album , including the title track ( duet with Magan ) , " Como la Flor " ( duet with Castro ) , " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " ( duet with Gomez ) , and " Fotos y Recuerdos " ( duet with Omar ) , entered the Billboard Latin digital charts for the first time since their original release in the 1990s . 
 Enamorada de Ti debuted and peaked at number one on the US Billboard Top Latin Albums and Latin Pop Albums charts . It remained at number one on the latter for two consecutive weeks . After debuting and peaking at number 135 on the Billboard 200 chart , the recording slipped off the chart and never returned , as sales declined . Enamorada de Ti peaked at number 56 on the Mexican Albums Chart . The album received a mixed response from music critics , many of whom preferred the original recordings . Carlos Quintana of About.com named Enamorada de Ti one of the " Best Latin Music Albums of the Year , So Far " and one of the " Most Popular Albums of the Year " in 2012 . 
 = = Quintanilla family project = = 
 In 2008 , Selena 's brother and former principal record producer A.B. Quintanilla III , known as A.B. , was planning to quit music and leave the Kumbia All @-@ Starz , the successor of Kumbia Kings . Their father and manager , Abraham Quintanilla , Jr . , told A.B. that he did not want him to quit music , saying that his dream was that his children would continue in the music industry and never give up . In 2009 , after performing to an enthusiastic crowd in Bolivia , A.B. decided to continue recording music . 
 A.B. and Abraham then planned to release an album featuring Selena , who was murdered in 1995 by her " friend " and ex @-@ employee Yolanda <unk> . Their aim was to update Selena 's music for the modern music industry . They intended to take vocals from five previously unreleased songs that Selena had recorded before signing a recording contract with Capitol Latin ( then EMI Latin ) in 1989 . The vocals would then be combined into new songs to create a full @-@ length album , as if Selena were still alive . 
 They announced their forthcoming project in the Spanish media , stating that they were choosing ten songs for the album and that it would be released in the fall of 2011 or early in 2012 . In the end they created several more songs than they had planned . When asked if the album might be released in March 2012 , marking the 17th anniversary of Selena 's death , Abraham said that it was a possibility . Many media outlets called it a remix album . Abraham told the press that it would be released in five volumes , with ten tracks on each . 
 The projected album was to include five previously unreleased a cappella songs , which were remastered and remixed . Some of the songs in the album were to be duets with Tejano artists , who donated their time to record new tracks featuring Selena . The song " Soy Amiga " ( " I 'm A Friend " ) , which first appeared in 1986 on Selena 's third LP record , Alpha , was transformed from a Spanish ballad into a modern cumbia recording . The album 's central themes would be Abraham 's influence on his children 's love of music , and bringing Selena 's music " back to life " . Abraham began negotiating with Capitol Latin to help distribute and market the album throughout the United States . 
 = = Production = = 
 In the fall of 2011 , Chilean record producer Humberto Gatica and Capitol Latin senior vice president Sergio Lopes had the idea of turning Selena 's songs into duets in popular music genres . In contrast to the Quintanilla family project , which had been using only Tejano artists , Gatica and Lopes wanted a diverse group . Forty @-@ six artists and eight producers showed an interest in working on the project , and Gatica held a press conference with the Quintanilla family for their input . Abraham chose Selena Gomez to record " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " because of her live cover of the song during several of her concerts . Selena 's sister Suzette Quintanilla , formerly drummer of Selena y Los Dinos , chose Samuel " Samo " Parra from the Mexican band Camila , saying that she chose him because she was a huge fan of Camila . Puerto Rican reggaeton singer Don Omar , Mexican singer Christian Castro , Spanish DJ mixer Juan Magan , and the Carlos Santana band were chosen by Capitol Latin . Other artists , such as Cuban American rapper Pitbull , Mexican singers Paulina Rubio and Thalía , Colombian singer Carlos Vives , and Cuban singer Gloria Estefan , were rejected for unspecified reasons , and many other artists could not part take in the project because of scheduling conflicts . 
 After meeting with the Quintanilla family , Lopes observed young fans at the Selena Museum in Corpus Christi , Texas , and their crying became his inspiration for the album . During pre @-@ production , Lopes extracted Selena 's vocals from studio recordings and created a " live album " version using other musicians , such as English singer @-@ songwriter Sting , Mexican guitarist Carlos Santana , American blues rock singer John Mayer , and Puerto Rican singer Luis Miguel . Recording sessions took place in ten different recording studios : <unk> Recording Studios in Mexico ; East West Recording Studios in Los Angeles ; Miami Beat Studios in Miami ; Move Studios in Los Angeles ; NRG Studios in Los Angeles ; Ocean Way Recording Studios in Los Angeles ; On the Groove Studios in Miami ; <unk> Studios in Miami ; The Village Studios in Los Angeles ; and Vanquish Studios in Davie , Florida . 
 = = Songs = = 
 Samo , who sang in " Amor Prohibido " , told the Ecuadoran newspaper El Telégrafo that he had always dreamed of recording a duet with Selena and that " Amor Prohibido " was one of his favorite songs . He said he felt the " presence of Selena " as soon as he put his headphones on and began recording . Joey Guerra of the San Antonio Express @-@ News believed that the lead single " proved a solid preview for the album " and that its " wistful lyrics work nicely as a duet with Samo " . Guerra described the song as a " gentle pop @-@ rock arrangement " and felt that this arrangement might have been how it was intended . Nilan Lovelace of Reporter Magazine called the remix version of " Amor Prohibido " an " album favorite " and believed it to be the type of music that Selena would be recording today . 
 The duet with Gomez in " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " had a mixed reception . The Belfast Telegraph wrote that Gomez had done an " amazing job " . At the Billboard Latin Music Awards in Miami , A.B. told E ! that Gomez gave a " fantastic vocal performance on the record " . Gomez told <unk> , " I was completely honored when they asked me to be on the tribute CD and when I went into the studio to record they actually had her vocals in the booth that she was in , so I felt like she was singing right next to me , it gave me chills ! It was incredible and it was a great experience and it was a great song . " Domingo Banda of the Semana News called " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " a " standout track " . Guerra , however , wrote that the new version of " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " was " virtually the same arrangement as the original . It would have been more effective reshaped as a poppy club track . " He found Gomez ' vocals " curiously lackluster " , as if she was " scared of the song " and " intimidated by her idol " . Lovelace commented that it was " obvious that Spanish isn 't Gomez ' first language , and comes in a distant second " , and that " Gomez ' odd voice " came across as sometimes " much higher and very squeaky when speaking Spanish " , concluding that it " doesn ’ t match the rest of the song and momentarily brings everything to a halt " . 
 Guerra wrote that the remix of " No Me Queda Más " , which includes a classical piano in its introduction , " is given a soft piano arrangement that highlights [ Selena 's ] rich , throaty delivery but ultimately pales compared to the original " . Guerra noted that Suzette 's vocals had been removed from " Tus <unk> " and thought that the new , " somber arrangement " failed to complement the " sassy " lyrics . Banda praised the recording 's use of choirs and piano and the way the rhythm of the " Tus <unk> " remix complemented Selena 's voice . 
 Banda liked Christian Castro 's interpretation of " Como la Flor " in his duet , as did Carlos Quintana from About.com , who also admired its " bolero @-@ <unk> " arrangements . Guerra described " Como La Flor " as " an elegant mariachi pairing " , praising Castro 's blending and rhythm but finding the duet less emotionally powerful than the original . Lovelace gave a negative assessment of " Como La Flor " , believing Castro to be a poor choice for it . 
 Enrique Lopetegui of the San Antonio Current described " Fotos y Recuerdos " as a " reggaeton @-@ ish " remix . Guerra saw it as " stuck in a battle between cumbia and reggaeton rhythms " , noticing a slightly faster tempo . He wrote that " Ya No " " exhibits some punch " , but he preferred the original to the new , " Santana @-@ esque " version . Quintana praised the electric guitar of " Ya No " and its " tropical beat " in the background . Banda commented that the track blended Tejano cumbia and electronic sounds , and he praised its new guitar chords . In " Techno Cumbia 2012 " , Guerra liked the " playful guitar " but found nothing else praiseworthy . He found the interpretation of " El Chico del Apartamento 512 " acceptable but lacking in force , and suggested that Gomez might have fared better on this track . Banda called " El Chico del Apartamento 512 " a " relaxed reggae " track . 
 The title track , " Enamorada de Ti " , received a favorable review from Guerra , who believed that its merengue version " manages to work up a considerable sweat " . Calling it a " tropical rhythm " , Banda noted that it is the earliest @-@ recorded track on the album . Lopetegui considered it " crowd @-@ pleasing " . Lovelace thought it " enjoyable " , saying that the merengue mix version " adds a lively , tropical tone to the original slow tempo love song " , but he added that it " seems awkwardly paired when it comes to collaborating artists , who often clash with Selena 's voice and the overall sound " . Of the acoustic bonus tracks , Guerra wrote that they are " unlikely highlights , the new instrumentation gives them all a nice edge and highlights Selena 's burgeoning vocal prowess " . Banda was more positive , listing them as recommended tracks that he found to be reminiscent of live Selena recordings . 
 = = Release = = 
 Latina magazine released a snippet of the acoustic track of " <unk> " on 30 March 2012 . Enamorada de Ti was released on 3 April 2012 through Capitol Latin and Q @-@ Productions . A deluxe edition of the album was released through Wal @-@ Mart on the same day , with three additional acoustic tracks . On iTunes , the Juan Magan remix of " Is It the Beat ? " was added as a bonus track . Verizon Wireless made an acoustic version of " Amor Prohibido " available as a ringtone . 
 The album debuted at number one on the US Top Latin Albums and Latin Pop Albums charts . It debuted and peaked at number 135 on Billboard 200 and at number 117 on the Billboard Comprehensive Albums chart . It was number one on the Latin Pop Albums chart for two consecutive weeks . On the week ending 8 April 2012 , it peaked at number 57 on Top 100 Mexico . It knocked Ednita Nazario 's Desnuda ( 2012 ) off the top of both Top Latin Albums and Latin Pop Albums . Carlos Quintana of About.com named Enamorada de Ti one of the " Best Latin Music Albums of the Year , So Far " and one of the " Most Popular Albums of the Year " in 2012 . The album was the 65th best @-@ selling Latin album of 2012 , and the 19th best @-@ selling Latin pop album of 2012 . 
 The lead single , " Amor Prohibido " , was released digitally on 28 February 2012 . It peaked at number 39 on the Latin Tropical Airplay chart , number 23 on Hot Latin Tracks , number 8 on Latin Pop Songs , and number 8 on Latin Regional Mexican Digital Songs . It also reached singles music charts in Colombia , Ecuador , Venezuela and Peru . The second single to be released digitally was the duet version of " Como La Flor " , with Christian Castro . It was released in Colombia on 14 August 2012 . 
 Because of the commercial success of Enamorada de Ti , Capitol Latin confirmed a trilogy of Selena remix / duet albums . In May 2012 , Capitol Latin confirmed an English @-@ language followup . By February 2012 , Canadian singer Michael Bublé was confirmed as one of many other artists who expressed interest in recording a duet with Selena . In late August 2012 , fans were asked to fill out a survey from the official Selena Facebook page , inviting them to choose three Latin singers and three non @-@ Latin singers they would like to see recording a duet with Selena on the follow @-@ up album . Guerra suggested La Mafia 's Oscar de la Rosa , Jennifer Lopez , Blake Shelton , Drake , Bruno Mars and Beyoncé Knowles . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Several music and talk shows , including E ! , the Cristina Show , Sábado Gigante , El Gordo y la <unk> and <unk> Total , competed in releasing the news to their viewers . Gomez earned praise from Gatica by using her Twitter account to tell her fans about the album 's release . Castro and Samo performed their respective duets from the album during the 2012 Latin Billboard Music Awards . Quintana of About.com wrote , " they delivered one of the most touching performances of the night with the songs ' Como La Flor ' and ' Amor Prohibido ' " . Capitol Latin created a website to promote the album . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Enamorada de Ti received mixed reviews . A writer for Semana News called the duets " unique collaborations " . Domingo Banda , also writing for Semana News , said that Selena 's voice sounded very much alive and vibrant again . Enrique Lopetegui of the San Antonio Current wrote that diehard Selena fans " will take the new pop duet of ' Amor Prohibido ' with Camila 's Samo over the cheesy cumbia original anytime " . Lopetegui described " <unk> " , " Si Una Vez " , and " No Quiero Saber " as " unplugged " because of their " superb acoustic guitar [ s ] " . Furthermore , Lopetegui complimented the technology used in the album to " change the tempo of Selena 's original track without changing the pitch , and her duet with Christian Castro is proof of technology put to good use " . He found " Fotos y Recuerdos " and the title track " unbearable " , however , and advised his readers to be prepared to skip them . 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic wrote that Enamorada de Ti gave a good idea of how Selena might have sounded in 2012 . Erlewine commented that " Amor Prohibido " , as updated for the album , " ha [ d ] much of its overly stiff drum machines stripped away , replaced with warmer studio musicians " . Far from making Selena sound contemporary , he thought that all the remixed songs " are rooted in the ' 90s and sound that way " , even if " fresher " than many other posthumous Selena releases . Guerra wrote that Enamorada de Ti included " reworked gems " , but he believed that it felt rushed and dated . Unlike the remixes , he found the originals " still fresh almost two decades later " . He disapproved of the acoustic and the slowing down of the music 's arrangements . Guerra concluded that Selena 's legacy " deserves better than this half @-@ hearted attempt " , and that better duet partners and producers ( he named René Pérez Joglar from Calle 13 , RedOne , Ximena Sariñana , and Cachorro López ) could have made Enamorada de Ti " a fascinating tribute to Selena " . 
 Quintana from About.com believed the duets on Enamorada de Ti underlined the " timeless appeal " of Selena 's music . He observed that the album is musically diverse , with examples of bolero ( " No Me Queda Mas " ) , ranchera ( " Como La Flor " ) , cumbia ( " Techno Cumbia " ) , reggaeton ( " Fotos y <unk> " ) , Latin pop ( " Amor Prohibido " ) and merengue ( " Enamorada de Ti " ) . Quintana was unsurprised by the excitement of Selena fans , calling Enamorada de Ti a " very experimental project " that " introduces a new sound to the music [ of Selena ] " . He concluded that the experiment was worthwhile and that the album is a good introduction to Selena 's repertoire . Lovelace of Reporter Magazine found Gomez ' " awkward " and " squeaky " voice unsuitable and believed that Castro was not the right choice for " Como La Flor " . " If you 're new to Spanish @-@ speaking music , " he wrote , " you 'll enjoy the mixes . If not , avoid them at all cost . " Then , however , he judged all the songs except " Como La Flor " , " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " , and the title track to be " excellent ... catchy and appropriate 2012 @-@ spin " . <unk> Palomares of Latina called Enamorada de Ti a " groundbreaking and emotional musical project " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are taken from the album 's liner notes . 
 Instruments 
 Technical and production 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Paul McCartney = 
 Sir James Paul McCartney , MBE ( born 18 June 1942 ) is an English singer @-@ songwriter , multi @-@ instrumentalist , and composer . With John Lennon , George Harrison , and Ringo Starr , he gained worldwide fame with the rock band the Beatles , one of the most popular and influential groups in the history of pop music . His songwriting partnership with Lennon is one of the most celebrated of the 20th century . After the band 's break @-@ up , he pursued a solo career and formed Wings with his first wife , Linda , and Denny Laine . 
 McCartney has been recognised as one of the most successful composers and performers of all time . More than 2 @,@ 200 artists have covered his Beatles song " Yesterday " , more than any other copyrighted song in history . Wings ' 1977 release " Mull of Kintyre " is one of the all @-@ time best @-@ selling singles in the UK . A two @-@ time inductee into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame ( as a member of the Beatles in 1988 , and as a solo artist in 1999 ) , and a 21 @-@ time Grammy Award winner , McCartney has written , or co @-@ written , 32 songs that have reached number one on the Billboard Hot 100 , and as of 2009 he has 25 @.@ 5 million RIAA @-@ certified units in the United States . McCartney , Lennon , Harrison and Starr received MBEs in 1965 , and in 1997 , McCartney was knighted for services to music . 
 McCartney has released an extensive catalogue of songs as a solo artist and has composed classical and electronic music . He has taken part in projects to promote international charities related to such subjects as animal rights , seal hunting , land mines , vegetarianism , poverty , and music education . He has married three times and is the father of five children . 
 = = Early life = = 
 James Paul McCartney was born on 18 June 1942 in Walton Hospital , Liverpool , England , where his mother , Mary Patricia ( née Mohin ; 1909 – 1956 ) , had qualified to practise as a nurse . His father , James ( " Jim " ) McCartney ( 1902 – 1976 ) , was absent from his son 's birth due to his work as a volunteer firefighter during World War II . Paul has one younger brother , Michael ( born 7 January 1944 ) . Though the children were baptised in their mother 's Catholic faith , their father was a former Protestant turned agnostic , and religion was not emphasised in the household . 
 McCartney attended Stockton Wood Road Primary School in Speke from 1947 until 1949 , when he transferred to Joseph Williams Junior School in Belle Vale because of overcrowding at Stockton . In 1953 , with only three others out of ninety examinees , he passed the 11 @-@ Plus exam , meaning he could attend the Liverpool Institute , a grammar school rather than a secondary modern school . In 1954 , he met schoolmate George Harrison on the bus from his suburban home in Speke . The two quickly became friends ; McCartney later admitted : " I tended to talk down to him because he was a year younger . " 
 McCartney 's mother Mary was a midwife and the family 's primary wage earner ; her earnings enabled them to move into 20 Forthlin Road in Allerton , where they lived until 1964 . She rode a bicycle to her patients ; McCartney described an early memory of her leaving at " about three in the morning [ the ] streets ... thick with snow " . On 31 October 1956 , when McCartney was fourteen , his mother died of an embolism . McCartney 's loss later became a point of connection with John Lennon , whose mother , Julia , had died when he was seventeen . 
 McCartney 's father was a trumpet player and pianist , who had led Jim Mac 's Jazz Band in the 1920s . He kept an upright piano in the front room , encouraged his sons to be musical and advised Paul to take piano lessons , but Paul preferred to learn by ear . He gave Paul a nickel @-@ plated trumpet for his fourteenth birthday , but when rock and roll became popular on Radio Luxembourg , McCartney traded it for a £ 15 Framus Zenith ( model 17 ) acoustic guitar , since he wanted to be able to sing while playing . He found it difficult to play guitar right @-@ handed , but after noticing a poster advertising a Slim Whitman concert and realising that Whitman played left @-@ handed , he reversed the order of the strings . McCartney wrote his first song , " I Lost My Little Girl " , on the Zenith , and composed another early tune that would become " When I 'm Sixty @-@ Four " on the piano . American rhythm and blues influenced him , and Little Richard was his schoolboy idol ; " Long Tall Sally " was the first song McCartney performed in public , at a Butlins holiday camp talent competition . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1957 – 60 : The Quarrymen = = = 
 At the age of fifteen , McCartney met Lennon and his band , the Quarrymen , at the St Peter 's Church Hall fête in Woolton on 6 July 1957 . The Quarrymen played a mix of rock and roll and skiffle , a type of popular music with jazz , blues and folk influences . The band invited McCartney to join soon afterwards as a rhythm guitarist , and he formed a close working relationship with Lennon . Harrison joined in 1958 as lead guitarist , followed by Lennon 's art school friend Stuart Sutcliffe on bass , in 1960 . By May 1960 the band had tried several names , including <unk> , Johnny and the Moondogs and the Silver Beetles . They adopted the name the Beatles in August 1960 and recruited drummer Pete Best shortly before a five @-@ engagement residency in Hamburg . 
 = = = 1960 – 70 : The Beatles = = = 
 Informally represented by Allan Williams , the Beatles ' first booking was for a residency in Hamburg , starting in 1960 . In 1961 , Sutcliffe left the band and McCartney reluctantly became their bass player . They recorded professionally for the first time while in Hamburg , credited as the Beat Brothers , as the backing band for English singer Tony Sheridan on the single " My Bonnie " . This brought them to the attention of Brian Epstein , a key figure in their subsequent development and success . He became their manager in January 1962 . Ringo Starr replaced Best in August , and the band had their first hit , " Love Me Do " , in October , becoming popular in the UK in 1963 , and in the US a year later . Their fans ' hysteria became known as " Beatlemania " , and the press sometimes referred to McCartney as the " cute Beatle " . 
 In August 1965 , the Beatles released the McCartney composition " Yesterday " , featuring a string quartet . Included on the Help ! LP , the song was the group 's first recorded use of classical music elements and their first recording that involved only a single band member . " Yesterday " became the most covered song in popular music history . Later that year , during recording sessions for the album Rubber Soul , McCartney began to supplant Lennon as the dominant musical force in the band . Musicologist Ian MacDonald wrote , " from [ 1965 ] ... [ McCartney ] would be in the ascendant not only as a songwriter , but also as instrumentalist , arranger , producer , and de facto musical director of the Beatles . " Critics described Rubber Soul as a significant advance in the refinement and profundity of the band 's music and lyrics . Considered a high point in the Beatles catalogue , both Lennon and McCartney said they had written the music for the song " In My Life " . McCartney said of the album , " we 'd had our cute period , and now it was time to expand . " Recording engineer Norman Smith stated that the Rubber Soul sessions exposed indications of increasing contention within the band : " the clash between John and Paul was becoming obvious ... [ and ] as far as Paul was concerned , George [ Harrison ] could do no right — Paul was absolutely finicky . " 
 In 1966 , the Beatles released the album Revolver . Featuring sophisticated lyrics , studio experimentation , and an expanded repertoire of musical genres ranging from innovative string arrangements to psychedelic rock , the album marked an artistic leap for the Beatles . The first of three consecutive McCartney A @-@ sides , the single " Paperback Writer " preceded the LP 's release . The Beatles produced a short promotional film for the song , and another for its B @-@ side , " Rain " . The films , described by Harrison as " the forerunner of videos " , aired on The Ed Sullivan Show and Top of the Pops in June 1966 . Revolver also included McCartney 's " Eleanor Rigby " , which featured a string octet . According to Gould , the song is " a neoclassical tour de force ... a true hybrid , conforming to no recognizable style or genre of song " . Except for some backing vocals , the song included only McCartney 's lead vocal and the strings arranged by producer George Martin . 
 The band gave their final commercial concert at the end of their 1966 US tour . Later that year , McCartney completed his first musical project apart from the group — a film score for the UK production The Family Way . The score was a collaboration with Martin , who used two McCartney themes to write thirteen variations . The soundtrack failed to chart , but it won McCartney an Ivor Novello Award for Best Instrumental Theme . 
 Upon the end of the Beatles ' performing career , McCartney sensed unease in the band and wanted them to maintain creative productivity . He pressed them to start a new project , which became Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band , widely regarded as rock 's first concept album . Inspired to create a new persona for the group , to serve as a vehicle for experimentation and to demonstrate to their fans that they had musically matured , McCartney invented the fictional band of the album 's title track . As McCartney explained , " We were fed up with being the Beatles . We really hated that fucking four little mop @-@ top approach . We were not boys we were men ... and [ we ] thought of ourselves as artists rather than just performers . " 
 Starting in November 1966 , the band adopted an experimental attitude during recording sessions for the album . According to engineer Geoff Emerick , " the Beatles were looking to go out on a limb , both musically and sonically ... we were utilising a lot of tape <unk> and other manipulation techniques ... limiters and ... effects like flanging and ADT . " Their recording of " A Day in the Life " required a forty @-@ piece orchestra , which Martin and McCartney took turns conducting . The sessions produced the double A @-@ side single " Strawberry Fields Forever " / " Penny Lane " in February 1967 , and the LP followed in June . McCartney 's " She 's Leaving Home " was an orchestral pop song . MacDonald described the track as " [ among ] the finest work on Sgt. Pepper — imperishable popular art of its time " . Based on an ink drawing by McCartney , the LP 's cover included a collage designed by pop artists Peter Blake and Jann Haworth , featuring the Beatles in costume as the Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band , standing with a host of celebrities . The heavy moustaches worn by the Beatles reflected the growing influence of hippie style trends on the band , while their clothing " spoofed the vogue in Britain for military fashions " , wrote Gould . Scholar David Scott <unk> described Sgt. Pepper as " the most important and influential rock @-@ and @-@ roll album ever recorded " . 
 Epstein 's death in August 1967 created a void , which left the Beatles perplexed and concerned about their future . McCartney , stepping in to fill that void , gradually became the de facto leader and business manager of the group Lennon had once led . His first creative suggestion after this change of leadership was to propose that the band move forward on their plans to produce a film for television , which was to become Magical Mystery Tour . The project was " an administrative nightmare throughout " , according to Beatles ' historian Mark Lewisohn . McCartney largely directed the film , which brought the group their first unfavourable critical response . However , the film 's soundtrack was more successful . It was released in the UK as a six @-@ track double extended play disc ( EP ) , and as an identically titled LP in the US , filled out with five songs from the band 's recent singles . The only Capitol compilation later included in the group 's official canon of studio albums , the Magical Mystery Tour LP achieved $ 8 million in sales within three weeks of its release , higher initial sales than any other Capitol LP up to that point . 
 In January 1968 , EMI filmed the Beatles for a promotional trailer intended to advertise the animated film Yellow Submarine , loosely based on the imaginary world evoked by McCartney 's 1966 composition . Though critics admired the film for its visual style , humour and music , the soundtrack album issued seven months later received a less enthusiastic response . By late 1968 , relations within the band were deteriorating . The tension grew during the recording of their self @-@ titled double album , also known as the " White Album " . Matters worsened the following year during the Let It Be sessions , when a camera crew filmed McCartney lecturing the group : " We 've been very negative since Mr. Epstein passed away ... we were always fighting [ his ] discipline a bit , but it 's silly to fight that discipline if it 's our own " . 
 In March 1969 , McCartney married Linda Eastman , and in August , the couple had their first child , Mary , named after his late mother . For Abbey Road , the band 's last recorded album , Martin suggested " a continuously moving piece of music " , urging the group to think symphonically . McCartney agreed , but Lennon did not . They eventually compromised , agreeing to McCartney 's suggestion : an LP featuring individual songs on side one , and a long medley on side two . In October 1969 , a rumour surfaced that McCartney had died in a car crash in 1966 and been replaced by a lookalike , but this was quickly refuted when a November Life magazine cover featured him and his family , accompanied by the caption " Paul is still with us " . 
 On 10 April 1970 , in the midst of business disagreements with his bandmates , McCartney announced his departure from the group . He filed suit for the band 's formal dissolution on 31 December 1970 . More legal disputes followed as McCartney 's attorneys , his in @-@ laws John and Lee Eastman , fought Lennon 's , Harrison 's , and Starr 's business manager , Allen Klein , over royalties and creative control . An English court legally dissolved the Beatles on 9 January 1975 , though sporadic lawsuits against their record company EMI , Klein , and each other persisted until 1989 . They are widely regarded as one of the most popular and influential acts in the history of rock music . 
 Prior to , and for a while after leaving the group , McCartney suffered from a deep depression as a result of the band 's break @-@ up . He spent days in bed and drank excessively : " I nearly had a breakdown , " he said . " I was going crazy . " Biographer Howard Sounes writes that " McCartney sank into whisky @-@ soaked oblivion , [ and ] only Linda knew how to save him . " She helped him pull out of that emotional crisis by praising his work as a songwriter and convincing him to continue writing and recording . In her honor , he later wrote " Maybe I 'm Amazed " , explaining that with the Beatles breaking up , " that was my feeling : Maybe I 'm amazed at what 's going on ... Maybe I 'm a man and maybe you 're the only woman who could ever help me ; Baby won 't you help me understand ... Maybe I 'm amazed at the way you pulled me out of time , hung me on the line , Maybe I 'm amazed at the way I really need you . " He added that " every love song I write is for Linda . " 
 = = = 1970 – 81 : Wings = = = 
 After the Beatles ' break @-@ up in 1970 , McCartney continued his musical career with his first solo release , McCartney , a US number @-@ one album . Apart from some vocal contributions from Linda , McCartney is a one @-@ man album , with Paul providing compositions , instrumentation and vocals . In 1971 , he collaborated with Linda and drummer Denny Seiwell on a second album , Ram . A UK number one and a US top five , Ram included the co @-@ written US number @-@ one hit single " Uncle Albert / Admiral Halsey " . Later that year , ex @-@ Moody Blues guitarist Denny Laine joined the McCartneys and Seiwell to form the band Wings . McCartney had this to say on the group 's formation : " Wings were always a difficult idea ... any group having to follow [ the Beatles ' ] success would have a hard job ... I found myself in that very position . However , it was a choice between going on or finishing , and I loved music too much to think of stopping . " In September 1971 , the McCartneys ' daughter Stella was born , named in honour of Linda 's grandmothers , both of whom were named Stella . 
 Following the addition of guitarist Henry McCullough , Wings ' first concert tour began in 1972 with a debut performance in front of an audience of seven hundred at the University of Nottingham . Ten more gigs followed as they travelled across the UK in a van during an unannounced tour of universities , during which the band stayed in modest accommodation and received pay in coinage collected from students , while avoiding Beatles songs during their performances . A seven @-@ week , 25 @-@ show tour of Europe followed , during which the band played solely Wings and McCartney solo material except for a few covers , including the Little Richard hit " Long Tall Sally " , the only song McCartney played during the tour that had previously been recorded by the Beatles . McCartney wanted the tour to avoid large venues ; most of the small halls they played had capacities of fewer than 3 @,@ 000 people . Of his first two post @-@ Beatles tours , McCartney said , " The main thing I didn 't want was to come on stage , faced with the whole torment of five rows of press people with little pads , all looking at me and saying , ' Oh well , he is not as good as he was . ' So we decided to go out on that university tour which made me less nervous ... by the end of that tour I felt ready for something else , so we went into Europe . " 
 In March 1973 , Wings achieved their first US number @-@ one single , " My Love " , included on their second LP , Red Rose Speedway , a US number one and UK top five . Paul 's collaboration with Linda and former Beatles producer Martin resulted in the song " Live and Let Die " , which was the theme song for the James Bond film of the same name . Nominated for an Academy Award , the song reached number two in the US and number nine in the UK . It also earned Martin a Grammy for his orchestral arrangement . Music professor and author Vincent Benitez described the track as " symphonic rock at its best " . 
 After the departure of McCullough and Seiwell in 1973 , the McCartneys and Laine recorded Band on the Run . The album was the first of seven platinum Wings LPs . It was a US and UK number one , the band 's first to top the charts in both countries and the first ever to reach Billboard magazine 's charts on three separate occasions . One of the best @-@ selling releases of the decade , it remained on the UK charts for 124 weeks . Rolling Stone named it Album of the Year for 1974 , and in 1975 it won Grammy Awards for Best Contemporary / Pop Vocal and Best Engineered Album . In 1974 , Wings achieved a second US number @-@ one single with the title track . The album also included the top @-@ ten hits " Jet " and " Helen Wheels " , and earned the 413th spot on Rolling Stone 's list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time . 
 Wings followed Band on the Run with the chart @-@ topping albums Venus and Mars ( 1975 ) and Wings at the Speed of Sound ( 1976 ) . In 1975 , they began the fourteen @-@ month Wings Over the World Tour , which included stops in the UK , Australia , Europe and the US . The tour marked the first time McCartney performed Beatles songs live with Wings , with five in the two @-@ hour set list : " I 've Just Seen a Face " , " Yesterday " , " Blackbird " , " Lady Madonna " and " The Long and Winding Road " . Following the second European leg of the tour and extensive rehearsals in London , the group undertook an ambitious US arena tour that yielded the US number @-@ one live triple LP Wings over America . 
 In September 1977 , the McCartneys had a third child , a son they named James . In November , the Wings song " Mull of Kintyre " , co @-@ written with Laine , was quickly becoming one of the best @-@ selling singles in UK chart history . The most successful single of McCartney 's solo career , it achieved double the sales of the previous record holder , " She Loves You " , and went on to sell 2 @.@ 5 million copies and hold the UK sales record until the 1984 charity single , " Do They Know It 's Christmas ? " 
 London Town ( 1978 ) spawned a US number @-@ one single ( " With a Little Luck " ) , and was Wings ' best @-@ selling LP since Band on the Run , making the top five in both the US and the UK . Critical reception was unfavourable , and McCartney expressed disappointment with the album . Back to the Egg ( 1979 ) featured McCartney 's collaboration with a rock supergroup dubbed " the Rockestra " . Credited to Wings , the band included Pete Townshend , David Gilmour , Gary Brooker , John Paul Jones and John Bonham . Though certified platinum , critics panned the album . Wings completed their final concert tour in 1979 , with twenty shows in the UK that included the live debut of the Beatles songs " Got to Get You into My Life " , " The Fool on the Hill " and " Let it Be " . 
 In 1980 , McCartney released his second solo LP , the self @-@ produced McCartney II , which peaked at number one in the UK and number three in the US . As with his first album , he composed and performed it alone . The album contained the song " Coming Up " , the live version of which , recorded in Glasgow , Scotland , in 1979 by Wings , became the group 's last number @-@ one hit . By 1981 , McCartney felt he had accomplished all he could creatively with Wings and decided he needed a change . The group disbanded in April 1981 following disagreements over royalties and salaries . 
 = = = 1982 – 90 = = = 
 In 1982 McCartney collaborated with Stevie Wonder on the Martin @-@ produced number @-@ one hit " Ebony and Ivory " , included on McCartney 's Tug of War LP , and with Michael Jackson on " The Girl Is Mine " from Thriller . " Ebony and Ivory " was McCartney 's record 28th single to hit number one on the Billboard 100 . The following year , he and Jackson worked on " Say Say Say " , McCartney 's most recent US number one as of 2014 . McCartney earned his latest UK number one as of 2014 with the title track of his LP release that year , " Pipes of Peace " . 
 In 1984 , McCartney starred in the musical Give My Regards to Broad Street , a feature film he also wrote and produced which included Starr in an acting role . <unk> by critics , Variety described the film as " characterless , bloodless , and pointless " . Roger Ebert awarded it a single star and wrote , " you can safely skip the movie and proceed directly to the soundtrack " . The album fared much better , reaching number one in the UK and producing the US top @-@ ten hit single " No More Lonely Nights " , featuring David Gilmour on lead guitar . In 1985 , Warner Brothers commissioned McCartney to write a song for the comedic feature film Spies Like Us . He composed and recorded the track in four days , with Phil Ramone co @-@ producing . McCartney participated in Live Aid , performing " Let it Be " , but technical difficulties rendered his vocals and piano barely audible for the first two verses , punctuated by squeals of feedback . Equipment technicians resolved the problems and David Bowie , Alison Moyet , Pete Townshend and Bob Geldof joined McCartney on stage , receiving an enthusiastic crowd reaction . 
 McCartney collaborated with Eric Stewart on Press to Play ( 1986 ) , with Stewart co @-@ writing more than half the songs on the LP . In 1988 , McCartney released <unk> B <unk> , released only in the Soviet Union , which contained eighteen covers ; recorded over the course of two days . In 1989 , he joined forces with fellow Merseysiders Gerry Marsden and Holly Johnson to record an updated version of " Ferry Cross the Mersey " , for the Hillsborough disaster appeal fund . That same year , he released Flowers in the Dirt ; a collaborative effort with Elvis Costello that included musical contributions from Gilmour and Nicky Hopkins . McCartney then formed a band consisting of himself and Linda , with Hamish Stuart and Robbie McIntosh on guitars , Paul " Wix " Wickens on keyboards and Chris Whitten on drums . In September 1989 , they launched the Paul McCartney World Tour , his first in over a decade . The following year , he released the triple album , Tripping the Live Fantastic , which contained select performances from the tour . In 1990 , the US publication Amusement Business presented McCartney with an award for the highest grossing show of the year ; his two performances at Berkeley earned over $ 3 @.@ 5 million . He performed for the largest paying stadium audience in history on 21 April 1990 , when 184 @,@ 000 people attended his concert at Maracanã Stadium in Rio de Janeiro , Brazil . 
 = = = 1991 – 2000 = = = 
 McCartney ventured into orchestral music in 1991 , when the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Society commissioned a musical piece by him to celebrate its sesquicentennial . He collaborated with composer Carl Davis , producing Liverpool Oratorio . The performance featured opera singers Kiri Te Kanawa , Sally Burgess , Jerry Hadley and Willard White , with the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra and the choir of Liverpool Cathedral . Reviews were negative . The Guardian was especially critical , describing the music as " afraid of anything approaching a fast tempo " , and adding that the piece has " little awareness of the need for recurrent ideas that will bind the work into a whole " . The paper published a letter McCartney submitted in response in which he noted several of the work 's faster tempos and added , " happily , history shows that many good pieces of music were not liked by the critics of the time so I am content to ... let people judge for themselves the merits of the work . " The New York Times was slightly more generous , stating , " There are moments of beauty and pleasure in this dramatic miscellany ... the music 's innocent sincerity makes it difficult to be put off by its ambitions " . Performed around the world after its London premiere , the Liverpool Oratorio reached number one on the UK classical chart , Music Week . 
 In 1991 , McCartney performed a selection of acoustic @-@ only songs on MTV Unplugged and released a live album of the performance titled Unplugged ( The Official Bootleg ) . During the 1990s , McCartney collaborated twice with Youth of Killing Joke as the musical duo " the Fireman " . The two released their first electronica album together , Strawberries Oceans Ships Forest , in 1993 . McCartney released the rock album Off the Ground in 1993 . The subsequent New World Tour followed , which led to the release of the Paul Is Live album later that year . 
 Starting in 1994 , McCartney took a four @-@ year break from his solo career to work on Apple 's Beatles Anthology project with Harrison , Starr and Martin . He recorded a radio series called Oobu Joobu in 1995 for the American network Westwood One , which he described as " widescreen radio " . Also in 1995 , Prince Charles presented him with an Honorary Fellowship of the Royal College of Music — " kind of amazing for somebody who doesn 't read a note of music " , commented McCartney . 
 In 1997 , McCartney released the rock album Flaming Pie . Starr appeared on drums and backing vocals in " Beautiful Night " . Later that year , he released the classical work Standing Stone , which topped the UK and US classical charts . In 1998 , he released Rushes , the second electronica album by the Fireman . In 1999 , McCartney released Run Devil Run . Recorded in one week , and featuring Ian Paice and David Gilmour , it was primarily an album of covers with three McCartney originals . He had been planning such an album for years , having been previously encouraged to do so by Linda , who had died of cancer in April 1998 . 
 He did an unannounced performance at the benefit tribute , " Concert for Linda , " his wife of 29 years who died a year earlier . It was held at the Royal Albert Hall in London on 10 April 1999 , and was organised by two of her close friends , Chrissie Hynde and Carla Lane . Also during 1999 , he continued his experimentation with orchestral music on Working Classical . In 2000 , he released the electronica album Liverpool Sound Collage with Super Furry Animals and Youth , using the sound collage and musique concrète techniques that had fascinated him in the mid @-@ 1960s . He contributed the song " Nova " to a tribute album of classical , choral music called A Garland for Linda ( 2000 ) , dedicated to his late wife . 
 = = = 2000 – 10 = = = 
 Having witnessed the 11 September 2001 attacks from the JFK airport tarmac , McCartney was inspired to take a leading role in organising the Concert for New York City . His studio album release in November that year , Driving Rain , included the song " Freedom " , written in response to the attacks . The following year , McCartney went out on tour with a band that included guitarists Rusty Anderson and Brian Ray , accompanied by Paul " Wix " Wickens on keyboards and Abe Laboriel , Jr. on drums . They began the Driving World Tour in April 2002 , which included stops in the US , Mexico and Japan . The tour resulted in the double live album Back in the US , released internationally in 2003 as Back in the World . The tour earned a reported $ 126 @.@ 2 million , an average of over $ 2 million per night , and Billboard named it the top tour of the year . 
 In July 2002 , McCartney married Heather Mills . In November , on the first anniversary of George Harrison 's death , McCartney performed at the Concert for George . He participated in the National Football League 's Super Bowl , performing " Freedom " during the pre @-@ game show for Super Bowl XXXVI in 2002 and headlining the halftime show at Super Bowl XXXIX in 2005 . The English College of Arms honoured McCartney in 2002 by granting him a coat of arms . His crest , featuring a Liver bird holding an acoustic guitar in its claw , reflects his background in Liverpool and his musical career . The shield includes four curved emblems which resemble beetles ' backs . The arms ' motto is Ecce Cor Meum , Latin for " Behold My Heart " . In 2003 , the McCartneys had a child , Beatrice Milly . 
 In July 2005 , he performed at the Live 8 event in Hyde Park , London , opening the show with " Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band " ( with U2 ) and closing it with " Drive My Car " ( with George Michael ) , " Helter Skelter " , and " The Long and Winding Road " . In September , he released the rock album Chaos and Creation in the Backyard , for which he provided most of the instrumentation . In 2006 , McCartney released the classical work Ecce Cor Meum . The rock album Memory Almost Full followed in 2007 . In 2008 , he released his third Fireman album , Electric Arguments . Also in 2008 , he performed at a concert in Liverpool to celebrate the city 's year as European Capital of Culture . In 2009 , after a four @-@ year break , he returned to touring and has since performed over 80 shows . More than forty @-@ five years after the Beatles first appeared on American television during The Ed Sullivan Show , he returned to the same New York theatre to perform on Late Show with David Letterman . On 9 September 2009 , EMI reissued the Beatles catalogue following a four @-@ year digital remastering effort , releasing a music video game called The Beatles : Rock Band the same day . 
 McCartney 's enduring fame has made him a popular choice to open new venues . In 2009 , he played three sold @-@ out concerts at the newly built Citi Field — a venue constructed to replace Shea Stadium in Queens , New York . These performances yielded the double live album Good Evening New York City later that year . In 2010 , McCartney opened the Consol Energy Center in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania . 
 = = = 2011 – present = = = 
 In July 2011 , McCartney played two sold @-@ out concerts at the new Yankee Stadium . A New York Times review of the first concert reported that McCartney was " not saying goodbye but touring stadiums and playing marathon concerts . " In September 2011 , having been commissioned by the New York City Ballet , McCartney released his first score for dance , a collaboration with Peter Martins called Ocean 's Kingdom . Also in 2011 , McCartney married Nancy Shevell . He released Kisses on the Bottom , a collection of standards , in February 2012 ; that same month the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences honoured him as the MusiCares Person of the Year , two days prior to his performance at the 54th Grammy Awards . 
 McCartney remains one of the world 's top draws . He played to over 100 @,@ 000 people total during two performances in Mexico City in May , the shows grossing nearly $ 6 million . In June 2012 , McCartney closed Queen Elizabeth 's Diamond Jubilee Concert held outside Buckingham Palace , performing a set that included " Let It Be " and " Live and Let Die " . He closed the opening ceremony of the 2012 Summer Olympics in London on 27 July , singing " The End " and " Hey Jude " and inviting the audience to join in on the coda . Having donated his time , he received £ 1 from the Olympic organisers . 
 On 12 December , McCartney performed with three former members of Nirvana ( Krist Novoselic , Dave Grohl , and Pat Smear ) during the closing act of 12 @-@ 12 @-@ 12 : The Concert for Sandy Relief , seen by approximately two billion people worldwide . On 28 August 2013 , McCartney released the title track of his upcoming studio album New , which came out in October 2013 . 
 A primetime entertainment special celebrating the legacy of seven @-@ time Grammy @-@ winning group the Beatles and their groundbreaking first performance on The Ed Sullivan Show , featuring Paul McCartney and Ringo Starr , was taped 27 January 2014 at the Ed Sullivan Theater with a 9 February 2014 CBS airing . The show , titled The Night That Changed America : A Grammy Salute to The Beatles , featured 22 classic Beatles songs as performed by various artists , including McCartney and Starr . 
 On 19 May 2014 , it was reported that McCartney had been bedridden by an unspecified virus on doctor 's orders , and had to cancel a sold @-@ out concert tour of Japan scheduled to begin later in the week . The tour would have included a stop at the famed Budokan Hall . McCartney also had to push his June US dates to October , as part of his doctor 's order to take it easy to make a full recovery . However , he resumed the tour with a high @-@ energy three hour appearance in Albany , New York , on 5 July 2014 . On 14 August 2014 , McCartney performed the final concert at Candlestick Park in San Francisco , California before its demolition . It was the same venue that the Beatles played their final concert in 1966 . 
 In 2014 , McCartney wrote and performed " Hope for the Future , " the ending song for the video game Destiny . In November 2014 , a 42 @-@ song tribute album titled The Art of McCartney was released , which features a wide range of artists covering McCartney 's solo and Beatles work . Also that year , McCartney collaborated with American recording artist Kanye West on the single " Only One " , released on 31 December . 
 In January 2015 , McCartney collaborated with Kanye West and Barbadian singer Rihanna on the single " <unk> " . They released a music video for the song in January and performed it live at the 57th Annual Grammy Awards on 8 February 2015 . McCartney is a featured guest on West 's 2015 single " All Day " , which also features Theophilus London and Allan Kingdom . 
 On 15 February 2015 , McCartney appeared and performed with Paul Simon for the Saturday Night Live 40th Anniversary Special . McCartney and Simon performed the first verse of " I 've Just Seen a Face " on acoustic guitars , and McCartney later performed " Maybe I 'm Amazed . " McCartney shared lead vocals on the Alice Cooper @-@ led Hollywood Vampires supergroup 's cover of his song " Come and Get It " which appears on their debut album , released 11 September 2015 . 
 On 31 March 2016 , McCartney announced the upcoming release , on 10 June , of his career @-@ spanning collection Pure McCartney . The set includes songs from throughout McCartney 's solo career and his work with Wings and the Fireman , and will be available in three different formats ( 2 @-@ CD , 4 @-@ CD , 4 @-@ LP and Digital ) . The 4 @-@ CD version will include 67 tracks , the majority of which were top 40 hits . 
 In 2017 , McCartney will appear in the movie Pirates of the Caribbean : Dead Men Tell No Tales . 
 = = Musicianship = = 
 Largely a self @-@ taught musician , McCartney 's approach was described by musicologist Ian MacDonald as " by nature drawn to music 's formal aspects yet wholly untutored ... [ he ] produced technically ' finished ' work almost entirely by instinct , his harmonic judgement based mainly on perfect pitch and an acute pair of ears ... [ A ] natural melodist — a creator of tunes capable of existing apart from their harmony " . McCartney commented , " I prefer to think of my approach to music as ... rather like the primitive cave artists , who drew without training . " 
 = = = Bass guitar = = = 
 McCartney 's skill as a bass player has been acknowledged by other bassists , including Sting , Dr. Dre bassist Mike Elizondo , and Colin Moulding of XTC . Best known for primarily using a plectrum or pick , McCartney occasionally plays fingerstyle . He does not use slapping or muting techniques . He was strongly influenced by Motown artists , in particular James Jamerson , who McCartney called a hero for his melodic style . He was also influenced by Brian Wilson , as he commented : " because he went to very unusual places " . Another favourite bassist of his is Stanley Clarke . 
 During McCartney 's early years with the Beatles , he primarily used a Höfner 500 / 1 bass , though in 1965 , he began sporadically using a Rickenbacker 4001S for recording . While typically using Vox amplifiers , by 1967 he had also begun using a Fender Bassman for amplification . During the late 1980s and early 1990s , he used a Wal 5 @-@ String , which he said made him play more thick @-@ sounding basslines , in contrast to the much lighter Höfner , which inspired him to play more sensitively , something he considers fundamental to his playing style . He changed back to the Höfner around 1990 for that reason . He uses Mesa Boogie bass amplifiers while performing live . 
 MacDonald identified " She 's a Woman " as the turning point when McCartney 's bass playing began to evolve dramatically , and Beatles biographer Chris Ingham singled out Rubber Soul as the moment when McCartney 's playing exhibited significant progress , particularly on " The Word " . Bacon and Morgan agreed , calling McCartney 's groove on the track " a high point in pop bass playing and ... the first proof on a recording of his serious technical ability on the instrument . " MacDonald inferred the influence of James Brown 's " Papa 's Got a Brand New Bag " and Wilson Pickett 's " In the Midnight Hour " , American soul tracks from which McCartney absorbed elements and drew inspiration as he " delivered his most spontaneous bass @-@ part to date " . 
 Bacon and Morgan described his bassline for the Beatles song " Rain " as " an astonishing piece of playing ... [ McCartney ] thinking in terms of both rhythm and ' lead bass ' ... [ choosing ] the area of the neck ... he correctly perceives will give him clarity for melody without rendering his sound too thin for groove . " MacDonald considered the track the Beatles ' best B @-@ side , stating that its " <unk> saturated texture resonates around McCartney 's [ bassline ] " , which MacDonald described as " so inventive that it threatens to overwhelm the track " . MacDonald also indicated the influence of Indian classical music in " exotic melismas in the bass part " . McCartney identified Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band as containing his strongest and most inventive bass playing , particularly on " Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds " . 
 = = = Acoustic guitar = = = 
 McCartney primarily <unk> while playing acoustic guitar , though he also uses elements of fingerpicking . Examples of his acoustic guitar playing on Beatles tracks include " Yesterday " , " I 'm Looking Through You " , " Michelle " , " Blackbird " , " I Will " , " Mother Nature 's Son " and " Rocky Raccoon " . McCartney singled out " Blackbird " as a personal favourite and described his technique for the guitar part in the following way : " I got my own little sort of cheating way of [ fingerpicking ] ... I 'm actually sort of pulling two strings at a time ... I was trying to emulate those folk players . " He employed a similar technique for " Jenny Wren " . He played an Epiphone Texan on many of his acoustic recordings , but also used a Martin D @-@ 28 . 
 = = = Electric guitar = = = 
 McCartney played lead guitar on several Beatles recordings , including what MacDonald described as a " fiercely angular slide guitar solo " on " Drive My Car " , which McCartney played on an Epiphone Casino . McCartney said of the instrument , " if I had to pick one electric guitar it would be this . " He contributed what MacDonald described as " a startling guitar solo " on the Harrison composition " Taxman " and the " shrieking " guitar on " Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band " and " Helter Skelter " . MacDonald also praised McCartney 's " coruscating pseudo @-@ Indian " guitar solo on " Good Morning Good Morning " . McCartney also played lead guitar on " Another Girl " . While in Wings , McCartney tended to leave electric guitar work to other group members , though he played most of the lead guitar on Band on the Run . In 1990 , when asked who his favourite guitar players were he included Eddie Van Halen , Eric Clapton and David Gilmour , stating , " but I still like Hendrix the best " . He has primarily used a Gibson Les Paul for electric work , particularly during live performances . 
 = = = Vocals = = = 
 Often renowned as one of the greatest singers in pop music , McCartney was ranked the 11th greatest singer of all time by The Rolling Stone , voted the 8th greatest singer ever by the NME readers and number 10 by the Music Radar readers in the list of ' the 30 greatest lead singers of all time ' . He is known for his belting power , versatility and wide tenor vocal range , spanning over four octaves . Heavily influenced by Little Richard , McCartney 's vocals would cross several musical genres throughout his career . On " Call Me Back Again " , according to Benitez , " McCartney shines as a bluesy solo vocalist " while MacDonald called " I 'm Down " " a rock @-@ and @-@ roll classic " that " illustrates McCartney 's vocal and stylistic versatility " . MacDonald described " Helter Skelter " as an early attempt at heavy metal , and " Hey Jude " as a " pop / rock hybrid " , pointing out McCartney 's " use of gospel @-@ style melismas " in the song and his " pseudo @-@ soul shrieking in the fade @-@ out " . Benitez identified " Hope of Deliverance " and " Put It There " as examples of McCartney 's folk music efforts while musicologist Walter Everett considered " When I 'm Sixty @-@ Four " and " Honey Pie " attempts at vaudeville . MacDonald praised the " swinging beat " of the Beatles ' twenty @-@ four bar blues song , " She 's a Woman " as " the most extreme sound they had manufactured to date " , with McCartney 's voice " at the edge , squeezed to the upper limit of his chest register and threatening to crack at any moment . " MacDonald described " I 've Got a Feeling " as a " raunchy , mid @-@ tempo rocker " with a " robust and soulful " vocal performance and " Back in the U.S.S.R. " as " the last of [ the Beatles ' ] up @-@ tempo rockers " , McCartney 's " belting " vocals among his best since " Drive My Car " , recorded three years earlier . McCartney also teasingly tried out classical singing , namely singing various renditions of " Besame Mucho " with the rest of The Beatles . He 'd continue wildly experimenting with various musical and vocal styles throughout his post @-@ Beatles career as a solo artist , " <unk> Moon Delight " being named by Pitchfork 's Jayson Greene as " an absolutely unhinged vocal take , Paul gulping and sobbing right next to your inner ear " , adding that " it could be a latter @-@ day Tom Waits performance " . 
 Over the years , McCartney has been named a significant vocal influence by a number of renowned artists , including Chris Cornell , Billy Joel , Steven Tyler , Brad <unk> and Axl Rose . 
 = = = Keyboards = = = 
 McCartney played piano on several Beatles songs , including " Every Little Thing " , " She 's a Woman " , " For No One " , " A Day in the Life " , " Hello , Goodbye " , " Hey Jude " , " Lady Madonna " , " Let It Be " and " The Long and Winding Road " . MacDonald considered the piano part in " Lady Madonna " as reminiscent of Fats Domino , and " Let It Be " as having a gospel rhythm . MacDonald called McCartney 's Mellotron intro on " Strawberry Fields Forever " an integral feature of the song 's character . McCartney played a Moog synthesizer on the Beatles song " Maxwell 's Silver Hammer " and the Wings track " Loup ( 1st Indian on the Moon ) " . Ingham described the Wings songs " With a Little Luck " and " London Town " as " full of the most sensitive pop synthesizer touches " . 
 = = = Drums = = = 
 McCartney played drums on the Beatles ' songs " Back in the U.S.S.R. " , " Dear Prudence " , " Martha My Dear " , " Wild Honey Pie " and " The Ballad of John and Yoko " . He also played all the drum parts on his first and second solo albums McCartney and McCartney II , as well as on the Wings album Band on the Run and most of the drums on his solo LP Chaos and Creation in the Backyard . McCartney also played drums on Paul Jones ' rendition of " And the Sun Will Shine " in 1968 . Using the pseudonym Paul Ramon , which he had first used during the Beatles first tour in Scotland in 1960 , McCartney played drums on Steve Miller Band 's 1969 tracks " Celebration Song " and " My Dark Hour " . 
 = = = Tape loops = = = 
 In the mid @-@ 1960s , when visiting artist friend John Dunbar 's flat in London , McCartney brought tapes he had compiled at then @-@ girlfriend Jane Asher 's home . They included mixes of various songs , musical pieces and comments made by McCartney that Dick James made into a demo for him . Heavily influenced by American avant @-@ garde musician John Cage , McCartney made tape loops by recording voices , guitars and bongos on a <unk> tape recorder and splicing the various loops . He referred to the finished product as " electronic symphonies " . He reversed the tapes , speeded them up , and slowed them down to create the desired effects , some of which the Beatles later used on the songs " Tomorrow Never Knows " and " The Fool on the Hill " . 
 = = = Early influences = = = 
 McCartney 's earliest musical influences include Little Richard , Elvis Presley , Buddy Holly , Carl Perkins , and Chuck Berry . When asked why the Beatles did not include Presley on the Sgt. Pepper cover , McCartney replied , " Elvis was too important and too far above the rest even to mention ... so we didn 't put him on the list because he was more than merely a ... pop singer , he was Elvis the King . " McCartney stated that for his bassline for " I Saw Her Standing There " , he directly quoted Berry 's " I 'm Talking About You " . 
 McCartney called Little Richard an idol , whose falsetto vocalisations inspired McCartney 's own vocal technique . McCartney said he wrote " I 'm Down " as a vehicle for his Little Richard impersonation . In 1971 , McCartney bought the publishing rights to Holly 's catalogue , and in 1976 , on the fortieth anniversary of Holly 's birth , McCartney inaugurated the annual " Buddy Holly Week " in England . The festival has included guest performances by famous musicians , songwriting competitions , drawing contests and special events featuring performances by the Crickets . 
 = = Lifestyle = = 
 = = = Creative outlets = = = 
 While at school during the 1950s , McCartney thrived at art assignments , often earning top accolades for his visual work . However , his lack of discipline negatively affected his academic grades , preventing him from earning admission to art college . During the 1960s , he delved into the visual arts , explored experimental cinema , and regularly attended film , theatrical and classical music performances . His first contact with the London avant @-@ garde scene was through artist John Dunbar , who introduced McCartney to art dealer Robert Fraser . At Fraser 's flat he first learned about art appreciation and met Andy Warhol , Claes Oldenburg , Peter Blake , and Richard Hamilton . McCartney later purchased works by Magritte , using his painting of an apple for the Apple Records logo . McCartney became involved in the renovation and publicising of the Indica Gallery in Mason 's Yard , London , which Barry Miles had co @-@ founded and where Lennon first met Yoko Ono . Miles also co @-@ founded International Times , an underground paper that McCartney helped to start with direct financial support and by providing interviews to attract advertiser income . Miles later wrote McCartney 's official biography , Many Years From Now ( 1997 ) . 
 McCartney became interested in painting after watching artist Willem de Kooning work in de Kooning 's Long Island studio . McCartney took up painting in 1983 , and he first exhibited his work in Siegen , Germany , in 1999 . The 70 @-@ painting show featured portraits of Lennon , Andy Warhol and David Bowie . Though initially reluctant to display his paintings publicly , McCartney chose the gallery because events organiser Wolfgang Suttner showed genuine interest in McCartney 's art . In September 2000 , the first UK exhibition of McCartney 's paintings opened , featuring 500 canvases at the Arnolfini Gallery in Bristol , England . In October 2000 , McCartney 's art debuted in his hometown of Liverpool . McCartney said , " I 've been offered an exhibition of my paintings at the Walker Art Gallery ... where John and I used to spend many a pleasant afternoon . So I 'm really excited about it . I didn 't tell anybody I painted for 15 years but now I 'm out of the closet " . McCartney is lead patron of the Liverpool Institute for Performing Arts , a school in the building formerly occupied by the Liverpool Institute for Boys . 
 When McCartney was a child , his mother read him poems and encouraged him to read books . His father invited Paul and his brother Michael to solve crosswords with him , to increase their " word power " , as McCartney said . In 2001 , McCartney published Blackbird Singing , a volume of poems and lyrics to his songs for which he gave readings in Liverpool and New York City . In the foreword of the book , he explains : " When I was a teenager ... I had an overwhelming desire to have a poem published in the school magazine . I wrote something deep and meaningful — which was promptly rejected — and I suppose I have been trying to get my own back ever since " . His first children 's book was published by Faber & Faber in 2005 , High in the Clouds : An Urban Furry Tail , a collaboration with writer Philip Ardagh and animator Geoff Dunbar . Featuring a squirrel whose woodland home is razed by developers , it had been scripted and sketched by McCartney and Dunbar over several years , as an animated film . The Observer labelled it an " anti @-@ capitalist children 's book " . 
 In 1981 , McCartney asked Geoff Dunbar to direct a short animated film called Rupert and the Frog Song ; McCartney was the writer and producer , and he also added some of the character voices . In 1992 , he worked with Dunbar on an animated film about the work of French artist Honoré Daumier , which won them a BAFTA award . In 2004 , they worked together on the animated short film Tropic Island Hum . The accompanying single , " Tropic Island Hum " / " We All Stand Together " , reached number 21 in the UK . 
 McCartney also produced and hosted The Real Buddy Holly Story , a 1985 documentary featuring interviews with Keith Richards , Phil and Don Everly , the Holly family , and others . In 1995 , he made a guest appearance on the Simpsons episode " Lisa the Vegetarian " and directed a short documentary about the Grateful Dead . 
 In 2015 , it was revealed that McCartney turned down an offer to play the role of father to Helen Baxendale 's character Emily in Friends . 
 = = = Business = = = 
 Since the Rich List began in 1989 , McCartney has been the UK 's wealthiest musician , with an estimated fortune of £ 730 million in 2015 . In addition to an interest in Apple Corps and MPL Communications , an umbrella company for his business interests , he owns a significant music publishing catalogue , with access to over 25 @,@ 000 copyrights , including the publishing rights to the musicals Guys and Dolls , A Chorus Line , Annie and Grease . He earned £ 40 million in 2003 , the highest income that year within media professions in the UK . This rose to £ 48 @.@ 5 million by 2005 . McCartney 's 18 @-@ date On the Run Tour grossed £ 37 million in 2012 . 
 McCartney signed his first recording contract , as a member of the Beatles , with Parlophone Records , an EMI subsidiary , in June 1962 . In the United States , the Beatles recordings were distributed by EMI subsidiary Capitol Records . The Beatles re @-@ signed with EMI for another nine years in 1967 . After forming their own record label , Apple Records , in 1968 , the Beatles ' recordings would be released through Apple although the masters were still owned by EMI . Following the break @-@ up of the Beatles , McCartney 's music continued to be released by Apple Records under the Beatles ' 1967 recording contract with EMI which ran until 1976 . Following the formal dissolution of the Beatles ' partnership in 1975 , McCartney re @-@ signed with EMI worldwide and Capitol in the US , Canada and Japan , acquiring ownership of his solo catalogue from EMI as part of the deal . In 1979 , McCartney signed with Columbia Records in the US and Canada — reportedly receiving the industry 's most lucrative recording contract to date , while remaining with EMI for distribution throughout the rest of the world . McCartney returned to Capitol in the US in 1985 , remaining with EMI until 2006 . In 2007 , McCartney signed with Hear Music , becoming the label 's first artist . He remains there as of 2012 's Kisses on the Bottom . 
 In 1963 , Dick James established Northern Songs to publish the songs of Lennon – McCartney . McCartney initially owned 20 % of Northern Songs , which became 15 % after a public stock offering in 1965 . In 1969 , James sold a controlling interest in Northern Songs to Lew Grade 's Associated Television ( ATV ) after which McCartney and John Lennon sold their remaining shares although they remained under contract to ATV until 1973 . In 1972 , McCartney re @-@ signed with ATV for seven years in a joint publishing agreement between ATV and McCartney Music . Since 1979 , MPL Communications has published McCartney 's songs . McCartney and Yoko Ono attempted to purchase the Northern Songs catalogue in 1981 , but Grade declined their offer and decided to sell ATV in its entirety to businessman Robert Holmes à Court . Michael Jackson subsequently purchased ATV in 1985 . In 1995 , Jackson merged his catalogue with Sony for a reported £ 59 @,@ 052 @,@ 000 ( $ 95 million ) , establishing Sony / ATV Music Publishing , in which he retained half @-@ ownership . McCartney has criticised Jackson 's purchase and handling of Northern Songs over the years . Now formally dissolved , in 1995 it became absorbed in the Sony / ATV catalogue . McCartney receives writers ' royalties which together are 33 ⅓ percent of total commercial proceeds in the US , and which vary elsewhere between 50 and 55 percent . Two of the Beatles ' earliest songs — " Love Me Do " and " P.S. I Love You " — were published by an EMI subsidiary , Ardmore & Beechwood , before signing with James . McCartney acquired their publishing rights from Ardmore in the mid @-@ 1980s , and they are the only two Beatles songs owned by MPL Communications . 
 = = = Drugs = = = 
 McCartney first used drugs in the Beatles ' Hamburg days , when they often used Preludin to maintain their energy while performing for long periods . Bob Dylan introduced them to marijuana in a New York hotel room in 1964 ; McCartney recalls getting " very high " and " giggling uncontrollably " . His use of the drug soon became habitual , and according to Miles , McCartney wrote the lyrics " another kind of mind " in " Got to Get You into My Life " specifically as a reference to cannabis . During the filming of Help ! , McCartney occasionally smoked a joint in the car on the way to the studio during filming , and often forgot his lines . Director Richard Lester overheard two physically attractive women trying to persuade McCartney to use heroin , but he refused . Introduced to cocaine by Robert Fraser , McCartney used the drug regularly during the recording of Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band , and for about a year total but stopped because of his dislike of the unpleasant melancholy he felt afterwards . 
 Initially reluctant to try LSD , McCartney eventually did so in late 1966 , and took his second " acid trip " in March 1967 , with Lennon , after a Sgt. Pepper studio session . He later became the first Beatle to discuss the drug publicly , declaring , " It opened my eyes ... [ and ] made me a better , more honest , more tolerant member of society . " He made his attitude about cannabis public in 1967 , when he , along with the other Beatles and Epstein , added his name to a July advertisement in The Times , which called for its legalisation , the release of those imprisoned for possession , and research into marijuana 's medical uses . 
 In 1972 , a Swedish court fined McCartney £ 1 @,@ 000 for cannabis possession . Soon after , Scottish police found marijuana plants growing on his farm , leading to his 1973 conviction for illegal cultivation and a £ 100 fine . As a result of his drug convictions , the US government repeatedly denied him a visa until December 1973 . Arrested again for marijuana possession in 1975 , in Los Angeles , Linda took the blame , and the court soon dismissed the charges . In January 1980 , when Wings flew to Tokyo for a tour of Japan , customs officials found approximately 8 ounces ( 200 g ) of cannabis in his luggage . They arrested McCartney and brought him to a local jail while the Japanese government decided what to do . After ten days , they released and deported him without charge . In 1984 , while McCartney was on holiday in Barbados , authorities arrested him for possession of marijuana and fined him $ 200 . Upon his return to England , he stated : " cannabis is ... less harmful than rum punch , whiskey , nicotine and glue , all of which are perfectly legal ... I don 't think ... I was doing anyone any harm whatsoever . " In 1997 , he spoke out in support of decriminalisation of the drug : " People are smoking pot anyway and to make them criminals is wrong . " He did however , decide to quit cannabis in 2015 , citing a desire to set a good example for his grandchildren . 
 = = = Vegetarianism and activism = = = 
 Since 1975 , McCartney has been a vegetarian ; he and his wife Linda were vegetarians for most of their 30 @-@ year marriage . They decided to stop consuming meat after Paul saw lambs in a field as they were eating a meal of lamb . Soon after , the couple became outspoken animal rights activists . In his first interview after Linda 's death , he promised to continue working for animal rights , and in 1999 he spent £ 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 to ensure Linda McCartney Foods remained free of genetically engineered ingredients . In 1995 , he narrated the documentary Devour the Earth , written by Tony Wardle . McCartney is a supporter of the animal @-@ rights organisation People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals . He has appeared in the group 's campaigns and , in 2009 , he narrated a short factory farm exposé titled " Glass Walls " . McCartney has also supported campaigns headed by the Humane Society of the United States , Humane Society International , World Animal Protection , and the David Shepherd Wildlife Foundation . 
 Following McCartney 's marriage to Mills , he joined her in a campaign against land mines , becoming a patron of Adopt @-@ A @-@ Minefield . He wore an anti @-@ landmines T @-@ shirt during some of the Back in the World tour shows . In 2006 , the McCartneys travelled to Prince Edward Island to raise international awareness of seal hunting . The couple debated with Danny Williams , Newfoundland 's then Premier , on Larry King Live , stating that fishermen should stop hunting seals and start seal @-@ watching businesses instead . McCartney also supports the Make Poverty History campaign . 
 McCartney has participated in several charity recordings and performances , including the Concerts for the People of Kampuchea , Ferry Aid , Band Aid , Live Aid , Live 8 , and the recording of " Ferry Cross the Mersey " . In 2004 , he donated a song to an album to aid the " US Campaign for Burma " , in support of Burmese Nobel Prize winner Aung San Suu Kyi . In 2008 , he donated a song to Aid Still Required 's CD , organised as an effort to raise funds to assist with the recovery from the devastation caused in Southeast Asia by the 2004 tsunami . 
 In 2009 , McCartney wrote to Tenzin Gyatso , the 14th Dalai Lama , asking him why he was not a vegetarian . As McCartney explained , " He wrote back very kindly , saying , ' my doctors tell me that I must eat meat ' . And I wrote back again , saying , you know , I don 't think that 's right ... I think he 's now being told ... that he can get his protein somewhere else ... It just doesn 't seem right — the Dalai Lama , on the one hand , saying , ' Hey guys , don 't harm sentient beings ... Oh , and by the way , I 'm having a steak . ' " 
 In 2012 , McCartney joined the anti @-@ fracking campaign Artists Against Fracking . 
 Save the Arctic is a campaign to protect the Arctic and an international outcry and a renewed focus concern on oil development in the Arctic , attracting the support of more than five million people . This includes McCartney , Archbishop Desmond Tutu and 11 Nobel Peace Prize winners . 
 In 2014 , McCartney narrated a video for People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals , titled " Glass Walls " , which was harshly critical of slaughterhouses , the meat industry , and their effect on animal welfare . 
 In 2015 , following British prime minister David Cameron 's decision to give Members of Parliament a free vote on amending the law against fox hunting , McCartney was quoted : " The people of Britain are behind this Tory government on many things but the vast majority of us will be against them if hunting is reintroduced . It is cruel and unnecessary and will lose them support from ordinary people and animal lovers like myself . " 
 = = = Meditation = = = 
 In August 1967 , McCartney met the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi at the London Hilton and later went to Bangor in North Wales to attend a weekend initiation conference , where he and the other Beatles learned the basics of Transcendental Meditation . He said , " The whole meditation experience was very good and I still use the mantra ... I find it soothing . " In 2009 , McCartney and Starr headlined a benefit concert at Radio City Music Hall , raising three million dollars for the David Lynch Foundation to fund instruction in Transcendental Meditation for at @-@ risk youth . 
 = = = Football = = = 
 McCartney has publicly professed support for Everton , and also shown favour for Liverpool . In 2008 , he ended speculation about his allegiance when he said , " Here 's the deal : my father was born in Everton , my family are officially <unk> , so if it comes down to a derby match or an FA Cup final between the two , I would have to support Everton . But after a concert at Wembley Arena I got a bit of a friendship with Kenny Dalglish , who had been to the gig and I thought ' You know what ? I am just going to support them both because it 's all Liverpool . ' " 
 = = Personal relationships = = 
 = = = Girlfriends = = = 
 = = = = Dot Rhone = = = = 
 McCartney 's first serious girlfriend in Liverpool was Dot Rhone , whom he met at the Casbah club in 1959 . According to Spitz , Rhone felt that McCartney had a compulsion to control situations . He often chose clothes and make @-@ up for her , encouraging her to grow her hair out like Brigitte Bardot 's , and at least once insisting she have it re @-@ styled , to disappointing effect . When McCartney first went to Hamburg with the Beatles , he wrote to Rhone regularly , and she accompanied Cynthia Lennon to Hamburg when they played there again in 1962 . The couple had a two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year relationship , and were due to marry until Rhone 's miscarriage ; according to Spitz , McCartney , now " free of obligation " , ended the engagement . 
 = = = = Jane Asher = = = = 
 McCartney first met British actress Jane Asher on 18 April 1963 , when a photographer asked them to pose at a Beatles performance at the Royal Albert Hall in London . The two began a relationship , and in November of that year he took up residence with Asher at her parents ' home at 57 Wimpole Street , London . They had lived there for more than two years before the couple moved to McCartney 's own home in St. John 's Wood , in March 1966 . He wrote several songs while living at the Ashers ' , including " Yesterday " , " And I Love Her " , " You Won 't See Me " and " I 'm Looking Through You " , the latter three having been inspired by their romance . They had a five @-@ year relationship and planned to marry , but Asher broke off the engagement after she discovered he had become involved with Francie Schwartz . 
 = = = Wives = = = 
 = = = = Linda Eastman = = = = 
 Linda Eastman was a music fan who once commented , " all my teen years were spent with an ear to the radio . " At times , she skipped school to see artists such as Fabian , Bobby Darin and Chuck Berry . She became a popular photographer with several rock groups , including the Jimi Hendrix Experience , the Grateful Dead , the Doors and the Beatles , whom she first met at Shea Stadium in 1966 . She commented , " It was John who interested me at the start . He was my Beatle hero . But when I met him the fascination faded fast , and I found it was Paul I liked . " The pair first properly met in 1967 at a Georgie Fame concert at The Bag O 'Nails club , during her UK assignment to photograph rock musicians in London . As Paul remembers , " The night Linda and I met , I spotted her across a crowded club , and although I would normally have been nervous chatting her up , I realised I had to ... <unk> worked for me that night ! " Linda said this about their meeting : " I was quite shameless really . I was with somebody else [ that night ] ... and I saw Paul at the other side of the room . He looked so beautiful that I made up my mind I would have to pick him up . " The pair married in 1969 . About their relationship , Paul said , " We had a lot of fun together ... just the nature of how we are , our favourite thing really is to just hang , to have fun . And Linda 's very big on just following the moment . " He added , " We were crazy . We had a big argument the night before we got married , and it was nearly called off ... [ it 's ] miraculous that we made it . But we did . " 
 The two collaborated musically after the Beatles ' break @-@ up , forming Wings in 1971 . They faced derision from some fans and critics , who questioned her inclusion . She was nervous about performing with Paul , who explained , " she conquered those nerves , got on with it and was really gutsy . " Paul defended her musical ability : " I taught Linda the basics of the keyboard ... She took a couple of lessons and learned some bluesy things ... she did very well and made it look easier than it was ... The critics would say , ' She 's not really playing ' or ' Look at her — she 's playing with one finger . ' But what they didn 't know is that sometimes she was playing a thing called a Minimoog , which could only be played with one finger . It was monophonic . " He went on to say , " We thought we were in it for the fun ... it was just something we wanted to do , so if we got it wrong — big deal . We didn 't have to justify ourselves . " Former Wings guitarist McCullough said of collaborating with Linda , " trying to get things together with a learner in the group didn 't work as far as I was concerned . " 
 They had four children — Linda 's daughter Heather ( legally adopted by Paul ) , Mary , Stella and James — and remained married until Linda 's death from breast cancer at age 56 in 1998 . After her death , Paul stated in the Daily Mail , " I got a counsellor because I knew that I would need some help . He was great , particularly in helping me get rid of my guilt [ about wishing I 'd been ] perfect all the time ... a real bugger . But then I thought , hang on a minute . We 're just human . That was the beautiful thing about our marriage . We were just a boyfriend and girlfriend having babies . " 
 = = = = Heather Mills = = = = 
 In 2002 , McCartney married Heather Mills , a former model and anti @-@ landmines campaigner . In 2003 , the couple had a child , Beatrice Milly , named in honour of Mills ' late mother , and one of McCartney 's aunts . They separated in April 2006 and divorced acrimoniously in March 2008 . In 2004 , he commented on media animosity toward his partners : " [ the British public ] didn 't like me giving up on Jane Asher ... I married [ Linda ] , a New York divorcee with a child , and at the time they didn 't like that " . 
 = = = = Nancy Shevell = = = = 
 McCartney married New Yorker Nancy Shevell in a civil ceremony at Old Marylebone Town Hall , London , on 9 October 2011 . The wedding was a modest event attended by a group of about 30 relatives and friends . The couple had been dating since November 2007 . Shevell is vice @-@ president of a family @-@ owned transportation conglomerate which owns New England Motor Freight . She is a former member of the board of the New York Metropolitan Transportation Authority . 
 = = = Beatles = = = 
 = = = = John Lennon = = = = 
 Though McCartney had a strained relationship with Lennon , they briefly became close again in early 1974 , and played music together on one occasion . In later years , the two grew apart . While McCartney would often phone Lennon , he was apprehensive about the reception he would receive . During one call , Lennon told him , " You 're all pizza and fairytales ! " In an effort to avoid talking only about business , they often spoke of cats , babies or baking bread . 
 On 24 April 1976 , the two were watching an episode of Saturday Night Live together at Lennon 's home in the Dakota , during which Lorne Michaels made a $ 3 @,@ 000 cash offer for the Beatles to reunite . While they seriously considered going to the SNL studio a few blocks away , they decided it was too late . This was their last time together . VH1 fictionalised this event in the 2000 television film Two of Us . McCartney 's last telephone call to Lennon , days before Lennon and Ono released Double Fantasy , was friendly ; he said this about the call : " [ It is ] a consoling factor for me , because I do feel it was sad that we never actually sat down and straightened our differences out . But fortunately for me , the last phone conversation I ever had with him was really great , and we didn 't have any kind of blow @-@ up . " 
 = = = = = Reaction to Lennon 's murder = = = = = 
 On 9 December 1980 , McCartney followed the news that Lennon had been murdered the previous night , his death creating a media frenzy around the surviving members of the band . That evening , as he was leaving an Oxford Street recording studio surrounded by reporters who asked him for his reaction , he responded : " It 's a drag " . The press quickly criticised him for what appeared to be a superficial response . He later explained , " When John was killed somebody stuck a microphone at me and said : ' What do you think about it ? ' I said , ' It 's a dra @-@ a @-@ ag ' and meant it with every inch of melancholy I could muster . When you put that in print it says , ' McCartney in London today when asked for a comment on his dead friend said , " It 's a drag " . ' It seemed a very flippant comment to make . " He described his first exchange with Ono after the murder , and his last conversation with Lennon : 
 I talked to Yoko the day after he was killed , and the first thing she said was , " John was really fond of you . " The last telephone conversation I had with him we were still the best of mates . He was always a very warm guy , John . His bluff was all on the surface . He used to take his glasses down , those granny glasses , and say , " it 's only me . " They were like a wall you know ? A shield . Those are the moments I treasure . 
 In 1983 , McCartney said , " I would not have been as typically human and standoffish as I was if I knew John was going to die . I would have made more of an effort to try and get behind his " mask " and have a better relationship with him . " He said that he went home that night , watched the news on television with his children and cried most of the evening . In 1997 , he admitted the ex @-@ Beatles were nervous at the time that they might also be murdered . He told Mojo magazine in 2002 that Lennon was his greatest hero . In 1981 , McCartney sang backup on Harrison 's tribute to their ex @-@ bandmate , " All Those Years Ago " , which featured Starr on drums . McCartney released " Here Today " in 1982 , a song Everett described as " a haunting tribute " to McCartney 's friendship with Lennon . 
 = = = = George Harrison = = = = 
 Discussing his relationship with McCartney , Harrison said , " Paul would always help along when you 'd done his ten songs — then when he got ' round to doing one of my songs , he would help . It was silly . It was very selfish , actually ... There were a lot of tracks , though , where I played bass ... because what Paul would do — if he 'd written a song , he 'd learn all the parts for Paul and then come in the studio and say ( sometimes he was very difficult ) : ' Do this ' . He 'd never give you the opportunity to come out with something . " 
 After Harrison 's death in November 2001 , McCartney issued a statement outside his home in St. John 's Wood , calling him " a lovely guy and a very brave man who had a wonderful sense of humour " . He went on to say , " We grew up together and we just had so many beautiful times together – that 's what I am going to remember . I 'll always love him , he 's my baby brother . " On the first anniversary of his death , McCartney played Harrison 's " Something " on a ukulele at the Concert for George . He also performed " For You Blue " and " All Things Must Pass " , and played the piano on Eric Clapton 's rendition of " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " . 
 = = = = Ringo Starr = = = = 
 Starr once described McCartney as " pleasantly insincere " , though the two generally enjoy each other 's company , and at least once went on holiday together in Greece . Starr recalled , " We couldn 't understand a word of the songs the hotel band were playing , so on the last night Paul and I did a few rockers like " What 'd I Say " . There was at times discord between them as well , particularly during sessions for the White Album . As Apple 's Peter Brown recalled , " it was a poorly kept secret among Beatle intimates that after Ringo left the studio Paul would often dub in the drum tracks himself ... [ Starr ] would pretend not to notice " . In August 1968 , the two got into an argument over McCartney 's critique of Starr 's drum part for " Back in the U.S.S.R. " , which contributed to Starr temporarily leaving the band . Starr later commented on working with McCartney : " Paul is the greatest bass player in the world . But he is also very determined ... [ to ] get his own way ... [ thus ] musical disagreements inevitably arose from time to time . " 
 McCartney and Starr collaborated on several post @-@ Beatles projects starting in 1973 , when McCartney contributed instrumentation and backing vocals for " Six O 'Clock " , a song McCartney wrote for Starr 's album Ringo . McCartney played a kazoo solo on another track from the album , " You 're Sixteen " . Starr appeared ( as a fictional version of himself ) in McCartney 's 1984 film Give My Regards to Broad Street , and played drums on most tracks of the soundtrack album , which includes re @-@ recordings of several McCartney @-@ penned Beatles songs . Starr played drums and sang backing vocals on " Beautiful Night " from McCartney 's 1997 album , Flaming Pie . The pair collaborated again in 1998 , on Starr 's Vertical Man , which featured McCartney 's backing vocals on three songs , and instrumentation on one . In 2009 , the pair performed " With a Little Help from My Friends " at a benefit concert for the David Lynch Foundation . They collaborated on Starr 's album Y Not in 2010 . McCartney played bass on " Peace Dream " , and sang a duet with Starr on " Walk with You " . On 7 July 2010 , Starr was performing at Radio City Music Hall in New York with his All @-@ Starr Band in a concert celebrating his seventieth birthday . After the encores , McCartney made a surprise last @-@ minute appearance , coming out and performing the Beatles ' song " Birthday " backed by members of Starr 's band . On 26 January 2014 McCartney and Starr performed " Queenie Eye " from McCartney 's new album New at the 56th Annual Grammy Awards . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Achievements = = = 
 McCartney was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1988 as a member of the Beatles and again as a solo artist in 1999 . In 1979 , the Guinness Book of World Records recognised McCartney as the " most honored composer and performer in music " , with 60 gold discs ( 43 with the Beatles , 17 with Wings ) and , as a member of the Beatles , sales of over 100 million singles and 100 million albums , and as the " most successful song writer " , he wrote jointly or solo 43 songs which sold one million or more records between 1962 and 1978 . In 2009 , Guinness World Records again recognised McCartney as the " most successful songwriter " having written or co @-@ written 188 charted records in the United Kingdom , of which 91 reached the top 10 and 33 made it to number one . 
 McCartney has written , or co @-@ written 32 number @-@ one singles on the Billboard Hot 100 : twenty with the Beatles ; seven solo or with Wings ; one as a co @-@ writer of " A World Without Love " , a number @-@ one single for Peter and Gordon ; one as a co @-@ writer on Elton John 's cover of " Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds " ; one as a co @-@ writer on Stars on 45 's " Medley " ; one as a co @-@ writer with Michael Jackson on " Say Say Say " ; and one as a co @-@ writer with Stevie Wonder on " Ebony and Ivory " . As of 2009 , he has 15 @.@ 5 million RIAA certified units in the United States as a solo artist plus another 10 million with Wings . 
 Credited with more number ones in the UK than any other artist , McCartney has participated in twenty @-@ four chart topping singles : seventeen with the Beatles , one solo , and one each with Wings , Stevie Wonder , Ferry Aid , Band Aid , Band Aid 20 and " The Christians et al . " He is the only artist to reach the UK number one as a soloist ( " Pipes of Peace " ) , duo ( " Ebony and Ivory " with Wonder ) , trio ( " Mull of Kintyre " , Wings ) , quartet ( " She Loves You " , the Beatles ) , quintet ( " Get Back " , the Beatles with Billy Preston ) and as part of a musical ensemble for charity ( Ferry Aid ) . 
 " Yesterday " is the most covered song in history with more than 2 @,@ 200 recorded versions , and according to the BBC , " the track is the only one by a UK writer to have been aired more than seven million times on American TV and radio and is third in the all @-@ time list ... [ and ] is the most played song by a British writer [ last ] century in the US " . His 1968 Beatles composition , " Hey Jude " , is also a career highlight . It achieved the highest sales in the UK that year , topping the US charts for nine weeks , longer than any other Beatles single . It was also the longest single released by the band , and at seven minutes eleven seconds , the longest ever number one to that point . " Hey Jude " is the best @-@ selling Beatles single , achieving sales of over five million copies soon after its release . 
