 In July 2005 , McCartney 's performance of " Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band " with U2 at Live 8 became the fastest @-@ released single in history . Available within forty @-@ five minutes of its recording , hours later it had achieved number one on the UK Official Download Chart . 
 = = = Awards and honours = = = 
 1971 Academy Award winner ( as a member of the Beatles ) 
 21 @-@ time Grammy Award winner : 
 12 as a member of the Beatles 
 Six as a solo artist 
 Two as a member of Wings 
 One as part of a joint collaboration 
 Two @-@ time inductee – Rock and Roll Hall of Fame : 
 Class of 1988 as a member of the Beatles 
 Class of 1999 as a solo artist 
 Member of the Order of the British Empire . 
 Planet <unk> named " McCartney " ( International Astronomical Union 's Minor Planet Center ) . 
 1997 : Knighted by Queen Elizabeth II for services to music . 
 2000 : Fellowship into the British Academy of Songwriters , Composers and Authors . 
 2008 : BRIT Award for Outstanding Contribution to Music 
 2008 : Honorary Doctor of Music degree from Yale University . 
 2010 : Gershwin Prize for his contributions to popular music . 
 2010 : Kennedy Center Honors . 
 2012 : Star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame . 
 2012 : Légion d 'Honneur for his services to music . 
 2012 : MusiCares Person of the Year 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = Tours = = 
 = Battle of Fort Washington = 
 The Battle of Fort Washington was a battle fought in New York on November 16 , 1776 during the American Revolutionary War between the United States and Great Britain . It was a British victory that gained the surrender of the remnant of the garrison of Fort Washington near the north end of Manhattan Island . It was one of the worst Patriot defeats . 
 After defeating the Continental Army under Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief General George Washington at the Battle of White Plains , the British Army forces under the command of Lieutenant General William Howe planned to capture Fort Washington , the last American stronghold on Manhattan . General Washington issued a discretionary order to General Nathanael Greene to abandon the fort and remove its garrison – then numbered at 1 @,@ 200 men but later to grow to 3 @,@ 000 – to New Jersey . Colonel Robert Magaw , commanding the fort , declined to abandon it as he believed it could be defended from the British . Howe 's forces attacked the fort before Washington reached it to assess the situation . 
 Howe launched his attack on November 16 . He led an assault from three sides : the north , east and south . Tides in the Harlem River prevented some troops from landing and delayed the attack . When the British moved against the defenses , the southern and western American defenses fell quickly . Patriot forces on the north side offered stiff resistance to the Hessian attack , but they too were eventually overwhelmed . With the fort surrounded by land and sea , Colonel Magaw chose to surrender . A total of 59 Americans were killed and 2 @,@ 837 were taken as prisoners of war . 
 After this defeat , most of Washington 's army was chased across New Jersey and into Pennsylvania , and the British consolidated their control of New York and eastern New Jersey . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Construction and defenses = = = 
 During the American Revolutionary War , Fort Washington was located at the highest point of the island of Manhattan , along a large outcropping of Manhattan schist near its northernmost tip . Along with Fort Lee , located just across the Hudson River atop the New Jersey Palisades , the twin forts were intended to protect the lower Hudson from British warships . 
 In June 1776 , American Patriot officers Henry Knox , Nathanael Greene , William Heath , and Israel Putnam examined the terrain on which Fort Washington would be located ; they agreed that if the fort was properly fortified , it would be practically impossible to take . Later in June , the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Continental Army , George Washington , inspected the location and determined that the area was the key to defense of the lower Hudson . Shortly after Washington 's survey , troops from Pennsylvania began construction on the fort under the supervision of Rufus Putnam . 
 They first prepared a cheval de frise to prevent British ships from sailing up the Hudson and outflanking the American position . For more than a month , the troops transported boulders from the heights of Manhattan to the edge of the river , where they loaded them into a collection of hulks and cribs made of timber and stretched it across the river . When the cheval de frise was finished , they began work on the fort . Little soil covered the rocky surface , so men had to haul soil up from the low ground . They were unable to dig the customary ditches or trenches around the fort . The fort was built in the shape of a pentagon with five bastions . The main walls were made of earth , constructed with ravelins with openings for guns from every angle . The fort enclosed a total of three to four acres . The troops built an <unk> around the fort . After the barracks were finished in September , all the troops in the area were placed under the command of Major General William Heath . Washington established his headquarters near the fort . 
 Supporting the fort were numerous defenses . Batteries were placed on Jeffrey 's Hook , which extended into the Hudson , on Cox 's Hill looking over Spuyten Duyvil Creek , at the north end of Manhattan controlling the King 's Bridge and Dyckman 's Bridge over the Harlem River and along Laurel Hill which was to the east of the Fort and went along the Harlem River ( see also Fort Tryon Park ) . To the south of the fort were three lines of defense . The lines went through the hills and were made of trenches and foxholes . The first line was supported by a second line about 0 @.@ 33 mi ( 0 @.@ 5 km ) to the north , and a third line was planned to be built 0 @.@ 25 mi ( 0 @.@ 4 km ) north of the second . 
 = = = Movements = = = 
 British General William Howe , after first gaining control of western Long Island in the Battle of Long Island at the end of August 1776 , launched an invasion of Manhattan on September 15 . His northward progress was checked the next day in the Battle of Harlem Heights , after which he sought to flank the strong American position on the north of the island . After an abortive landing attempt on October 11 , Howe began landing troops in southern Westchester County , New York on October 18 , intending to cut off the Continental Army 's avenue of retreat . Washington , aware of the danger , withdrew most of his troops north to White Plains . He left a garrison of 1 @,@ 200 men at Fort Washington under the command of Colonel Robert Magaw ; this force was inadequate to fully defend the extensive works . In order to monitor the American garrison in the fort , Howe left Hugh Percy and a small force below Harlem Heights . 
 On the morning of October 27 , sentries informed Magaw that Percy 's troops were launching an attack supported by two frigates sailing up the Hudson . Magaw ordered an attack on the frigates , and both British ships were badly damaged by the guns from Fort Lee and Fort Washington . The frigates could not elevate their own guns to the height of the American positions . The British towed away the frigates , but an artillery duel continued for some time between British and American gunners . 
 On November 8 , about two dozen American soldiers drove off a slightly larger Hessian company from a forward redoubt . The Hessians held higher ground with better cover and had the advantage of artillery support throughout this minor skirmish , but were still unable to maintain their position . The Colonials had a single man wounded while the Hessians lost at least two men killed and others wounded . After burning and looting the temporary structures on the site , the victors occupied it until dark when they returned to their main lines . By the next day the Hessians had reoccupied the spot but were quickly driven off again by a larger American force . This time the Hessians left ten dead with , again , a single American wounded . 
 Because of these minor successes , Magaw became overconfident ; he boasted of being able to hold the fort through a siege to the end of December . On November 2 , Magaw 's adjutant , William <unk> , deserted to the British ; he gave them all of the details of the fort . Percy sent the information on to Howe , who had defeated Washington a few days earlier at the Battle of White Plains . During the weeks between Washington 's northward retreat and the British assault on the fort , reinforcements continued to trickle into the fort , increasing the size of the garrison to nearly 3 @,@ 000 men . 
 = = = Plans and preparations = = = 
 Washington had considered abandoning Fort Washington , but he was swayed by Nathanael Greene , who believed the fort could be held and that it was vital to do so . Greene argued that holding the fort would keep open communications across the river and might dissuade the British from attacking New Jersey . Magaw and Putnam concurred with Greene . Washington deferred to Greene and did not abandon the fort . 
 On November 4 , Howe ordered his army south toward Dobbs Ferry . Rather than pursue the American forces in the highlands , and possibly prompted by the intelligence acquired by the defection of <unk> , Howe had decided to attack Fort Washington . Washington responded by dividing his army . Seven thousand troops were to remain east of the Hudson under the command of Charles Lee to prevent a British invasion of New England ; General William Heath with 3 @,@ 000 men was to guard the Hudson Highlands to prevent any further British advance north , and Washington with 2 @,@ 000 men was to go to Fort Lee . On the 13th , Washington and his army reached Fort Lee . 
 Howe 's plan of attack was to storm the fort from three directions while a fourth force feinted ; by then it had received reinforcements and was garrisoned by 3 @,@ 000 men . Hessian troops under the command of Wilhelm von Knyphausen would attack the fort from the north , Percy was to lead a brigade of Hessians and several British battalions from the south , and Lord Cornwallis with the 33rd Regiment of Foot and General Edward Mathew with the light infantry were to attack from the east . The feint was to be by the 42nd Highlanders , who were to land on the east side of Manhattan , south of the fort . Before attacking , Howe sent Lieutenant Colonel James Patterson under a flag of truce on November 15 to deliver a message that if the fort did not surrender , the entire garrison would be killed . Magaw said the Patriots would defend the fort to the " last extremity " . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Initial fighting = = = 
 Before dawn on November 16 , the British and Hessian troops moved out . Knyphausen and his troops were ferried across the Harlem River on flatboats and landed on Manhattan . The <unk> then turned down the river to ferry Mathew 's troops across the river . However , due to the tide , they were unable to get close enough to the shore to bring the British troops across . Thus , Knyphausen 's troops were forced to halt their advance and wait until Mathew could cross . Around 7 : 00 a.m. , Hessian guns opened fire on the American battery on Laurel Hill , and the British frigate Pearl began to fire at the American entrenchments . Also , south of the Fort , Percy had his artillery open fire on the fort itself . Percy 's artillery aimed at Magaw 's guns which had damaged the British ships several weeks before . 
 By noon , Knyphausen and his Hessians restarted their advance . As soon as the tide was high enough , Mathew and his troops , accompanied by Howe , were ferried across the Harlem River . They landed under heavy fire from the American artillery on the Manhattan shore . The British troops charged up the hillside and dispersed the Americans until they reached a redoubt defended by some Pennsylvania Volunteer companies . After brief fighting , the Americans turned and ran towards the fort . 
 To the north of the fort , the Hessian right , commanded by Johann Rall , moved up the steep hillside south of Spuyten Duyvil Creek against almost no resistance from the Americans . The Hessians began to bring up their artillery . At this point , the main body of Hessians , 4 @,@ 000 men , under Knyphausen began to advance down the Post Road , which ran between Laurel Hill and the hill Rall was on . The Hessians crossed swampy land and when they approached the wooded hillside near the fort , they were fired upon by 250 riflemen of the Maryland and Virginia Rifle Regiment under the command of Lt. Col. Moses Rawlings . Rawlings ' men hid behind rocks and trees and darted from place to place to shoot at the Hessians as they tried to advance through the fallen trees and rocks . The first and second charges by the Hessians were repulsed by Rawlings ' riflemen . 
 Around the same time , to the south , Percy advanced with some 3 @,@ 000 men . Percy advanced in two columns with his brigade of Hessians on the left and Percy himself leading the right . About 200 yards from the American lines Percy halted the advance , waiting for the feint by Stirling to take place . Facing Percy was Alexander Graydon and his company . Graydon 's superior was Lambert Cadwalader , Magaw 's second in command , who was in charge of holding the three defensive lines south of Fort Washington . After hearing that there was a landing on the shore in his rear , Cadwalader sent 50 men to oppose it . The 50 men ran into the feint by Col. Stirling 's 42nd Foot of 700 men . Where Stirling landed happened to be the least defended area of the American defenses , and when Cadwalader heard how many men were there , he sent another 100 men to reinforce the 50 he had sent earlier . The British landing parties spread out , looking for a path through the rough terrain on the landing spot . The Americans took up a position on a hilltop and began firing at the British troops who were still crossing the river , killing or wounding 80 men . The British troops charged the American position , dispersing them . 
 Upon hearing the shooting , Percy ordered his troops to continue their advance . British artillery fire forced Graydon in the first defensive line to fall back to the second line , where Washington , Greene , Putnam and Hugh Mercer were located . The four were encouraged to leave Manhattan , which they did immediately , sailing across the river to Fort Lee . Magaw realized that Cadwalader was in danger of being surrounded and sent orders for him to withdraw toward the fort . Cadwalader 's force was pursued by Percy 's troops at the same time the troops opposing Stirling 's landing were also being chased back to the fort . Stirling 's troops , landed in the rear of Cadwalader , paused , believing that there were troops in the entrenchments . Some of the retreating Americans engaged Stirling , giving most of the rest of the American troops enough time to escape . 
 = = = Collapse = = = 
 With the collapse of Magaw 's outer lines to the south and east of the fort , the general American retreat towards the perceived safety of the fort took place . To the south , the third defensive line had never been completed so Cadwalader had nowhere left to retreat to except the fort . To the north , the riflemen under Rawlings still held , but barely , as there were fewer riflemen than before and because the increased amount of firing had jammed some of the men 's weapons , some of the men were forced to push boulders down the hill at the attacking Hessians . The American battery at Fort Washington was silenced by Pearl . By this time , the riflemen 's fire had almost ceased , and the Hessians slowly advanced up the hill and engaged the Americans in hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting . <unk> the Americans , the Hessians reached the top of the hill and swarmed into the redoubt with a bayonet charge , capturing it quickly . 
 Washington , who was watching the battle from the other side of the river , sent a note to Magaw asking him to hold out until nightfall , thinking that the troops could be evacuated during the night . By this time , the Hessians had taken the ground between the fort and the Hudson River . Johann Rall was given the honor of requesting the American surrender by Knyphausen . Rall sent Captain Hohenstein , who spoke English and French , under a flag of truce to call for the fort 's surrender . Hohenstein met with Cadwalader , and Cadwalader requested that Magaw be given four hours to consult with his officers . Hohenstein denied the request and gave the Americans a half hour to decide . As Magaw was consulting with his officers , Washington 's messenger , Captain John Gooch arrived , just before the fort was completely surrounded , with Washington 's request to hold out until nightfall . Magaw attempted to get easier terms for his men , who would only be allowed to keep their belongings , but this failed . Magaw announced his decision to capitulate at 3 : 00 pm , and at 4 : 00 pm , the American flag was brought down in the fort , replaced by the British flag . Before the surrender , John Gooch leaped off the side of the fort , tumbled to the bottom of the cliff , evaded musket fire and bayonet stabs , and managed to get onto a boat , arriving at Fort Lee a short while later . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the Hessians entered the fort , the American officers attempted to placate the Hessian commander , Captain von <unk> , who was in charge of the surrender . They invited him into their barracks , and offered him punch , wine , cake , with compliments . As they left the fort , the Hessians stripped the American troops of their baggage and beat some of them . Their officers intervened to prevent further injuries or deaths . The British captured thirty @-@ four cannon , two howitzers , along with many tents , blankets , tools and much ammunition . 
 The British and Hessians suffered 84 killed and 374 wounded . The Americans lost 59 killed , had 96 wounded casualties , and 2 @,@ 838 men captured . Under the usual treatment of prisoners of war in the American Revolutionary War , only 800 survived their captivity to be released 18 months later in a prisoner exchange ; nearly three @-@ quarters of the prisoners died . 
 Three days after the fall of Fort Washington , the Patriots abandoned Fort Lee . Washington and the army retreated through New Jersey and crossed the Delaware River into Pennsylvania northwest of Trenton , pursued as far as New Brunswick , New Jersey by British forces . After about one month , on the night of December 25 – 26 , 1776 , Washington crossed the Delaware and defeated the Hessian garrison under the command of Rall at Trenton . Washington went on to defeat the British next at Princeton , which revived the morale of the American army and the colonies affected by the fall of Fort Washington . 
 After seven years , on November 25 , 1783 , with the peace treaty signed , General Washington and Governor George Clinton triumphantly reclaimed Fort Washington as they marched toward lower Manhattan after the last British forces had left New York . 
 The site of Fort Washington is now in Bennett Park in the Washington Heights neighborhood of Manhattan , just north of the George Washington Bridge . The location of its walls are demarcated by stones placed in the park , and there is a commemorative plaque . 
 = Thirty Flights of Loving = 
 Thirty Flights of Loving is a first @-@ person adventure video game developed by Brendon Chung 's indie video game studio , Blendo Games . It was released in August 2012 for Microsoft Windows , and in November 2012 for OS X. The game employs a modified version of id Software 's 1997 @-@ era id Tech 2 engine — originally used for Quake 2 — and incorporates music composed by Idle Thumbs member Chris Remo . It follows three people as they prepare for an alcohol heist and the aftermath of the operation . 
 The game is a non @-@ direct sequel to Gravity Bone ( 2008 ) and features the same main character — an unnamed spy . It was developed as part of the Kickstarter campaign for the revival of the Idle Thumbs podcast and included a free copy of its predecessor . Thirty Flights of Loving received generally favorable reviews from video game media outlets , scoring 88 out of 100 on aggregate website Metacritic . A follow @-@ up , Quadrilateral Cowboy , was released on July 25 , 2016 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Thirty Flights of Loving is a first @-@ person adventure video game that is estimated to take about 15 minutes on average to complete . Using the WASD keys and mouse , the player controls the main character , an unnamed spy who participates in an alcohol @-@ smuggling operation . The player works alongside non @-@ playable characters Anita , a demolitions expert , and Borges , a forger . The game follows the group as they prepare for a heist and experience its aftermath . The robbery is omitted from the game , although it is revealed that it went wrong . 
 Unlike Gravity Bone , Thirty Flights of Loving employs non @-@ linear storytelling , forcing the player to piece together the narrative . During gameplay , objectives and guidance are provided through the player 's interactions with objects . The player has little control over the game mechanics and is only able to move freely and pick up objects as needed to progress . Several optional actions , such as drinking alcohol , are available at several stages of the game . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Thirty Flights of Loving begins with the player walking through a small corridor where individual gameplay elements such as movement and key allocations are explained . After walking through a bar and several more corridors , Anita and Borges are introduced . All three characters then exit on a plane . A smash cut skips the narrative forward to a scene with Anita and Borges lying shot in a room full of crates . The player character lifts Borges and takes him outside to what looks to be an airport . The player is then taken to a dark room with Anita sitting on a chair , peeling and eating oranges . After walking through another corridor , Anita , Borges , and the player join a wedding . 
 Anita and the player get drunk on a table while the rest of the characters start dancing and flying across the room . Then the player is taken again to the room where Anita was peeling oranges , and then back to the room where both she and Borges were lying shot . The player is then shown leaving the airport carrying Borges on a luggage cart . They arrive at a small place where the gunfight sequence takes place , followed by the motorcycle ride sequence , which ends with a crash that leads the player into a museum . In this area , there are several plaques showing the game 's name and credits . The player leaves the area and goes into a new one where Bernoulli 's principle about low and high air pressures is explained . Then , the player is again moved to the motorcycle sequence , where the game ends . 
 = = Development = = 
 Thirty Flights of Loving was developed by Brendon Chung 's video game studio Blendo Games . Chung , who worked as a level designer for Pandemic Studios , has contributed to the development of Full Spectrum Warrior and Lord of the Rings : Conquest . Thirty Flights of Loving was created using a modified version of <unk> II , a port of id Software 's id Tech 2 , the graphics engine for Quake 2 . It incorporates a gameplay enhancement add @-@ on named Lazarus , developed by David Hyde and Mad Dog . Chung acknowledged that although he has worked with newer , " powerful and flexible " engines , he preferred the older engine because it was released as an open @-@ source platform , " so you can redistribute it for free . " 
 The game was first conceived as a prototype to Gravity Bone , and was scrapped because it was " too dialogue heavy . " However , Chung revived the idea after being contacted by Idle Thumbs to develop a game for their Kickstarter campaign . The main development phase , in which content creation took place , was finished within three months . Several more months were spent polishing the game and fixing software bugs . Chung brought multiple existing assets from Gravity Bone to develop Thirty Flights of Loving , and used a diverse set of tools to create the elements of the game . Blender was picked for the creation of models , while Audacity and Adobe Photoshop were used for audio and texture work . Another tool , <unk> , was used to create the game 's levels . 
 Chung developed Thirty Flights of Loving 's environment as a way to present the criminal nature of the group . He intentionally avoided the use of voice @-@ overs , and instead modeled the environment to bridge " the disconnect between the player 's knowledge and the player 's character 's knowledge . " Characters Anita and Borges were to be introduced using dialogue , but this was removed . However , montages were later added after Idle Thumbs ' crew expressed concerns that the characters ' relationships were unclear . Chung included a system to automate the generation of non @-@ playable characters to replace the process of manually scripting every person in the game . He explained that although it allows characters to " randomly wander near waypoints , " the software is " occasionally glitchy and behaves badly around staircases . " This automation code was originally developed for a surveillance game prototype " that never panned out . " 
 A first @-@ person meal simulator was designed for Thirty Flights of Loving . The sequence included the main characters " enjoy [ ing ] street <unk> . " However , the idea was scrapped and replaced with the motorcycle ride featured in the final version . The gunfight scene portrayed in the game was supposed to have a " musical rhythm , " inspired by the film Koyaanisqatsi and Baraka . The last level of the game is modeled from the French National Museum of Natural History . Chung explained that when developing levels , he first spends time researching and " learning how things work . " He elaborated that researching is important in " how it gives specificity and grounding " to a game . Thirty Flights of Loving is the seventh " Citizen Abel " game developed by Chung . The first two games were coded in 1999 , while the following three were written between 2000 and 2004 . The sixth game in the series , Gravity Bone ( 2008 ) , became the first to be published . On the Tone Control podcast , he spoke about how every game he has produced , including Thirty Flights of Loving , takes place in the same shared universe . 
 Thirty Flights of Loving includes references and Easter eggs , as did Gravity Bone . Films such as Three Days of the Condor and The Conversation , film directors Steven Soderbergh and Quentin Tarantino , games such as Zork and Saints Row : The Third , and animated shows like Animaniacs and <unk> are referenced in the campaign . Unlike most of Chung 's previous games , Thirty Flights of Loving was not framed around a certain musical composition . It incorporates music composed by Idle Thumbs member Chris Remo , while additional audio was provided by Jared Emerson @-@ Johnson and A.J. <unk> . It makes use of <unk> 's sound library . 
 = = Release = = 
 Thirty Flights of Loving was announced in February 2012 as part of the Kickstarter campaign for Idle Thumbs ' podcast . The Idle Thumbs team talked to Chung about a possible sequel to Gravity Bone , which was offered as one of the rewards of their Kickstarter campaign . Those who supported the campaign received Thirty Flights of Loving before its official release on August 2012 . They also gained access to an exclusive " Goldblum mode " that was not part of the general release . It replaced the character model with ones resembling actor Jeff Goldblum . The game , alongside a free copy of Gravity Bone , was made available to early supporters in July 2012 and to the general public a month later via Steam . A Mac OS X release followed in November 2012 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Thirty Flights of Loving received generally favorable reviews upon release . On Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the game received an average score of 88 out of 100 , based on 10 reviews . Destructoid 's Patrick Hancock awarded the game 9 @.@ 5 out of 10 , stating that " you 'll never look at linear storytelling the same way again . " 
 GameSpot 's Carolyn Petit wrote that " the pleasure of Thirty Flights of Loving emerges from the things left <unk> " , allowing the player to infer and imagine the events , such as the heist itself , that are not otherwise shown . Graham Smith of PC Gamer extolled the minimalist storytelling , asserting that Thirty Flights of Loving " tells a better story in 13 minutes than most games do in 13 hours " . Mark Brown from Wired UK classified the game as a " brassy , super @-@ short , cubic heist drama , " and stated that Chung " spins a memorable yarn , delivers it with confidence and panache [ ... ] with a 15 year old engine , without voice acting , in 20 minutes . " 
 IGN 's Nathan Meunier said the game " gets off to a fascinating start before completely throwing any and all expectations you might form during its first few minutes into the wood chipper . " British video game magazine Edge found Thirty Flights of Loving to be " an intriguing psychological thriller that feels like Wes Anderson taking on Hitchcock . " The magazine added that the game had a " wonderfully ambiguous " story , crafted by replacing dialogue with " artful framing and shrewd gestures , and booting out cutscenes in favour of prickly jump @-@ cuts . " Greek magazine PC Master praised the game 's storytelling and stated that Thirty Flights of Loving " attempts to blur the lines between gaming and art . " Thirty Flights of Loving was a Narrative Award finalist at the 2013 Independent Games Festival . However , Richard <unk> 's Cart Life ( 2011 ) became the winner . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 A follow @-@ up to Thirty Flights of Loving , Quadrilateral Cowboy , is being developed by Chung . The game takes place in the same universe as Gravity Bone and Thirty Flights of Loving but is not a direct sequel . It follows a hacker who oversees agents who infiltrate buildings and steal documents . Unlike its predecessors , Quadrilateral Cowboy uses id Software 's id Tech 4 engine — originally used for Doom 3 . According to Chung , the new engine provides " a lot more modern functionality " than the earlier engine used in the first two games . 
 = Grey currawong = 
 The grey currawong ( Strepera versicolor ) is a large passerine bird native to southern Australia and Tasmania . One of three currawong species in the genus Strepera , it is closely related to the butcherbirds and Australian magpie of the family Artamidae . It is a large crow @-@ like bird , around 48 cm ( 19 in ) long on average , with yellow irises , and a heavy bill , and dark plumage with white undertail and wing patches . The male and female are similar in appearance . Six subspecies are recognised and are distinguished by overall plumage colour , which ranges from slate @-@ grey for the nominate from New South Wales and eastern Victoria and subspecies plumbea from Western Australia , to sooty black for the clinking currawong of Tasmania and subspecies halmaturina from Kangaroo Island . All grey currawongs have a loud distinctive ringing or clinking call . 
 Within its range , the grey currawong is generally sedentary , although it is a winter visitor in the southeastern corner of Australia . Comparatively little studied , much of its behaviour and habits is poorly known . Omnivorous , it has a diet that includes a variety of berries , invertebrates , and small vertebrates . Less arboreal than the pied currawong , the grey currawong spends more time foraging on the ground . It builds nests high in trees , which has limited the study of its breeding habits . Unlike its more common relative , it has adapted poorly to human impact and has declined in much of its range . The habitat includes all kinds of forested areas as well as scrubland in dryer parts of the country . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 The grey currawong was first described as Corvus versicolor by ornithologist John Latham in 1801 , who gave it the common name of " variable crow " . The specific name versicolor means ' of variable colours ' in Latin . Other old common names include grey crow @-@ shrike , leaden crow @-@ shrike , mountain magpie , black @-@ winged currawong ( in western Victoria ) , clinking currawong ( in Tasmania ) , and squeaker ( in Western Australia ) . The black @-@ winged currawong was known to the <unk> people of Encounter Bay as <unk> @-@ eri , the word meaning " to sneak " or " to track " . <unk> @-@ <unk> was a name derived from the call used by the people of the lower Murray River . 
 Together with the pied currawong ( S. graculina ) and black currawong ( S. fuliginosa ) , the grey currawong forms the genus Strepera . Although crow @-@ like in appearance and habits , currawongs are only distantly related to true crows , and are instead closely related to the Australian magpie and the butcherbirds . The affinities of all three genera were recognised early on and they were placed in the family Cracticidae in 1914 by ornithologist John Albert Leach after he had studied their musculature . Ornithologists Charles Sibley and Jon Ahlquist recognised the close relationship between the woodswallows and the butcherbirds and relatives in 1985 , and combined them into a Cracticini clade , which later became the family Artamidae . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 Six subspecies are spread around Australia . They vary extensively in the colour of their plumage , from grey to sooty black , and the amount of white on their wings , and most were at one time considered separate species : 
 S. v. versicolor , the nominate race , is known as the grey currawong , and is found in New South Wales , the ACT , and eastern and central Victoria , west to Port Phillip on the coast , and to the Grampians inland . 
 S. v. intermedia , the grey @-@ brown form of South Australia , is also known as the brown currawong . It is found in the Yorke and Eyre Peninsulas , the Gawler and Mount Lofty Ranges and the eastern areas of the Great Australian Bight . The smallest of the six subspecies , it has a shorter wing and tail . Birds in the southern Eyre Peninsula have darker plumage than those in the northern parts . First described by Richard Bowdler Sharpe in 1877 from a specimen collected in Port Lincoln , its specific name is the Latin adjective intermedia " intermediate " . 
 S. v. arguta , the darkest race , is from eastern Tasmania and is known as the clinking currawong from its call or locally as the black magpie . Sharpe called it the Tasmanian hill @-@ crow . It was first described by John Gould in 1846 . The specific name is the Latin adjective <unk> " shrill / piercing " , " noisy " or " melodious " . Larger and heavier than the nominate subspecies , it has longer wings , tail , bill , and tarsus . 
 S. v. melanoptera , known as the black @-@ winged currawong , is from western Victoria 's Mallee region and South Australia west to the Mount Lofty Ranges . It can be difficult to distinguish from the black and pied currawongs at any distance . Of similar size and bill @-@ shape to the nominate subspecies , it has a darker blackish @-@ brown plumage and lacks the white wing markings . Birds from much of western Victoria are intermediates between this and the nominate subspecies , often bearing partial white markings on the wings . Similarly , in the western part of its range in South Australia are intermediate with subspecies to the west and also have some paler patches . Named by John Gould in 1846 , its specific name is derived from the Ancient Greek words <unk> " black " and pteron " wings " . American ornithologist Dean Amadon observed that birds from northwestern Victoria were lighter in plumage than those of South Australia , and tentatively classified them as a separate subspecies <unk> . However , he noted they warranted further investigation , and subsequent authorities have not recognised the populations as separate . 
 S. v. halmaturina is restricted to Kangaroo Island . A dark @-@ plumaged subspecies , it has a longer narrower bill than the nominate race , and is lighter in weight . The specific name is the adjective halmaturina " of Kangaroo Island " . It was first named by Gregory Mathews in 1912 . 
 S. v. plumbea is found from western South Australia and the southwestern corner of the Northern Territory westwards into Western Australia . It is colloquially known as " squeaker " from the sound of its call . Named by Gould in 1846 , its specific name is the Latin adjective <unk> " leaden " . Very similar in plumage to the nominate subspecies , it differs in its thicker , more downward curved bill . The base plumage is variable , but tends to be slightly darker and possibly more brown @-@ tinged than the nominate subspecies . Amadon noted that a specimen from the Everard Ranges in northwestern South Australia was larger and paler than other specimens of plumbea . Although he considered these Central Australian birds as a separate subspecies <unk> , he conceded very little was known . They have been considered part of plumbea subsequently . 
 = = Description = = 
 A larger and more slender bird than its more common relative the pied currawong , the adult grey currawong ranges from 44 to 57 cm ( 17 to 22 in ) in length , with an average of around 52 cm ( 20 in ) ; the wingspan varies from 72 to 85 cm ( 28 to 33 in ) , averaging around 78 cm ( 31 in ) , with an average weight of around 350 g ( 12 oz ) . Adults of the Tasmanian subspecies average around 440 g ( 16 oz ) . The male is on average slightly larger than the female , but the size and weight ranges mostly overlap . It is generally a dark grey bird with white in the wing , undertail coverts , the base of the tail and most visibly , the tip of the tail . It has yellow eyes . The orbital ( eye @-@ ring ) , legs and feet are black , whereas the bill and gape range from greyish black to black . The overall plumage varies according to subspecies . The nominate race versicolor and plumbea are slate @-@ grey in colour , while melanoptera and intermedia are blackish @-@ brown , and arguta of Tasmania and halmaturina a sooty black . The size of the white patch on the wing also varies , being large and easily spotted in versicolor , plumbea , intermedia and arguta , but non @-@ existent or indistinct in melanoptera and halmaturina . 
 More specifically , the nominate subspecies has a grey forehead , crown , nape , ear @-@ coverts and throat with the face a darker grey @-@ black . The feathers of the throat are longer , giving rise to hackles there . The upperparts and underparts are a brownish @-@ grey and become more brown with age . Towards the belly , the feathers are a paler grey . The wings are grey @-@ brown , and the blackish primaries have white edges which merge to form the prominent white wing markings . 
 Birds appear to moult once a year in spring or summer , although observations have been limited . Young birds spend about a year in juvenile plumage before moulting into adult plumage at around a year old . Juvenile birds have more brown @-@ tinged and uniform plumage ; the darker colour around the lores and eyes are less distinct . Their blackish bill is yellow @-@ tipped , and the gape is yellow . Their eyes are brownish , but turn yellow early . The exact timing is unknown but likely to be around four months of age . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 Unlike that of the pied currawong , the grey currawong 's call does not sound like its name . It is best known for making a sound variously transcribed as p <unk> , clink , cling , ker @-@ link or <unk> , either in flight or when gathered in any numbers . The call has been described as very loud and ringing in the Tasmanian and Kangaroo Island subspecies ; Edwin Ashby wrote that in Tasmania it was akin to the squeaking of a wheelbarrow and Gregory Mathews that it was like the <unk> of an anvil . Elsewhere , their call has been likened to the screech of <unk> metal grinding in Victoria and South Australia ( races versicolor and melanoptera are noted as similar to each other ) , and as a harsh squeak in Western Australia . The clinking call resembles that of the superb lyrebird , which imitates the currawong call at times . 
 A softer and more tuneful musical call has been called the toy @-@ trumpet call . It has been reported to foretell rainy weather . The loud bell call resembles the clinking call , and is a clear piping sound . Females and young make an insistent repetitive squawking when begging for food from a parent or mate , similar to the begging call of the Australian magpie , and make a gobbling sound when fed . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 The grey currawong is unlikely to be confused with other species apart from other currawongs . It is immediately distinguishable from crows and ravens as they have wholly black plumage , a stockier build and white ( rather than yellow ) eyes . However , it can be encountered in mixed @-@ species flocks with the pied currawong . It can be distinguished by its paler plumage , lack of white base to the tail , straighter bill , and very different vocalisations . In northwestern Victoria , the black @-@ winged currawong ( subspecies melanoptera ) has a darker plumage than other grey subspecies , and is thus more similar in appearance to the pied currawong , but its wings lack the white primaries of the latter species . In Tasmania , the black currawong is similar but has a heavier bill and call similar to the pied and lacks the white rump . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Grey currawongs are found right across the southern part of Australia from the Central Coast region of New South Wales , occurring south of latitude 32 ° S southwards and westwards , from the vicinity of Mudgee in the north and southwest to Temora and Albury onto the Riverina and across most of Victoria and southern South Australia to the fertile south @-@ west corner of Western Australia and the semi @-@ arid country surrounding it . The clinking subspecies is endemic to Tasmania , where it is more common in the eastern parts , but is absent from King and Flinders Islands in Bass Strait . There is an outlying population in the arid area where the Northern Territory meets South Australia and Western Australia . In general , the grey currawong is sedentary throughout its range , although it appears to be resident in the cooler months only in south Gippsland in eastern Victoria and the far south coast of New South Wales . 
 The grey currawong is found in wet and dry sclerophyll forests across its range , as well as mallee scrubland , and open areas such as parks or farmland near forested areas . It also inhabits pine plantations . Preferences vary between regions ; subspecies versicolor is more common in wetter forests in southeastern mainland Australia , while the Tasmanian subspecies arguta is found most commonly in lowland dry sclerophyll forest . The subspecies melanoptera and intermedia are found mainly in mallee scrublands and woodlands , while in Western Australia , subspecies plumbea is found in various forests and woodlands , such as jarrah ( Eucalyptus marginata ) , karri ( E. diversicolor ) , tuart ( E. gomphocephala ) and wandoo ( E. wandoo ) , as well as paperbark woodlands around swampy areas , and acacia shrublands dominated by summer @-@ scented wattle ( Acacia <unk> ) and mulga ( Acacia aneura ) with Eremophila understory . 
 The grey currawong appears to have declined across its distribution ; formerly common , it became scarce in northern Victoria in the 1930s , and in northeastern Victoria in the 1960s . Habitat destruction has seen it decline in southeastern South Australia around Naracoorte and from many areas in the Western Australian Wheatbelt . It also became rare in the Margaret River and Cape Naturaliste regions after 1920 , and vanished from much of the Swan Coastal Plain by the 1940s . One place which has seen an increase in numbers is the Mount Lofty Ranges in the 1960s . The species has never been common in the Sydney Basin and sightings have been uncommon and scattered since the time of John Gould in the early 19th century . The status of the species is uncertain in the Northern Territory , where it may be extinct . It has been classified as critically endangered there pending further information . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 Overall , data on the social behaviour of the grey currawong is lacking , and roosting habits are unknown . It is generally shyer and more wary than its pied relative , but has become more accustomed to people in areas of high human activity in southwest Western Australia . Its undulating flight is rapid and silent . It hops or runs when on the ground . Birds are generally encountered singly or in pairs , but may forage in groups of three to eleven birds . Up to forty birds may gather to harvest a fruit tree if one is found . The black @-@ winged subspecies is seldom seen in groups larger than four or five , while the clinking currawong may form groups of up to forty birds over the non @-@ breeding season . 
 There is some evidence of territoriality , as birds in the Wheatbelt maintain territories year @-@ round there . The grey currawong has been recorded harassing larger birds such as the wedge @-@ tailed eagle , square @-@ tailed kite and Australian hobby . The species has been observed bathing by shaking its wings in water at ponds , as well as applying clay to its plumage after washing . 
 Two species of chewing louse have been isolated and described from grey currawongs : ( Menacanthus <unk> ) from subspecies halmaturina on Kangaroo Island in South Australia , and <unk> <unk> from subspecies arguta near Launceston in Tasmania . A new species of <unk> nematode , <unk> <unk> isolated from a grey currawong at <unk> was described in 1977 . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The grey currawong is an omnivorous and opportunistic feeder . It preys on many invertebrates , such as snails , spiders and woodlice , and a wide variety of insects including beetles , earwigs , cockroaches , wasps , ants and grasshoppers , and smaller vertebrates , including frogs , lizards such as the bearded dragon as well as skinks , rats , mice , and nestlings or young of Tasmanian <unk> , red wattlebird , eastern spinebill , house sparrow ( Passer domesticus ) , and splendid fairywren ( M. splendens ) , It has been recorded hunting at the nests of the superb fairywren ( Malurus cyaneus ) , and the bell miner ( Manorina <unk> ) . 
 A wide variety of plant material is also consumed , including the fruit or berries of Ficus species , Leucopogon species , Exocarpos species , a cycad <unk> <unk> , a mistletoe <unk> <unk> , Astroloma <unk> , A. <unk> , Myoporum insulare , <unk> tomentosa and Coprosma <unk> . The grey currawong also eats berries of introduced plants such as Pyracantha angustifolia and P. <unk> , and Cotoneaster species , and crops such as maize , apples , pears , quince , various stone fruit of the genus Prunus , grapes , tomato , passion flowers , and the nectar of <unk> lily ( <unk> excelsa ) . On Kangaroo Island , the grey currawong has been identified as the main vector for the spread of bridal creeper ( Asparagus <unk> ) . <unk> ( <unk> monilifera subspecies monilifera ) , another invasive species readily dispersed in bird droppings , is also consumed by grey currawongs . In Tasmania , A. <unk> is especially popular , and one observer noted that the normally noisy birds became quiet and sluggish after eating it , prompting him to wonder whether the plant had a narcotic effect on the birds . 
 Foraging takes place on the ground , or less commonly in trees or shrubs . Most commonly the grey currawong probes the ground for prey , but sometimes chases more mobile animals . It has been recorded removing insects from parked cars , as well as employing the <unk> method , where it inserts its bill in a crack or under a rock and uses it to lever open a wider space to hunt prey . In one case , a bird was observed holding bark off the branch of a eucalypt and levering open gaps every 4 to 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 to 2 in ) with its bill . The grey currawong usually swallows prey whole , although one bird was observed impaling a rodent on a stick and eating parts of it , in the manner of a butcherbird . A field study on road ecology in southwestern Australia revealed that the grey currawong is unusual in inhabiting cleared areas adjacent to roads . However , it was not recorded feeding on roadkill , and moves away from the area in breeding season . It was also commonly hit and killed by vehicles . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The breeding habits of the grey currawong are not well known , and the inaccessibility of its nests makes study difficult . The breeding season lasts from August to December . The grey currawong builds a large shallow nest of thin sticks lined with grass and bark high in trees ; generally eucalypts are chosen . It produces a clutch of one to five ( though usually two or three ) rounded or tapered oval eggs , which vary in size and colour according to subspecies . Those of subspecies versicolor average 30 mm × 43 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in × 1 @.@ 7 in ) in size and are a pale brown or buff with shades of pink or wine tones , and are marked with streaks or splotches of darker brown , purple @-@ brown , slate @-@ grey or even blue @-@ tinged . Those of the black @-@ winged currawong are similarly sized at 30 mm × 41 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in × 1 @.@ 6 in ) and are buff or flesh @-@ coloured with a purple tint and marked with darker browns or purple @-@ browns . The clinking currawong lays larger and paler eggs of dull white , pale grey or buff with a faint wine @-@ colour tint , and marked with darker tones of <unk> , <unk> or blue @-@ tinged brown , which average 31 mm × 46 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in × 1 @.@ 8 in ) . The eggs of the brown currawong are also pale wine @-@ tinted brown , buff , or cream with darker markings of cinnamon , brown or purple @-@ brown , and measure 29 mm × 42 mm ( 1 @.@ 1 in × 1 @.@ 7 in ) . Finally , the western subspecies lays eggs averaging 31 mm × 43 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in × 1 @.@ 7 in ) in size which are pale shades of red @-@ brown or wine @-@ colour , with darker red @-@ brown markings . In all subspecies , the markings can coalesce over the larger end of the egg to form a darker ' cap ' . The incubation period is poorly known because of the difficulty of observing nests , but one observation suggested around 23 days from laying to hatching . Like all passerines , the chicks are born naked , and blind ( altricial ) , and remain in the nest for an extended period ( nidicolous ) . Both parents feed the young . 
 Data on nesting success rates is limited ; one study of 35 nests found 28 ( 80 % ) resulted in the fledging of at least one young currawong . Causes of failure included nest collapse by gale @-@ force winds and rain , and harassment and nest raiding by pied currawongs . The incidence of brood parasitism is uncertain . A pair of grey currawongs have been observed feeding a channel @-@ billed cuckoo ( Scythrops novaehollandiae ) chick on one occasion . 
 = Jordan Eberle = 
 Jordan Leslie Eberle ( born May 15 , 1990 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey right winger and alternate captain currently playing for the Edmonton Oilers of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . He was selected in the first round , 22nd overall , in the 2008 NHL Entry Draft . 
 During his four @-@ year junior career with the Regina Pats of the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) , he won the CHL Player of the Year Award in 2010 , the Doc Seaman Trophy as the scholastic player of the year in 2008 and was a two @-@ time First Team East All @-@ Star in 2008 and 2010 . In his second season in the NHL , Eberle was named to the All @-@ Star Game and led the Oilers in goal- and point @-@ scoring . 
 Internationally , Eberle has competed for Canada in two World Junior Championships , winning gold and silver in 2009 and 2010 , respectively . He was named Tournament MVP and Best Forward at the 2010 World Junior Championships and is tied with Brayden Schenn as Canada 's second all @-@ time leading scorer at the tournament with 26 points . Both are 5 behind Eric Lindros ' 31 points . TSN named him the best Canadian World Junior Player ever , being the only player to have earned points in all 12 career games played , the longest career scoring streak in team history by five games . 
 = = Hockey career = = 
 = = = Minor = = = 
 Eberle played novice with Hockey Regina 's tier @-@ 1 Kings and amassed 216 goals over sixty games in 1999 – 2000 . He went on to play Bantam AAA for the Athol Murray College of Notre Dame in Wilcox , Saskatchewan , as a fourteen @-@ year @-@ old . After being selected by his hometown major junior team , the Regina Pats of the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) , in the seventh round ( 126th overall ) of the 2005 WHL Bantam Draft , Eberle joined the midget ranks with the Calgary Buffaloes of the Alberta Midget Hockey League ( <unk> ) . He won a bronze medal with the Buffaloes at the 2006 Mac 's Midget Hockey Tournament , scoring two goals in the bronze @-@ medal game against the Prince Albert Mintos . He helped his team qualify for the 2006 Telus Cup national midget championship , where the Buffaloes lost a 5 – 4 triple @-@ overtime game in the final against the Mintos . Eberle scored a goal in the losing effort and was awarded the Most Sportsmanlike Award for the tournament . 
 = = = Regina Pats = = = 
 Eberle debuted with the Pats in 2006 – 07 , scoring 55 points and a team @-@ high 28 goals as a rookie . He added two goals and seven points in six games against the Swift Current Broncos in the opening round of the 2007 WHL playoffs , but was sidelined for the entirety of the second round against the Medicine Hat Tigers with a virus . Eberle started his second major junior season by earning WHL Player of the Month honours for October 2007 , totaling sixteen goals and 26 points over sixteen games for the Pats . He had missed two games early in the season with tonsillitis , before scoring a hat trick in his return on October 6 , 2007 , against the Moose Jaw Warriors . Eberle later represented Team WHL against Russia in the 2007 ADT Canada @-@ Russia Challenge in late November . Midway through the season , he was chosen to compete in the 2008 CHL Top Prospects Game in Edmonton . 
 Eberle finished 2007 – 08 with a team @-@ high 42 goals and 75 points . His 42 goals accounted for one @-@ fifth of his team 's scoring and marked the first time a Pats player hit the forty @-@ goal mark since Matt <unk> scored 48 in 2001 – 02 . It also tied for fourth in league scoring with Drayson Bowman of the Spokane Chiefs . He was selected to the WHL East First All @-@ Star Team and received the Doc Seaman Trophy as WHL Scholastic Player of the Year ( beating out defenceman Jared Cowen of the Spokane Chiefs ) . 
 Eberle had started the 2007 – 08 season ranked seventh among WHL skaters in the NHL Central Scouting Bureau 's preliminary rankings for the 2008 NHL Entry Draft . At mid @-@ season , he was ranked 24th among North American skaters , then dropped to 33rd in the NHL CSS 's final rankings . Director of NHL Central Scouting E. J. McGuire described Eberle as a scorer whose strengths are his skating and stickhandling . He was selected in the first round , 22nd overall , by the Edmonton Oilers . Having grown up in Regina , Eberle was a childhood fan of the Oilers , even after his family moved to Calgary at fourteen years old . After being selected , he commented in an interview , " If I had to pick one pick , [ the Oilers ] would have been it . " 
 Eberle competed in his second ADT Canada – Russia Challenge for Team WHL in 2008 . After completing the 2008 – 09 WHL season with a team @-@ leading 74 points in 61 games , Eberle was signed to a three @-@ year , entry @-@ level contract with the Oilers on March 23 , 2009 . 
 Competing for a roster spot with the Oilers in the 2009 training camp , Eberle was one of the final cuts . He was returned to the Pats on September 27 , 2009 , and reeled off 25 points in twelve games to be named WHL Player of the Month for September and October . He was named to Team WHL for the 2009 Subway Super Series ( formerly known as the ADT Canada – Russia Challenge ) and was selected as an alternate captain to Pats teammate Colten Teubert for Game 5 . Eberle finished the 2009 – 10 WHL season second in league scoring with 106 points in 57 games ( one point behind Brandon Kozun of the Calgary Hitmen in eight fewer games ) and was a unanimous selection to his second WHL East First All @-@ Star Team in three years . He was the first member of the Pats to score 50 goals and record 100 points since Ronald <unk> during the 1997 – 98 season . Eberle finished his career with the Pats seventh all @-@ time in franchise goal scoring with 155 and twelfth in points with 310 . Eberle was named the Regina Pats Player of the Year , Most Sportsmanlike Player and the Most Popular player after the 2009 – 10 season . Despite the Pats ' disappointing season as a team , Eberle was selected as the winner of the Four Broncos Memorial Trophy as WHL Player of the Year , defeating Western Conference nominee Craig Cunningham of the Vancouver Giants . He was later named CHL Player of the Year , beating out the Ontario Hockey League ( OHL ) and Quebec Major Junior Hockey League ( QMJHL ) nominees Tyler Seguin and Mike Hoffman , respectively . It marked the third time a Pats player won the award , after Ed <unk> in 1975 and Doug Wickenheiser in 1980 . 
 In recognition of his outstanding junior hockey career , the Pats retired Eberle 's number 7 on December 5 , 2012 . 
 = = = Edmonton Oilers = = = 
 Soon after signing a professional contract with the Oilers in 2009 , Eberle was assigned to the teams ' minor league affiliate , the Springfield Falcons of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) , for the remainder of the 2008 – 09 season . He scored his first professional goal in his third game with the Falcons , a 4 – 3 loss to the Portland Pirates , on March 29 , 2009 . He went on to tally three goals and nine points in nine games . Eberle was again assigned to the Falcons after finishing the 2009 – 10 season with the Pats . He notched six goals and 14 points in the Falcons ' last 11 games of the regular season . 
 Eberle made his NHL debut with the Oilers on October 7 , 2010 , against the Calgary Flames . He recorded his first goal , on the penalty kill in the third period , <unk> past defenceman Ian White on a two @-@ on @-@ one before scoring on a backhand deke past goaltender Miikka Kiprusoff . The goal was later voted by fans as the NHL 's Goal of the Year on the League 's Facebook page , as well as Play of the Year on The Sports Network 's website . He later added an assist on the powerplay , taking a shot that deflected off teammate Shawn Horcoff 's <unk> . The Oilers went on to win the game 4 – 0 . Eberle was named the first star of the game . Later in the season , Eberle suffered a high ankle sprain after colliding with opposing forward Aleš Kotalík during a game against the Flames on January 1 , 2011 . While sidelined with the injury , he underwent an unrelated emergency appendectomy four days later . Missing 13 games with his ankle injury , he returned to action in early February . During a game against the Vancouver Canucks late in the season , on April 5 , Eberle received a hit to the head from opposing forward Raffi Torres . While Eberle was not injured on the play , Torres received a four @-@ game suspension for the hit . Eberle finished the season with 43 points ( 18 goals and 25 assists ) in 69 games , leading his team in scoring and ranking sixth among league rookies . Though the Oilers finished with the worst record in the NHL for the second straight year , expectations remained high in Edmonton for the future of the team , as Eberle 's success as a rookie was matched by the performance of fellow first @-@ year forwards Taylor Hall and Magnus <unk> . 
 During his second NHL season , Eberle sustained a sprained knee after colliding with Dallas Stars forward Jamie Benn during a game on January 7 , 2012 . At the time of the injury , Eberle was among the league 's top scorers and six points behind the league 's leader . Despite his success , he was left off the 2012 NHL All @-@ Star Game roster , which was selected while he was sidelined . Several members within the Oilers organization were outspoken regarding the omission , including captain Shawn Horcoff and Head Coach Tom Renney , to which the League replied that Eberle would have been selected had he not been injured . By January 19 , Eberle returned to the Oilers lineup after missing four games . Five days later , he was nonetheless named as an All @-@ Star replacement for the injured Mikko Koivu . Eberle was selected to Team Chara as part of the All @-@ Star Fantasy Draft and went on to record an assist in the squad 's 12 – 9 win against Team Alfredsson . The following month , Eberle recorded his 100th career NHL point on February 21 , 2012 , with a goal and two assists in a 6 – 1 victory over the Calgary Flames . He finished his second NHL season leading with a team @-@ leading 34 goals , 42 assists and 76 points . Among league scorers , he ranked 16th in goals and points . The Oilers continued to struggle as a team , however , and finished 14th in the Western Conference with 32 wins and 74 points . 
 On April 23 , 2012 , Eberle was nominated for the Lady Byng Memorial Trophy , along with Florida Panthers Brian Campbell and New York Islanders Matt <unk> . 
 On August 30 , 2012 , Eberle signed a six @-@ year , $ 36 million contract extension with the Oilers . 
 During the 2012 – 13 NHL lockout , Eberle played for the Oklahoma City Barons of the AHL and at the time the lockout was resolved , Eberle was leading the League with 25 goals and 51 points . This led Eberle to become AHL Player of the Month for two consecutive months . 
 On February 11 , 2016 , Eberle scored his first career hat @-@ trick against the Toronto Maple Leafs . All three goals were assisted by Connor McDavid . This also happened to be the final hat @-@ trick scored at Rexall Place . 
 = = International play = = 
 Eberle represented Alberta at the 2007 Canada Games in Whitehorse , Yukon . He notched two goals and an assist in the bronze medal game against British Columbia in Alberta 's 4 – 3 win . He finished the tournament with six goals and five assists in five games played to place eighth in tournament scoring . Several months later , Eberle played for Team Canada 's under @-@ 18 team at the 2007 Ivan Hlinka Memorial Tournament , but failed to register a point as Canada was kept from a medal . He continued with the national under @-@ 18 team the following year at the 2008 IIHF World U18 Championships in Russia . He began the tournament by earning player of the game honours with a two @-@ goal effort in the first round @-@ robin game against Germany — a 9 – 2 win for Canada . He later notched two goals and an assist in an 8 – 0 gold medal game win to help Canada to their first tournament championship in five years . Eberle finished the tournament with ten points in seven games , second in team scoring to Cody Hodgson . 
 In his third WHL season , Eberle was selected to the Team Canada 's under @-@ 20 team for the 2009 World Junior Championships in Ottawa . In the semi @-@ finals , on January 3 , 2009 , Eberle was named player of the game after scoring two goals and the shootout @-@ winner against Russia in a 6 – 5 win . Eberle dramatically scored his second goal of the night with just 5 @.@ 4 seconds left in regulation to force extra time and the eventual shootout , in which he shot first and scored . Defeating Sweden 5 – 1 in the final , Eberle helped Canada to a record @-@ tying fifth straight gold medal and was named by the coaching staff as one of the team 's best three players . At the conclusion of the tournament , Eberle was third in tournament scoring with 13 points ( six goals , seven assists ) . 
 The following year , Eberle was named to his second national junior team for the 2010 World Junior Championships in his hometown Regina , Saskatchewan . He was selected as an alternate captain to Patrice Cormier along with fellow returnees Colten Teubert , Alex Pietrangelo and Stefan Della Rovere . He was named player of the game against Switzerland in the second game of the round @-@ robin — a 6 – 0 win — with a five @-@ point game ( one goal , four assists ) . Two games later , he notched two goals in regulation ( one of which began a two @-@ goal comeback late in the third period ) and one in the shootout against the United States in the final game of the round @-@ robin to earn his second player of the game honour of the tournament . Canada later met the United States again in the gold medal game . Down 5 – 3 with three minutes to go in regulation , Eberle scored twice to force overtime . His tying goal with 1 : 35 left made him Canada 's all @-@ time leading goal scorer in the tournament with 14 goals , passing John Tavares ' mark set the previous year . Canada eventually lost in overtime , earning silver and ending their five @-@ year gold medal streak . 
 At the conclusion of the tournament , Eberle finished tied for the tournament lead in goals with André <unk> of Sweden and was second in points to Derek Stepan of the United States . He was voted as the Most Valuable Player and Top Forward . He was also named to the tournament All @-@ Star Team by the media and named one of Canada 's top three players by the coaches . Three days after the gold medal game , Regina Mayor Pat Fiacco proclaimed January 8 , 2010 , as " Jordan Eberle and Colten Teubert Day " in the city for their efforts in the tournament . 
 On April 16 , 2010 , Eberle was named to Team Canada as an alternate for the 2010 IIHF World Championship in Germany . After injuries to Ryan Smyth and Steve Stamkos in the preliminary round , he debuted with Canada 's men 's team on May 14 , 2010 , versus Norway . Eberle scored a goal and assisted on three others to earn the Player of the Game Award in a 12 – 1 Canadian victory . He played in three more games without any points as Canada finished in seventh place with a loss to Russia in the quarter @-@ final . 
 Following his NHL rookie season , Eberle joined the Canadian men 's team for the second consecutive year for the 2011 IIHF World Championship in Slovakia . During the preliminary round , Eberle scored a goal in a contest against Switzerland to be named player of the game . In a game against the United States during the qualifying round , Eberle scored in a shootout , helping Canada to a 4 – 3 win , while also temporarily tying them for the lead in their pool . Canada went on to top their pool , but lost 2 – 1 in the quarter @-@ final against Russia for the second consecutive year . Scoring four times over seven tournament games ( no assists ) , Eberle tied for second in team goal @-@ scoring , behind John Tavares . 
 At the 2015 World Championships , where Canada won the gold medal for the first time since 2007 with a perfect 10 @-@ 0 record , Eberle finished second in scoring with 5 goals and 8 assists , one point behind tournament leader Jason Spezza . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Eberle was born to Darren and Lisa Eberle in Regina , Saskatchewan . His dad coached him on his minor hockey teams growing up . He has two sisters , Ashley and Whitney , and a younger brother , Dustin . He attended high school at the Athol Murray College of Notre Dame in Wilcox , Saskatchewan , before moving to Calgary , Alberta , at age 15 with his parents and three siblings . He returned to Regina to play junior hockey for the Regina Pats and attended Archbishop M.C. O 'Neill High School during the hockey season . He went on to graduate from Bishop O 'Byrne Senior High School in Calgary in June 2008 . 
 Eberle has a cousin , Derek Eberle , who also played junior for the Pats from 1990 to 1993 . His brother Dustin was drafted by the Pats in the 12th round , 248th overall , of the 2007 WHL Bantam Draft . 
 Eberle has been in a relationship with his girlfriend Lauren since 2007 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = Kylie Gauci = 
 Kylie Gauci ( born 1 January 1985 ) is an Australian Paralympic 2 @-@ point wheelchair basketball player . She participated in the 2004 Summer Paralympics in Athens , where she won a silver medal ; in the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing , where she won a bronze medal , and the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London , where she won a second silver medal . Gauci represented Australia at the 2002 , 2006 and 2010 World Championships , and was named to the World All Star 5 at the World Championships in Amsterdam in 2006 . She has played over 180 international games . 
 Playing with the Hill 's Hornets , Gauci was named the Women 's National Wheelchair Basketball League ( WNWBL ) ' s Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) 2 Pointer and named to the All Star Five on five consecutive occasions . In 2006 she switched to the North 's Bears , now known as the Stacks Goudkamp Bears , and was named MVP 2 Pointer and All Star Five six times in a row . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Gauci was born on 1 January 1985 . She was born with lumbar sacral agenesis , meaning that she is missing the lower part of her spine . In 2008 and 2009 , she was the Australian Paralympic Committee 's New South Wales Assistant . As of 2012 , she lives in <unk> Hill , New South Wales . 
 = = Basketball = = 
 Gauci is an Australian Paralympic wheelchair basketball 2 @-@ point player . She began competing in 1996 when she was eleven years old , and was inspired to play for the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team after watching their performance at the 2000 Sydney Paralympics . She enjoys the physical aspects of the game : " I 'm a big fan of the big hits in rugby league . The aggression in wheelchair basketball is not as fierce , but it 's as close as I 'm likely to get . " Her 2008 national team coach Gerry Hewson said , " She 's got a really good outside game and she can get inside and mix it with the best . " 
 While still a member of the New South Wales women 's junior representative team , Gauci played with a New South Wales State team in a warm @-@ up game against the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team in the lead up to the 2000 Summer Paralympics . 
 In financial year 2012 / 13 , the Australian Sports Commission gave her a A $ 20 @,@ 000 grant as part of their Direct Athlete Support program . She received $ 17 @,@ 000 in 2010 / 11 and again in 2011 / 12 and $ 5 @,@ 571 @.@ 42 in 2009 / 10 . In 2012 , she had a scholarship with the New South Wales Institute of Sport . 
 = = = Club = = = 
 She played for the Hills Hornets in 2000 , when they finished second in the Women 's National Wheelchair basketball League ( WNWBL ) final , losing 51 – 50 to the Victorian Women . With the Hornets , she was named the WNWBL 's Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) 2 Pointer and named to the All Star Five in 2001 , 2002 , 2003 , 2004 and 2005 . In 2006 she switched to the North 's Bears , now known as the Stacks Goudkamp Bears , and was named 2 Pointer MVP and All Star Five in 2006 , 2007 , 2008 , 2009 , 2010 and 2011 . 
 Since 2008 , she has played for the <unk> <unk> in the National Wheelchair Basketball League ( NWBL ) . She also plays for the Stacks Goudkamp Bears in the WNWBL . In 2012 , as a member of the Stacks Goudkamp Bears , she was the WNWBL 's MVP 2 Pointer and named to the All Star Five for the twelfth year running . Her team finished second , losing 77 – 54 to the Victoria Dandenong Rangers in the WNWBL 's championship game . 
 = = = National team = = = 
 Gauci first played for the Australian junior national team when she was fourteen years old . She joined the national team , known as the Gliders , in 2002 , when she was 17 years old . She played in a four @-@ game test series in Canberra against Japan in March , the first Australian hosted international for the team since the 2000 Summer Paralympics . She was then selected to play at the 2002 World Cup event in Japan . 
 Gauci represented Australia as a member of the Gliders at the 2002 , 2006 and 2010 World Championships , where they finished fourth each time . She was named to the World All Star 5 at the World Championships in Amsterdam in 2006 . She was selected to participate in a national team training camp in 2010 , and was a member of the team that played in the Osaka Cup in 2009 . She has played over 180 international games . 
 = = = = Paralympics = = = = 
 Gauci competed with the team at the 2004 Summer Paralympics in Athens and 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing , where she won a silver and bronze medal respectively . The 2004 Games were her debut Games . She also played in the 2012 Summer Paralympics . In the group stage , the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team at the 2012 Summer Paralympics posted wins against Brazil , Great Britain , and the Netherlands , but lost to the Canada . This was enough to advance the Gliders to the quarter @-@ finals , where they beat Mexico . The Gliders then defeated the United States by a point to set up a final clash with Germany . The Gliders lost 44 – 58 , and earned a silver medal . Gauci scored 15 points with 4 rebounds . She was the only player on her team to score a three @-@ point field goal in the whole series , scoring two of them . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = 1986 Chalfant Valley earthquake = 
 The 1986 Chalfant Valley earthquake struck southern Mono County near Bishop and Chalfant , California at 07 : 42 : 28 Pacific Daylight Time on July 21 . With a moment magnitude of 6 @.@ 2 and a maximum Mercalli intensity of VI ( Strong ) , the shock injured two people and caused property damage estimated at $ 2 @.@ 7 million in the affected areas . There was a significant foreshock and aftershock sequence that included a few moderate events , and was the last in a series of three earthquakes that affected southern California and the northern Owens Valley in July 1986 . 
 Strong motion stations at the Long Valley Dam and an instrumented building in Bishop captured light to moderate readings from the event . The faulting reached the surface of the ground , but the maximum amount of measurable slip was limited to about 11 centimeters ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) of strike @-@ slip motion along the White Mountain Fault Zone . Other destructive and surface @-@ rupturing earthquakes , as well as large volume volcanic eruptions , have occurred in the area . Although the series of shocks occurred within the White Mountain seismic gap , the region continues to have potential for a very large earthquake . 
 = = Preface = = 
 July 1986 was an unusually active month for moderate to strong earthquakes in California , with three events occurring in less than two weeks , each with mild to moderate effects . The first of these shocks came on July 8 with a <unk> event on the Banning fault near Palm Springs and the second event occurred off the coast of Oceanside as a M5.8 shock on July 13 . While the earthquake off the southern California coast occurred in an area thought to be capable of generating a tsunami , the earthquake near Palm Springs occurred on a portion of the southern San Andreas Fault system that has been designated a seismic gap , and is a likely location for a very large earthquake . The same seismic gap theory ( regarding the potential for a future large earthquake ) had also been presented for the White Mountains area near Chalfant . 
 = = Tectonic setting = = 
 The Owens Valley , located at the western boundary of the Basin and Range Province , is confined by the Sierra Nevada mountain range to the west and the White @-@ Inyo Mountains to the east . The valley was brought about by active tectonics over the last 2 – 4 million years , and was the scene of a very large earthquake in 1872 that generated surface rupture from Lone Pine in the south to as far north as Big Pine , a distance of approximately 100 kilometers ( 62 mi ) . Other large , surface rupturing events in 1915 , 1932 , and 1954 delineate the Eastern California – Central Nevada seismic zone . 
 As no large earthquake has occurred between the southern extent of the 1932 Cedar Mountain earthquake 's rupture and the northern extent of the 1872 Lone Pine earthquake 's rupture in the south ( a distance of 130 km ( 81 mi ) ) , the zone has been labeled the White Mountain seismic gap . The 1934 M6.3 Excelsior Mountains earthquake and the 1986 Chalfant Valley event were several smaller earthquakes that have occurred within the gap , and both generated limited surface faulting and some surface cracking in the Volcanic Tableland , which was created .7 mya from a major volcanic eruption that also formed the Long Valley Caldera northwest of Bishop . An estimated 500 cubic kilometers of material ( tephra ) produced in the event covers the northern Owens Valley as a rocky landform . The surface of the layered plateau is known as Bishop Tuff and features fumarole mounds and hundreds of north @-@ south oriented fault scarps , many of which are visible on topographic maps , via aerial photography , and satellite imagery . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 The University of Nevada , Reno ( UNR ) and the United States Geological Survey ( USGS ) both operated seismograph networks in the region where the Chalfant Valley earthquake sequence occurred . The data that was captured was transmitted in real time to Reno , Nevada and Menlo Park , California and was digitized for later examination . The foreshock activity was found to have begun eighteen days prior to the main event on July 3 , with the onset of a 3 @.@ 5 event ( local magnitude ) . Activity increased on July 18 with several doublets then reduced again in the hours prior to the primary <unk> ( intensity V ( Moderate ) ) foreshock on July 20 . All forty events that were recorded by the UNR and USGS stations before that event were within 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) its epicenter , and another 132 events that were considered to be its aftershocks were documented in the remaining 24 hours leading up to the mainshock . One of these events , just over two hours after the primary foreshock , reached <unk> with an intensity of IV ( Light ) . 
 = = Earthquake = = 
 The mainshock occurred at 07 : 42 : 26 on July 21 and caused the most damage in the sequence of events . The shock measured 6 @.@ 2 Mw as measured by the International Seismological Centre and originated at a depth of approximately 10 @.@ 8 kilometers ( 6 @.@ 7 mi ) . The focal mechanisms of the three largest events ( the July 20 foreshock , the mainshock , and the largest aftershock ) were primarily strike @-@ slip with a minor amount of normal @-@ slip and were especially well @-@ constrained due to the dense array of seismometers in the area that were operated by the UNR and the USGS . The primary foreshock 's preferred fault plane solution indicated left @-@ lateral slip on a fault striking <unk> ° E , but neither the mainshock nor the largest aftershock conformed with their right @-@ lateral slip striking <unk> ° W and N15 ° W respectively . 
 = = = Damage = = = 
 In Bishop , windows were shattered and ceiling tiles fell in several buildings , and a portion of the brick facade at the First Sierra bank building fell onto the sidewalk . A Burger King restaurant had part of its ceiling come down . Northwest of Bishop , a portion of U.S. Route 395 was blocked temporarily by a landslide . Campers were briefly trapped at the Pleasant Valley Reservoir when a 150 ft ( 46 m ) section of an access road was destroyed as a result of land movement . Both injuries that were reported occurred to the north in Chalfant Valley ( minor cuts and injuries from falling objects ) where 53 mobile homes were knocked off their foundations and two homes were destroyed . Nearly all the buildings in that small town were affected , with water and sewer lines broken there as well . 
 Many of the mobile homes were able to be remounted on their foundations , but 18 – 20 of the homes were unable to be repaired . The overall damage from the event was compared with the other events in southern California . While the Oceanside shock caused $ 200 @,@ 000 in damage , the Palm Springs event caused an estimated $ 8 million in damage . Damage in from the Chalfant Valley event was estimated at $ 2 @.@ 7 million . 
 = = = Surface faulting = = = 
 Ground fractures that were deemed to be tectonic in nature were documented on about 10 @.@ 5 kilometers ( 6 @.@ 5 mi ) of the White Mountain Fault Zone from Silver Creek to <unk> Creek . The cracks trended 350 ° and a maximum right @-@ lateral slip of about 11 centimeters ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) was measured , though other vertical ( downslope ) or extensional movement was also seen , especially on the 150 m ( 500 ft ) -thick surface of the Bishop Tuff in the Volcanic Tableland . There , the largest displacements were seen in the vicinity of Casa Diablo Mountain . The cracks were found primarily in loose sand , which made measurements difficult . 
 = = = Strong motion = = = 
 The foreshock , mainshock , and the two largest aftershocks were recorded by strong motion stations that were operated by the California Strong Motion Instrumentation Program ( CSMIP ) and the USGS . A total of 36 seismograms were captured from 11 stations , including a two story steel frame building , the Long Valley Dam , and several free field stations . The Chalfant strong motion station recorded the largest horizontal accelerations for the foreshock , mainshock , and the July 21 <unk> aftershock of <unk> , .46g , and <unk> The instruments at the building on North Main street in Bishop recorded all four shocks and indicated .25g at ground level and .4g on the roof , both during the mainshock . The station at the earthen Long Valley Dam had produced many quality recordings since being put into operation in 1979 and saw mainshock accelerations of <unk> on bedrock , and <unk> on an upper abutment . 
 = = Aftershocks = = 
 The day of the main event two aftershocks occurred ( 5 @.@ 6 at 14 : 51 and 5 @.@ 4 at 22 : 07 ) but the initial shock was V ( Moderate ) on the Mercalli intensity scale and the second event was felt only . Ten days following the mainshock on July 31 , a stronger aftershock occurred with a local magnitude of 5 @.@ 8 and a maximum Mercalli intensity of VI ( Strong ) . That aftershock was felt in California and western Nevada , broke windows and knocked items of shelves in Bishop , and light fixtures were damaged at the National Weather Service office . 
 = Sibyl de Neufmarché = 
 Sibyl de Neufmarché , Countess of Hereford , suo jure Lady of Brecknock ( c . 1100 – after 1143 ) , was a Cambro @-@ Norman noblewoman , heiress to one of the most substantial fiefs in the Welsh Marches . The great @-@ granddaughter of Gruffydd ap Llywelyn , king of Wales , Sibyl was also connected to the nobility of England and Normandy . Sibyl inherited the titles and lands of her father , Bernard de Neufmarché , Lord of Brecon , after her mother , Nest ferch Osbern , had declared her brother Mahel to have been illegitimate . Most of these estates passed to Sibyl 's husband , Miles de Gloucester , 1st Earl of Hereford , as her dowry . Their marriage had been arranged personally by King Henry I of England in the spring of 1121 . Sibyl , with her extensive lands , was central to the King 's plans of consolidating Anglo @-@ Norman power in south @-@ east Wales by the merging of her estates with those of Miles , his loyal subject on whom he relied to implement Crown policy . 
 As an adult , Sibyl lived through King Stephen 's turbulent reign , known to history as the Anarchy , in which her husband played a pivotal role . Following Miles ' accidental death in 1143 , Sibyl entered a religious life at Llanthony Secunda Priory , Gloucestershire , England , which she had endowed up to six years previously . Sibyl is buried at the priory , founded by Miles in 1136 . 
 = = Family = = 
 = = = Ancestry = = = 
 Sibyl was born in about 1100 in Brecon Castle , Brecon , Wales , the only daughter of Marcher Lord Bernard de Neufmarché , Lord of Brecon , and Nest ferch Osbern . Nest was the daughter of Osbern <unk> and Nest ferch Gruffydd . Sybil 's maternal great @-@ grandparents were Gruffydd ap Llywelyn , king of Wales , and Ealdgyth ( Edith of Mercia ) . Ealdgyth , the daughter of Ælfgar , Earl of Mercia , was briefly Queen consort of England by her second marriage to Harold Godwinson , the last Anglo @-@ Saxon king of England , who was killed at the Battle of Hastings . 
 Sibyl 's father , Bernard , was born at the castle of Le Neuf @-@ Marché @-@ en @-@ Lions , on the frontier between Normandy and Beauvais . Bernard was a knight who had fought under English kings William I , William Rufus and Henry I. According to historian Lynn H Nelson , Bernard de Neufmarché was " the first of the original conquerors of Wales " . He led the Norman army at the Battle of Brecon in 1093 , during which Rhys ap Tewdwr was killed . Kingship in Wales ended with Rhys ' death , and allowed Bernard to confirm his hold on Brycheiniog , becoming the first ruler of the lordship of Brecon . The title and lands would remain in his family 's possession until 1521 . The name Neufmarché , Novo Mercato in Latin , is anglicised into ' Newmarket ' or ' Newmarch ' . 
 = = = Inheritance = = = 
 Sibyl had two brothers , Philip , who most likely died young , and Mahel . Nest had Mahel disinherited by swearing to King Henry I of England that Mahel had been fathered by another man . According to Giraldus Cambrensis , this was done out of vengeance when Mahel had <unk> Nest 's lover , a knight whose identity is not disclosed . In the 19th century , Bernard Bolingbroke Woodward proposed that , after Bernard 's death , Nest " disgraced herself with an intrigue " with one of his soldiers . Mahel , who had by this time inherited Bernard 's estates , disapproved of the liaison to such an extent that he killed Nest 's lover . Nest 's revenge was to have Mahel disinherited by claiming that Bernard was not Mahel 's father . The maritagium ( marriage charter ) arranged by King Henry I in 1121 for the marriage between Sibyl and her future husband Miles , however , makes it clear that Bernard was still alive when it was written ; showing Bernard Bolingbroke Woodward 's version of the story to diverge from the known facts . Author Jennifer C. Ward suggests that , although the marriage charter recorded that King Henry was acting at the request of Bernard , Nest , and the barons , it was probable he had put considerable pressure on the <unk> to disinherit Mahel in favour of Sibyl and , thereby , Miles . Nevertheless , whatever the timing or reason , the outcome of Nest 's declaration was that Sibyl ( whom Nest acknowledged as Bernard 's child ) became the sole lawful heiress to the vast Lordship of Brecon , one of the most important and substantial fiefs in the Welsh Marches . Henry 's maritagium referred specifically to Sibyl 's parents ' lands as " comprising <unk> , the forest of <unk> , the castle of Hay , the whole land of Brecknock , up to the boundaries of the land of Richard Fitz Pons , namely up to Brecon and Much <unk> , a vill in England " ; the fees and services of several named individuals were also granted as part of the dowry . This made her suo jure Lady of Brecknock on her father 's death , and one of the wealthiest heiresses in south Wales . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 Sometime in April or May 1121 , Sibyl married Miles ( or Milo ) FitzWalter de Gloucester , who on his father 's death in 1129 , became sheriff of Gloucester , and Constable of England . The marriage was personally arranged by King Henry I , to whom Miles was a trusted royal official . A charter written in Latin ( the maritagium ) , which dates to 10 April / 29 May 1121 , records the arrangements for the marriage of Sibyl and Miles . Historian C. Warren Hollister found the charter 's wording telling , noting that " the king gave the daughter as if he were making a grant of land " : " Know that I [ King Henry I ] have given and firmly granted to Miles of Gloucester Sibyl , daughter of Bernard de Neufmarché , together with all the lands of Bernard her father and of her mother after their deaths … " . Her parents ' lands would be conveyed to Miles after their deaths or earlier during " their life if they so wish " . Henry also commanded that the fief 's tenants were to pay Miles liege homage as their lord . 
 By arranging a series of matrimonial alliances , similar to that between Sibyl and Miles , King Henry I of England transformed " the map of territorial power in south @-@ east Wales " . Such arrangements were mutually advantageous . Hollister describes Miles ' marriage to Sibyl as having been a " crucial breakthrough in his career " . The new lords , in similar positions to Miles , were the King 's own loyal vassals , on whom he could rely to implement royal policy . Sibyl 's father died sometime before 1128 ( most probably in 1125 ) , and Miles came into possession of her entire inheritance , which when merged with his own estates , formed one honour . 
 = = = Children = = = 
 Together Sibyl and Miles had eight children : 
 Margaret of Hereford ( 1122 / <unk> 6 April 1197 ) , married Humphrey II de Bohun , by whom she had children . She received the office of constable of England and exercised lordship of Herefordshire as a widow until her death . 
 Roger Fitzmiles , 2nd Earl of Hereford ( before <unk> 22 September 1155 ) . Roger 's marriage settlement with Cecily FitzJohn ( her first marriage ) , daughter of Payn FitzJohn and Sibyl de Lacy , was ratified by King Stephen in 1137 . The marriage was childless as were Cecily 's subsequent marriages . 
 Walter de Hereford ( died 1159 / 60 ) , whether he married is unknown ; however , Walter departed for Palestine on Michaelmas 1159 , and died shortly afterwards without leaving legitimate issue 
 Henry Fitzmiles ( died <unk> ) , married a woman named Isabella , surname unknown ; Henry died without legitimate issue . 
 Mahel de Hereford ( died 1164 ) , no record of marriage ; died without legitimate issue . 
 William de Hereford ( died 1166 ) , no record of marriage ; died without legitimate issue . 
 Bertha of Hereford ( <unk> ) , married William de Braose , 3rd Lord of Bramber , by whom she had issue . 
 Lucy of Hereford , Lady of Blaen <unk> and Bwlch y Dinas ( died 1219 / 20 ) , married Herbert FitzHerbert of Winchester , by whom she had issue . 
 = = The Anarchy = = 
 After Henry I 's death in 1135 , the throne of England was seized by Stephen of Blois , a grandson of William I of England . Henry 's daughter , Empress Matilda ( Maud ) , also claimed the throne , and had the support of the Marcher Lords . On the death of her husband , the Holy Roman Emperor , Henry V , in 1125 , Matilda had returned to England for the first time in 16 years . At the insistence of her father , the barons ( including Stephen ) swore to uphold Matilda 's rights as his heir . Matilda married Geoffrey of Anjou in 1128 . They lived together in France , having three sons ; the eldest of whom was to become King Henry II of England . Initially , Miles supported Stephen . In about 1136 , Stephen granted Sibyl 's husband the entire honour of Gloucester and Brecknock , and appointed him Constable of Gloucester Castle , whereby Miles became known as one of Stephen 's " henchmen " . 
 Llanthony Priory had been established near <unk> , in the Vale of Ewyas , in 1118 ; Wales ' earliest Augustine monastery . Miles ' father , Walter de Gloucester , had retired there by 1126 . The unrest that had been simmering in Wales during the last years of Henry 's reign , boiled over in 1135 on his death . The area around the priory returned to Welsh rule , coming under such “ hostile <unk> ” from the Welsh that the non @-@ Welsh canons decided to leave . Miles established a new Priory for them in Gloucester , England , which they called Llanthony Secunda , in 1136 . Sometime after 1137 , Sibyl , together with her husband , made a further endowment to Llanthony Secunda . 
 Miles transferred his allegiance to Empress Matilda , on her return to England in <unk> 2002 , pp. 95 , 96 According to Professor Edmund King , Miles ' decision to support Matilda was guided by <unk> rather than principle , and the necessity of joining forces with Matilda 's illegitimate half @-@ brother , the powerful Robert , Earl of Gloucester , who was the overlord of some of Miles ' fiefs . Stephen stripped Miles of the title ' Constable of England ' in punishment for having deserted him . On 25 July 1141 , in gratitude for his support and military assistance and , according to historian <unk> Davis , possibly to compensate Miles for having appeared to have lost the constableship , Matilda invested him as 1st Earl of Hereford . He also received St. Briavels Castle and the Forest of Dean . At the time Matilda was the de facto ruler of England , Stephen having been imprisoned at Bristol following his capture the previous February after the Battle of Lincoln . Sibyl was styled Countess of Hereford , until Miles ' unexpected death over two years later . In 1141 , Miles received the honour of Abergavenny from Brien FitzCount , the ( likely illegitimate ) son of Duke Alan IV of Brittany . This was in appreciation of the skilled military tactics Miles had deployed which had spared Brien 's castle of Wallingford during King Stephen 's <unk> in 1139 / 1140 . Matilda gave her permission for the transfer . 
 During the Anarchy , which the period of Stephen 's reign as King of England was to become known , life was greatly disrupted in her husband 's lands . Sibyl would have doubtless suffered as a result , especially after Miles ' decision to support Matilda 's claim to the throne and to oppose Stephen . When Matilda was defeated at Winchester in late 1141 , Miles was compelled to return to Gloucester in disgrace : " weary , half @-@ naked and alone " . In November of that same year , Stephen was released from prison and restored to the English throne . 
 Sibyl 's distress would have been heightened in 1143 after the Bishop of Hereford , Robert de Bethune placed an interdict upon Hereford , blocked all the cathedral 's entrances with thorns , and excommunicated Miles . In order to raise money to pay his troops and to assist Matilda financially , Miles had imposed a levy on all the churches in his earldom , an act which the bishop had regarded as unlawful . When the bishop protested and threatened Miles with excommunication , Miles in response , sent his men to plunder the diocese of its resources . In retaliation against Miles ' earlier attacks on the royalist city of Worcester and the castles of Hereford and Wallingford , King Stephen bestowed the title " Earl of Hereford " on Robert de Beaumont , 2nd Earl of Leicester ; Miles , however , never surrendered the earldom nor the title to Robert de Beaumont . 
 = = Widowhood and death = = 
 While on a deer @-@ hunting expedition in his own Forest of Dean , Sibyl 's husband was accidentally shot in the chest by an arrow which killed him on 24 December 1143 . He had been involved in legal proceedings against the bishop 's jurisdiction when he died . Their eldest son , Roger succeeded him in the earldom . In protest against his father 's excommunication , Roger remained an outspoken enemy of the Church until close to the end of his life when he entered a Gloucester monastery as a monk . After her husband 's death , Sibyl entered a religious life at Llanthony Secunda Priory , Gloucester , which she had previously endowed . Sibyl was buried in the same priory , the dates of death and burial unrecorded . 
 = = Sibyl 's legacy = = 
 Upon the childless death of Roger in 1155 , the Earldom of Hereford fell into abeyance until 1199 when King John bestowed the title on Henry de Bohun , Sibyl 's grandson through her eldest daughter , Margaret . As her sons all died without legitimate offspring , Sibyl 's three daughters became co @-@ heirs to the Brecon honour , with Bertha , the second daughter , passing Sibyl 's inheritance on ( through marriage ) to the de <unk> , thereby making them one of the most powerful families in the Welsh Marches . 
 The Brecknock lordship would eventually go to the de <unk> , by way of Eleanor de Braose . Eleanor , a descendant of Sibyl 's through Bertha of Hereford , married Humphrey de Bohun , son of the 2nd Earl of Hereford . Eleanor and Humphrey 's son , Humphrey de Bohun , succeeded his grandfather to the titles in 1275 . 
 Through the advantageous marriages of her daughters , Sibyl was an ancestress of many of England and Ireland 's noblest families including among others , the de Bohun 's , de Beauchamps , Mortimers , <unk> , de Burghs , de Lacy 's , and <unk> . Four of her descendants , Humphrey de Bohun , 4th Earl of Hereford , Elizabeth de Burgh , 4th Countess of Ulster , Eleanor de Bohun , and Mary de Bohun married into the English royal family , while another , Anne Mortimer was the grandmother of Yorkist kings Edward IV and Richard III . By way of Edward 's daughter , Elizabeth of York , every monarch of England and , subsequently , the United Kingdom , from Henry VIII up to and including Elizabeth II , descended from Sibyl de Neufmarché , as did the various royal sovereigns of Europe who shared a common descent from Mary , Queen of Scots . 
 = Prithu = 
 According to Hindu mythology , Prithu ( Sanskrit : <unk> , <unk> , lit . " large , great , important , abundant " ) is a sovereign ( chakravartin ) , named in the Vedic scriptures and considered an Avatar ( incarnation ) of the preserver god — Vishnu . He is also called <unk> , <unk> and Prithu <unk> , literally , Prithu — the son of Vena . Prithu is " celebrated as the first consecrated king , from whom the earth received her ( Sanskrit ) name Prithvi . " He is mainly associated with the legend of his chasing the earth goddess , Prithvi , who fled in the form of a cow and eventually agreed to yield her milk as the world 's grain and vegetation . The epic Mahabharata and text Vishnu Purana describes him as a part Avatar ( incarnation ) of Vishnu . 
 = = Legends = = 
 The birth of Prithu is without female intervention . Thus being a <unk> ( " born without ( the participation ) of the yoni " ) , Prithu is untouched by desire and ego and can thus control his senses to rule dutifully upholding Dharma . 
 The Mahabharata traces Prithu 's lineage from <unk> Almighty Vishnu created a human named Virajas to rule the earth and bring order to the Humans . Virajas lost his desire to rule the earth after beholding Vishnu and became an ascetic . Virajas ' son was <unk> , who became an ascetic . <unk> 's son was Kardama . Kardama 's son was <unk> and <unk> 's son was Atibala . Atibala , also called Anga , conquered the earth and ruled well . Atibala married <unk> 's daughter , Sunita and had a son named Vena . Vena 's son would be Prithu . 
 The Bhagavata Purana and Vishnu Purana tells the story of Prithu : King Vena , from the lineage of the pious Dhruva , was an evil king , who neglected Vedic rituals . Thus the rishis ( sages ) killed him , leaving the kingdom without an heir and in famine due to the anarchy of Vena . So , the sages churned Vena 's body , out of which first appeared a dark dwarf hunter , a symbol of Vena 's evil . Since the sins of Vena had gone away as the dwarf , the body was now pure . On further churning , Prithu emerged from right arm of the corpse . To end the famine by slaying the earth and getting her fruits , Prithu chased the earth ( Prithvi ) who fled as a cow . Finally , cornered by Prithu , the earth states that killing her would mean the end of his subjects too . So Prithu lowered his weapons and reasoned with the earth and promised her to be her guardian . Finally , Prithu milked her using Manu as a calf , and received all vegetation and grain as her milk , in his hands for welfare of humanity . Before Prithu 's reign , there was " no cultivation , no pasture , no agriculture , no highway for merchants " , all civilization emerged in Prithu 's rule . By granting life to the earth and being her protector , Prithu became the Earth 's father and she accepted the patronymic name " Prithvi " . However , the Manu Smriti considers Prithvi as Prithu 's wife and not his daughter , and thus suggests the name " Prithvi " is named after her husband , Prithu . 
 The Vayu Purana records that when born , Prithu stood with a bow , arrows and an armour , ready to destroy the earth , which was devoid of Vedic rituals . Terrified , the earth fled in form of a cow and finally submitted to Prithu 's demands , earning him the title chakravartin ( sovereign ) . Prithu is the first king , recorded to earn the title . The creator @-@ god Brahma is described to have recognized Prithu as an avatar of Vishnu , as one of Prithu 's birthmark was Vishnu 's chakram ( discus ) on his hand and thus Prithu was " numbered amongst the human gods " . According to Oldham , the title Chakravarti may be derived from this birthmark , and may not be indicative of universal dominion . Prithu was worshipped as an incarnation of Vishnu in his lifetime and now is considered a Nāga demi @-@ god . Shatapatha Brahmana ( Verse 3 @.@ 5 @.@ 4 . ) calls him the first anointed king and Vayu Purana calls him <unk> ( " first king " ) . 
 The epic Mahabharata states that Vishnu crowned Prithu as the sovereign and entered the latter 's body so that everyone bows to the king as to god Vishnu . Now , the king was " endowed with Vishnu 's greatness on earth " . Further , Dharma ( righteousness ) , Shri ( goddess of wealth , beauty and good fortune ) and Artha ( purpose , material prosperity ) established themselves in Prithu . 
 = = = Reign = = = 
 Prithu became the first true king . He became a Kshatriya after he healed the Brahmanas of their wounds , inflicted by Prithu 's tyrannical father , Vena . After acquiring many presents from the gods , Prithu conquered and ruled the earth as well as the Devas , Asuras , Yakshas , Rakshasas and Nagas in all glory . It was where the Satya Yuga reached its pinnacle . Prithu liberated his father Vena , from the hell called <unk> , hence all sons are called <unk> . Practicing detachment , Prithu ruled according to the Vedas and the <unk> . 
 His capital is believed to be somewhere in modern @-@ day Haryana . Prithu used his Kshatriya power to make the earth yield its riches . Hence the earth is called Prithvi , daughter of Prithu . Prithu , by mere fiat of will , created millions of men , elephants , chariots and horses . During his reign , there was no <unk> , no calamity , no famine , no disease , no agriculture and no mining . Prithu enjoyed popularity amongst his subjects , hence all kings are called Rajas . Cows yielded buckets of rich milk when they were touched . Trees and lotuses always had honey in them . People were healthy and happy and had no fear of thieves or wild animals . Nobody died of accidents . Kusha grass was golden in colour . Fruits were always sweet and ripe and nobody went hungry . People lived in houses or caves or trees or wherever they liked . For the first time , civilization and commerce came into existence . 
 Prithu himself shattered many mountains with his arrows and made the earth even . He had divine powers of creating or disappearing any mundane object with his mental power ; ability to play musical instruments , sing and act . His chariot could travel over land , water and air with complete ease . Mountains made way for Prithu on his chariot and his flagstaff was never entangled when Prithu travelled through dense forests as the trees made way for him . Prithu practised charity and donated colossal amounts of gold to the Brahmanas . 
 Prithu appointed <unk> , the son of Bhrigu and Garga , the son of <unk> as his preceptors . The <unk> , a group consisting of 60 @,@ 000 thumb sized ascetics and known for their genius , became Prithu 's counsellors . 
 The Atharvaveda credits him of the invention of ploughing and thus , agriculture . He is also described as one who flattened the Earth 's rocky surface , thus encouraging agriculture , cattle @-@ breeding , commerce and development of new cities on earth . In a hymn in Rigveda , Prithu is described as a rishi ( seer ) . D. R. Patil suggests that the Rigvedic Prithu was a vegetarian deity , associated with Greek god Dionysus and another Vedic god Soma . 
 Bhagavata Purana further states that Prithu performed ninety @-@ nine <unk> <unk> ( horse @-@ sacrifices ) , but Indra , kings of the demi @-@ gods , disturbed Prithu 's hundredth one . The <unk> was abandoned , Vishnu gave Prithu his blessings and Prithu forgave Indra for the latter 's theft of the ritual @-@ horse . It also states that the Four <unk> , the four sage @-@ incarnations of Vishnu , preached Prithu about devotion to Vishnu . After governing his kingdom for a long time , Prithu left with his wife Archi , to perform penance in the forest in his last days . He experienced Samadhi and voluntarily gave up his body in the forest , and Archi went Sati on his funeral pyre . 
 = = = Wives and children = = = 
 Apart from Prithvi who is sometimes considered the daughter or wife of Prithu , Prithu has a wife called Archi and five sons . Archi , emerged from Vena 's body , along with Prithu and is considered as an avatar of goddess Lakshmi , the wife of Vishnu . Prithu 's son <unk> , became the sovereign and controlled the middle of the kingdom . Prithu 's other sons , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ruled the east , south , west and north of kingdom respectively . 
 = = Symbolism = = 
 O 'Flaherty interprets the myth of Prithu — his transformation from a hunter who chased the earth @-@ cow to the herdsman @-@ farmer — as a transition in Vedic or Hindu people from eating beef to having cow 's milk and cultivated vegetables and grain instead of beef . David Shulman compares Prithu with the Vedic deity Rudra @-@ Shiva . Prithu , like Rudra , is an ideal king , but with a violent side . Prithu 's actions of chasing the earth @-@ cow as a hunter and finally milking her , display this terrifying side of the king . Both , Prithu and Rudra , are closely associated with sacrifice . 
 = = Celebration in Indian society = = 
 Chinese scholar Hiuen Tsang ( c . 640 AD ) records the existence of the town <unk> , named after Prithu , " who is said to be the first person that obtained the title Raja ( king ) " . Another place associated with Prithu is <unk> ( lit . " Prithu 's pool " ) , a town on banks of Sarasvati river , where Prithu is believed to have performed the Shraddha of his father . The town is referred as the boundary between Northern and central India and referred to by Patanjali as the modern <unk> . 
 Shriman Narayan , one of the protagonists of Indian Panchayati Raj movement , tracing its origin , writes : " It is believed that the system was first introduced by King <unk> while colonizing the Doab between the Ganges and Jamuna . " 
 = Robinson Crusoe economy = 
 A Robinson Crusoe economy is a simple framework used to study some fundamental issues in economics . It assumes an economy with one consumer , one producer and two goods . The title " Robinson Crusoe " is a reference to the novel of the same name authored by Daniel Defoe in 1719 . 
 As a thought experiment in economics , many international trade economists have found this simplified and idealized version of the story important due to its ability to simplify the complexities of the real world . The implicit assumption is that the study of a one agent economy will provide useful insights into the functioning of a real world economy with many economic agents . This article pertains to the study of consumer behaviour , producer behaviour and equilibrium as a part of microeconomics . In other fields of economics , the Robinson Crusoe economy framework is used for essentially the same thing . For example , in public finance the Robinson Crusoe economy is used to study the various types of public goods and certain aspects of collective benefits . It is used in growth economics to develop growth models for underdeveloped or developing countries to embark upon a steady growth path using techniques of savings and investment . 
 In the Robinson Crusoe economy , there is only one individual – Robinson Crusoe himself . He acts both as a producer to maximise profits , as well as consumer to maximise his utility . The possibility of trade can be introduced by adding another person to the economy . This person is Crusoe 's friend , Man Friday . Although in the novel he plays the role of Crusoe 's servant , in the Robinson Crusoe economy he is considered as another actor with equal decision making abilities as Crusoe . Along with this , conditions of Pareto Efficiency can be analysed by bringing in the concept of the Edgeworth box . 
 The basic assumptions of the Robinson Crusoe economy are as follows : 
 The island is cut off from the rest of the world ( and hence cannot trade ) 
 There is only a single economic agent ( Crusoe himself ) 
 All commodities on the island have to be produced or found from existing stocks 
 = = Framework = = 
 Robinson Crusoe is assumed to be shipwrecked on a deserted island . Similar to the choices that households ( suppliers of labour ) face , Crusoe has only two activities to participate in – earn income or pass his time in leisure . 
 The income generating activity in this case is gathering coconuts . As usual , the more time he spends in leisure , the less food he has to eat , and conversely , the more time he spends gathering coconuts , the less time he has for leisure . This is depicted in figure 1 . 
 = = Production function and indifference curves = = 
 Crusoe 's indifference curves depict his preferences for leisure and coconuts while the production function depicts the technological relationship between how much he works and how many coconuts he gathers . If the axes depicting coconut collection and leisure are reversed and plotted with Crusoe 's indifference map and production function , figure 2 can be drawn : 
 The production function is concave in two dimensions and quasi @-@ convex in three dimensions . This means that the longer Robinson works , the more coconuts he will be able to gather . But due to diminishing marginal returns of labour , the additional number of coconuts he gets from every additional hour of labour is declining . 
 The point at which Crusoe will reach an equilibrium between the number of hours he works and relaxes can be found out when the highest indifference curve is tangent to the production function . This will be Crusoe 's most preferred point provided the technology constraint is given and cannot be changed . At this equilibrium point , the slope of the highest indifference curve must equal the slope of the production function . 
 Recall that the Marginal rate of substitution is the rate at which a consumer is ready to give up one good in exchange for another good while maintaining the same level of utility . Additionally , an input 's marginal product is the extra output that can be produced by using one more unit of the input , assuming that the quantities of no other inputs to production change . Then , 
 MPL 
 = MRSLeisure , Coconuts 
 where , 
 MPL = 
 Marginal Product of Labour , and 
 MRSLeisure , Coconuts = Marginal rate of substitution between Leisure and Coconuts 
 = = Crusoe 's multifaceted role = = 
 Suppose Crusoe decides to stop being a producer and consumer simultaneously . He decides he will produce one day and consume the next . His two roles of consumer and producer are being split up and studied separately to understand the elementary form of consumer theory and producer theory in microeconomics . For dividing his time between being a consumer and producer , he must set up two collectively exhaustive markets , the coconut market and the labour market . He also sets up a firm , of which he becomes the sole shareholder . The firm will want to maximise profits by deciding how much labour to hire and how many coconuts to produce according to their prices . As a worker of the firm , Crusoe will collect wages , as a shareholder , he will collect profits and as a consumer , he will decide how much of the firm 's output to purchase according to his income and the prevailing market prices . Let 's assume that a currency called " Dollars " has been created by Robinson to manage his finances . For simplicity , assume that <unk> = $ 1 @.@ 00 . This assumption is made to make the calculations in the numerical example easy because the inclusion of prices will not alter the result of the analysis . For more details , refer to <unk> commodities . 
 = = = Producer = = = 
 Assume that when the firm produces C amount of total coconuts , <formula> represents its profit level . Also assume that when the wage rate at which the firm employs labour is w , L amount of labour will be employed . Then , 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 The above function describes iso @-@ profit lines ( the locus of combinations between labour and coconuts that produce a constant profit of Π ) . Profits can be maximised when the marginal product of labour equals the wage rate ( marginal cost of production ) . Symbolically , 
 MPL = w 
 Graphically , the iso @-@ profit line must be tangent to the production function . 
 The vertical intercept of the iso @-@ profit line measures the level of profit that Robinson Crusoe 's firm will make . This level of profit , Π , has the ability to purchase Π dollars worth of coconuts . Since <unk> is $ 1 @.@ 00 , Π number of coconuts can be purchased . Also , the firm will declare a dividend of Π dollars . This will be given to the firm 's sole shareholder , Crusoe himself . 
 = = = Consumer = = = 
 As a consumer , Crusoe will have to decide how much to work ( or indulge in leisure ) and hence consume . He can choose to not work at all , since he has an endowment of Π dollars from being a shareholder . Let us instead consider the more realistic case of him deciding to work for a few hours . His labour consumption choice can be illustrated in figure 4 : 
 Note that labour is assumed to be a ' bad ' , i.e. , a commodity that a consumer doesn 't like . Its presence in his consumption basket lowers the utility he derives . On the other hand , coconuts are goods . This is why the indifference curves are positively sloped . The maximum amount of labour is indicated by L ' . The distance from L ' to the chosen supply of labour ( L * ) gives Crusoe 's demand for leisure . 
 Notice Crusoe 's budget line . It has a slope of w and passes through the point ( 0 , Π ) . This point is his endowment level i.e. , even when he supplies 0 amount of labour , he has Π amount of coconuts ( dollars ) to consume . Given the wage rate , Crusoe will choose how much to work and how much to consume at that point where , 
 MRSLeisure , Coconuts = w 
 = = Equilibrium = = 
 At equilibrium , the demand for coconuts will equal the supply of coconuts and the demand for labour will equal the supply of labour . 
 Graphically this occurs when the diagrams under consumer and producer are superimposed . Notice that , 
 MRSLeisure , Coconuts 
 = w 
 MPL = 
 w 
 - = > MRSLeisure , Coconuts = MPL 
 This ensures that the slopes of the indifference curves and the production set are the same . 
 As a result , Crusoe ends up consuming at the same point he would have if he made all the above decisions together . In other words , using the market system has the same outcome as choosing the individual utility maximisation and cost minimisation plans . This is an important result when put into a macro level perspective because it implies that there exists a set of prices for inputs and outputs in the economy such that the profit @-@ maximising behaviour of firms along with the utility @-@ maximizing actions of individuals results in the demand for each good equaling the supply in all markets . This means that a competitive equilibrium can exist . The merit of a competitive equilibrium is that an efficient allocation of resources is achievable . In other words , no economic agent can be made better off without making another economic agent worse off . 
 = = Production possibilities with two goods = = 
 Let 's assume that there is another commodity that Crusoe can produce apart from coconuts , for example , fish . Now , Robinson has to decide how much time to spare for both activities , i.e. how many coconuts to gather and how many fish to hunt . The locus of the various combinations of fish and coconuts that he can produce from devoting different amounts of time to each activity is known as the production possibilities set . This is depicted in the figure 6 : 
 The boundary of the production possibilities set is known as the Production @-@ possibility frontier ( PPF ) . This curve measures the feasible outputs that Crusoe can produce , with a fixed technological constraint and given amount of resources . In this case , the resources and technological constraints are Robinson Crusoe 's labour . 
 It is crucial to note that the shape of the PPF depends on the nature of the technology in use . Here , technology refers to the type of returns to scale prevalent . In figure 6 , the underlying assumption is the usual decreasing returns to scale , due to which the PPF is concave to the origin . In case we assumed increasing returns to scale , say if Crusoe embarked upon a mass production movement and hence faced decreasing costs , the PPF would be convex to the origin . The PPF is linear with a downward slope in two circumstances : 
 If the technology for gathering coconuts and hunting fish exhibits constant returns to scale 
 If there is only one input in production 
 So in the Robinson Crusoe economy , the PPF will be linear due to the presence of only one input . 
 = = = Marginal rate of transformation = = = 
 Suppose that Crusoe can produce 4 pounds of fish or 8 pounds of coconuts per hour . If he devotes <unk> hours to fish gathering and <unk> hours to gathering coconuts , he will produce <unk> pounds of fish and <unk> pounds of coconuts . Suppose that he decides to work for 12 hours a day . Then the production possibilities set will consist of all combinations of fish , F , and coconuts , C , such that 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 Solve the first two equations and substitute in the third to get , 
 <formula> 
 This equation represents Crusoe 's PPF . The slope of this PPF measures the Marginal rate of transformation ( MRT ) , i.e. , how much of the first good must be given up in order to increase the production of the second good by one unit . If Crusoe works one hour less on hunting fish , he will have 4 less fish . If he devotes this extra hour to collecting coconuts , he will have 8 extra coconuts . The MRT is thus , 
 MRT Coconuts , Fish <formula> <formula> 
 = = = Comparative advantage = = = 
 Under this section , the possibility of trade is introduced by adding another person to the economy . Suppose that the new worker who is added to the Robinson Crusoe Economy has different skills in gathering coconuts and hunting fish . The second person is called " Friday " . 
 Friday can produce 8 pounds of fish or 4 pounds of coconuts per hour . If he too decides to work for 12 hours , his production possibilities set will be determined by the following relations : 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 Thus , MRT Coconuts , Fish <formula> <formula> 
 This means that for every pound of coconuts Friday gives up , he can produce 2 more pounds of fish . 
 So , we can say that Friday has a Comparative advantage in hunting fish while Crusoe has a comparative advantage in gathering coconuts . Their respective <unk> can be shown in the following diagram : 
 The joint production possibilities set at the extreme right shows the total amount of both commodities that can be produced by Crusoe and Friday together . It combines the best of both workers . If both of them work to gather coconuts only , the economy will have 144 coconuts in all , 96 from Crusoe and 48 from Friday . ( This can be obtained by setting F = 0 in their respective PPF equations and summing them up ) . Here the slope of the joint PPF is -1 / 2 . 
 If we want more fish , we should shift that person who has a comparative advantage in fish hunting ( i.e. Friday ) out of coconut gathering and into fish hunting . When Friday is producing 96 pounds of fish , he is fully occupied . If fish production is to be increased beyond this point , Crusoe will have to start hunting fish . Here onward , the slope of the joint PPF is -2 . If we want to produce only fish , then the economy will have 144 pounds of fish , 48 from Crusoe and 96 from Friday . Thus the joint PPF is kinked because Crusoe and Friday have comparative advantages in different commodities . As the economy gets more and more ways of producing output and different comparative advantages , the PPF becomes concave . 
 = = Pareto efficiency = = 
 Assume that there are c units of coconut and f units of fish available for consumption in the Crusoe Friday economy . Given this endowment bundle ( c , f ) , the Pareto efficient bundle can be determined at the mutual tangency of Crusoe 's and Friday 's indifference curves in the Edgeworth box along the Pareto Set ( Contract curve ) . These are the bundles at which Crusoe 's and Friday 's Marginal rate of substitution are equal . In a simple exchange economy , the contract curve describes the set of bundles that exhaust the gains from trade . But in a Robinson Crusoe / Friday economy , there is another way to exchange goods – to produce less of one good and more of the other . 
 From the figure 8 , it is clear that an economy operating at a position where the <unk> of either Crusoe or Friday is not equal to the MRT between coconuts and fish cannot be Pareto efficient . This is because the rate at which , say Friday is willing to trade coconuts for fish is different from the rate at which coconuts can be transformed into fish . Thus , there is a way to make Friday better off by rearranging the production pattern . 
 Thus for Pareto Efficiency , 
 MRT Coconuts , Fish = <unk> , Fish 
 ( for both Crusoe and Friday ) 
 This can be achieved in a competitive market by decentralising production and consumption decisions , i.e. Crusoe and Friday will both solve their own problems of how much to consume and produce independently . 
 = New York State Route 458 = 
 New York State Route 458 ( NY 458 ) is a state highway in the North Country of New York in the United States . It extends for 24 @.@ 42 miles ( 39 @.@ 30 km ) from an intersection with NY 11B in the St. Lawrence County town of Hopkinton to a junction with NY 30 in the Franklin County town of Brighton . The route follows a generally northwest – southeast alignment between the two points , serving only small hamlets as it crosses an otherwise rural area of the North Country . NY 458 was assigned c . 1973 to the former routing of NY 72 east of the Hopkinton hamlet of Nicholville . Prior to being signed as part of NY 72 in 1930 , it was designated as part of NY 56 in the 1920s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 458 begins at a junction with NY 11B in Hopkinton at the western fringe of the Lawrence hamlet of Nicholville . The route heads southeast , loosely paralleling the St. Regis River as it proceeds through rural eastern St. Lawrence County . After 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) , it passes into both the Franklin County town of Waverly and Adirondack Park . 
 Now within the park boundaries , NY 458 crosses over the Lake <unk> Outlet on its way eastward to the hamlet of St. Regis Falls , the largest community on the entire route . The route crosses the St. Regis River twice and intersects County Route 5 ( CR 5 ) , a connector to the hamlet of Moira 10 miles ( 16 km ) to the north , within St. Regis Falls . At the junction with CR 5 , here named North Main Street but known as Moira – St. Regis Falls Road north of Adirondack Park , the highway turns south to follow South Main Street out of the community . 
 NY 458 continues southeast through Waverly to the hamlet known as Santa Clara in the town of the same name . The route heads through the hamlet and over the St. Regis for the final time as it approaches Goodnow Mountain , a peak rising roughly 1 @,@ 960 feet ( 600 m ) above sea level . Instead of traversing the mountain , the highway bypasses it to the south . East of the peak , NY 458 turns southeast and begins to parallel the east branch of the St. Regis River . This pairing remains intact through the towns of Santa Clara and Duane to Brighton , where NY 458 ends at NY 30 . 
 = = History = = 
 The entirety of modern NY 458 was originally designated as part of NY 56 , a route extending from Massena to Brighton via Winthrop and Nicholville , in the mid @-@ 1920s . NY 56 was realigned in 1927 to continue west from Nicholville to a new terminus in Potsdam . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , NY 56 was renumbered to NY 72 . The portion of NY 72 east of Nicholville remained unchanged until c . 1973 when NY 72 was truncated to its current eastern terminus in Hopkinton . The former routing of NY 72 from Nicholville to Brighton was renumbered to NY 458 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Indian Head cent = 
 The Indian Head cent , also known as an Indian Head penny , was a one @-@ cent coin ( $ 0 @.@ 01 ) produced by the United States Bureau of the Mint from 1859 to 1909 . It was designed by James Barton Longacre , the Chief Engraver at the Philadelphia Mint . 
 From 1793 to 1857 , the cent was a copper coin about the size of a half dollar . As rising copper prices made it impractical to keep striking them , in 1857 the Mint reduced the size of the cent , issuing a new design , the Flying Eagle cent . The new pieces were identical in diameter to modern cents , though somewhat thicker and made of copper @-@ nickel . The design caused production difficulties , and the Mint soon looked to replace the coin . Mint Director James Ross Snowden selected the Indian Head design , and chose a laurel wreath for the reverse that was replaced in 1860 by an oak wreath with a shield . Cents were hoarded during the economic chaos of the American Civil War , when the metal nickel was in short supply . As Mint officials saw that privately issued bronze tokens were circulating , they induced Congress to pass the Coinage Act of 1864 , authorizing a slimmer cent of bronze alloy . 
 In the postwar period , the cent became very popular and was struck in large numbers in most years . An exception was 1877 , when a poor economy and little demand for cents created one of the rarest dates in the series . With the advent of coin @-@ operated machines in the late 19th and early 20th centuries , even more cents were produced , reaching 100 million for the first time in 1907 . In 1909 , the Indian Head cent was replaced by the Lincoln cent , designed by Victor D. Brenner . 
 = = Inception = = 
 The half @-@ dollar @-@ sized large cent was struck from 1793 to 1857 , authorized by the Mint Act of 1792 which defined the " cent " as 1 / 100 dollar . That coin was intended to contain close to a cent 's worth of copper , as people then expected that coins contain close to their face values in metal . Nevertheless , because of the constitutional clause making only gold and silver legal tender , the government would not accept copper cents for taxes or other payments . By the early 1850s , fluctuations in the price of copper led the Mint of the United States ( hereafter Mint ) to seek alternatives , including reducing the size of the cent and experimenting with compositions other than pure copper . The result was the Flying Eagle cent , the same diameter as the later Lincoln cent but somewhat thicker and heavier , composed of 88 % copper and 12 % nickel . The Flying Eagle cent was struck in limited numbers as a pattern coin in 1856 , then for circulation in 1857 and 1858 . 
 The Flying Eagle cent was issued in exchange for worn Spanish colonial silver coins , which until then had circulated widely in the United States . These " small cents " were also issued in exchange for the copper coins they had replaced . By 1858 , Mint authorities found the piece unsatisfactory in production . The high points on both sides of the coin ( the eagle 's head and the wreath ) opposed each other , and it was difficult to get the design to be brought out fully in the tough copper @-@ nickel alloy . Mint Engraver James B. Longacre , designer of the Flying Eagle cent , was instructed to develop alternative designs . He produced one , showing a slimmer eagle , which would not clash as much with the reverse wreath . Although this would have cured the production problem , the design was not liked . Mint Director James Ross Snowden suggested a head of Columbus as an obverse design , but Longacre felt the public would not approve of a historic figure on an American coin . 
 In 1858 , the Mint tested new designs for the cent . Between 60 and 100 sets of twelve pattern coins were struck , consisting of the standard Flying Eagle obverse , a " scrawny eagle " pattern , and the Indian Head design , mated with four different wreaths for the reverse . Snowden would make his choice of what design would be struck in 1859 from these patterns ; the sets were also sold to collectors . The Indian Head design was apparently prepared by April , as on the twelfth of that month , a Mr. Howard wrote to Snowden that " I have learned that a new pattern piece for the cent has been struck off at the Mint [ with ] a head resembling that of the three dollar piece and on the reverse a shield at the top of the olive and oak wreath " , and asking to purchase a specimen . Other numismatists also sought pieces : R. Coulton Davis , a Philadelphia druggist with ties to the Mint , wrote to Snowden in June informing him of a favorable story in a Boston newspaper , and Augustus B. Sage wrote to the Mint Director the same month , asking for a specimen for himself , and one for the newly founded American Numismatic Society . 
 According to Walter Breen , Snowden most likely chose the combination of the Indian Head and the laurel wreath as it was the lowest relief of any of the options , and could be expected to strike well . On November 4 , 1858 , Snowden wrote to Treasury Secretary Howell Cobb about the Indian Head design , and two days later wrote to Longacre , informing him that it was approved . Longacre was to prepare the necessary dies for production , which was to begin on January 1 , 1859 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Longacre advocated his Indian Head design in an August 21 , 1858 , letter to Snowden : 
 From the copper shores of Lake Superior , to the silver mountains of Potosi from the Ojibwa to the <unk> , the feathered tiara is as characteristic of the primitive races of our hemisphere , as the turban is of the Asiatic . Nor is there anything in its decorative character , repulsive to the association of Liberty … It is more appropriate than the Phrygian cap , the emblem rather of the emancipated slave , than of the independent freeman , of those who are able to say " we were never in bondage to any man " . I regard then this emblem of America as a proper and well defined portion of our national inheritance ; and having now the opportunity of consecrating it as a memorial of Liberty , ' our Liberty ' , American Liberty ; why not use it ? One more graceful can scarcely be devised . We have only to determine that it shall be appropriate , and all the world outside of us cannot wrest it from us . 
 By numismatic legend , the facial features of the goddess Liberty on the obverse of the Indian Head cent were based on the features of Longacre 's daughter Sarah ; the tale runs that she was at the mint one day when she tried on the headdress of one of a number of Native Americans who were visiting , and her father sketched her . However , Sarah Longacre was 30 years old and married in 1858 , not 12 as in the tale , and Longacre himself stated that the face was based on a statue of Venus in Philadelphia on loan from the Vatican . He did often sketch his elder daughter , and there are resemblances between the depictions of Sarah and the various representations of Liberty on his coins of the 1850s . These tales were apparently extant at the time , as Snowden , writing to Treasury Secretary Howell Cobb in November 1858 , denied that the coin was based " on any human features in the Longacre family " . Lee F. McKenzie , in his 1991 article on Longacre , notes that any artist can be influenced by many things , but calls the story " essentially false " . 
 Regardless of who posed for Longacre , the facial features of the " Indian " are essentially Caucasian , meaning that a White woman wears the headdress of a Native American man . Longacre had , in 1854 , designed the three @-@ dollar piece with a female with similar features ( also supposedly based on the museum sculpture ) but a more fanciful headdress , and adapted that design for the gold dollar . Officials were aware of this artistic license at the time of issue ; Snowden , in his November 1858 letter to Cobb , characterizes the two earlier coins as " the artists at the Mint evidently not realizing the absurd incongruity of placing this most masculine attribute of the warrior brave on the head of a woman " . Longacre would not be the last to juxtapose the features of a White woman with an Indian headdress reserved for men ; Augustus Saint Gaudens , for the Indian Head eagle ( 1907 ) , produced a similar design . Later issues depict more accurate Indians , including Bela Lyon Pratt 's Indian Head gold pieces ( 1908 ) , the Buffalo nickel ( 1913 ) by James Earle Fraser , who worked from Native American models , and the Oregon Trail Memorial half dollar ( 1926 ) , designed by Fraser and his wife Laura . 
 Art historian Cornelius Vermeule had mixed emotions about the Indian Head cent : " Longacre enriched the mythology of American coinage in a pleasant if unpretentious fashion . Given his pattern half @-@ dollar designs of 1859 as a yardstick , he could have done worse . " In another comparison , Vermeule suggested , " far from a major creation aesthetically or iconographically , and far less attractive to the eye than the [ flying eagle ] , the Indian head cent was at least to achieve the blessing of popular appeal . The coin became perhaps the most beloved and typically American of any piece great or small in the American series . Great art the coin was not , but it was one of the first products of the United States mints to achieve the common touch . " 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Redesign and surplus ( 1859 – 1861 ) = = = 
 Production of the Indian Head cent for commerce began at the start of 1859 . As issued for circulation , the pieces differ in some particulars from the pattern 1858 cent of similar design ; Longacre sharpened some details . The pattern coin had the laurel leaves in the reverse wreath in bunches of five leaves ; the issued 1859 cent has them in bunches of six . Cents dated 1858 with the adopted reverse ( with six @-@ leaf bunches ) are known , were most likely struck in 1859 , and are extremely rare . 
 In 1860 , the reverse of the cent was changed to feature an oak wreath and a narrow shield ; such reverses are also known on 1859 @-@ dated pieces struck as patterns . According to Richard Snow in his guide book to Flying Eagle and Indian Head cents , this was not due to problems with the " Laurel Wreath " reverse design used in 1859 , as full details survive on many extant pieces . Walter Breen , however , suggested that the feathers and curls on the obverse did not strike as well as they would later , and that " this may account for Snowden 's decision to change the design again " . David Lange , in his history of the Mint , states that it was to give the coin , quoting Snowden , " more National character " . All 1859 cents and some from 1860 have the cutoff of Liberty 's bust on the obverse end with a point ; most 1860 cents and all later issues have it rounded . 
 Tens of millions of Flying Eagle cents had been issued in exchange for the old American coppers and small Spanish silver . The Spanish silver was still flowing into the Mint in early 1859 and , at Snowden 's urging , Congress on March 3 of that year extended the redemption of these foreign coins , legal tender in the US until 1857 , for another two years . Neil Carothers , in his work on small @-@ denomination currency , challenged this decision as unnecessary — deprived of legal tender status , the remaining Spanish silver would have been eliminated through sales to banks for their bullion . Those who brought the old coins to the Mint received cents for them , at first Flying Eagle , and then Indian Head . In the year following the renewal , some forty million Indian Head cents were issued , meaning nearly a hundred million copper @-@ nickel cents had entered commerce since 1857 . As the coin did not circulate in the South and West due to prejudice against base @-@ metal money , they choked commerce . No one had to take them ; no law made them legal tender . At Snowden 's urging Congress in June 1860 ended the exchange . Nevertheless , as Snowden admitted in his annual report that year , there were too many cents in circulation . In October 1860 , The Bankers ' Magazine and Statistical Register reported that there were ten million cents in commerce in New York City above what was needed , and if anyone wished to order in bulk , they could be purchased at a discount . 
 = = = Shortage and redesign ( 1862 – 1864 ) = = = 
 The surplus of cents was relieved by the economic chaos engendered by the American Civil War , which began in 1861 . At the end of that year , the banks stopped paying out gold , which thereafter commanded a premium over paper money . These greenbacks , beginning in the following year , were issued in large quantities by the federal government . Silver vanished from commerce in June 1862 , as the price of that metal rose , leaving the cent the sole federal coin that had not entirely vanished from commerce through hoarding . The glut of cents had by then abated , as merchants had stored them away in quantity — one New York City floor collapsed beneath the load . There were other means of making change which passed in the emergency , from postage stamps to privately issued tokens , but the public demand was for the cent — the Philadelphia Mint struck record numbers , and set aside part of the production to be transmitted to other cities . Nevertheless , by July 1862 , the cent , in quantity , could only be purchased at a premium of 4 % in paper money in major cities in the East . The copper @-@ nickel pieces were nicknamed " nickels " , or " nicks " . Presentation of coins in payment carried with it no obligation to make change in the same . Accordingly , with a small quantity of " nicks " , a shopper could make purchases with exact change , without receiving such makeshifts as merchants ' credit slips , that others might not accept at the stated value . 
 By 1863 , The Bankers ' Magazine reported that the premium for cents in Philadelphia had risen to 20 % . Thereafter , the premium decreased as there was a flood of metal tokens issued by merchants , which were widely accepted . Other war expedients , such as fractional currency , lessened the demand for the cent by taking the place of missing silver coinage . Small quantities of cents circulated among them , though many were still hoarded . 
 Government officials saw that the public readily accepted the merchant tokens . Many of these tokens were made of bronze , and when , in 1863 , they attempted to restore coins to circulation , the use of bronze coins , which would not contain their face values in metal , was considered . In his annual report submitted October 1 , 1863 , Lincoln Administration Mint Director James Pollock noted that " whilst people expect a full value in their gold and silver coins , they merely want the inferior [ base metal ] money for convenience in making exact payments " . He observed that the private cent tokens had sometimes contained as little as a fifth of a cent in metal , yet had still circulated . He proposed that the copper @-@ nickel cent be replaced with a bronze piece of the same size . Pollock also wanted to eliminate nickel as a coinage metal ; its hard alloys destroyed dies and machinery . On December 8 , Pollock wrote to Treasury Secretary Salmon P. Chase , proposing a bronze cent and two @-@ cent piece . 
 On March 2 , 1864 , Pollock wrote urgently to Chase , warning him that the Mint was running out of nickel and that demand for cents was at an all @-@ time high . He also informed the Secretary that the United States Assay Commission , composed of citizens and officials who had met the previous month to test the nation 's silver and gold coinage , had recommended the use of French bronze ( 95 % copper with the remainder tin and zinc ) as a coinage metal for the cent and a new two @-@ cent piece . Three days later , Chase sent Pollock 's December letter and draft legislation for bronze one- and two @-@ cent pieces to Maine Senator William P. Fessenden , chairman of the Senate Finance Committee . Fessenden took no immediate action , and on March 16 , Pollock wrote again to Chase , warning that the Mint was going to run out of nickel , much of which was imported . Chase forwarded his letter to Fessenden . Legislation was finally introduced by New Hampshire Senator Daniel Clark on March 22 ; Pollock 's letters were read and apparently influenced proceedings as the Senate passed the bill without debate . 
 The domestic supply of nickel was at that time produced by a mine at Gap , Pennsylvania , owned by industrialist Joseph Wharton . On March 19 , Pollock wrote to Chase that they had no more nickel , nor was any available from overseas ; " we are thus shut up to the home supply ; from the works of Mr. Wharton " . Opposed to the removal of nickel from the cent , Wharton published a pamphlet in April 1864 proposing coinage of one- , two- , three- , five- , and ten @-@ cent pieces of an alloy of one part nickel to three of copper , doubling the percentage of nickel used in the cent . Despite Wharton 's efforts , on April 20 , a select committee of the House of Representatives endorsed the bill . It was opposed by Pennsylvania 's Thaddeus Stevens , who represented the mining area from which Wharton extracted his nickel . Wharton had spent $ 200 @,@ 000 to develop his mine and ore refinement machinery , Stevens related , and it was unfair to deprive him of the major use of his metal . " Shall we destroy all this property because by coining with another metal more money may be saved to the government ? " Besides , he argued , the copper @-@ nickel alloy for the cent had been approved by Congress , and the new metal , which he termed " brass " , would show rust . He was rebutted by Iowa Congressman John A. Kasson , chairman of the House Committee on Coinage , Weights , and Measures , who stated that the bronze alloy did not resemble brass , and he could not support the proposition that the government is bound to purchase from a supplier because he has spent money in anticipation of sales . 
 The legislation passed the House , and the Coinage Act of 1864 was signed by President Abraham Lincoln on April 22 , 1864 . The legislation made base metal coins legal tender for the first time : both cents and two @-@ cent pieces were acceptable in quantities of up to ten . The government would not , however , redeem them in bulk . The act also outlawed the private one- and two @-@ cent tokens , and later that year Congress abolished all such issues . The legislation did not allow for the redemption of the old copper @-@ nickel cents ; it had been drafted by Pollock , who was hoping that the seignorage income from issuing the new coins would help finance Mint operations , and he did not want it reduced by the recall of the old pieces . Wharton and his interests were appeased by the passage of a bill for a three @-@ cent piece in 1865 and a five @-@ cent piece in 1866 , both of his proposed alloy , out of which the " nickel " , as the latter coin has come to be known , is still struck . Despite this , Wharton and his nickel interests made repeated attempts to return nickel to the cent , each time failing , both as part of the deliberations over what became the Coinage Act of 1873 , and in the early 1880s . 
 The copper @-@ nickel cents from early in 1864 were generally bought up by speculators and did not circulate in large numbers . The Mint began producing bronze cents on May 13 , three weeks after the passage of the Coinage Act , and they were released into circulation on May 20 . Dies prepared for copper @-@ nickel pieces were used to strike bronze . Sometime during 1864 , Longacre sharpened his design for use in striking the softer bronze pieces , and also added his initial " L " . It is not known when this was done ; it may have been as early as May , with the new dies used alongside the old . These bronze pieces are often referred to as " 1864 @-@ L " and " 1864 No L " . The " L " is known on 1863 @-@ dated pieces , in both metals , and on 1864 @-@ dated copper @-@ nickel pieces — some of these issues , all extremely rare , were likely struck at a later date . The bronze cent was immediately accepted by the public , and heavy production of the issue soon alleviated the shortage of cents . 
 = = = Later years ( 1865 – 1909 ) = = = 
 In the postwar years , the heavy production of cents was scaled back , as hoarding ceased and some of the slack was taken up by other base @-@ metal coins . Nevertheless , the various issues of small coins , at that time not redeemed by the government , caused another glut in commerce , which was not completely broken until the Act of March 3 , 1871 , allowed redemption of cents and other minor coins in lots of $ 20 or more . Pursuant to this act , over thirty million copper @-@ nickel cents , of both the Indian Head and Flying Eagle designs , were redeemed ; the Mint melted these for recoinage . Fifty @-@ five million bronze cents were also sold to the government ; beginning in 1874 , the Mint re @-@ issued these in response to commercial requests for cents , lowering the demand for new coins . Drops in the price of silver brought coins of that metal , hoarded for a decade or more , back into commerce , also decreasing demand . Between 1866 and 1878 , production only occasionally exceeded ten million ; the 1877 coin , with a circulation mintage of 852 @,@ 500 , is a rare date for the series . After 1881 , there were few redemptions of bronze cents , due to high demand for the denomination , though copper @-@ nickel cents continued to be redeemed and melted . 
 With the discontinuance of the two @-@ cent piece and three @-@ cent silver in 1873 , the cent and the three @-@ cent nickel were the sole survivors of the coins valued at less than five cents . The three @-@ cent nickel , by this time , was unpopular because of its odd denomination and ( with the return of silver coinage ) its similarity in size to the dime . A three @-@ cent postage rate had been one of the reasons why that denomination had begun , in the 1850s ; in the early 1880s the Post Office decreased the basic rate for letters to two cents . This change both increased demand for cents , and decreased the demand for the three @-@ cent nickel , which was abolished in 1890 . In most years of the 1880s , there were large issues of Indian Head cents . The exception was in the mid @-@ 1880s , when poor economic times led to less demand for minor coins . No cents or five @-@ cent nickels were minted after February 1885 until near the end of 1886 . Production of undated dies into which the year of issue could be punched did continue , and during the hiatus in coin production , Chief Engraver Charles E. Barber modified the design , removing light outlines between the lettering on the obverse and the rest of the design , and making other changes . This led to two types for the 1886 Indian Head cent , which may be distinguished : on the Type I , the lowest feather on the obverse points between the I and the C in " AMERICA " , while on the Type II it points between the C and the final A. Snow estimates that 14 million of the mintage of 17 @,@ 654 @,@ 290 were Type I , as were a majority of the 4 @,@ 290 proof strikings . 
 The economic Panic of 1893 again caused a decrease in the number of cents produced , as coins accumulated in private hands were spent , creating a surplus . Aside from that , the final years of the series before its termination in 1909 were marked by large mintages , with 1907 topping the hundred million mark . A healthy economy in most years fueled demand , as did the increasing popularity of coin @-@ operated machines , some of which could be found at penny arcades . By the early 20th century , the cent was accepted across the nation , but by law production of the cent was limited to the Philadelphia Mint . Treasury officials sought removal of this restriction , and for an increase in the annual appropriation to purchase base metals for production of the cent and nickel — the amount expended had remained the same since 1873 , although demand for cents had greatly increased . By the Act of April 24 , 1906 , the Mint received permission to strike base metal coins at any mint , and the appropriation was quadrupled to $ 200 @,@ 000 . Small quantities of cents were struck at the San Francisco Mint in 1908 and 1909 . 
 = = Replacement = = 
 Congress passed legislation in 1890 allowing the Mint to alter designs that had been in use for 25 years without the need for legislative authorization . In 1904 , President Theodore Roosevelt wrote to his Secretary of the Treasury , Leslie Mortier Shaw , complaining that U.S. coinage lacked artistic merit , and enquiring if it would be possible to engage a private artist , such as sculptor Augustus Saint @-@ Gaudens , to prepare new coin designs . At Roosevelt 's instructions , the Mint hired Saint @-@ Gaudens to redesign the cent and the four gold pieces : the double eagle ( $ 20 ) , eagle ( $ 10 ) , half eagle ( $ 5 ) , and quarter eagle ( $ 2 @.@ 50 ) . As the designs of those pieces had remained the same for 25 years , they could be changed without an act of Congress , as could the Indian Head cent . 
 Saint @-@ Gaudens originally conceived a flying eagle design for the cent , but at Roosevelt 's request , developed it for the $ 20 piece after learning that under the 1873 act , an eagle could not appear on the cent . Writer and friend Witter Bynner recalled that in January 1907 , Saint @-@ Gaudens was seriously ill with cancer , and was carried to his studio for ten minutes a day to critique the work of his assistants on current projects , including the cent . Saint @-@ Gaudens died on August 3 , 1907 , without having submitted another design for the cent . 
 With the redesign of the four gold denominations completed by 1908 , Roosevelt turned his attention to the cent . The centennial of the birth of assassinated president Abraham Lincoln would occur in February 1909 , and large numbers of privately manufactured souvenirs were already being issued . Many citizens had written to the Treasury Department , proposing a Lincoln coin , and Roosevelt was interested in honoring his fellow Republican . This was a break with previous American numismatic tradition ; before the Lincoln cent , no regularly circulating U.S. coin had featured an actual person ( as opposed to idealized personifications , as of " liberty " ) . 
 In late 1908 , Roosevelt sat for sculptor Victor David Brenner , who was designing a medal for the Panama Canal Commission . It is uncertain how Brenner was selected to design the coin , but in January 1909 , Mint Director Frank A. Leach hired him to design a Lincoln cent . This went into circulation later in 1909 , putting an end to the Indian Head cent series . 
 = = Collecting = = 
 Indian Head cents were popular among coin collectors even in the half @-@ century when they were produced ; since then , with the growth of the hobby , interest has increased . The 1930s introduction of inexpensive coin albums to house the series and encourage collectors to seek a complete set came at a time when the bronze version of the Indian Head cent was still common in pocket change . They were not widely studied until the 1960s ; numismatic writer Tom DeLorey , in his introduction to Snow 's book , ascribes this to prejudice among numismatists who grew up with the Indian Head cent as a common circulation piece . He notes that the 1960 edition of R.S. Yeoman 's A Guide Book of United States Coins ( commonly , the Red Book ) listed only four dates for which there were varieties , one of which , the overdate 1869 / 68 was in error , as the final digit was actually over another 9 . The 2015 edition of the Red Book lists varieties for 11 dates . 
 Like most other denominations of U.S. coins , the 1873 may be found in two varieties , depending on the appearance of the final digit of the date : the " Close 3 " or " Closed 3 " is from early dies ; but after Chief Coiner A. Loudon Snowden complained that the " 3 " looked too much like an " 8 " , Chief Engraver William Barber modified his work to create the " Open 3 " . Some 1875 pieces have a dot appearing on the letter " N " in " ONE " on the reverse . This may have been a secret mark , added to catch a thief within the Philadelphia Mint . 
 The Indian Head cent was struck in large quantities and most dates remain inexpensive : Yeoman lists all dates from 1900 to 1908 from Philadelphia at $ 2 in Good @-@ 4 condition . The record holder for the denomination is a proof specimen of the 1864 @-@ L , of which there were an estimated 20 struck ; it sold for $ 161 @,@ 000 in 2012 . 
 = Belton House = 
 Belton House is a Grade I listed country house in Belton near Grantham , Lincolnshire , England . The mansion is surrounded by formal gardens and a series of avenues leading to follies within a larger wooded park . Belton has been described as a compilation of all that is finest of Carolean architecture , the only truly vernacular style of architecture that England had produced since the Tudor period . The house has also been described as the most complete example of a typical English country house ; the claim has even been made that Belton 's principal facade was the inspiration for the modern British motorway signs which give directions to stately homes . Only Brympton d 'Evercy has been similarly lauded as the perfect English country house . 
 For three hundred years , Belton House was the seat of the Brownlow and Cust family , who had first acquired land in the area in the late 16th century . Between 1685 and 1688 Sir John Brownlow and his wife had the present mansion built . Despite great wealth they chose to build a modest country house rather than a grand contemporary Baroque palace . The contemporary , if provincial , Carolean style was the selected choice of design . However , the new house was fitted with the latest innovations such as sash windows for the principal rooms , and more importantly completely separate areas for the staff . As the Brownlows rose from baronets to barons upward to earls and then once again became barons , successive generations made changes to the interior of the house which reflected their changing social position and tastes , yet the fabric and design of the house changed little . 
 Following World War I ( a period when the Machine Gun Corps was based in the park ) , the Brownlows , like many of their peers , were faced with mounting financial problems . In 1984 they gave the house away — complete with most of its contents . The recipients of their gift , the National Trust , today fully open Belton to the public . It is in a good state of repair and visited by many thousands of tourists each year . 
 = = Early history = = 
 The Brownlow family , a dynasty of lawyers , began accumulating land in the Belton area from approximately 1598 . In 1609 they acquired the reversion of the manor of Belton itself from the Pakenham family , who finally sold the manor house to Sir John Brownlow I in 1619 . The old house was situated near the church in the garden of the present house and remained largely unoccupied , since the family preferred their other houses elsewhere . John Brownlow had married an heiress but was childless . He became attached to two of his more distant blood relations : a great @-@ nephew , also called John Brownlow , and a great @-@ niece , Alice Sherard . The two cousins married each other in 1676 when both were aged 16 ; three years later , the couple inherited the Brownlow estates from their great @-@ uncle together with an income of £ 9 @,@ 000 per annum ( about £ 1 @.@ 24 million in present @-@ day terms ) and £ 20 @,@ 000 in cash ( equivalent to about £ 2 @.@ 76 million now ) . They immediately bought a town house in the newly fashionable Southampton Square in Bloomsbury , and decided to build a new country house at Belton . 
 Work on the new house began in 1685 . The architect thought to have been responsible for the initial design is William Winde , although the house has also been attributed to Sir Christopher Wren , while others believe the design to be so similar to Roger Pratt 's Clarendon House , London , that it could have been the work of any talented draughtsman . The assumption popular today , that Winde was the architect , is based on the stylistic similarity between Belton and Coombe Abbey , which was remodelled by Winde between 1682 and 1685 . Further evidence is a letter dated 1690 , in which Winde recommends a plasterer who worked at Belton to another of his patrons . 
 Whoever the architect , Belton follows closely the design of Clarendon House , completed in 1667 . This great London town house ( demolished circa 1683 ) has been one of the most admired buildings of its era due to " its elegant symmetry and confident and common @-@ sensical design " . Sir John Summerson described Clarendon House as " the most influential house of its time among those who aimed at the grand manner " and Belton as " much the finest surviving example of its class " . John and Alice Brownlow assembled one of the finest teams of craftsmen available at the time to work on the project . This dream team was headed by the master mason William Stanton who oversaw the project . His second in command , John Thompson , had worked with Sir Christopher Wren on several of the latter 's London churches , while the chief joiner John Sturges had worked at Chatsworth under William Talman . The wrought @-@ <unk> John Warren worked under Stanton at Denham Place , Buckinghamshire , and the fine wrought iron gates and overthrow at Belton may be his . Thus so competent were the builders of Belton that Winde may have done little more than provide the original plans and drawings , leaving the interpretation to the on @-@ site craftsmen . This theory is further demonstrated by the external appearance of the adjoining stable block . More provincial , and less masterful in proportion , it is known to have been entirely the work of Stanton . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Ethos = = = 
 The late 17th century in England was a time of great progress in design . Following the austere years of Commonwealth rule , a great flourishing and development in both architecture and the arts began after the restoration of the monarchy in 1660 . Royalist exiles and wealthy young men who made the Grand Tour , returned home with new ideas — often extravagant variations on classical themes . This was , for England , the dawn of the Baroque era . The new wave of architects such as Roger Pratt , John Webb , and Sir Christopher Wren were not just building vast edifices in Renaissance @-@ inspired styles , but also transforming existing older houses . Representative of the utilisation of older houses is Coleshill House in Berkshire , where Pratt transformed the medieval , but now redundant , great hall into a classically inspired entrance hall complete with an imperial staircase . Great Halls were considered redundant now that employers wished to live separately from their servants , and no longer ate with them in a Great Hall . All evidence and odours of cooking and staff were banished from the principal parts of the house . Employers began to live in fine airy rooms , above the ground floor , with privacy from their servants , who were now confined , unless required , to specifically delegated areas — often the ground and uppermost attic floors . This was a period of great social change in British history , and the educated prided themselves on enlightenment and elegance . While Belton is not in the Baroque style , it displays all the traits typical of the new tendencies . 
 Belton was designed in the restrained almost Palladian @-@ inspired architecture of the time immediately before the full emergence in England of the ornate Baroque . The general form this architecture took was of severely symmetrical , often rectangular houses , with a pediment over the central bays . This almost rigid concept was to influence the design of innumerable houses , including Belton . Later to be known as the Carolean style ( from " Carolus , " the Latin name for the reigning monarch Charles II ) , it was popular with the minor aristocracy and gentry for both their town and country houses until long after Charles II 's death . 
 Belton is faced with the local Ancaster stone , with a lighter ashlar from Ketton for the quoining . The " H " -shaped plan was a design which became popular in the late Elizabethan period . However , by the late 16th century , domestic architecture had evolved further than the " one room deep " ranges of the earlier " H " plan houses , such as Montacute House . The new layout placed rooms back to back , creating a house two rooms deep . This became known as " double pile " . As at Belton , this permitted rooms to be not just better lit and heated but also better accessed and related to each other , and with the greatest advantage of all — greater privacy . On the construction side , the double room depth allowed the house to be more compact and under one , more easily constructed , roof , thus lowering building costs . Houses now had the appearance of being more solid , with more than just one or two facades . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 The plan of the rooms at Belton was passé for a grand house of its time . Following the Restoration and the influx of European ideas , it had become popular for large houses to follow the continental fashion of a suite of state rooms consisting of a withdrawing room , dressing room , and bedroom proceeding from either side of a central saloon or hall . These rooms were permanently reserved for use by a high ranking guest , such as a visiting monarch . While Belton does have a saloon at its centre , enfilades of state rooms of lessening grandeur do not flank it . The possible reason for this unusual layout is that , while the Brownlows possessed great wealth , their title was only a baronetcy , and their fortune was barely a century old . They would have been regarded as gentry , not aristocracy . As a result , building a suite of state rooms would have been in hope rather than anticipation of a royal guest . However , the lack of a fashionable and formal suite of state apartments coupled with the Brownlows ' lack of social credentials did not prevent a visit from King William III to the newly completed house in 1695 . The King occupied the " Best bedchamber " , a large room with an adjoining closet , directly above the saloon , that led directly from the second floor Great Dining Chamber . 
 This design followed the older style of having reception rooms and bedrooms scattered over the two main floors . The layout used followed Roger Pratt 's theory that guest and family rooms should be quite separate . As a consequence of this philosophy , the family occupied the rooms on the first and second floors of the west and east wings , with the state rooms in the centre . The great staircase , designed to be grand and imposing , rose to the east side of the house , and formed part of the guest 's state route from the Hall and Saloon on the first floor to the principal dining room and bedroom on the second . This older concept is more clearly exemplified at the Elizabethan Hardwick Hall in neighbouring Derbyshire . 
 The principal entrance hall , reception and family bedrooms were placed on the first floor above a low semi @-@ basement containing service rooms . The two principal entrances to the mansion in the centre of both the north and south facades were accessed by external staircases , originally a single broad flight on the north side and a double staircase on the south . These staircases have since been replaced by simpler designs . 
 The second floor has a matching fenestration , with windows of equal value to those on the first floor below . The very latest innovation , sash windows , was used on both floors . The semi @-@ basement and attic storey used the more old @-@ fashioned mullioned and transomed windows , indicating the lower status of the occupants of these floors . It was clearly emphasised from without that the two main floors of the house were purely for state and family use , and the staff and service areas were confined to the semi @-@ basement and attic floors . This concept of keeping staff and domestic matters out of sight ( when not required ) was relatively new and had first been employed by Pratt in the design of Coleshill House in Berkshire . The contemporary social commentator of the day Roger North lauded back stairs , of which Belton has two examples ( 5 and 14 on plan ) , as one of the most important inventions of his day . 
 The principal room is the large Marble Hall ( 1 ) at the centre of the south front ; this hall is the beginning of a grand procession of rooms , and corresponds to the former Great Parlour or Saloon ( 9 ) on the north front . The Marble Hall is flanked by the former Little Parlour ( 11 , now the Tapestry Room ) and the Great Staircase ( 2 ) , while the Saloon is flanked by two withdrawing rooms ( 8 , 10 ) . The bedrooms are arranged in individual suites on both floors of the two wings ( 3 , etc . ) that flank the state centre of the house . The main staircase , set to one side of the Marble Hall , is one of the few things at Belton which is asymmetrically placed . It has a robust plaster @-@ work ceiling incorporating the Brownlow crest by the London plasterer Edward Goudge , " now looked on as ye best master in England in his profession , " William Winde reported in 1690 . 
 <unk> and spiritual needs were balanced symmetrically within the mansion : the kitchen ( 16 ) and the chapel ( 7 ) were both large two @-@ storied halls , rising from the semi @-@ basement to the first floor . This design not only provided a great and lofty space , but also allowed the servants to worship in the chapel without leaving the service floor , while their employers would worship from a private gallery , complete with fireplace , overlooking the chapel on the first floor . 
 One of the most Carolean features of the house is the balustrade and cupola surmounting the roof , another element introduced to English architecture by Roger Pratt . The cupola at Belton does not light a lofty domed hall , as is often the case in Europe , but houses a staircase which gives access to a large viewing platform on top of a lead roof , concealed from the ground by the balustrade which tops the more conventional and visible hipped roof . From this vantage point , the owners of Belton could admire the perfect symmetry of their avenues and formal gardens spreading from the house . This feature of the house was removed by the architect James Wyatt when he modernised the house in the 18th century . It was restored to its original form in the 1870s by the 3rd Earl Brownlow . 
 = = Interior and contents = = 
 Some of Belton 's many rooms have been altered over the last 300 years both in use and design . One of the principal rooms , the Marble Hall ( 1 ) , the first of the large reception rooms , serves as an entrance hall from the south entrance , and takes its name from a <unk> board patterned floor of black and white marble tiles . By the time of Belton 's conception , the great hall was no longer a place for the household to eat , but intended as a grand entrance to the house . The hall was originally hung with 28 portraits of Kings , Queens , and Emperors , from William the Conqueror to William III , intended to give the house an air of dynastic importance . The less numerous and far newer Brownlow family portraits were originally hung in the Great Dining Room immediately above . The room is fully panelled , and parts of the panelling contain lime wood embellishments attributed to Grinling Gibbons . In the early 19th century , this room , and some others , were re @-@ modelled by Jeffry Wyatville , who in addition to graining and painting the panelling to imitate oak inserted fake doors in the panelling to balance real doors already in place . 
 The second of the principal reception rooms , the Saloon ( 9 ) , opens from the Marble Hall . This large panelled room is on an axis to the avenues of the formal north gardens . Originally known as the Great Parlour , this has always been the chief reception room of the house . It retains its original marble fireplace and has an ornate plaster ceiling which is a Victorian copy of the original ceiling by the Carolean plasterer Edward Goudge . The centrepiece of the room is a large <unk> carpet made in 1839 for the 1st Earl Brownlow . 
 Either side of the Saloon are two smaller drawing rooms ( 8 , 10 ) , which would originally have served as private withdrawing rooms from the more public activities which would have taken place in the Marble Hall and Saloon . One of these rooms , now called the Tyrconnel Room ( 10 ) , was transformed into the principal or state bedroom during the occupancy of Lord Tyrconnel in an attempt to create a more fashionable suite of Baroque state rooms on the first floor . After his death in 1754 , it became a Billiard Room , until the 3rd Earl Brownlow had it refurnished more than a century later . Unusually , the floor is painted with the family arms and crest . The date of the floor is not known for certain but the early nineteenth century has been suggested . 
 The final large reception room on the first floor is the <unk> Room ( 16 ) , so named because of the three huge oil paintings by Melchior d <unk> ( 1636 – 1695 ) , depicting scenes of birds in courtyards , which are fitted into the neo @-@ Carolean panelling . The panelling was introduced to the room by the 3rd Earl Brownlow in 1876 , when it was furnished as the principal dining room of the mansion . The room was initially created as a library in 1808 from the upper part of the earlier kitchen which had originally risen two stories . The West staircase ( 14 ) was originally a service stairs , and would have been plainer in decor , but by the late nineteenth century it was in regular use by the family . 
 Either side of the Marble Hall , lie the Great Staircase ( 2 ) and the Tapestry Room ( 11 ) , which contains a collection of early eighteenth century Mortlake tapestries . The Great Staircase to the east of the Marble Hall is unusually placed at Belton , as in a house of this period one would expect to find the staircase in the hall . The stairs rise in three flights around the west , north , and east walls to the former Great Dining Room above the Marble Hall . Thus the staircase served as an important state procession link between the three principal reception rooms of the house . The Great Dining Room , now the Library , has been greatly altered and all traces of Carolean decoration removed , first by James Wyatt in 1778 when it was transformed into a drawing room with a vaulted ceiling , and again in 1876 , when its use was again changed , this time to a library . The room contains some 6000 volumes , a superb example of book collecting over 350 years . When Lord Tyrconnel died in 1754 a catalogue of his library identified almost 2 @,@ 300 books . Almost all of these remain in the Belton library today . Rupert <unk> attributed the carved marble chimneypiece depicting two Roman goddesses to Sir Richard Westmacott . 
 Leading from the Library is the Queen 's Room , the former " Best Bed Chamber " . This panelled room was redecorated in 1841 for the visit of Queen Adelaide , widow of William IV , when its former function as a state bedroom was resurrected . It contains the great canopied Rococo @-@ style bed in which the Queen slept , complete with the royal monogram " AR " ( Adelaide Regina ) embroidered on the <unk> . Other rooms on the second floor are mostly bedrooms , which include the Chinese Room ( directly above the Tyrconnel Room ) with its original hand @-@ painted 18th @-@ century Chinese wallpaper , the Yellow Room ( directly above the Blue Room ) , and the Windsor Bedroom ( directly above the School Room ) , so called following its use by King Edward VIII of the United Kingdom , who became the Duke of Windsor after the abdication crisis of 1936 . Edward visited Belton in the 1930s with his mistress Wallis Simpson , and the 6th Baron Brownlow was heavily involved in the crisis thanks to his position as the King 's Lord @-@ in @-@ waiting . Today , Belton has a permanent exhibition devoted to that event . Another royal visitor , Charles , Prince of Wales , also used the room frequently while a cadet at nearby RAF Cranwell . 
 = = Gardens and the park = = 
 In 1690 , Sir John Brownlow was granted permission to enclose an area of 1000 acres ( 4 km ² ) to transform into a park , with a grant to keep deer . There is evidence to suggest that some of this area had been a park since at least 1580 . The park was laid out with avenues , including the still surviving Eastern Avenue which led east from the house . Brownlow also had a large pond or lake dug and planted 21 @,@ 400 ash trees , 9 @,@ 500 oak trees , and 614 fruit trees . It is thought that William Winde may have advised on the layout of the gardens . Closer to the house were a series of more formal gardens , including canal ponds bordered by plantations containing symmetrical walks resembling the " rond @-@ points " ( circular clearings in a garden from which straight paths radiate ) introduced by the landscape gardener André Le Nôtre . By the end of the eighteenth century , these formal parterres had been removed and the canal ponds filled in . 
 Sir John Brownlow was succeeded at Belton by his brother , who was content to permit Brownlow 's widow , Alice , to remain in occupation . She spent the remainder of her life at Belton arranging advantageous marriages for her five daughters . On her death in 1721 , the house passed to her husband 's nephew ( and her son @-@ in @-@ law ) Sir John Brownlow III ( later Viscount Tyrconnel ) . Tyrconnel , a dilettante of no great intellect , was responsible for many of the architectural features which survive in the park and garden . Between 1742 and 1751 , a series of follies , including a Gothic ruin , a cascade , and a prospect or belvedere known as the <unk> Tower , were constructed for him . When built the tower had two small wings flanking each side , since removed . 
 = = Later history = = 
 In 1754 , Belton was inherited by Sir John Cust , the son of previous owner Viscount Tyrconnel 's widowed sister . Cust was a distinguished politician active during the politically turbulent 1760s , and his monument at Belton blames his death at the age of 51 to the " unusual fatigues of his office " . His heir was created Lord Brownlow in 1776 , and Belton was owned by successive Lords Brownlow for the next 200 years . 
 In the last three decades of the 19th century the 3rd Earl Brownlow spent much time and money restoring Belton , and consequently the house entered the 20th century in a good state of repair and preservation . However , the 20th century was to present Belton and its estate with serious problems . These included the introduction of income tax and death duties which would leave the finances of the Brownlow family severely depleted . 
 At the beginning of World War I , like many other British landowners , the 3rd Earl Brownlow offered his house and park to the Government for war service . The offer was accepted , and the largest and most drastic changes were made in the park since the time of Viscount Tyrconnel 's folly building . In August 1914 , the house and park were used as the assembly point for the 11th ( Northern ) Division before its deployment . In 1915 , the home <unk> and training ground of the Machine Gun Corps were established in the southern part of Belton park . The lie of the land there , where the River Witham passes between the Lower Lincolnshire Limestone and the Upper Lias mudstone , lent itself to the development of the necessary firing ranges close to good communications by way of the Great North Road and the East Coast main line railway station at Grantham . The <unk> was closed in 1919 , the site cleared and the land restored to Lord Brownlow in 1920 . Little sign of the Machine Gun Corps 's stay remains in the park , but plaques and inscriptions can be followed from the south gate of Belton park to the memorial gate on the way from there to the town centre and in the north aisle of Grantham parish church . 
 Belton again saw war service during World War II . From 1942 , part of the Royal Air Force Regiment was housed in nissen huts at the park in a facility named RAF Belton Park . The RAF Regiment had its headquarters at nearby RAF Alma Park , with additional accommodation at nearby RAF <unk> and RAF North Witham airfields . 
 The years following World War I were severely testing for the owners of many great estates . The staff both indoor and outdoor , which had previously been plentiful , essential , and cheap , were now in short supply . Millions of men had left private service to join the army , and very few returned . Female domestic staff had been called up for war service in factories , and now realised there was an easier and better paid existence outside of the gates of the great country houses . With both fortunes and staff depleted many owners of country houses now fought a losing battle to retain them . 
 Belton House remained relatively untouched during this period , largely owing to the failing fortunes of the Brownlow family . The 3rd Earl Brownlow and his Countess lived for only a few months of the year at Belton , where they came for the fox @-@ hunting , and divided the remainder of their time between their house in London and Ashridge , another country house in Hertfordshire . Ashridge , a huge Gothic revival pile , had come to the Brownlows in the 19th century through the Egerton family . It was sold , with its art collection and furnishings , to pay the death duties arising on the death of the 3rd Earl in 1921 . Hence Belton became the Brownlow 's sole country home . Further death duties were incurred in 1927 on the death of the 3rd Earl 's successor , his second cousin Adelbert Cust , 5th Baron Brownlow . 
 In the ensuing period many thousands of country houses of great architectural value were demolished , or had whole wings razed to the ground . In 1955 alone one house was demolished every five days . In this respect Belton was fortunate to survive at all , as in addition to the family 's problems , the house deteriorated to such an extent that in 1961 the 6th Baron employed the architect Francis Johnson to oversee a large restoration program lasting three years . Not only was the roof repaired but much of the panelling taken down and repaired , and new cornices installed . Also attempts were made to curtail serious infestations of dry rot . By the time of the death of the 6th Baron in 1978 , the resultant death duties , coupled with the rising costs of the upkeep , made Belton too much for the Brownlow family . 
 = = = National Trust = = = 
 The seventh Baron attempted to retain the house and estate by opening to the public . An adventure playground was built in the nearby woods to attract families to the house as a tourist attraction . However , the financial difficulties were too great and in January 1984 he transferred ownership of the house , garden and some of the contents to the National Trust , a charitable body experienced in the management of historic properties . The National Trust further purchased at a cost of eight million pounds ( worth about £ 23 million today ) 1 @,@ 317 acres ( 5 @.@ 3 km ² ) of parkland and much of the remaining contents with a grant from the National Heritage Memorial Fund . 
 The Trust quickly produced a guide book for the 1984 season and opened to the public . A priority was the establishment of a restaurant , which would not only augment the estate 's income , but also encourage people to spend more time at Belton , and travel greater distances to visit . Though the house , its contents and outbuildings were in an adequate state of repair at the time of the gift , they have since become part of an ongoing programme of conservation and restoration . At the same time the National Trust has introduced new features and attractions such as a silver exhibition which displays a collection of silver amassed by the Brownlow family , dating from 1698 . Further revenue is raised from the use of the property as a filming location , and from licensing the Marble Hall for civil weddings . The house is featured in the BBC 's 1988 adaptation of <unk> and also as " Rosings Park " in the BBC 's 1995 television version of Pride and Prejudice . 
 = = Owners = = 
 Until its acceptance by the National Trust , Belton House was always in the ownership of the family of its builder , though the failure of three generations to produce a son and heir caused the ownership to pass sideways and sometimes through the female line . 
 The owners of Belton are buried in the village of Belton 's parish church close to the house . Their tombs are collectively one of the most complete sets of family memorials in England — continuous generation to generation for almost 350 years . The earliest Brownlow buried here is the founder of the family fortune the lawyer Richard Brownlow ( 1555 – 1638 ) , and one of the most recent is the 6th Baron Brownlow ( 1899 – 1978 ) . 
 The owners of Belton House have been : 
 Sir John Brownlow I ( 1594 – 1679 ) <unk> Belton to his great @-@ nephew John Brownlow II . 
 Sir John Brownlow II ( 1659 – 1697 ) . Builder of Belton House 
 Sir William Brownlow ( 1665 – 1702 ) . Brother of Sir John Brownlow II , permitted his widowed sister @-@ in @-@ law Alice to retain Belton . 
 Sir John Brownlow III ( 1690 – 1754 ) . Created Viscount Tyrconnel in 1718 . Nephew and son @-@ in @-@ law of Sir John Brownlow II . 
 Sir John Cust , 3rd Baronet ( 1718 – 1770 ) . Speaker of the House of Commons and nephew of Tyrconnel . 
 Sir Brownlow Cust ( 1744 – 1807 ) . Created Baron Brownlow in 1776 . Son of Sir John Cust . 
 John , 2nd Baron Brownlow ( 1779 – 1853 ) . Created 1st Earl Brownlow in 1815 . Son of Sir Brownlow Cust . 
 John Egerton @-@ Cust , 2nd Earl Brownlow ( 1842 – 1867 ) Grandson of John , 2nd Baron Brownlow . 
 Adelbert , 3rd ( and last ) Earl Brownlow ( 1844 – 1921 ) . Brother of John , 2nd Earl Brownlow . 
 Adelbert Salusbury Cockayne Cust , 5th Baron Brownlow ( 1867 – 1927 ) . Second cousin of Adelbert , 3rd Earl Brownlow . 
 Peregrine Cust , 6th Baron Brownlow ( 1899 – 1978 ) . Son of the 5th Baron Brownlow . 
 Edward Cust , 7th Baron Brownlow ( born 1936 ) . Son of the 6th Baron Brownlow . 
 The National Trust ( 1984 onwards ) . 
 = Mephisto ( wrestler ) = 
 Mephisto ( born December 12 , 1968 ) is the ring name of a Mexican luchador enmascarado , or masked professional wrestler and currently works for Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre ( CMLL ) . His real name is not a matter of official record as he is an enmascarado , which by lucha libre traditions means that his personal life is kept secret from the general public . 
 Mephisto is the son of Luchador Astro Rey / Kahoz and has previously worked both as Astro Rey Jr. and Kahoz Jr. but has been most successful as Mephisto . Since adopting the Mephisto gimmick he has been associated with the group Los Infernales ( " The Infernal Ones " ) and later on Los Hijos del Averno ( " The Sons of Hell " ) , especially working closely with Averno as his regular tag team partner for years . Mephisto and Averno are considered one of the top teams in Mexico between 2000 and 2010 . 
 He is currently the leader of Los Hijos del Infierno ( " The Sons of the Inferno " ) that also includes Ephesto and Luciferno . While working as Mephisto he has won multiple CMLL championships and currently holds part of the Mexican National Trios Championship with the other Hijos del Infierno . Previous he has held the CMLL World Tag Team Championship ( 3 times ) , CMLL World Trios Championship , CMLL World Welterweight Championship , Mexican National Light Heavyweight Championship , Mexican National Welterweight Championship , NWA World Welterweight Championship and was the first ever holder of the NWA World Historic Welterweight Championship 
 = = Personal life = = 
 The man who would grow up to wrestle as Mephisto was born on December 12 , 1968 in Mexico City , son of Alberto Leonel Hernández López , better known as the Luchador ( professional wrestler ) " Astro Rey " ( Spanish for " Astro King " ) and later on as " Kahoz " . By 1971 his father had started wrestling which meant that the future Mephisto grew up around wrestlers , wanting to become one himself from a very early age . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 After training under his father , and his uncle the luchador known as " El Gallo Giro " , he made his debut as " Kahoz Jr . " , as a tribute to his father 's final wrestling character . From 1988 until 1993 he wrestled as Kahoz Jr. for various promotions in Mexico . His father , however , urged him to change gimmicks to the one that got his father the most fame " Astro Rey Jr . " . As Astro Rey Jr. or simply " Astro Jr . " he travelled the world and wrestled extensively in Mexico and Japan . On March 22 , 1999 Astro Rey Jr. won the Mexican National Welterweight Championship from Arkangel de la Muerte and defended it several times during his 19 month reign . Astro Rey Jr. finally lost the title to Karloff Lagarde Jr. on October 23 , 2000 . 
 = = = Los Infernales ( 2001 @-@ 2009 ) = = = 
 Over the summer of 2001 El Satánico , the leader of a team known as Los Infernales ( " The Infernal ones " ) was involved in a storyline with former Infernales team members Último Guerrero , Rey Bucanero , Tarzan Boy who had turned on him . CMLL decided to expand the storyline , teaming El Satánico up with two other wrestlers , both of whom were repackaged to fit with the " infernal " theme of El Satánico . The storyline was that El Satánico used his supposed " satanic powers " to turn the tecnico ( face ) <unk> Latino into one of his " minions " , the rudo ( heel ) known as " Averno " ( " Hell " ) in a televised segment . After this turn was completed they were joined by Mephisto , formerly Kahoz Jr. and Astro Rey Jr . , but unlike Averno , no references to his previous identities were made at the time . Together the three became the new version of Los Infernales and feuded with the splinter group of Infernales consisting of Guerrero , Bucanero , Tarzan Boy and Máscara Mágica over the following year . A year later , September 2002 at the CMLL 68th Anniversary Show , the two groups faced off in a steel cage match to determine who had the rights to the " Los Infernales " name . In the end Satánico made Máscara Mágica submit gaining the rights for his own group as well as taking the mask of Máscara Mágica . After the steel cage match the feud between the two groups more or less ending , the splinter faction changed their name to Los Guerreros del Infierno ( " The Warriors of the Inferno " ) . 
 On June 23 , 2002 , Los Infernales won the Mexican National Trios Championship from Olímpico , Mr. Niebla and Safari . After they won the championship they began feuding with La Familia de Tijuana ( Nicho el Millonario , Halloween and Damián 666 ) . The trio lost the title to La Familia on September 27 , 2002 but continued feuding into 2003 . When Nicho stopped appearing for CMLL the trios championship was vacated but Los Infernales refused to take them without a match . This storyline led to an eight @-@ team trios title tournament <unk> Infernales did not win . Instead Los Infernales did win a tournament to become the number one contenders for the CMLL World Trios Championship but lost to champions Black Tiger III , Dr. Wagner Jr. and Universo 2000 on August 1 , 2003 . At the end of the year , Averno and Mephisto turned on Satánico but there was little to feuding afterwards they split from the group and ventured out on their own . On February 4 , 2004 Mephisto defeated El Satánico to win the CMLL World Welterweight Championship at CMLL ’ s home at Arena México . 
 = = = <unk> del Terror / Perros del Mal ( 2006 @-@ 2008 ) = = = 
 Mephisto and Averno defeated Atlantis and Blue Panther for the CMLL World Tag Team Championship in a heated match on April 2 , 2005 . The team would defend the tag team titles several times over the next year in some very well received matches that led to several reporters labeling them as one of the best Mexican tag teams in the 21st century . Their most prominent defense was on the last Arena México show of 2005 when they defeated El Hijo del Santo and Negro Casas in the main event . In early 2006 , they defended their titles against Místico and Black Warrior twice . In the first match , they won by disqualification when Black Warrior interfered in the match after being pinned . In the second match two weeks later , Black Warrior turned on Místico , starting a long @-@ running storyline between the two . On April 14 , 2006 , they lost the tag team championship to the team of Místico and Negro Casas , ending their year @-@ long reign . 
 In late @-@ 2006 / early @-@ 2007 Mephisto and Averno began teaming regularly with Ephesto ( named after the Greek god Hephaestus ) , who was formerly known as Safari before . He was given an " underworld " character by CMLL and teamed up with Averno and Mephisto to create a regular trio team . The three came to the ring wearing black , hooded robes and were briefly introduced as Los Ku Klux Klan , but soon after dropped the controversial name to become known as La <unk> del Terror ( " The Terror Trio " ) . While the team of Mephisto and Averno had been busy defending the CMLL Tag Team titles Mephisto also found time to defend the CMLL World Welterweight title he had worn for over three years , until he was finally defeated by CMLL ’ s rising star Místico on April 10 , 2007 , ending his title reign after days 1 @,@ 141 days . In 2008 Mephisto and Averno were invited to join Perro Aguayo Jr . ' s Perros del Mal ( " The Bad Dogs " ) faction , while Ephesto was not asked to join them . The duo had only been a part of Los Perros del Mal for a short while before Aguayo Jr. and a number of other Perros members decided to leave CMLL . Mephisto and Averno remained with CMLL and teamed up with Ephesto once more as well as El Texano Jr. and El Terrible to form a group called La <unk> del Terror ( " the Hounds of Terror " , playing off the " Perros " name ) 
 = = = Los Hijos del Averno ( 2009 @-@ 2014 ) = = = 
 Not long after the group changed their name to Los Hijos del Averno ( " The Sons of Hell " ) . On February 15 , 2009 , Mephisto unsuccessfully challenged Místico for the CMLL World Welterweight Championship on a New Japan Pro Wrestling show in Sumo Hall , Tokyo . On May 27 , 2009 Mephisto defeated La Sombra to win the NWA World Welterweight Championship . During Mephisto 's reign , the title was replaced with the NWA World Historic Welterweight Championship . On August 16 , 2010 it was announced that Mephisto was one of 14 men putting their mask on the line in a Luchas de Apuestas steel cage match , the main event of the CMLL 77th Anniversary Show . Mephisto was the second man to leave the steel cage as all three members of Los Hijos del Averno quickly left the cage , keeping their masks safe . The match came down to La Sombra pinning Olímpico to unmask him . On March 13 , 2011 , Mephisto lost the NWA World Historic Welterweight Championship to La Sombra . 
 In April 2011 El Terrible and El Texano , Jr. split from Los Hijos del Averno to form a new faction with Rey Bucanero called La Fuerza TRT ( " The TRT Power " ) . On July 15 , Los Hijos del Averno defeated La Generación Dorada ( " The Golden Generation " ; Máscara Dorada , La Máscara and La Sombra ) to win the CMLL World Trios Championship . They would lose the title to El <unk> del Amor ( Marco Corleone , Máximo and Rush ) on February 19 , 2012 . Mephisto returned to Japan in January 2013 , when he took part in the three @-@ day Fantastica Mania 2013 event , co @-@ promoted by CMLL and New Japan Pro Wrestling in Tokyo . During the first night on January 18 , he teamed with Gedo and Jado to defeat Atlantis , Jushin Thunder Liger and Tiger Mask in a six man tag team match . The following night , Mephisto and Okumura defeated Diamante and Máscara Dorada in a tag team match . During the third and final night , Mephisto teamed with Euforia and Kazuchika Okada in a six man tag team main event , where they were defeated by Atlantis , Hiroshi Tanahashi and Prince Devitt . On August 13 , Mephisto defeated La Máscara for the Mexican National Light Heavyweight Championship . In January 1 , 2014 , Mephisto defended the Mexican National Light Heavyweight Championship against Atlantis . 
 In January 2014 , Mephisto returned to Japan to take part in the five @-@ day Fantastica Mania 2014 tour . In the main event of the fourth show on January 18 , he successfully defended the Mexican National Light Heavyweight Championship against Místico . Mephisto participated in the 2014 La Copa Junior VIP tournament in the first qualifying round that took place on the September 26 , 2014 Super Viernes show . Mephisto first defeated Guerrero Maya Jr . , then Shocker and finally Volador Jr. to qualify for the finals On October 10 Mephisto lost in the finals to Máximo . 
 = = = Los Hijos del Infierno ( 2015 @-@ present ) = = = 
 With Averno 's exit from CMLL in 2014 Mephisto and Ephesto continued to team up , but never used the name " Hijos del Averno " <unk> later they began being introduced as " Los Hijos del Infierno " , ( " The Sons of the Infierno " ) where Mephisto became the leader of the team and they and added a third member , Luciferno , ( formerly known as <unk> ) . In January 2015 , Mephisto returned to Japan to take part in the Fantastica Mania 2015 tour , during which he joined Bullet Club and successfully defended the Mexican National Light Heavyweight Championship against Stuka Jr . On August 9 , 2015 Los Hijos del Infierno defeated Los Reyes de la Atlantida ( " The Kings of the Atlantis " ; Atlantis , Delta and Guerrero Maya Jr . ) to win the Mexican National Trios Championship , Mephisto 's second Trios title reign and the first team championship for Los Hijos del Infierno . Atlantis defeated Mephisto to win the Mexican National Light Heavyweight Championship on August 24 , 2015 , ending Mephisto 's reign after 741 days . In January 2016 , Mephisto returned to NJPW to take part in the Fantastica Mania 2016 tour , during which no reference was made to his previous association with Bullet Club . In the main event of the final show , Mephisto unsuccessfully challenged Volador Jr. for the NWA World Historic Welterweight Championship . On May 2 , 2016 Mephisto defeated Máscara Dorada to win the CMLL World Welterweight Championship for the second time . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Demon Driller ( Double underhook facebuster ) 
 Devil 's Wings ( Lifting double underhook facebuster ) 
 Signature moves 
 Boston crab 
 Gedo clutch 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre 
 CMLL World Tag Team Championship ( 3 times ) – with Averno 
 CMLL World Trios Championship ( 1 time ) – with Averno and Ephesto 
 CMLL World Welterweight Championship ( 2 times , current ) 
 Mexican National Light Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Mexican National Trios Championship ( 2 times , current ) – with El Satánico and Averno ( 1 time ) , with Ephesto and Luciferno ( 1 time , current ) 
 Mexican National Welterweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 NWA World Welterweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 NWA World Historic Welterweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI ranked him # 54 of the 500 best singles wrestlers of the PWI 500 in 2006 . 
 = = = Luchas de Apuestas record = = = 
 = Isn 't It a Pity = 
 " Isn 't It a Pity " is a song by English musician George Harrison from his 1970 solo album All Things Must Pass . It appears in two variations there : one the well @-@ known , seven @-@ minute version ; the other a reprise , titled " Isn 't It a Pity ( Version Two ) " . Harrison wrote the song in 1966 , but it was rejected for inclusion on releases by the Beatles . In many countries around the world , the song was also issued on a double A @-@ side single with " My Sweet Lord " . In America , Billboard magazine listed it with " My Sweet Lord " when the single topped the Hot 100 chart , while in Canada , " Isn 't It a Pity " reached number 1 as the preferred side . 
 An anthemic ballad and one of Harrison 's most celebrated compositions , " Isn 't It a Pity " has been described as the emotional and musical centrepiece of All Things Must Pass and " a poignant reflection on The Beatles ' coarse ending " . Co @-@ produced by Phil Spector , the recording employs multiple keyboard players , rhythm guitarists and percussionists , as well as orchestration by arranger John Barham . In its extended fadeout , the song references the closing refrain of the Beatles ' 1968 hit " Hey Jude " . Other musicians on the recording include Ringo Starr , Billy Preston , Gary Wright and the band Badfinger , while the reprise version features Eric Clapton on lead guitar . 
 The song appeared as the closing track on Harrison 's career @-@ spanning compilation Let It Roll ( 2009 ) , and a live version , from his 1991 tour with Clapton , was included on Live in Japan ( 1992 ) . Clapton and Preston performed the song together at the Concert for George tribute in November 2002 . " Isn 't It a Pity " has been covered by numerous artists , including Nina Simone , Matt Monro , Cowboy Junkies , Paul Young , Elliott Smith , Galaxie 500 , Jonathan Wilson and Graham Nash , Tedeschi Trucks Band , and Roberta Flack . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 While no longer the " really tight " social unit they had been throughout the chaos of Beatlemania – or the " four @-@ headed monster " , as Mick Jagger famously called them – the individual Beatles were still bonded by genuine friendship during their final , troubled years as a band , even if it was now more of a case of being locked together at a deep psychological level after such a sustained period of heightened experience . Eric Clapton has described this bond as being just like that of a typical family , " with all the difficulties that entails " . When the band finally split , in April 1970 – a " terrible surprise " for the outside world , in the words of author Mark Hertsgaard , " like the sudden death of a beloved young uncle " – even the traditionally most disillusioned Beatle , George Harrison , suffered a mild bereavement . 
 Towards the end of May that year , among the dozens of tracks that would be considered and / or recorded for his All Things Must Pass triple album , Harrison returned to a number of unused songs that he had written during the late 1960s . " Isn 't It a Pity " was one of these , having most recently been rejected by the Beatles during the January 1969 Get Back sessions that resulted in their final album , Let It Be . According to Abbey Road engineer Geoff Emerick , however , the song had been offered for inclusion on 1967 's Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band , while Mark Lewisohn , the band 's acknowledged recording historian , has stated that it was first presented during sessions for the previous year 's Revolver . Lewisohn 's opinion appears to tally with a bootlegged conversation from the Get Back sessions , where Harrison reveals that John Lennon had vetoed " Isn 't It a Pity " three years before , and that he ( Harrison ) considered offering the song to Frank Sinatra . ( Harrison had recently met Sinatra in Los Angeles while working there with Apple signing Jackie Lomax . ) 
 Despite its relative antiquity by 1970 , the song 's lyrics lent themselves well to the themes of spiritual salvation and friendship that define All Things Must Pass , being consistent with the karmic subject matter of much of the album . In his 1980 autobiography , Harrison explains : " ' Isn 't It a Pity ' is about whenever a relationship hits a down point ... It was a chance to realise that if I felt somebody had let me down , then there 's a good chance I was letting someone else down . " His lyrics adopt a nonjudgmental tone throughout : 
 Isn 't it a pity , isn 't it a shame 
 How we break each other 's hearts , and cause each other pain 
 How we take each other 's love without thinking any more 
 Forgetting to give back , now isn 't it a pity . 
 Harrison biographer Ian Inglis has referred to the song 's " surprisingly complex " lyrics , which in one sense can be seen as a personal observation on a " failed love affair " yet at the same time serve as a comment on " the universal love for , and among , humankind " . This theme had featured in previous Harrison songs such as " Within You Without You " and " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " and would remain prominent in much of his subsequent compositions . The same parallels regarding the universality of love in Harrison 's work has been noted by Dale Allison , author of the first " spiritual biography " on the ex @-@ Beatle ; " When George asks , ' Isn 't It A Pity ? ' , " Allison writes , " the scope of his question is vast : it embraces almost everything . " 
 Speaking to Billboard editor @-@ in @-@ chief Timothy White in 2000 , Harrison said of " Isn 't It a Pity " : " It 's just an observation of how society and myself were or are . We take each other for granted – and forget to give back . That was really all it was about . " 
 = = Recording = = 
 Two contrasting versions of the song were recorded in London in mid 1970 during the sessions for All Things Must Pass , both of which were intended for release , from the outset . According to Harrison , after recording the first version , he had decided he was unhappy with it , and the second version came about by chance " weeks later " , when one of the backing musicians began playing the song during a session . The so @-@ called " Isn 't It a Pity ( Version Two ) " is noticeably slower than the better known , seven @-@ minute " epic " reading of the song . Eric Clapton 's lead guitar fills , phased piano from Tony Ashton , and John Barham @-@ arranged woodwinds dominate Version Two , which is also more in keeping with the Beatles ' earlier attempts on the track ; as with " Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp " , it features extensive use of the Leslie speaker sound so familiar from the band 's Abbey Road album . 
 Like the concurrently recorded " My Sweet Lord " , the album 's other " Isn 't It a Pity " betrays the influence of co @-@ producer Phil Spector more so than the comparatively sedate Version Two . It is also the most extreme example of Harrison 's stated intention to allow some of the songs on All Things Must Pass to run longer and feature instrumentation to a greater degree than had been possible within the confines of the more pop @-@ oriented Beatles approach to recording . " Isn 't It a Pity " ( Version One , in its All Things Must Pass context ) starts small and builds – " and it builds and it builds " , NME 's Alan Smith would soon write . Taping of the backing track took place at Abbey Road Studios on 2 June , and judging by Spector 's comments regarding Harrison 's early mixes , the orchestral arrangement was not added until late August at the earliest . The first slide @-@ guitar break on the released recording , quite possibly overdubbed some time after the June sessions also , would adopt a near @-@ identical melody to the one Harrison had vocalised when <unk> the song for the other Beatles on 26 January 1969 – reflecting a quality admired by Elton John in the latter 's 2002 tribute to Harrison : " All his solos are very melodic – you can almost sing his solos . " Inglis writes that the effect of Harrison 's " elaborate patterns " on slide guitar is to " counterbalance the underlying atmosphere of pessimism with shafts of beauty " , similar to the " notes of light and dark " provided by Pete Drake 's pedal steel on the song " All Things Must Pass " . 
 Now in the key of G ( two semitones down from the Get Back performance ) , " Isn 't It a Pity " begins " dirge " -like with a two @-@ note pedal point provided by layers of keyboards and acoustic guitars . Only at the one @-@ minute mark , at the start of verse two , does the rhythm section come in , after which the instruments begin to " break out of their metronomic straitjacket to attain an almost ecstatic release " , as Beatles Forever author Nicholas Schaffner put it in 1977 . The " balmy " slide guitar passage , supported by Barham 's string section , follows this second verse , and from that point on – around 2 : 38 – the same , circular chord structure continues for the remaining four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half minutes of the song . The long fade @-@ out sees what Schaffner termed the " pseudo @-@ symphonic tension " burst into a frenzy of brass and timpani , further bottleneck soloing , and the " What a pity " mantra joined by " Hey Jude " -style " Na @-@ na @-@ na @-@ na " chorus . 
 One of the most obvious examples of what Rolling Stone magazine 's album reviewer later termed " the music of mountain tops and vast horizons " , " Isn 't It a Pity " featured the largest line @-@ up of musicians found on the album – including three or four keyboard players , a trio of extra rhythm guitarists , the orchestral strings , brass and tympani , and a male choir . Harrison 's former bandmate Ringo Starr and two musicians with well @-@ established links to the Beatles , Klaus Voormann and Billy Preston , were among the participants , on drums , bass and organ , respectively . Members of Apple band Badfinger provided the " felt but not heard " acoustic guitars ( behind Harrison 's ) , consistent with Spector 's criteria for his Wall of Sound technique , while author Bruce Spizer has suggested that Peter Frampton may have been among the rhythm guitarists also . Pianist Gary Wright , who would go on to collaborate regularly with Harrison over the subsequent decades , recalls the session for " Isn 't It a Pity " as being his first with Harrison . Bobby Whitlock , the other main keyboard player on All Things Must Pass , with Wright , recalls playing a " phase @-@ shifted pump organ , or harmonium " on the track . Another possible participant is Maurice Gibb , Starr 's Highgate neighbour at the time , who claimed to have played piano on the song . 
 = = Release = = 
 Originally , the intention had been to release " Isn 't It a Pity " as the lead single from All Things Must Pass in October 1970 , until Spector and others persuaded Harrison that " My Sweet Lord " was the most obvious choice . The full , seven @-@ minute " Isn 't It a Pity " was therefore issued as a double A @-@ side with " My Sweet Lord " on 23 November in the United States and Canada ( as Apple 2995 ) , four days before the album 's release there . Reflecting the equal status of the two tracks , both sides of the single 's picture sleeve featured the same Barry Feinstein @-@ shot photo of Harrison , the only differences being the song title below Harrison 's name and the fact that the green Apple Records logo and catalogue number appeared only on the side for " My Sweet Lord " . 
 The single was phenomenally successful in North America , and around the world . Both songs were listed at number 1 on America 's Billboard Hot 100 chart , for four weeks starting on 26 December . In Canada , " Isn 't It a Pity " was the lead side when the single topped the RPM 100 chart for five weeks , through to mid January 1971 . " Isn 't It a Pity " was issued on All Things Must Pass as the final track on side one of the LP format , providing , in biographer Elliot Huntley 's words , an " elegiac , plaintive song of reconciliation " after the angry " Wah @-@ Wah " . Author Robert Rodriguez writes of the public 's perception of " Isn 't It a Pity " on release : " All Things Must Pass was replete with songs that could easily be interpreted as commentary on the Beatles ' breakup ; though this particular song predated the events of 1969 – 1970 , the subtext [ wasn 't ] diminished in the least . " " Isn 't It a Pity ( Version Two ) " appeared as the penultimate track on side four of the original three @-@ record set , thus serving as what Rodriguez terms " a bookend to a nearly completed journey " . 
 Despite the song 's commercial success , and its standing as one of the most @-@ covered compositions among Harrison 's post @-@ Beatles output , " Isn 't It a Pity " was omitted from EMI / Capitol 's The Best of George Harrison in November 1976 . It was included on the 2009 compilation Let It Roll : Songs by George Harrison , however . A demo version of the song , recorded during the Get Back sessions , is also available on Let It Roll as an iTunes Store exclusive . 
 A live version from December 1991 , again with Clapton , appears on the album Live in Japan . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Isn 't It a Pity " remains one of Harrison 's most popular songs with critics and fans alike . AllMusic calls it " deeply moving and powerful " , while in their book on the solo Beatles ' recording history , Eight Arms to Hold You , Chip Madinger and Mark Easter declare : " If any George Harrison song can be called ' majestic ' , ' Isn 't It a Pity ' would be the one . " In his December 1970 album review for the NME , Alan Smith described it as a track that " catches the mood of aching tolerance of pain , which Harrison can do so well " and " a ballad which will stand out from the album with the passing of the years " . While reviewing the song 's pairing with " My Sweet Lord " , Billboard magazine wrote of a " powerhouse two @-@ sided winner " with " equally potent lyric lines and infectious rhythms " . 
 Simon Leng identifies the song as musically " sumptuous " and praises Harrison 's melody and " unique " use of notes beyond the key signature , as well as John Barham 's " evocative , suspended orchestration " . He notes also the similarity of their combined musical counterbalance with elements of Indian raga , in the number of <unk> ( tones ) in both ascending and descending scales . To Leng , " Isn 't It a Pity " is the " pivotal song " , the " essence " of All Things Must Pass , encapsulating the album 's struggle between " gospel ecstasy and the failure of human relationships " . He concludes : " Ever bittersweet , ' Isn 't It a Pity ' records the last dying echoes of the Beatles . " 
 Writing in the late 1970s , Nicholas Schaffner noted the song 's " towering simplicity " and the " endlessly repetitive fade @-@ out that somehow manages to be hypnotic instead of boring " . Like Leng and Schaffner , a number of commentators have remarked on the significance of " Isn 't It a Pity " in the context of the Beatles ' demise , starting with the song 's length : 7 : 10 – just a second under " Hey Jude " . Ben Gerson , in his 1971 Rolling Stone review , described the song as a " lament ... whose beginning is the broken thirds of John 's ' I Am the Walrus ' and whose end is the decadent , exultant last half of Paul 's ' Hey Jude ' " . Peter Doggett considers " Isn 't It a Pity " a " remarkably non @-@ judgemental commentary on the disintegration of the Beatles ' spirit " . 
 Elliot Huntley has complained of the song 's enforced period in hibernation : " [ It ] simply beggars belief that the track was rejected by Martin , Lennon and McCartney – three men whose reputations rested on their ability to spot a good tune when they heard one . " Huntley views " Isn 't It a Pity " as worthy of " fully fledged standard " status , with Barham 's " soaring " strings and Harrison 's " sublime " slide guitar combining to take the song " into the heavens , where it stays " . Mojo contributor John Harris highlights the song in his review of one of the few " truly essential " solo albums by a former Beatle , writing : " The faster songs [ on All Things Must Pass ] ( <unk> Wah Wah ) are delightful ; the slowies ( Isn 't It A Pity , Beware Of Darkness ) simply jaw @-@ dropping . " 
 Speaking in 2001 during promotion for the 30th anniversary reissue of All Things Must Pass , Harrison named the song among his three favourite tracks on the album , along with " Run of the Mill " and " Awaiting on You All " . In 2010 , AOL Radio listeners voted " Isn 't It a Pity " seventh in a poll to find the ten best post @-@ Beatles George Harrison songs . Both Eric Clapton and Tom Petty have named " Isn 't It a Pity " among their favourite two Harrison compositions , Petty calling the song " a masterpiece " . According to Acclaimed Music , " Isn 't It a Pity " is featured in Bruce Pollock 's 2005 book The 7 @,@ 500 Most Important Songs of 1944 – 2000 , while in 2013 , Holland 's Radio 2 program Het Theater van het Sentiment listed the song at number 1 ( ahead of Lennon 's " Imagine " ) in its " Top 40 Songs by Year " for 1971 . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The musicians who performed on the two All Things Must Pass versions of " Isn 't It a Pity " are believed to be as follows . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 In May 1971 , singer Matt Monro released a UK single of " Isn 't It a Pity " ( produced by George Martin ) . 
 Nicky Thomas recorded the song for his 1971 album Tell It Like It Is . 
 Ireland 's 1970 Eurovision Song Contest winner , Dana , covered the song in 1971 , a rendition that has been described as a " poignant " commentary to the political upheaval then gripping Ulster . 
 The Three Degrees recorded " Isn 't It a Pity " during their period on Roulette Records in 1970 – 72 , later released on the 1995 compilation The Roulette Years . 
 Nina Simone 's " intense " , eleven @-@ minute reworking of " Isn 't It a Pity " was released on her 1972 album Emergency Ward ! , a statement on the Vietnam War which also includes a cover of " My Sweet Lord " . A six @-@ minute version of " Isn 't It a Pity " was issued on the 51 @-@ track compilation The Essential Nina Simone in 1993 . In his autobiography , Harrison says he was influenced by Simone 's treatment when he came to record his song " The Answer 's at the End " in 1975 . 
 Galaxie 500 covered the song on their On Fire album in 1989 . 
 A version by Pete Drake appeared on his eponymous solo album , released in 1997 . 
 The song appears on Television Personalities ' 1998 album Don 't Cry Baby ... It 's Only a Movie . 
 In March 2001 , 18th Dye contributed a version of " Isn 't It a Pity " to <unk> – A Tribute to Galaxie 500 . 
 At the Concert for George on 29 November 2002 , a year to the day after Harrison 's death , Eric Clapton and Billy Preston performed the song with backing from Dhani Harrison , Jeff Lynne , Gary Brooker , Jim Keltner , Ray Cooper , Jim Horn , Tom Scott and others . 
 Jay Bennett and Edward Burch recorded " Isn 't It a Pity " for Songs from the Material World : A Tribute to George Harrison , a multi @-@ artist compilation released in February 2003 . 
 Classical guitarist Joseph <unk> recorded a version of the song for his 2003 tribute album George Harrison Remembered : A Touch of Class . 
 Cowboy Junkies covered the song on their Early 21st Century Blues album in 2005 . 
 Joel Harrison recorded " Isn 't It a Pity " for his album Harrison on Harrison : Jazz Explanations of George Harrison , released in October 2005 . 
 A cover version by Les Fradkin was released in 2005 on his Something for George tribute album . 
 Spanish singer <unk> de la Cuba covered the song in December 2005 . 
 A version by Paul Young was included on his 2006 album Rock Swings . 
 Pedro Aznar covered the song as " No Es Una Pena ? " , with Spanish lyrics , on his album <unk> in 2008 . 
 In September 2008 , members of Heard of Buffalo performed the song for the Jerry Lewis MDA Telethon . 
 " Isn 't It a Pity " was among a number of Harrison and Beatle covers recorded or performed by Elliott Smith ; a version appears on the 1998 @-@ 08 @-@ 12 : Hoboken , NJ , USA album . 
 Soul singer Bettye LaVette covered the song on Interpretations : The British Rock Songbook in 2010 . 
 David McAlmont and Bernard Butler 's performance of " Isn 't It a Pity " was released on the Live From Leicester Square album in February 2011 . 
 A version by Jonathan Wilson and Graham Nash appeared on Harrison Covered , a tribute CD accompanying the November 2011 issue of Mojo magazine . 
 Also in November 2011 , marking the ten @-@ year anniversary of Harrison 's death , Keane recorded a version of the song . 
 Roberta Flack covered " Isn 't It a Pity " on her album Let It Be Roberta – Roberta Flack Sings The Beatles , released in February 2012 . 
 My Morning Jacket have included " Isn 't It a Pity " in their live performances ; when playing the song at the <unk> Festival in July 2012 , they were joined on stage by Dean Wareham of Galaxie 500 . 
 Local H covered the song on their 2014 album Local H 's Awesome Mix Tape 2 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Encounter at Farpoint = 
 " Encounter at Farpoint " is the first episode and series premiere of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation , which premiered in syndication on September 28 , 1987 . It was written by D. C. Fontana and Gene Roddenberry and directed by Corey Allen . Roddenberry was the creator of Star Trek , and Fontana was a writer on the original series . 
 The series follows the adventures of the crew of the Starfleet starship Enterprise . In this episode , the crew of the newly built Enterprise examine the mysterious Farpoint Station which the Bandi people are offering to the Federation , while under the gaze of a powerful alien entity that calls itself " Q " ( John de Lancie ) . 
 The episode was made as a pilot for the new Star Trek series , and was a double length episode at Paramount Television Group 's insistence . After the show was initially announced on October 10 , 1986 , Roddenberry put together a production team which included staff members from the original series such as Robert H. Justman . The show utilized some existing sets and props from the Star Trek films and both Star Trek : The Original Series and Star Trek : Phase II . New actors were hired for the pilot , which in some cases required the character concepts to be redeveloped to better fit the actor . Marina Sirtis and Denise Crosby were hired for the roles of Macha Hernandez and Deanna Troi respectively , but were later switched by Roddenberry and Crosby 's new role renamed to Tasha Yar . DeForest Kelley agreed to appear in a cameo role in the pilot but as a gesture to Roddenberry , he refused to be paid more than the minimum possible salary . The show made its debut in syndication to a mixed critical response , an assessment which was upheld by critics reassessing the episode following the end of the entire series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 2364 , the newest flagship of the United Federation of Planets , Starfleet 's USS Enterprise , is assigned to travel to Deneb IV for its maiden voyage , both to collect the remaining members of its crew and to open relations with the simple Bandi people who have somehow been able to tap immense energy reserves and construct Farpoint Station , much to the surprise of the Federation . En route , the Enterprise is met by an omnipotent being who identifies himself as Q , a member of the Q Continuum and declares that humanity is being put on trial — posing in appearance as a Grand Inquisitor — and deciding that their actions in their upcoming mission will be used to judge their worthiness and determine their fate as a race . Before letting the ship resume its course , Q warns Captain Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) that he is destined to fail . 
 As the Enterprise arrives , the awaiting crew members explore the offerings of Farpoint Station and establish relations with their Bandi host , <unk> Zorn ( Michael Bell ) . The crew becomes suspicious when items they desire seem to appear out of nowhere moments later , and are unable to identify the power source that feeds the station . Deanna Troi ( Marina Sirtis ) , an empath , senses a being with powerful yet despairing emotions nearby , and the crew discover a strange labyrinth beneath the station , but Zorn does not offer an explanation . As the Enterprise crew continues its explorations , a large unknown alien craft enters orbit and begins to fire upon an older Bandi settlement near Farpoint Station , and abducts Zorn . Before Picard orders the ship 's phasers to be fired at the craft , Q appears to remind him of humanity 's trial and prompts Picard to send an away team to the alien craft . The away team discovers the craft has passages similar to those under Farpoint and they are able to free Zorn . Their actions cause the alien craft to transform into a jellyfish @-@ like space creature , and Picard is able to deduce the mystery of Farpoint Station . He confirms with the apologetic Zorn that the Bandi found a similar lifeform injured on their planet and , while attempting to care for it , they also exploited its ability to synthesize matter to create Farpoint Station . The creature now in orbit is trying to help free its mate by attacking those who hold it captive . 
 Though Q goads Picard into punishing the Bandi , Picard refuses , instead ordering the Enterprise to fire a vivifying energy beam onto Farpoint after the station is evacuated . The beam allows the land @-@ bound creature to transform back into its jellyfish @-@ like form , and it flies into orbit to join its fellow being . As the crew watches the reunion of the alien creatures , Q reluctantly tells Picard that they have succeeded in their test , but hints that they will meet again . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception and development history = = = 
 The new Star Trek series was announced on October 10 , 1986 by the head of Paramount Television Group , Mel Harris . He announced that the creator of Star Trek , Gene Roddenberry , was to be executive producer and lead the creation of the new series . It was the second attempt at creating a new live action television series based on Star Trek for Paramount ; the previous attempt , called Star Trek : Phase II , failed as a television series but led to Star Trek : The Motion Picture . Paramount had pitched ideas to Roddenberry earlier in the year as it was the twentieth anniversary of the original series , but Roddenberry turned them down and initially didn 't want to do a new series . He later said , " It was only when the Paramount people agreed with me and said a sequel was probably impossible anyway that my interest was piqued . " 
 All four major networks turned down the new Star Trek series , as they were not willing to commit to a twenty @-@ six @-@ hour first season with a guaranteed unchanging time slot as well as a promotional campaign for the show . The team proceeded with the project with the backing of Paramount . Roddenberry began putting together a production crew which included colleagues who had worked with him on the original series , including Robert H. Justman , David Gerrold , and Eddie Milkis . Justman proposed three ideas to the others on October 17 , including families on board the ship , a concept which later became the holodeck and both an android and a Klingon character . One idea discussed by the production team was for Deanna Troi to have three breasts to which writer D. C. Fontana objected . 
 Fontana , who had previously worked on a number of episodes of the original series , was tasked with writing the script for the pilot . The production team met in full for the first time on February 18 , 1987 , having received the first draft of Fontana 's script a few days earlier . The original premise involved the Enterprise and the USS <unk> approaching an alien lifeform captured by a race called the Annoi and turned into a weapon . After the Annoi told the Starfleet ships to surrender , the <unk> opened fire and was destroyed , while Troi contacted the alien and convinced it to crash on a nearby planet so that the Enterprise can help it to free itself along with rescuing other prisoners the Annoi were using as slaves on the surface . Despite numerous changes taking place to the plot before the final version , some of the introductions for various characters made it through to the final version . The plot involving Q was added subsequently to the episode in order to make it longer . Roddenberry was aiming for an hour @-@ long pilot , but Paramount wanted a two @-@ hour show and eventually won out . Other items were also added in order to lengthen the episode , including the saucer separation sequence and the appearance of Admiral Leonard McCoy . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Roddenberry realized early on that a series with the original crew from Star Trek was unlikely to be practical , nor did he want to recast the roles or have a " retread " crew – a series of different characters in very similar roles to the original series . He explained , " I would hate to think our imagination is so slender that there aren 't other possibilities to think about . " The first casting call was sent out on December 10 , 1986 . While some characters such as Geordi La Forge and Beverly Crusher remain recognizable from their descriptions in the initial casting call , others have clear differences ; " Julien Picard " would lapse into a French accent when he became emotional , and Data was non @-@ Caucasian . Macha Hernandez was a Latino security chief based on Jenette Goldstein 's role in Aliens , while Deanna Troi was to appear " foreign " or more specifically of an Icelandic or Scandinavian nature . Leslie Crusher was listed as a fifteen @-@ year @-@ old girl with a photographic memory , although was quickly changed to a male teenager called Wesley . Justman argued for a female teenager but Roddenberry thought that there would be a greater number of storylines available if the character was male . 
 Patrick Stewart was cast in the role of Jean @-@ Luc Picard after Justman saw him perform at the University of California , Los Angeles . Roddenberry insisted that he wanted a French actor in the role , but Justman arranged a meeting between Stewart and the production team to introduce the actor , and later Berman supported the casting . Fontana thought that American actor Stephen Macht would be better in the role . Justman wanted Stewart in the show in some capacity , and with Roddenberry still opposing him as Picard , Justman suggested that he might be a good fit instead for Data . Because Roddenberry couldn 't find any actor he preferred more for Picard , he relented and changed his concept of Picard to fit Stewart better . Although Stewart was willing to put on an American accent to portray the role of Picard , the producers asked him to use his natural accent instead . They also tested him with a hairpiece but thought that it looked awful . He was pleased to have received the role , saying that his children were impressed with the new part and praised the mythos of the show saying , " The great strength of ' Star Trek ' is its epic , classic feel . For an actor of my background , it has more richness and depth than you might expect on television . " 
 Roddenberry 's favorite for Riker was Jonathan Frakes , who went through seven auditions before claiming the role . Despite being the second choice actor for the casting team , he was hired after their first choice was unimpressive in his auditions . 
 LeVar Burton had worked with Justman on another pilot for a series called Emergency Room and was suggested to apply for the La Forge role . For US audiences he was the most well @-@ known actor in the cast , due to his role in Roots . 
 Both Gates McFadden and Brent Spiner gained the parts of Beverly Crusher and Data respectively through the normal audition processes . Eric Menyuk had also been considered for the part of Data , and would later be cast as the recurring character of the Traveller in three subsequent episodes . Justman later said that he was the only one out of the production team who preferred Menyuk in the role . 
 Marina Sirtis auditioned for the role of Macha Hernandez , while Denise Crosby auditioned for the part of Deanna Troi . They both gained the parts with the approval of Berman and Justman , but Roddenberry switched the roles of the actresses as he thought Sirtis would be better suited for the role of the ship 's counselor . Macha Hernandez was re @-@ written to become Tasha Yar to better suit Crosby . 
 The role of Worf required a black actor in order to make the Klingon make up easier to apply , and was expected to be a recurring character , but following the casting of Michael Dorn and his work in " Encounter at Farpoint " , the role was expanded . 
 Wil Wheaton was cast as Wesley Crusher despite what he perceived as an awful first callback . 
 The appearance of DeForest Kelley as Leonard McCoy was kept a secret , with the character only being referred to in scripts as " Admiral " . While Roddenberry had wanted Kelley to appear , he thought that the actor would turn him down . The two had lunch together and Roddenberry suggested the appearance , with Kelley agreeing not only to appear , but also that he wouldn 't take anything more than the Screen Actor 's Guild base salary for the part . He later said , " I just wanted scale , to let it be my way of saying thank @-@ you to Gene for the many good things he has done for me " . 
 John de Lancie deliberately missed his first audition for Q as he was appearing as a lead in a play at the time , a second audition was arranged during lunchtime so that he could attend . He later said that after he auditioned , " A big guy walked out , put his hands on my shoulder , and said , ' You make my words sound better than they are . ' I said , ' Well , you must be the writer . ' And he said , ' I 'm Gene Roddenberry . ' I had absolutely no idea who that was . " 
 Colm Meaney was cast in the part of the conn ensign on the ship 's battle bridge , and after a further appearance in the episode " Lonely Among Us " , his character was given the name Miles O 'Brien in season two . 
 The cast was announced on May 15 , 1987 . There was a certain degree of uncertainty regarding job security during the pilot for the main cast , as they didn 't hear until after production had wrapped that the show had been picked up for a further thirteen episodes . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Due to what was seen as a low budget for the pilot and series in general , the existing sets and equipment from the Star Trek movies were re @-@ used in the new show . Milkis and Justman were given the task of reviewing the standing sets from the movies on the Paramount lot in order to see what they could use . The duo would later recall that one stage was so completely covered with cat feces due to the volume of cats living on the lot that the pair couldn 't walk on the set . Certain sets were re @-@ used , including a re @-@ dress of the Enterprise 's bridge from Star Trek III : The Search for Spock to act as the Enterprise 's battle bridge in the new series . The main engineering set from Star Trek III became the new main engineering set , albeit with a command console from Star Trek IV added as well as two walls from sickbay from Star Trek III . The rest of the sickbay set became the observation lounge during the first season . Some of the sets contained components from both Star Trek : The Motion Picture and the unfilmed Star Trek : Phase II . 
 After running tests with a company for computer @-@ generated special effects , it was decided that , for the sake of reliability , Industrial Light & Magic would produce the new models of the Enterprise , at a cost of $ 75 @,@ 000 for a 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) and a 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) version . ILM was also integral to the development of the " jump to warp " special effect , which resulted in the company remaining on the show 's end credits through its entire run . Filming of " Encounter at Farpoint " began on the Paramount lot May 29 , 1987 , and wrapped on June 25 . Wil Wheaton noted that during the filming of " Encounter at Farpoint " , most of the cast didn 't believe that the series would last more than a year . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The show was broadcast on both 98 independent stations and 112 network affiliates . In several locations , including Dallas , Los Angeles , Seattle and Miami , the stations which were broadcasting " Encounter at Farpoint " gained higher ratings than the four major networks during prime time . Overall , it aired to an audience of 27 million . The show was immediately called the " highest @-@ rated syndicated one @-@ hour drama series on television " . 
 Jill L. Lanford watched the episode for The Herald Journal , prior to the series premiere . She thought it was a resurrection of a " legend " . She believed the episode itself was reminiscent of classic Star Trek episodes " Arena " and " The Squire of Gothos " , was the " perfect vehicle to introduce the crew " , and a " perfect start " . Don Merrill , writing for TV Guide said that the show was a " worthy successor to the original " . Bob <unk> reviewed " Encounter at Farpoint " for Newhouse News and thought that the show had potential on the back of the episode , but there were problems such as " spots where the dialogue is pedestrian and interactions sputter " . Tom Shales of The Washington Post viewed DeForest Kelley 's cameo as " touching " , but thought that Patrick Stewart was a " grim bald crank who would make a better villain " . He felt Jonathan Frakes " verges on namby @-@ pamby " . Actress Marina Sirtis later recalled the reviews of the show 's debut in 1987 while being interviewed to promote The Next Generation 's fourth film , Star Trek : Nemesis ; saying " they bloody hated us " . 
 Several reviewers reassessed the episode some time after the series aired . Michelle Erica Green reviewed the episode for TrekNation , and found the episode disappointing with reference to the character of Captain Picard and the female crew members and a lack of sense of fun . Actor Wil Wheaton , also reviewing the episode years later for TV Squad , gave the episode a ' C- ' grade , suggesting that " at the time , Trekkies who were hoping to see the Star Trek that they were used to from the sixties must have been disappointed " . Zack Handlen at The A.V. Club , criticized some of the elements of the episode such as the " long , rather pointless sequence " where the Enterprise undergoes a saucer separation and overall described the episode " more functional than inspiring " . He praised the performance of Patrick Stewart as Captain Picard , describing him as a " damn fine actor " and enjoyed John de Lancie as Q. He gave the episode an overall score of B- . James Hunt , from Den of Geek , re @-@ reviewed the show following the re @-@ release of season one on Blu @-@ ray Disc . He stated , " even if it wasn 't the first episode , it 'd be worth watching " despite it coming from " what could arguably be called the worst season of Star Trek " . Keith DeCandido for Tor.com thought that the pace of the episode was slow , but that both Patrick Stewart and Brent Spiner stood out from the rest of the cast for good reasons . He enjoyed the references to the original series , especially DeForest Kelley 's appearance . He gave it overall a score of four out of ten . The episode was one of a handful of Star Trek programs recommended for viewing to introduce new viewers to the mythos in Jon <unk> and Jan <unk> 's 1998 book Deep Space and Sacred Time : Star Trek in the American Mythos . 
 = = Home media release = = 
 Star Trek : The Next Generation made its debut on VHS in September 1991 with " Encounter at Farpoint " as a feature length episode on a single tape . It was subsequently released on DVD on region one on March 26 , 2002 . The sound was remastered to Dolby Digital 5 @.@ 1 Surround standards , and a series of interviews with the cast and crew were included on the sixth disc . 
 " Encounter at Farpoint " was one of the first episodes of the series to be released on Blu @-@ ray Disc . The episode was remastered into high @-@ definition video and involved the original production team in updating some of the special effects in the episode . It was featured on the single disc sampler of the series which was launched prior to any full season box sets in early 2012 , entitled Star Trek : The Next Generation – The Next Level along with two other episodes . " Encounter at Farpoint " was subsequently included in the Blu @-@ ray Disc release of the season one box set . 
 = Ceolnoth = 
 Ceolnoth ( died 870 ) was a medieval English Archbishop of Canterbury . Although later chroniclers stated he had previously held ecclesiastical office in Canterbury , there is no contemporary evidence of this , and his first appearance in history is when he became archbishop in 833 . Ceolnoth faced two problems as archbishop — raids and invasions by the Vikings and a new political situation resulting from a change in overlordship from one kingdom to another during the early part of his archiepiscopate . Ceolnoth attempted to solve both problems by coming to an agreement with his new overlords for protection in 838 . Ceolnoth 's later years in office were marked by more Viking raids and a decline in monastic life in his archbishopric . 
 = = Archbishop = = 
 Gervase of Canterbury wrote at the end of the twelfth century that Ceolnoth was Dean of the see of Canterbury previous to being elected to the archiepiscopal see of Canterbury , but this story has no confirmation in contemporary records . There is no sign of him being associated with either Canterbury or Kent , the region where Canterbury is located , prior to his elevation as archbishop . Given the length of his archiepiscopate , he was probably a young man when he was elected to Canterbury . Ceolnoth was consecrated archbishop on 27 July 833 . Upon becoming archbishop , Ceolnoth had to deal with two problems — first the Viking attacks on his archbishopric and the surrounding lands in Kent and second the newly ascendant kings of Wessex who had just gained control of Kent . Previously , the Mercian kings had ruled Kent . 
 In 836 , Ceolnoth presided , with Wiglaf of Mercia , over a council held at Croft attended by the clergy of the southern part of Britain . This was the last time that the archbishop worked in concert with a Mercian king as , after this , he was an attendee at the Wessex royal court instead of the Mercian . In 838 a council was held at Kingston upon Thames where Ceolnoth made an alliance with the West Saxon kings Egbert and Æthelwulf . This agreement gave control of all of the free minsters under Canterbury 's authority to the king in return for protection from Viking raids . Ceolnoth also ceded the right to influence the election of abbots within Kent to the king . In return , Egbert received the support of Ceolnoth for the succession of Egbert 's son Æthelwulf as king . When Egbert died shortly after this , Æthelwulf succeeded his father and became the first son to follow his father as king of Wessex in almost two centuries . Ceolnoth also recovered control of some lands that had been lost by Canterbury . The end result of this agreement was that the Wessex kings became the secular protectors of the churches and monasteries of the archdiocese of Canterbury . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 During Ceolnoth 's archbishopric , monastic life declined under the pressure of the Viking attacks , and there was a noticeable decline in the quality of the books and other works produced by the <unk> . A number of monasteries died out under the pressure of the raids by the invaders , who wintered over in Kent in 851 and 855 . He held councils in 839 and 845 , the second at London . During his later years in office , he was assisted by four clerics , who appear to have been or acted as archdeacons , one of the earliest appearances of this office in England . Ceolnoth is also known to have corresponded with Pope Leo IV . 
 Archbishop Ceolnoth died on 4 February 870 . Although monastic and secular life suffered during the later part of Ceolnoth 's archbishopric , his agreement with Egbert set the foundation for the co @-@ operation between the archbishops of Canterbury and the kings of England in the future . 
 = Delaware Route 12 = 
 Delaware Route 12 ( DE 12 ) is a state highway in Kent County , Delaware . It runs from Maryland Route 314 ( MD 314 ) at the Maryland border near Whiteleysburg , Maryland east to an interchange with DE 1 near Frederica . The route follows a mostly rural alignment , passing through the towns of Felton and Frederica . DE 12 intersects U.S. Route 13 ( US 13 ) in Felton and DE 15 east of Felton . What would become DE 12 was built as a state highway during the 1920s . DE 12 was designated between Felton and Frederica by 1936 and extended west to Maryland by 1938 . The eastern terminus was moved to its current location in 1965 when US 113 ( now DE 1 ) was routed to bypass Frederica . The DE 1 intersection became an interchange in 2011 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 12 begins at the Maryland border , continuing west into that state as MD 314 at the state line . From the state line , the route heads southeast on two @-@ lane undivided Whiteleysburg Road briefly before turning northeast onto Whites Lane . A short distance later , DE 12 intersects Two State Road and becomes <unk> Mill Road . The road runs through farmland with some woods and homes , curving east and entering Felton . At this point , DE 12 becomes Main Street and heads into residential areas , crossing Norfolk Southern 's Delmarva Secondary railroad line . The road comes to an intersection with US 13 on the eastern edge of Felton . 
 Upon leaving Felton , the route becomes Midstate Road and continues through agricultural areas with some woods and homes . DE 12 crosses DE 15 and comes to an intersection with Andrews Lake Road , where the name changes to <unk> Landing Road . The road passes through more rural areas before entering Frederica , where it becomes Front Street and is lined with homes . In the eastern part of town , the route splits into the one @-@ way pair of David Street eastbound and Front Street westbound . DE 12 turns north onto two @-@ way Frederica Road and leaves Frederica , passing through marshland and crossing a branch of the Murderkill River . DE 12 continues to its eastern terminus at an interchange with DE 1 . 
 DE 12 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 5 @,@ 207 vehicles where it intersects Frederica Road from the west to a low of 2 @,@ 204 vehicles at the eastern terminus at DE 1 . None of DE 12 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 What is now DE 12 existed as an unimproved county road by 1920 . By 1924 , the route was completed as a state highway between <unk> and Frederica and was proposed as a state highway between the Maryland border in Whiteleysburg and <unk> and within Frederica . The entire road between Whiteleysburg and Frederica was built as a state highway a year later . DE 12 was designated to run from US 13 in Felton to US 113 ( Frederica Road ) in Frederica by 1936 . By 1938 , DE 12 was extended west to the Maryland border in Whiteleysburg . 
 In 1965 , US 113 was moved to a bypass to the east of Frederica , and DE 12 was extended north on the former alignment of US 113 to end at that route a short distance north of Frederica . In November 2009 , construction began for a grade @-@ separated interchange at DE 1 ( which had replaced US 113 ) ; the interchange was completed in June 2011 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Kent County . 
 = Cyclone Keila = 
 Cyclonic Storm Keila ( IMD designation : ARB 02 , JTWC designation : 03A ) was the first named storm of the 2011 North Indian Ocean cyclone season . A weak system for much of its duration , Keila developed in the western Arabian Sea in late October 2011 , amid an area of marginally favorable conditions . On November 2 , it briefly organized enough to be classified as a cyclonic storm , which has maximum sustained winds of at least 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . Given the name Keila by the India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) , the storm quickly moved ashore southern Oman near Salalah , and weakened while meandering over the country . The remnants soon after moved offshore , dissipating on November 4 . 
 The storm brought heavy rainfall to Oman , reaching just over 700 mm ( 28 in ) in the mountains near Salalah . Moisture from the storm spread across most of the country , causing flash flooding near the capital Muscat . Floods from the storm killed 14 people , injured over 200 , washed away hundreds of cars , and damaged many buildings . Two hospitals were damaged , forcing 60 patients to be evacuated elsewhere by helicopter . Overall damage was estimated at US $ 80 million ( 2011 USD ) . Offshore , Keila capsized a boat originating from India , killing five of the crew and leaving another nine missing ; six sailors were rescued by the Omani Coast Guard . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The Intertropical Convergence Zone produced an area of convection in the southeastern Arabian Sea toward the end of October 2011 . The overall system moved west @-@ northwestward , developing a distinct low pressure area on October 27 . By that time , the thunderstorm activity was still disorganized and associated with a weak circulation . Environmental conditions were unfavorable initially , consisting of strong wind shear and dry air . An anticyclone over the system caused the shear to decrease by October 28 , amid warm water temperatures of 29 ° C ( 84 ° F ) , both more favorable conditions . By that time the circulation became well @-@ defined , although still elongated , and the convection was still scattered . On October 29 , the India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) designated the system as Depression ARB 02 about 885 km ( 550 mi ) east of the Yemeni island of Socotra . 
 Convection continued to organize and deepen as the nascent depression continued west @-@ northwestward , steered by a ridge to the north . However , dry air from the Arabian Peninsula and cooler waters proved deleterious to the system , and the circulation became more disorganized on October 30 . Despite the marginally favorable conditions , the overall structure improved on November 1 , with pronounced outflow developing along the western periphery . A nearby buoy reported a barometric pressure of 998 mbar ( 29 @.@ 5 inHg ) , which confirmed the increasing organization . At 03 : 00 UTC on November 1 , the IMD upgraded the depression to a deep depression , and 24 hours later to Cyclonic Storm Keila . By that time , the agency estimated peak 3 minute sustained winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) while the storm was just 150 km ( 95 mi ) southeast of Oman . The American @-@ based Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) also designated the system as Tropical Cyclone 03A at 03 : 00 UTC on November 2 . 
 With cool waters and an unfavorable phase of the Madden – Julian oscillation , Keila failed to intensify significantly as it approached the southeastern Arabian Peninsula . An irregular central dense overcast developed over the circulation , consisting of shallow convection . A passing trough weakened the ridge to the north , steering Keila toward the north . After weakening to a deep depression again , Keila made landfall near Salalah , Oman around 18 : 00 UTC on November 2 . Around that time , the JTWC discontinued advisories , once the storm was weakening rapidly over land . With a ridge to the north and east , Keila followed the track of the anticyclone aloft , which brought it back offshore Oman on November 3 . Such looping near the coast was considered rare by the IMD . According to the agency , the system continued eastward and dissipated on November 4 . However , the JTWC tracked the system further in a post @-@ season analysis , estimating that Keila intensified once offshore and attained peak winds of 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) on November 3 . The agency assessed that the storm turned to the southwest and weakened , only to turn back to the northwest and dissipate over extreme eastern Yemen on November 5 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 There was confusion in the country over Keila 's intensity ; the IMD classified it as a cyclonic storm , while officials in Oman designated it as a deep depression , based on available observations . Officials warned residents of the potential for heavy rainfall . The Pakistani government also warned fishermen not to venture to the open seas , due to the uncertain effects of the storm . 
 While Keila was offshore and still in its developmental stages , it brought winds of 41 km / h ( 25 mph ) to Salalah International Airport , and at the time of landfall , the station reported slightly stronger winds of 43 km / h ( 26 mph ) . However , the storm 's most severe effects were related to the heavy rainfall it produced over Oman , which peaked at just over 700 mm ( 28 in ) in the mountains near Salalah . In southern Oman , Keila dropped 50 to 100 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 to 3 @.@ 9 in ) of rainfall at Salalah , the equivalent of a year 's worth of precipitation . Moisture from the storm coalesced over the Al Hajar Mountains in northern Oman , producing severe thunderstorms that led to flash flooding . Across southern Oman where the storm crossed , there were no deaths ; all of the deaths occurred due to the flash floods in northern Oman , where 14 people lost their lives . Three people were killed due to electrocutions , another two were crushed to death by large objects , and nine drowned . Overall damage was estimated at US $ 80 million , and over 200 people were injured nationwide . 
 The rains caused wadis – typically dry riverbeds – to accumulate with floodwaters , washing away hundreds of cars and disrupting traffic . Police officers helped rescue victims who were stranded in flooded wadis . Some drivers rode out the floods on the roofs of their cars . The deluge also damaged crops and farm buildings elsewhere in the country . Damage was heaviest near the capital city Muscat , where houses and businesses were damaged by the floods , and there were many traffic accidents . A school bus was swept away in Wadi Kabir , although the students were soon after rescued by local authorities . Several buildings collapsed in Sur due to the rains . In the valley near Al @-@ Rustaq , floodwaters swept away cars , dead animals , and property , with water levels reaching 1 @.@ 8 m ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) high in some places . The floods damaged two hospitals in northern Oman ; police helicopters transferred 60 patients after the facilities were closed for maintenance , and other patients were moved to other local hospitals . Just days after Keila dissipated , another deep depression threatened Oman and brought additional rainfall . 
 Sailing from the Indian state of Gujarat to Dubai , a ship with the call sign MSV Shiv Sagar <unk> <unk> encountered Keila offshore southern Oman . The storm 's high winds caused the boat to capsize , killing five of the sailors , and leaving nine others missing . Six of the crew were rescued by the Omani Coast Guard . 
 = Plateosaurus = 
 Plateosaurus ( probably meaning " broad lizard " , often mistranslated as " flat lizard " ) is a genus of plateosaurid dinosaur that lived during the Late Triassic period , around 214 to 204 million years ago , in what is now Central and Northern Europe . Plateosaurus is a basal ( early ) sauropodomorph dinosaur , a so @-@ called " prosauropod " . As of 2011 , two species are recognized : the type species P. engelhardti from the late Norian and Rhaetian , and the slightly earlier P. gracilis from the lower Norian . However , others have been assigned in the past , and there is no broad consensus on the species taxonomy of plateosaurid dinosaurs . Similarly , there are a plethora of synonyms ( invalid duplicate names ) at the genus level . 
 Discovered in 1834 by Johann Friedrich Engelhardt and described three years later by Hermann von Meyer , Plateosaurus was the fifth named dinosaur genus that is still considered valid . Although it had been described before Richard Owen formally named Dinosauria in 1842 , it was not one of the three genera used by Owen to define the group , because at the time , it was poorly known and difficult to identify as a dinosaur . It is now among the dinosaurs best known to science : over 100 skeletons have been found , some of them nearly complete . The abundance of its fossils in Swabia , Germany , has led to the nickname Schwäbischer <unk> ( Swabian <unk> ) . 
 Plateosaurus was a bipedal herbivore with a small skull on a long , flexible neck , sharp but plump plant @-@ crushing teeth , powerful hind limbs , short but muscular arms and grasping hands with large claws on three fingers , possibly used for defence and feeding . Unusually for a dinosaur , Plateosaurus showed strong developmental plasticity : instead of having a fairly uniform adult size , fully grown individuals were between 4 @.@ 8 and 10 metres ( 16 and 33 ft ) long and weighed between 600 and 4 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 300 and 8 @,@ 800 lb ) . Commonly , the animals lived for at least 12 to 20 years , but the maximum life span is not known . 
 Despite the great quantity and excellent quality of the fossil material , Plateosaurus was for a long time one of the most misunderstood dinosaurs . Some researchers proposed theories that were later shown to conflict with geological and palaeontological evidence , but have become the paradigm of public opinion . Since 1980 the taxonomy ( relationships ) , taphonomy ( how the animals became embedded and fossilized ) , biomechanics ( how their skeletons worked ) , and <unk> ( life circumstances ) of Plateosaurus have been re @-@ studied in detail , altering the interpretation of the animal 's biology , posture and behaviour . 
 = = Description = = 
 Plateosaurus had the typical body shape of a herbivorous bipedal dinosaur : a small skull , a long and flexible neck composed of 10 cervical vertebrae , a stocky body , and a long , mobile tail composed of at least 40 caudal vertebrae . The arms of Plateosaurus were very short , even compared to most other " prosauropods " . However , they were strongly built , with hands adapted for powerful grasping . The shoulder girdle was narrow ( often misaligned in skeletal mounts and drawings ) , with the clavicles ( collar bones ) touching at the body 's midline , as in other basal sauropodomorphs . The hind limbs were held under the body , with slightly flexed knees and ankles , and the foot was digitigrade , meaning the animal walked on its toes . The proportionally long lower leg and metatarsus show that Plateosaurus could run quickly on its hind limbs . The tail of Plateosaurus was typically dinosaurian , muscular and with high mobility . 
 The skull of Plateosaurus is small and narrow , rectangular in side view , and nearly three times as long as it is high . There is an almost rectangular lateral temporal foramen at the back . The large , round orbit ( eye socket ) , the sub @-@ triangular antorbital fenestra and the oval naris ( nostril ) are of almost equal size . The jaws carried many small , leaf @-@ shaped , socketed teeth : 5 to 6 per premaxilla , 24 to 30 per maxilla , and 21 to 28 per dentary ( lower jaw ) . The thick , leaf @-@ shaped , bluntly serrated tooth crowns were suitable for crushing plant material . The low position of the jaw joint gave the chewing muscles great leverage , so that Plateosaurus could deliver a powerful bite . These features suggest that it fed primarily to exclusively on plants . Its eyes were directed to the sides , rather than the front , providing all @-@ round vision to watch for predators . Some fossil skeletons have preserved sclerotic rings ( rings of bone plates that protect the eye ) . 
 The ribs were connected to the dorsal ( trunk ) vertebrae with two joints , acting together as a simple hinge joint , which has allowed researchers to reconstruct the inhaled and exhaled positions of the ribcage . The difference in volume between these two positions defines the air exchange volume ( the amount of air moved with each breath ) , determined to be approximately 20 l for a P. engelhardti individual estimated to have weighed 690 kg , or 29 ml / kg bodyweight . This is a typical value for birds , but not for mammals , and indicates that Plateosaurus probably had an avian @-@ style flow @-@ through lung , although indicators for postcranial pneumaticity ( air sacs of the lung invading the bones to reduce weight ) can be found on the bones of only a few individuals , and were only recognized in 2010 . Combined with evidence from bone histology this indicates that Plateosaurus was endothermic . 
 The type species of Plateosaurus is P. engelhardti . Adults of this species reached 4 @.@ 8 to 10 metres ( 16 to 33 ft ) in length , and ranged in mass from 600 to 4 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 300 to 8 @,@ 800 lb ) . The geologically older species , P. gracilis ( formerly named Sellosaurus gracilis ) , was somewhat smaller , with a total length of 4 to 5 metres ( 13 to 16 ft ) . 
 = = Discovery and history = = 
 In 1834 , physician Johann Friedrich Engelhardt discovered some vertebrae and leg bones at <unk> near Nuremberg , Germany . Three years later German palaeontologist Hermann von Meyer designated them as the type specimen of a new genus , Plateosaurus . Since then , remains of well over 100 individuals of Plateosaurus have been discovered at various locations throughout Europe . 
 Material assigned to Plateosaurus has been found at over 50 localities in Germany ( mainly along the Neckar and <unk> river valleys ) , Switzerland ( Frick ) and France . Three localities are of special importance , because they yielded specimens in large numbers and of unusually good quality : near Halberstadt in Saxony @-@ Anhalt , Germany ; Trossingen in Baden @-@ Württemberg , Germany ; and Frick . Between the 1910s and 1930s , excavations in a clay pit in Saxony @-@ Anhalt revealed between 39 and 50 skeletons that belonged to Plateosaurus , along with teeth and a small number of bones of the theropod <unk> , and two skeletons and some fragments of the turtle <unk> . Some of the <unk> material was assigned to P. longiceps , a species described by palaeontologist Otto Jaekel in 1914 but now considered a junior synonym of P. engelhardti . Most of the material found its way to the Museum für Naturkunde in Berlin , where much of it was destroyed during World War II . The Halberstadt quarry today is covered by a housing development . 
 The second major German locality with P. engelhardti finds , a quarry in Trossingen in the Black Forest , was worked repeatedly in the 20th century . Between 1911 and 1932 , excavations during six field seasons led by German palaeontologists Eberhard Fraas ( 1911 – 1912 ) , Friedrich von Huene ( 1921 – 23 ) , and finally Reinhold Seemann ( 1932 ) revealed a total of 35 complete or partially complete skeletons of Plateosaurus , as well as fragmentary remains of approximately 70 more individuals . The large number of specimens from Swabia had already caused German palaeontologist Friedrich August von Quenstedt to nickname the animal Schwäbischer <unk> ( Swabian <unk> or Swabian dragon ) . Much of the Trossingen material was destroyed in 1944 , when the <unk> in Stuttgart ( predecessor to the State Museum of Natural History Stuttgart ( SMNS ) ) burnt to the ground after an Allied bombing raid . Luckily , however , a 2011 study by SMNS curator Rainer Schoch found that , at least from the finds of Seemann 's 1932 excavation , " the scientifically most valuable material is still available " . 
 The Plateosaurus skeletons in a clay pit of the <unk> Keller AG in Frick , Switzerland , were first noticed in 1976 . While the bones are often significantly deformed by taphonomic processes , Frick yields skeletons of P. engelhardti comparable in completeness and position to those of Trossingen and Halberstadt . 
 In 1997 , workers of an oil platform of the Snorre oil field , located at the northern end of the North Sea , were drilling through sandstone for oil exploration when they stumbled on a fossil they believed to be plant material . The drill core containing the fossil was extracted from 2 @,@ 256 metres ( 7 @,@ 402 ft ) below the seafloor . Martin Sander and Nicole Klein , palaeontologists of the University of Bonn , analysed the bone microstructure and concluded that the rock preserved fibrous bone tissue from a fragment of a limb bone belonging to Plateosaurus , making it the first dinosaur found in Norway . Plateosaurus material has also been found in the Fleming Fjord Formation of East Greenland . 
 Plateosaurus gracilis , the older species , is found in the Löwenstein Formation ( Lower Norian ) . P. engelhardti stems from the upper Löwenstein Formation ( Upper Norian ) , the Trossingen Formation ( Upper Norian ) , and equivalently aged rock units . Plateosaurus thus lived probably from approximately 214 to 204 million years ago . 
 = = Classification and type material = = 
 Plateosaurus is a member of a group of early herbivores known as " prosauropods " . The group name is obsolete , as " Prosauropoda " is not a monophyletic group ( thus given in quotation marks ) , and most researchers prefer the term basal sauropodomorph . Plateosaurus was the first " prosauropod " to be described , and gives its name to the family Plateosauridae Marsh , 1895 as type genus . Initially , when the genus was poorly known , it was only included in Sauria , being some kind of reptile , but not in any more narrowly defined taxon . In 1845 , von Meyer created the group <unk> ( a defunct junior synonym of Dinosauria ) to include Plateosaurus , Iguanodon , Megalosaurus and Hylaeosaurus . Plateosauridae was proposed by Othniel Charles Marsh in 1895 within Theropoda . Later it was moved to " Prosauropoda " by von Huene , a placement that was accepted by most authors . Before the advent of cladistics in paleontology during the 1980s , with its emphasis on monophyletic groups ( clades ) , Plateosauridae was defined loosely , as large , broad @-@ footed , broad @-@ handed forms with relatively heavy skulls , unlike the smaller " <unk> " and sauropod @-@ like " <unk> " . <unk> of " prosauropods " in light of the new methods of analysis led to the reduction of Plateosauridae . For many years the clade only included Plateosaurus and various junior synonyms , but later two more genera were considered to belong to it : Sellosaurus and possibly <unk> . Of these , Sellosaurus is probably another junior synonym of Plateosaurus . 
 The type series of Plateosaurus engelhardti included " roughly 45 bone fragments " , of which nearly half are lost . The remaining material is kept in the Institute for Palaeontology of the University of Erlangen @-@ Nuremberg , Germany . From these bones , German palaeontologist Markus Moser in 2003 selected a partial sacrum ( series of fused hip vertebrae ) as a lectotype . The type locality is not known for certain , but Moser attempted to infer it from previous publications and the colour and preservation of the bones . He concluded that the material probably stems from the " <unk> " , roughly 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) south of <unk> . 
 The type specimen of Plateosaurus gracilis , an incomplete <unk> , is kept at the <unk> Museum für Naturkunde Stuttgart , Germany , and the type locality is <unk> , a suburb of the same city . 
 = = = Etymology = = = 
 The etymology of the name Plateosaurus is not entirely clear . Moser pointed out that the original description contains no information , and various authors have offered differing interpretations . German geologist Hanns Bruno <unk> in 1846 gave " ( πλατυς , <unk> ) " [ English : broad ] In the same year , Agassiz offered Ancient Greek <unk> ( <unk> - " paddle " , " rudder " ; Agassiz translates this as Latin pala 
 = " spade " ) and σαυρος ( sauros - " lizard " ) . Agassiz consequently renamed the genus <unk> , probably from Greek πλατυς ( <unk> - " broad , flat , broad @-@ shouldered " ) , creating an invalid junior synonym . Later authors often referred to this derivation , and the secondary meaning " flat " of πλατυς , so that Plateosaurus is often translated as " flat lizard " . Often , claims were made that πλατυς is supposed to have been intended as a reference to flat bones , for example the laterally flattened teeth of Plateosaurus , but the teeth and other flat bones such as the pubic bones and some skull elements were unknown at the time of description . 
 In 1855 , von Meyer published a detailed description of Plateosaurus with illustrations , but again gave no details on the etymology . He repeatedly referred to its gigantic size ( " <unk> " = 
 giant lizard ) and massive limbs ( " <unk> " ) , comparing Plateosaurus to large modern land mammals , but did not describe any important features that fit the terms " flat " or " shaped like an oar . " 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 = = = Valid species = = = 
 The taxonomic history of Plateosaurus is " long and confusing " , a " chaotic tangle of names " . As of 2011 , only two species are universally accepted as valid : the type species P. engelhardti and P. gracilis , previously assigned to its own genus Sellosaurus . British palaeontologist Peter Galton showed clearly that all cranial material from Trossingen , Halberstadt and Frick pertains to one species . Moser performed the most extensive and detailed investigation of all plateosaurid material from Germany and Switzerland , concluding that all Plateosaurus and most other prosauropod material from the Keuper stems from the same species as the type material of Plateosaurus engelhardti . Moser considered Sellosaurus to be the same genus as Plateosaurus , but did not discuss whether S. gracilis and P. engelhardti belong to the same species . Palaeontologist Adam Yates of the University of the Witwatersrand cast further doubt on the generic separation . He included the type material of Sellosaurus gracilis in Plateosaurus as P. gracilis and reintroduced the old name <unk> for some material that had been assigned to Sellosaurus . In 1926 , von Huene had already concluded the two genera were the same . 
 Yates has cautioned that P. gracilis may be a <unk> , which means that there is neither evidence that the material assigned to it is monophyletic ( belongs to one species ) , nor that it is paraphyletic ( belongs to several species ) . This is the case because the holotype of P. ( Sellosaurus ) gracilis has no skull , and the other specimens consist of skulls and material that overlaps too little with the holotype to make it certain that it belongs to the same taxon . It is therefore possible that the known material contains more species belonging to Plateosaurus . 
 Some scientists regard other species as valid as well , for example P. erlenbergensis . Such works , however , ignore Moser ( 2003 ) , the publication that shows the type series of P. engelhardti to be diagnostic , and other material to be referable to it . 
 = = = Invalid species = = = 
 All named species of Plateosaurus except the type species and P. gracilis have turned out to be junior synonyms of the type species or invalid names . Von Huene practically erected a new species and sometimes a new genus for each relatively complete find from Trossingen ( three species of Pachysaurus and seven of Plateosaurus ) and Halberstadt ( one species of Gresslyosaurus and eight of Plateosaurus ) . Later , he merged several of these species , but remained convinced that more than one genus and more than one species of Plateosaurus was present in both localities . Jaekel also believed that the Halberstadt material included several plateosaurid dinosaurs , as well as non @-@ plateosaurid prosauropods . Systematic research by Galton drastically reduced the number of genera and species . Galton synonymised all cranial material , and described differences between the syntypes of P. engelhardti and the Trossingen material , which he referred to P. longiceps . Galton recognized P. <unk> , P. <unk> and P. integer to be identical to P. longiceps . Markus Moser , however , showed that P. longiceps is itself a junior synonym of P. engelhardti . Furthermore , a variety of species in other genera were created for material belonging to P. engelhardti , including <unk> <unk> , Gresslyosaurus robustus , Gresslyosaurus <unk> , Pachysaurus ajax , Pachysaurus giganteus , Pachysaurus magnus and Pachysaurus <unk> . The skull of AMNH <unk> <unk> , the best @-@ preserved skull of Plateosaurus that has been taken apart during preparation and is thus available as separate bones , was described anew in 2011 . The authors of that publication , palaeontologists Albert Prieto @-@ Márquez and Mark A. Norell , refer the skull to P. erlenbergensis , a species erected in 1905 by Friedrich von Huene . If the P. erlenbergensis holotype is diagnostic ( i.e. , has enough characters to be distinct from other material ) , it is the correct name for the material assigned to P. longiceps Jaekel , 1913 . However , according to the last detailed study of the holotype material of P. engelhardti by Markus Moser , P. erlenbergensis is a junior synonym of P. engelhardti . 
 Aside from fossils clearly belonging to Plateosaurus , there is much prosauropod material from the German <unk> in museum collections , most of it labeled as Plateosaurus , that does not belong to the type species and possibly not to Plateosaurus at all . Some of this material is not diagnostic ; other material has been recognized to be different , but was never sufficiently described . 
 = = Taphonomy = = 
 The taphonomy ( burial and fossilization process ) of the three main Plateosaurus sites — Trossingen , Halberstadt and Frick — is unusual in several ways . All three sites are nearly monospecific assemblages , meaning that they contain practically only one species , which requires very special circumstances . However , shed teeth of theropods have been found at all three sites , as well as remains of the early turtle <unk> . Additionally , a partial " prosauropod " skeleton was found in Halberstadt that does not belong to Plateosaurus , but is preserved in a similar position . All sites yielded almost complete and partial skeletons of Plateosaurus , as well as isolated bones . The partial skeletons tend to include the hind limbs and hips , while parts of the anterior body and neck are rarely found in isolation . The animals were all adults or subadults ( nearly adult individuals ) ; no juveniles or hatchlings are known . Complete skeletons and large skeleton parts that include the hind limbs all rest dorsal ( top ) side up , as do the turtles . Also , they are mostly well @-@ articulated , and the hind limbs are three @-@ dimensionally preserved in a zigzag posture , with the feet often much deeper in the sediment than the hips . 
 = = = Earlier interpretations = = = 
 In the first published discussion of the Trossingen Plateosaurus finds , Fraas suggested that only miring in mud allowed the preservation of the single complete skeleton then known . Similarly , Jaekel interpreted the Halberstadt finds as animals that waded too deep into swamps , became mired and drowned . He interpreted partial remains as having been transported into the deposit by water , and strongly refuted a catastrophic accumulation . In contrast , von Huene interpreted the sediment as aeolian deposits , with the weakest animals , mostly subadults , succumbing to the harsh conditions in the desert and sinking into the mud of ephemeral water holes . He argued that the completeness of many finds indicated that transport did not happen , and saw partial individuals and isolated bones as results of weathering and trampling . Seemann developed a different scenario , in which Plateosaurus herds congregated on large water holes , and some herd members got pushed in . Light animals managed to get free , while heavy individuals got stuck and died . 
 A different school of thought developed almost half a century later , with palaeontologist David Weishampel suggesting that the skeletons from the lower layers stemmed from a herd that died catastrophically in a mudflow , while those in the upper layers accumulated over time . Weishampel explained the curious monospecific assemblage by theorizing that Plateosaurus were common during this period . This theory was erroneously attributed to Seemann in a popular account of the <unk> in the collection of the Institute and Museum for Geology and Palaeontology , University of Tübingen , and has since become the standard explanation on most internet sites and in popular books on dinosaurs . Rieber proposed a more elaborate scenario , which included the animals dying of thirst or starvation , and being concentrated by mudflows . 
 = = = Mud @-@ miring trap = = = 
 A detailed re @-@ assessment of the taphonomy by palaeontologist Martin Sander of the University of Bonn , Germany , found that the mud @-@ miring hypothesis first suggested by Fraas is true : animals above a certain body weight sank into the mud , which was further liquefied by their attempts to free themselves . Sander 's scenario , similar to that proposed for the famous Rancho La Brea Tar Pits , is the only one explaining all taphonomic data . The degree of completeness of the carcasses was not influenced by transport , which is obvious from the lack of indications for transport before burial , but rather by how much the dead animals were scavenged . Juveniles of Plateosaurus and other taxa of herbivores were too light to sink into the mud or managed to extract themselves , and were thus not preserved . Similarly , scavenging theropods were not trapped due to their lower body weights , combined with proportionally larger feet . There is no indication of herding , or of catastrophic burial of such a herd , or catastrophic accumulation of animals that previously died isolated elsewhere . 
 = = Palaeobiology = = 
 = = = Posture and gait = = = 
 Practically every imaginable posture has been suggested for Plateosaurus in the scientific literature at some point . Von Huene assumed digitigrade bipedality with erect hind limbs for the animals he excavated at Trossingen , with the backbone held at a steep angle ( at least during rapid locomotion ) . In contrast , Jaekel , the main investigator of the Halberstadt material , initially concluded that the animals walked quadrupedally , like lizards , with a sprawling limb position , plantigrade feet , and laterally undulating the body . Only a year later , Jaekel instead favoured a clumsy , kangaroo @-@ like hopping , a change of heart for which he was mocked by German zoologist Gustav <unk> , who interpreted the shape of the articulation surfaces in the hip and shoulder as typically reptilian . Fraas , the first excavator of the Trossingen lagerstätte , also favoured a reptilian posture . Müller @-@ Stoll listed a number of characters required for an erect limb posture that Plateosaurus supposedly lacked , concluding that the lizard @-@ like reconstructions were correct . However , most of these adaptations are actually present in Plateosaurus . 
 From 1980 on , a better understanding of dinosaur biomechanics , and studies by palaeontologists Andreas Christian and Holger <unk> on the resistance to bending of the back of Plateosaurus , led to widespread acceptance of an erect , digitigrade limb posture and a roughly horizontal position of the back . Many researchers were of the opinion that Plateosaurus could use both quadrupedal gaits ( for slow speeds ) and bipedal gaits ( for rapid locomotion ) , and Wellnhofer insisted that the tail curved strongly downward , making a bipedal posture impossible . However , Moser showed that the tail was in fact straight . 
 The bipedal @-@ quadrupedal consensus was changed by a detailed study of the forelimbs of Plateosaurus by <unk> and Senter ( 2007 ) , which clearly showed that Plateosaurus was incapable of <unk> its hands . The pronated position in some museum mounts had been achieved by exchanging the position of radius and ulna in the elbow . The lack of forelimb pronation meant that Plateosaurus was an obligate ( i.e. unable to walk in any other way ) biped . Further indicators for a purely bipedal mode of locomotion are the great difference in limb length ( the hind limb is roughly twice as long as the forelimb ) , the very limited motion range of the forelimb , and the fact that the centre of mass rests squarely over the hind limbs . 
 Plateosaurus shows a number of cursorial adaptations , including an erect hind limb posture , a relatively long lower leg , an elongated metatarsus and a digitigrade foot posture . However , in contrast to mammalian <unk> , the moment arms of the limb extending muscles are short , especially in the ankle , where a distinct , moment arm @-@ increasing tuber on the calcaneum is missing . This means that in contrast to running mammals , Plateosaurus probably did not use gaits with aerial , unsupported phases . Instead , Plateosaurus must have increased speed by using higher stride frequencies , created by rapid and powerful limb retraction . Reliance on limb retraction instead of extension is typical for non @-@ avian dinosaurs . 
 = = = Feeding and diet = = = 
 Important cranial characteristics ( such as jaw articulation ) of most " prosauropods " are closer to those of herbivorous reptiles than those of carnivorous ones , and the shape of the tooth crown is similar to that of modern herbivorous or omnivorous iguanas . The maximum width of the crown was greater than that of the root for the teeth of most " prosauropods " , including Plateosaurus ; this results in a cutting edge similar to those of extant herbivorous or omnivorous reptiles . Paul Barrett proposed that prosauropods supplemented their herbivorous diets with small prey or carrion . 
 So far , no fossil of Plateosaurus has been found with gastroliths ( gizzard stones ) in the stomach area . The old , widely cited idea that all large dinosaurs , implicitly also Plateosaurus , swallowed gastroliths to digest food because of their relatively limited ability to deal with food orally has been refuted by a study on gastrolith abundance , weight , and surface structure in fossils compared to alligators and ostriches by Oliver Wings . The use of gastroliths for digestion seems to have developed on the line from basal theropods to birds , with a parallel development in Psittacosaurus . 
 = = = Growth , metabolism and life span = = = 
 Similar to all non @-@ avian dinosaurs studied to date , Plateosaurus grew in a pattern that is unlike that of both extant mammals and birds . In the closely related sauropods with their typical dinosaurian physiology , growth was initially rapid , continuing somewhat more slowly well beyond sexual maturity , but was determinate , i.e. the animals stopped growing at a maximum size . Mammals grow rapidly , but sexual maturity falls typically at the end of the rapid growth phase . In both groups , the final size is relatively constant , with humans atypically variable . Extant reptiles show a sauropod @-@ like growth pattern , initially rapid , then slowing after sexual maturity , and almost , but not fully , stopping in old age . However , their initial growth rate is much lower than in mammals , birds and dinosaurs . The reptilian growth rate is also very variable , so that individuals of the same age may have very different sizes , and final size also varies significantly . In extant animals , this growth pattern is linked to behavioural thermoregulation and a low metabolic rate ( i.e. ectothermy ) , and is called " developmental plasticity " . ( Note that is not the same as neural developmental plasticity ) . 
 Plateosaurus followed a trajectory similar to sauropods , but with a varied growth rate and final size as seen in extant reptiles , probably in response to environmental factors such as food availability . Some individuals were fully grown at only 4 @.@ 8 metres ( 16 ft ) total length , while others reached 10 metres ( 33 ft ) . However , the bone microstructure indicates rapid growth , as in sauropods and extant mammals , which suggests endothermy . Plateosaurus apparently represents an early stage in the development of endothermy , in which endothermy was decoupled from developmental plasticity . This hypothesis is based on a detailed study of Plateosaurus long @-@ bone histology conducted by Martin Sander and Nicole Klein of the University of Bonn . A further indication for endothermy is the avian @-@ style lung of Plateosaurus . 
 Long @-@ bone histology also allows estimating the age a specific individual reached . Sander and Klein found that some individuals were fully grown at 12 years of age , others were still slowly growing at 20 years , and one individual was still growing rapidly at 18 years . The oldest individual found was 27 years and still growing ; most individuals were between 12 and 20 years old . However , some may well have lived much longer , because the fossils from Frick and Trossingen are all animals that died in accidents , and not from old age . Due to the absence of individuals smaller than 4 @.@ 8 metres ( 16 ft ) long , it is not possible to deduce a complete ontogenetic series for Plateosaurus or determine the growth rate of animals less than 10 years of age . 
 = = = Daily activity patterns = = = 
