 Comparisons between the scleral rings and estimated orbit size of Plateosaurus and modern birds and reptiles suggest that it may have been cathemeral , active throughout the day and night , possibly avoiding the mid @-@ day heat . 
 = Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands = 
 The Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands , fought during 25 – 27 October 1942 , sometimes referred to as the Battle of Santa Cruz or in Japanese sources as the Battle of the South Pacific ( <unk> ) , was the fourth carrier battle of the Pacific campaign of World War II and the fourth major naval engagement fought between the United States Navy and the Imperial Japanese Navy during the lengthy and strategically important Guadalcanal campaign . In similar fashion to the battles of Coral Sea , Midway , and the Eastern Solomons , the ships of the two adversaries were rarely in direct visual range of each other . Instead , almost all attacks by both sides were mounted by carrier or land @-@ based aircraft . 
 In an attempt to drive Allied forces from Guadalcanal and nearby islands and end the stalemate that had existed since September 1942 , the Imperial Japanese Army planned a major ground offensive on Guadalcanal for 20 – 25 October 1942 . In support of this offensive , and with the hope of engaging Allied naval forces , Japanese carriers and other large warships moved into a position near the southern Solomon Islands . From this location , the Japanese naval forces hoped to engage and decisively defeat any Allied ( primarily U.S. ) naval forces , especially carrier forces , that responded to the ground offensive . Allied naval forces also hoped to meet the Japanese naval forces in battle , with the same objectives of breaking the stalemate and decisively defeating their adversary . 
 The Japanese ground offensive on Guadalcanal was under way in the Battle for Henderson Field while the naval warships and aircraft from the two adversaries confronted each other on the morning of 26 October 1942 , just north of the Santa Cruz Islands . After an exchange of carrier air attacks , Allied surface ships were forced to retreat from the battle area with one carrier sunk and another heavily damaged . The participating Japanese carrier forces , however , also retired because of high aircraft and aircrew losses plus significant damage to two carriers . Although a tactical victory for the Japanese in terms of ships sunk and damaged , the loss of many irreplaceable , veteran aircrews would prove to be a long term strategic advantage for the Allies , whose aircrew losses in the battle were relatively low and could be quickly replaced . The high casualties for the Japanese prevented their carrier forces from further significant involvement in the battle for Guadalcanal , contributing to the eventual Allied victory in that campaign . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 7 August 1942 , Allied forces ( primarily U.S. ) landed on Japanese @-@ occupied Guadalcanal , Tulagi , and Florida Islands in the Solomon Islands . The landings on the islands were meant to deny their use by the Japanese as bases for threatening the supply routes between the U.S. and Australia , and to secure the islands as starting points for a campaign with the eventual goal of neutralising the major Japanese base at Rabaul while also supporting the Allied New Guinea campaign . The landings initiated the six @-@ month @-@ long Guadalcanal campaign . 
 After the Battle of the Eastern Solomons from 24 – 25 August , in which the aircraft carrier USS Enterprise was heavily damaged and forced to travel to Pearl Harbor , Hawaii , for a month of major repairs , three U.S. carrier task forces remained in the South Pacific area . The task forces included the carriers USS Wasp , Saratoga , and Hornet plus their respective air groups and supporting surface warships , including battleships , cruisers , and destroyers , and were primarily stationed between the Solomons and New Hebrides ( Vanuatu ) islands . At this location , the carriers were charged with guarding the line of communication between the major Allied bases at New Caledonia and Espiritu Santo , supporting the Allied ground forces at Guadalcanal and Tulagi against any Japanese counteroffensives , covering the movement of supply ships to Guadalcanal , and engaging and destroying any Japanese warships , especially carriers , that came within range . 
 The area of ocean in which the U.S. carrier task forces operated was known as " Torpedo Junction " by U.S. forces because of the high concentration of Japanese submarines in the area . 
 On 31 August , USS Saratoga was torpedoed by Japanese submarine I @-@ 26 and was out of action for three months for repairs . On 14 September , USS Wasp was hit by three torpedoes fired by Japanese submarine I @-@ 19 while supporting a major reinforcement and resupply convoy to Guadalcanal and almost engaging two Japanese carriers Shōkaku and Zuikaku ( which withdrew just before the two adversaries came into range of each other 's aircraft ) . With power knocked out from torpedo damage , Wasp 's damage @-@ control teams were unable to contain the ensuing large fires , and she was abandoned and scuttled . 
 Although the U.S. now had only one operational carrier ( Hornet ) in the South Pacific , the Allies still maintained air superiority over the southern Solomon Islands because of their aircraft based at Henderson Field on Guadalcanal . However , at night , when aircraft were not able to operate effectively , the Japanese were able to operate their ships around Guadalcanal almost at will . Thus , a stalemate in the battle for Guadalcanal developed , with the Allies delivering supplies and reinforcements to Guadalcanal during the day , and the Japanese doing the same by warship ( called the " Tokyo Express " by the Allies ) at night , with neither side able to deliver enough troops to the island to secure a decisive advantage . By mid @-@ October , both sides had roughly an equal number of troops on the island . The stalemate was briefly interrupted by two large @-@ ship naval actions . On the night of 11 / 12 October , a U.S. naval force intercepted and defeated a Japanese naval force en route to bombard Henderson Field in the Battle of Cape Esperance . But just two nights later , a Japanese force that included the battleships Haruna and Kongō successfully bombarded Henderson Field , destroying most of the U.S. aircraft and inflicting severe damage on the field 's facilities . Although still marginally operational , it took several weeks for the airfield to recover from the damage and replace the destroyed aircraft . 
 At this time , the U.S. made two moves to try to break the stalemate in the battle for Guadalcanal . First , repairs to Enterprise were expedited so that she could return to the South Pacific as soon as possible . On 10 October , Enterprise received her new air groups ; on 16 October , she left Pearl Harbor ; and on 23 October , she arrived back in the South Pacific and rendezvoused with Hornet and the rest of the Allied South Pacific naval forces on 24 October , 273 nmi ( 506 km ; 314 mi ) northeast of Espiritu Santo . 
 Second , on 18 October , Admiral Chester Nimitz , Allied Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of Pacific Forces , replaced Vice Admiral Robert L. Ghormley with Vice Admiral William Halsey , Jr. as Commander , South Pacific Area : this position commanded Allied forces involved in the Solomon Islands campaign . Nimitz felt that Ghormley had become too myopic and pessimistic to lead Allied forces effectively in the struggle for Guadalcanal . Halsey was reportedly respected throughout the U.S. naval fleet as a " fighter . " Upon assuming command , Halsey immediately began making plans to draw the Japanese naval forces into a battle , writing to Nimitz , " I had to begin throwing punches almost immediately . " 
 The Japanese Combined Fleet was also seeking to draw Allied naval forces into what was hoped to be a decisive battle . Two fleet carriers — Hiyō and Junyō — and one light carrier — Zuihō — arrived at the main Japanese naval base at Truk Atoll from Japan in early October and joined Shōkaku and Zuikaku . With five carriers fully equipped with air groups , plus their numerous battleships , cruisers , and destroyers , the Japanese Combined Fleet , directed by Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto , was confident that it could make up for the defeat at the Battle of Midway . Apart from a couple of air raids on Henderson Field in October , the Japanese carriers and their supporting warships stayed in the northwestern area of the Solomon Islands , out of the battle for Guadalcanal and waiting for a chance to approach and engage the U.S. carriers . With the Japanese Army 's next planned major ground attack on Allied forces on Guadalcanal set for 20 October , Yamamoto 's warships began to move towards the southern Solomons to support the offensive and to be ready to engage any Allied ( primarily U.S. ) ships , especially carriers , that approached to support the Allied defenses on Guadalcanal . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 From 20 – 25 October , Japanese land forces on Guadalcanal attempted to capture Henderson Field with a large @-@ scale attack against U.S. troops defending the airfield . However , the attack was decisively defeated with heavy casualties for the Japanese during the Battle for Henderson Field . 
 Incorrectly believing that the Japanese army troops had succeeded in capturing Henderson Field , a force of Japanese warships approached Guadalcanal on the morning of 25 October to provide further support for the army offensive . Aircraft from Henderson Field attacked the convoy throughout the day , sinking the light cruiser Yura and damaging the destroyer Akizuki . 
 Despite the failure of the Japanese ground offensive and the loss of Yura , the rest of the Combined Fleet continued to maneuver near the southern Solomon Islands on 25 October with the hope of encountering Allied naval forces in battle . The Japanese naval forces now consisted of four carriers , because Hiyō had suffered an accidental , damaging fire in her engine room on October 22 that forced her to return to Truk for repairs . 
 The Japanese naval forces were divided into three groups : The " Advanced " force consisted of the carrier Jun 'yō , plus two battleships , four heavy cruisers , one light cruiser , and 10 destroyers , and was commanded by Vice Admiral Nobutake Kondō in heavy cruiser Atago ; 
 the " Main Body " consisted of Shōkaku , Zuikaku , and Zuihō plus one heavy cruiser and eight destroyers , and was commanded by Vice Admiral Chuichi Nagumo aboard Shōkaku ; 
 the " Vanguard " force contained two battleships , three heavy cruisers , one light cruiser , and seven destroyers , and was commanded by Rear Admiral Hiroaki Abe in battleship Hiei . In addition to commanding the Advanced force , Kondo acted as the overall commander of the three forces . 
 The U.S. naval forces were deployed as two separate carrier groups , Task Force 16 under command of Rear Admiral Thomas Kinkaid and built around carrier Enterprise , and Task Force 17 under command of Rear Admiral George Murray and built around carrier Hornet . The two groups were under overall command by Kinkaid , and were separated from each other by about 10 nmi ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) . The carriers were supported by one battleship ( USS South Dakota ) , three heavy cruisers ( Portland , Northampton , Pensacola ) , three light anti @-@ aircraft cruisers ( San Juan , San Diego , Juneau ) , and 14 destroyers . A third U.S. task force , Task Force 64 , commanded by Rear Admiral Willis Lee , consisted of battleship USS Washington , heavy cruiser San Francisco , light cruiser Helena , anti @-@ aircraft cruiser Atlanta , and 6 destroyers . This last force , however , had withdrawn to the South East for fueling , and played no part in the upcoming battle . 
 The two U.S. carrier groups swept around to the north of the Santa Cruz Islands on October 25 searching for the Japanese naval forces . A U.S. PBY Catalina based in the Santa Cruz Islands located the Japanese Main body carriers at 11 : 03 . However , the Japanese carriers were about 355 nmi ( 657 km ; 409 mi ) from the U.S. force , just beyond carrier aircraft range . Kinkaid , hoping to close the range to be able to execute an attack that day , steamed towards the Japanese carriers at top speed and , at 14 : 25 , launched a strike force of 23 aircraft . But the Japanese , knowing that they had been spotted by U.S. aircraft and not knowing where the U.S. carriers were , turned to the north to stay out of range of the U.S. carriers ' aircraft . Thus , the U.S. strike force returned to their carriers without finding or attacking the Japanese warships . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Carrier action on 26 October : first strikes = = = 
 At 02 : 50 on 26 October , the Japanese naval forces reversed direction and the naval forces of the two adversaries closed the distance until they were only 200 nmi ( 370 km ; 230 mi ) away from each other by 05 : 00 . Both sides launched search aircraft and prepared their remaining aircraft to attack as soon as the other side 's ships were located . Although a radar @-@ equipped PBY Catalina sighted the Japanese carriers at 03 : 10 , the report did not reach Kinkaid until 05 : 12 . Therefore , believing that the Japanese ships had probably changed position during the intervening two hours , he decided to withhold launching a strike force until he received more current information on the location of the Japanese ships . 
 At 06 : 45 , a U.S. scout aircraft sighted the carriers of Nagumo 's main body . At 06 : 58 , a Japanese scout aircraft reported the location of Hornet 's task force . Both sides raced to be the first to attack the other . The Japanese were first to get their strike force launched , with 64 aircraft , including 21 Aichi D3A2 dive bombers , 20 Nakajima B5N2 torpedo bombers , 21 A6M3 Zero fighters , and two Nakajima B5N2 command and control aircraft on the way towards Hornet by 07 : 40 . Also at 07 : 40 , two U.S. SBD @-@ 3 Dauntless scout aircraft , responding to the earlier sighting of the Japanese carriers , arrived and dove on Zuihō . With the Japanese combat air patrol ( CAP ) busy chasing other U.S. scout aircraft away , the two U.S. aircraft were able to hit Zuihō with both their 500 @-@ pound bombs , causing heavy damage and preventing the carrier 's flight deck from being able to land aircraft . 
 Meanwhile , Kondo ordered Abe 's Vanguard force to race ahead to try to intercept and engage the U.S. warships . Kondo also brought his own Advanced force forward at maximum speed so that Junyō 's aircraft could join in the attacks on the U.S. ships . At 08 : 10 , Shōkaku launched a second wave of strike aircraft , consisting of 19 dive bombers and eight Zeros , and Zuikaku launched 16 torpedo bombers at 08 : 40 . Thus , by 09 : 10 the Japanese had 110 aircraft on the way to attack the U.S. carriers . 
 The U.S. strike aircraft were running about 20 minutes behind the Japanese . Believing that a speedy attack was more important than a massed attack , and because they lacked fuel to spend time assembling prior to the strike , the U.S. aircraft proceeded in small groups towards the Japanese ships , rather than forming into a single large strike force . The first group — consisting of 15 Douglas SBD Dauntless dive bombers , six Grumman TBF @-@ 1 Avenger torpedo bombers , and eight Grumman F4F Wildcat fighters , led by Lieutenant Commander R. <unk> from Hornet — was on its way by about 08 : 00 . A second group — consisting of three SBDs , seven TBFs , and eight Wildcats from Enterprise — was off by 08 : 10 . A third group — which included nine SBDs , eight TBFs , and seven F4Fs from Hornet — was on its way by 08 : 20 . 
 At 08 : 40 , the opposing aircraft strike formations passed within sight of each other . Nine Zeros from Zuihō surprised and attacked the Enterprise group , attacking the climbing aircraft from out of the sun . In the resulting engagement , four Zeros , three Wildcats , and two TBFs were shot down , with another two TBFs and a Wildcat forced by heavy damage to return to Enterprise . 
 At 08 : 50 , the lead U.S. attack formation from Hornet spotted four ships from Abe 's Vanguard force . Pressing on , the U.S. aircraft sighted the Japanese carriers and prepared to attack . Three Zeros from Zuihō attacked the formation 's Wildcats , drawing them away from the bombers they were assigned to protect . Thus , the dive bombers in the first group initiated their attacks without fighter escort . Twenty Zeros from the Japanese carrier CAP attacked the SBD formation and shot down four of them . The remaining 11 SBDs commenced their attack dives on Shōkaku at 09 : 27 , hitting her with three to six bombs , wrecking her flight deck and causing serious damage to the interior of the ship . The final SBD of the 11 lost track of Shōkaku and instead dropped its bomb near the Japanese destroyer Teruzuki , causing minor damage . The six TBFs in the first strike force , having become separated from their strike group , missed finding the Japanese carriers and eventually turned back towards Hornet . On the way back , they attacked the Japanese heavy cruiser Tone , missing with all of their torpedoes . 
 The TBFs of the second U.S. attack formation from Enterprise were unable to locate the Japanese carriers and instead attacked the Japanese heavy cruiser Suzuya from Abe 's Vanguard force but caused no damage . At about the same time , the third U.S. attack formation — from Hornet — found Abe 's ships and attacked the Japanese heavy cruiser Chikuma , hitting her with two 1 @,@ 000 lb ( 450 kg ) bombs and causing heavy damage . The three Enterprise SBDs then arrived and also attacked Chikuma , causing more damage with one bomb hit and two near @-@ misses . Finally , the eight TBFs from the third strike group arrived and attacked the smoking Chikuma , scoring one more hit . Chikuma — escorted by two destroyers — withdrew from the battle and headed towards Truk for repairs . 
 The U.S. carrier forces received word from their outbound strike aircraft at 08 : 30 that Japanese attack aircraft were headed their way . At 08 : 52 , the Japanese strike force commander sighted the Hornet task force ( the Enterprise task force was hidden by a rain squall ) and deployed his aircraft for attack . At 08 : 55 , the U.S. carriers detected the approaching Japanese aircraft on radar — about 35 nmi ( 65 km ; 40 mi ) away — and began to vector the 37 Wildcats of their CAP to engage the incoming Japanese aircraft . However , communication problems , mistakes by the U.S. fighter control directors , and primitive control procedures prevented all but a few of the U.S. fighters from engaging the Japanese aircraft before they began their attacks on Hornet . Although the U.S. CAP was able to shoot down several dive bombers , most of the Japanese aircraft commenced their attacks relatively unmolested by U.S. fighters . 
 At 09 : 09 , the anti @-@ aircraft guns of Hornet and her escorting warships opened fire as the 20 untouched Japanese torpedo planes and remaining 16 dive bombers commenced their attacks on the carrier . At 09 : 12 , a dive bomber placed its 551 lb ( 250 kg ) , semi @-@ armor @-@ piercing bomb dead center on Hornet 's flight deck , across from the island , which penetrated three decks before exploding , killing 60 men . Moments later , a 534 lb ( 242 kg ) " land " bomb struck the flight deck , detonating on impact and creating an 11 ft ( 3 @.@ 4 m ) hole as well as killing 30 men . A minute or so later , a third bomb hit Hornet near where the first bomb hit , penetrating three decks before exploding , causing severe damage but no direct loss of life . At 09 : 14 , a dive bomber was hit and damaged by Hornet 's anti @-@ aircraft guns ; on fire , the damaged aircraft deliberately crashed into Hornet 's stack , killing seven men and spreading burning aviation fuel over the signal deck . 
 At the same time that the dive bombers were attacking , the 20 torpedo bombers were also approaching Hornet from two different directions . Despite suffering heavy losses from anti @-@ aircraft fire , the torpedo planes planted two torpedoes into Hornet 's side between 09 : 13 and 09 : 17 , knocking out her engines . As Hornet glided to a stop , a damaged Japanese dive bomber approached and purposely crashed into the carrier 's side , starting a fire near the ship 's main supply of aviation fuel . At 09 : 20 , the surviving Japanese aircraft departed , leaving Hornet dead in the water and burning . Twenty @-@ five Japanese aircraft and six American aircraft were destroyed in this attack . 
 With the assistance of <unk> from three escorting destroyers , the fires on Hornet were under control by 10 : 00 . Wounded personnel were evacuated from the carrier , and an attempt was made by the heavy cruiser USS Northampton to tow Hornet away from the battle area . However , the effort to rig the towline took some time , and more attack waves of Japanese aircraft were inbound . 
 = = = Carrier action on October 26 : post @-@ first strike actions = = = 
 Starting at 09 : 30 , Enterprise landed many of the damaged and fuel @-@ depleted CAP fighters and returning scout aircraft from both carriers . However , with her flight deck full , and the second wave of Japanese aircraft inbound , which was detected on radar at 09 : 30 , Enterprise ceased landing operations at 10 : 00 . Fuel @-@ depleted aircraft then began ditching in the ocean as the carrier 's escorting destroyers rescued the aircrews . One of the ditching aircraft , a damaged TBF from Enterprise 's strike force that had been attacked earlier by Zuihō Zeros , crashed into the water near the destroyer USS Porter . As Porter rescued the TBF 's aircrew , she was struck by a torpedo , perhaps from the ditched aircraft , causing heavy damage and killing 15 crewmen . After the task force commander ordered the destroyer scuttled , the crew was rescued by the destroyer USS Shaw which then sank Porter with gunfire ( 08 ° 32 ′ S 167 ° 17 ′ E ) . 
 As the first wave of Japanese strike aircraft began returning to their carriers from their attack on Hornet , one of them spotted the Enterprise task force ( which had just emerged from a rain squall ) and reported the carrier 's position . Thus , the second Japanese aircraft strike wave — believing Hornet to be sinking — directed their attacks on the Enterprise task force , beginning at 10 : 08 . Again , the U.S. CAP had trouble intercepting the Japanese aircraft before they attacked Enterprise , shooting down only two of the 19 dive bombers as they began their dives on the carrier . Attacking through the intense anti @-@ aircraft fire put up by Enterprise and her escorting warships , the bombers hit the carrier with two 551 lb ( 250 kg ) bombs and near @-@ missed with another . The bombs killed 44 men and wounded 75 , and caused heavy damage to the carrier , including jamming her forward elevator in the " up " position . Twelve of the 19 Japanese bombers were lost in this attack . 
 Twenty minutes later , the 16 Zuikaku torpedo planes arrived and split up to attack Enterprise . One group of torpedo bombers was attacked by two CAP Wildcats which shot down three of them and damaged a fourth . On fire , the fourth damaged aircraft purposely crashed into the destroyer Smith , setting the ship on fire and killing 57 of her crew . To make matters worse , the torpedo carried by this aircraft somehow survived the initial impact but detonated shortly afterward , causing even more damage . The fires initially seemed out of control until Smith 's commanding officer ordered the destroyer to steer into the large spraying wake of the battleship USS South Dakota , which helped put out the fires . Smith then resumed her station , firing her remaining anti @-@ aircraft guns at the still attacking torpedo planes . 
 The remaining torpedo planes attacked Enterprise , South Dakota , and cruiser Portland , but all of their torpedoes missed or were duds , causing no damage . The engagement was over at 10 : 53 ; nine of the 16 torpedo aircraft were lost in this attack . After suppressing most of the onboard fires , at 11 : 15 Enterprise reopened her flight deck to begin landing returning aircraft from the morning U.S. strikes on the Japanese warship forces . However , only a few aircraft landed before the next wave of Japanese strike aircraft arrived and began their attacks on Enterprise , forcing a suspension of landing operations . 
 Between 09 : 05 and 09 : 14 , Junyō had arrived within 280 nmi ( 320 mi ; 520 km ) of the U.S. carriers and launched a strike of 17 dive bombers and 12 Zeros . As the Japanese Main body and Advanced force maneuvered to try to join formations , Junyō readied follow @-@ up strikes . At 11 : 21 , the Junyō aircraft arrived and dove on the Enterprise task force . The dive bombers scored one near miss on Enterprise , causing more damage , and one hit each on South Dakota and light cruiser San Juan , causing moderate damage to both ships . Eleven of the 17 Japanese dive bombers were destroyed in this attack . 
 At 11 : 35 , Kinkaid decided to withdraw Enterprise and her screening ships from the field of battle , since Hornet was out of action , Enterprise was heavily damaged , and surmising ( correctly ) that the Japanese had one or two undamaged carriers in the area . Leaving Hornet behind , all Kinkaid could do was to direct the carrier and her task force to retreat as soon as they were able . Between 11 : 39 and 13 : 22 , Enterprise recovered 57 of the 73 airborne U.S. aircraft as she headed away from the battle . The remaining U.S. aircraft ditched in the ocean , and their aircrews were rescued by escorting warships . 
 Between 11 : 40 and 14 : 00 , the two undamaged Japanese carriers , Zuikaku and Junyō , recovered the few aircraft that returned from the morning strikes on Hornet and Enterprise and prepared follow @-@ up strikes . It was now that the devastating losses sustained during these attacks became all too apparent . Lt. Cmdr. Okumiya Masatake , Junyō 's air staff officer , described the return of the carrier 's first strike groups : 
 Only one of Junyō 's bomber leaders returned from the first strike , and upon landing he appeared " so shaken that at times he could not speak coherently . " 
 At 13 : 00 , Kondo 's Advanced force and Abe 's Vanguard force warships together headed directly towards the last reported position of the U.S. carrier task forces and increased speed to try to intercept them for a warship gunfire battle . The damaged carriers Zuihō and Shōkaku , with Nagumo still on board , retreated from the battle area , leaving Rear Admiral Kakuji Kakuta in charge of the Zuikaku and Junyō aircraft forces . At 13 : 06 , Junyō launched her second strike of seven torpedo planes and eight Zeros , and Zuikaku launched her third strike of seven torpedo planes , two dive bombers , and five Zeros . At 15 : 35 , Junyō launched the last Japanese strike force of the day , consisting of four bombers and six Zeros . 
 After several technical problems , Northampton finally began slowly towing Hornet out of the battle area at 14 : 45 , but only at a speed of five knots . Hornet 's crew was on the verge of restoring partial power but at 15 : 20 , Junyō 's second strike arrived , and the seven torpedo planes attacked the almost stationary carrier . Although six of the torpedo planes missed , at 15 : 23 , one torpedo struck Hornet mid @-@ ship , which proved to be the fatal blow . The torpedo hit destroyed the repairs to the power system and caused heavy flooding and a 14 ° list . With no power to pump out the water , Hornet was given up for lost , and the crew abandoned ship . The third strike from Zuikaku attacked Hornet during this time , hitting the sinking ship with one more bomb . All of the Hornet 's crewmen were off by 16 : 27 . The last Japanese strike of the day dropped one more bomb on the sinking carrier at 17 : 20 . 
 After being informed that Japanese forces were approaching and that further towing efforts were unfeasible , Admiral Halsey ordered the Hornet sunk . While the rest of the U.S. warships retired towards the southeast to get out of range of Kondo 's and Abe 's oncoming fleet , destroyers USS Mustin and Anderson attempted to scuttle Hornet with multiple torpedoes and over 400 shells , but she still remained afloat . With advancing Japanese naval forces only 20 minutes away , the two U.S. destroyers abandoned Hornet 's burning hulk at 20 : 40 . By 22 : 20 , the rest of Kondo 's and Abe 's warships had arrived at Hornet 's location . Upon finding the carrier that had launched the Doolittle Raid , the Japanese briefly considered taking Hornet as a war trophy , but ultimately decided that she was too damaged to try to capture . The destroyers Makigumo and Akigumo then finished Hornet with four 24 in ( 610 mm ) torpedoes . At 01 : 35 on 27 October 1942 , she finally sank on the approximated position 08 ° 38 ′ S 166 ° 43 ′ E. Several night attacks by radar @-@ equipped Catalinas on Junyō and Teruzuki , knowledge of the head start the U.S. warships had in their retreat from the area , plus a critical fuel situation apparently caused the Japanese to reconsider further pursuit of the U.S. warships . After refueling near the northern Solomon Islands , the ships returned to their main base at Truk on 30 October . During the U.S. retirement from the battle area towards Espiritu Santo and New Caledonia , South Dakota collided with destroyer Mahan , heavily damaging the destroyer . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Japanese claimed victory by claiming to have sunk three American carriers , one battleship , one cruiser , one destroyer and one " unidentified large warship " along with 79 American carrier aircraft destroyed ( plus many more sunk on the carriers ) . In fact , the Americans lost one carrier ( Hornet ) and the destroyer Porter . The Enterprise was heavily damaged as was the battleship South Dakota , the light cruiser San Juan , and the destroyers Smith and Mahan . Of the 175 U.S. aircraft at the start of the battle , 81 were lost ( 33 fighters , 28 dive @-@ bombers , and 20 torpedo bombers ) . 
 For the Japanese , two carriers ( Shōkaku and Zuihō ) and the heavy cruiser Chikuma had been badly damaged and 99 of 203 Japanese carrier aircraft involved in the battle had been lost . 
 The loss of Hornet was a severe blow for Allied forces in the South Pacific , leaving Enterprise as the one operational , but damaged , Allied carrier in the entire Pacific theater . As she retreated from the battle , the crew posted a sign on the flight deck : " Enterprise vs Japan . " 
 Enterprise received temporary repairs at New Caledonia and , although still somewhat damaged , returned to the southern Solomons area just two weeks later to support Allied forces during the Naval Battle of Guadalcanal , playing an important role in what turned out to be the decisive naval engagement in the overall campaign for Guadalcanal . 
 Although a tactical victory for the Japanese in terms of ships sunk , it came at a high cost for Japanese naval forces . Both damaged carriers were forced to return to Japan for extensive repairs and refitting . After repair , Zuihō returned to Truk in late January 1943 . Shōkaku was under repair until March 1943 and did not return to the front until July 1943 , when she was reunited with Zuikaku at Truk . 
 The most significant losses for the Japanese Navy , however , were in aircrew . The U.S. lost 81 aircraft along with 26 pilots and aircrew members in the battle . The Japanese , on the other hand , lost 99 aircraft and 148 pilots and aircrew members including two dive bomber group leaders , three torpedo squadron leaders , and 18 other section or flight leaders . Forty @-@ nine percent of the Japanese torpedo bomber aircrews involved in the battle were killed along with 39 % of the dive bomber crews and 20 % of the fighter pilots . The Japanese lost more aircrew at Santa Cruz than they had lost in each of the three previous carrier battles at Coral Sea ( 90 ) , Midway ( 110 ) , and Eastern Solomons ( 61 ) . By the end of the Santa Cruz battle , at least 409 of the 765 elite Japanese carrier aviators who had participated in the Attack on Pearl Harbor were dead . 
 Having lost so many of its veteran carrier aircrew , and with no quick way to replace them because of an institutionalized limited capacity in its naval aircrew training programs and an absence of trained reserves , the undamaged Zuikaku and Hiyō were also forced to return to Japan because of a scarcity of trained aircrew to man their air groups . Although the Japanese carriers returned to Truk by the summer of 1943 , they played no further offensive role in the Solomon Islands campaign . 
 Admiral Nagumo , upon being relieved of command shortly after the battle and reassigned to shore duty in Japan , stated in his report to the Combined Fleet Headquarters : " This battle was a tactical win , but a shattering strategic loss for Japan . Considering the great superiority of our enemy 's industrial capacity , we must win every battle overwhelmingly in order to win this war . This last one , although a victory , unfortunately , was not an overwhelming victory . " 
 In retrospect , despite being a tactical victory , the battle effectively ended any hope the Japanese navy might have had of scoring a decisive victory before the industrial might of the United States placed that goal out of reach . Historian Eric Hammel summed up the significance of the Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands as , " Santa Cruz was a Japanese victory . That victory cost Japan her last best hope to win the war . " 
 Military historian Dr. John <unk> offers a dissenting view : this was not a Pyrrhic Victory for Japan , but a Strategic victory . 
 " By any reasonable measure the Battle of Santa Cruz marked a Japanese victory -- and a strategic one . At its end the Imperial Navy possessed the only operational carrier force in the Pacific . The Japanese had sunk more ships and more combat tonnage , had more aircraft remaining , and were in physical possession of the battle zone ... Arguments based on aircrew losses or who owned Guadalcanal are about something else -- the campaign , not the battle . " 
 In his view , the real story of the aftermath is that the Imperial Navy failed to exploit the hard @-@ won victory . 
 = The Boat Race 1952 = 
 The 98th Boat Race took place on 29 March 1952 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . In a race umpired by former Cambridge rower Kenneth Payne , Oxford won by a canvas in a time of 20 minutes 23 seconds . At no point during the contest was there clear water between the boats . The race , described as " one of the closest fought of all time " , was their second win in seven years and took the overall record in the event to 53 – 44 in Cambridge 's favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1951 race by a three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths , and had won the previous five races . They led overall with 53 victories to Oxford 's 43 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Oxford 's coaches were A. J. M. Durand ( who had rowed for the Dark Blues in the 1920 race ) , Hugh " Jumbo " Edwards ( who rowed for Oxford in 1926 and 1930 ) , R. D. Hill ( who rowed in the 1940 wartime race ) and J. H. Page . Cambridge were coached by C. B. M. Lloyd ( three @-@ time Blue between 1949 and 1951 ) , Roy Meldrum ( a coach for Lady Margaret Boat Club ) , James Owen and Harold Rickett ( who rowed three times between 1930 and 1932 ) . The race was umpired for the third time by the former British Olympian Kenneth Payne , who had rowed for Cambridge in the 1932 and 1934 races . 
 Although Cambridge had arrived at Putney as clear favourites to win , Oxford 's improvements during the build @-@ up to the race had shortened their odds : as the rowing correspondent in The Manchester Guardian suggested , " anything might happen " . The rowing correspondent for the The Times reported that Cambridge were " quoted as even " but would " still start [ the ] race as favourites " . Moreover , the crews were " extraordinarily evenly matched , but Oxford have a very good chance of breaking the run of Cambridge wins . " 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 12 st 11 @.@ 5 lb ( 81 @.@ 2 kg ) , 2 @.@ 5 pounds ( 1 @.@ 1 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Oxford 's crew contained three rowers with Boat Race experience including their stroke Chris Davidge who was making his third appearance in the event . Cambridge saw three participants return , including cox John Hinde . Oxford 's number six Ken <unk> was the only participant registered as non @-@ British ; the former Harvard University rower was from the United States . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing the Surrey side of the river to Oxford . The weather was inclement , with gale @-@ force winds and snow disrupting the race , and limiting the number of spectators lining the banks of the Thames to a few thousand . Umpire Payne started the race at 3 : 15 p.m. Cambridge made the cleaner start in the rough conditions , and held a quarter @-@ length lead at the Dukes ' Head pub . Despite making a number of spurts , the Light Blues could not pull away from Oxford , the Dark Blues ' stroke maintaining a higher stroke rate to keep in touch . Keeping to more sheltered conditions yet in slower water , Cambridge passed the Mile Post with a lead of half a length . 
 With the bend in the river beginning to favour Oxford , the lead was slowly eroded until both boats passed nearly level below Hammersmith Bridge . Alongside Chiswick Eyot , the Dark Blues were almost half @-@ a @-@ length ahead but not gaining further . Cambridge 's cox Hinde pushed the Oxford boat towards the centre of the river and as they passed under Barnes Bridge the Dark Blue lead was down to less than a quarter of a length . Oxford won by a canvas ( approximately 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) ) in a time of 20 minutes 23 seconds , the narrowest margin of victory since 1877 , and their first win in six attempts . At no point during the course of the race did either boat have a clear water advantage over their opponent . The rowing correspondent for The Manchester Guardian described the race as " one of the closest fought of all time " , while Ian Thomson , writing in The Observer suggested it was " one of the most exciting races ever rowed . " 
 = Nidan = 
 Nidan ( sometimes known as Midan or Idan ) was a Welsh priest and , according to some sources , a bishop , in the 6th and 7th centuries . He is now commemorated as a saint . He was the confessor for the monastery headed by St Seiriol at Penmon , and established a church at what is now known as Llanidan , which are both places on the Welsh island of Anglesey . He is the patron saint of two churches in Anglesey : St Nidan 's Church , Llanidan , built in the 19th century , and its medieval predecessor , the Old Church of St Nidan , Llanidan . Midmar Old Kirk in Aberdeenshire , Scotland , is also dedicated to him : Nidan is said to have helped to establish Christianity in that area as a companion of St Kentigern . St Nidan 's , Llanidan , has a reliquary dating from the 14th or 16th century , which is said to house his relics . 
 = = Life = = 
 Little is known in detail about Nidan 's life , and his year and place of birth are unknown . He is sometimes referred to as " Midan " or " Idan " . According to manuscript sources , such as <unk> MS 45 ( which has been dated to the 14th century ) in the National Library of Wales , he was the son of <unk> ab <unk> ab Urien Rheged . He was a descendant of Urien Rheged , as was Saint <unk> of Llanrwst , a town on the north Wales mainland in present @-@ day Conwy County Borough . Urien was a " celebrated warrior " from the late 5th century , whose deeds were commemorated by the Welsh poet Taliesin . 
 Nidan was associated with St Seiriol 's monastery at Penmon , on the eastern tip of Anglesey in north Wales , and was the monastery 's confessor . He is also referred to as a bishop in one source . He founded a church in what is now known as Llanidan , also on Anglesey , near to the Menai Straits . According to tradition , this was established in 616 . He is reported to have lived at Cadair Idan , near the church , and a well about 200 yards ( 180 m ) away from the church is reputed to be his holy well . 
 Nidan is said to have been one of the 665 monks who travelled with St Kentigern , also known as St Mungo , and reputed to be a cousin of his , from <unk> , north Wales , to Scotland . Together with another of Kentigern 's companions , Finan or Ffinan , they are said to have established Christianity in Midmar , in what is now Aberdeenshire , in the 7th century . A church in Midmar was dedicated to Nidan . However , the existence of a link between Nidan and Kentigern has been doubted , with one author saying that " the whole idea that these people [ i.e. Nidan and Ffinan ] had any connection with Kentigern is without any real foundation . " 
 According to some sources , he died in about 610 , which would be inconsistent with the reported foundation date for the church at Llanidan of 616 . 
 = = Commemoration = = 
 The Old Church of St Nidan , Llanidan , was in use until the middle of the 19th century when it was replaced by St Nidan 's Church , Llanidan , nearer to the village of Brynsiencyn . This was for two reasons : the old church needed repair , and also because the population of Brynsiencyn needed a church . The old church was then partially demolished . The new church contains a sandstone reliquary , about 26 inches ( 66 cm ) long , which is said to contain Nidan 's relics . The reliquary 's date is uncertain : it has been described as being " probably " from the 14th century , but also , in a more recent description , as " probably 16th century " . It was found buried under the altar of the old church in 1700 . 
 His feast day in the Welsh calendar of saints is 30 September ; in the Scottish calendar of saints , it is 3 November . Nidan was venerated as a saint , although he was never canonized by a pope : as the historian Jane Cartwright notes , " In Wales sanctity was locally conferred and none of the medieval Welsh saints appears to have been canonized by the Roman Catholic Church " . 
 = East Riding of Yorkshire = 
 The East Riding of Yorkshire , or simply East Yorkshire , is a ceremonial county of England . It is located in the region of Yorkshire and the Humber . It is a local government district with unitary authority status . For ceremonial purposes the county also includes the city of Kingston upon Hull , which is a separate unitary authority . It is named after the historic East Riding of Yorkshire ( one of three ridings alongside the North Riding and West Riding ) , which also constituted a ceremonial and administrative county until 1974 . From 1974 to 1996 the area of the modern East Riding of Yorkshire constituted the northern part of the non @-@ metropolitan county of Humberside . At the 2011 Census the Unitary Authority population was 334 @,@ 179 . 
 The landscape consists of a crescent of low chalk hills , the Yorkshire Wolds , surrounded by the low @-@ lying fertile plains of Holderness and the Vale of York . The Humber Estuary and North Sea mark its southern and eastern limits . Archaeological investigations have revealed artefacts and structures from all historical periods since the last ice age . There are few large settlements and no industrial centres . The area is administered from the ancient market and ecclesiastical town of Beverley . Christianity is the religion with the largest following in the area and there is a higher than average percentage of retired people in residence . 
 The economy is mainly based on agriculture and this , along with tourism , has contributed to the rural and seaside character of the Riding . These aspects are also reflected in the places of interest to visitors and major landmarks , which include historic buildings , nature reserves and the Wolds Way long @-@ distance footpath . The open and maritime aspects and lack of major urban developments have also led to the county being allocated relatively high targets for the generation of energy from renewable sources . 
 Major sporting and entertainment venues are concentrated in Kingston upon Hull , while the seaside and market towns support semi @-@ professional and amateur sports clubs and provide seasonal entertainment for visitors . Bishop Burton is the site of an agricultural college , and Hull provides the region 's only university . On the southern border , close to Hull , the Humber Bridge spans the Humber Estuary to enable the A15 to link Hessle with Barton @-@ upon @-@ Humber in North Lincolnshire . 
 = = History = = 
 When the last glacial period ended , the hunter gatherers of the Palaeolithic period followed the animal herds across the land between continental Europe and Britain . Then , as conditions continued to improve and vegetation became more able to support a greater diversity of animals , the annual range of seasonal movement by Mesolithic communities decreased , and people became more fixed to particular localities . Until about 6 @,@ 000 BC , Mesolithic people appear to have exploited their environment as they found it . As communities came to rely on a smaller territorial range and as population levels increased , attempts began to be made to modify or control the natural world . In the Great Wold Valley pollen samples of Mesolithic date , indicate that the forest cover in the area was being disturbed and altered by man , and that open grasslands were being created . The Yorkshire Wolds became a major focus for human settlement during the Neolithic period as they had a wide range of natural resources . The oldest monuments found on the Wolds are the Neolithic long barrows and round barrows . Two earthen long barrows in the region are found at <unk> , on Willerby Wold , and at Kilham , both of which have radiocarbon dates of around 3700 BC . 
 From around 2000 to 800 BC the people of the Bronze Age built the 1 @,@ 400 Bronze Age round barrows that are known to exist on the Yorkshire Wolds . These are found both in isolation and grouped together to form cemeteries . Many of these sites can still be seen as prominent features in the present @-@ day landscape . By the later Bronze Age , an open , cleared , landscape predominated on the Wolds . It was used for grazing and also for arable cultivation . The wetlands on either side of the Wolds in the River Hull valley , Holderness and the Vale of York were also being used for animal rearing at this time . In the Iron Age there were further cultural changes in the area . There emerged a distinctive local tradition known as the Arras Culture , named after a site at Arras , near Market Weighton . There are similarities between the chariot burials of the Arras Culture and groups of La <unk> burials in northern Europe , where the burial of carts was also practised . The area became the kingdom of the tribe known as the Parisi . 
 After invading Britain in 43 AD the Romans crossed the Humber Estuary in 71 AD to invade the Northumbrian territory of the Parisi tribe . From their bridgehead at <unk> they travelled northwards and built roads along the Wolds to <unk> , present day Malton , and then westwards to the River Ouse where they built the fort of Eboracum . There is evidence of extensive use of the light soils of the Wolds for grain farming in the Roman era . Several Roman villas which were the centres of large agricultural estates have been identified around Langton and Rudston . In the low @-@ lying lands on either side of the Wolds there was an increase in the number of settlements between 500 BC and 500 AD as the land became drier and more accessible due to a fall in sea level . The lower @-@ lying land was used for stock breeding . During the last years of Roman occupation Anglo @-@ Saxon raiders were troubling the area and , by the second half of the fifth century , settlement by Anglian invaders was taking place in east Yorkshire . Village names containing the elements -ing , <unk> or <unk> are Anglian settlement names . As Christianity became established in the area from the seventh century onwards , several cemeteries like the one at Garton on the Wolds show evidence of the abandonment of pagan burial practices . In 867 AD the Great Danish Army captured the Anglian town of York , and the remnants of the army settled in Yorkshire from 876 AD when their leader Halfdan shared out the land among them . Scandinavian settlements have names including the elements -by and <unk> . Scandinavian rule in the area came to an end in 954 AD with the death of their ruler Eric Bloodaxe . 
 After the Norman Conquest of England by William the Conqueror in 1066 AD , the land in the East Riding was granted to followers of the new Norman king and ecclesiastical institutions . When some of the northern earls rebelled , William retaliated with the Harrying of the North which laid waste many East Riding villages . The land was then distributed among powerful barons , such as the Count of Aumale in Holderness and the Percy family in the Wolds and the Vale of York . These lay lords and ecclesiastical institutions , including the monasteries , continued to improve and drain their holdings throughout the Middle Ages to maximise the rents they could charge for them . 
 In the mid @-@ sixteenth century Henry VIII of England dissolved the monasteries , resulting in the large areas of land owned by Meaux Abbey , Bridlington Priory and other monastic holdings being confiscated . The Crown subsequently sold these large tracts of land into private ownership . Along with the land already belonging to lay owners , they formed some of the vast estate holdings which continued to exist in the Riding until the twentieth century . 
 The eighteenth and nineteenth centuries saw first the expansion of canals and then the construction of rail links . The River Derwent was canalised as far upstream as Malton and was linked to Pocklington by the cutting of the Pocklington Canal . Other canals were cut to join the towns of Beverley and Driffield to the River Hull , which was also improved to aid navigation . The Market Weighton Canal connected the town directly to the Humber Estuary . An early rail link was constructed between Filey and Bridlington in 1847 and the Malton to Driffield railway was the first to cross the Wolds in 1853 . These routes primarily served the agricultural community in helping to get their products to the expanding industrial markets in the West Riding of Yorkshire and to the port of Hull for export . The rail links served also to transport holidaymakers to the expanding coastal resorts of Bridlington , Hornsea and Withernsea . The canals and canalisation of some of the rivers helped to aid drainage in such of the low @-@ lying ill @-@ drained areas that then still existed . The landscape in the East Riding had changed little since the enclosure of the open fields , in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries , except for the removal of some hedgerows to allow for the use of large agricultural machinery in the twentieth century . 
 = = Geography = = 
 = = = Location = = = 
 As a ceremonial county , the East Riding of Yorkshire borders North Yorkshire , South Yorkshire and Lincolnshire , and includes the city of Kingston upon Hull , which is a separate unitary authority . As a district the East Riding borders North East Lincolnshire , beyond the Humber estuary ; North Lincolnshire , beyond the Humber and on land ; Hull , Doncaster , Selby , York , Ryedale and Scarborough . 
 = = = Geology = = = 
 Geologically the East Riding district is split into three parts . The western part is the eastern section of the Vale of York with the southern extension into the Humberhead Levels . In this area there is a belt of sandstones overlain by glacial and lake deposits formed at the close of the last ice age . The middle part is the Yorkshire Wolds , a chalk formation which extends from the Humber at North Ferriby to the coast at Flamborough Head , a chalk headland . The south @-@ east of the district is the low @-@ lying coastal plain of Holderness , which faces east to the North Sea , and to the south drains into the Humber estuary . South of Flamborough Head is Bridlington , which features several beaches , and at the far south @-@ east of the district is the Spurn peninsula . 
 Before the last ice age the eastern coastline of the area was located along the eastern foot of the Yorkshire Wolds where remnants of beaches have been discovered . The North Sea ice sheet deposited huge amounts of boulder clay as it retreated and this subsequently formed a wet and swampy area which became the plain of Holderness . Another ice sheet in the Vale of York retreated at the same time leaving thick glacial deposits and two prominent moraines to the west of the Wolds . These Vale of York deposits also formed wetlands . The Wolds themselves were largely ice @-@ free , well drained , chalk uplands . Gradually the tundra conditions that had existed as the ice retreated gave way to vegetation that could support grazing fauna . Because a lot of water was still locked in the northern ice sheets , sea level was much lower than in the present day and an area of land stretched eastwards to the low countries . 
 = = = Landscape = = = 
 The Wolds area takes the form of an elevated , gently rolling plateau , cut by numerous deep , steep @-@ sided , flat @-@ bottomed valleys of glacial origin . The chalk formation of the hills provides exceptionally good drainage , with the result that most of these valleys are dry . Surface water is quite scarce throughout the Wolds . At Flamborough Head the Wolds rise up to form high chalk cliffs , where there are water @-@ worn caves and stacks along the shore . Flamborough Headland is designated a Heritage Coast . Coastal erosion around Flamborough Head has led to visitors being warned by the Humber Coastguard to be very careful on coastal paths . 
 The Holderness landscape is dominated by deposits of till , boulder clays and glacial lake clays . These were deposited during the Devensian glaciation . The glacial deposits form a more or less continuous lowland plain which has some peat filled depressions ( known locally as meres ) which mark the presence of former lake beds . There are other glacial landscape features such as <unk> mounds , ridges and kettle holes scattered throughout the area . The well drained glacial deposits provide fertile soils that can support intensive arable cultivation . Fields are generally large and bounded by drainage ditches . There is very little woodland in the area and this leads to a landscape that is essentially rural but very flat and exposed . 
 The Holderness coastline suffers the highest rate of coastal erosion in Europe : 2 metres a year on average or 2 million tonnes of material a year . Some of this is transported by longshore drift with about 3 % of material being deposited at Spurn Head spit , to the south . The coastline has retreated noticeably in the last 2 @,@ 000 years , with many former settlements now flooded , particularly <unk> Odd and Ravenspurn , which was a major port until its destruction in the 14th century . Erosion is an ongoing concern in the area . The East Riding of Yorkshire Council has been carrying out cliff erosion defences between <unk> and <unk> since 1951 . The Holderness area drains mostly into the Humber and the eponymous River Hull drains the area north of Hull . 
 The western part of the district in the Vale of York borders on and is drained by the River Derwent . The landscape is generally low @-@ lying and flat although minor ridges and glacial moraines provide some variations in topography . Where there are dry sandy soils there are remnants of historic heathlands and ancient semi @-@ natural woodlands . Arable fields dominate the land cover of the area and grasslands are infrequent . There are very few flood meadows left , although some significant areas remain on the lower reaches of the River Derwent . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 The East Riding generally has cool summers and relatively mild winters . Weather conditions vary from day to day as well as from season to season . The latitude of the area means that it is influenced by predominantly westerly winds with depressions and their associated fronts , bringing with them unsettled and windy weather , particularly in winter . Between depressions there are often small mobile anticyclones that bring periods of fair weather . In winter , anticyclones bring cold dry weather . In summer the anticyclones tend to bring dry settled conditions which can lead to drought , particularly on the Wolds . For its latitude this area is mild in winter and cooler in summer due to the influence of the Gulf Stream in the northern Atlantic Ocean . Air temperature varies on a daily and seasonal basis . The temperature is usually lower at night , and January is the coldest time of the year . The two dominant influences on the climate of the area are the shelter against the worst of the moist westerly winds provided by the Pennines and the proximity of the North Sea . 
 The High <unk> weather station is in the East Riding on the Yorkshire Wolds , but areas in Holderness which are lower and nearer to the sea have generally milder weather . 
 = = Governance = = 
 = = = Administrative history = = = 
 The administrative division of the East Riding of Yorkshire originated in antiquity . Unlike most counties in Great Britain , which were divided anciently into hundreds , Yorkshire was divided first into three ridings and then into numerous wapentakes within each riding . The separate Lieutenancy for the riding was established after the Restoration , and the ridings each had separate Quarter Sessions . For statistical purposes in the 19th century an East Riding of Yorkshire registration county was designated , consisting of the entirety of the Poor Law Unions of Beverley , Bridlington , Driffield , Howden , Hull , <unk> , Pocklington , Sculcoates , <unk> and York . 
 A county council for the East Riding of Yorkshire was set up in 1889 , covering an administrative county which did not cover the county borough of Hull , but otherwise had the same boundaries as the historic riding . Both the administrative county and the historic Lieutenancy were abolished under the Local Government Act 1972 , on 1 April 1974 , with most of the riding going to form the northern part of Humberside . The creation of this cross @-@ Humber authority was unpopular and this culminated in the local government review in the 1990s , which saw Humberside abolished and the northern part form two unitary authorities . The East Riding district was formed on 1 April 1996 . The ceremonial county , the area in which the Lord Lieutenant of the East Riding of Yorkshire represents the Crown , was re @-@ established the same day , covering Hull as well as the district . The district is entirely parished ; Hull has no parishes . From 1996 Beverley had Charter Trustees to maintain the charter of the borough of Beverley : these were replaced by a Beverley Town Council in 1999 , and Bridlington was parished in 1999 . The unparished area consisting of the urban district of Haltemprice was divided into various parishes in 1999 and 2000 . 
 = = = Current administration = = = 
 The East Riding of Yorkshire Council is based in Beverley , in the former headquarters of Humberside County Council , and East Riding County Council before that . There are 26 wards electing a total of 67 councillors in the District . The council elects on a four @-@ yearly cycle with all seats up for election at the same time . It first had elections in 1995 — a year before it came into its powers — as a shadow authority . Between 1995 and 2007 the council had No overall control . In the 2007 local elections the Conservative Party gained a majority of seats , including those of the Liberal Democrat and Labour Party leaders . The council has a leader @-@ and @-@ executive system , the leader being Stephen Parnaby of the Conservatives . In the Audit Commission report covering 2007 the council was given a four @-@ star rating , which places the authority as one of the best in the country . 
 = = = 2007 local election results = = = 
 = = = Westminster parliamentary = = = 
 For representation in the Parliament of the United Kingdom the bulk of the East Riding district is divided into three county constituencies : Beverley and Holderness , East Yorkshire and Haltemprice and Howden , which are all Conservative @-@ held . One of Hull 's three borough constituencies , Kingston upon Hull West and Hessle , spills into the area , as does Brigg and Goole , otherwise in North Lincolnshire . All the Hull seats are Labour @-@ held . 
 = = = European parliamentary = = = 
 For the European Parliament it lies within the Yorkshire and the Humber constituency , which in the May 2014 European Election elected three UKIP , two Labour and one Conservative MEPs . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 Until 1 April 2009 , the East Riding was the largest district and the largest unitary authority in England by area and the second largest non @-@ metropolitan district in England by population . Following the 2009 structural changes to local government in England it fell to fifth place by area and sixth place by population . 
 The East Riding of Yorkshire covers 240 @,@ 768 hectares ( 930 sq mi ) and has a population of 335 @,@ 049 ( 2008 Office for National Statistics mid @-@ year estimates ) , a density of 1 @.@ 4 people per hectare . The most populous parishes in the main 2001 census were Bridlington ( 34 @,@ 000 ) , Goole ( 17 @,@ 000 ) , Beverley ( 17 @,@ 000 ) , Cottingham ( 17 @,@ 000 , part of the Hull urban area ) , Hessle ( 15 @,@ 000 , by Hull ) , Driffield ( 11 @,@ 000 ) , Anlaby with Anlaby Common ( 10 @,@ 000 , by Hull ) , Hornsea ( 8 @,@ 000 ) and Willerby ( 8 @,@ 000 , by Hull ) , Pocklington ( 8 @,@ 000 ) and <unk> @-@ cum @-@ Brough ( 7 @,@ 000 ) . Half the district 's population reside in these 11 parishes , with the other half living in the other 160 parishes . In comparison , Hull 's population according to the same census was 243 @,@ 589 . The population density of the district was around 135 people per square km , which made it the least densely populated unitary authority after the Isles of Scilly , Rutland and Herefordshire . 
 The East Riding has a larger than average number of residents aged 40 and above . There is a particularly strong deficit in the number of young adults . There is a higher @-@ than @-@ average level of car ownership . 36 @.@ 4 % of all households do not have a car . Less than 5 % of the population travel to work by public transport compared with 15 % nationally . The district is one of the lowest non @-@ white populations , with the census reporting 98 @.@ 8 % of the inhabitants being white . Hull itself is also quite <unk> for a city of its size , with the census reporting 97 @.@ 7 % white . 
 Areas of the East Riding show significant signs of affluence , including the Parliamentary constituency of Haltemprice and Howden which mainly consists of middle class suburbs , towns and villages including <unk> , Cottingham , Howden , Brough and North Ferriby . The area is affluent and has one of the highest proportions of owner @-@ occupiers in the country . 
 The crime rate in the East Riding is lower than the national average in robbery , sexual offences , theft of a vehicle , theft from a vehicle , violence against a person and burglary . 
 Christianity is the religion with the largest following in the area , with 79 @.@ 67 % residents so identifying in the 2001 census . These census figures show no other single religion returned affiliation , as a percentage of population , above the national average for England . At the time of the 2001 UK census the population of the East Riding was 314 @,@ 113 and its ethnic composition was 96 @.@ 80 % white , compared with the English average of 90 @.@ 92 % . The area has a slightly higher elderly population , of 24 @.@ 0 % in 2008 , than the national average . 
 = = Towns and villages = = 
 Excluding Kingston upon Hull there are several areas of settlement in the East Riding , each giving rise to distinctive types of small to medium @-@ sized towns and villages . Cottingham and Willerby are exceptional in that they are suburban villages which are almost contiguous with the Hull urban area . Bridlington is the most populous of the coastal settlements , which also include Flamborough , Hornsea , Withernsea and <unk> . Towns and villages on the flat agricultural area of Holderness are Hedon and Roos , and nestling in the Great Wold Valley is Rudston . Along the eastern foot of the Wolds lie Beverley , Bishop Burton , Driffield and Lockington . In the low @-@ lying lands close to the Humber Estuary are Goole , Brough , North Ferriby , Hessle and Kirk Ella . Stamford Bridge , Pocklington , Market Weighton , Holme @-@ on @-@ Spalding @-@ Moor , Howden and South Cave all lie to the north and west of the area , between the River Derwent and the scarp slope of the Wolds . 
 = = Places of interest = = 
 There are a wide range of interesting places to visit in the East Riding . These include historic buildings such as <unk> Hall , Burton Agnes Manor House , Burton Agnes Hall , <unk> Hall , Skipsea Castle and the gun battery of Fort Paull . The religious edifices of the Rudston Monolith , Beverley Minster and Beverley Friary , and Howden Minster can be visited at all seasons . 
 The sails of <unk> Windmill can be seen providing the power to grind flour on certain days , and natural sites provide interest at Spurn , <unk> Cliffs , Hornsea Mere , Humber Estuary , River Hull , Watton Beck , River Derwent , River Ouse , River Aire , River Trent , and River Don , some of which are owned or run by the Yorkshire Wildlife Trust . 
 The Driffield Navigation , Leven Canal , Market Weighton Canal and Pocklington Canal offer glimpses of tranquillity . Stamford Bridge is the site of the famous battle , and the Yorkshire Wolds Way is a long @-@ distance footpath that takes a winding route through the Yorkshire Wolds to Filey . 
 = = = Religious sites = = = 
 Most of the East Riding is in the East Riding Archdeaconry of the Church of England Diocese of York . The archdeaconry includes the Yorkshire Wolds and the City of Hull , with a coastline extending from Scarborough and Bridlington in the north to Spurn Point . The Middlesbrough Roman Catholic diocese covers the East Riding of Yorkshire and North Yorkshire , together with the City of York . Notable religious sites include Beverley Minster and Bridlington Priory along with the historic parish church of St Augustine , Hedon , known as the ' King of Holderness ' , which is a Grade I listed building . The Sykes Churches Trail is a tour of East Yorkshire churches which were built , rebuilt or restored by the Sykes family of Sledmere House in the nineteenth century . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The East Riding has only a small segment of motorway . Part of the M62 serves to link the Hull area to West Yorkshire and the national motorway network , while the M18 incidentally passes the district border near Goole . Primary roads in the district include the A63 , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and the <unk> . 
 Hull Paragon is a large railway station , served by the Selby Line to the west and the Yorkshire Coast Line to the north . See Railway stations in the East Riding of Yorkshire . 
 Train operators active in the area are Northern , Virgin Trains East Coast and TransPennine Express . Hull Trains is an ' open access ' operator established in 2002 running fast services between London and Hull . Bus services are provided by several operators including FirstGroup , which provides services from the East Riding into York , Goole Town Service and also services from Goole to Doncaster . Stagecoach provides services from the East Riding to Hull and into Lincolnshire , and East Yorkshire Motor Services , historically the dominant area operator , provides a wide variety of bus services throughout the East Riding . Yorkshire Coastliner provides services from Bridlington to Malton , York and Leeds . Holderness Area Rural Transport , a charity , provides a community transport service for North Holderness , taking people to medical appointments in Hull and to the shops . 
 The Humber Bridge , a road @-@ only bridge , part of the A15 , links Hessle , west of Hull , with Barton @-@ upon @-@ Humber in Lincolnshire . West of this the next crossing of the river ( the Ouse at this point ) are three bridges near Goole : a railway bridge , the M62 bridge and the A614 . 
 The area is served by Humberside Airport located in Lincolnshire . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The district is generally rural , with no towns approaching the size of Hull . There are a few market towns such as Beverley , Driffield , Goole , Market Weighton and Pocklington , and the coastal towns of Bridlington , Hornsea and Withernsea . In the south the district contains areas such as Hessle which are part of the Hull urban area but outside the city boundaries . Rural areas tend to have a greater business stock than urban areas , reflecting the number of agricultural businesses and small businesses in rural areas . 20 % of all VAT registered businesses in the East Riding are in agriculture and related sectors , although the number of such businesses fell by 40 % between 1997 and 2003 . Easington , on the coast , is the site of a natural gas terminal , Easington Gas Terminal , used for the <unk> pipeline , as well as three other gas terminals operated by BP and <unk> . 
 This is a chart of trend of regional gross value added of East Riding of Yorkshire at current basic prices with figures in millions of British Pounds Sterling . 
 a Components may not sum to totals due to rounding 
 b includes hunting and forestry 
 c includes energy and construction 
 d includes financial intermediation services indirectly measured 
 The East Riding is characterised by a high employment rate and a relatively low unemployment level . The overall unemployment rate is 4 @.@ 3 % , which is 1 @.@ 2 percentage points lower than the national average . However , there are unemployment hotspots in Bridlington , Goole and Withernsea . Unemployment levels tend to fluctuate over the course of the year with lower levels during the summer months due to increased employment in the tourism and food production sectors . A major year @-@ round employer in the East Riding is the Defence School of Transport at RAF Leconfield , which trains 14 @,@ 000 personnel from the Army , the Royal Air Force and the Royal Marines each year and provides more than 1 @,@ 000 civilian jobs . 
 The East Riding of Yorkshire Council has joined Hull City Council , North East Lincolnshire and North Lincolnshire Councils in the Hull and Humber Ports City Region Partnership . 
 = = = Renewable energy = = = 
 The UK government has set a target to generate 10 % of the UK 's electricity from renewable energy sources by 2010 . The Energy White Paper ( 2003 ) sets out the Government 's aspiration to double that figure to 20 % by 2020 . It has additionally signed up to the legally binding Kyoto Protocol , which requires a reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by 12 @.@ 5 % of 1990 levels by 2008 – 12 and a reduction of CO2 emissions by 20 % of 1990 levels by 2010 . Regional and local authorities are required to contribute to the delivery of these national targets . The East Riding has an above @-@ average potential to generate renewable electricity for Local Authorities in the region due its large wind energy potential . The East Riding of Yorkshire is set a target of 41 MW by 2010 , and a target for 2021 of 148 MW for installed grid @-@ connected renewable energy . There are operational wind farms at <unk> in Holderness and Out Newton to the north of the Humber estuary . 
 There are single turbines at the Waste Water Treatment Works at <unk> and at <unk> Bridge Water Treatment Works near Barmby on the Marsh . In addition , several other wind developments have either been given or are applying for permission . By late February 2009 there was existing developed capacity or planning approval for 140 MW of renewable energy from wind farm developments . The overall renewable energy target for 2010 and 2021 has therefore already been exceeded by wind energy proposals alone , assuming some of these schemes will be operational by 2010 . The East Riding has also exceeded 148 MW , when other renewable energy types such as biomass are included in the calculation . The Humber estuary is to be used for trials of a tidal stream generator . If successful , it will be used to develop larger models which could be deployed in a 100 @-@ unit " renewable power station " capable of powering 70 @,@ 000 homes . 
 = = Education = = 
 The East Riding local education authority supports 150 schools : 131 primary schools and 19 secondary schools . The total net spending per head of population on education rose from £ 578 @.@ 08 in 2006 / 07 to £ 632 @.@ 88 in 2007 / 08 . In 2009 primary school test results showed a slide down the national performance table for the East Riding authority , dropping eight places in the national league table to 28th after other education authorities improved more in the tests . 
 At secondary level the authority slipped seven places to 39th out of 149 authorities , despite producing the best set of General Certificate of Secondary Education ( GCSE ) results since the inception of East Riding Council in 1996 . The percentage of students achieving five or more good GCSEs , at grades A * – C including maths and English , rose to 52 @.@ 5 per cent , from 50 @.@ 8 per cent in 2007 . This is above the national average of 47 @.@ 6 per cent . Bishop Burton is the location of Bishop Burton College , a further education and higher education college specialising in agriculture and equine studies . Beverley Grammar School , which was founded around 700 AD , is widely renowned for being the oldest continuously operating state school in England . 
 Furthermore , Hull is home to several schools , including the private Hymers College , and a university . The University of Hull was founded as a university college in 1927 and received full university status in 1954 ; it is home to the Hull York Medical School , and has seen large scale expansion in recent years to cater for the ever growing number of students . 
 = = Public services = = 
 Both the East Riding and Hull are still covered by the Humberside Police area and the Humberside Fire and Rescue Service . <unk> water is supplied by Yorkshire Water who also maintain the sewerage system . About 1 % of the population use water from private supplies . They are usually in the more remote parts of the East Riding . The majority are bore holes but they can be wells or natural springs . NHS East Riding of Yorkshire provides health services such as district nursing , health visiting , school nursing , intermediate care and therapy services . It works with local GP practices , pharmacists , dentists , optometrists and ambulance services to provide a primary healthcare service . Hull and East Yorkshire Hospitals NHS Trust provides hospitals at Castle Hill Hospital , Hull Royal Infirmary and Beverley Westwood Hospital . Scarborough and North East Yorkshire Healthcare NHS Trust runs Bridlington Hospital and also provides health care from the community hospitals at Driffield and Malton which are run by the local primary care trusts ( NHS East Riding and NHS North Yorkshire and York ) . Small cottage and community hospitals provide a range of services at Hornsea and Withernsea . 
 There are ten household waste recycling sites across the East Riding . In the financial year 2004 / 05 210 @,@ 112 tonnes ( 206 @,@ 794 long tons ; 231 @,@ 609 short tons ) of municipal waste was collected by East Riding and 154 @,@ 723 tonnes ( 152 @,@ 279 long tons ; 170 @,@ 553 short tons ) by Hull . Between 2003 / 04 and 2004 / 05 the amount of waste collected in Hull increased by 1 @.@ 77 % ( 2 @,@ 696 tonnes ( 2 @,@ 653 long tons ; 2 @,@ 972 short tons ) ) and in the East Riding by 4 @.@ 80 % ( 9 @,@ 629 tonnes ( 9 @,@ 477 long tons ; 10 @,@ 614 short tons ) ) . Target 45 + is a joint sustainable waste @-@ management strategy developed in partnership by Hull City Council and the East Riding of Yorkshire Council . The overall aim is to achieve 45 % recycling or composting by 2010 and then go beyond this . At the outset it was anticipated that recycling rates in the East Riding by the end of 2005 / 06 would be 22 @.@ 4 % and in Hull the rate would be 17 @.@ 4 % . The Waste Recycling Group is a company working in partnership with the Hull City and East Riding of Yorkshire councils to deal with waste . The company has plans to build an energy from waste plant at <unk> to deal with 240 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 240 @,@ 000 long tons ; 260 @,@ 000 short tons ) of rubbish and put waste to a productive use by providing power for the equivalent of 20 @,@ 000 houses . 
 = = Sport and leisure = = 
 Hull is the main centre for national @-@ level sport in the region . Hull City A.F.C. play in the Premier League , the first tier of the English football league system , after promotion from the Championship in the 2016 play @-@ off final win against Sheffield Wednesday . Bridlington Town A.F.C. play in the Northern Counties East League Premier Division . There are two professional rugby league teams based in Hull : Hull F.C. and Hull Kingston Rovers . Both teams play in the Super League . Bridlington Rugby Union Football Club plays at Dukes Park in Bridlington . The Hull Stingrays ice hockey team plays in the highest tier of the sport , the Elite League . 
 Horse racing is catered for at Beverley Racecourse on the Westwood to the west of Beverley . What the organisers claim is the world 's oldest horse race , the <unk> Derby , has been held annually in the East Riding since 1519 . There are more than a dozen golf clubs in the Riding including the cliff @-@ top course at Flamborough . The Royal Yorkshire Yacht Club is based at Bridlington , and flying and gliding take place from Pocklington airfield and <unk> airfield . 
 = = Media = = 
 The region is covered by the BBC Yorkshire and Lincolnshire based in Hull and ITV Yorkshire , broadcast from Leeds . Local analogue radio stations include BBC Radio Humberside , Capital Yorkshire , <unk> , Viking FM and Yorkshire Coast Radio . A local Digital Audio Broadcasting multiplex is based around Humberside . The county also has three Community radio stations Seaside FM , which serves the Holderness area on 105 @.@ 3 FM MHz , Vixen 101 which serves Market Weighton and Pocklington and 107 @.@ 8 Beverley FM which serves Beverley and the surrounding areas . 
 Newspapers include the Hull Daily Mail , owned by the Northcliffe Media group . An East Riding Mail has recently been launched as a sister paper to this . Other newspapers in the area include the Bridlington Free Press , the Beverley Guardian , the Driffield Times & Post , the Goole Times and the Holderness Gazette . 
 = HMS Philomel ( 1890 ) = 
 HMS Philomel , later HMNZS Philomel , was a Pearl @-@ class cruiser . She was the fifth ship of that name and served with the Royal Navy . After her commissioning in 1890 , she served on the Cape of Good Hope Station and later with the Mediterranean Fleet . 
 In 1914 , she was loaned to New Zealand for service with what would later become the Royal New Zealand Navy . During the early stages of the First World War she performed convoy escort duties and then carried out operations in the Mediterranean against the Turks . She later conducted patrols in the Red Sea and Persian Gulf . 
 By 1917 , she was worn out and dispatched back to New Zealand where she served as a depot ship in Wellington Harbour for minesweepers . In 1921 she was transferred to the Devonport Naval Base in Auckland for service as a training ship . Decommissioned and sold for scrap in 1947 , her hulk was scuttled in 1949 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 HMS Philomel was laid down on 9 May 1889 at HM Naval Dockyard in Devonport , Plymouth . Her name is derived from Philomela , in Greek mythology the daughter of Pandion I , King of Athens , and was the fifth ship to be so named . 
 The ship had an overall length of 278 feet ( 84 @.@ 7 m ) , a beam of 41 feet ( 12 @.@ 5 m ) and a draught of 17 feet 6 inches ( 5 @.@ 3 m ) . She displaced 2 @,@ 575 long tons ( 2 @,@ 616 t ) . Propulsion was through 3 @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion steam engines , driving two shafts , which produced a total of 7 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 5 @,@ 600 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . She was also rigged for sail and when installing the foremast , workmen noticed it was stamped " Devonport Dockyard 1757 " . Her main armament consisted of eight QF 4 @.@ 7 inch ( 120 mm ) guns with a secondary armament of eight 3 @-@ pounders . As well as four machine guns , the ship also mounted two submerged 14 @-@ inch ( 360 mm ) torpedo tubes . 
 Philomel was launched on 28 August 1890 , and completed the following March . After completing sea trials , she was commissioned in the Royal Navy on 10 November 1891 . Commanded by Captain Charles Campbell , she was assigned to the Cape of Good Hope Station although fitting work and working up trials meant that Philomel did not arrive in South Africa until June 1892 . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 For six years , Philomel served on station , intercepting slave traders along the coast of Africa . In 1896 , she participated in the Anglo @-@ Zanzibar War , during which rebels murdered the Sultan of Zanzibar and seized his palace . Along with the three gunboats and HMS St George , she bombarded the palace fortress and the only ship of the Zanzibar Navy , the HHS Glasgow . This action lasted less than an hour and resulted in the routing of the rebels . The following year , Philomel was transferred to the West Africa Station and participated in the Benin Expedition . 
 A refit was completed in 1898 after which Philomel returned to Cape of Good Hope Station . She served throughout the Second Boer War . Some of her complement of 220 men served in the field with the Naval Brigade . Two of her 4 @.@ 7 inch guns were disembarked and used in the Battle of Colenso . After the war , she returned to Devonport and was paid off on 22 March 1902 . She was laid up in the Firth of Forth for several years before a refit was carried out in 1907 at <unk> Dock in Ireland . During her tow to Ireland she went adrift for a night in the North Sea when the rope to the towing vessel , the HMS Hampshire , broke . 
 Philomel was recommissioned in February 1908 for service with the Mediterranean Fleet under the command of Captain John Seagrave . She provided assistance in the wake of the earthquake at Messina in Sicily . The following year she served with the East Indies Station , running patrols from Aden in the Persian Gulf for two years . 
 = = = Transfer to New Zealand = = = 
 In 1913 the Admiralty agreed to lend Philomel to New Zealand as a seagoing training cruiser to form the nucleus of the newly established New Zealand Naval Forces , which was a new division of the Royal Navy . This was in response to the desire of the New Zealand Minister of Defence at the time , James Allen , who wanted to establish a local naval force which would co @-@ operate with the fledgling Royal Australian Navy . 
 Philomel was recommissioned in October 1913 in Singapore and later sailed for New Zealand to join HMAS Psyche and HMAS Pyramus , both Pelorus @-@ class cruisers serving on the New Zealand Station . The Philomel was commissioned for New Zealand service on 15 July 1914 , under the command of Captain Percival Hall @-@ Thompson . Although mainly crewed by Englishmen , she was the country 's first warship . 
 = = = First World War = = = 
 The Philomel was on a short shakedown voyage to Picton on 30 July 1914 , prior to taking on its first complement of New Zealand cadets , when it was recalled to Wellington Harbour in anticipation of the outbreak of war . Largely crewed by personnel from the Royal Navy , volunteers were brought on board to bring the ship up to full strength and after stocking up with supplies , she departed for Auckland to await further instructions . On 15 August 1914 she formed part of the ocean escort for the New Zealand forces which was dispatched to occupy German Samoa ( now Samoa ) . The escort would have been unlikely to offer much resistance to the German cruisers SMS Scharnhorst and SMS Gneisenau that were known to be in the area . Fortunately , the convoy did not encounter the German ships . Philomel then steamed for the Kingdom of Tonga to deliver news of the hostilities with Imperial Germany before returning to New Zealand . 
 By now the main body of the New Zealand Expeditionary Force , formed for service overseas , were ready to embark from Wellington on a convoy for the Middle East . Philomel escorted the convoy as far as Western Australia . Then , along with Pyramus , she sailed northeastwards for Singapore in search of the German cruiser SMS Emden , which was then carrying out raids in the Indian Ocean . The two ships , which would have been outgunned by the more modern Emden , had reached Christmas Island when they received news of the Emden 's sinking by HMAS Sydney . They arrived in Singapore on 12 November from where Philomel continued onto Port Said , escorting three French troopships . 
 From late 1914 , Philomel , needing maintenance and an update of equipment , was berthed at Malta and underwent an overhaul . This was completed by late January 1915 and she then started operations in the Mediterranean against the Turks . On 8 February she landed an armed party in Southern Turkey where a large force of Turkish soldiers were encountered , resulting in three seamen being killed and three wounded . This action marked the first deaths in the war of New Zealanders serving with a New Zealand formation . 
 Subsequently Philomel was deployed in the Red Sea and in the Persian Gulf for much of the remainder of the year . In December 1915 she sailed to Bombay for maintenance work but was back in the Persian Gulf in January 1916 , continuing her patrolling . By the end of the year , her engines were giving trouble and her stern glands were worn out . A lengthy and costly refit was required and rather than incur this cost for a ship which was nearly at the end of her operational life , the Admiralty decided to gift her to New Zealand and dispatched her home to be paid off . She duly arrived in Wellington Harbour in March 1917 . A large portion of her Royal Navy crew were returned to England to be assigned to other berths . Armament removed , Philomel was recommissioned as a depot ship in Wellington , supporting minesweeping operations until May 1919 . 
 = = = Postwar service = = = 
 In March 1921 , on the creation of the New Zealand Division of the Royal Navy , Philomel was recommissioned as a training base . She steamed from her berth at Wellington to the dockyard at the Devonport Naval Base in Auckland . Moored alongside the training jetty , she was operated as a training facility for new recruits to the naval service , under the command of a series of officers from the Royal Navy including , for nearly six months in 1923 , Commander Augustus Agar VC . Training armament was installed and in 1925 , her boilers and engines were removed to create more accommodation space . Further accommodation , in the form of wooden cabins , was later constructed on her deck . In October 1941 , on the creation of the Royal New Zealand Navy , Philomel was recommissioned as the training base HMNZS Philomel . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 Philomel was paid off and decommissioned on 17 January 1947 and her name transferred to the Devonport Naval Shore Establishment . On the day of her decommissioning , the New Zealand Naval Board sent a signal to Philomel which stated : 
 " ... their regret at the passing from the service of the first of His Majesty ’ s New Zealand Ships , a ship that has meant so much to all who served in her . She goes as many good ships have gone before her , but when HMNZS Philomel ’ s colours are hauled down at sunset this evening , the tradition which she has established during her long career will live on in the depot to which she has given her name . " 
 The hulk of the Philomel was sold to the Strongman Shipping Company , based in Coromandel . She was towed and deliberately ran aground in Coromandel harbour , near the wharf . After her fittings and parts were removed , she was towed out to sea and sunk near Cuvier Island on 6 August 1949 . Much of the teak timber and some fittings went into a newly built coaster named <unk> , an amalgamation of Coromandel and Philomel . Her crest is mounted to the gate of the Devonport Naval Base . 
 = Personal relationships of Michael Jackson = 
 The personal relationships of Michael Jackson have been the subject of public and media attention for several decades . He was introduced to the topic of sexual activity at age nine while a member of The Jackson 5 . He and his brothers would perform at strip clubs , sharing the bill with female strippers and drag queens , and the sexual adventures of his brothers with groupies further affected Jackson 's early life . The entertainer said his " first real date " was with the child actress Tatum O 'Neal , when he was a teenager in the 1970s ; he called her " my first love - after Diana [ Ross ] . " The pair eventually " cooled off " and Jackson entered into a romance with model Brooke Shields in 1981 . Although the relationship became largely platonic , Shields said there were times he had asked her to marry him . As they grew older , the two saw each other less . 
 Having first been introduced to Lisa Marie Presley by her father , Elvis , in 1974 , Jackson reconnected with Lisa Marie in November 1992 . Shortly after becoming involved with her , in 1993 , Jackson was subjected to his first set of child sexual abuse accusations , followed by similar allegations in 2003 . Presley supported Jackson as he became dependent on pain medication , and eventually helped convince him to enter drug rehabilitation . In a telephone call , he proposed marriage to Presley . She agreed , and the two wed on May 26 , 1994 , at a private ceremony in the Dominican Republic . Married life for the couple was difficult , and the union ended in divorce in August 1996 . Presley and Jackson continued to date , on and off , for four more years after their divorce . 
 Throughout his marriage with Presley , Jackson maintained a friendship with Debbie Rowe . She was the assistant of the pop singer 's dermatologist and had been treating his appearance @-@ changing disease vitiligo since the mid @-@ 1980s . While separated but still married to Presley , Jackson impregnated Rowe , but she suffered a miscarriage and lost their baby in March 1996 . Following the ordeal and the finalization of his first divorce , Jackson wed the pregnant Rowe on November 13 , 1996 , in Sydney , Australia . From the marriage , two of Jackson 's three children were produced : son Michael Joseph " Prince " Jackson , Jr . ( born February 13 , 1997 ) and daughter Paris Michael Katherine Jackson ( born April 3 , 1998 ) . Jackson and Rowe divorced on October 8 , 1999 , with Rowe giving full custody rights of the children to Jackson . His third and final child , son Prince Michael Jackson II , was born to an unnamed surrogate mother on February 21 , 2002 . 
 In July 2009 , it was revealed Jackson 's will named Diana Ross as the next @-@ in @-@ line guardian for his children , after his mother , Katherine . In September 2009 , Rabbi Shmuley <unk> released a book based on taped conversations he had with Jackson in 2001 . It included Jackson 's thoughts on personal relationships in general and specific ones . His romantic feelings for two famous friends were widely cited in the media ; when asked if he got jealous when his long @-@ time friend Elizabeth Taylor dated other men , he replied , " Yes and no . I know that if we ever did anything romantically the press would be so mean and nasty and call us the Odd Couple . It would turn into a circus and that 's the pain of it all . " 
 = = Early sexual and emotional experiences = = 
 = = = Strip clubs = = = 
 From a young age , Jackson was exposed to sex . He received mixed messages on the subject from his parents . His mother Katherine was a devout Jehovah 's Witness and conveyed her thoughts clearly ; lust in thought or deed was sinful outside of marriage , and physical intimacy should be saved for marriage . In contrast to his wife , father Joseph , a steel mill worker , shunned the religion and would have The Jackson 5 perform at strip clubs and seedy bars in the earliest days of their career . He allowed nine @-@ year @-@ old Michael to watch from the wings of the stage as male audience members whistled at women who stripped until nude . In one incident , a fascinated Michael watched as an apparently big breasted female removed all but her underwear . The stripper then proceeded to reach into her bra , removing two large oranges and the wig from her head , to reveal that the person he thought was a female was not a woman at all . 
 While playing at Chicago 's Peppermint Lounge , the brothers made use of a peephole in their dressing room , through which they had a clear view of the women 's bathroom . They would take turns watching the women and , as Marlon recalled , " learned everything there was to know about ladies " . During other residencies , the siblings would perform Joe Tex 's " Skinny Legs and All " . Joseph Jackson would instruct a young Michael to make his way into the audience , crawl under tables , lift up ladies ' skirts and peek at their panties as part of the performance . Though embarrassed by the task , Jackson feigned enjoyment as he knew the audience loved the routine . 
 Following such performances , the Jackson brothers would be tucked in bed by their oblivious mother and reminded of the virtues of being a good Jehovah 's Witness . Katherine remained unaware of her sons ' strip club activities for many years . Journalist J. Randy Taraborrelli reflected on Jackson 's early life and noted that at such a young age , the singer may not have been psychologically equipped to fully understand any sexual stimulation he may have received from such voyeuristic events . The writer further commented that Jackson 's views on sex must have been conflicted between those of his religiously strict mother and his more libertine and promiscuous father . 
 = = = Groupies and prostitutes = = = 
 As members of the increasingly successful Jackson 5 , Michael 's brothers Jermaine and Jackie found fame advantageous . As they toured the country , they had sex with many female fans . Their guide was their father Joseph , who would often organize and arrange sexual encounters for his sons as well as cheat on his wife Katherine with their sons ' groupies . The two brothers would bring girls back to a hotel room , where younger siblings Michael and Marlon were instructed to " play sleep " . One girl , who had sexual relations with Jermaine , recalled such an experience : 
 " I jumped into bed with him and he climbed on top of me . As he climaxed , he shuddered so loudly I was afraid he would wake up Michael and Marlon , who were sleeping three feet away in the next bed . Or at least I thought they were sleeping . As I was slipping out of the room , I heard Michael say to Jermaine , ' Nice job . Now , can we please get some sleep ? ' " 
 While Marlon would correspond with and eventually marry his wife Carol at 18 , Michael never had sex with groupies , finding his brothers ' behavior toward women disgusting . In addition to not touching groupies , Jackson reportedly never had an interest in having any type of sex as a youngster . In one alleged incident , when he was 15 years old , a male family member arranged for two prostitutes to take his virginity . They were told to " work him over " , before being locked in a room with him . Instead Michael picked up a bible and read bible verses to the girls . The girls left in tears . James <unk> , who worked with The Jackson 5 , stated that the lead singer of the band often needed someone to talk with . It was at these times that women would be introduced to him for companionship . <unk> asserted that he never witnessed anything sexual , and that such females were not Jackson 's type ; " He liked nice girls , pure girls who appeared to have no street background . " 
 Jackson occasionally admonished and advised the groupies and prostitutes sent to pleasure his siblings . One Jackson fan recalled being selected from the audience to meet with Jackie . Backstage , she was handed a scrap of paper with an address to the location in which they were to meet . Michael approached her from behind and warned her that his brothers did not treat women right and that his brother only wanted to use her for sex . Changing the subject , the female fan asked for the pop star 's autograph , which request he obliged in addition to writing , " Please , don 't go " . The woman ignored Michael 's request and headed to the Jacksons ' apartment complex , where she had sex with Jackie . Afterward , Jackie informed the woman that they would not meet again . Ashamed and upset , the fan left the apartment in tears . 
 On another occasion , a prostitute was brought to Jackson 's room after a concert in Madison Square Garden . There , the pop star interrogated the sex worker , asking why she was a prostitute , whether she wanted to have sex with him , and how much it would cost . The woman responded that she was a prostitute for the money , but that she would have sex with him for free because she wanted him . The prostitute then proceeded to <unk> her blouse , exposing her breasts . Apparently repulsed , Jackson turned his head and begged her to " put them back " . The singer suggested that they talk instead but would still pay her , which the prostitute declined to do ; she was not there to talk . Instead , she gave Jackson her telephone number , urging him to call her when he wanted to " get off " . Jackson acknowledged the prostitute as she left , stating that he would perhaps call her one day , though he never did . 
 = = First relationships = = 
 = = = Tatum O 'Neal = = = 
 One of Jackson 's first documented relationships was with the child actress Tatum O 'Neal in the 1970s . Their friendship was established by the time O 'Neal was 12 and Jackson was 17 , and featured in gossip columns for several years after . Jackson reflected in 1982 that he and O 'Neal had been engaged in a serious relationship , but because both were busy , it had " cooled off " to the point of their remaining just friends . 
 In the documentary Living With Michael Jackson ( 2003 ) , Michael alleged that near the beginning of their relationship , the 12 @-@ year @-@ old actress tried to seduce the then 17 @-@ year @-@ old singer . According to Jackson , the incident happened at her home , where she attempted to <unk> his shirt and talked explicitly about sex . O 'Neal 's behavior apparently proved too much for Jackson , who became scared and covered his face , before she walked away . When confronted with the allegation , O 'Neal claimed to have been " just as shocked as everyone else " . She stated that while having respect for Jackson as an artist and a person , he had " a very vivid imagination " . The actress described his statements as " inaccurate " ; " at 12 years old , there was no way she was capable of being as mature or as sophisticated as he claimed " . O 'Neal released her autobiography A Paper Life in 2004 , a year after the Jackson documentary . In the book , she claimed it was Jackson who attempted to make out with her . The actress wrote , " I was just 12 and not at all ready for a real @-@ life encounter [ ... ] Michael , who was sweating profusely , seemed as intimidated as I was . He jumped up nervously and said , ' Uh ... gotta go . ' " 
 But this contradicted O 'Neal 's own account of the relationship in 1995 in Vibe , where she remembered Jackson as " being so shy " and " one of the nicest , most innocent people I 've ever met " , and , " Once he came into my bedroom , and he wouldn 't even sit on my bed . " She described the relationship as " a really wonderful friendship " where they would dance and " talk on the phone all the time . " She recalled that he found it funny that she could drive at 12 and he couldn 't . And that one time they had a " jam session " at her house where he played the drums and her brother played guitar . She said the relationship ended when she was 12 , after he asked her to go to the premiere of The Wiz with him , but her agent disapproved , " maybe because they thought he wasn 't a big enough star yet " , and she did what she was told because she was a child . While she claimed they never spoke after that , they were actually shown to be together a number of times after this would have happened . 
 Jackson also spoke about O 'Neal in 2001 with Rabbi Shmuley . He described holding hands with her : " I was , like , in heaven . It was the most magical thing . It was better than kissing her , it was better than anything . " He recalled one of the times they held hands : 
 I remember we went to this club , and I don 't go to clubs , which was called the Roxy . And I was watching the band , I was sitting there , and underneath the table , she was holding my hand , and I was , like melting . [ Rabbi Shmuley : She held your hand and you felt love ? ] Fireworks going off . It was all I needed . But that means nothing to kids today . She grew up too fast . She wasn 't into innocence , and I love that . 
 And similar to what he told Bashir , he said , " ... she was 13 . And I was naive . She wanted to do everything and I didn 't want to have sex at all . " 
 = = = Brooke Shields = = = 
 Jackson met 15 @-@ year @-@ old actress / model Brooke Shields in 1981 , at the Academy Awards . From there , the pair enjoyed a close relationship . Speaking in 2009 , she reflected that they were close because sex was never an issue for them . Although the headlines in the media referred to Shields ' talking about an " asexual Jackson " after his death , what she actually said was , “ As he grew older and the more he started to change physically , the more asexual he became to me . ” She also said that as she grew up and started having boyfriends , she would confide in him about her intimate experiences , as he was curious . She said , " he was like a little kid who talked about the bases – what first base was , what second base was " – and his curiosity was understandable given his guarded life . 
 In 2001 , Jackson told Rabbi Shmuley : Shields was " one of the loves of my life . I just wished she loved me as much as I loved her " , and , they " dated a lot . " Before meeting her , he said that he had pictures of her all over his room . He recalled his happiness when they first met in 1981 . He was at the 53rd Academy Awards with Diana Ross , and Shields walked up and introduced herself ; then at the after @-@ party she asked him to dance with her . They exchanged numbers , and he " was up all night , singing , spinning around my room , just so happy . " He also said , “ We had one encounter when she got real intimate and I chickened out . And I shouldn ’ t have . ” 
 In Moonwalk ( 1988 ) , Jackson said his relationship with Shields was " romantically serious for a while . " Shields said that while never formally proposing , he would speak about the two marrying and raising adoptive children together . The suggestions were met with disapproval from Shields , who felt such a move would have " divided [ her ] life too much " . She recalled : " There were times when he would ask me to marry him , and I would say , ' You have me for the rest of your life , you don ’ t need to marry me , I ’ m going to go on ... have my own marriage and my own kids , and you ’ ll always have me . ' I think it made him relax . He didn ’ t want to lose things that meant something to him . " 
 As the couple 's separate lives diverged , the two gradually saw each other less . At the time of Jackson 's death in 2009 , the pair had not seen each other for 16 years . Shields claimed that in the singer 's last years " it was harder to get the right number to get through to him " . In July 2009 , she spoke at the Michael Jackson memorial service , reminiscing about their time together : 
 " Thinking back to when we met and the many times that we spent together and whenever we were out together , there would be a caption of some kind , and the caption usually said something like ' an odd couple ' or ' an unlikely pair , ' but to us it was the most natural and easiest of friendships .... Michael always knew he could count on me to support him or be his date and that we would have fun no matter where we were . We had a bond .... Both of us needed to be adults very early , but when we were together , we were two little kids having fun . " 
 In a June 30 , 2009 interview , Ola Ray also said that she and Jackson " would play like little kids " when working on the Thriller video ( 1983 ) , as she recalled how he was clearly " into Brooke Shields " and kept on teasing her about Shields ' visiting the set . 
 = = Lisa Marie Presley = = 
 = = = First meeting and courtship = = = 
 In 1974 , a 16 @-@ year @-@ old Michael Jackson — who would later be dubbed " The King of Pop " — was introduced for the first time to his future wife at the MGM Grand Hotel and Casino in Paradise , Nevada by her father , " The King of Rock ' n ' Roll " , Elvis Presley . Lisa Marie was six at the time , and had been brought to the hotel to watch a show by The Jackson 5 , of whom she was a big fan . The young girl was particularly fascinated by lead singer Michael Jackson and his talent at dancing . 
 According to a friend of Presley 's , " their adult friendship began in November 1992 in L.A. " They met at a private dinner held at the home of their mutual friend the artist Brett @-@ Livingstone Strong . Knowing that Presley had been looking for help within the music industry , Strong had her play tapes for Jackson , who was impressed with the female singer 's voice . The pair talked for the remainder of the night , until it was time for Jackson to leave . At this point , according to Strong , the entertainer gave Presley , who was still married at the time , a penetrating look and said in a conspiratorial voice , " You and me , we could get into a lot of trouble . Think about that , girl . " 
 In the days following this interaction , Presley and Jackson spoke on the telephone almost every day , forging a strong friendship . The two came to realize they had much in common : both had been protected and sheltered from the real world , both felt they had missed out on a normal childhood , both were mistrustful of outsiders having spent most of their lives feeling exploited by them , and both had problems with the media . Presley was raised in Graceland , while Jackson lived at Neverland . 
 In 1993 , he became the subject of child sexual abuse accusations and the female singer , along with a few others , was there for emotional support . Michael would call Presley from overseas as he embarked upon the second leg of the Dangerous World Tour and the child abuse investigation intensified . During such telephone conversations , the female star attempted to reverse Jackson 's sadness with humour and advice . Presley later recalled that she believed in the musician 's innocence and that she could " save him " . Fueled by her past addictions and her father 's death , Presley supported Jackson as he became addicted on painkillers , urging him to settle the allegations out of court and go into rehabilitation . He subsequently did both . 
 = = = Proposal and wedding = = = 
 It was during one of Jackson 's calls to Presley that he proposed marriage . " If I asked you to marry me , would you do it ? " , the singer queried . Though still married to actor Danny Keough , whom she had wed in 1988 and had two children with , Presley replied that she would . After a pause , Jackson exclaimed that he had to use the bathroom . Having apparently relieved himself , the singer explained to his new fiancee that his love for her was genuine and she had to believe him . In 2010 , Presley acknowledged to Oprah Winfrey that Jackson did formally propose one day in the library , taking out a 10 carat diamond ring and getting down on his knees . 
 Following several months engaged , Jackson and Presley wed on May 26 , 1994 , at a ceremony in the Dominican Republic . Presley had divorced Keough only 20 days before . The 15 @-@ minute ceremony was held by Judge Hugo Francisco Alvarez Perez at his home in the La Vega Province . The union was conducted in Spanish and translated for Presley and Jackson by an attorney . Eva Darling , Presley 's friend , served as a witness along with Thomas Keough , her ex @-@ husband 's brother . At the time of their marriage , the press and public were unaware that the two even knew each other . The wedding was kept secret from them , Jackson 's family , and Presley 's mother Priscilla . However , Gotham Chopra recalled that Jackson called him " in a panic " on his wedding night and asked if he had any " sex advice " , wanting " to make sure that Lisa was impressed with his ' moves . ' " 
 Upon being informed of her daughter 's marriage with Jackson a week later , Priscilla became irritated ; she believed the male pop singer was using her child to rehabilitate his image following the child abuse accusations . To the press , however , Priscilla stated that she was " very supportive of Lisa Marie and everything she does " . 
 The union was met with a mixed reaction from the media when it was made public two months later . Some sources described the union of " The King of Pop " and " The Princess of Rock ' n ' Roll " as being " The Marriage of the Century " . One newspaper headline scoffed , " Jackson @-@ Presley Union Sparks Shock , Doubt , Laughs . " Addressing both the media and public , the new Mrs. Presley @-@ Jackson issued a statement : 
 " My married name is Mrs. Lisa Marie Presley @-@ Jackson . My marriage to Michael Jackson took place in a private ceremony outside the United States ( 11 ) weeks ago . It was not formally announced until now for several reasons ; foremost being that we are both very private people living in the glare of the public media . We both wanted a private marriage ceremony without the distraction of a media circus . I am very much in love with Michael , I dedicate my life to being his wife . I understand and support him . We both look forward to raising a family and living happy , healthy lives together . We hope friends and fans will understand and respect our privacy . " 
 = = = Married life and disagreements = = = 
 For the next year of their married life , the newly wedded couple divided their time between Jackson 's 2 @,@ 700 @-@ acre ( 11 km2 ) Neverland Ranch in Santa Ynez , California and Presley 's 1 @-@ acre ( 4 @,@ 000 m2 ) estate , 100 miles ( 160 km ) away in Hidden Hills . Defying the initial thoughts of some of the public , Presley did not move into Jackson 's home upon getting married . According to J. Randy Taraborrelli , this was due to her wanting to remain independent , as well as Presley 's children ( Danielle and Benjamin ) finding their new stepfather " a little strange " . 
 The pair 's first appeared together on television at the 1994 MTV Video Music Awards , in what has been described as a " memorable moment " . Holding hands , the couple walked onto the stage in New York . In front of a television audience of 250 million , Jackson announced , " Just think , nobody thought this would last " , before embracing Presley in a kiss . Afterward , Presley became angered at her husband , feeling he had used her . The male pop singer reasoned that the <unk> , which was dubbed " The Kiss of the Century " , would be talked about for decades , with people playing the clip over and over . Jackson 's attempts at placating his wife proved futile ; she told the singer not to " fucking even come near me " and remained angry for several days . 
 In the same week , Jackson and Presley had another argument . Newspaper reports had been suggesting that if Elvis were alive , he would not approve of his daughter 's marriage . Annoyed , Jackson reportedly suggested that the couple could find out by holding a séance to contact the deceased " King of Rock ' n ' Roll " . During the session they would ask his opinion of the union . Presley felt the idea was tasteless and , upon Jackson 's continuing to push the idea , warned , " If you stay on this particular road , they 're gonna need a medium to contact you in the Great Beyond , because I 'm about to put you there , right now . " The two supposedly never spoke of the incident again . 
 = = = Primetime and further marriage difficulties = = = 
 Jackson and Presley appeared on the television show Primetime in June 1995 . In Jackson 's first interview since 1993 and Presley 's first ever , Diane Sawyer quizzed the pair on their private life with , according to Jet , a series of " insensitive " questions . Presley boasted that she and Jackson had regular sex , following Sawyer 's questioning their sex life . When asked if the marriage was a sham , Presley asserted that such rumors were " crap " ; she said she would never marry someone for any other reason than being in love with him , and concluded that if the public thought differently , they could " eat it " . The following day , Presley reflected that the interview had been a disaster ; she had hoped the couple would be perceived as being serious , yet Jackson fooled around during the show , at one point holding two fingers behind his wife 's head to make bunny ears . Presley 's friend Monica <unk> revealed that it was at this point that the female singer began to wonder whether she had made a mistake in choosing Jackson as a long @-@ term partner . 
 A further problem for the pair was Jackson 's insistence on being around children . Though she never believed he was a pedophile — " I wouldn 't have let him near my kids if I thought that " — she felt her husband was only opening himself up to more rumor and innuendo following the 1993 allegations . One evening at Neverland , Presley confronted the pop star on the issue and was met with a defiant Jackson , resulting in another argument . Upon being called selfish , the male musician pointed to his humanitarian endeavors . Presley countered that his philanthropy was irrelevant , that the issue was about them . 
 Presley also disagreed with having children with the singer . Imagining the future and what would happen if the marriage ended , Presley saw a " custody battle nightmare " . In addition , she felt her husband was too emotionally immature to be a parent , having watched his daily interactions with other people ; she believed he was the one in need of parenting . Jackson explained to his wife over breakfast one morning that she did not have to be the biological mother if she so desired . He explained , " My friend Debbie [ Rowe ] said she will get pregnant and have my baby . If you won 't do it , then she will . How about that ? " Unmoved , Presley replied that it was fine by her . 
 Following several more troubled months , Jackson ended up in the hospital ; he had collapsed while rehearsing for a concert in New York . Presley arrived to meet her ill husband , and yet another heated debate ensued . The argument ended after Jackson warned her that she was making his heart rate go up and asked her to leave . She obliged , and was admonished by a doctor and Jackson 's mother Katherine along the way . Presley subsequently returned to Los Angeles . Upon being discharged from hospital , Jackson went to Disneyland Paris to recover . 
 = = = Divorce = = = 
 Presley filed for divorce in early 1996 , citing " irreconcilable differences " and noting their date of separation as December 10 , 1995 , shortly after the incident in the hospital . The divorce was finalized on August 20 , 1996 . As part of the settlement , the female singer received 10 % of the royalties from HIStory : Past , Present and Future , Book I , which album contained the song " You Are Not Alone " , whose music video featured a semi @-@ nude Presley and Jackson frolicking against an ethereal backdrop . As she did not sign a confidentiality agreement , a further clause stated that Presley could write a tell @-@ all book about her time with Jackson . At the time , " The Princess of Rock ' n ' Roll " revealed that she had no wish to write a memoir ; the singer still had respect for Jackson and did not want to speak critically of him . Presley also wanted to preserve her own dignity and keep their life together private . 
 The divorce proved difficult for Jackson , who spent several weeks lamenting his loss . Presley was the first person with whom he had connected on such a high level . She had supported him as he faced allegations and became dependent on pain medication . It was also the first time that the pop singer had had a sexual chemistry with another . Presley was able to make him open up and express himself through their physically intimate moments together . At the time , Jackson was afraid there would never be another who made him feel the way his ex @-@ wife had . He eventually realized he had to move on ; he had a world tour coming up and music to work on . Jackson also knew that Presley would never make him a father , which he longed to be . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Presley was seen with Jackson in various cities during HIStory World Tour in 1997 ; notably at various functions in South Africa and in London , holding hands backstage and around the city . In February 1998 , they were photographed in an intimate moment together outside a Beverly Hills restaurant on Presley 's birthday . 
 In a 2010 Oprah interview , Presley admitted that they spent four years after the divorce " getting back together and breaking up " , until she felt she " had to push it away . " She described the parallels between the lives of Jackson and her father Elvis , and said Jackson constantly asked her about the details of Elvis ' death because he felt that he was " going to end up the same way . " She had described such a conversation in a blog post the day after Jackson died , wherein she shared her feelings about his death . According to Presley , the last " coherently good conversation " she had with Jackson was in 2005 . She said Jackson told her she had been right about certain people around him , whom she called " vampires . " She replied that she was indifferent when he asked if she still loved him . But Presley also said his death made her realize he loved her . She acknowledged his efforts in the relationship , saying , " He honestly tried so hard and went through so much with me " , but " I didn ’ t appreciate it then and I wish I did . " At the end of the conversation , he reportedly told her " he felt that someone was going to try to kill him to get a hold of his catalog and his estate " and named some names she didn 't want to say in the interview . 
 = = Debbie Rowe = = 
 = = = Background and friendship = = = 
 Debbie Rowe met Michael Jackson in the mid @-@ 1980s , while working as an assistant for the pop star 's dermatologist Dr. Arnold Klein . Rowe treated Jackson 's vitiligo , which he had been diagnosed with in 1986 and which would affect his physical appearance for the remainder of his life . Rowe supported Jackson , providing answers to the questions Jackson asked about his medical condition . The pair became good friends ; the pop star frequently sent autographed merchandise to the woman , who hung it on the walls of her office . According to Rowe 's friend Tanya Boyd , the dermatologist 's assistant would obsess over Jackson , gushing over him and his traits . She would say to her friend , " If people knew him like I knew him , they would not think he was strange . He 's unique , kinky , actually . " 
 The Jackson @-@ Rowe friendship would last for several years , during which time the female assistant married and divorced Richard Edelman , a man she claimed to have felt trapped by . Rowe and the musician would both talk to each other about their unhappy marriages ; his with Presley and hers with Edelman , a teacher at Hollywood High School . Like Jackson 's first wife , Rowe supported the entertainer when he was accused of child sexual abuse . Jackson kept his friendship with Rowe a secret from his wife , who eventually found out but thought nothing of it ; she felt the dermatologist 's assistant was not her husband 's type because she was not glamorous enough . 
 = = = First pregnancy and miscarriage = = = 
 As Presley had refused to carry Jackson 's children , Rowe offered to give birth to a child for the pop singer . Shortly after Presley and Jackson 's separation , Rowe became pregnant but suffered a miscarriage in March 1996 . The event devastated the woman , who feared she would never be able to have a baby . Jackson comforted and consoled Rowe throughout the ordeal , which remained hidden from the media and public . 
 = = = Second pregnancy and reaction = = = 
 Jackson embarked on the first leg of his HIStory World Tour on September 1996 . One month into the tour and several months after his divorce from Presley , Jackson 's personal life made headlines as it was revealed that Debbie Rowe was pregnant with his child . One tabloid newspaper , the News of the World , told the story under the headline " I 'm Having Michael 's Baby " . Rowe reacted furiously to the publication , labeling the editorial staff " bastards " and complaining that they reported the story as if she and Jackson were freaks . J. Randy Taraborrelli later noted that the article , which had been put together from a secret tape recording between Rowe and a friend , had been fairly accurate . It detailed that Jackson was the father of the baby and that he would be raising the child alone . It also stated that Jackson impregnated Rowe artificially with his own sperm cells , a " foolproof " method of insemination . Further reports alleged that the relationship was an " economic " one ; she was in it for the money and he sought a baby . 
 In a statement , Jackson condemned the accusations of being in an economic relationship and using artificial insemination as " completely false and irresponsible " . Despite the denials , it was noted that Rowe had received millions of dollars from Jackson as " gifts " over the years . Among court papers filed against Jackson in 2002 by business manager Myung Ho Lee , a monthly budget for Jackson was detailed and included a $ 1 @.@ 5 million payment to Rowe . The pop musician later bought the woman a $ 1 @.@ 3 million home in 1997 ; he and Rowe never lived together . 
 When the news of Rowe 's pregnancy broke to Jackson 's mother Katherine , the Jackson family matriarch urged her son to wed the mother of his unborn child . Katherine did not want her son to be like his father , who had produced an illegitimate child with a woman while married to Michael 's mother . Katherine first spoke on the telephone to Rowe about the sanctity of marriage and about the Jehovah 's Witness faith . She later spoke to Jackson , telling him to marry " that nice girl , Debbie " and " give your child a name , not like your poor , half @-@ sister , Joh <unk> " . The words resonated with the musician , who did not want to repeat his father 's sins . 
 Prior to Katherine 's words , the view had been for Rowe to act as a surrogate mother ; she would give the baby to Jackson as a friendly favor and he would raise it . Jackson intended to issue a statement following the birth that the identity of the mother was a secret , in the same way that the identities of many surrogates are protected . Katherine 's involvement , however , influenced Jackson to call Rowe and ask her to meet him in Australia , where he was staying , as soon as she could . There , the entertainer announced his plans for them to wed the next day . 
 = = = Wedding = = = 
 Jackson and Rowe wed on November 13 , 1996 , at the Sheraton on the Park Hotel in Sydney , Australia . The night before the wedding , Jackson had called Presley , who gave him and Rowe her blessing . In front of 15 friends , the pair exchanged vows at the hotel . An 8 @-@ year @-@ old boy named Anthony , who was Jackson 's nephew , served as the best man during the ceremony . For the occasion , Jackson had put special effort into his appearance . 
 Media and public reaction to the marriage was negative and cynical . Some commentators believed Jackson was marrying a person he did not love , and Rowe was having a baby who may not have been biologically Jackson 's . The Daily Mirror , a British tabloid newspaper , published a photograph of Rowe on the balcony of an Australian hotel . In it , she is seen holding her head in her hands . One Jackson biographer stated that the woman 's dismayed and exasperated pose was most probably due to the excessive presence of paparazzi below . The Daily Mirror , however , ran the photograph while mockingly proclaiming , " Oh , God ! I 've Just Married Michael Jackson . " 
 = = = Birth of Prince Michael = = = 
 Jackson and Rowe 's first child together , Michael Joseph Jackson , Jr . ( also known as " Prince Michael " ) , was born on February 13 , 1997 , at Cedars @-@ Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles . The baby was named after Michael 's grandfather and great @-@ grandfather , who were both called Prince . After Rowe and Jackson cut the baby 's umbilical cord together , Prince was taken to intensive care , where he spent five hours with only minor problems . He was subsequently taken by his father to Neverland Ranch . Prince 's mother recuperated at a friend 's house upon her release from the hospital . 
 Six weeks after the birth , Rowe saw her son for the first time since his arrival into the world . She had met with Jackson to pose for photographs with their newborn son at a hotel . Upon arriving , Rowe was ushered into the hotel room , where she was given the infant to hold and told to smile for the camera with Michael . Afterward , she was sent on her way . Rowe did not want to become too attached to Prince , as she felt it would make her situation harder to deal with . At Neverland , Prince was cared for by a team of six nannies and six nurses during his first few months . According to one nanny who worked at the Californian ranch , Prince Michael 's mother was not a significant presence in the child 's early life . " I saw her maybe three times and she seemed very sullen . " 
 = = = Second pregnancy and birth of Paris = = = 
 Rowe announced that she was pregnant with Jackson 's second child in November 1997 . The baby was to be a girl and named Paris , after the French city in which her parents said she was conceived . On April 3 , 1998 , blue @-@ eyed Paris @-@ Michael Katherine Jackson was born . Her middle names come from Michael and his mother , Katherine . Jackson later claimed that he was so anxious following the birth of his daughter , that he " snatched " her and ran straight home " with all the placenta and everything all over her " . Rowe later confirmed that Jackson had the placenta frozen . Following the birth , Jackson 's associates contacted Pope John Paul II at the Vatican in Rome , in the hope that the Pontiff would personally baptize the pop star 's daughter . An official for the Pope informed Jackson by letter that the leader of the Catholic Church would not participate in what may be perceived as a publicity stunt . 
 = = = Divorce = = = 
 Feeling uncomfortable with their arrangement , Rowe asked Jackson for a divorce , which he granted on October 8 , 1999 . Rowe received around $ 10 million in a settlement , which started with an immediate payment of $ 1 @.@ 5 million . With the divorce , Rowe gave Jackson full custody rights to her children . At the time , both Rowe and Jackson requested privacy and asked the public not to speculate on the reasons for their divorce . They concluded that despite coming to the end of married life , they would continue to remain friends . 
 = = = After divorce = = = 
 Following the divorce , Jackson would go on to have a third child . Prince Michael II was born on February 21 , 2002 , to an unnamed surrogate mother . Rowe denied being the biological mother of Prince Michael II , who is nicknamed " Blanket " . Jackson stated that the baby was produced through artificial insemination using his own sperm cells . He further claimed that he did not know the mother , and she did not know him . The pop star added that in asking for a surrogate mother , he did not care how old she was or what race she was . It did , however , matter to him that she was intelligent , healthy , and had uncorrected eyesight . 
 In the television documentary , The Michael Jackson Interview : The Footage You Were Never Meant to See , a rebuttal video to Martin Bashir 's Living with Michael Jackson ( 2003 ) interview , Rowe attempted to explain her relationship with Jackson and their two children : 
 " My kids don 't call me Mom because I don 't want them to . They 're Michael 's children . It 's not that they are not my children , but I had them because I wanted him to be a father . People make remarks , ' I can 't believe she left her children . ' Left them ? I left my children ? I did not leave my children . My children are with their father , where they are supposed to be . I didn 't do it to be a mother ... If he called me tonight and said let 's have five more [ children ] , I 'd do it in a heartbeat . " 
 In 2006 , Rowe legally applied for her access to her two children to be reinstated and subsequently reached an agreement with Jackson . Following the singer 's death in 2009 , his mother Katherine was made the permanent guardian of Prince Michael , Paris , and their half @-@ brother Prince Michael II . In addition , a new custody arrangement was made with Rowe , who has visitation rights with her two children and will continue to receive spousal support payments . 
 Questions have frequently arisen as to whether Jackson was the biological father of his three children . Doubts first surfaced after it was reported that his son , Prince , had " white skin " . Jackson insisted in 2003 that the children were biologically his . 
 = = Allegations regarding sexuality = = 
 Despite his relationships with women , Jackson 's sexuality was the subject of speculation and controversy for decades . The pop singer faced allegations of being gay since he was a teenager , as well as later being labelled asexual . One 1970s newspaper story alleged that the then 19 @-@ year @-@ old singer was to have a sex change operation and marry the songwriter Clifton Davis . Jackson found out about the story from a crying fan . The musician reassured the girl that the tale was untrue and condemned it as a " stupid rumor " . The story circulated for many months , during which time Jackson became upset ; he was raised in a family where homosexuality was considered sinful . Jackson would continue to deny being gay throughout his life . In a 1979 interview , the pop star stated that he was not gay and that he would not " have a nervous breakdown because people think I like having sex with men " . He added that if he let the rumor affect him , it would make him cheap and make it sound as if he was prejudice against gay people . He expressed that many of his fans may be gay , and that he did not mind that . " That 's their life and this is mine . " 
 = = = 1993 child sexual abuse allegations = = = 
 In 1993 , Jackson was accused of child sexual abuse by Evan Chandler , on behalf of his then @-@ 13 @-@ year @-@ old child , Jordan Chandler . To the father 's disapproval and concern , his son had become friends with the musician in May 1992 . Allegedly under the influence of a controversial sedative administered by Evan Chandler , a dentist , his son said that Jackson had touched his penis . Evan Chandler was tape @-@ recorded threatening to damage the singer 's music career , and engaged Jackson in unsuccessful negotiations to resolve the issue with a financial settlement . Jordan Chandler then told a psychiatrist and later police that he and Jackson had engaged in acts of kissing , masturbation and oral sex . Jackson settled a civil suit out of court with the Chandler family and their legal team for $ 22 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in January 1994 . After Jordan Chandler refused to testify in the criminal proceedings , the state closed its criminal investigation citing lack of evidence , and Jackson was not charged with a crime . Jordan Chandler later admitted to lying . After Jackson 's death , Evan Chandler committed suicide . 
 = = = 2003 child sexual abuse allegations = = = 
 Further accusations of child sexual abuse were made in 2003 , by 13 @-@ year @-@ old Gavin Arvizo . The allegations came after Jackson and the boy appeared in the documentary Living with Michael Jackson , in which the entertainer stated that he shared his bed with children in a non @-@ sexual fashion . The musician was subsequently indicted on four counts of molesting a minor , four counts of intoxicating a minor , one count of abduction , and one count of conspiring to hold the boy and his family captive at Neverland Ranch . During the five @-@ month trial , Jackson faced allegations of child molestation and assertions that he had attempted to abduct the Arvizo family in a hot air balloon . He denied all the charges and family members proclaimed that he was the victim of an extortion attempt . One friend , Firpo Carr , expressed amazement at the allegations leveled against the singer , who at the time was living at Neverland Ranch . " I 'm surprised they haven 't accused him of bestiality because he also has a zoo there . I mean , it gets ridiculous after a while . " On June 13 , 2005 , the jury found Jackson not guilty on all charges . 
 = = = 2013 and 2014 child sexual abuse allegations = = = 
 In May 2013 , choreographer Wade Robson filed a civil lawsuit against Jackson 's estate for child sexual abuse . The date for the hearing which would determine whether or not Robson could sue Jackson 's estate was scheduled for June 2 , 2014 . 
 Robson met Jackson when he was 5 years old . In 2005 , he had testified in Jackson 's defense during his child molestation trial . At that trial , Jackson 's former housekeeper Blanca Francia had testified that she had witnessed Robson showering with Jackson when Robson was 8 or 9 years old . 
 However , in his 2013 filing , Robson claimed that by the time he was 7 years old , he was regularly having sleepovers at Jackson 's Neverland Ranch and Jackson 's homes in Los Angeles and Las Vegas , which lasted until he was 14 , and that Jackson sexually abused him throughout the 7 @-@ year period . Blanca Francia agreed to testify on Robson 's behalf in the case . The attorney for Jackson 's estate described Robson 's claim as " outrageous and pathetic " . 
 In May 2014 , a second man , Jimmy Safechuck , filed a lawsuit against the Jackson estate alleging that Jackson had sexually abused him between the ages of " 10 to about 15 " . Jackson had met Safechuck in 1987 and Safechuck , then 10 , was featured in the commercial of Jackson 's Pepsi ad advertising his upcoming Bad World Tour at the time . 
 = Westholme House = 
 Westholme House is a historic building in the English market town of Sleaford in Lincolnshire , set in 32 acres of parkland and school grounds . Built around 1849 in the style of a French Gothic mansion by Charles Kirk for his business partner Thomas Parry , it was privately owned until the 1940s , when Kesteven County Council acquired the house and its grounds . It subsequently served as the county library and part of Sleaford Secondary Modern School ( later St George 's Academy ) . The stone house follows an asymmetrical layout and incorporates a range of Gothic elements in its design . In 1974 , it was recorded in the National Heritage List for England as a designated Grade II listed building , recognising it as of " special interest " . 
 = = History = = 
 Prior to the enclosure of Sleaford in 1794 , the lands that later became the Westholme estate were mostly open fields . The largest was <unk> Race behind the houses on Westgate , thought to be named for the muddy puddles that formed there . That field was bounded to the north by Drove Lane , a track running to South Rauceby , and parts of the future estate also included " <unk> Furlong " to the north west and <unk> to the north east . Following the enclosure , Drove Lane was straightened and moved northwards by a third of a mile ; the old open fields were reorganised within this new space , producing straight , geometric boundary lines . The future Westholme grounds were divided up between several land @-@ owners , including Lord Bristol and Benjamin Handley . 
 = = = Private ownership = = = 
 Thomas Parry ( 1818 − 1879 ) , an architect , builder and future Member of Parliament for Boston employed his business partner and brother @-@ in @-@ law , Charles Kirk the younger , to design Westholme House on the site for him ; their firm Kirk and Parry completed the mansion around 1849 . Parry moved in with his wife , mother and sister , and employed two servants ; by 1871 , two domestic workers had been added to his household . Parry died in 1879 followed by his wife , Henrietta , in 1882 . 
 Henry Peake ( 1821 – 1886 ) was occupying Westholme in 1885 , three years after the death of Parry 's wife . Peake was a solicitor who served as clerk to the county magistrates , and was a partner in the local law firm Peake , Snow and Peake , along with his son Henry Arthur Peake . The partnership had connections with Kirk and Parry , and Peake married Eliza , a daughter of Charles Kirk the elder . After his death , Peake 's sons , George Herbert and Henry Arthur , successively occupied the house in the late 19th and early 20th centuries . During the First World War , Henry Arthur and his wife , Alice Ann , lost three of their sons in battle . In 1923 , Henry Arthur died while staying at Hastings . He and his wife were planning to sell Westholme and move to Guildford before his death ; she did so and died there in 1933 . The businessman and Liberal politician Samuel Pattinson ( 1870 – 1942 ) lived at the house from at least 1924 . His wife , Betsy Sharpley Pattinson , also died in 1942 and their trustees auctioned off the furniture at Westholme two years later . 
 = = = Public ownership = = = 
 Westholme was occupied by the military during the Second World War . Kesteven County Council had acquired the land by 1945 and proposed to use it for educational purposes . The council wanted to convert the house into Kesteven County Library , but it had to wait for the War Department to agree to pay fees for " <unk> " caused during its occupancy . The Department provisionally agreed on £ 1 @,@ 276 16s in 1947 and the library was operating at the house by 1949 . An Navy , Army and Air Force Institutes ( NAAFI ) canteen supplied school meals after the war ; and in 1947 the council bought a series of huts on the site from the War Department . 
 In 1957 , the council planned to open a new mixed secondary modern at Westholme and , by 1960 , Sleaford Secondary Modern School was operating there alongside its original buildings on Church Lane . In 1983 , an extension to the Westholme block opened , allowing the school to close the old site ; new teaching blocks were then built around the grounds . The school changed its name to St George 's School in 1984 , became a technology college in 1992 and converted to St George 's Academy in 2010 . The house continued to be used as a library into the 1980s , but by the next decade , had become the school 's sixth form base and an adult education centre . As a result of major rebuilding work at St George 's in 2011 – 12 , a new sixth form centre opened and Westholme House was converted into the school 's administrative centre . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Charles Kirk and Thomas Parry were builders and architects in Sleaford ; their company prospered in the mid @-@ 19th century and was responsible for a number of civic , religious and corporate buildings in the town , including the gas works , Carre 's Grammar School and Carre 's Hospital . Westholme has been called their " most cheerfully inventive " building ; built in the style of a Gothic château , Pevsner described the mansion as " an ebullient essay in French [ 15th century ] domestic Gothic . " 
 The two @-@ storey house is built in coursed stone with steep , Welsh slate roofing . Its asymmetrical design incorporates an eclectic range of Gothic elements , including tall , polygonal chimney stacks , a four @-@ centred arch doorway , dragon motifs and carved pinnacles . The eastern façade includes two gables with a tall four @-@ centred arch window . To the right is a tower of three @-@ storeys with a pointed roof which connects to a projecting bay of two storeys . The bay incorporates a stack of three square windows topped with a Flamboyant arch , two hipped roofs with decorative spikes , and three chimneys . The rear is more simple ; the windows are mullioned and most are square , except for three bay windows . It has two wings laid out like half an " H " , which each have a gable and embattled parapets . 
 The site also houses a Gothic stable @-@ block , which Sir Nikolaus Pevsner considered " charming " , and two Tudor @-@ style lodges . A stretch of wall in the grounds is 100m long and made up of stone fragments , many Gothic , which were most likely taken from church restorations conducted by Kirk and Parry . 
 = 1953 FA Charity Shield = 
 The 1953 Football Association Charity Shield was the 29th FA Charity Shield , an annual football match played between the winners of the previous season 's Football League First Division and FA Cup competitions . It was held at Highbury Stadium on 12 October 1953 . The game was played between Arsenal , champions of the 1952 – 53 Football League and Blackpool , who had beaten Bolton Wanderers to win the 1953 FA Cup Final . This was Blackpool 's first FA Charity Shield appearance to Arsenal 's ninth . 
 In the match , Blackpool started strongly and scored first with Stan Mortensen 's goal in the 30th minute . Against the run of play , however , Arsenal equalised through Tommy Lawton and in the second half they went ahead when Doug Lishman reacted first to a rebounded shot . Lishman scored his second of the match in the 80th minute , which sealed a seventh Charity Shield honour for Arsenal . 
 = = Background = = 
 The FA Charity Shield was founded in 1908 as a successor to the Sheriff of London Charity Shield . It was a contest between the respective champions of the Football League and Southern League , and then by 1913 teams of amateur and professional players . In 1921 , it was played by the Football League champions and FA Cup winners for the first time . 
 Arsenal qualified for the 1953 FA Charity Shield as champions of the 1952 – 53 Football League First Division . The other Charity Shield place went to Blackpool who won the 1952 – 53 FA Cup . The final of the competition , which pitted Blackpool against Bolton Wanderers , was best remembered for Stanley Matthews ' performance , and later associated by his name . The 1953 Shield marked Blackpool 's first appearance in the annual contest . By contrast , this was Arsenal 's ninth Charity Shield appearance ; prior to the game they had won six Shields ( 1930 , 1931 , 1933 , 1934 , 1938 and 1948 ) , and lost two ( 1935 and 1936 ) . 
 Arsenal announced their team two days before the match , recalling Cliff Holton who had recovered from injury . Blackpool refused to reveal their team until the evening of 12 October , but manager Joe Smith did confirm to the press that Matthews would start . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 On a foggy , floodlit night at Highbury , it was the visitors who dominated the early proceedings ; The Times football correspondent assessing that Blackpool 's forward line had " … flowed sweetly , the ball on the ground in the most lovely [ sic ] , sweeping movements . " Matthews was at the heart of their best moves and , in particular , one pass through the Arsenal defence sent Bill Perry clear on goal . He tripped over the incoming Arsenal goalkeeper Jack Kelsey , but quickly managed to get up . With Kelsey out of his line , Perry was presented with the chance to score , but his shot hit the post . Blackpool continued to create chances and went ahead after 30 minutes of play . Breaking forward with the ball from the half @-@ way line , Matthews combined with his team @-@ mate Ernie Taylor , which culminated in Stan Mortensen getting the better of his marker and shooting past Kelsey . 
 Despite Blackpool 's dominance , Arsenal managed to equalise seconds before half @-@ time . From the left wing , Holton got the better of his opponent Eddie <unk> by taking the ball off him , and proceeded to cross ; the ball found Tommy Lawton who scored from the byline . Once play resumed in the second half , Blackpool struggled to reproduce the same kind of intensity that had merited their earlier lead . Arsenal dictated play the longer the match went on , and looked more assured in defence – The Times singled out Mercer ’ s growing influence , adding " … one noticed the improvement of [ Bill ] Dodgin at centre @-@ half , and the high promise of young [ Len ] Wills , playing only his second game at right back . " 
 Arsenal took the lead in the 65th minute when Jimmy Logie 's pass was collected by Holton . His shot at goal rebounded into the path of Doug Lishman , who was following up , and he scored . Ten minutes before the end , a cross by Don Roper into Blackpool ’ s penalty area was headed down by Lawton ; the ball reached Lishman who scored again to make sure of Arsenal 's win . 
 The Shield was presented to Arsenal by Lord Alexander of Tunis , the Minister of Defence . Gate receipts for the match totalled £ 6 @,@ 589 . In his assessment of the game , The Manchester Guardian 's football correspondent John Woodcock wrote : " The football was not the only thing that had been of a high order . The sportsmanship and spirit in which it was played had been in every way as fine . " Arsenal ended the season 12th in the First Division , and reached the fourth round of the FA Cup . Blackpool finished six positions higher in the league , but progressed no further than the fifth round of the cup competition . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 Source : 
 = Thurstan = 
 This page is about Thurstan of Bayeux ( 1070 – 1140 ) who became Archbishop of York . Thurstan of Caen became the first Norman Abbot of Glastonbury in circa 1077 . 
 Thurstan or Turstin of Bayeux ( c . 1070 – 6 February 1140 ) was a medieval Archbishop of York , the son of a priest . He served kings William II and Henry I of England before his election to the see of York in 1114 . Once elected , his consecration was delayed for five years while he fought attempts by the Archbishop of Canterbury to assert primacy over York . Eventually , he was consecrated by the pope instead and allowed to return to England . While archbishop , he secured two new suffragan bishops for his province . When Henry I died , Thurstan supported Henry 's nephew Stephen of Blois as king . Thurstan also defended the northern part of England from invasion by the Scots , taking a leading part in organising the English forces at the Battle of the Standard ( 1138 ) . Shortly before his death , Thurstan resigned from his see and took the habit of a Cluniac monk . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Thurstan was the son of a canon of St Paul 's in London named Anger , Auger or Ansgar , who held the prebend of <unk> . Another son of Anger , <unk> , was later Bishop of Évreux . Thurstan 's mother was named <unk> . Thurstan was born sometime about 1070 in Bayeux , in the Bessin region of Normandy . Before 1104 the father was given the prebend of <unk> by Maurice , Bishop of London , and the family moved to England . 
 Early in his career , Thurstan held the prebendary of <unk> per mare in the diocese of London , and served both William Rufus and Henry I as a royal clerk . At some point in Thurstan 's early career , he visited Cluny , where he vowed to become a Cluniac monk later in his life . Thurstan also served Henry as almoner , and it was Henry who obtained Thurstan 's election as Archbishop of York in August 1114 . He was ordained a deacon in December 1114 and ordained a priest on 6 June 1115 by Ranulf Flambard , who was Bishop of Durham . 
 = = Controversy and exile = = 
 The Archbishop of Canterbury , Ralph d 'Escures , refused to consecrate Thurstan unless the archbishop @-@ elect made a profession of obedience to the southern see . This was part of the long @-@ running Canterbury @-@ York dispute , which started in 1070 . Thurstan refused to make such a profession , and asked the king for permission to go to Rome to consult Pope Paschal II . Henry I refused to allow him to make the journey , but even without a personal appeal from Thurstan , Paschal decided against Canterbury . At the Council of Salisbury in 1116 the English king ordered Thurstan to submit to Canterbury , but instead Thurstan publicly resigned the <unk> . On his way to the Council , Thurstan had received letters from Paschal II that supported York and commanded that he should be consecrated without a profession . Similar letters had gone to Ralph d 'Escures from the pope , ordering Ralph , as Archbishop of Canterbury , to consecrate Thurstan . After the news of the letters became public , Thurstan 's resignation was ignored , and he continued to be considered the archbishop @-@ elect . 
 Over the next three years , the new popes , Gelasius II and Calixtus II , championed Thurstan 's case , and on 19 October 1119 he was consecrated by Calixtus at Reims . Calixtus had earlier promised Henry that he would not consecrate Thurstan without the king 's permission , which had still not been granted . Enraged at this , the king refused to allow the newly consecrated archbishop to enter England , and Thurstan remained for some time on the continent in the company of the pope . While he was traveling with the pope , he also visited Adela of Blois , King Henry 's sister , who was also Thurstan 's spiritual daughter . At about this same time , Calixtus issued two bulls in Thurstan 's favor : one released York from Canterbury 's supremacy forever , and the other demanded the king allow Thurstan to return to York . The pope threatened an interdict on England as a punishment if the papal bull was not obeyed . At length , Thurstan 's friends , including Adela , succeeded in reconciling him with Henry , and he rejoined the king in Normandy . At Easter 1120 , he escorted Adela to the monastery of <unk> , where she retired from active secular affairs . He was recalled to England in early 1121 . 
 = = Archbishop = = 
 One of the main weaknesses of the see of York was its lack of suffragan bishops . Thurstan managed to secure the resurrection of the Diocese of Galloway , or Whithorn , in 1125 . It is possible that he compromised with Fergus of Galloway , who was the lord or sub @-@ king of Galloway , in what is now Scotland . In this Thurstan secured another suffragan , and Fergus gained a bishop in his lordship , where previously ecclesiastical matters in his subkingdom had been handled by Scottish bishops . The first bishop was the native Galwegian – Gilla Aldan . This provoked the wrath of <unk> , Bishop of the Isles , who had previously had jurisdiction over Galloway ; but the new bishopric survived , and York had a new suffragan , an important step in the battle between York and Canterbury over the primacy , which was mainly a battle over the prestige of their respective sees . The number of bishops subject to either archbishop was an important factor in the reputation of each . In 1133 , Thurstan , who had received papal permission to found an entirely new diocese , consecrated Æthelwold as the first bishop of the new see of Carlisle . 
 Thurstan refused to accept that the new Archbishop of Canterbury , William de Corbeil , was his superior , and did not help with William 's consecration . The dispute between the two continued , and both archbishops carried their complaints in person to Rome twice . In 1126 , Pope Honorius II ruled in favour of York . The pope based his decision on the fact that Canterbury 's supporting documents had been forged . 
 Thurstan supported King Stephen after Henry I 's death in 1135 , and appeared at Stephen 's first court at Easter held at Westminster . Thurstan negotiated a truce at Roxburgh in 1138 between England and Scotland . It was Thurstan who mustered the army which defeated the Scots at the Battle of the Standard on 22 August 1138 near Northallerton , Yorkshire . Thurstan did not take direct part in the battle . , but he created the standard that gave the battle its name , by putting a ship 's mast in a cart and hanging the banners of Saint Peter of York , Saint John of Beverley , and Saint Wilfrid of Ripon on the mast . The Scots had invaded attempting to aid the Empress Matilda , the daughter of Henry I and Stephen 's rival for the throne . On 21 January 1140 Thurstan resigned his see and entered the order of the Cluniacs at Pontefract and he died there on 6 February 1140 . He was buried in the church at Pontefract . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Thurstan gave land to many of the churches of his diocese and founded several religious houses . He founded the first nunnery in Yorkshire when he founded St Clement 's between 1125 and 1133 . He obtained for Whitby Abbey a papal privilege of protection as well as giving his own privilege to the abbey . He also helped found the Cistercian Abbey of Fountains , by giving the site to monks who had been expelled from the Abbey of St. Mary 's , York . Thurstan helped the <unk> Christina of Markyate at several points in her career , and tried to persuade her to become the first prioress of his foundation of St. Clement 's . He was a patron to the Augustinian Hexham Priory , founded by his predecessor at York , as well as helping the foundation of Bridlington Priory , another Augustinian house . He was a sincere reformer , and opposed to the election of unfit men to the episcopacy . When Pope Innocent II asked Thurstan 's opinion on the elevation of Anselm of St Saba , who was Abbot of Bury St. Edmunds , to become Bishop of London , Thurstan replied " If we consider his life and reputation , it would be much more fitting to remove him from his abbacy than to promote him to be bishop of London . " Anselm was not confirmed as bishop . 
 Thurstan 's nephew was Osbert de Bayeux , who became an archdeacon at York , and in 1154 was accused of the murder of William of York , one of Thurstan 's successors at York . 
 = Planescape : Torment = 
 Planescape : Torment is a role @-@ playing video game developed by Black Isle Studios and published by Interplay Entertainment for Microsoft Windows . Released on December 12 , 1999 , the game takes place in locations from the multiverse of Planescape , a Dungeons & Dragons ( D & D ) fantasy campaign setting . The game 's engine is a modified version of the Infinity Engine , which was used for BioWare 's Baldur 's Gate , a previous D & D game set in the Forgotten Realms . 
 Planescape : Torment is primarily story @-@ driven and combat is not prominent . The protagonist , known as The Nameless One , is an immortal who has lived many lives but has forgotten all about them , even forgetting his own name . The game focuses on his journey through the city of Sigil and other planes to reclaim his memories of these previous lives . Several characters in the game may join The Nameless One on his journey , and most of these characters have encountered him in the past or have been influenced by his actions in some way . 
 The game was not a significant commercial success but received widespread critical praise and has since become a cult classic . It was lauded for its immersive dialogue , for the dark and relatively obscure Planescape setting , and for the protagonist 's unique persona , which shirked many characteristics of traditional role @-@ playing games . It was considered by video game journalists to be the best role @-@ playing game of 1999 , and continues to receive attention long after its release . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Planescape : Torment is built on BioWare 's Infinity Engine , which presents the player with a two @-@ dimensional world in which player characters are controlled . The game 's rules are based on those of Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2nd Edition . The player takes the role of " The Nameless One " , an immortal being on a quest to learn why he cannot die . Exploration around the painted scenery is accomplished by clicking on the ground to move , or on objects and characters to interact with them . Items and spells may be employed through hotkeys , " quick slots " , or a radial menu . An alternative to armor is the use of magical tattoos , which can be applied to The Nameless One and certain other characters to enhance their abilities . 
 The game begins with character creation , where the player assigns attribute points ( such as strength , intelligence , charisma ) to The Nameless One . The Nameless One starts the game as a fighter , but the player may later change his character class to thief or wizard , with the option to also change back to fighter , after finding corresponding tutors . The player may recruit adventuring companions over the course of the game ; there are seven potential party members , but a maximum of five may accompany the player at any one time . Conversation is frequent among party members , occurring both randomly and during conversations with other non @-@ player characters . 
 Planescape : Torment 's gameplay often focuses on the resolution of quests through dialogue rather than combat , and many of the game 's combat encounters can be resolved or avoided through dialogue or stealth ; a review of the game in incite PC Gaming says that " The game is almost entirely story driven , and by asking the right questions you should only have to get violent a handful of times . " The Nameless One carries a journal , which helps the player keep track of the game 's numerous quests and subplots . Death of the player character usually imposes no penalty beyond respawning in a different location . 
 Alignment in D & D — which determines a character 's ethical and moral perspective on the independent axes of " good vs. evil " and " law vs. chaos " — is a static property , chosen by the player at the start of a game . In Planescape : Torment , the character begins as a " true neutral " character ( that is , neither good nor evil , and neither lawful nor chaotic ) and throughout the game , based on the character 's actions , this property is incrementally changed . Non @-@ player characters respond to The Nameless One differently , depending on his alignment . A review in NextGen reported that " the game caters to both the goody @-@ goody player who wants to be nice and lawful , and the evil bastards who just want to kill everything and take no guff from anyone " . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Planescape : Torment is set in the Planescape " multiverse " of D & D , a setting which consists of various planes of existence , the creatures which live in them ( such as devils , <unk> , and even deities ) , and the properties of the magic that infuses each plane . In a March 2000 article for Game Studies , Diane Carr called the setting " a freak show , a long story , a zoo , and a cabinet of talkative curiosities " and described the creatures and monsters in the game as " grotesque rather than scary " . Planescape : Torment is the first video game to be set in the Planescape universe . 
 The first part of Planescape : Torment takes place in Sigil , a city located atop an infinitely tall spire at the center of the multiverse , that connects the planes with each other via a series of portals . The city is overseen by the powerful Lady of Pain , while fifteen factions control different functions of the city related to each group 's world view . Every faction strives for further control of the city . The Nameless One can even join several of these factions during the game . The story eventually moves on to other planes , such as Baator and Carceri , where The Nameless One continues to discover more about his past . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Planescape : Torment 's protagonist is " The Nameless One , " an immortal being who , if killed , will wake up later , sometimes with complete amnesia . Each time The Nameless One dies , another person in the multiverse dies to fuel his resurrection . These dead turn into ghosts that seek revenge on him . When the game starts , The Nameless One wakes in a mortuary with no memories , as a result of his latest death . He sets out on a quest to regain his lost memories and discover why he is immortal . He slowly learns about the personalities of his previous incarnations , and the influence they have had on the world and people that surround him . 
 Over the course of the game , The Nameless One meets seven characters who can join him on his quest : Morte , Annah @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Shadows , Dak <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Fall @-@ From @-@ Grace , and <unk> . These playable characters can also interact with the Nameless One to further the game 's plot . Morte is a cynical floating skull originally from the Pillar of Skulls in Baator . He is introduced at the game 's beginning in the mortuary . Morte loyally follows The Nameless One , partly out of guilt for having caused the deaths of some of his previous incarnations . The Nameless One meets Annah @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Shadows , a young and brash tiefling ( a human with fiendish ancestry ) rogue , outside the mortuary , but she does not join the group until a later point in the game . Dak <unk> is a <unk> , who once made an oath to follow The Nameless One until the latter died , not knowing of The Nameless One 's immortality ; this bound him to The Nameless One for eternity . <unk> is a <unk> mage who was the apprentice of one of The Nameless One 's past selves . In the <unk> Dungeon Construct , the Nameless One can find <unk> , a <unk> disconnected from its species ' hive mind . Fall @-@ From @-@ Grace is a succubus who acts as proprietress of the Brothel of <unk> Intellectual <unk> in Sigil ; unlike other succubi , she is not interested in seducing mortals . <unk> , found below the city of Curst on the plane of the Outlands , is essentially an animated suit of armor dedicated to serving merciless justice . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 The game 's story begins when The Nameless One wakes up in a mortuary . He is immediately approached by a floating skull , Morte , who offers advice on how to escape . Morte also reads the tattoos written on The Nameless One 's back , which were inked there as reminders to himself , that contain instructions to find a man named Pharod . After a conversation with the ghost of his former lover , <unk> , and passing by various undead , The Nameless One leaves the mortuary to explore the slums of Sigil . He finds Pharod , who is the chief of an underground village of scavengers , and retrieves a magical bronze sphere for him . In return , Pharod gives him further hints to piece together his forgotten past . Later on , The Nameless One learns from a powerful sorcerer named Lothar that the night hag Ravel Puzzlewell caused his immortality , but the hag is currently imprisoned in a magical maze by the Lady of Pain . The Nameless One finds a portal to Ravel 's maze , but realizes that it requires a piece of Ravel to activate it ; for this , he locates Ravel 's daughter and takes drops of her blood . 
 Once in the maze , The Nameless One converses with Ravel , who asks him , " What can change the nature of a man ? " — a question that plays a prominent role throughout the game . Ravel is pleased with The Nameless One 's answer because he offers his own thoughts ; she claims she has killed many men in the past who , instead of giving their own answers , tried to guess what her answer might be . As the conversation progresses , Ravel explains that , in a past life , The Nameless One had asked her to make him immortal ; however , the ritual she performed was flawed , causing him to lose his memory each time he died . She reveals that the mortality she separated from him was not destroyed , and that as long as he was alive , his mortality must still be intact . She does not know where his mortality is , but suggests that the fallen deva Trias might . 
 Ravel then attempts to keep The Nameless One there by force . After the Nameless One and his party leave the maze , Ravel gets up , having actually survived the encounter . The Transcendent One appears , and , after a short conversation , kills Ravel . Following this , The Nameless One travels to the city of Curst , a gate town on the border of the Outlands and Carceri , to meet and free Trias . Through a tip from Trias , who claims not to know where The Nameless One 's mortality lies , The Nameless One then visits the Outlands and Baator , where he learns that his mortality lies in the Fortress of Regrets and that only Trias knows how to access this place . Meanwhile , however , the city of Curst has " slid " from the border of the Outlands to the neighboring chaotic plane Carceri due to the chaos unleashed by Trias after The Nameless One freed him . After a fight , Trias tells The Nameless One that the portal to the Fortress of Regrets is located in Sigil 's mortuary , in the very room where the game began . 
 In the Fortress of Regrets , The Nameless One encounters three of his past incarnations : one practical , one good , and one paranoid . The Nameless One learns that the " good " incarnation is the original , who was made immortal by Ravel . The Nameless One had committed immeasurably terrible deeds in his lifetime , and when he realized there would be retribution on his soul when he died , he sought to postpone death as long as possible in order to atone . After meeting his past incarnations , The Nameless One confronts his mortality , which is embodied as a powerful being called The Transcendent One . The Transcendent One reveals that since being separated from The Nameless One , he has enjoyed his freedom and has been attempting to erase clues that might lead The Nameless One to discover the truth . Depending on the player 's choice , The Nameless One either slays his mortality or convinces it to rejoin with him ; either option finally ends his immortality and allows him to die . In the game 's final scene , The Nameless One awakens near a battleground of the eternal Blood War between demons and devils ; he picks up a mace and walks toward the conflict . 
 = = Development = = 
 In 1997 , the game 's designers produced a 47 @-@ page document that outlined the game 's premise and vision statement , and was used to pitch the idea to management at Interplay . Initially , the game was to be called Last Rites , and they described the game as " avant @-@ garde " fantasy to distinguish it from high fantasy . The document also contained concept artwork for characters and areas of the game . 
 From the outset , Planescape : Torment 's designers intended to challenge traditional role @-@ playing game conventions : the game features no dragons , elves , goblins , or other common fantasy races ; there are only three swords ; the rats faced in the game can be quite challenging to defeat ; and the undead sometimes prove more sympathetic than humans . The designers explained that most RPGs tend to have a " correct " approach to solving problems , which is almost always the morally good approach . They called this " predictable and stupid " and wished to make a game with greater moral flexibility , where a particular problem might have " two wrongs or two rights " . The main quest is not about saving the world , but about understanding The Nameless One and his immortality . Death ( of the protagonist or his companions ) is often just a minor hindrance , and even necessary at times . 
 According to lead designer Chris Avellone , Planescape : Torment was inspired by books , comics , and games , including Archie Comics , The Chronicles of Amber , The Elementals and Shadowrun . The game 's 1997 outline also makes references to The Lord of the Rings to describe some characters . While working on Planescape : Torment , Avellone was simultaneously working on Fallout 2 . In an interview from 2007 , he says that Fallout 2 helped him rethink the possibilities of dialogue in Planescape : Torment ( and in later games he was involved with , including Neverwinter Nights 2 ) . Avellone remarked that many of the ideas in the game " could only have been communicated through text , simply because no one would have the budget or resources to fully realise many of these fantasy works through TV or movies " . Ultimately , Avellone has expressed some regret about the game 's heavy focus on dialogue , as he feels this interfered with the overall game mechanics , particularly the combat system . The game 's script contains around 800 @,@ 000 words , after early previews had indicated that the game would be only about 20 hours long . 
 In several interviews the producer of the game , Guido Henkel , stated that he was increasingly frustrated by the pressure the management of Interplay put on the development team after Interplay 's initial public offering . Although only a few additional subplots and characters had to be discarded to meet the planned release date , he accused the Interplay management of disregarding the development team regarding things like package design and marketing . Henkel said that it was his main goal to prevent the game from being " crippled " before leaving Interplay when the game reached beta status . He also made the claim that his overall influence on the game was greater than that of Chris Avellone , Eric Campanella , or Dave Maldonaldo , but since a producer often has to make unpopular decisions his role was later downplayed . 
 The game used the Infinity Engine , a game engine initially developed by BioWare for Baldur 's Gate . However , Planescape : Torment was being developed using the Infinity Engine before Baldur 's Gate had been released , leaving the engine 's acceptance in the market still unknown . Black Isle made modifications to the engine to suit the game . For example , playable characters were able to run , and both the character sprites and backgrounds were larger and more detailed . The greater size and detail was achieved by bringing the perspective closer to the ground . Magic was also an important part of the game 's design , and a team of four designers worked solely on the visuals and mechanics of spells . 
 In addition to official localizations , for example the one by CD Projekt for the Polish market , fan communities developed Spanish , Hungarian , and Italian fan translations of the game . When Interplay dropped support for Planescape : Torment after the official 1 @.@ 1 patch , several not yet fixed bugs were corrected by fan created unofficial patches . Other mods add back items and quests omitted from the final version of the game or new features such as widescreen support . 
 The game was re @-@ released on DVD in 2009 , and for purchase on GOG.com in September 2010 . 
 Interplay initially hired dark ambient musician Lustmord to create the musical score for Planescape : Torment , although this score was ultimately not used . His music was pulled from the game by the producer so that the game 's music could be taken in a different direction , and Mark Morgan created the game 's final music . The game 's cast of voice actors included Michael T. Weiss , Sheena Easton , Rob Paulsen , Mitch Pileggi , Dan Castellaneta , and Tony Jay . 
 After the game 's release , a reviewer for Game Revolution praised its sound , saying that " When you 're in a crowded city , it sounds like a crowded city . Walk past a bar , and you 'll hear the noise of the drunken patrons inside . Wander near a slave auction , and you 'll hear the auctioneer calling . Go to a party in the festival hall , and it sounds just like a party " . The same reviewer also stated " Planescape has just about the best sound I 've ever heard in a game . " IGN gave the sound 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 and noted that " The game has fantastic speech and sound effects , but what 's more impressive is the way they fade in and out depending on how close you 're standing to them . " 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 A book by the same name was written by Ray and Valerie <unk> and released by Wizards of the Coast in 1999 . The book 's plot follows the game 's only loosely ; for example , in the game , the main character 's lack of a name is a sign of his incomplete state and a source of protection in being anonymous . In the book , the protagonist chooses a proper name . For the game 's re @-@ release on GOG.com a second , more accurate , novelization produced by <unk> Hess was bundled with the game , based on the game script by Chris Avellone and Colin McComb . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Planescape : Torment received widespread critical acclaim upon its release , but only made a small profit . GameSpot 's reviewer stated " It 's clearly the best traditional computer role @-@ playing game of the year " , a comment which the website would later expand to " one of the greatest ever " . Allen Rausch , writing for GameSpy 's 2004 retrospective " A History of D & D Video Games " , commented that Black Isle Studios " went way over the top for this one , crafting an utterly unique experience that has yet to be equaled by any RPG since " . The gameplay was often compared to Baldur 's Gate , another Interplay game that used the same engine as Planescape : Torment . 
 The game 's premise and writing were warmly received ; a review in the New York Times noted " The game 's level of detail and its emotional impact have prompted some players to cast about for literary peers . " Reviewers were pleased with the ability to shape their character 's journey as they wished . In 2005 , GameSpot stated " Planescape : Torment has quite possibly the best implementation of role @-@ playing an evil character ever to appear in a computer or video game to date " . The heavily tattooed , egocentric and potentially selfish Nameless One was welcomed as a change of pace from the conventional RPG hero , who was considered a predictable do @-@ gooder . Reviewers also approved of the protagonist 's ability to gain new powers by " remembering " past lives . The dark and diversified representation of the D & D setting of Planescape was lauded as a fresh departure from the traditional high fantasy of computer role @-@ playing games . A review in NextGen praised the game , saying that " Torment offers the best RPG gameplay anyone can find on store shelves , hands down . " <unk> <unk> of <unk> commented that " Planescape : Torment proves that it is possible to make an inventive , fun and refreshing game in this " sea of clones " . Creating a computer edition of Planescape system is another triumph for Black Isle Studios . " 
 [ Planescape Torment 's ] limits are elusive . [ ... ] Even small choices have multiple and unpredictable results , leading players to incidents , to confrontations or to nothing much . The game resists resolution or even comprehension . A rambling text like Planescape Torment bounces when you try and nail it down , it resists <unk> . It has its moments of " rush " and of confrontation , but it wants to be savoured , wandered through , in the company of armed companions . 
 The technical aspects of the game were also praised . Although by the time of its release in late 1999 , Planescape : Torment 's default 640x480 resolution was not considered particularly advanced , reviewers were pleased with the art design and color of the environments . The game 's sound and music were described as " well above the norm " and " superb " , and one reviewer stated that his only complaint about the music was that " there wasn 't enough of it " . Another reviewer stated that Planescape : Torment had " just about the best sound " they had heard in a video game . GamePro stated , " ... the characters talk with the talent of real professional voice actors during crucial bits of dialog " . The game 's graphics were moderately well received , with incite PC Gaming saying that " [ the graphics ] can be a little lackluster , although some of the spell effects certainly look very good " , a statement echoed in NextGen which stated that " mind @-@ blowing spell effects ... will remind you of a two @-@ dimensional Final Fantasy game . " 
 The game 's interface received positive remarks . The US edition of PC Gamer commented on the automap , which automatically marked important locations and allowed the user to add custom notes , and on the journal , which separated completed quests from unfinished quests . PC Gamer also praised the fine @-@ tuning of the Infinity Engine , such as the use of a radial menu , which allowed the player to stay focused on the game instead of managing multiple screens and " messing with windows and buttons " . 
 ... we were swept away by Planescape : Torment . It wasn 't the effective engine , demented characters , or lavish lands that won us . It was the rich storyline . This tale is more a reflection of your true self than any game ever made . 
 Criticism of the game was minimal and problems were generally described as minor , but included complaints about long load times on computers of the day , or the game slowing down during combat . Bugs were responsible for slowing down the game when a high level of graphical assets were on @-@ screen at the same time , but it was reported that a fix was released that solved the problem . Allgame 's Derek Williams considered the game 's combat simplistic ( with a comparison to Diablo ) , which made the game too easy . The most negative major review came from Eurogamer , who gave the game seven out of ten ( and later increased it to eight when the game was patched ) . Their reviewer expressed distaste at the immortality of the player character , saying that it made the lives of characters " cheap and meaningless " , although other reviews welcomed this aspect , saying it was " implemented perfectly " and did not make the game easier . Eurogamer also disapproved of the amount of experience that was awarded for certain dialogues later in the game . However , other reviews cited this as one of the main things that elevated Planescape : Torment above the standard RPG format . Some reviewers also criticized the game 's pathfinding AI as being " less than impressive " . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Planescape : Torment was given several Editor 's Choice awards , was named RPG of the Year for 1999 by both GameSpot and Computer Gaming World , and won the Vault Network 's Game of the Year for 1999 . PC Gamer US named Planescape : Torment " Game of the Month " in their March 2000 issue ( the issue in which the game 's review appeared ) . It has since attracted a cult following , and continues to garner respect long after its release — in 2004 , GameSpy added it to their Hall of Fame , and in 2005 GameSpot declared it one of its greatest games of all time . In 2007 , IGN named it 71st on their list of the Top 100 Games of All Time , stating that many have " had their ideas of what an RPG is completely revamped after playing this one " . In 2008 , the UK edition of PC Gamer rated it ninth on its own Top 100 list . 
 In 2006 , The A.V. Club included Planescape : Torment in their list of " 11 of Video Gaming 's Strangest Moments " , due to the game 's use of death as a means to advance the plot . In 2006 , Gamasutra polled video game industry professionals with the question : " Which role playing game over the entire history of the genre do you think has made the biggest ' quantum leap ' , and why ? " . Planescape : Torment was ranked second overall after Fallout , earning it a " Quantum Leap Award " . The game also received an honorable mention for the same awards in the " Storytelling " category . In December 2008 , IGN listed it as 8th out of 10 in a list of " Franchises We Want Resurrected " and praised the game as having " some of the best writing and characterization seen in gaming " . 
 In 2009 , Bit @-@ tech included Planescape : Torment on their list of " 30 PC Games to Play Before You Die " . Chris Avellone was awarded Eurogamer 's " Gaming Globe " award for Best Designer in 2000 for his work on Planescape : Torment , and The Nameless One was considered to be the Best Male Lead Character . In 2009 , Game Informer put the game 188th on their list of " The Top 200 Games of All Time " , saying that it " allowed players to ... influence the plot to an unheard @-@ of degree for 1999 " . In 2010 , UGO ranked it as # 5 on the list of games needing a sequel . A 2011 update of PC Gamer magazine 's top 100 PC games of all @-@ time ranked Planescape : Torment as the 19th greatest PC game . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Following the announcement of Baldur 's Gate : Enhanced Edition , Overhaul Games announced their intention to make overhauls of more games set in the Dungeons & Dragons universes , at first naming only Planescape : Torment . They said that such a release would depend on the success of Baldur 's Gate : Enhanced Edition . 
 In November 2012 , Penny Arcade Report wrote that Brian Fargo , the head of inXile Entertainment , had acquired the rights to Torment . In January 2013 , Brian Fargo announced that the spiritual successor to Planescape : Torment , titled Torment : Tides of <unk> , was in production and would be set in the <unk> RPG universe created by Monte Cook . 
 = Melbourne Storm = 
 Melbourne Storm is an Australian professional rugby league team based in Melbourne , Victoria that participates in the National Rugby League . The first fully professional rugby league team based in the state , they entered the competition in 1998 . Melbourne Storm was originally a Super League initiative and created in 1997 during the Super League war . The club plays its home games at AAMI Park . The Storm has won two premierships since its inception , in 1999 and 2012 , and has contested several more grand finals . A salary cap breach discovered in 2010 saw the club stripped of two titles by the NRL . Melbourne Storm also competes in the NRL 's Under @-@ 20s competition and has done since the inception of the competition in 2008 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1990s = = = 
 By 1994 , due to the high attendances at recent State of Origin series matches ( including a then Australian rugby league record crowd of 87 @,@ 161 in 1994 at the Melbourne Cricket Ground ) the Australian Rugby League ( ARL ) had planned to establish a Melbourne @-@ based team in the Premiership by 1998 . However , the disruption caused by the Super League war caused great change to the game in Australia . By May 1997 , Super League boss John Ribot pushed for a Melbourne @-@ based club for his competition , which was the rival of the ARL . Former Brisbane Broncos centre Chris Johns became the CEO of the club and Ribot stepped down from the head of Super League to set up the club . In September 1997 , Melbourne announced that Chris Anderson would be their foundation coach , and then Super League announced that the new team would be named the Melbourne Storm . 
 The Melbourne club then went forward with signing players , mainly from folding Super League clubs Perth Reds and Hunter Mariners . Some of these players included Robbie Ross , Glenn Lazarus , Brett Kimmorley and Scott Hill . With the Super League and ARL joining into one competition for the 1998 season , the Melbourne team became part of the National Rugby League ( NRL ) . The Melbourne Storm club was unveiled at a function in the Hyatt in February 1998 . 
 In their first game , they defeated the Illawarra Steelers , with Glenn Lazarus as their inaugural captain . Melbourne , in a complete shock to the rest of the competition , won their first four games , before losing to the Auckland Warriors . They went on to make the finals , but were defeated by the eventual premiers , the Brisbane Broncos . 
 In January 1999 , CEO John Ribot negotiated a deal that saw Melbourne Storm games televised in China every weekend . The club won eight of their first eleven games of the 1999 NRL season , and went on to make the finals in third position on the Premiership ladder . The team was beaten convincingly 34 – 10 in the quarter final by St. George Illawarra . After narrow victories against the Canterbury Bulldogs and the Parramatta Eels however Melbourne once more faced St. George Illawarra , this time winning 20 – 18 and securing their first Premiership . 
 = = = 2000s = = = 
 Melbourne 's Premiership defence began relatively slowly losing their first four games of the 2000 NRL season , the club went on to make the finals ( finishing 6th ) , but were eventually knocked out by Newcastle Knights in the quarter @-@ finals . Between 2001 and 2002 , the club 's on field performances waned , resulting in a 10th @-@ placed finish in 2002 . Cracks were starting to appear between John Ribot and Anderson throughout the period , with Anderson quitting as coach after round 7 , 2001 . He was replaced by Mark Murray . The Melbourne club failed to make the finals in 2001 . Johns left the club as CEO at the end of 2002 and coach Murray was sacked due to Melbourne 's poor form , with the club missing the finals for the second year in a row . Wayne Bennett 's assistant coach at the Brisbane Broncos , Craig Bellamy was announced as the new coach of Melbourne for 2003 . In addition to a new captain in Kiwi international skipper Stephen Kearney , Bellamy 's strict coaching would see the Melbourne Storm get back on track from the previous lean years . 
 Between 2003 and 2005 , Melbourne consistently made the finals , but lost games in the semi finals that prevented them from reaching the grand final . On 17 July 2004 , during round 19 of the 2004 NRL season , Danny Williams king @-@ hit Wests Tigers ' player Mark O 'Neill . 
 Williams defended the incident , using four medical experts to argue on his behalf that he was suffering post @-@ traumatic amnesia when the incident occurred , which he claims was the result of a high tackle by O 'Neill just prior to the incident . Despite Williams ' claim , he was suspended for 18 weeks by the NRL judiciary . After the decision , Williams stated that he was " obviously disappointed with the outcome " . It was the longest suspension in Australian rugby league since Steve Linnane was suspended for twenty weeks for eye @-@ gouging in 1987 . 
 In 2005 , Storm coach Craig Bellamy , in his third season as an NRL coach , gained representative honours when he was selected to start coaching the Country Origin team . 
 Season 2006 saw the retirement of captain Robbie Kearns , the emergence of talented rookie halfback Cooper Cronk , taking the reins from Matt Orford , and the recruitment of hard @-@ man Michael Crocker . Contrary to expectation , 2006 was a standout year for the Melbourne team , winning their first Minor Premiership . Melbourne only lost four games in the season , making them outright leaders by four wins . They went on to win their two finals matches , and were favourites in the 2006 NRL Grand Final , but lost 15 – 8 to the Brisbane Broncos , in a match where controversial refereeing decisions against Melbourne caused much media coverage . 
 In 2007 , the Storm finished the season Minor Premiers by finishing on top of the table again . They progressed through the finals series with wins over Brisbane , 40 – 0 , and then Parramatta 26 – 10 , in the Preliminary final . This secured a berth in the 2007 NRL Grand Final against the Manly Sea Eagles which they won 34 – 8 , with Greg Inglis winning the Clive Churchill Medal for best on ground . 
 In 2008 , foundation player Matt Geyer became the first player to play 250 games for the club . Melbourne finished on top of the ladder after the 26 rounds of regular competition and despite becoming the first minor premiers since the McIntyre Final Eight System was introduced to lose their opening finals game ( 15 – 18 to the New Zealand Warriors ) , they then defeated the Brisbane Broncos 16 – 14 , scoring in the last minute of their semi final . Cameron Smith was suspended for two matches for a grapple tackle on Brisbane 's Sam Thaiday in the match , seeing him miss the rest of the finals , and Craig Bellamy was fined $ 50 @,@ 000 for making scathing remarks against the judiciary 's decision . Melbourne convincingly beat the Cronulla Sharks 28 – 0 to qualify for the Grand Final , but suffered the heaviest Grand Final defeat in league history , beaten 40 – 0 by Manly . Greg Inglis , Billy Slater , Cameron Smith and Israel Folau all won awards at the Dally M Awards , and Slater and Smith finished equal second for the Dally M Medal . Billy Slater was awarded the international player of the year Golden Boot award for 2008 , following on from Cameron Smith in 2007 . 
 In the 2009 season , Melbourne finished 4th on the ladder ; they defeated Manly 40 – 12 in the first week of the finals and Brisbane 40 – 10 in the preliminary finals to qualify for a fourth straight grand final ( the first since Parramatta from 1981 – 1984 ) . Against Parramatta , who had finished eighth in the home @-@ and @-@ away season but had won ten of its last eleven matches , the Storm led at one stage by 16 points , before finishing 23 – 16 winners . Slater won the Clive Churchill Medal , and they were named as the NRL Team of the Decade for the 2000s . 
 In the late 2000s the Melbourne Storm were still running at a loss of up to $ 6M per season . However , they were voted the state of Victoria 's most popular sports team by a national Roy Morgan Poll in October 2009 . 
 = = = 2010s = = = 
 On 11 January 2010 , it was announced that Brian Waldron resigned his position as CEO to take up the same position at the Melbourne Rebels Super Rugby team . He was replaced by Matt Hanson who was the Chief Operating Officer , however following the Salary cap revelations Matt Hanson was then stood down and Ron Gauci appointed . 
 The Storm 's first match of the season was the 2010 World Club Challenge against equally dominant English side , the Leeds Rhinos , in very cold and wet conditions the Storm prevailed 18 – 10 . For the 2010 NRL season , they played their first three home games at Etihad Stadium before unveiling their new purpose built permanent home ground , AAMI Park . 
 On 22 April 2010 the club admitted that it had committed serious and systematic breaches of the salary cap for the last five years by running a well @-@ organized dual contract and bookkeeping system which left the NRL ignorant of $ 3 @.@ 17 million in payments made to players outside of the salary cap , including $ 550 @,@ 000 in 2007 , $ 965 @,@ 000 in 2009 and $ 1 @.@ 03 million in 2010 . As a result , NRL Chief Executive David Gallop stripped the Melbourne Storm of their 2007 and 2009 Premierships and their 2006 , 2007 and 2008 minor Premierships ( all of which were withheld , rather than awarded to the runners @-@ up ) , fined them a then Australian sporting record $ 1 @,@ 689 @,@ 000 , deducted all eight Premiership points they had already received in the 2010 season , and barred them from receiving Premiership points for the rest of the season . The club had won enough matches to make the finals , but automatically finished in last place due to the penalties . The penalty did not have an effect on the players , who remained eligible for Test and State of Origin selection as well as Dally M contention ; ultimately , Melbourne did not figure prominently in the latter awards . 
 The Storm 's 2011 season saw a return to the top of the NRL ladder , winning what after the salary cap penalties was considered the club 's first Minor Premiership . The season included a club record twelve consecutive wins . However , Melbourne did not reach the Grand Final , losing the preliminary final against New Zealand . Billy Slater won the Dally M Medal , and Craig Bellamy and Cameron Smith also won awards on Dally M Medal night . 
 The Storm 's 2012 season started very strongly with nine consecutive wins , the club 's best start to a season up to that time . A five @-@ game losing streak between Rounds 16 and 21 , ( the club 's second worst losing streak to that time ) saw them fall from the top of the ladder . However , from Round 22 forward they recovered their winning form and finished the regular season with five straight wins , ending the regular season in second place on the table . Storm began their finals campaign with a 24 @-@ 6 win over South Sydney Rabbitohs . Storm played its fifth Preliminary Final in six years , this time defeating Manly @-@ Warringah Sea Eagles 40 @-@ 12 at AAMI Park , following this they then went on to claim their second official Premiership defeating the Canterbury Bulldogs 14 - 4 in the Grand Final . 
 The Storm began its 2013 season when they defeated Leeds Rhinos 18 @-@ 14 in the World Club Challenge , to be crowned World Champions for 2013 . In round 5 , they won their 5th consecutive game for the season and their 13th consecutive overall . Setting a new club record , the streak ended at 15 games with a loss in Round 8 . 
 On 21 May 2013 the Storm announced that , effective immediately , News Limited had sold the club to Holding M.S. Australia Pty Limited , an organisation made up of internationally experienced and successful businessmen . This change included replacement of the News Ltd Board and Executive , which included the replacement of Chairman Stephen Rue with Bart Campbell and CEO Ron Gauci with Mark Evans . News Limited had owned the Storm since its inception in 1997 . On 9 June 2013 Captain Cameron Smith played his 250th game for the club . 
 The Storm managed to finish 3rd in 2013 , however successive losses to the South Sydney Rabbitohs and Newcastle Knights in the finals saw the Storm miss the Preliminary Finals for the first time since 2005 ( excluding 2010 ) . 
 On 15 March 2014 Billy Slater reached his 250th game milestone , a feat matched by Cooper Cronk on 30 August 2014 . Craig Bellamy passed 300 games as coach on 16 May 2014 . In mid 2014 the Storm also announced a new feeder partnership with the Sunshine Coast Falcons this would complement their existing relation ship with Brisbane Easts with a view to establishing a permanent footprint in the Sunshine Coast Area . The 2015 season began successfully for the Storm with the club finding itself on top of the ladder following Round 7 . In April Storm CEO Mark Evans announced that he will return to England and complete his tenure as CEO in late June , the club is now in the process of searching for his replacement . An expanded Representative weekend over the 2 – 3 May saw fifteen Storm players selected to play in the various matches . In June 2015 the Club announced that Dave Donaghy will be taking over as CEO from Mark Evans . In Round 19 of the 2015 season Cameron smith played his 300th game becoming only the 24th player in history to do so . In August 2015 the storm formally announce that they would create an Academy on the sunshine Coast to develop and nurture developing talent in the region with a view to progressing through the Storm ranks . Part of the establishment of this Academy meant that the Melbourne Storm Under 20s Team would play all of its home games at the new facility from 2016 onward . 
 The 2016 season began well for the Storm finding themselves in Third place on the ladder after 10 rounds . In Round 5 they scored their 300th NRL win and in Round 9 , Craig Bellamy coached his 350th NRL game . On 23 May the Melbourne Storm announced that it had been one of three successful bidders and the only NRL club to gain a licence to field a Netball side in a new expanded Australian Netball League to commence in 2017 . The Storm were nominated by Netball Australia as a preferred bidder for one of three new team licences under their expansion plans . “ Melbourne Storm have partnered with the University of the Sunshine Coast for this project and we ’ re both very proud and excited to have reached the preferred bidder stage for a license in the new national netball league , ” Smith said at the announcement press conference on Thursday . The Team will be based on the Sunshine Coast at the Storm sports Academy and in effect be a second Queensland Team . The announcement is to establish the Storm as not just a Rugby League club but a sporting and community club . 
 = = Season summaries = = 
 = = Emblem and colours = = 
 Originally , the club favoured the name Melbourne Mavericks with a gunslinger logo holding a fistful of dollars . The club officials were all set to go with this until News Limited 's Lachlan Murdoch told them to go with something else because the Mavericks sounded too American . Trams and Flying Foxes were also some ideas that came up . However co @-@ CEOs Chris Johns and John Ribot decided to go with the themes lightning , power and storm . The club then became known as the Melbourne Storm . 
 The Storm was always going to go with the colours of their state , Victoria ( Navy blue with a white ' V ' ) , but club consultant at the time , Peter McWhirter of the JAG fashion house , suggested that they should also have purple and gold to make their merchandise more attractive . These colours appear in the logo , however , on the home jersey they have varied . Between 1998 and 2004 these four colours also appeared but between 2005 and 2009 , gold was completely removed and silver introduced . Between 2010 - 2012 , gold returned and silver was omitted , purple also became the dominant colour in the jersey . For 2013 a new design was announced featuring a deeper V , with more navy blue in the jersey , gold disappeared along with most of the white , the lightning bolts were also changed to purple . During 2015 the jersey changed again for the first time not featuring a V at all , but the V returned somewhat along with the Lightening bolts in 2016 with a manufacturer change . Over the years and in all variations of the Jersey , Navy Blue and Purple always remain the main colours . 
 Between 1998 – 2001 , Melbourne was the only club to display player names on the back of jerseys . This was because there was no major sponsor for the Storm to display on the chest or back at the time and in addition it helped supporters new to the game identify the players . In 2001 , Melbourne gained its first major sponsor in Adecco , and was displayed on the jersey chest , while maintaining the players names on the back until the end of 2001 . In 2002 , the Storm removed the player 's names and displayed Adecco 's logo on the back . Since then the Storm have had varying sponsors adorning the Jersey . 
 = = Club Song = = 
 The Melbourne Storm 's club song , written by Jon Mol and Phil Wall , is called " We Are the Storm " . The song is played over the public address system following each home victory . 
 = = Rivalries = = 
 St. George Illawarra Dragons 
 The Storm narrowly beat them in their first grand final in 1999 , with a late penalty try putting the Storm in front . The following year Anthony Mundine declared that the Storm were not " worthy premiers " in the run up to their round 5 rematch . The Storm responded by beating the Dragons 70 – 10 . In Round 18 the Dragons added to the rivalry by defeating the Storm 50 – 4 . In 2006 the Storm defeated St. George Illawarra in the Preliminary Final . On 21 July 2008 , the Storm won at Olympic Park 26 – 0 , in a match that was highlighted by several ugly brawls . In 2009 , the Storm beat them in the Round 1 home game 17 – 16 with a field goal in Golden Point . 
 Brisbane Broncos 
 The Melbourne Storm has a strong rivalry with Brisbane , built in large part on the large number of finals games played between the teams , including one final in each year from 2004 to 2009 ; the Storm winning all but one of them . The move of Brisbane assistant coach Craig Bellamy to Melbourne has also been attributed to fueling the rivalry , as well as the wide spread of Queensland Origin players across their squads in the better part of the past decade . 
 " When Bellamy left here and went to Melbourne , the rivalry with them went up a notch then ... their record is good against us . " 
 Every year since Brisbane 's victory over Melbourne in the 2006 Grand Final , Melbourne have ended the Broncos ' season by knocking them out of the finals . Melbourne captain Cameron Smith commented on the rivalry prior to their 2009 Preliminary Final at Etihad Stadium . 
 " A lot of people talk about us and Manly , but I think all the boys for whatever reason would say we take more satisfaction out of beating the Broncos ... we love playing them ... there is always plenty of feeling and intensity in the games ... it probably wouldn 't feel like September if we weren 't playing them at some stage . " 
 The Brisbane Broncos defeated the Storm 15 – 8 in the 2006 NRL Grand Final . The Storm sought revenge through a 40 – 0 thrashing in the 2007 Qualifying Final at Olympic Park Stadium . The 2008 Semi @-@ Final at Suncorp Stadium ended with Melbourne dramatically winning 16 – 14 with a try on the final play of the game . In 2009 Brisbane were again beaten by eventual premiers Melbourne , this time 40 – 10 at Etihad Stadium , catapulting the Storm to their 4th consecutive Grand Final Appearance . 
 Manly @-@ Warringah Sea Eagles 
 The Storm defeated Manly 34 – 8 in the 2007 Grand Final but lost to in the 2008 re @-@ match in a history @-@ making 0 – 40 loss . To add to the rivalry , Melbourne beat Manly 40 – 12 in the opening final of the 2009 finals series , ending their bid to be back @-@ to @-@ back premiers . In September 21 , 2012 , Storm and Manly played each other in the preliminary final for the first time . Storm again thrashed Manly 40 @-@ 12 , again ending their chances of winning back @-@ to @-@ back titles . 
 I haven 't been a part of the matches previous to this year which built that rivalry but you certainly get a sense that interest in the game and the level of excitement and enthusiasm from the players goes up , " 
 As of the 2015 NRL season , the NRL have replaced the Storm 's tradition ANZAC Day game with the New Zealand Warriors with a clash against the Sea Eagles . 
 New Zealand Warriors 
 More of a traditional rivalry due to the large amount of Kiwi internationals Melbourne has fielded in their history . Matches between the two clubs are normally close and low scoring , with the overall head to head ( as of 2016 ) slightly in Melbourne 's favour ( 37 clashes , Storm 19 @-@ Warriors 16 & 2 draws ) . These two sides played an annual ANZAC Day clash each year between 2009 - 2014 . For 2015 it will was played earlier in April before moving back to ANZAC Day for 2016 . 
 = = Stadium and attendances = = 
 Melbourne 's home ground since 2010 has been AAMI Park . Their highest season average attendance for home games was 16 @,@ 302 in 2013 . Their highest regular season attendance of 28 @,@ 716 was set on 25 April 2014 for the ANZAC Day match against New Zealand Warriors at AAMI Park . A home finals attendance record of 33 @,@ 427 was set in 2007 for the Preliminary Final against Parramatta , at the Docklands Stadium . 
 Melbourne previously played the vast majority of their home matches at the city 's Olympic Park Stadium , affectionately coined " The Graveyard " by fans due to the incredible 77 @.@ 2 % winning percentage there . It was there that the club played their inaugural home match in the fourth round of the 1998 season on 3 April 1998 , having come off the back of three successive away victories . The team recorded a 26 – 16 victory over the North Sydney Bears , and the crowd of 20 @,@ 522 was the largest attendance for the club at Olympic Park . 
 The team remained at the ground until the end of the 2000 season . In the 2000 season they attracted an average home attendance of 14 @,@ 622 , which remained their largest average attendance ever until the 2010 season which drew an average on 14 @,@ 670 . They played at Melbourne Cricket Ground for two games in 2000 , and they won both times including the 70 – 10 thrashing of St George Illawarra Dragons in the Grand Final rematch from the previous year . Following steady attendance increases over the three years , it was decided to move home games to the 56 @,@ 347 capacity Docklands Stadium for the following year . Docklands is an oval shaped venue primarily built for use by the Australian Football League ( AFL ) . However , with the team ending up missing the finals , crowd numbers declined and it was decided to move the team back to Olympic Park . Due to the high costs involved , as well as Docklands stadium management ( which included the AFL ) citing damage to the playing surface , the Storm only used the movable seating once in their time at the venue . This came in their Round 21 win over the Brisbane Broncos in 2001 . It also saw the Storm 's largest home attendance of the 2001 season with 15 @,@ 470 fans attending the game . 
 The Storm had their lowest crowd average of 8 @,@ 886 per home game in 2004 , but crowds steadily rose over the following years , breaking the previous record average in 2010 , and then up to an peak of 16 @,@ 302 for the 2013 season , their highest yearly average to date . 
 The Storm played their last game at Olympic Park in round 25 , 29 August 2009 , with a 36 – 4 thrashing of the Sydney Roosters . 
 For the 2010 NRL Premiership season , the Storm 's first three home games ( rounds four , six and seven ) were played at Docklands Stadium , before moving into their new home ground , AAMI Park in round nine ( 9 May 2010 ) against the Brisbane Broncos . The club had anticipated playing its first game at the new ground in round four against the St George Illawarra Dragons , however , a delay in construction required the opening to be pushed back several weeks . Since then all Storm home games , regular season and finals , have been played at AAMI Park . 
 = = Statistics and records = = 
 As of the end of Round 18 of the 2016 NRL season , the Storm have won two legitimate NRL Premierships in 1999 and 2012 and one Minor Premiership in 2011 . Their current wins percentage of 63 @.@ 72 % is the best in the league . The clubs most capped player is Cameron Smith with 325 appearances thus far , Smith is also the clubs highest point scorer with 1916 career points . Fullback Billy Slater is the club 's most prolific try scorer with 173 tries scored so far . Melbourne also has three Dally M medal winners in Cameron Smith ( 2006 ) , Billy Slater ( 2011 ) and most recently Cooper Cronk in 2013 and in addition , the Storm have so far had three Golden Boot award winners ( Smith 2007 , Slater 2008 and Greg Inglis 2009 ) . 
 Melbourne Storm 's current winning streak record for the most consecutive matches won stands at 15 matches , completed between Round 22 of the 2012 NRL season and Round 7 of the 2013 NRL season , this included winning the 2012 NRL Premiership . The club 's all @-@ time highest score is 70 points scored against St. George Illawarra on 3 March 2000 but the highest winning margin is 64 points achieved in a 64 @-@ 0 win over West Tigers in 2001 and equaled in a 68 @-@ 4 win over Canberra Raiders in 2013 . 
 = = Players = = 
 also 
 = = = Current Squad = = = 
 = = = Team of the decade = = = 
 As part of their 10 @-@ year celebrations in 2007 , Melbourne Storm released a team of the decade . The 17 man team was selected by former assistant coach Greg Brentnall , foundation CEO John Ribot , and then board member Frank Stanton ( all 3 were members of the 1982 Kangaroo tour " Invincibles " , Brentnall and Ribot as players with Stanton the coach ) . The trio were joined by The Daily Telegraph ( Sydney ) journalist Steve <unk> . 
 = = Supporters = = 
 The Melbourne Storm 's supporter base grew from almost 500 @,@ 000 in 2004 to almost 800 @,@ 000 in 2009 , making them the fourth most popular rugby team . The club 's supporter group , the " Graveyard Crew " , make an Aussie @-@ rules- ( AFL ) style banner for the team to run through in important matches . 
 = = = Notable Supporters = = = 
 = = Feeder clubs = = 
 In 1998 , the Storm established an affiliation with Queensland Cup side the <unk> Devils and used the club as a feeder for their first grade team . The relationship would prove to be a fruitful one as 13 of the 17 players to compete for the Storm in the 2006 NRL Grand Final had played for the Devils in previous years . In 2005 , the Storm also established an affiliation with the North Sydney Bears in the New South Wales Cup . Melbourne severed ties with both the Bears and the Devils in 2007 and aligned themselves with the Central Coast Storm in the New South Wales Cup . The affiliation lasted three seasons before the Storm decided to establish their own team in the NSW Cup in 2010 which would share its namesake . An unsuccessful venture saw the Storm revert to the Queensland Cup in 2011 when it established a feeder relationship with the Easts Tigers . Melbourne established a second feeder relationship with the Sunshine Coast Falcons in 2014 , also from the Queensland Cup . The Storm further committed to the area in 2015 when it was announced their National Youth Competition U20 side would be based out of the Sunshine Coast from 2016 . The Storm justified the decision by stating most of their talent is fostered in Queensland anyway . 
 = The Confessions Tour ( album ) = 
 The Confessions Tour is the second live album by American singer @-@ songwriter Madonna . It was released on January 26 , 2007 by Warner Bros. Records . Directed by Jonas Åkerlund , the album chronicles Madonna 's 2006 Confessions Tour . It was recorded at Wembley Arena during the London dates of the tour , and was released in both CD and DVD format . The DVD contains the entire concert and the CD includes thirteen live songs only . The album became the first release from Semtex Films , a production company founded by Madonna in 2006 . 
 The Confessions Tour received generally positive reviews from contemporary critics and won the Best Long Form Music Video category at the 50th Grammy Awards . After its release , the release reached number one on the official charts in Australia , Belgium , Czech Republic , Hungary , Italy , Portugal and Spain . It received moderate success in her native country , peaking at number fifteen on the U.S. Billboard 200 albums chart . The Confessions Tour has sold more than 1 @.@ 2 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the 2006 live release I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret , Madonna released her second live album , The Confessions Tour . The album was recorded at Wembley Arena on August 15 and 16 , 2006 , during the London stop of her 2006 Confessions Tour , which was promoting her 2005 studio album Confessions on a Dance Floor . It was the first release from her new production company , Semtex Films and was released in both DVD and CD formats , capturing the tour as directed by Jonas Åkerlund . The DVD release consists of the full twenty @-@ one song set list of the tour , while the CD captures thirteen highlights from the same . The tour was first shown on NBC during the Thanksgiving of 2006 . This broadcast was edited , cutting the likes of " Paradise ( Not For Me ) " . Madonna 's performance of " Live to Tell " , while hanging from a glass embellished crucifix , faced strong reaction from the media and religious groups . " Live to Tell " was followed by the performance of " Forbidden Love " from the Confessions on a Dance Floor album , where Madonna took off a crown made of thorns from her head . Asian media and services company <unk> reported that the album was banned in Singapore , Malaysia and parts of East Asia , because of the inclusion of the performances in the DVD . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine from Allmusic felt that the CD version of the album was " not all that much fun to hear , even if the reinterpretations of the 20 @-@ year @-@ old hits are interesting . The DVD doesn 't feel as cold thanks entirely to the pizzazz of the visuals and the determined efficiency of the show , but even so , this is primarily of interest to the diehards who don 't mind purchasing another live CD / DVD set just a year after the first . " Ed Gonzalez from Slant Magazine felt that the concert finale in the album " is a reminder that Madonna 's music need not be motivated by sex or politics to be good as long as it displays a smidgen of heart and soul . " Thomas Inskeep from Stylus Magazine also complimented the finale of the tour . According to him , " [ The Confessions Tour ] is almost exclusively up @-@ tempo , staged within an inch of its life yet more vivacious than anything she 's done in years . Its CD companion is a pared @-@ down 13 tracks taken from the live show , and good God it smokes . " However , he felt that the disc loses its momentum during the " Confessions " part , which demonstrates a trio of individuals confessing about their sufferings in life . 
 Tom Young from BBC Music said that he did not see the actual performances on the tour and felt that " some of the magnitude of the performance is lost and the track / scene changes appear needlessly long @-@ winded . [ ... ] As far as live albums go , this is a job well done . " Stephen M. Deusner from Pitchfork Media gave a negative review for the album , stating " Madonna herself is mostly to blame . On stage , she draws from a deep well of amazing pop songs and has the money and power to reinvent this sort of traveling circus . So why not try to break down the wall between performance and audience and hold a gigantic rave ? [ ... ] Åkerlund gives you everything you don 't want from a concert film : incessant quick cuts that you give you no sense of space or stage , overdubbed music and vocals that give you no sense of performance , and only a few shots of the audience to gauge their excitement . " Mini <unk> @-@ <unk> The Hindu commented that " Madonna pulls out all stops in this effort turn the world into a dance floor and one just has to <unk> one 's hat to her energy . " At the 50th Grammy Awards held on February 10 , 2008 at Staples Center in Los Angeles , The Confessions Tour won in the category of Grammy Award for Best Long Form Music Video . 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 In the United States , the album debuted at number 15 on the Billboard 200 chart with first week sales of 40 @,@ 000 according to Nielsen Soundscan . In Canada , it debuted at number two on the Canadian Albums Chart . The Confessions Tour was not able to enter the official ARIA Albums Chart , but debuted at number @-@ one on the Australian Top 40 DVD chart , on the issue dated February 12 , 2007 . At the year end Australian chart for 2007 , The Confessions Tour became the 27th best selling DVD in Australia . The album was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , for shipment of 10 @,@ 000 copies in DVD units . 
 In the United Kingdom , it debuted at number seven on the UK Albums Chart . In Japan , the album reached a peak of number ten on the Oricon weekly albums chart and was present on the chart for twelve weeks . In Hong Kong , it was awarded a Gold Disc Award by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry for becoming one of ten biggest @-@ selling international album for 2007 . 
 Across Europe The Confessions Tour reached the top of the charts in Belgium ( Wallonia ) , Italy , Portugal and Spain , while reaching the top ten of the rest of the European nations . In Mexico , New Zealand and Norway , the album just missed the top ten of the charts . The commercial success in Europe enabled the album to debut at position two on Billboard 's European Top 100 Albums chart , behind Norah Jones ' studio album Not Too Late . The DVD of The Confessions Tour has sold more than 1 @.@ 2 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Formats = = = 
 CD / DVD – double disc digipak edition containing the live DVD and the live CD . 
 DVD – DVD keep case packed with the DVD . 
 Digital download – The live performances and the live song with 2 bonus tracks : " Ray of Light " and " Get Together " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Director – Jonas Åkerlund 
 Production company – Semtex Films , Semtex TV Productions 
 Producer – Sara Martin 
 Executive producers – Madonna , Angela Becker , Guy Oseary and John Payne 
 Photography – Eric Broms 
 Film editing – Jonas Åkerlund , Philip Richardson , Johan Söderberg and Danny Tull 
 Costume designer – Jean @-@ Paul Gaultier and Arianne Phillips 
 Credits adapted from The Confessions Tour CD liner notes : 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Lauren Conrad = 
 Lauren Katherine Tell ( née Conrad ; born February 1 , 1986 ) is an American television personality , fashion designer , and author . Born and raised in Laguna Beach , California , she attended Laguna Beach High School . In September 2004 , at the age of 18 , Conrad came to prominence after being cast in the reality television series Laguna Beach : The Real Orange County , which documented her life and those of her friends . 
 After moving to Los Angeles to pursue a career in the fashion industry in May 2006 , Conrad was commissioned to star in her own spin @-@ off series The Hills , which chronicled the personal and professional lives of her and friends Heidi Montag , Audrina Patridge , and Whitney Port . During its production , she attended the Fashion Institute of Design & Merchandising and held positions with Teen Vogue and Kelly Cutrone 's PR firm People 's Revolution . As the series progressed , a widely publicized feud developed between Conrad , Montag and Montag 's boyfriend Spencer Pratt . Consequently , the conflict became the central focus of the series , and was carried through each subsequent season in which Conrad appeared . 
 In May 2009 , Conrad left The Hills after five seasons , and was replaced by former Laguna Beach cast member Kristin Cavallari . She filmed an alternate ending for the series finale in July 2010 , which was broadcast in August 2013 . Conrad launched the fashion lines LC Lauren Conrad and Paper Crown in 2009 and 2011 , respectively . She released the L.A. Candy book trilogy in 2010 and the spin @-@ off The Fame Game series in 2012 . Conrad married former musician and law school graduate William Tell in September 2014 . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = 1986 – 2005 : Early life and Laguna Beach = = = 
 Conrad was born in Laguna Beach , California on February 1 , 1986 , to parents Jim , an architect , and Kathy ( née Lawrence ) . She has two younger siblings , a sister named Breanna , also a television personality , and a brother , Brandon . Conrad first expressed an interest in a career in the fashion industry when she was in the sixth grade . Her father added that Conrad " wasn 't a great student [ and ] wasn 't that interested " during her childhood , although noted that " we figured out along the way that she was an artist and her real love was fashion . " 
 Alongside eventual castmates Lo Bosworth , Kristin Cavallari , and Stephen Colletti , Conrad was educated at Laguna Beach High School . In 2004 , they starred in Laguna Beach : The Real Orange County , an MTV reality television series which documented their lives during high school . During its production , she was often referred to by the initialism " L.C. " , although she has since expressed her distaste for the nickname . The series proved successful for the network ; she described the lifestyle it imposed on her as being " definitely a different way to grow up " . The first season notably focused on the love triangle between Conrad , Cavallari , and Colletti , and the subsequent feud between the former two . Upon the conclusion of the first season , Conrad appeared on an episode of MTV Cribs . 
 After graduating high school in 2004 , Conrad attended the Academy of Art University in San Francisco for one semester , where she met Heidi Montag . Conrad left the series after the second season , during which period she moved back home and transferred to the Fashion Institute of Design & Merchandising in Los Angeles . After her sister Breanna became a primary cast member , Conrad made a guest appearance on the series during the third season in 2006 . 
 = = = 2006 – 2009 : The Hills = = = 
 After moving to Los Angeles in May 2006 , the spin @-@ off series The Hills was developed to chronicle the lives of Conrad , her housemate Montag , and their friends Audrina Patridge and Whitney Port . During production of the first season , Conrad and Port held internships with Teen Vogue under the direction of West Coast Vogue editor Lisa Love ; she stated that they had to interview successfully for the positions , " regardless of what the cameras wanted " . By the second season , their friendship had deteriorated after Montag began dating Spencer Pratt . After Montag moved in with Pratt , Patridge and Lo Bosworth later became roommates with Conrad . 
 During the third season , Conrad ended her friendship with Montag after she suspected that Montag and Pratt were responsible for rumors of a sex tape involving herself and her former boyfriend Jason Wahler ; the ensuing feud carried through each subsequent season in which Conrad appeared . Conrad briefly dated fellow castmate Brody Jenner , which she commented had been subject to " editing to drag it out " during the series . In January 2007 , Conrad was announced as the inaugural spokeswoman of Avon Products 's " mark . " line , marketed towards young women ; she was succeeded by actress Ashley Greene in June 2010 . Later in 2007 , Conrad appeared as a satirical version of herself in the comedy film Epic Movie . In 2008 , Conrad and Port began employment with Kelly Cutrone 's PR firm , People 's Revolution . Conrad later made a cameo appearance in an episode of Greek and provided her voice for a cartoon version of herself in an episode of Family Guy . In March , she premiered her first fashion line The Lauren Conrad Collection . After underwhelming sales figures , Conrad ended the line the following year to further familiarize herself with the industry . 
 In 2008 , Conrad began dating actor Kyle Howard . Howard expressed concern that appearing on reality television would interfere with his acting career ; consequently , their relationship was not documented on The Hills . ( After three years together , Conrad and Howard ended their relationship in 2011 . ) Upon the conclusion of the fourth season of the series that December , Conrad wished to leave the series to pursue other career opportunities . However , per the producers ' requests , she filmed ten episodes for the following season , in which she closed her storylines . Conrad made her final appearance on the series in May 2009 , attending Montag and Pratt 's wedding after much deliberation during the mid @-@ season finale of the fifth season . However , in the July 2009 issue of Cosmopolitan , she stated that producers had pressured her into a reconciliation with Montag throughout the season , adding that she was displeased when they would not allow otherwise . Conrad was replaced by former Laguna Beach castmate Kristin Cavallari until the series ' conclusion in July 2010 . 
 = = = 2009 – 12 : Expansion into fashion and retail industries = = = 
 Conrad 's first novel L.A. Candy was released in June 2009 , and became a bestseller on The New York Times . It was inspired by her life , focusing on a woman named Jane Roberts who moves to Los Angeles . It was followed by sequels Sweet Little Lies and Sugar and Spice in 2010 . Conrad also released the fashion guide Lauren Conrad Style in 2010 . She later made appearances on the syndicated game show Who Wants to Be a Millionaire , playing for her charity " <unk> by mark " and Kathy Griffin : My Life on the D @-@ List , and also served as a guest judge on the thirteenth cycle of America 's Next Top Model . In fall 2009 , Conrad collaborated with Kohl 's to launch her second fashion line LC Lauren Conrad , and was later expanded to include a bedding collection . 
 In September 2010 , Conrad was to star in an MTV series that would have focused on her career endeavors , though the network chose not to pick up the program after Conrad preferred not to film her private life . In April 2011 , Conrad launched The Beauty Department with her hairstylist , Kristin Ess , and her makeup artist , Amy Nadine ; she later announced plans to expand the brand to include a line of cosmetics . Looking to target a more upscale audience , Conrad released her third fashion line Paper Crown that August ; Conrad released her fourth novel The Fame Game as a spin @-@ off to the L.A. Candy series in April 2012 @.@ she has since established an account with Nordstrom for the line . In July , she collaborated with <unk> to launch XO ( eco ) , an environmentally @-@ friendly collection of bags . In October 2012 , Conrad released The Fame Game continuation novel Starstruck and the style guide Lauren Conrad Beauty . The final novel Infamous was released in June 2013 . 
 = = = 2013 – present : Marriage and continued career = = = 
 In September 2010 , Conrad revealed that she had filmed an alternate ending for The Hills with Jenner . Upon the conclusion of their month @-@ long morning marathon of the series , titled " RetroMTV Brunch " , MTV aired the footage in August 2013 . The scene depicts Jenner returning to his apartment after seeing Cavallari 's limousine off to Europe . Conrad is revealed to be sitting on his couch , and comforts him that " it 's hard to say goodbye " to a " friend of [ his ] " , before the camera focuses on a smiling Conrad . That month , she also expressed interest in participating in a potential reunion film . In December 2013 , Montag stated that she and Conrad have " talked a few times " since the series ' conclusion , elaborating that " it 's unfortunate things happened the way that it did , but we 're both different people now , older and more mature . " 
 Having begun dating in February 2012 , Conrad and law student and former Something Corporate guitarist William Tell , moved into a shared residence in Westwood , Los Angeles in September 2013 , and announced their engagement the following month . That October , Conrad and her friend Hannah <unk> opened the online store The Little Market , which distributes handmade pieces from women of varying cultural backgrounds . Conrad and Tell got married on September 13 , 2014 in California . 
 Conrad respectively released limited @-@ run Cinderella , Minnie Mouse , and Bambi @-@ inspired collections for LC Lauren Conrad in February , May , and October 2015 . She also introduced an upscale runway collection for the line during New York Fashion Week that September . 
 = = Public image = = 
 Since appearing on Laguna Beach : The Real Orange County , Conrad has been recognized as being among the first individuals to benefit from the popularity of reality television in the early 2000s . In 2009 , Thomas Rogers from Salon described her as " one of the dullest major characters in reality television history " , but opined that her normalcy compared to her co @-@ stars on The Hills made her " vaguely likable " . An editor from People stated that Conrad " became a full @-@ blown TV phenom " during its third season , which notably introduced the conflict with Montag and Pratt , in addition to controversy regarding scripting allegations . 
 In 2013 , Misty White <unk> from The Daily Beast noted that Conrad established a following based on her respectability instead of " bitch @-@ slaps and drunken sex @-@ <unk> " , further commenting that her more relatable image made her an " anomaly " among television personalities . Conrad herself commented that The Hills was intended to be an " aspirational " program despite being " laced with scandal and catfights " , stating that the storyline differed from the " shock value " emphasized in recent programming . Conrad has additionally been recognized for originating several now @-@ famous quotes on The Hills , including " He 's a <unk> person ! " when criticizing Spencer Pratt during the second season , and " You know what you did ! " when arguing with Heidi Montag over her alleged involvement with sex tape rumors involving herself in the third season . 
 Conrad has been featured on the covers of several magazine 's best @-@ selling issues , including those of People <unk> and Cosmopolitan . She appeared on the May 2012 issue of Glamour , which sold approximately 500 @,@ 000 copies and became the magazine 's strongest @-@ selling issue of the year , and was featured on the covers of the second highest @-@ selling issues of Lucky and Marie Claire in 2013 . Lauren Sherman from <unk> credited Conrad 's success to " her knack for entrepreneurship , her easy style , and her friendliness " . Jim Higgins from Milwaukee Journal Sentinel complimented her pursuit of several different career endeavors , and compared her to a " young Martha Stewart " . However , in August 2012 , Conrad was criticized for destroying a collection of A Series of Unfortunate Events novels for a crafting tutorial posted to YouTube . 
 During its production , Conrad was the highest @-@ paid cast member on The Hills , earning an annual salary of $ 2 @.@ 5 million . In 2008 , her endeavors earned her an additional $ 1 @.@ 5 million . In 2010 , Conrad was named the second highest @-@ paid reality television personality , ranking behind Kim Kardashian . Conrad is a registered member of the Republican Party . She has stated that she has " done several things to [ ... ] encourage people to vote " , but respects the private ballot and " [ doesn 't ] want to ever influence someone 's vote or have [ her ] vote change someone 's opinion of [ her ] " . Conrad collaborated with Seventeen magazine to film a public service announcement for Declare Yourself , a campaign which encouraged young adults to register themselves to vote during the 2008 presidential election . She has additionally expressed her support for same @-@ sex marriage , and on one occasion left a Mexican restaurant after learning of its disapproval of marriage equality . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Published works = = 
 L.A. Candy ( 2009 ) 
 Sweet Little Lies ( 2010 ) 
 Sugar and Spice ( 2010 ) 
 Lauren Conrad Style ( 2010 ) 
 The Fame Game ( 2012 ) 
 Lauren Conrad Beauty ( 2012 ) 
 Starstruck ( 2012 ) 
 Infamous ( 2013 ) 
 Lauren Conrad Celebrate ( 2016 ) 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Soeara Berbisa = 
 Soeara Berbisa ( [ <unk> <unk> ] ; Perfected Spelling : Suara Berbisa ; Indonesian for Venomous Voice ) is a 1941 film from the Dutch East Indies . Produced by Ang Hock Liem for Union Films and directed by R Hu , this black @-@ and @-@ white film starred Raden Soekarno , Ratna Djoewita , Oedjang , and Soehaena . The story , written by Djojopranoto , follows two young men who compete for the affections of a woman before learning that they are long @-@ lost brothers . 
 Completed between September and October 1941 , Soeara Berbisa featured keroncong music and was shot partly in western Java . It was released to coincide with the Eid al @-@ Fitr holiday , and rated for all ages . Advertisements emphasised the film 's appeal to both Native and Dutch audiences , and a review in De Indische Courant was positive . Although the film – Union 's penultimate production – was screened as late as 1949 , it is now likely lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The young athlete Mitra and his sweetheart Neng Mardinah are to be wed . However , a young man named Mardjohan has fallen in love with Mardinah , and to win her heart he spreads rumours about Mitra being the son of a convicted criminal . In the backlash over the rumours , Mitra abandons the city and his beloved , hoping to find peace in the countryside . 
 There , Mitra finds work at a factory which is , coincidentally , owned by Mardjohan . Refusing the romantic advances of a worker there , he leaves the factory . One day , he comes across Mardjohan , gravely injured following an accident . Mitra saves the man , then takes him for treatment . Mardjohan 's mother , seeing Mitra , believes that he is her son who went missing when he was aged three . She finds several witnesses who testify of the resemblance , and is ultimately able to prove her suspicions . Meanwhile , Mitra 's name is cleared , and he is reunited with Mardinah . 
 = = Production = = 
 The sixth production of Union Films , Soeara Berbisa was produced by Ang Hock Liem and directed by R Hu , an ethnic Chinese director who had worked for the company since 1940 ; the sound technician Boen Kin Nam served as assistant director . The screenplay was written by Djojopranoto , who replaced Union 's former screenwriter Saeroen after the latter left for rival company Star Film following Wanita dan Satria ( 1941 ) . The film began production by September 1941 , and by October it was nearly complete . 
 Soeara Berbisa starred Raden Soekarno and Ratna Djoewita , and featured the acting talents of Oedjang and Soehaena . Soekarno and <unk> were new hires , whereas Oedjang and Djoewita had previously done work for Union ; the former had been acting for Union since its first production , Kedok Ketawa , in 1940 , and the latter had held a role in Wanita dan Satria . This black @-@ and @-@ white film included several keroncong songs , and was partly shot in the Preanger region of west Java . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Union announced that Soeara Berbisa would be released to coincide with the Eid al @-@ Fitr holiday , which began on 22 October 1941 , and advertisements for screenings in Medan , in northern Sumatra , date to early November 1941 . A review in the Surabaya edition of De Indische Courant , however , indicates that the film had only premiered in the east Javan city on 14 January 1942 . That newspaper gave a positive review , describing Soeara Berbisa as a tense film with humorous moments and beautiful scenery . Its review ended with a recommendation that young people and their parents see the film . 
 Soeara Berbisa was open to audiences of all ages . To reach educated audiences , Union claimed to have " paid attention to dialogue , arranged it as best as possible in accordance with the wants of the Indonesian people " . In Dutch @-@ language newspapers , the film was advertised as " an interesting and fascinating tale of two young men in the world of indigenous sports " , which nonetheless was produced in a " civilised " manner such that it could be appreciated by European audiences . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Union 's final production , Mega Mendoeng , was directed by Boen and released in early 1942 . It again starred Soekarno , though this time alongside the new find Sofiati . The company was closed after the Japanese occupied the Indies in March 1942 , and most of its employees never returned to the film industry . Soekarno was an exception ; he continued to act until the 1970s , though he was generally credited as Rendra Karno . 
 Soeara Berbisa was screened as late as February 1949 . The film is likely lost . Movies in the Indies were recorded on highly flammable nitrate film , and after a fire destroyed much of Produksi Film Negara 's warehouse in 1952 , old films shot on nitrate were deliberately destroyed . As such , American visual anthropologist Karl G. Heider suggests that all Indonesian films from before 1950 are lost . However , JB Kristanto 's Katalog Film Indonesia ( Indonesian Film Catalogue ) records several as having survived at Sinematek Indonesia 's archives , and film historian Misbach Yusa Biran writes that several Japanese propaganda films have survived at the Netherlands Government Information Service . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = The Long , Hot Summer = 
 The Long , Hot Summer is a 1958 film directed by Martin Ritt . The screenplay was written by Irving Ravetch and Harriet Frank , Jr . , based in part on three works by William Faulkner : the 1931 novella " Spotted Horses " , the 1939 short story " Barn Burning " , and the 1940 novel The Hamlet . The title is taken from The Hamlet , as Book Three is called " The Long Summer " . Some characters , as well as tone , were inspired by Tennessee Williams ' 1955 play , Cat on a Hot Tin Roof , a film adaptation of which - also starring Paul Newman - was released five months after the release of The Long , Hot Summer . 
 The plot follows the conflicts of the Varner family after ambitious drifter Ben Quick ( Newman ) arrives in their small Mississippi town . Will Varner ( Orson Welles ) , the family 's patriarch and the owner of most of the town , has doubts about the abilities of his only son , Jody ( Anthony Franciosa ) , and sees Ben as a better choice to inherit his position . Will therefore tries to push Ben and his daughter Clara ( Joanne Woodward ) into marriage . Clara is initially reluctant to court Ben , and Jody senses that Ben threatens his position . 
 Filmed in Clinton , Louisiana , the film 's cast was composed mostly of former Actors Studio students , whom Ritt met while he was an assistant teacher to Elia Kazan . For the leading role , Warner Brothers loaned Paul Newman to 20th Century Fox . The production was marked by conflicts between Welles and Ritt , which drew media attention . The music score was composed by Alex North , and the title song , " The Long Hot Summer " , written by North and Sammy Cahn , was performed by Jimmie Rodgers . 
 The film was well received by critics but did not score significant results at the box office . Its critical success revitalized the career of Martin Ritt , who had been blacklisted during most of the 1950s , and also earned national fame for Paul Newman , who won the Best Actor Award at the Cannes Film Festival . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Ben Quick is on trial , suspected of barn @-@ burning , but when no solid evidence is found , the peace judge expels him from town . Ben then hitches a ride to Frenchman 's Bend , Mississippi , with two young women in a convertible , Clara Varner and her sister @-@ in @-@ law Eula ( Lee Remick ) . Clara 's father , Will Varner , is the domineering owner of most of the town . 
 Ben goes to the Varner plantation . Will is away , but Jody , Will 's only son , agrees to let him become a sharecropper on a vacant farm . When Will returns from a stay in the hospital , he begins to see in Ben a younger version of himself and comes to admire his ruthlessness and ambition , qualities that Jody lacks . Will is also disappointed with the man that his 23 @-@ year @-@ old daughter , Clara , has been seeing for five or six years : Alan Stewart ( Richard Anderson ) , a genteel Southern " blue blood " and a mama 's boy . Will therefore schemes to push his daughter and Ben together , to try to bring fresh , virile blood into the family . However , she is openly hostile to the crude , if magnetic , upstart . Will is determined to have his bloodline go on , so he offers Ben much wealth to marry Clara . Ben is interested , but eventually comes to see something more in Clara . Meanwhile , Minnie Littlejohn ( Angela Lansbury ) , Will 's long @-@ time mistress , is dissatisfied with the arrangement and wants to marry him . Will , a widower , is strongly against the idea . 
 Jody becomes increasingly alarmed and frustrated when he sees his position in the family undermined by Ben . After Ben manages to sell some wild horses , Will offers him the position of clerk in the general store , alongside Jody . Later , Will invites him to live in the family mansion . 
 This is the final straw for Jody . When he finds Ben alone , he pulls a gun on him and threatens to kill him . Ben talks his way out by telling Jody about buried Civil War @-@ era treasure he has supposedly found on a property that Will gave him , a down payment to seal their bargain over Clara . Ben and Jody head to the property , where they start digging . When the two men find a bag of coins , Jody is elated , thinking he might finally get free of his father 's domination ; he buys the land from Ben . Late that night , Will finds his son , still digging . After examining one of the coins , Will notices that it was minted in 1910 . Jody is shattered . 
 Meanwhile , Ben aggressively pursues Clara . She finally asks Alan his intentions , and does not like what she hears . The following day , a crushed and frustrated Jody finds his father alone in their barn . Jody bolts the entrance and sets the barn on fire , but he cannot go through with it and releases Will . The incident leads to a reconciliation between Jody and Will . Meanwhile , some of the men assume Ben is the culprit and start toward him . Clara persuades a defiant Ben to drive away in her car . Will later claims responsibility for accidentally starting the fire by dropping his cigar . 
 The smell of fire brings back bad memories for Ben , who confesses to Clara that his father was a real barn @-@ burner . He tells her how , at the age of ten , he had to warn a farmer that his father was about to set another fire . Ben 's father got away , but Ben never saw him again . Grateful that she saved his life , he tells her he is leaving town . However , Clara makes it clear she has fallen in love with him , so he stays . An elated Will confides to Minnie that life is so good , he may have to live forever . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Paul Newman as Ben Quick . Newman met director Martin Ritt as a student at the Actors Studio , where Ritt was a teacher @-@ assistant for Elia Kazan . Newman , who was under a contract with Warner Brothers , was loaned to 20th Century Fox for a fee of US $ 75 @,@ 000 . Meanwhile , his contract earned him US $ 17 @,@ 500 for each ten @-@ week shot . He travelled to Clinton , Louisiana , before the start of filming to study the mannerisms , accent and speech of the Southern men in order to create a proper characterization . 
 Orson Welles as Will Varner . The character was inspired by Big Daddy Pollitt from Tennessee Williams ' play Cat on a Hot Tin Roof . Welles ' presence on the film was marked by multiple conflicts with director Martin Ritt . He agreed to take the role due to a tax debt of US $ 150 @,@ 000 ; he stated years later , " I hated making Long Hot Summer . I 've seldom been as unhappy in a picture " . 
 Director Martin Ritt met the three cast members listed below while they were students at the Actors Studio . 
 Joanne Woodward as Clara Varner 
 Anthony Franciosa as Jody Varner 
 Lee Remick as Eula Varner . Remick later admitted that during the shooting she was intimidated by Orson Welles on the set because of his " icon " status . 
 The supporting roles were played by : 
 Angela Lansbury as Minnie Littlejohn 
 Richard Anderson as Alan Stewart 
 Sarah Marshall as Agnes Stewart 
 Mabel Albertson as Elizabeth Stewart 
 J. Pat O 'Malley as Ratliff 
 William " Bill " Walker as Lucius 
 = = Production notes = = 
 Producer Jerry Wald hired former co @-@ worker and Warner Brothers director Martin Ritt to shoot the adaptation of two William Faulkner novels based on a recommendation by script writer Irving Ravetch . Wald convinced the studio executives to pay US $ 50 @,@ 000 for the rights for the novels The Sound and the Fury and The Hamlet . The first to be produced , The Hamlet , was renamed The Long Hot Summer to avoid confusion with William Shakespeare 's play Hamlet . Ravetch and Harriet Frank , Jr. wrote the script , also adding fragments from Faulkner 's short stories " Barn Burning " and " Spotted Horses " . In the new script , the book 's main character , Flem Snopes , and the rest of the Snopes family were removed . The plot was <unk> on a minor character , Ben Quick , and the reconciliation of the Varner family . On their first important screenplay , Ravetch and Frank implemented their signature style , using the names of characters and a few details of the plot but significantly modifying the details of the story . The final product was heavily influenced by Tennessee Williams ' play Cat on a Hot Tin Roof , resulting in an " erotically charged " story . 
 The film was shot in Clinton and Baton Rouge , Louisiana , in CinemaScope color , with a budget of US $ 1 @,@ 645 @,@ 000 . A Southern Gothic story , Ritt decided to shoot it on location to capture the characteristics of the area , emphasizing the regional details . Ritt met leading actor Paul Newman while teaching at the Actors Studio . The rest of the main cast also consisted of former Actors Studio alumni , including Joanne Woodward , Anthony Franciosa and Lee Remick . 
 The film attracted attention for the appearance of Orson Welles as Will Varner , the patriarch of the family . 20th Century Fox wanted to avoid the casting of Welles due to his temperament , but the studio was persuaded by Ritt , who considered him the right actor for the role . The director and the actor had several marked differences during the shooting of the movie , which included problems with the interpretation of the lines , costume design and the position of Welles while shooting the scenes . At one point during the production , Welles informed Ritt that he did not want to memorize his lines , requesting instead that they be dubbed afterwards . Part of the cast was intimidated by Welles ' temperamental attitude . 
 The conflicts between Welles and Ritt attracted media attention . Immediately after filming was completed , during an interview with Life , Welles explained that the cause of his behavior was that he did not know what kind of " <unk> " his co @-@ stars would be or the " caprices " they would receive from him . He also stated that they overcame the differences and completed the film . Welles later wrote a letter to Ritt praising his work and apologizing for his interference during the making of the movie . Ritt replied , expounding his admiration for Welles . Despite the mutual apologies , during an interview in 1965 , Ritt recalled an incident on the set . While the film was being shot , it was often stopped by bad weather . During a day suitable for shooting , he found Welles not ready for the scene , instead reading a newspaper in Spanish . Ritt decided to skip Welles ' scene and shoot the next one . He attributed Welles ' later cooperation to the incident , which Welles had found humiliating . Ritt thus earned the nickname " the Orson Tamer " throughout the Hollywood community . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Alex North composed the film 's score , which leaned toward a jazz style . " The Long Hot Summer " was the only song written by North to be used as the title track of a film . Composed in a AABA form , it was characterized by its <unk> and its " tense dissonant " jazz @-@ figures . The lyrics of the song were written by Sammy Cahn , while instrumental variations of the melody were used throughout the film , underlining the progression of the relationship between Ben and Clara . Recorded by Jimmie Rodgers , it was released by Roulette Records , reaching number 77 on Billboard 's Top 100 Sides in June 1958 . The orchestra was conducted by Lionel Newman . 
 Billboard described the soundtrack as " a model of music use in a dramatic film " . On another review , Billboard favored the album , stating that it " makes for good listening out of the cinematic context " and that the financial success of the soundtrack may have been propelled by Jimmie Rodgers ' " smooth vocal treatment " . The publication praised North 's musical understanding of the deep South , and particularly praised the song " Eula " , describing it as a " pure gem of sex @-@ on @-@ wax " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The movie opened to good reviews but did not score a significant profit at the box office , grossing US $ 3 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 . Billboard commended the acting as " first @-@ rate " and " robust " , with particular praise for Woodward , and also praised Ritt 's direction . Meanwhile , The Reporter highlighted the film 's similarities to the play Cat on a Hot Tin Roof and described the cast as " an impressive one " but remarked that the actors and characters " never seem to get together " . The review called Welles ' " great " and " gusty " but described Woodward 's participation in the movie as a " poker bluff " . 
 Time described Newman 's performance as " mean and keen as a cackle @-@ edge scythe " . The publication also praised Woodward , <unk> her acting delivered with " fire and grace not often seen in a movie queen " , but decried Welles ' acting as " scarcely an improvement " on his performance in his previous role , in Moby Dick . Variety praised the scriptwriters for the successful merging of the three Faulkner stories that inspired the film . The review also praised Martin Ritt , the camerawork by Joseph <unk> , and the film 's musical score . Cosmopolitan called the movie a " gutsy melodrama " . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 The film reestablished the career of Martin Ritt , who had been on the blacklist for most of the decade for alleged associations with communists . Paul Newman 's performance as Ben Quick brought him national fame , as well as the Best Actor Award at the Cannes Film Festival . During the production , Newman married co @-@ star Joanne Woodward . 
 The film was remade as a television series of the same name , airing between 1965 and 1966 , featuring Dan O 'Herlihy , Roy Thinnes , Nancy Malone , Lana Wood , Ruth Roman , and Edmond O 'Brien . It was remade again for television in 1985 , featuring Jason Robards , Don Johnson , and Cybill Shepherd . This rendition received two Emmy nominations , for Outstanding Miniseries and Outstanding Art Direction for a Miniseries or a Special . 
 = Regina Elena @-@ class battleship = 
 The Regina Elena class was a group of four pre @-@ dreadnought battleships built for the Italian Regia Marina between 1901 and 1908 . The class comprised four ships : Regina Elena , the lead ship , Vittorio Emanuele , Roma , and Napoli . Designed by Vittorio Cuniberti , they were armed with a main battery of two 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) guns and twelve 8 in ( 200 mm ) guns , and were capable of a top speed of 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) . They were the fastest battleships in the world at the time of their commissioning , faster even than the British turbine @-@ powered HMS Dreadnought . 
 The ships saw service during the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 1912 with the Ottoman Empire . They frequently supported Italian ground forces during the campaigns in North Africa and the islands of the eastern Mediterranean Sea . They served during World War I , in which Italy participated from 1915 to 1918 , but they saw no combat as a result of the cautious policies adopted by the Italian and Austro @-@ Hungarian navies . All four ships were discarded between 1923 and 1926 and broken up for scrap . 
 = = Design = = 
 Starting in 1899 , Vittorio Cuniberti began design work on a warship armed with a uniform battery of twelve 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) guns , armored with 6 in ( 150 mm ) thick belt armor , and capable of a top speed of 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) , on a displacement of 8 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 7 @,@ 900 long tons ; 8 @,@ 800 short tons ) . This proved to be the genesis of Cuniberti 's later designs , which culminated in the British all @-@ big @-@ gun HMS Dreadnought . When the 1899 design project was not accepted , Cuniberti turned his attention to a new design requirement for a 13 @,@ 000 @-@ metric @-@ ton ( 13 @,@ 000 @-@ long @-@ ton ; 14 @,@ 000 @-@ short @-@ ton ) battleship faster than all British and French battleships and stronger than the armored cruisers fielded by both navies . This resulted in a modified version of his earlier design , what came to be the Regina Elena class . 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 The ships of the Regina Elena class were 132 @.@ 6 meters ( 435 ft ) long at the waterline and 144 @.@ 6 m ( 474 ft ) long overall . They had a beam of 22 @.@ 4 m ( 73 ft ) and a draft of 7 @.@ 91 to 8 @.@ 58 m ( 26 @.@ 0 to 28 @.@ 1 ft ) . They displaced 12 @,@ 550 to 12 @,@ 658 long tons ( 12 @,@ 751 to 12 @,@ 861 t ) at normal loading and up to 13 @,@ 771 to 13 @,@ 914 long tons ( 13 @,@ 992 to 14 @,@ 137 t ) at full combat load . The ships had a crew of 742 – 764 officers and enlisted men . The ships were initially fitted with two masts , but after refits early in their careers , Regina Elena 's and Napoli 's foremasts were removed . 
 The battleships ' propulsion system consisted of two vertical four @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines rated at 19 @,@ 299 to 21 @,@ 968 indicated horsepower ( 14 @,@ 391 to 16 @,@ 382 kW ) . Steam for the engines was provided by twenty @-@ eight coal @-@ fired Belleville boilers in the first two ships , and 28 Babcock & Wilcox boilers in the last two , split between three boiler rooms . The boilers were trunked into three tall funnels . The ships ' propulsion system provided a top speed in excess of 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) ; Napoli , the fastest member of the class , reached 22 @.@ 15 knots ( 41 @.@ 02 km / h ; 25 @.@ 49 mph ) on her speed trials . The ships had a range of approximately 10 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 19 @,@ 000 km ; 12 @,@ 000 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . At the time of their completion , they were the fastest battleships in the world , faster even than the steam turbine @-@ powered HMS Dreadnought . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 The Regina <unk> were armed with two 12 in ( 305 mm ) 40 @-@ caliber guns placed in two single gun turrets , one forward and one aft . The turrets were placed well clear of the superstructure , giving them a wide arc of fire , close to 300 degrees of rotation . Electric power was used for training and elevation of the turrets and ammunition handling . The lighter main battery , compared to other pre @-@ dreadnought type battleships that typically carried twice as many heavy guns , was criticized by some observers , but Dr. Philip Alger writing in Proceedings of the United States Naval Institute noted that " it should be borne in mind that a pair of guns in a turret do not make twice as good shooting as a single gun , " and that given the limited displacement of the design , it " was the wisest choice that could be made . " Fire control for the guns was provided by Barr and Stroud rangefinders mounted on the conning tower . The ammunition magazines were fitted with refrigeration systems to minimize the risk of accidental explosions . 
 The ships were also equipped with twelve 8 in ( 203 mm ) 40 @-@ cal. guns in six twin turrets amidships , which also used electrical operation . The central turrets were placed a deck higher than the others to permit them firing directly ahead and astern . Close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats was provided by a battery of sixteen 3 in ( 76 mm ) 40 @-@ cal. guns , though Roma and Napoli both had an additional eight guns of this caliber . All four ships were also equipped with two 17 @.@ 7 in ( 450 mm ) torpedo tubes placed in the hull below the waterline . 
 The ships was protected with Krupp cemented steel manufactured in Terni . The main belt was 9 @.@ 8 in ( 249 mm ) thick amidships , reduced to 6 in ( 152 mm ) abreast of the main battery turrets , and 4 in ( 102 mm ) thick at the bow and stern . The deck was 1 @.@ 5 in ( 38 mm ) thick . The conning tower was protected by 10 in ( 254 mm ) of armor plating . The main battery guns had 8 in ( 203 mm ) thick plating , and the 8 @-@ inch gun turrets had 6 in thick sides . 
 = = Ships of the class = = 
 = = Service histories = = 
 The four ships of the Regina Elena class served in the active duty squadron after their commissioning through 1911 and participated in the peacetime routine of fleet training . On 29 September 1911 , Italy declared war on the Ottoman Empire , starting the Italo @-@ Turkish War . The four ships saw action during the war in the 1st Division of the 1st Squadron . They participated in the operations off North Africa in the first months of the war , including escorting the crossing of the Italian expeditionary army sent to conquer Cyrenaica . Later in the war , they took part in the seizure of Rhodes and the Dodecanese . 
 Italy initially remained neutral during World War I , but by 1915 , had been convinced by the Triple Entente to enter the war against Germany and Austria @-@ Hungary . Both the Italians and Austro @-@ Hungarians adopted a cautious fleet policy in the confined waters of the Adriatic Sea , and so the four Regina Elena @-@ class battleships did not see action . They spent the war rotating between the naval bases at Taranto , Brindisi , and Valona . After the end of the war , the ships of the class were included amongst the battleships that Italy could keep in service ( by the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty ) , but they were retained only for a few years . Between February 1923 and September 1926 , all four ships were stricken from the naval register and broken up for scrap . 
 = Stanisław Staszic = 
 Stanisław Wawrzyniec Staszic [ staˈɲiswaf <unk> ͡ s ] ( 6 November 1755 – 20 January 1826 ) was a leading figure in the Polish Enlightenment : a Catholic priest , philosopher , geologist , writer , poet , translator and statesman . A physiocrat , monist , pan @-@ Slavist ( after 1815 ) and laissez @-@ <unk> , he supported many reforms in Poland . He is particularly remembered for his political writings during the " Great ( Four @-@ Year ) Sejm " ( 1788 – 92 ) and for his support of the Constitution of 3 May 1791 , adopted by that Sejm . 
 He co @-@ founded the Warsaw Society of Friends of Learning ( precursor to the Polish Academy of Sciences ) , of which he became president . He served as a member of the State Council of the Duchy of Warsaw and as minister of trade and industry in Congress Poland . Staszic is seen as the father of Polish geology , statistics , sociology , Tatra Mountains studies and exploration , mining and industry . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Stanisław Staszic was born into a burgher family in the town of Piła on 6 November 1755 , the youngest of four siblings . His father , Wawrzyniec Staszic , was mayor of Piła and a royal secretary . 
 Staszic attended secondary school at <unk> . He studied theology and graduated from a Jesuit school at Poznań in 1778 and was ordained a Catholic priest ( he took lesser Holy Orders in 1774 , and higher orders about 1778 – 79 ) . Between 1779 and 1781 he continued his studies in France at the Collège de France , where he took classes in physics and natural history . 
 On returning to Poland in 1781 , he accepted a position as tutor in the house of Grand Crown Chancellor Andrzej Zamoyski . In 1782 he received a doctorate from the <unk> Academy . He translated several works from French into Polish and briefly worked at the Academy as a teacher of French language . 
 = = = Reformer = = = 
 His Remarks upon the Life of Jan Zamoyski ( <unk> nad życiem Jana Zamoyskiego , 1787 ) , published anonymously on the eve of the Great Sejm , transformed the little @-@ known tutor into one of the chief political thinkers of the late 18th @-@ century Commonwealth . It became a model for other similar works and began a flood of political books and pamphlets unprecedented in the Commonwealth 's history . It was reprinted numerous times , including in unauthorized editions . 
 Within his Remarks , Staszic did not portray the life of Jan Zamoyski ( 1542 – 1605 , one of the most prominent statesmen in Polish history ) ; rather , he argued that reforms are needed , and that Zamoyski had already proposed or supported many of them two centuries before . Staszic was a strong partisan of reforms and an ardent advocate for the interests of the lower classes . He advocated the abolition of the serfdom and improvements of the peasants ' fate ( by granting them land and private rights ) . He criticised the szlachta ( Polish nobility ) for inefficient governance , and argued that it showed itself too inept to be allowed to govern alone . He argued for a slight increase in taxes , which should allow the Commonwealth to create an army of 100 @,@ 000 that would at least stand a chance against the still @-@ larger armies of its neighbours . Although he preferred republicanism in theory , in the Commonwealth context he agreed that a strengthening of the central ( royal ) power was the most practical solution for reforming the country , in line with the similar developments elsewhere in Europe . In Remarks he even supported the introduction of an absolute monarchy in Poland . 
 Staszic was a keen observer of the proceedings of the Great Sejm , spending much time in Warsaw since the Sejm began its deliberations in 1788 . He continued publishing new books and pamphlets . His Warnings for Poland , coming from the current European politics and natural laws , by the writer of the remarks upon the life of Jan Zamoyski ( <unk> dla Polski z <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> i z praw <unk> <unk> przez <unk> <unk> nad życiem Jana Zamoyskiego , 1790 ) , together with his previous Remarks , are considered among the most influential works of the Polish Enlightenment . In Warnings , he criticised the magnates of Poland and Lithuania , monastic orders and serfdom , and supported the enfranchisement of the townsfolk . Although he was not a participant of the Sejm , he was an influential onlooker , and through his widely read and discussed writings of the time is recognized as one of the founding fathers of the Constitution of May 3 , 1791 . 
 During 1790 – 1791 he accompanied Zamoyski 's family on a trip abroad , and continued to serve as an adviser to the family , although his relations with the sons ( Aleksander August Zamoyski , Stanisław Kostka Zamoyski ) had become strained ; he would eventually align himself with the daughter of the family , Anna Zamoyska ( Anna Jadwiga <unk> ) . He supported the 1794 Kościuszko Uprising , a failed attempt to liberate Commonwealth from foreign influence following the events of the 1793 Second Partition of Poland , donating money to the insurgents ' cause . Upon the defeat of the Uprising , he accompanied the family on their trip to Vienna . He also made some successful financial investments , including in the stock market . He then served as an economic adviser for the Zamoyski and the Sapieha families , invested in their estates , and lent them money . 
 = = = Late life = = = 
 After the partitions of Poland , in which Russia , Prussia , and Austria seized all of the Commonwealth 's territory , Staszic was active in many scientific and scholarly initiatives . He studied the geology of the Carpathian Mountains . In 1800 he co @-@ founded the Warsaw Society of Friends of Learning ; from 1802 he was one of its most active members . In 1804 he went to France , where he observed the changes wrought by Napoleon . On return to Poland in 1805 , he spent some time in the Tatra Mountains , where he continued his geological studies and conducted ethnographic ones . He worked with Jan <unk> Hoffmann on a geological map of Poland . In the Duchy of Warsaw he worked with the Ministry of Education ( Izba <unk> Księstwa Warszawskiego ) and was involved in numerous educational reforms and initiatives . He also briefly worked with the Ministry of Treasury . 
 From 1808 he was president of the Society of Friends of Learning ( Towarzystwo <unk> <unk> , or TPN ) , forerunner to the Polish Academy of Sciences ( Polska Akademia <unk> ) ; he would be elected repeatedly as the society 's president until his death . In 1808 he also became <unk> to the State Council ( Rada <unk> ) of the Duchy ; in 1810 he became a full member . In the Council , he was active in regard to questions of education and the economy . As TPN president he was active in many initiatives which supported and popularized science in Poland . He oversaw the construction of a headquarters for the TPN , which came to be known as the " Staszic Palace " . 
 From 1814 he supported the Russian Empire , seen as a Pan @-@ Slavist ally of Poland , and favored the idea of a great Slavic monarchy . After the fall of the Duchy of Warsaw in 1815 , he became a member of the government of the newly created small state of Congress Poland ( in personal union with Russia ) , initially in the new Ministry of Education and Religion , in 1816 serving as deputy minister . In 1815 he was decorated with the Order of Saint Stanislaus . In 1819 he endorsed a controversial censorship law , damaging his reputation . 
 His 1815 Polish translation of Homer 's Iliad met with a negative reception . In 1816 – 20 he published many of his writings in a 9 @-@ volume Works ( <unk> ) . Volumes 7 – 9 comprised his Humankind : A Didactic Poem ( <unk> <unk> . Poema <unk> ) , a gigantic philosophical essay and poem that is regarded as an important contribution to the history of Polish philosophy . However , the work ran afoul of the new censorship law and was not distributed , much of the edition eventually being destroyed . 
 He also carried out studies on education and on human behavior , in a social @-@ science tradition . Some of his views and theories made him a precursor of evolutionism in the natural and social sciences . In his essays on human nature , he declared for the primacy of science and was relatively critical of the influence of religion . These views gained him some critics , as he was seen as a priest who had abandoned religion . 
 From 1816 he was involved in mining research and projects . He also actively supported industrial development in Poland . He was one of the first to see the importance of coal , and supported the development of metallurgy @-@ related projects , from mines to zinc and steel mills . He was also involved in the development of ceramic and textile industries , and improving the transport infrastructure ( roads , canals ) . He discovered coal deposits in <unk> <unk> , where he initiated the building of a coal mine . Between 1816 and 1824 he was the de facto minister of industry of the Congress Poland ( styled officially the " director of the Department of Trade , Crafts and Industry " ) and initiated construction of the Old Polish Industrial Area ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) . As his projects did not result in quick returns , he incurred increasing criticism , and eventually resigned from his position in 1824 . 
 In 1816 he founded the <unk> Towarzystwo <unk> ( Hrubieszów Agricultural Society ) , seen by some as the first Polish cooperative . 
 He died in Warsaw on 20 January 1826 , most likely due to a stroke . His funeral gathered 20 @,@ 000 people , including the viceroy of the Congress Poland , Józef Zajączek . He was buried in the cemetery of the Camaldolese Hermit Monastery in Kraków . His testament left his property at Hrubieszów to its tenants , and much of his wealth went to various philanthropic initiatives . 
 = = Private life = = 
 Staszic was remembered by his contemporaries as a loner and not a person who was quick to make friends . He has been described as somewhat miserly ; despite acquiring significant wealth , he was said to wear old clothes and use an old carriage . He was nonetheless widely respected by his contemporaries . He was seen as stern but honest , and had a tendency to speak in a fashion that some found amusing . 
 = = Remembrance = = 
 He is seen as one of the chief representatives of the political activists and writers of the Polish Enlightenment . He is also seen as the father of Polish geology , statistics , sociology , Tatra Mountains studies and exploration , mining and industry . He is one of the figures immortalised in Jan Matejko 's 1891 painting " Constitution of May 3 , 1791 " . He was also the protagonist of the Charles Dickens ' novella " Judge Not " ( 1851 ) , and of Hanna <unk> @-@ <unk> 's novel " <unk> ze <unk> " ( Little chalice of silver ) . Wacław <unk> published a biography of Staszic , but it is now lost . In 1926 , on the 100th anniversary of his death , he was celebrated in the Second Polish Republic with several studies , articles and publications . 
 In April 1951 , he was honoured on a postage stamp of the People 's Republic of Poland as part of the set issued for the First Congress of Polish Science . His figure was popular among the Marxist scholars of the People 's Republic , who stressed his materialist , determinist and anti @-@ clerical views . The 150th anniversary of his death in 1976 was also celebrated , with many works dedicated to him , including poems by Jan <unk> and Jan Lohmann . He has been made a patron of over 200 schools , including the AGH University of Science and Technology in Kraków . There are statues of Stanisław Staszic in Łódź , Kielce , Hrubieszów and <unk> <unk> . Several geographical landmarks , minerals and a bacterium bear his name as well . In Piła , there is a Museum of Stanisław Staszic , which has gathered various artifacts related to him , and publishes a journal , " <unk> <unk> " ( Staszic Notebooks ) . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Order of Saint Stanislaus 
 Knight of the Order of the White Eagle 
 = = Works = = 
 His best @-@ known works include the following : 
 " Remarks upon the Life of Jan Zamoyski " ( <unk> nad życiem Jana Zamoyskiego , 1787 ) 
 " Warnings for Poland " ( or Warnings to Poland , <unk> dla Polski , 1790 ) 
 " On the Origin of Mountains in Former <unk> and Later Poland " ( O <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> Polski , 1815 ) 
 " On the Reasons of Jewish <unk> " ( O <unk> <unk> <unk> , 1818 ) 
 " Humankind " ( <unk> <unk> , 1820 ) 
 A Polish translation of Homer 's Iliad ( 1815 ) . 
 = Sound film = 
 A sound film is a motion picture with synchronized sound , or sound technologically coupled to image , as opposed to a silent film . The first known public exhibition of projected sound films took place in Paris in 1900 , but decades passed before sound motion pictures were made commercially practical . Reliable synchronization was difficult to achieve with the early sound @-@ on @-@ disc systems , and amplification and recording quality were also inadequate . Innovations in sound @-@ on @-@ film led to the first commercial screening of short motion pictures using the technology , which took place in 1923 . 
 The primary steps in the commercialization of sound cinema were taken in the mid- to late 1920s . At first , the sound films incorporating synchronized dialogue — known as " talking pictures " , or " talkies " — were exclusively shorts ; the earliest feature @-@ length movies with recorded sound included only music and effects . The first feature film originally presented as a talkie was The Jazz Singer , released in October 1927 . A major hit , it was made with Vitaphone , which was at the time the leading brand of sound @-@ on @-@ disc technology . Sound @-@ on @-@ film , however , would soon become the standard for talking pictures . 
 By the early 1930s , the talkies were a global phenomenon . In the United States , they helped secure Hollywood 's position as one of the world 's most powerful cultural / commercial systems ( see Cinema of the United States ) . In Europe ( and , to a lesser degree , elsewhere ) , the new development was treated with suspicion by many filmmakers and critics , who worried that a focus on dialogue would subvert the unique aesthetic virtues of soundless cinema . In Japan , where the popular film tradition integrated silent movie and live vocal performance , talking pictures were slow to take root . In India , sound was the transformative element that led to the rapid expansion of the nation 's film industry . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early steps = = = 
 The idea of combining motion pictures with recorded sound is nearly as old as the concept of cinema itself . On February 27 , 1888 , a couple of days after photographic pioneer Eadweard Muybridge gave a lecture not far from the laboratory of Thomas Edison , the two inventors privately met . Muybridge later claimed that on this occasion , six years before the first commercial motion picture exhibition , he proposed a scheme for sound cinema that would combine his image @-@ casting zoopraxiscope with Edison 's recorded @-@ sound technology . No agreement was reached , but within a year Edison commissioned the development of the Kinetoscope , essentially a " peep @-@ show " system , as a visual complement to his cylinder phonograph . The two devices were brought together as the Kinetophone in 1895 , but individual , cabinet viewing of motion pictures was soon to be outmoded by successes in film projection . In 1899 , a projected sound @-@ film system known as <unk> or <unk> , based primarily on the work of Swiss @-@ born inventor François <unk> , was exhibited in Paris ; similar to the Kinetophone , the system required individual use of earphones . An improved cylinder @-@ based system , Phono @-@ Cinéma @-@ Théâtre , was developed by Clément @-@ Maurice <unk> and Henri <unk> of France , allowing short films of theater , opera , and ballet excerpts to be presented at the Paris Exposition in 1900 . These appear to be the first publicly exhibited films with projection of both image and recorded sound . <unk> and yet another sound @-@ film system — <unk> — were also presented at the Exposition . 
 Three major problems persisted , leading to motion pictures and sound recording largely taking separate paths for a generation . The primary issue was synchronization : pictures and sound were recorded and played back by separate devices , which were difficult to start and maintain in tandem . Sufficient playback volume was also hard to achieve . While motion picture projectors soon allowed film to be shown to large theater audiences , audio technology before the development of electric amplification could not project satisfactorily to fill large spaces . Finally , there was the challenge of recording fidelity . The primitive systems of the era produced sound of very low quality unless the performers were stationed directly in front of the cumbersome recording devices ( acoustical horns , for the most part ) , imposing severe limits on the sort of films that could be created with live @-@ recorded sound . 
 Cinematic innovators attempted to cope with the fundamental synchronization problem in a variety of ways . An increasing number of motion picture systems relied on gramophone records — known as sound @-@ on @-@ disc technology ; the records themselves were often referred to as " Berliner discs " , after one of the primary inventors in the field , German @-@ American Emile Berliner . In 1902 , Léon Gaumont demonstrated his sound @-@ on @-@ disc <unk> , involving an electrical connection he had recently patented , to the French Photographic Society . Four years later , Gaumont introduced the <unk> , a compressed @-@ air amplification system based on the <unk> , developed by British inventors Horace Short and Charles Parsons . Despite high expectations , Gaumont 's sound innovations had only limited commercial success — though improvements , they still did not satisfactorily address the three basic issues with sound film and were expensive as well . For some years , American inventor E. E. Norton 's <unk> was the primary competitor to the Gaumont system ( sources differ on whether the <unk> was disc- or cylinder @-@ based ) ; it ultimately failed for many of the same reasons that held back the <unk> . 
 In 1913 , Edison introduced a new cylinder @-@ based synch @-@ sound apparatus known , just like his 1895 system , as the Kinetophone ; instead of films being shown to individual viewers in the Kinetoscope cabinet , they were now projected onto a screen . The phonograph was connected by an intricate arrangement of pulleys to the film projector , allowing — under ideal conditions — for synchronization . However , conditions were rarely ideal , and the new , improved Kinetophone was retired after little more than a year . By the mid @-@ 1910s , the groundswell in commercial sound motion picture exhibition had subsided . Beginning in 1914 , The Photo @-@ Drama of Creation , promoting Jehovah 's Witnesses ' conception of mankind 's genesis , was screened around the United States : eight hours worth of projected visuals involving both slides and live action were synchronized with separately recorded lectures and musical performances played back on phonograph . 
 Meanwhile , innovations continued on another significant front . In 1907 , French @-@ born , London @-@ based Eugene Lauste — who had worked at Edison 's lab between 1886 and 1892 — was awarded the first patent for sound @-@ on @-@ film technology , involving the transformation of sound into light waves that are photographically recorded direct onto celluloid . As described by historian Scott Eyman , 
 It was a double system , that is , the sound was on a different piece of film from the picture .... In essence , the sound was captured by a microphone and translated into light waves via a light valve , a thin ribbon of sensitive metal over a tiny slit . The sound reaching this ribbon would be converted into light by the shivering of the diaphragm , focusing the resulting light waves through the slit , where it would be photographed on the side of the film , on a strip about a tenth of an inch wide . 
 Though sound @-@ on @-@ film would eventually become the universal standard for synchronized sound cinema , Lauste never successfully exploited his innovations , which came to an effective dead end . In 1914 , Finnish inventor Eric <unk> was granted German patent 309 @,@ 536 for his sound @-@ on @-@ film work ; that same year , he apparently demonstrated a film made with the process to an audience of scientists in Berlin . Hungarian engineer Denes Mihaly submitted his sound @-@ on @-@ film <unk> concept to the Royal Hungarian Patent Court in 1918 ; the patent award was published four years later . Whether sound was captured on cylinder , disc , or film , none of the available technology was adequate for big @-@ league commercial purposes , and for many years the heads of the major Hollywood film studios saw little benefit in producing sound motion pictures . 
 = = Crucial innovations = = 
 A number of technological developments contributed to making sound cinema commercially viable by the late 1920s . Two involved contrasting approaches to synchronized sound reproduction , or playback : 
 = = = Advanced sound @-@ on @-@ film = = = 
 In 1919 , American inventor Lee De Forest was awarded several patents that would lead to the first optical sound @-@ on @-@ film technology with commercial application . In De Forest 's system , the sound track was photographically recorded onto the side of the strip of motion picture film to create a composite , or " married " , print . If proper synchronization of sound and picture was achieved in recording , it could be absolutely counted on in playback . Over the next four years , he improved his system with the help of equipment and patents licensed from another American inventor in the field , Theodore Case . 
 At the University of Illinois , Polish @-@ born research engineer Joseph <unk> @-@ <unk> was working independently on a similar process . On June 9 , 1922 , he gave the first reported U.S. demonstration of a sound @-@ on @-@ film motion picture to members of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers . As with Lauste and <unk> , <unk> 's system would never be taken advantage of commercially ; however , De Forest 's soon would . 
