 Several currently prescribed amphetamine formulations contain both enantiomers , including Adderall , <unk> XR , and <unk> , the last of which is racemic amphetamine sulfate . Amphetamine is also prescribed in <unk> and prodrug form as dextroamphetamine and lisdexamfetamine respectively . <unk> is structurally different from amphetamine , and is inactive until it metabolizes into dextroamphetamine . The free base of racemic amphetamine was previously available as Benzedrine , <unk> , and <unk> . <unk> was previously available as <unk> . Many current amphetamine pharmaceuticals are salts due to the comparatively high volatility of the free base . However , oral suspension and orally disintegrating tablet ( <unk> ) dosage forms composed of the free base were introduced in 2015 and 2016 . Some of the current brands and their generic equivalents are listed below . 
 = = Reference notes = = 
 = Mikengreg = 
 Mikengreg is an independent video game development team of Mike Boxleiter and Greg Wohlwend . Their games include Solipskier , Gasketball , and TouchTone . The two met in a game development class at Iowa State University and later began to collaborate on the Adobe Flash game Dinowaurs . When the project was funded , they founded Intuition Games with other college friends in Ames , Iowa , where they worked on small Flash games such as Gray , <unk> , and Fig . 8 for Flash game sites such as Kongregate . Dinowaurs was one of the first games signed for the Kongregate platform . Their other games involved controlling the weather , influencing individuals in a riot , and riding a bicycle . Boxleiter and Wohlwend worked on several additional games that were put on hiatus . 
 They later became Mikengreg in 2010 and released Solipskier in August for both Flash and iOS later that year . Its success let them take a more experimental approach towards their next game , the free @-@ to @-@ play Gasketball . Mikengreg ran out of money during the game 's development and the two lived on friends ' couches . The game was reviewed favorably upon its August 2012 launch , but did not earn near the developers ' estimates . Their next game , TouchTone ( 2015 ) , spent two years in development . 
 = = Intuition Games = = 
 Boxleiter and Wohlwend met in an experimental video game development class at Iowa State University . Wohlwend had attempted to help Boxleiter with a project , but quit after drawing a few aliens . Boxleiter said he " didn 't like [ Wohlwend ] much after that " . They met again as coworkers at the university 's Virtual Reality Application Center during Boxleiter 's final year of college ( Wohlwend 's penultimate year ) . Upon discovering their close interests , they began to work on an Adobe Flash game named Dinowaurs while they completed college . Boxleiter graduated in 2007 with a degree in computer science , and Wohlwend a year later with a degree in graphic design . They concluded that they needed a company to make money while they worked on the game with collaborators , and around May 2007 , founded Intuition Games at the university 's Research Park . They decided to stay in Ames , Iowa due to its financial feasibility and local connections , but two other members of the team , Josh Larson and Ted Martens , lived in Des Moines and Chicago , respectively . The team met as students at Iowa State through work and game development circles . They saw Flash games as an easy entry point into full @-@ time self @-@ employment , but planned to eventually work on console platforms such as WiiWare . Before Dinowaurs , the team made a game about a destructive porpoise , which was abandoned when Dinowaurs received funding . 
 In their development process , Boxleiter and Wohlwend both proposed and worked on each other 's ideas , and would drop the ideas they found unexciting . The two also built games from keywords and brainstorming , and would flesh out the game mechanics through " heated " argument . Their labor as a team was divided in that Wohlwend always did the art and Boxleiter the programming , as reflective of their skills at the time . The pair agreed to an assessment of their partnership as " left @-@ brain right @-@ brain " , and agreed that " editing " — the process of iterating through revisions — was central to their joint work . As they worked , they always retained their prototypes . They both appreciated the " creative freedom " of being self @-@ employed , though they struggled with the business aspects , relative workplace " isolation " , low salaries , and lack of job stability . Both were motivated to do their own work instead of contracted tasks . They thought of themselves as artists and of their work as experimental . Boxleiter and Wohlwend worked long hours when making the Flash games , which they found exciting and unsustainable . At Intuition , they worked on games such as Dinowaurs , Gray , Fig . 8 , and Liferaft and participated in at least six game jams . As of April 2010 , they had created 10 games together . 
 = = = Dinowaurs = = = 
 Intuition 's first game , Dinowaurs , is a strategy and action game where two players compete as dinosaurs to seize the most cavemen settlements on a single screen . Captured settlements provide resources for upgrades to the players ' dinosaurs . The object of this arms race is to kill the other dinosaur . It features online matchmaking . The game was built from an unfinished Flash @-@ based multiplayer strategy game started by Boxleiter and an image of a stegosaurus with a jetpack drawn by Martens . The team combined the concepts for a strategy game about dinosaurs fighting for food . They struggled with long @-@ distance communication , but used a project management website and Skype to stay in touch . When looking for a platform , Intuition originally pitched the game with a clay dinosaur to Adult Swim — who was funding Flash games — but was declined for not being " edgy enough " . In June , they then tried then @-@ new Flash site Kongregate via a connection Larson had made with its CEO Jim Greer at the 2007 Game Developers Conference . He asked the team to wait for their new Director of Games to be hired , who ended up being Intuition 's contact at Adult Swim . The contact had liked the idea and thought the game worked better for Kongregate than did for Adult Swim , and so funded the game by November 2007 as one of the first five for the Kongregate platform . The package was a one @-@ year browser exclusivity agreement that let Intuition keep the intellectual property . 
 Dinowaurs was finished in two years for a 2009 release . Their later games would only take a few months apiece in comparison . They abandoned the use of design documents after Dinowaurs , and instead chose to refine and experiment in process . IndieGames.com reported mixed reviews from players and recommended the game as " good solid fun " for newcomers and veterans . The Escapist described the game as similar to Scorched Earth and " surprisingly complex " with its need for three tutorials . He complimented its " faux @-@ retro " soundtrack and aesthetics , which he felt outweighed the learning curve 's difficulty . 
 = = = Other games = = = 
 Intuition released Effing Hail and Gray around April 2009 . Players in action game Effing Hail control hail and wind to destroy the most buildings and midair objects within a time limit . The hail grows in size when the wind is used to suspend it in air . The game was published through Kongregate . As an example of their more experimental games , Intuition built Gray — a game about " political consciousness " — as a result of their frustrations during the 2008 U.S. presidential election . Players control a single character and try to end a riot by influencing other individuals in the crowd . The game was featured at IndieCade in 2009 . 
 Fig . 8 @.@ is based on one of Wohlwend 's college art projects . It went unused on their whiteboard for four months until they needed an idea , whereupon Boxleiter added game mechanics to the visuals . It took about ten hours to prototype the controls , and they tested a ten @-@ wheel bike before deciding on two . The scrolling camera was inspired by a game Boxleiter had been playing called String Theory , and they added the soundtrack last . Fig . 8 was funded by a sponsor . Boxleiter considers Gray and Fig . 8 to be " small games " . As projects , he considered them " more like vacations ... than actual work " . 
 Intuition attempted to fund their next game , Liferaft , via crowdfunding site Kickstarter . The game is set in a single day within an " abandoned testing facility ... in a post @-@ apocalyptic sci @-@ fi " world . The player @-@ character is a young woman named Goss who had been surviving off of lichen until a giant squid crashes into the room and allows her escape . Liferaft was built for release in three episodes : her escape , " revelation " , and " resolution " . The core gameplay revolves around a " Bionic Commando @-@ style grappling hook " . Intuition released a two @-@ level Flash demo where the game had 16 @-@ bit era graphics and music composed by Danny Baranowsky of Canabalt and Fathom . They expected development to take six months between November 2009 and February 2010 . They canceled the Kickstarter and put the project on hiatus in October 2009 for two small Flash games and an intern 's Unity project . 
 In March 2010 and under the moniker Mikengreg , Boxleiter and Wohlwend 's 4fourths was chosen among six games out of more than 150 submissions for inclusion in Kokoromi 's Gamma IV showcase . Submissions were based on the theme of " one button games " . The four @-@ player game is played with two teams each controlling spaceships on each side of the screen . One player on each team controls the ship 's vertical height and the other fires the guns , which aim towards the center of the screen . Since every player only has one button , the vertical height controls boost the ship vertically when the button is pressed and leaves the ship to slowly descend when unpressed . The teams work together to shoot at and destroy enemy boss ships that travel through the center of the screen . Teams can also shoot each other 's ships as friendly fire is activated . The game was displayed at Gamma IV in San Francisco and at the 2010 Game Developers Conference . 4fourths was Michael Rose of <unk> 's favorite game of the Gamma IV selections . It was later chosen for Brandon Boyer 's Wild Rumpus London event in September 2011 . 
 Mikengreg announced Liferaft : Zero and Solipskier in November 2010 . The former is a " prequel teaser " to the Flash platform game Liferaft that they had announced the previous year , a game of trial @-@ based challenges with wall @-@ jumping and grappling wherein girl clones attempt to swing and jump around test chambers to reach and ring a bell . Wohlwend and Boxleiter made the shorter version to limit the scope creep of the overall project . IndieGames.com named the Flash game their third best browser platformer of the year . Their other game , 4fourths , was put on hiatus for lack of resources . They were interested in making games outside the Flash market . 
 = = Solipskier = = 
 Their first game as Mikengreg was Solipskier , where the player 's finger draws the ground for the on @-@ screen skier to pass through a level filled with gates , tunnels , and walls . It was designed as a Flash game , which set the limitations for its mechanics . The game concept came from a brainstorming session about parallax scrolling , and was revised in fits of creativity . They paired the parallax scrolling with speed and began to prototype . Boxleiter first understood its potential when publishers fought for the bid to the game . They then decided to develop for iOS in addition to Flash , and to release both versions simultaneously . It was released on August 29 , 2010 and became their first game to receive public appreciation . Solipskier for iOS made around $ 70 @,@ 000 in its first two months ( as compared to $ 15 @,@ 000 from the Flash release ) , which gave them enough stability to branch out into non @-@ Flash platforms . 
 Boxleiter spoke at the 2012 Game Developers Conference Indie Soapbox on how indie stars were made from hard work and not from the Independent Games Festival . He added that winning an award at the festival for Solipskier was an insignificant aspect of his career . 
 = = Gasketball = = 
 Riding the earnings from Solipskier , Mikengreg continued to pay themselves their same salary but now had the means to try new ideas . Wohlwend estimated that they discarded about six " fairly polished prototypes " over the development of their next game , Gasketball . They were able to live on $ 20 – 25 @,@ 000 a year each in Iowa for the next two years while working on the new game . Wohlwend made somewhat more income due to other collaborations , such as Puzzlejuice with Asher Vollmer , but shared his income with Boxleiter . Even though Solipskier was successful , the duo did not have a following comparable to indie developers like Team Meat and thus felt like their external pressure was low . Instead , their pressure was internal . Wohlwend said he worked 100 @-@ hour weeks with no weekends or vacations while living off of the Solipskier funds . In making Gasketball , Boxleiter and Wohlwend felt that their game quality had improved continually , but found the idea of a million @-@ person audience " daunting " and Wohlwend questioned whether he could even recreate Solipskier 's success . When they ran out of money , Boxleiter borrowed money from his parents , and eventually they both went homeless , living off of the couches of friends . 
 Gasketball was released for iPad on August 9 , 2012 . They had decided to release the game as what they deemed to be an ethically non @-@ coercive free @-@ to @-@ play game , with a free base game and in @-@ app purchases for the extended content . Not as many players paid for the content as expected . This was due , in part , to the players ' difficulty in finding the purchase function . The game had been downloaded 200 @,@ 000 times in its August 2012 launch week and was briefly ranked near the top of an iTunes top downloads ranking , though it did not break the top 200 grossing chart . 
 = = TouchTone = = 
 After Gasketball 's release , Boxleiter and Wohlwend planned a celebratory road trip to a game jam in Victoria , British Columbia . The game did not fare as expected , so Boxleiter wanted to use the jam to create " something new , ... something really small and perfect " . By the end of the two @-@ day jam , the core mirror reflection mechanics of TouchTone were in place , though it would take two years of sporadic work to finalize the remainder of the game . In TouchTone , the player monitors phone calls as part of a government surveillance program to find public threats . The story is told through a series of reflection puzzles wherein the player swipes the screen to reflect a beam around a room to its intended destination . 
 Mikengreg felt that their first theme of light , prisms , and audio signal too closely mimicked " a hacking minigame from a bigger AAA game like BioShock or System Shock " , but eventually paired the concept with a satirical Edward Snowden theme following the mid @-@ 2013 global surveillance disclosures . Their original efforts were jocular , but their concept became more serious as the story and " political message " grew deeper . Boxleiter wrote most of the script , which is over 20 @,@ 000 words . It was his first effort at professional writing , and it took him five months . He and Wohlwend would conference after each chapter for coherency . Boxleiter wanted the story to explore the " questions ... floating around the national consciousness " rather than be " heavy @-@ handed " and prescriptive . They playtested the game in public at the theater in Logan Square , Chicago , though they acknowledged difficulty in playtesting the story 's private experience . Mikengreg decided against including an option to skip puzzles , which they felt would spoil the game and the player 's capacity to adapt to increasing difficulty . They called this philosophy the " Derek Yu ( of Spelunky ) school of game design " . TouchTone was released on March 19 , 2015 for iOS . Review aggregator Metacritic characterized its reviews as generally favorable . 
 = Agrippa ( A Book of the Dead ) = 
 Agrippa ( A Book of the Dead ) is a work of art created by science fiction novelist William Gibson , artist Dennis Ashbaugh and publisher Kevin Begos Jr. in 1992 . The work consists of a 300 @-@ line semi @-@ autobiographical electronic poem by Gibson , embedded in an artist 's book by Ashbaugh . Gibson 's text focused on the ethereal nature of memories ( the title is taken from a photo album ) . Its principal notoriety arose from the fact that the poem , stored on a 3 @.@ 5 " floppy disk , was programmed to encrypt itself after a single use ; similarly , the pages of the artist 's book were treated with photosensitive chemicals , effecting the gradual fading of the words and images from the book 's first exposure to light . 
 = = Origin and concept = = 
 The impetus for the initiation of the project was Kevin Begos Jr . , a publisher of museum @-@ quality manuscripts motivated by disregard for the commercialism of the art world , who suggested to abstract painter Dennis Ashbaugh that they " put out an art book on computer that vanishes " . Ashbaugh — who despite his " heavy art @-@ world resume " was bored with the abstract impressionist paintings he was doing — took the suggestion seriously , and developed it further . 
 A few years beforehand , Ashbaugh had written a fan letter to cyberpunk novelist William Gibson , whose oeuvre he had admired , and the pair had struck up a telephone friendship . Shortly after the project had germinated in the minds of Begos and Ashbaugh , they contacted and recruited Gibson . The project exemplified Gibson 's deep ambivalence towards technologically advanced futurity , and as The New York Times expressed it , was " designed to challenge conventional notions about books and art while extracting money from collectors of both " . 
 Some people have said that they think this is a scam or pure hype … [ m ] aybe fun , maybe interesting , but still a scam . But Gibson thinks of it as becoming a memory , which he believes is more real than anything you can actually see . 
 The project manifested as a poem written by Gibson incorporated into an artist 's book created by Ashbaugh ; as such it was as much a work of collaborative conceptual art as poetry . Gibson stated that Ashbaugh 's design " eventually included a supposedly self @-@ devouring floppy @-@ disk intended to display the text only once , then eat itself . " Ashbaugh was gleeful at the dilemma this would pose to librarians : in order to register the copyright of the book , he had to send two copies to the United States Library of Congress , who , in order to classify it had to read it , and in the process , necessarily had to destroy it . The creators had initially intended to infect the disks with a computer virus , but declined to after considering the potential damage to the computer systems of innocents . 
 = = Release and replication = = 
 OK , sit down and pay attention . We 're only going to say this once . 
 The work was premiered on December 9 , 1992 , at The Kitchen , an art space in Greenwich Village , New York City . The performance — known as " The Transmission " — consisted of the public incomplete reading of the poem by illusionist Penn Jillette , recorded and simultaneously transmitted to several other cities . The poem was inscribed on a sculptural magnetic disk which had been vacuum @-@ sealed until the event 's commencement , and was programmed to erase itself upon exposure to air . Contrary to numerous colourful reports , neither this disk nor the diskettes embedded in the artist 's book were ever actually hacked in any strict sense . 
 Academic researcher Matthew Kirschenbaum has reported that a pirated text of the poem was released the next day on MindVox , " an edgy New York City @-@ based electronic bulletin board " . Kirschenbaum considers <unk> , an interface between the dark web and the global Internet , to have been " an ideal initial host " . The text spread rapidly from that point on , first on FTP servers and anonymous mailers and later via USENET and <unk> email . Since Gibson did not use email at the time , fans sent copies of the pirated text to his fax machine . 
 The precise manner in which the text was obtained for MindVox is unclear , although the initial custodian of the text , known only as " Templar " attached to it an introductory note in which he claimed credit . Begos claimed that a troupe of New York University students representing themselves as documentarians attended The Transmission and made a videotape recording of the screen as it displayed the text as an accompaniment of Jillette 's reading . Kirschenbaum speculates that this group included the offline persona of Templar or one of his associates . According to this account , ostensibly endorsed by Templar in a post to Slashdot in February 2000 , the students then transcribed the poem from the tape and within hours had uploaded it to MindVox . However , according to a dissenting account by hacktivist and MindVox co @-@ founder Patrick K. Kroupa , subterfuge prior to The Transmission elicited a betrayal of trust which yielded the uploaders the text . Kirschenbaum declined to elaborate on the specifics of the Kroupa conjecture , which he declared himself " not at liberty to disclose " . 
 Agrippa owes its transmission and continuing availability to a complex network of individuals , communities , ideologies , markets , technologies , and motives . Only in the most heroic reading of the events … is Agrippa saved for posterity solely by virtue of the knight Templar . … Today , the 404 File Not Found messages that Web browsing readers of Agrippa inevitably encounter … are more than just false leads ; they are latent affirmations of the work 's original act of erasure that allow the text to stage anew all of its essential points about artifacts , memory , and technology . " Because the struggle for the text is the text . " 
 On December 9 , 2008 ( the sixteenth anniversary of the original Transmission ) , " The Agrippa Files " , working with a scholarly team at the University of Maryland , released an emulated run of the entire poem ( derived from an original diskette loaned by a collector ) and an hour 's worth of " bootleg " footage shot covertly at the Americas Society ( the source of the text that was posted on MindVox ) . 
 = = = Cryptography = = = 
 Since its debut in 1992 , the mystery of Agrippa remained hidden for 20 years . Although many had tried to hack the code and decrypt the program , the <unk> source code was lost long ago . Alan Liu and his team at " The Agrippa Files " created an extensive website with tools and resources to crack the Agrippa Code . They collaborated with Matthew Kirschenbaum at the Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities and the Digital Forensics Lab , and Quinn DuPont , a PhD student of cryptography from the University of Toronto , in calling for the aid of cryptographers to figure out how the program works by creating " Cracking the Agrippa Code : The Challenge " , which enlisted participants to solve the intentional scrambling of the poem in exchange for prizes . The code was successfully cracked by Robert Xiao in late July 2012 . 
 There is no encryption algorithm present in the Agrippa binary ; consequently , the visual encryption effect that displays when the poem has finished is a ruse . The visual effect is the result of running the decrypted ciphertext ( in memory ) through the re @-@ purposed bit @-@ scrambling decryption algorithm , and then abandoning the text in memory . Only the fake genetic code is written back to disk . 
 The encryption resembles the RSA algorithm . This algorithm encodes data in 3 @-@ byte blocks . First , the each byte is permuted through an 8 @-@ position permutation , then the bits are split into two 12 @-@ bit integers ( by taking the low 4 bits of the second byte and the 8 bits of the first byte as the first 12 @-@ bit integer , and the 8 bits of the third byte and the 4 high bits of the second integer as the second 12 @-@ bit integer ) . Each is individually encrypted by taking them to the <unk> power , mod <unk> ; the bits are then reassembled into 3 bytes . The encrypted text is then stored in a string variable as part of the program . To shroud the would be visible and noticeable text it is compressed with the simple <unk> before final storage . As the Macintosh Common Lisp compiler compresses the main program code into the executable , this was not that necessary . 
 In order to prevent a second running of the program it corrupts itself when run . The program simply <unk> itself with a 6000 byte long DNA @-@ like code at a certain position . Archival documents suggest that the original plan was to use a series of ASCII 1 's to corrupt the binary , but at some point in development a change was made to use fake genetic code , in keeping with the visual motifs in the book . The genetic code has a codon entropy of 5 @.@ 97 bits / codon , much higher than any natural DNA sequence known . However , the ciphertext was not overwritten . 
 = = = = Weakness = = = = 
 A memory dump of Mini <unk> can be obtained with Linux <unk> or a similar tool after the Agrippa program has been loaded . The executable code could be reverse engineered . 
 The encryption itself due to the block cipher exhibited a regular pattern due to repeated text in the original plaintext . 
 The LZW compression itself does not hide the letter frequencies . 
 The scramble display has exactly the same letter frequencies as the underlying plaintext . 
 = = Content and editions = = 
 The book was published in 1992 in two limited editions — Deluxe and Small — by Kevin Begos Jr . Publishing , New York City . The deluxe edition came in a 16 by 21 ½ -inch ( 41 cm × 55 cm ) metal mesh case sheathed in Kevlar ( a polymer used to make bulletproof vests ) and designed to look like a buried relic . Inside is a book of 93 ragged and charred pages sewn by hand and bound in stained and singed linen by Karl Foulkes ; the book gives the impression of having survived a fire ; it was described by Peter <unk> as " a black box recovered from some unspecified disaster . " The edition includes pages of DNA sequences set in double columns of 42 lines each like the Gutenberg Bible , and copperplate aquatint etchings by Ashbaugh <unk> by Peter <unk> on Fabriano Tiepolo paper . The monochromatic etchings depict stylised chromosomes , a hallmark of Ashbaugh 's work , accompanied by imagery of a pistol , camera or in some instances simple line drawings — all allusions to Gibson 's contribution . 
 The deluxe edition was set in Monotype Gill Sans at <unk> Letter Foundry , and printed on Rives heavyweight text by Begos and the Sun Hill Press . The final 60 pages of the book were then fused together , with a hollowed @-@ out section cut into the centre , containing the self @-@ erasing diskette on which the text of Gibson 's poem was encrypted . The encryption was the work of a pseudonymous computer programmer , " <unk> " , assisted by Electronic Frontier Foundation founders John Perry Barlow and John Gilmore . The deluxe edition was originally priced at US $ 1500 ( later $ 2000 ) , and each copy is unique to some degree because of handmade or hand @-@ finished elements . 
 The small edition was sold for $ 450 ; like the deluxe edition , it was set in Monotype Gill Sans , but in single columns . It was printed on Mohawk <unk> text by the Sun Hill Press , with the reproduction of the etchings printed on a Canon laser printer . The edition was then Smythe sewn at Spectrum <unk> and enclosed in a <unk> box . A bronze @-@ boxed collectors ' copy was also released , and retailed at $ 7 @,@ 500 . 
 Fewer than 95 deluxe editions of Agrippa are extant , although the exact number is unknown and is the source of considerable mystery . The Victoria and Albert Museum possesses a deluxe edition , numbered 4 of 10 . A publicly accessible copy of the deluxe edition is available at the Rare Books Division of the New York Public Library and a small copy resides at Western Michigan University in Kalamazoo , Michigan , while the Frances Mulhall Achilles Library at the Whitney Museum of American Art in New York City hosts a promotional prospectus . The Victoria and Albert Museum 's copy was first exhibited in a display entitled The Book and Beyond , held in the Museum 's 20th Century Gallery from April to October 1995 . The same copy was subsequently also included in a V & A display entitled Digital Pioneers , from 2009 – 2010 . Another copy of the book was exhibited in the 2003 – 2004 exhibition Ninety from the Nineties at the New York Public Library . Gibson at one point claimed never to have seen a copy of the printed book , spurring speculation that no copies had actually been made . Many copies have since been documented , and Gibson 's signature was noted on the copy held by the New York Public Library . In 2011 , the Bodleian Library 's Special Collections Department at the University of Oxford acquired Kevin Begos ' copy of Agrippa , as well as the archive of Begos ' papers related to the work . 
 = = Poem = = 
 The construction of the book and the subject matter of the poem within it share a metaphorical connection in the decay of memory . In this light , critic Peter <unk> asserts that Agrippa can be understood as organized by two ideas : the death of Gibson 's father , and the disappearance or absence of the book itself . In this sense , it <unk> the ephemeral nature of all text . 
 = = = Theme and form = = = 
 The poem is a detailed description of several objects , including a photo album and the camera that took the pictures in it , and is essentially about the nostalgia that the speaker , presumably Gibson himself , feels towards the details of his family 's history : the painstaking descriptions of the houses they lived in , the cars they drove , and even their pets . 
 It starts around 1919 and moves up to today , or possibly beyond . If it works , it makes the reader uncomfortably aware of how much we tend to accept the contemporary media version of the past . You can see it in Westerns , the way the ' mise @-@ en @-@ scene ' and the collars on cowboys change through time . It 's never really the past ; it 's always a version of your own time . 
 In its original form , the text of the poem was supposed to fade from the page and , in Gibson 's own words , " eat itself " off of the diskette enclosed with the book . The reader would , then , be left with only the memory of the text , much like the speaker is left with only the memory of his home town and his family after moving to Canada from South Carolina , in the course of the poem ( as Gibson himself did during the Vietnam War ) . 
 = = = " The mechanism " = = = 
 The poem contains a motif of " the mechanism " , described as " Forever / Dividing that from this " , and which can take the form of the camera or of the ancient gun that misfires in the speaker 's hands . Technology , " the mechanism " , is the agent of memory , which transforms subjective experience into allegedly objective records ( photography ) . It is also the agent of life and death , one moment dispensing lethal bullets , but also likened to the life @-@ giving qualities of sex . Shooting the gun is " [ l ] ike the first time you put your mouth / on a woman " . 
 The poem is , then , not merely about memory , but how memories are formed from subjective experience , and how those memories compare to mechanically @-@ reproduced recordings . In the poem , " the mechanism " is strongly associated with recording , which can replace subjective experience . <unk> as memories constitute our identities , " the mechanism " thus represents the destruction of the self via recordings . Hence both cameras , as devices of recording , and guns , as instruments of destruction , are part of the same mechanism — dividing that ( memory , identity , life ) from this ( recordings , anonymity , death ) . 
 = = Critical reception and influence = = 
 Agrippa was extremely influential — as a sigil for the artistic community to appreciate the potential of electronic media — for the extent to which it entered public consciousness . It caused a fierce controversy in the art world , among museums and among libraries . It challenged established notions of permanence of art and literature , and , as Ashbaugh intended , raised significant problems for archivists seeking to preserve it for the benefit of future generations . Agrippa was also used as the key of a book cipher in the Cicada 3301 mystery . 
 Agrippa was particularly well received by critics , with digital media theorist Peter <unk> describing it in 2001 as " one of the most evocative <unk> published in the 1990s " . Professor of English literature John Johnson has claimed that the importance of Agrippa stems not only from its " foregrounding of <unk> in an assemblage of texts " , but also from the fact that " media in this work are explicitly as passageways to the realm of the dead " . English Professor Raymond <unk> argues that " the poem 's stanzas form a metaphorical DNA fingerprint that reveals Gibson 's life to be , paradoxically , a novel repetition of his father 's and grandfather 's lives . " The Cambridge History of Twentieth @-@ Century English Literature , which described the poem as " a mournful text " , praised Agrippa 's inventive use of digital format . However , academic Joseph <unk> remarked in a 2008 paper that Agrippa was among those works that are " canonized before they have been read , resisted , and reconsidered among fellow authors within an institutional environment that persists in time and finds outlets in many media " . 
 In a lecture at the exhibition of Agrippa at the Center for Book Arts in New York City , semiotician Marshall Blonsky of New York University drew an allusion between the project and the work of two French literary figures — philosopher Maurice <unk> ( author of " The Absence of the Book " ) , and poet Stéphane Mallarmé , a 19th @-@ century forerunner of semiotics and deconstruction . In response to Blonsky 's analysis that " [ t ] he collaborators in Agrippa are responding to a historical condition of language , a modern skepticism about it " , Gibson disparagingly commented " Honest to God , these academics who think it 's all some sort of big @-@ time French philosophy — that 's a scam . Those guys worship Jerry Lewis , they get our pop culture all wrong . " 
 = Girl in Mirror = 
 Girl in Mirror ( sometimes Girl in the Mirror ) is a 1964 porcelain @-@ enamel @-@ on @-@ steel pop art painting by Roy Lichtenstein that is considered to exist in between eight and ten editions . One edition was part of a $ 14 million 2012 lawsuit regarding a 2009 sale , while another sold in 2010 for $ 4 @.@ 9 million . Although it uses Ben @-@ Day dots like many other Lichtenstein works , it was inspired by the New York City Subway rather than directly from a panel of a romance comics work . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Girl in Mirror uses Ben @-@ Day dots like many of his other works , but it was inspired by the hard reflective finish of signs in the New York City Subway system and , in turn , they inspired his subsequent ceramic head works . Enamel facilitated a more mechanical appearance than even his paintings while remaining in two dimensions . After 1963 , Lichtenstein 's comics @-@ based women " ... look hard , crisp , brittle , and uniformly modish in appearance , as if they all came out of the same pot of makeup . " This particular example is one of several that is cropped so closely that the hair flows beyond the edges of the canvas . 
 = = Editions = = 
 One edition of this painting was the subject of a legal dispute involving 2009 sale without consent . Another edition of this work sold at auction at Christie 's ( New York , Rockefeller Plaza ) Post @-@ War and Contemporary Evening Sale for $ 4 @,@ 898 @,@ 500 ( premium ) on November 10 , 2010 although it was only expected to sell in the $ 3 – 4 million range . Girl in Mirror exists in eight editions according to most , however , " Clare Bell of the Roy Lichtenstein Foundation said that inventory records for the Leo Castelli Gallery , where Lichtenstein showed in the 1960s , say that there may be 10 versions of the work , some of them original proofs " . One edition exhibited at the Gagosian Gallery in New York in 2008 . There had been three previous auction sales of this work : May 5 , 1986 at Sotheby 's New York for $ 100 @,@ 000 USD ( hammer ) , May 4 , 1987 at Sotheby 's New York for $ 150 @,@ 000 USD ( hammer ) , and May 15 , 2007 Sotheby 's New York for $ 3 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 ( hammer ) / $ 4 @,@ 072 @,@ 000 ( premium ) . 
 = = 2012 lawsuit = = 
 On January 18 , 2012 , a suit was filed in Manhattan in New York State Court in a case related to two earlier federal cases . The suit alleges both lack of consent and fraudulent misrepresentation of the painting 's condition . The suit was for $ 14 million , including $ 10 million in punitive damages . 93 @-@ year @-@ old Jan Cowles claims that in 2008 her son , New York art dealer Charles Cowles , transferred a version of Girl in Mirror to Larry Gagosian for sale without her consent . The suit claims that Gagosian fraudulently claimed the painting was damaged and sold it between August and December 2009 for $ 2 million , while charging a $ 1 million commission , rather than sell at or above the $ 3 million low estimate for a negotiated commission of $ 500 @,@ 000 . As a result of the edition shown during the summer 2008 " Roy Lichtenstein : Girls " exhibition at the Gagosian Gallery , at one point the gallery was in possession of two editions of Girl in Mirror , one of which was damaged . The intake notes for the Cowles version indicate no damage and Gagosian 's international marketing of the work was consistent with the undamaged condition . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The New York Times notes that this was an example of Lichtenstein 's ability to " glorify the American woman by giving innocuous images of her generic concocted self and her roiling emotions such blazing formal power " . Framing a small fragment of the image in the mirror serves an artistic purpose . " Extraordinary sections like ... linking the falling hair to the semi @-@ reflected face of the girl in the mirror ( Girl in the mirror , 1964 ) ... which cut up , analyse , and unite , all have the one aim of intensifying the signifying fragment . " 
 = Solo ( Gonzalo Rubalcaba album ) = 
 Solo is a studio album by Cuban jazz performer Gonzalo Rubalcaba . It was released by Blue Note Records on March 7 , 2006 , and peaked at number 22 in the Billboard Top Jazz Albums chart . The album is titled Solo since no additional performers were included on the recording as in Rubalcaba 's previous albums . 
 Also produced by Rubalcaba , Solo was released following his second collaborative work with Charlie Haden on the album Land of the Sun , which resulted in a Grammy Award for Haden . The album includes fifteen tracks and met with mostly positive reviews by critics , most commenting on the ability of the performer and the simplicity of the arrangements . The album was nominated for a Billboard Latin Music Award , and won the Latin Grammy for Best Latin Jazz Album . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Cuban pianist Gonzalo Rubalcaba recorded Solo following his collaboration with Charlie Haden on Land of the Sun , an album featuring songs written by Mexican composer José Sabre Marroquin and arranged by Rubalcaba , a sequel to Nocturne ( 2001 ) , another collaboration between them . Haden and Rubalcaba were awarded the Grammy Award for Best Latin Jazz Album for both albums . Solo was the first solo album ( not featuring guest musicians ) released by the performer in twenty years . Rubalcaba described this album as an " aural diary , an album of secrets , letters and notes , and photos . " The album was released by Blue Note Records on March 7 , 2006 . 
 = = Content = = 
 Solo includes fifteen tracks , some previously released . Recording sessions took place from November 8 to 10 , 2005 , at The Hit Factory and Criteria Studios in Miami , Florida . There are four improvised tracks inspired by John Coltrane 's Giant Steps : " Paseo <unk> " , " Paseo en Media Luz " , " Paseo Azul " , and " Paseo <unk> " . " <unk> ( Improv # 1 ) " , according to Roberto R. Calder of PopMatters , has " stock phrasing , but a pause in concentration before the sublime quality of a one @-@ minute lullaby worth waiting for " ; " Media Luz ( Improv # 2 ) " " hints at jazz with concert @-@ room sonorities and a striking ending " ; " Azul ( Improv # 3 ) " " proceeds with more consistent direction than its two predecessors " and becomes a hymn " ; and " <unk> ( Improv # 4 ) " " develops into long linear passages for each hand . " " Faro " is a track with " a simple ostinato bass , a transition section and a loud climax . " The opening track , " <unk> " , is an interlude inspired by the work of French composer Claude Debussy and American performer Duke Ellington , and is " based on Afro @-@ Cuban melodies sung during Santería rites . " " Silencio " is a tribute to Cuban boleros . " <unk> ( Prologue to a Fantasy ) " features a " congenial intellectual playfulness alternating between something like Spanish piano music of a century ago , and the dance @-@ hall . " " Bésame Mucho " was first included on the 1991 album The Blessing , Rubalcaba 's first recording to be issued in the United States , and the version was named by Scott Yanow of Allmusic a " highlight " of the album , including accompaniment from Haden on bass guitar and drummer Jack <unk> . A reworked version is included on Solo , and is described as having an " intensely meditative character and slow deliberation , " and " a more complex higher level of communication " than the original version . " Here 's That Rainy Day " is a jazz ballad , recorded earlier for the album Inner Voyage , with an arrangement described as " breathtaking " by Ken Dryden of Allmusic . The first version of " Quasar " can be found on Paseo ( 2004 ) ; and the version included on Solo is described as " seven minutes of drama , " by Calder of PopMatters , with " a sprawling , improv @-@ heavy composition that runs Rubalcaba up and down the keyboard . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Solo received mostly positive reviews from critics . Andrew <unk> of Jazz Houston stated that Rubalcaba played " at once a pyrotechnical and thunderous two @-@ handed assault , he also demonstrates a profound awareness of space and dynamics , " and finally called the album " stunning " . Joey Guerra of Amazon said that Solo " finds Rubalcaba soaring on the strength of his own talent " , creating a " unique experience . " Website Allmusic stated that the album is a spellbinding collection of improvisations with " remarkable stylistic display . " Harvey Siders of JazzTimes commented that the album did not need elaborate arrangements , being a " spontaneous inner dialogue from a brilliant inquisitive mind " and that on Solo " elegance trumps excitement . " PopMatters ' Robert R. Calder stated that the record was " a very remarkable solo piano recital . " David Miller of All About Jazz gave the album a mixed review , being critical of the entertainment value , stating that the performer " is more introspective than ever , frequently using silence as his means of expression . The only problem is , it doesn 't necessarily work . " Miller also suggested that " Rubalcaba should develop his ideas in more conventional settings . He still has time to become a great solo artist , and this writer has every confidence that he will . " In a separate review , Jim <unk> , also of All About Jazz , praised Solo , commenting that Rubalcaba " finds space in his exploratory interpretation for dreamy soliloquies , but the excitement is all there , and it 's powerful . The pianist makes us wait for this moment , and it 's always worth the anticipation . Ultimately he lights an inspiring fire . " Mark <unk> , in a third review of the album by All About Jazz , compared Rubalcaba 's work to fellow Cuban artist Bebo Valdés , <unk> that both performers " blurred the lines between jazz , classical and folk , easily convincing you there need be no distinction . " Timothy Sprinkle of Jazz Review declared that the performer " carries the disc with a light , breezy ease that 's surprising , especially given all of the slow selections . " 
 Solo peaked at number 22 in the Billboard Top Jazz Albums chart and was nominated for " Latin Jazz Album of the Year " at the 18th Annual Billboard Latin Music Awards , losing to Around the City by Eliane Elias . Rubalcaba earned the Latin Grammy Award for Best Latin Jazz Album at the 7th Latin Grammy Awards for Solo . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 The track listing is from Allmusic . All tracks written and composed by Gonzalo Rubalcaba , except " Nightfall " by Charlie Haden ; " Bésame Mucho " by Consuelo Velázquez ; and " Here 's That Rainy Day " by Johnny Burke and James Van Heusen . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 This information is adapted from Allmusic . 
 = Jean @-@ Joseph Ange d 'Hautpoul = 
 Jean @-@ Joseph Ange d 'Hautpoul ( 13 May 1754 – 14 February 1807 ) was a French cavalry general of the Napoleonic wars . He came from an old noble family of France whose military tradition extended for several centuries . 
 Efforts by the French Revolutionary government to remove him from his command failed when his soldiers refused to give him up . A big , loud @-@ voiced man , he led from the front of his troops . Although the failure of his cavalry to deploy at the Battle of Stockach ( 1799 ) resulted in a court martial , he was exonerated and went on to serve in the Swiss campaign in 1799 , at the Second Battle of Stockach , the Battle of Biberach , and later at Battle of Hohenlinden . He served under Michel Ney and Joachim Murat . He was killed in Murat 's massive cavalry charge of the Battle of Eylau in 1807 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in an ancient noble family from the Languedoc , he entered the French royal army as a volunteer in 1769 . After having served in the Corsican legion , he transferred in 1771 to a Dragoon regiment . From 1777 , he served as an officer in the Dragoon Regiment of the Languedoc . By 1792 , he had become its colonel . 
 In 1802 , he married Alexandrine <unk> , and they had one child , born 29 May 1806 , named Alexandre Joseph Napoléon . His cousin , Alphonse Henri , comte d 'Hautpoul , also served in the Napoleonic Wars , as a lieutenant in the Iberian peninsula , and was taken prisoner at the Battle of Salamanca . He later became the 28th prime minister of France , from 1849 – 1851 . 
 = = Revolutionary Wars = = 
 By contemporary accounts , d 'Hautpoul was a big man , possibly taller than Joachim Murat , who was nearly six feet tall . Endowed with broad shoulders and a big voice . He spoke the language of the common soldier , and led from the front . Early in the French Revolution , commissioners visited the various regiments to weed out dangerous , and prospectively traitorous nobles ; generally , the commissioners cowed the army into submission , but d 'Hautpoul 's cavalry regiment refused to be intimidated . When the commissioners came for their colonel , a scion of impoverished nobility , his soldiers refused to give him up : " No d 'Hautpoul , no 6th Chasseurs . " Thus , despite his noble birth , at the exhortations of his soldiers he remained in the French Revolutionary Army . 
 d 'Hautpoul served in the 1794 – 1799 campaigns against the armies of the First and Second Coalitions . In April 1794 , d 'Hautpoul was promoted in the field to general of brigade and he commanded the brigade under both Jacques Desjardin and his successor , François Séverin Marceau @-@ <unk> . After the battle of Fleurus , his unit was transferred to the division of François Joseph Lefebvre . In June 1795 , his provisional rank of general of brigade was made permanent by the Committee of Public Safety . He distinguished himself in a fight at Blankenberge on 13 September 1795 . In June 1796 , d 'Hautpoul was promoted to general of division and inspector of the cavalry . At Altenkirchen , he was wounded in the shoulder by a musket ball . 
 After his recovery , d 'Hautpoul was given command of the heavy cavalry of the Army of Sambre @-@ et @-@ Meuse under General Paul Grenier . After Neuwied , he was transferred to the Army of England under command of Lazare Hoche . When the French Directory abandoned the idea of an invasion of England , he was again deployed on the German front , this time as part of the Army of the Danube . After the French loss at the Battle of Ostrach , his Cavalry reserve protected the French retreat from Pfullendorf . A few days later , after failing to lead a timely charge at the Battle of Stockach , he was suspended on orders of the Army commander , Jean @-@ Baptiste Jourdan , who blamed d 'Hautpoul for the defeat . Acquitted by a court @-@ martial in Strasbourg , d 'Hautpoul resumed his duties at the end of July 1799 , having missed the critical actions at the First Battle of Zurich . 
 In 1799 , d 'Hautpoul commanded cavalry brigades under Ney , Lecourbe and Baraguey d 'Hilliers in rest of the campaign in northeastern Switzerland . In the German campaign of 1800 , he served under Moreau and distinguished himself at the battles of Biberach and Hohenlinden , during which his heavy cavalry was instrumental in disrupting the Austrian infantry defenses . 
 = = Napoleonic wars = = 
 In July 1801 , First Consul Bonaparte appointed d 'Hautpoul as inspector @-@ general of the cavalry and then awarded him command of the cavalry in the camps of Compiègne and Saint @-@ Omer . In August 1805 , d 'Hautpoul was given command of the 2nd division of cuirassiers under Joachim Murat . At Austerlitz , d 'Hautpoul distinguished himself by leading his heavy cavalry into the Russian center at the Pratzen heights , breaking the infantry squares . In 1804 , Napoleon made him a grand officer ( grand cordon ) of the Légion d 'honneur and a senator , which carried with it an annual income of 20 @,@ 000 francs . 
 In the War of the Fourth Coalition , d 'Hautpoul served at Jena and in the capture of Lübeck . Transferred to the Corps of Marshal Bessières in December 1806 , he again served under Murat in the maneuvers in East Prussia in the Winter of 1807 . 
 = = = Battle of Eylau = = = 
 When military activity resumed in the winter of 1807 , Napoleon hoped to overwhelm a Russian rear guard at Hof near Eylau , which was called " <unk> Eylau " ( and is now within the borders of the Russian Kaliningrad Oblast ) . He ordered his dragoons to take a bridge ; they failed and suffered severe casualties . D 'Hautpoul and his cuirassiers — heavy cavalry of big men on big horses — thundered over the bridge and scattered the Russian rear guard . As the retreating infantry fled , d 'Hautpoul 's cuirassiers captured four guns and two standards . Napoleon was so pleased with d 'Hautpoul and his cuirassiers that he embraced the six @-@ foot man in front of his division the next day . In his own turn , d 'Hautpoul was so pleased that he announced first , to have such a compliment , he must be willing to die for his emperor , and second , to his troops : " The Emperor has embraced me on behalf of all of you . And I am so pleased with you that I kiss all your <unk> . " 
 The pursuit of the Russian troops continued . On 7 February 1807 , the French arrived outside the village of Eylau , as night was falling . In some confusion , the Imperial coach rumbled into the village , although the Emperor was setting up his camp a few kilometers away . The Russian patrol in the village chased off the coach driver and his men and plundered the Emperor 's belongings ; in turn , the Imperial escort chased them off . More and more men were sent into the engagement , and in the end the French took the village when the Russians withdrew . Both sides lost 4 @,@ 000 men in the contest for the village and the Emperor 's nightshirt . Settling for the night , they prepared to engage the next day . 
 The next morning , the two armies of unequal strength faced each other across frozen fields fissured by ice @-@ covered streams and ponds , which were in turn covered by snow and drifts . The snow and gloom meant that neither side was aware of the inequalities of men and artillery . Napoleon opened the engagement by sending Soult 's's corps , which successfully pushed the Russian right flank back , nearly turning the Russian force . To follow up on this success , he ordered Pierre Augereau 's force to attack the left center . No sooner had Augereau and VII Corps , plus St. Hilaire 's division , sallied out when a sudden snow storm engulfed the battle field . In white @-@ out conditions , Augereau 's entire corps disappeared in a flurry of whirling snow . When the snow cleared , friend and foe alike discovered that the first units onto the field had wandered off course . The line of march should have taken them directly to the Russian flank ; have no point of reference , they had instead followed the terrain and led the entire corps parallel to the Russian line , along a V @-@ shaped formation in which the left and center merged , and directly into the face of the Russian 70 – gun batteries . The artillery , although shocked to find a French Corps advancing straight toward them , immediately opened fire , as did the Russian infantry on both sides of Augereau 's corps . 
 The result was devastating . Five thousand French soldiers fell in a matter of minutes and the entire engagement stood on the brink of disaster . Not only did they face the Russian fire , but the French artillery pounded them as well . Augereau 's Corps melted under the withering fire , the bayonets of the Russians , and the onslaught of the cavalry ; as they retreated to their own lines , Napoleon was nearly captured at the Eylau churchyard , where he had established a lookout post , but his escort cavalry chased the Russians away . 
 = = = = Charge at Eylau = = = = 
 To fill the breach left by Augereau 's decimated corps , Napoleon ordered Murat 's cavalry reserve , 80 squadrons of 10 @,@ 700 cavalrymen , into action at 10 : 30 in the morning . They had to cover 2 @,@ 500 yards ( 2 @,@ 300 m ) of snow @-@ covered , obstacle @-@ filled ground , which they could not do at a gallop . Murat 's Reserve charged into the Russian squares in two columns : Grouchy 's cavalry , d 'Hautpoul 's cuirassiers and General Louis Lepic 's grenadiers — 24 squadrons in total — were flank to flank when they hit the Russian center . This was the occasion of Lepic 's famous comment , " Heads up , by God ! those are bullets , not turds ! " Grouchy , Lepic , and d 'Hautpoul 's horse broke the center , wheeled , and charged a second time . On the second charge , they broke the second formation of squares ; at this point , Grouchy 's men were forced back , but d 'Hautpoul 's cuirassiers pounded forward , reaching the Russian reserve . 
 At this point , the horses were nearly blown , but d 'Hautpoul 's cuirassiers charged the third line , which they also broke . The Russian cossacks , assembled in the reserve , entered the melee , but their light horses were no match for the French mounts , big horses confiscated from the Prussians the previous year . The Russian infantry had started to reform their squares behind d 'Hautpoul 's men . During this charge , d 'Hautpoul was struck by artillery grapeshot and badly wounded . Several of his men managed to carry or drag him back to French lines . 
 Napoleon 's valet recounted : 
 ... I seem still to hear the brave d 'Hautpoul saying to His Majesty , just as he was galloping off to charge the enemy : " Sire , I am going to show you my big heels ; they will go into the enemies ' squares as if they were made of butter ! " An hour later he was dead . One of his regiments while fighting in an interval of the Russian army , was shot down and cut to pieces by the Cossacks ; only eighteen of them escaped . General d 'Hautpoul , three times forced to recoil with his division , thrice rallied them to the charge ; the third time , he again rushed on the enemy , crying in a loud voice : " Cuirassiers , forward , in the name of God ! forward , my brave cuirassiers ! " But grapeshot had mowed down too many of these heroes . Very few of them were in condition to follow their leader , who fell , covered with wounds , in the middle of a Russian square into which he had flung himself almost alone . 
 The Emperor ordered the best surgeons to attend to d 'Hautpoul . These disagreed on the method of treatment . Against the advice of military surgeon , Larrey , d 'Hautpoul refused to have his leg amputated and he died a few days later . 
 There is some disagreement in the records about his actual date of death : the original death record of the parish at Eylau indicates he died of wounds on 1 February 1807 , but this was before the battle , and it is possible that the pastor simply left off a digit in his record , or , more likely , that the record was transcribed incorrectly . Other records suggest that he died the day after the battle ( 8 February ) , on 11 February , or on 14 February . Originally buried at <unk> , His son , Alexandre Joseph Napoléon , brought his remains to France in 1840 to be buried in the family crypt at the Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris . D 'Hautpoul 's heart is conserved in a vault in Les Invalides , and his name is inscribed on Column 16 of the Arc de Triomphe , among the first 384 names to be inscribed at the Arc . 
 = Australia Day = 
 Australia Day is the official National Day of Australia . Celebrated annually on 26 January , it marks the anniversary of the 1788 arrival of the First Fleet of British Ships at Port Jackson , New South Wales , and the raising of the Flag of Great Britain at Sydney Cove by Governor Arthur Phillip . In present @-@ day Australia , celebrations reflect the diverse society and landscape of the nation , and are marked by community and family events , reflections on Australian history , official community awards , and citizenship ceremonies welcoming new immigrants into the Australian community . 
 The meaning and significance of Australia Day has evolved over time . Unofficially , or historically , the date has also been variously named " Anniversary Day " , " Foundation Day " , and " ANA Day " . 26 January 1788 marked the proclamation of British sovereignty over the eastern seaboard of Australia ( then known as New Holland ) . Although it was not known as Australia Day until over a century later , records of celebrations on 26 January date back to 1808 , with the first official celebration of the formation of New South Wales held in 1818 . On New Year 's Day 1901 , the British colonies of Australia formed a Federation , marking the birth of modern Australia . A national day of unity and celebration was looked for . It was not until 1935 that all Australian states and territories had adopted use of the term " Australia Day " to mark the date , and not until 1994 that the date was consistently marked by a public holiday on that day by all states and territories . 
 In contemporary Australia , the holiday is marked by the presentation of the Australian of the Year Awards on Australia Day Eve , announcement of the Australia Day Honours list and addresses from the Governor @-@ General and Prime Minister . It is an official public holiday in every state and territory of Australia , unless it falls on a weekend in which case the following Monday becomes a public holiday instead . With community festivals , concerts and citizenship ceremonies , the day is celebrated in large and small communities and cities around the nation . Australia Day has become the biggest annual civic event in Australia . 
 Since at least 1938 , Australia Day has also been marked by Indigenous Australians protesting the invasion of their land by Europeans and its celebration as a national holiday . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Arrival of the First Fleet = = = 
 On 13 May 1787 a fleet of 11 ships , which came to be known as the First Fleet , was sent by the British Admiralty from England to Australia . Under the command of Captain Arthur Phillip , the fleet sought to establish a penal colony at Botany Bay on the coast of New South Wales , which had been explored and claimed by Lieutenant James Cook in 1770 . The settlement was seen as necessary because of the loss of the Thirteen Colonies in North America . The Fleet arrived between 18 and 20 January 1788 , but it was immediately apparent that Botany Bay was unsuitable . 
 On 21 January , Phillip and a few officers travelled to Port Jackson , 12 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) to the north , to see if it would be a better location for a settlement . They stayed there until 23 January ; Phillip named the site of their landing Sydney Cove , after the Home Secretary , Thomas Townshend , 1st Viscount Sydney . They also made contact with the local Aboriginal people . 
 They returned to Botany Bay on the evening of 23 January , when Phillip gave orders to move the fleet to Sydney Cove the next morning , 24 January . That day , there was a huge gale blowing , making it impossible to leave Botany Bay , so they decided to wait till the next day , 25 January . However , during 24 January , they spotted the ships Astrolabe and <unk> , flying the French flag , at the entrance to Botany Bay ; they were having as much trouble getting into the bay as the First Fleet was having getting out . 
 On 25 January the gale was still blowing ; the fleet tried to leave Botany Bay , but only HMS Supply made it out , carrying Arthur Phillip , Philip Gidley King , some marines and about 40 convicts ; they anchored in Sydney Cove in the afternoon . On 26 January , early in the morning , Phillip along with a few dozen marines , officers and oarsmen , rowed ashore and took possession of the land in the name of King George III . The remainder of the ship 's company and the convicts watched from on board Supply . 
 Meanwhile , back at Botany Bay , Captain John Hunter of HMS Sirius made contact with the French ships , and he and the commander , Captain de Clonard , exchanged greetings . Clonard advised Hunter that the fleet commander was Jean @-@ François de Galaup , comte de <unk> . Sirius successfully cleared Botany Bay , but the other ships were in great difficulty . Charlotte was blown dangerously close to rocks ; Friendship and Prince of Wales became entangled , both ships losing booms or sails ; Charlotte and the Friendship actually collided ; and Lady Penrhyn nearly ran aground . Despite these difficulties , all the remaining ships finally managed to clear Botany Bay and sail to Sydney Cove on 26 January . The last ship anchored there at about 3 pm . 
 The formal establishment of the Colony of New South Wales did not occur on 26 January as is commonly assumed . It did not occur until 7 February 1788 , when the formal proclamation of the colony and of Arthur Phillip 's governorship were read out . The vesting of all land in the reigning monarch King George III also dates from 7 February 1788 . 
 = = = First fifty years : 1788 to 1838 = = = 
 Although there was no official recognition of the colony 's anniversary , with the New South Wales <unk> of 1806 and 1808 placing no special significance on 26 January , by 1808 the date was being used by the colony 's immigrants , especially the emancipated convicts , to " celebrate their love of the land they lived in " with " drinking and merriment " . The 1808 celebrations followed this pattern , beginning at sundown on 25 January , and lasted into the night , the chief toast of the occasion being Major George Johnston . Johnston had the honour of being the first officer ashore from the First Fleet , having been carried from the landing boat on the back of convict James Ruse . Despite suffering the ill @-@ effects of a fall from his gig on the way home to Annandale , Johnston led the officers of the New South Wales Corps in arresting Governor William Bligh on the following day , 26 January 1808 , in what became known as the " Rum Rebellion " . 
 In 1817 The Sydney Gazette and New South Wales Advertiser reported on one of these unofficial gatherings at the home of Isaac Nichols : 
 On Monday the 27th <unk> a dinner party met at the house of Mr. Isaac Nichols , for the purpose of celebrating the Anniversary of the Institution of this Colony under Governor Philip , which took place on 26 Jan. 1788 , but this year happening upon a Sunday , the commemoration dinner was reserved for the day following . The party assembled were select , and about 40 in number . At 5 in the afternoon dinner was on the table , and a more agreeable entertainment could not have been anticipated . After dinner a number of loyal toasts were drank , and a number of festive songs given ; and about 10 the company parted , well gratified with the pleasures that the meeting had afforded . 
 1818 was the 30th anniversary of the founding of the colony , and Governor Lachlan Macquarie chose to acknowledge the day with the first official celebration . The Governor declared that the day would be a holiday for all government workers , granting each an extra allowance of " one pound of fresh meat " , and ordered a 30 gun salute at Dawes Point – one for each year that the colony had existed . This began a tradition that was retained by the Governors that were to follow . 
 Foundation Day , as it was known at the time , continued to be officially celebrated in New South Wales , and in doing so became connected with sporting events . One of these became a tradition that is still continued today : in 1837 the first running of what would become the Australia Day regatta was held on Sydney Harbour . Five races were held for different classes of boats , from first class sailing vessels to watermen 's skiffs , and people viewed the festivities from both onshore and from the decks of boats on the harbour , including the steamboat Australian and Francis Freeling – the second of whom ran aground during the festivities and had to be refloated the next day . Happy with the success of the regatta , the organisers resolved to make in an annual event . However , some of the celebrations had gained an air of elitism , with the " United Australians " dinner being limited to those born in Australia . In describing the dinner , the Sydney Herald justified the decision , saying : 
 The parties who associated themselves under the title of " United Australians " have been censured for adopting a principle of exclusiveness . It is not fair so to censure them . If they invited emigrants to join them they would give offence to another class of persons – while if they invited all they would be subject to the presence of persons with whom they might not wish to associate . That was a good reason . The " Australians " had a perfect right to dine together if they wished it , and no one has a right to complain . 
 The following year , 1838 , was the 50th anniversary of the founding of the colony , and as part of the celebrations Australia 's first public holiday was declared . The regatta was held for a second time , and people crowded the foreshores to view the events , or joined the five steamers ( Maitland , Experiment , Australia , Rapid , and the miniature steamer Firefly ) to view the proceedings from the water . At midday 50 guns were fired from Dawes ' Battery as the Royal Standard was raised , and in the evening rockets and other fireworks lit the sky . The dinner was a smaller affair than the previous year , with only 40 in attendance compared to the 160 from 1837 , and the anniversary as a whole was described as a " day for everyone " . 
 = = = Centenary celebration : 1839 to 1888 = = = 
 Prior to 1888 , 26 January was very much a New South Wales affair , as each of the colonies had their own commemorations for their founding . In Tasmania , Regatta Day occurred in December , South Australia had Proclamation Day 28 December , and Western Australia had their own Foundation Day ( now Western Australia Day ) on 1 June . 
 In 1888 , all colonial capitals except Adelaide celebrated ' Anniversary Day ' . In 1910 , South Australia adopted Australia Day , followed by Victoria in 1931 . By 1935 , all states of Australia were celebrating 26 January as Australia Day ( although it was still known as Anniversary Day in New South Wales ) . The name ' Foundation Day ' persisted in local usage . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The 150th anniversary of British settlement in Australia in 1938 was widely celebrated . Preparations began in 1936 with the formation of a Celebrations Council . In that year , New South Wales was the only state to abandon the traditional long weekend , and the annual Anniversary Day public holiday was held on the actual anniversary day – Wednesday 26 January . The Commonwealth and state governments agreed to unify the celebrations on 26 January as ' Australia Day ' in 1946 , although the public holiday was instead taken on the Monday closest to the actual anniversary . 
 = = = Bicentennial year = = = 
 In 1988 , the celebration of 200 years since the arrival of the First Fleet was organised on a large scale , with many significant events taking place in all major cities . Over 2 @.@ 5 million people attended the event in Sydney . These included street parties , concerts , including performances on the steps and forecourt of the Sydney Opera House and at many other public venues , art and literary competitions , historic re @-@ enactments , and the opening of the Powerhouse Museum at its new location . A re @-@ enactment of the arrival of the First Fleet took place in Sydney Harbour , with ships that had sailed from Portsmouth a year earlier taking part . 
 = = Contemporary celebrations = = 
 Since 1988 participation in Australia Day has increased and in 1994 all states and territories began to celebrate a unified public holiday on the actual day for the first time . Research conducted in 2007 reported that 27 @.@ 6 % of Australians polled attended an organised Australia Day event and a further 25 @.@ 6 % celebrated with family and friends making Australia Day the largest annual public event in the nation . This reflected the results of an earlier research project where 66 % of respondents anticipated that they would actively celebrate Australia Day 2005 . 
 Outdoor concerts , community barbecues , sports competitions , festivals and fireworks are some of the many events held in communities across Australia . These official events are presented by the National Australia Day Council , an official council or committee in each state and territory , and local committees . 
 In Sydney the harbour is a focus and boat races are held , such as a ferry race and the tall ships race . In Adelaide the key celebrations are ' Australia Day in the City ' which is a parade , concert and fireworks display held in Elder park and the traditional International Cricket match played at the Adelaide Oval . Featuring the People 's March and the Voyages Concert , Melbourne 's events focus strongly on the celebration of multiculturalism . Despite a drop in attendance in 2010 , but with audiences still estimated at 400 @,@ 000 , the Perth <unk> is the largest single event presented each Australia Day . 
 Citizenship ceremonies are also commonly held with Australia Day now the largest occasion for the acquisition of Australian citizenship . On 26 January 2011 , more than 300 citizenship ceremonies took place and 13 @,@ 000 people from 143 countries took Australian citizenship . In recent years many citizenship ceremonies have included an affirmation by existing citizens . Research conducted in 2007 reported that 78 @.@ 6 % of respondents thought that citizenship ceremonies were an important feature of the day . 
 The official Australia Day Ambassador Program supports celebrations in communities across the nation by facilitating the participation of high @-@ achieving Australians in local community celebrations . In 2011 , 385 ambassadors participated in 384 local community celebrations . The Order of Australia awards are also a feature of the day . The Australia Day Achievement Medallion is awarded to citizens by local governments based on excellence in both government and non @-@ government organisations . The Governor @-@ General and Prime Minister both address the nation . On the eve of Australia Day each year , the Prime Minister announces the winner of the Australian of the Year award , presented to an Australian citizen who has shown a " significant contribution to the Australian community and nation " and is an " inspirational role model for the Australian community " . Subcategories of the award include Young Australian of the Year and Senior Australian of the Year , and an award for Australia 's Local Hero . 
 Various music festivals are held on Australia Day , such as the Big Day Out , the Triple J Hottest 100 , and the Australia Day Live Concert which is televised nationally . For many years an international cricket match has been held on Australia Day at the Adelaide Oval . These matches have included both Test matches and One Day Internationals . 
 Research in 2009 indicated that Australians reflect on history and future fairly equally on Australia Day . Of those polled , 43 % agreed that history is the most important thing to think about on Australia Day and 41 % said they look towards " our future " , while 13 % thought it was important to " think about the present at this time " and 3 % were unsure . Despite the date reflecting the arrival of the First Fleet , contemporary celebrations are not particularly historical in their theme . There are no large @-@ scale re @-@ enactments and the national leader 's participation is focused largely on events such as the Australian of the Year Awards announcement and Citizenship Ceremonies . 
 Possibly reflecting a shift in Australians ' understanding of the place of Indigenous Australians in their national identity , Newspoll research in November 2009 reported that ninety percent of Australians polled believed " it was important to recognise Australia 's indigenous people and culture " as part of Australia Day celebrations . A similar proportion ( 89 % ) agreed that " it is important to recognise the cultural diversity of the nation " . Despite the strong attendance at Australia Day events and a positive disposition towards the recognition of Indigenous Australians , the date of the celebrations remains a source of challenge and national discussion . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 For some Australians , particularly Indigenous Australians , Australia Day has become a symbol of the adverse impacts of British settlement on Australia 's Indigenous people . The celebrations in 1938 were accompanied by an Aboriginal Day of Mourning . A large gathering of Aboriginal people in Sydney in 1988 led an " Invasion Day " commemoration marking the loss of Indigenous culture . The anniversary is also known as " Survival Day " and marked by events such as the Survival Day concert first held in Sydney in 1992 , celebrating the fact that the Indigenous people and culture have not been completely wiped out . 
 In response , official celebrations have tried to include Indigenous people , holding ceremonies such as the <unk> @-@ ma @-@ <unk> ceremony , which was held in Sydney in 2006 and honoured the past and celebrated the present ; it involved Indigenous Australians and the Governor of New South Wales . 
 = = = Invasion Day = = = 
 Invasion Day is a term used by some Indigenous figures and their supporters to refer to 26 January , and protests occur almost every year , sometimes at Australia Day events . 
 In January 1988 , members of various Indigenous groups collectively made an effort to promote an awareness among other Australians of their presence , their needs and their desire that there should be communication , reconciliation and co @-@ operation over the land rights issues . To this purpose , during January they set up a highly visible Tent Embassy at a <unk> location at a point called Mrs Macquarie 's Chair , adjacent to the Sydney Royal Botanic Gardens . The embassy , consisting of several large marquees and smaller tents , was manned by a group of Aboriginal people from Eveleigh Street , Redfern , and was organised with the co @-@ operation of the local council 's department of parks and gardens . It became a gathering place for Aboriginal people from all over Sydney . One of the aims of the embassy was to be seen by the many thousands of <unk> whom the organisers claimed did not know , and rarely even saw , any Aboriginal people . 
 = = Suggested changes to the date = = 
 Both prior to the establishment of Australia Day as the national day of Australia , and in the years subsequent to its creation , several dates have been proposed for its celebration and , at various times , the possibility of moving Australia Day to an alternative date has been mooted . While the reasons for such a move have been varied , concerns with the current arrangement have included : 
 The current date , celebrating the foundation of the Colony of New South Wales , can be seen as lacking national significance . 
 Australia Day falls during the school holidays , limiting the ability of schools to engage children in the event . 
 The date can be perceived as being intrinsically connected to Australia 's convict past , celebrating " Britain 's driving ashore of Australia 's first white citizens in chains " . 
 It fails to encompass all Australians , including members of the indigenous community and others who see it as commemorating the date of the invasion of their land . Connected to this is the suggestion that moving the date would be seen as a significant symbolic act . 
 Amongst those calling for change have been Tony Beddison , then chairman of the Australia Day Committee ( Victoria ) , who argued for change and requested debate on the issue in 1999 ; and Mick Dodson , who was Australian of the Year in 2009 , called for debate in regard to when Australia Day was held . 
 = = = Proposed alternative dates = = = 
 = = = = Federation of Australia , 1 January = = = = 
 As early as 1957 , 1 January was suggested as a possible alternative day , to commemorate the Federation of Australia . In 1902 , the year after Federation , 1 January was named " Commonwealth Day " . However , New Year 's Day was already a public holiday , and Commonwealth Day did not gather much support . 
 = = = = Day before British settlement , 25 January = = = = 
 The day before Arthur Phillip 's landing at Sydney Cove has been suggested as an alternative day , as it would commemorate the last date when the Australian continent was solely occupied by its indigenous peoples . Moving the holiday by only one day would also have the advantage of being in the summer months . Such a small change would also have little impact on retailers , and ensure public holidays remain distributed as they are currently . 
 = = = = Anzac Day , 25 April = = = = 
 There has been a degree of support in recent years for making Anzac Day , 25 April , Australia 's national day , although the suggestions have also encountered strong opposition . In 1999 , prompted by Tony Beddison 's call for the date to be changed , a merger with Anzac Day found support with Peter Hollingworth ( Anglican Archbishop of Brisbane , Queensland ) , and the Federal Leader of the Opposition , Kim Beazley . 
 The suggestion was raised again in 2001 , when the national president of the Returned and Services League of Australia ( RSL ) , Major @-@ General ( retired ) Peter Phillips , suggested that the merger may be possible in the future . Phillips was in the process of planning a major review into the future of Anzac Day , and the combination of the two caused considerable concern in the RSL . Although he subsequently stated that he was misrepresented , and that the review was not considering a merger of the two dates , the suggestion sparked controversy . The idea was strongly opposed , with both Prime Minister John Howard and Opposition Leader Kim Beazley speaking against the concept . ( Beazley clarified his earlier stance by stating that he did not support a merger , but that he nevertheless saw Anzac Day as the true national day of Australia . ) 
 Counter arguments to merging the two holidays include the belief that many war veterans view Anzac Day as their day ; that Anzac Day is also a public holiday in New Zealand , Cook Islands , Niue , Samoa and Tonga ; and that a merger would detract from the core purpose of Anzac Day – to honour the war dead . 
 = = = = Opening of the first Federal Parliament , 9 May = = = = 
 The date 9 May is also sometimes suggested , being not only the date on which the first Federal Parliament was opened in Melbourne in 1901 , but also the date of the opening of the Provisional Parliament House in Canberra in 1927 , and the date of the opening of the New Parliament House in 1988 . The date has , at various times , won the support of Queensland Premier Peter Beattie , Tony Beddison , and Geoffrey Blainey . However , as with the Eureka Stockade , the date has been seen by some as being too closely connected with Victoria , and its location close to the start of winter has been described as an impediment . 
 = = = = Anniversary of the 1967 referendum , 27 May = = = = 
 The anniversary of the 1967 referendum to amend the constitutional status of Aborigines has also been suggested as an alternative . The day of the referendum was 27 May and the resulting amendments to the constitution were made on 10 August . The changes made enabled Aborigines to be accounted for under federal law , and to be included in the national census . The public vote in favour was 90 @.@ 77 % . The event was a milestone in the recognition of Indigenous rights in Australia . 
 = = = = Eureka Stockade , 3 December = = = = 
 The Eureka Stockade on 3 December has had a long history as an alternative choice for Australia Day , having been proposed by The Bulletin in the 1880s . The Eureka uprising occurred in 1854 during the Victorian gold rush , and saw a failed rebellion by the miners against the Victorian colonial government . Although the rebellion was crushed , it led to significant reforms , and has been described as being the birthplace of Australian democracy . Supporters of the date have included senator Don Chipp and Victorian Premier Steve Bracks . Nevertheless , the idea failed to gain traction in the 1880s , possibly due to the loyalty of the colonialists to Britain , for " even in Ballarat Eureka had to be forgotten . " The Eureka Stockade idea has opposed after being claimed by both " hard @-@ left unions " and " right @-@ wing nationalist groups " , and amongst some it is still seen as an essentially Victorian event . 
 = = = = Other recommended dates = = = = 
 Wattle Day on 1 September has been proposed as a unifying national patriotic holiday by the Wattle Day Association , and has been raised as an alternative date for Australia Day . There is a degree of historical precedent to the suggestion : Wattle Day was celebrated as Australia Day in South Australia for many years , though from 1915 to 1918 , Australia Day was celebrated there on 26 July . 
 Constitution Day , 9 July is also suggested as a possible alternative , commemorating the day in 1900 when Queen Victoria gave her assent to the Constitution of Australia . 
 The 3 March anniversary of the Australia Acts coming into force has been raised as an option , having been referred to as Australian Independence Day . These Acts removed the United Kingdom 's ability to legislate for the Australian States , the Queen 's ability to disallow or suspend State legislation , as well as severing the remaining appeal channels from the State Supreme Courts and the High Court of Australia to the Privy Council of the United Kingdom . Queen Elizabeth II signed a proclamation at Government House in Canberra on 2 March 1986 for the Acts to take effect 5 @.@ 00 am Greenwich Mean Time the next day . 
 = = = Opposition to change = = = 
 Any decision to change the date of Australia Day would have to be made by a combination of the Australian Federal and State Governments . In recent years such a move has lacked sufficient support , with both Prime Ministers and Leaders of the Opposition speaking against the idea . In 2001 the Prime Minister John Howard stated that he acknowledged Aboriginal concerns with the date , but that it was nevertheless a significant day in Australia 's history , and thus he was in favour of retaining the current date . He also noted that 1 January , which was being discussed in light of the Centenary of Federation , was inappropriate as it coincided with New Year 's Day . Prime Minister Kevin Rudd gave a " straightforward no " to a change of date , speaking in response to Mick Dodson 's suggestion to reopen the debate . The Leader of the Opposition , Malcolm Turnbull , echoed Rudd 's support of 26 January , but , along with Rudd , supported the right of Australians to raise the issue . In regard to State leaders , New South Wales Premier Nathan Rees stated that he was yet to hear a " compelling argument " to support change ; and Queensland Premier Anna Bligh expressed her opposition to a change of date in spite of any controversy . 
 In 2004 , a Newspoll that asked if the date of Australia Day should be moved to one that is not associated with European settlement found 79 per cent of respondents favoured no change , 15 per cent favoured change and 6 per cent were uncommitted . Historian Geoffrey Blainey said he believed 26 January worked well as Australia Day and that : " My view is that it is much more successful now than it 's ever been . " 
 = Kain ( Legacy of Kain ) = 
 Kain is a fictional character , and the main protagonist and title character of the Legacy of Kain video game series . First introduced in Blood Omen : Legacy of Kain in 1996 , he was created by Denis Dyack and Silicon Knights , and has appeared in all subsequent Legacy of Kain games under the direction of developer Crystal Dynamics . Between games , he serves as either the central playable character , or as an antagonist , but in all his depictions he has consistently been described as an antihero . 
 Drawing inspiration from the morally @-@ ambiguous character of William Munny from Clint Eastwood 's 1992 film Unforgiven , Silicon Knights conceived Kain as a nobleman murdered and revived as a vampire to take revenge on his assassins . He gradually embraces his new existence , and learns of his birthright to maintain balance in Nosgoth ( the fictional setting of the series ) . Crystal Dynamics later portrayed Kain as an Oedipus @-@ like figure , seeking to thwart the fate determined for him before his birth . 
 Beyond his role in the series , Kain has also featured in tie @-@ in comics , and in Crystal Dynamics ' Lara Croft and the Guardian of Light . In all of his voiced appearances , he has been played by actor Simon Templeman . He has been favorably received by video game critics and enthusiasts , with praise attributed to his antagonistic role in Legacy of Kain : Soul Reaver , and his status as a strong example of a memorable , nuanced antihero in the medium . 
 = = Concept and creation = = 
 Kain 's character was originally conceived circa 1993 by Silicon Knights ' president , Denis Dyack , as the protagonist of The Pillars of Nosgoth , an initial video game concept for what would become 1996 's Blood Omen : Legacy of Kain . He was modeled in part on William Munny , the protagonist of Clint Eastwood 's 1992 Western film , Unforgiven . The developers set out to craft an antihero to suit " a game where the player is put in the position where everyone believes you are evil " , feeling that the industry required a story addressing issues of moral ambiguity and wondering how players would react when " everyone in the world was your enemy ( including yourself ) [ ... ] where you had to kill innocents to survive [ and ] you are the ultimate pawn " . Other influences which helped to define Kain 's character arc included The Wheel of Time , <unk> , and cover art from The Pillars of the Earth . In comparison to Count Dracula , Dyack commented in an interview that he believed Kain would " kick his ass " in a fight . He and writer Ken McCulloch considered Simon Templeman 's voiceover for the character superlative , despite initial apprehensions that the actors they had hired might not be able to convey the game 's complicated dialogue . 
 After a legal dispute with Silicon Knights , Blood Omen publisher Crystal Dynamics obtained the rights to the Legacy of Kain intellectual property , with Amy Hennig directing Kain 's characterization for the sequel , 1999 's Legacy of Kain : Soul Reaver . In this game , which built upon the Blood Omen ending in which he damns the world , Kain adopted the role of antagonist , with new character Raziel serving as the lead . Hennig justified this choice , believing that it would prove interesting to see what his decision had engendered after a few millennia . She emphasized , though , that she did not consider him a monster or mustache @-@ twirling villain , remarking that " in many ways , he 's a more complex and sympathetic character than Raziel himself " . Sources which helped to formulate his role in the plot ranged from Biblical lore to Eastern myth and mysticism . 
 In interviews preceding the release of 2001 's Soul Reaver 2 , Hennig said that Crystal Dynamics had a huge investment in Kain as a character . His portrayal in this game extrapolated further from Blood Omen 's story , and was influenced by Joseph Campbell 's ideals . No longer acting as a pure villain , Kain was intended to function as a " steadfast character " , coming to the story from a position of knowledge in contrast to Raziel 's relative ignorance . Hennig expressed that , by Soul Reaver 2 , her personal perception of Kain 's character had changed over the years , and that she now considered him a somewhat more attractive and interesting individual than Raziel due to his complexity . She dubbed him a tragic hero , " screwed by his own character flaws " , and argued that this <unk> added to his depth . Since joining Naughty Dog , when asked whether Raziel or Kain is closest to her heart , Hennig has said that while Raziel is a sympathetic protagonist , she probably prefers Kain as a character . 
 For 2002 's Blood Omen 2 , developed by a different team within Crystal Dynamics , Kain returned as the playable protagonist . The development staff chose to focus on his rise to power as a younger vampire , combining aspects of his Blood Omen and Soul Reaver incarnations . He was marketed as a more powerful and ruthless character than traditional video game heroes , with lead designer Mike Ellis inviting comparison to Final Fantasy VI 's Kefka Palazzo and Revolver Ocelot of the Metal Gear series . Design issues , raised by the wealth of abilities and equipment he accumulated in Blood Omen , prompted the team to add to his backstory and convincingly deprive him of these powers . Producer Sam Newman described him as " a very unique character " who " doesn 't fit to the generic character molds you find in many other games , books and movies [ ... ] not good , he 's not necessarily evil -- Kain does as Kain believes " . 
 Legacy of Kain : Defiance , released in 2003 , returned to the aged , elder Kain from Soul Reaver and Soul Reaver 2 , now controllable alongside Raziel . The prospect of making this incarnation of Kain playable left the development team " very excited " , and was agreed upon very early in pre @-@ production . Recognizing that he is " the most important character in the series " , designer Kyle <unk> named several parallels and influences concerning his development up to that point , citing Neo and John Murdoch ( the protagonists of The Matrix and Dark City respectively ) , the archetypal Fisher King of Arthurian legend , the story of Oedipus , and Gnostic myth as inspirations ( with both latter sources being reaffirmed as strong influences by Hennig in a later interview ) . The spells he obtains over the course of his levels were intended to pay homage to the original Blood Omen . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Kain 's appearance undergoes " pretty dramatic changes " throughout the games as he ages , but core personality attributes cited by Defiance 's developers include his intelligence and cynicism , arrogance and regality , and his defiant nature . In the series ' fictional universe , he is described as the guardian of balance , a being responsible for preserving the health and integrity of Nosgoth ( the games ' setting ) , but left incapable of realizing this duty due to spiritual corruption he inherited at birth . 
 The character 's transformation into a vampire , and the visceral nature this trait lends the series , was derived from William Shakespeare 's classical models : " for the drunken commoners in the front rows he would insert dirty jokes to keep them entertained but for the aristocracy in the balconies he would write very cerebral metaphors " . According to Silicon Knights , the gore and vampirism in Blood Omen served as their " dirty jokes " , supplemented by a complex story . 
 As the story progresses , Kain evolves from a directionless young nobleman , to a lithe and devious vampire , to a " craggy " figure . As a playable character , he frequently narrates his thoughts through the dramatic device of soliloquy . In Blood Omen and Defiance , his battle cry and catchphrase is <unk> <unk> , a Latin phrase attributed to Brennus meaning " woe to the conquered " . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Debut = = = 
 In Blood Omen : Legacy of Kain , Kain is introduced as a young human noble . In the game 's prologue , he is murdered by assassins , and resurrected as a vampire by Mortanius , a necromancer . He is promised both vengeance and a cure to his vampirism if he can restore the nine Pillars of Nosgoth , edifices whose state dictates the vitality of the world ; the nine guardians who symbiotically represent the Pillars were corrupted prior to his birth , and must be killed before the land can recover . During his quest , he meets the ancient vampire Vorador , who influences him to forsake his former humanity and accept his vampirism , and discovers the Soul Reaver , a legendary soul @-@ devouring sword . Using the Reaver , he tries to alter the course of Nosgoth 's history to prevent the Nemesis — a tyrant king — from coming to power . Tricked by Moebius , the guardian of time , Kain succeeds in destroying the Nemesis , but the temporal paradox this triggers results in a new timeline in which vampires have been hunted to extinction ; Kain is left the last surviving vampire in Nosgoth . After systematically tracking down and killing most of the guardians , he confronts Mortanius — revealed as the guardian of death , and the orchestrator of Kain 's assassination — and realizes that he himself is the final guardian , and that the cure to his curse entails his own destruction . Faced with the obligation of self @-@ sacrifice — thereby restoring the world , but ensuring the annihilation of the vampire race — or the alternative of destroying the Pillars to rule over the world in its <unk> state , Kain opts for the latter choice , embracing vampirism as a blessing as the Pillars collapse . 
 = = = Soul Reaver games = = = 
 Legacy of Kain : Soul Reaver features Kain as the main antagonist and a recurring boss character , narratively following him centuries after his decision . Since the first game , Kain has revived the vampire race , and has become the despotic ruler of the land . When the game 's protagonist , his lieutenant Raziel , surpasses Kain , Raziel is executed for his transgression . Resurrected by The Elder God , Raziel returns to destroy his former brethren and Kain , and eventually confronts Kain at the ruins of the Pillars . Kain attacks Raziel with the Soul Reaver , but the blade shatters when it strikes him , and Kain escapes , strangely satisfied . Raziel discovers , to his horror , that Kain created him and his other lieutenants from the corpses of the Sarafan , an ancient order of vampire hunters . He fights Kain a second time in Moebius 's abandoned time machine , the Chronoplast , where Kain explains the nature of free will and rationalizes his actions . Narrowly escaping , Kain activates the Chronoplast and travels into the past , with Raziel pursuing him as the game ends . 
 In Soul Reaver 2 , Kain acts as a non @-@ player character encountered by Raziel in several cutscenes . As the game 's plot progresses , his agenda and motives become clearer . He seeks a third option to the dilemma prescribed for him at the end of Blood Omen , hoping to both restore Nosgoth and return the Pillars to vampire control . Having viewed the timestream , he learned that history is predestined , and seeks to change his fate by triggering more temporal paradoxes , an objective which demanded Raziel 's temporary destruction . It is revealed that Raziel is destined to be consumed by the Soul Reaver , thus becoming the soul @-@ devouring entity trapped within the weapon . With Raziel 's help , Kain is able to defy history and prevent his own pre @-@ ordained death , and , in return , he saves Raziel from being consumed by the Reaver at the story 's climax . However , this alteration putatively changes history for the worse , leading into the events of Blood Omen 2 and Legacy of Kain : Defiance . 
 = = = Blood Omen 2 and Defiance = = = 
 Blood Omen 2 pursues a younger Kain during his early conquests of Nosgoth , in the altered timeline triggered by the changes to Raziel 's destiny at the end of Soul Reaver 2 . Legacy of Kain : Defiance takes place in the same altered timeline , periodically switching between the characters of the elder Kain and Raziel from Soul Reaver 2 , with both acting as playable protagonists . Over the course of the game , Moebius manipulates Kain into believing he is a champion prophesied to fight against and destroy Raziel , culminating in a final battle between the two characters which Raziel wins . It is discovered that The Elder God is malevolent , and he and Moebius — his servant — had conspired against Kain from the outset of the series , considering vampires an abomination . Kain , after being presumed dead , returns , and reconciles with Raziel , who willingly enters the Soul Reaver . As he does so , he uses his powers to cleanse Kain of the corruption he inherited at birth as a Pillar guardian . Armed with the ancient sword once again , Kain is able to see and battle The Elder God for the first time , but is unable to destroy him . The story ends as he looks out at the Nosgoth landscape ; though uncertain that he can ever restore the world , he contemplates Raziel 's sacrifice and the " first bitter taste " of hope it has given him . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 = = = Merchandise and promotion = = = 
 Several action figures and figurines of Kain have been created by Blue Box Interactive and the National Entertainment Collectibles Association in partnership with Eidos . He featured extensively in marketing for the Legacy of Kain series , including a $ 1 million advertising campaign for Soul Reaver . Beyond the games , he also appeared in Top Cow 's promotional comics for Soul Reaver and Defiance , and was included alongside Raziel as a playable character in downloadable content for 2010 's Lara Croft and the Guardian of Light . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Opinion on Kain 's character has been largely positive in critical reviews of the Legacy of Kain games . Praise has frequently been directed towards Simon Templeman 's voice acting , with IGN , Game Revolution and Adrenaline Vault citing Kain 's soliloquies as " both gruesome and entertaining " , " the best part [ of the game 's audio ] " and " one of the best stints of voice acting ever recorded " respectively in their assessments of his debut in the original Blood Omen . For Blood Omen 2 , although critics expressed disappointment with the game itself , they praised Kain 's character nevertheless ; GameSpot 's Greg Kasavin branded him " a very intriguing protagonist " and " as memorable of a main character as they come " , while IGN 's Douglass C. Perry felt he was " incredibly likeable " , and " in a very true sense [ ... ] a great videogame character " . GameZone 's Michael Knutson opined that he was a " wicked cool character " , and Game Revolution 's Johnny Liu named him a " great anti @-@ hero " . Kasavin again praised him in a review for Defiance , writing that " it 's rare enough to find a truly memorable main character in a game , let alone two " , and that the game 's ensemble cast " [ to some extent superseded ] the problems in the gameplay " . Ian Dransfield of Play has stated that " we totally and completely fell in love with [ Kain ] " and highlighted him as a " character who [ needs ] to be revived " . 
 Kain has also appeared in contention on several lists comparing video game characters , both critical and user @-@ decided . A 2000 GameSpot readers ' choice poll to determine the top ten video game villains ranked him at # 10 , and the same site 's 2010 All @-@ Time Greatest Game Villain contest included him as one of 64 candidates . He featured in IGN 's 2005 Battle of the Badasses , surviving to the " Elite Eight " stage before being eliminated . A 2008 IGN Reader 's Choice poll determined that he ranked among ten heroes most desired to appear in a Soulcalibur game , and he appeared in an IGN list of gaming 's most notorious anti @-@ heroes , sharing both honors with Raziel . He ranked as # 34 in IGN 's top 100 videogame villains list , was showcased as # 2 on a 1UP.com list of the top five videogame characters named Kain / Kane , and ranked as # 4 on the latter site 's list of top ten vampires . GameDaily ranked him as # 17 out of their top 25 anti @-@ heroes , and GamingBolt listed him as one of " 35 Characters We Want To See In Sony 's Super Smash Bros " . Joystick Division included him as # 2 on their list of the top ten best vampires in video @-@ game history , while Diehard <unk> named him # 8 on theirs . GamesRadar praised Kain 's role as an antagonist , putting him in their 2013 list of the best villains in video game history at # 59 , but noted that he " lives in more of a grey area than most of the villains on this list . " 
 Some reviewers were less enthusiastic about aspects of the character , with IGN 's Perry commenting that his Soul Reaver 2 dialogue was haughty and " overwritten " , and Ivan <unk> considering his Blood Omen 2 incarnation " nothing more than an arrogant jerk with little to latch on to and care about " while expressing preference for Raziel . Also relating to Blood Omen 2 , IGN 's Aaron Boulding regarded his pompous nature as his " one personality trait " , and considered it comedic , while Matt Casamassina felt Kain was " cool " , but decried his visual design as " flamboyant to the point of being comical " . 
 = Drizzt Do 'Urden = 
 Drizzt Do 'Urden / <unk> <unk> / is a fictional character in the Forgotten Realms campaign setting for the Dungeons & Dragons fantasy role @-@ playing game . Drizzt was created by author R. A. Salvatore as a supporting character in the Icewind Dale Trilogy . Salvatore created him on a whim when his publisher needed to replace another character in Salvatore 's first novel , The Crystal Shard . Drizzt has since become a popular heroic character of the Forgotten Realms setting , and has been featured as the main character of a long series of books , starting chronologically with The Dark Elf Trilogy . As an atypical drow ( dark elf ) , Drizzt has forsaken both the evil ways of his people and their home in the Underdark , in the drow city of Menzoberranzan . 
 Drizzt 's story is told in Salvatore 's fantasy novels in The Icewind Dale Trilogy , The Dark Elf Trilogy , the Legacy of the Drow series , the Paths of Darkness series , The Hunter 's Blades Trilogy , the Transitions series , and the Neverwinter Saga , as well as in the short stories " The Dowry , " " Dark Mirror " , and " Comrades at Odds " . All of the novels featuring Drizzt have made the New York Times Best Seller list . A number of the novels have been adapted into graphic novels by Devil 's Due Publishing . Drizzt has also been featured in D & D @-@ based role @-@ playing video games , including the Baldur 's Gate Series and Forgotten Realms : Demon Stone . 
 = = Concept and creation = = 
 Drizzt Do 'Urden 's stories are set in the Forgotten Realms campaign setting for Dungeons & Dragons . The character has been a mainstay for author R. A. Salvatore , appearing in his novels for over 20 years . Drizzt is a drow who acts against the drow stereotype , favoring friendship and peace over hatred and violence . His unusual personality creates the conflict that allows Salvatore to create so many novels with stories about courage and friendship . Drizzt fights the dark traits that are inherent in the drow . 
 Salvatore uses Drizzt to represent issues of racial prejudice , particularly in The Dark Elf Trilogy . For instance , Drizzt is concerned that if he and his love <unk> @-@ Brie ( a human ) have children , their offspring will face hostility from both races . Drizzt is also troubled by the lifespan discrepancy between himself and <unk> @-@ Brie . 
 Drizzt was created by happenstance . In 1987 R.A. Salvatore sent Mary Kirchoff , then managing editor of TSR 's book department , a manuscript for what would become his 1990 novel Echoes of the Fourth Magic . She liked it , but asked if he could rewrite it to take place in the Forgotten Realms . She sent him Darkwalker on Moonshae by Douglas Niles , the only novel at the time set in the Forgotten Realms . Salvatore sent her a proposal for a sequel to Darkwalker , but Kirchoff sent back a large map of the Forgotten Realms and told him she wanted a new story set in a different part of the Realms . After two weeks of phone calls , Salvatore found a spot on the map that was not already designated for another project , and he located Icewind Dale there . According to Salvatore , the book was " set on the Moonshae Isles , because at the time I thought that was the Realms . When I found out how big the Realms were , I moved the story a thousand miles to the north . " 
 Salvatore created Drizzt on the spur of the moment . He was under pressure to create a sidekick for Wulfgar in the Icewind Dale series . Salvatore had sent an early version of The Crystal Shard ( what would become his first published novel ) to TSR , and one day Kirchoff called him . She was on her way to a marketing meeting concerning the book , and informed him that they could not use one of the characters . He asked for time to think , but she was already late for the meeting . Off the top of his head , Salvatore said he had a Dark Elf . Kirchoff was skeptical , but Salvatore convinced her it would be fine because he was just a sidekick . She asked his name , and he replied Drizzt Do 'Urden . She asked if he could spell it , and he said " not a chance " . Recalling Drizzt 's creation in an interview , Salvatore said , " I don 't know where it came from . I guess that Gary Gygax just did such an amazing job in creating the drow elves that something about them got stuck in the back of my head . Thank God ! " Although many readers have assumed that Drizzt is based on one of the many Dungeons & Dragons role @-@ playing campaigns that the author has played , this is not the case . Salvatore 's main influences were classical literature and works of J. R. R. Tolkien . " I like to think of Drizzt as a cross between <unk> from Darkwalker on Moonshae and Aragorn from The Lord of the Rings . " Salvatore calls Drizzt " the classic romantic hero — misunderstood , holding to a code of ideals even when the going gets tough , and getting no appreciation for it most of the time . " 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Drizzt 's story begins in the novel Homeland , the start of The Dark Elf Trilogy and published as a prequel in 1990 to The Icewind Dale Trilogy , which was published between 1988 and 1990 . In the book , Drizzt is born in Menzoberranzan as the third son to Matron Malice , the leader of House Do 'Urden ( a type of family akin to a Scottish clan ) . His father is Zaknafein , a weapons master who secretly hates drow society and teaches Drizzt his martial skills as he reinforces Drizzt 's innate moral code . The 1996 short story " The Fires of <unk> " , in the Realms of the Underdark anthology , describes unrelated events involving Zaknafein as the main character , and a young Drizzt plays a supporting role . 
 During a raid against a group of surface elves , Drizzt finds himself unable to participate in the slaughter with his fellow drow . He pretends to kill an elf child , but actually helps her to escape . When the deception is discovered , Zaknafein is sacrificed in Drizzt 's stead to appease <unk> ( Known as <unk> by the Deep Gnomes - <unk> ) , the drow 's goddess . Following a war against another House , Drizzt curses his family and the evil drow ways and escapes Menzoberranzan into the Underdark . At this time he also acquires the statuette that allows him to summon the magical panther Guenhwyvar . Guenhwyvar travels by Drizzt 's side as he makes his way across the Realms . 
 Drizzt fights off the resurrected spirit @-@ wraith of his father in Exile , the second book in the Dark Elf Trilogy and also published in 1990 . Sojourn picks up the story when Drizzt leaves the Underdark for the surface , where he meets a blind human ranger named Montolio <unk> . When Montolio begins teaching him the ways of the ranger , Drizzt realizes that , unknowingly , he had been following those very principles his entire life . From then on Drizzt 's patron goddess is <unk> , the <unk> goddess of the forest and of rangers . Montolio eventually dies , and Drizzt travels the Realms in search of a new home . He eventually finds himself in Icewind Dale where he meets dwarven king Bruenor <unk> , and Bruenor 's adopted human daughter , <unk> @-@ brie . 
 The fourth book chronologically in the series , although the first published , is The Crystal Shard ( 1988 ) , the first in The Icewind Dale Trilogy . It describes Drizzt 's meeting with the barbarian Wulfgar and the halfling Regis , and their adventures as they stop <unk> Kessel , a mage possessed by the sentient artifact <unk> ( the book 's eponymous Crystal Shard ) , from gaining control of the region . Streams of Silver ( 1989 ) , tells the story of the group as they journey to <unk> Hall , Bruenor 's boyhood home . Artemis Entreri , a recurring character in the series , also makes his first appearance . In later books , Artemis is Drizzt 's equal in combat , and they clash often due to their conflicting views and goals . In the 1990 book The Halfling 's Gem , Artemis kidnaps Regis while in the employ of a powerful crime lord . Drizzt and Wulfgar chase the assassin by sea , with the help of Captain <unk> , to recover Regis . Drizzt ends up in combat with Artemis Entreri , who leaves the battle wounded . At the end of the book the group finds Regis , and Guenhwyvar kills Artemis 's employer . 
 Legacy of the Drow is a tetralogy , unlike the previous two trilogies . The 1993 short story , Dark Mirror , in the Realms of Valor anthology , describes events just prior to the series . The first three books , The Legacy , <unk> Night , and Siege of Darkness , describe a drow attack on Mithril Hall . Wulfgar is seemingly slain by a <unk> , and Drizzt returns to Menzoberranzan to prevent his friends from being further attacked by dark elves . The drow launch a second attack against Mithril Hall during the Time of Troubles . It is eventually repelled and Drizzt returns to his friends . 
 Passage to Dawn , the final book in the Legacy of the Drow series and published two years after Siege of Darkness , picks up the story six years after the drow attack . Drizzt and <unk> @-@ Brie work with Captain <unk> on his pirate @-@ hunting ship , with the Companions of the Hall ultimately fighting the powerful demon <unk> who is aided by the Crystal Shard , which had previously been buried under a mountain of snow . Wulfgar , never truly dead , returns to life from the Abyss as the demon who had held his soul was destroyed . 
 Drizzt is the main character in only two books of the Paths of Darkness series . The Silent Blade ( 1998 ) describes the group 's journey to permanently destroy the Crystal Shard . Sea of Swords ( 2001 ) continues Drizzt 's story after the events of The Spine of the World ( 1999 ) , which focuses on Wulfgar , and Servant of the Shard ( 2000 ) , which has Artemis Entreri and <unk> as the main characters . Sea of Swords covers the companions ' search for Wulfgar 's lost magical warhammer , Aegis @-@ fang , and the reunion of the group after an extended separation . 
 Drizzt returns as the main character throughout The Hunter 's Blades Trilogy . In The Thousand Orcs ( 2002 ) , Drizzt and his friends encounter the powerful orc <unk> Many @-@ Arrows , who has employed frost giants to aid him in gaining control of the region . After a battle at the town of <unk> , Drizzt believes the other Companions of the Hall to have fallen in battle , and he sets off into the wilderness to fight all orcs in vengeance . The Lone Drow ( 2003 ) continues this storyline as the still @-@ living Companions protect Mithril Hall from orc attacks without the aid of Drizzt . He is reunited with his friends in The Two Swords ( 2003 ) . 
 R.A. Salvatore 's next series of Forgotten Realms books , The <unk> Trilogy , focus on the further adventures of Artemis Entreri and <unk> , with Drizzt only being mentioned in them . However , Drizzt is once again the main character in the Transitions trilogy , consisting of The Orc King , The Pirate King , and The Ghost King . Drizzt is the main character , along with Bruenor , in R.A. Salvatore 's next series in the Forgotten Realms , Neverwinter Saga ; the first book in this series , <unk> , was released October 5 , 2010 . The second book in the series Neverwinter , was released October 4 , 2011 , with the third installment entitled Charon 's Claw released August 7 , 2012 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Drizzt Do 'Urden books are popular with fantasy fans , and the Drizzt character is author R.A. Salvatore 's best known creation . All 31 novels featuring Drizzt by Salvatore have made the New York Times Best Seller list , starting with The Crystal Shard . The Orc King , which marked the 20th anniversary of the character , made it to # 7 on the list , as well as # 9 on the Wall Street Journal list , # 6 on the Publishers Weekly bestseller list , and # 36 on the USA Today list of top sellers . 
 The Two Swords peaked at # 4 on the New York Times Best Seller list in 2004 . It reached the top of the Wall Street Journal 's hardcover bestseller list after only two weeks , a record for its publisher Wizards of the Coast . It also debuted at # 4 on The New York Times 's bestseller list and # 2 on Publisher 's Weekly bestseller list . 
 The Lone Drow debuted at # 7 on the New York Times Best Seller list in October 2003 . Publishers Weekly felt that The Lone Drow was clichéd , but that some of the characters did achieve " some complexity " . They singled out two characters for praise : <unk> , an elf who talks " pensively " of her long life in contrast to the short lived humans , and <unk> the orc king . 
 A special Icewind Dale adventure was featured as the centerpiece at the November 3 , 2007 , Worldwide Dungeons and Dragons Game Day event , in honor of the 20th anniversary of the creation of Drizzt . According to PopMatters ' Andrew Welsh , Drizzt is Salvatore 's attempt to create a multifaceted character who faces internal struggles , in hopes of standing out from the drow , and fantasy fiction in general . Welsh feels that Salvatore fails in this regard , saying " any blood Drizzt finds on his hands is quickly justified and most “ internal ” conflict is superficial at best . " A review for Pyramid refers to Drizzt as the " most famous denizen " of Menzoberranzan , identifying him and the city as " some of the most famous pieces of the Realms " . Rob Bricken of Kotaku called Drizzt " one of the Mary Sue @-@ <unk> characters in all of fiction " . 
 = = Other media = = 
 Drizzt Do 'Urden has been featured in several accessories and one book for the Advanced Dungeons & Dragons fantasy role @-@ playing game . The Hall of Heroes accessory for the second edition of Advanced Dungeons & Dragons , published in 1989 , features a four @-@ page description and game statistics for Drizzt and Guenhwyvar , written by R. A. Salvatore . The Heroes ' <unk> accessory , published in 1996 and written by Dale Donovan and Paul <unk> , features an update and revision of Drizzt 's information from Hall of Heroes . The 1999 accessory Drizzt Do 'Urden 's Guide to the Underdark by Eric L. Boyd , details the cities and civilizations of Faerûn 's Underdark through the perspective of the title character . The Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting hardcover for the game 's third edition features a brief description and game statistics for Drizzt for this edition , under the section on the Sword Coast North . 
 Drizzt has also appeared in a number of graphic novels and video games , and as a miniature figure . Beginning in 2005 , Devil 's Due Publishing began releasing comic book adaptations of the Drizzt novels , covering each book in a three @-@ issue mini @-@ series along with a trade paperback collection . To date , Homeland , Exile , Sojourn , The Crystal Shard , Streams of Silver , The Halfling 's Gem , The Legacy , and <unk> Night have been released . The character has appeared in several video games . He is part of the story and a party member the 1994 SSI game for PC Menzoberranzan . In Forgotten Realms : Demon Stone he is a playable character in the game 's seventh stage , described by a writer for Imagine Games Network ( IGN ) as " cool but utterly ineffective . " He is also an unlockable playable character in Baldur 's Gate : Dark Alliance and Baldur 's Gate : Dark Alliance II . Drizzt appears in Baldur 's Gate fighting some <unk> ; it is possible for a skilled player to kill him and steal his items , and a friendly or hostile version of Drizzt can be spawned with a cheat code . Drizzt also appears in the sequel Baldur 's Gate II and will react negatively if the player has imported characters from the first game that killed Drizzt or have any of his unique items . He will also react negatively to any elven character with a low reputation with the same name , challenging them to a duel of honor . Drizzt is also included in the Dungeons and Dragons Miniatures game , in the Legend of Drizzt Scenario Pack that also includes Wulfgar and the dragon <unk> . An enclosed booklet lets players recreate the battle between Drizzt , Wulfgar , and the dragon . The boxed set was nominated for Best Miniature Product at the 2008 <unk> . 
 Drizzt features prominently in the D & D Adventure System Cooperative Play board game The Legend of Drizzt , released October 18 , 2011 . 
 = Operation Deny Flight = 
 Operation Deny Flight was a North Atlantic Treaty Organization ( NATO ) operation that began on 12 April 1993 as the enforcement of a United Nations ( UN ) no @-@ fly zone over Bosnia and Herzegovina . The United Nations and NATO later expanded the mission of the operation to include providing close air support for UN troops in Bosnia and carrying out coercive air strikes against targets in Bosnia . Twelve NATO members contributed forces to the operation and , by its end on 20 December 1995 , NATO pilots had flown 100 @,@ 420 sorties . 
 The operation played an important role in shaping both the Bosnian War and NATO . The operation included the first combat engagement in NATO 's history , a 28 February 1994 air battle over Banja Luka , and in April 1994 , NATO aircraft first bombed ground targets in an operation near Goražde . These engagements helped show that NATO had adapted to the post @-@ Cold War era and could operate in environments other than a major force on force engagement on the plains of Central Europe . Cooperation between the UN and NATO during the operation also helped pave the way for future joint operations . Although it helped establish UN @-@ NATO relations , Deny Flight led to conflict between the two organizations . Most notably , significant tension arose between the two after UN peacekeepers were taken as hostages in response to NATO bombing . 
 The operations of Deny Flight spanned more than two years of the Bosnian War and played an important role in the course of that conflict . The no @-@ fly zone operations of Deny Flight proved successful in preventing significant use of air power by any side in the conflict . Additionally , the air strikes flown during Deny Flight led to Operation Deliberate Force , a massive NATO bombing campaign in Bosnia that played a key role in ending the war . 
 = = Background and Operation Sky Monitor = = 
 In October 1992 , at the beginning of the Bosnian War , the United Nations Security Council passed Resolution 781 . This resolution prohibited unauthorized military flights in Bosnian airspace . Following the resolution , NATO began Operation Sky Monitor during which NATO forces monitored violations of the no @-@ fly zone , without taking any military action against violators . By April 1993 , NATO forces had documented more than 500 violations of the no @-@ fly zone . In response to these " blatant " violations of Bosnian air space , and implicitly of resolution 781 , the UN Security Council issued Resolution 816 . 
 While Resolution 781 prohibited only military flights , Resolution 816 prohibited all flights in Bosnian air space , except for those expressly authorized by the UN Flight Coordination Center in Zagreb . The resolution also authorized UN member states to " take all necessary measures ... to ensure compliance " with the no @-@ fly zone restrictions . In response to this resolution , NATO commenced Operation Deny Flight on 12 April 1993 . Initially Deny Flight was intended only to enforce the no @-@ fly zone ; however several NATO members , including the United States , were eager to find ways to end the war and improve the situation of civilians , and hoped that military action could do so . The US had already taken unilateral actions to aid civilians caught in the conflict by dropping humanitarian supplies into Bosnia under Operation Provide Promise , and many US officials argued for the use of military force . These officials were eager to expand US air operations through Deny Flight , hoping that an aggressive no @-@ fly zone and possible air strikes would end the conflict more quickly . NATO forces suffered its first loss on the second day of operations , when a French Mirage 2000 crashed in the Adriatic Sea due to mechanical failure . The pilot ejected safely . 
 = = Enforcement of no @-@ fly zone = = 
 After its adoption , Operation Deny Flight was relatively successful in preventing fixed @-@ wing aircraft from flying over restricted air space in Bosnia . During the monitoring phase of Operation Sky Monitor , unauthorized fixed @-@ wing flights averaged twenty per month , but during Deny Flight , the average was three . During the conflict , there were only an estimated 32 fixed @-@ wing military aircraft in Bosnia , all of them former Yugoslav National Army planes under the control of the Bosnian Serbs . Thus , NATO primarily needed to prevent incursions into Bosnian airspace from Croatia and Serbia . 
 The first serious violation to the no @-@ fly zone came on 28 February 1994 , when six Serb J @-@ 21 Jastreb jets bombed a Bosnian factory . US Air Force F @-@ 16s shot down four of the six Serb jets over Banja Luka . This engagement was the first combat engagement of Operation Deny Flight , and its only significant air @-@ to @-@ air combat engagement . Perhaps more importantly , the Banja Luka incident was also the first combat engagement in the history of NATO . The Serbs acknowledged the loss of a fifth aircraft in the incident . 
 While Deny Flight was relatively successful in stopping flights of fixed @-@ wing aircraft , NATO forces found it very difficult to stop helicopter flights , which presented a more complicated challenge . All sides in the conflict used helicopters extensively for non @-@ military purposes , and some of these flights were authorized by the UN . Under the operation 's rules of engagement , NATO fighters were only authorized to shoot down helicopters that committed a hostile act . Otherwise , NATO fighters issued orders to " land or exit " , in other words , land the aircraft or leave the no @-@ fly zone . Typically , helicopters in Bosnian airspace complied with these orders by landing , but then took off again after NATO forces departed . None of the parties in the conflict respected the ban on helicopter flights , as evidenced when Ratko Mladić responded to a BBC journalist 's question about his violation of the ban with the statement , " The commander of the Bosnian Serb armed forces does not ride on a donkey . " 
 Deceptive markings on helicopters further complicated matters for NATO pilots . Many of the combatants painted their helicopters to look like those of organizations that the UN 's Zagreb Flight Coordination Center had authorized to fly in restricted space . For example , the army of the Republika Srpska often painted a Red Cross logo on their helicopters , and Croatian helicopters were given markings similar to those of UN humanitarian aid helicopters . The questionable identity of these helicopters became particularly problematic after the Black Hawk Incident in Iraq , because NATO pilots became more reluctant to engage potential belligerents without clear identification . As a result of the rules of engagement and difficulties in aircraft identification , NATO forces proved unable to stop most unauthorized helicopter flights , resulting in a documented total of <unk> unauthorized flights during the conflict . 
 = = Close air support and air strikes = = 
 Even before Operation Deny Flight began , a number of US officials lobbied for a large role for NATO air power in Bosnia . In particular , as part of Bill Clinton 's platform during his 1992 campaign for President of the United States he promised a " lift and strike " policy , which included the use of air strikes against Bosnian Serb forces . After the commencement of Operation Deny Flight , US officials , including President Clinton , pushed for an expanded mission . After the Bosnian Serbs rejected the Vance @-@ Owen Plan on 6 May 1993 , Clinton and other US officials intensified these calls and they discussed the possibility of using large @-@ scale strikes to coerce the Serbs into acceptance . Ultimately , no such strikes were approved or carried out , but American officials became more open to the idea of using air power for coercion . 
 In June 1993 , partly in response to pressure from the United States , the Security Council passed Resolution 836 which authorized NATO forces to provide close air support for UNPROFOR forces upon request . The procedure to request air support was quite difficult , as it involved the " dual key " of both UN and NATO approval . UN approval required contact with the United Nations headquarters in New York City , making effective coordination nearly impossible given the difference in time zones . The UN approval process was later somewhat streamlined when UN Secretary @-@ General Boutros Boutros @-@ Ghali delegated the authority to authorize air strikes to his special representative in Bosnia , Yasushi Akashi . Even after this simplification , however , " dual key " remained a problem as all requests first had to be processed through the UN Air Operations Center in Kiseljak then pass up the entire UNPROFOR chain of command to Akashi . After Akashi approved the request , he would make a request to NATO commanders who then had to pass orders back down their chain of command and coordinate with forces on the ground . 
 Due to the difficult " dual key " authorization measure , NATO did not fulfill its close air support mission for several months . Nonetheless , NATO soon began further planning for a third mission : coercive air strikes as advocated by the United States . NATO first prepared to use Deny Flight to carry out air strikes in August 1993 as part of a plan to end the Siege of Sarajevo . After diplomatic intervention , the plan was not executed , but a precedent was established for the possible use of air strikes . Thus , in February 1994 , after the Sarajevo Marketplace Bombing , NATO issued an ultimatum to the Serbs to withdraw all heavy weapons from an exclusion zone around Sarajevo or face bombing . The Bosnian Serbs complied with NATO demands and no strikes were carried out . 
 = = = Attack on Goražde = = = 
 In April 1994 , Bosnian Serbs forces launched an attack on the UN Safe Area of Goražde . Initially , US Secretary of Defense William Perry told reporters that the United States would " not enter the war to stop " the Serbs from overrunning Goražde , and other senior officials publicly downplayed the possibility of using air strikes . Several days into the attack , however , a number of UNPROFOR soldiers were injured , and one was killed by Serb fire . Thus , General Michael Rose , the UNPROFOR Commander , requested NATO strikes under the mandate of UNSCR 836 . 
 On 10 April , in response to the request , two US Air Force F @-@ 16s dropped bombs on Serb targets , including a tank and a command post . The next day , two US Marine Corps F / A @-@ 18C aircraft strafed additional targets in the area . That same day , General Ratko Mladić , the commander of the Bosnian Serb army , called General Rose and threatened the safety of his forces , saying " one more attack and I will shoot down aircraft – cannot guarantee safety of UNPROFOR and will attack UNPROFOR and your headquarters " . Making good on his threat , from 12 April to 14 April , Mladić ordered his forces to surround 150 UNPROFOR peacekeepers , effectively taking them hostage . Mladić then telephoned General Rose and told him " that if NATO did not stop its actions , not one UN soldier would leave alive " . Some of the UNPROFOR hostages were from NATO member states , notably the United Kingdom and France , who pushed for an immediate end to the strikes out of fear for the safety of their personnel . In response to the British and French concerns , NATO temporarily recalled its forces , but on 15 April , in response to increased Serb attacks , aircraft were again deployed to the area . 
 As Mladić had promised , the Bosnian Serb army around Goražde attempted to shoot down NATO aircraft . On 15 April 1994 , a French Dassault Étendard IV jet was hit by ground fire while conducting a reconnaissance mission in the area . The jet was damaged , but returned safely to its carrier , the Clemenceau . On 16 April , a British Sea Harrier from the carrier HMS Ark Royal was called in by UN forces to strike a tank . After making several unsuccessful passes at the target , the Sea Harrier was targeted by a Bosnian Serb shoulder @-@ launched surface @-@ to @-@ air missile and was subsequently shot down . The pilot ejected safely and was rescued , but his plane was destroyed . After the Harrier shootdown , NATO did not carry out any further strikes around Goražde , and on 17 April , Mladić released most of the hostages he had taken . Over the next several days , the Serbs agreed to , and then broke , several ceasefires in the Goražde area . In an effort to secure Goražde and to force the Serbs to honor agreements , NATO and the UN issued an ultimatum for Bosnian Serb forces to cease their attacks and withdraw their forces or face additional air strikes on 22 April . The Serbs complied with the ultimatum , requiring a withdrawal of heavy weapons from a 20 kilometers ( 12 mi ) zone and all forces from a 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) zone . Because of the Serb compliance , NATO ceased its operations around Goražde . 
 = = = Sarajevo = = = 
 In February 1994 ( when air strikes were originally threatened ) , NATO had created a heavy weapons exclusion zone around Sarajevo , and collected weapons at a number of sites . On 5 August , the VRS seized several weapons from the <unk> Weapons Collection site in clear violation of the exclusion zone agreement . During the seizure , Serb forces injured a Ukrainian UNPROFOR peacekeeper . In response to the attack , the UN once again requested NATO air support . Two U.S. A @-@ 10 aircraft repeatedly strafed Serb targets , and the Serbs returned the seized weapons to the collection site . 
 On 22 September , UNPROFOR again requested NATO air support in the Sarajevo area after Serb forces attacked a French armored personnel carrier . In response , two British SEPECAT Jaguar aircraft struck near a Serb tank , destroying it . 
 = = = Banja Luka incident = = = 
 On 28 February 1994 , a NATO Airborne Early Warning aircraft flying over Hungary vectored two US F @-@ 16s to an area south of Banja Luka , where six J @-@ 21 Jastreb and two J @-@ 22 Orao were flying back to their base after bombing the " <unk> " military factory at Novi Travnik , in blatant violation of the non @-@ fly zone . Four Serb aircraft were shot down and another crashed while trying to escape in low @-@ level flight . This marked the first combat mission in NATO 's history . 
 = = = Attack on Bihać , bombing of Udbina and hostages = = = 
 In October and November 1994 , during the Siege of Bihać , the Muslim @-@ Croat Federation launched a large offensive around the town of Bihać , in far northwestern Bosnia . The Serbs soon launched a counterattack , and in support of their operations , launched air strikes with aircraft based at a former JNA military airport in Udbina , south of Bihać , located in the Republic of Serbian Krajina . The Serb aircraft dropped napalm and cluster bombs . Although most of the ordnance came from old , unreliable stocks and failed to explode , the attacks were a clear violation of the no @-@ fly zone , and a challenge to NATO . NATO immediately looked for ways to respond , but its forces were not permitted to carry out operations in Croatian airspace , and due to Bihać 's proximity to the border , Serb aircraft could attack into Bosnia , then cross back into Croatia before being intercepted . As such , NATO was powerless to stop the incursions . 
 In recognition of the situation , the Security Council passed Resolution 958 , which allowed NATO aircraft to operate in Croatia . On 21 November , NATO acted under its new authority with a strike on the Udbina airfield . The strike , which involved 39 aircraft , was the largest combat operation in NATO 's history up to that time ; nonetheless , it was criticized as a " pinprick " that did little real damage to Serb capabilities , only temporarily disabling runways . The NATO forces deliberately refrained from attacking Serb planes at the airfield , and only targeted runways and anti @-@ air capabilities . Following the Udbina strike , NATO continued to launch strikes in the area , and on 23 November , after a NATO reconnaissance plane was illuminated by the radar of a surface @-@ to @-@ air missile ( SAM ) system , NATO planes attacked SAM sites at Otoka and Dvor with AGM @-@ 88 HARM anti @-@ radiation missiles . The Serbs reacted to these strikes by immediately seizing 250 UNPROFOR hostages , and a total of 500 by early December . While the hostages were treated fairly well , some were used as human shields , including three who were forced to lie on the tarmac at the Bosnian Serb airbase in Banja Luka . 
 After the strikes at Otoka and Dvor , Bosnian Serb forces continued to target NATO aircraft with surface @-@ to @-@ air missiles , while advancing against the Bihać enclave . On 24 November , Serb forces fired radar @-@ guided missiles at two British Tornado F3 aircraft . The next day , Serb forces fired on two NATO F @-@ 16s . In response to this growing SAM threat , and the UNPROFOR hostages , NATO suspended flights in Bosnian airspace on 2 December . 
 Shortly after the suspension of NATO flights , former US President Jimmy Carter personally negotiated a four @-@ month ceasefire in Bosnia . Although there were some violations of this ceasefire , most of the parties in the conflict heeded it . NATO ordered its planes back in the air , but due to the diminished hostilities , they did not engage in any significant operations for the next several months . The reduced tensions resulting from the Carter ceasefire and the cessation of NATO air operations also led to the release of most of the UNPROFOR hostages over the next several weeks . 
 = = Expansion of the air campaign in 1995 = = 
 Although 1994 ended peacefully with the Carter ceasefire , NATO continued planning for new operations . Both NATO and UN officials believed that after the ceasefire expired in March , the fighting would resume . As such , planners at the Balkans Combined Air Operations Center ( CAOC ) began drawing up plans for new air operations . By late December , the planners developed a plan called " Dead Eye " , designed to eliminate Serb SAM capabilities , so that NATO could regain uncontested air superiority . Over the next several months , the planning for " Dead Eye " gradually evolved into the plan for Operation Deliberate Force , a massive bombing of Serb targets that was eventually executed in August and September 1995 . 
 = = = Bombing of Pale and the hostage crisis = = = 
 While NATO was planning its new strategy , the ceasefire expired , and , as predicted , fighting resumed . As the fighting gradually widened , Bosnian Muslim forces launched a large @-@ scale offensive in the area of Sarajevo . In response to the attack , the Bosnian Serbs seized heavy weapons from a UN @-@ guarded depot , and began shelling targets . As a retaliation for these actions , the UN commander , Lt. General Rupert Smith requested NATO air strikes . NATO honored the request on 25 and 26 May 1995 by bombing a Serb ammunition dump at Pale . The mission was carried out by USAF F @-@ 16s and Spanish Air Force EF @-@ 18As Hornet armed with laser @-@ guided bombs . The Serbs then seized 377 UNPROFOR hostages and used them as human shields for a variety of targets in Bosnia , forcing NATO to end its strikes . 
 Facing a second hostage crisis , General Smith and other top UN commanders began shifting strategies . The UN began to redeploy its forces to more defensible locations , so that they would be harder to attack or take hostage . More importantly , Gen. Rose established the UN Rapid Reaction Force , a heavily armed unit with more aggressive rules of engagement , designed to take offensive action if necessary to prevent hostage @-@ taking and enforce peace agreements . 
 = = = Downing of Scott O 'Grady = = = 
 After the seizure of the 377 hostages , NATO did not carry out further air strikes , but it did continue regular air patrol operations in support of the no @-@ fly zone . On 2 June 1995 , Captain Scott O 'Grady of the United States Air Force was sent on a routine no @-@ fly zone patrol in his F @-@ 16 . While on patrol , O 'Grady 's F @-@ 16 was shot down by a Serb SA @-@ 6 surface @-@ to @-@ air missile system near Mrkonjić Grad . O 'Grady ejected safely , but found himself trapped in Serb @-@ controlled territory . According to many US officials , he may have been deliberately targeted so that the Serbs could take an American hostage . 
 After O 'Grady was shot down , tensions increased greatly between NATO and the Bosnian Serbs . A number of US commanders called for immediate retaliatory air strikes ; however , the Serbs still held the majority of the hostages seized after the bombing of Pale . The threat to the hostages prevented NATO from acting more forcefully , and the Serbs released 121 hostages immediately after the incident in an effort to cool tensions . Nonetheless , the situation remained explosive for the next six days until O 'Grady was rescued on 8 June by the 3rd Battalion 8th Marines 2nd Marine Division , ending the calls for immediate offensive action . Shortly thereafter , the Serbs released the remaining hostages . As a result of the incident , NATO ordered that all further sorties be accompanied by aircraft designed for suppression of enemy air defenses ( SEAD ) . 
 On 11 August , a USAF MQ @-@ 1 Predator UAV was shot down by Serb <unk> fire in the same area , while another was lost to mechanical failure on 14 August . 
 = = = Response to Srebrenica = = = 
 A month after the O 'Grady incident , on 6 July , the VRS launched an offensive against the UN <unk> area of Srebrenica . Dutch peacekeepers in the area considered calling for NATO air strikes in response to the attack , but they decided against them because the Serbs were not using heavy weapons , and out of fear of another hostage crisis . On 10 July , as the fighting intensified , the Dutch troops finally requested close air support from NATO , but due to communication problems in the " dual key " system , the request was not authorized until the next day . 
 On 11 July , NATO prepared for a large @-@ scale mission in Srebrenica involving 60 aircraft . At 2 : 30 PM , the first wave of the assault , two Dutch F @-@ 16s , bombed two Serb tanks on the outskirts of the town . Two USAF F @-@ 16s were dispatched next to attack an artillery piece , but they failed to find their target . Soon thereafter , Bosnian Serb troops seized several Dutch peacekeepers as hostages and threatened to kill them if NATO did not call off its attacks . The Dutch commander reported this back to his government , and Dutch Defense Minister Joris <unk> immediately telephoned the NATO operations center and ordered an end to the attacks . 
 By the end of the day , Srebrenica had fallen to Bosnian Serb forces , who began a brutal campaign of ethnic cleansing that left roughly 7 @,@ 000 men dead . In the wake of this tragedy , many observers blamed NATO for failing to use its airpower more forcefully . David Rohde , a journalist , later wrote that " if NATO close air support had been used earlier ... the 7 @,@ 079 missing might still be alive today " . This feeling that NATO could have prevented thousands of deaths by acting more strongly led to increased planning for Operation Deliberate Force . 
 = = = The London Conference = = = 
 After the events at Srebrenica , sixteen nations met at the London Conference , which began on 21 July 1995 , to consider new options for Bosnia . As a result of the conference , UN Secretary @-@ General Boutros Boutros @-@ Ghali gave General Bernard Janvier , the UN military commander , the authority to request NATO airstrikes without consulting civilian UN officials . The North Atlantic Council , NATO 's top political body , and the UN also agreed to use NATO air strikes in response to attacks on any of the other safe areas in Bosnia . The participants at the conference also agreed in principle to the use of large @-@ scale NATO air strikes in response to future acts of Serb aggression . 
 = = Operation Deliberate Force = = 
 On 28 August 1995 , a mortar shell slammed into a Sarajevo marketplace , killing 37 people . The United States subsequently blamed Bosnian Serb forces for the attack . Admiral Leighton Smith , the NATO commander , recommended that NATO launch retaliatory air strikes against the Serbs under the plan established for Operation Deliberate Force . On 30 August 1995 , NATO officially launched Operation Deliberate Force with large @-@ scale bombing of Serb targets . This bombing superseded Operation Deny Flight 's role for air strikes and close air support , but Deny Flight remained an active operation , still enforcing the no @-@ fly zone over Bosnia . 
 Until 20 September 1995 , when Operation Deliberate Force ended , the role played by Deny Flight was minimal . After the suspension of Operation Deliberate Force ; however , several further operations were carried out under Deny Flight . On 4 October 1995 , Deny Flight aircraft fired HARM missiles after being targeted by surface @-@ to @-@ air missiles . On 8 October 1995 , the UN requested close air support near Tuzla . Due to bad weather conditions , NATO aircraft were unable to locate their targets , but on 9 October , in the final combat engagement of Deny Flight , NATO aircraft returned and destroyed a Serb command and control bunker . 
 = = Termination of Deny Flight = = 
 After the adoption of the Dayton Accords , a peace agreement for Bosnia , Deny Flight 's mission was no longer necessary . On 15 December 1995 , the United Nations Security Council officially terminated the resolutions that had authorized the operation , and on 16 December , the North Atlantic Council agreed to terminate Operation Deny Flight , effective 20 December . On 21 December 1995 , NATO held a formal closure ceremony for Deny Flight in Vicenza . Many of the forces assigned to Deny Flight were transferred to Operation Decisive Endeavor , to provide support for new IFOR peacekeepers in Bosnia . 
 = = Structure of forces = = 
 Throughout the course of its operation , Deny Flight was directed by Allied Forces Southern Europe ( <unk> ) in Naples , under the command of the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of Allied Forces Southern Europe . At the beginning of the operation , Admiral Jeremy Boorda served as the commanding officer ; he was replaced by Admiral Leighton Smith in 1994 . Smith and Boorda , however , delegated day to day authority to Allied Air Forces Southern Europe ( <unk> ) commanded by Lieutenant General Joseph W. <unk> ( until 1994 ) and then Lt. Gen Michael Ryan . While <unk> maintained day to day command , " mission tasking and operational control " were delegated to the commander of the NATO 5th Allied Tactical Air Force ( <unk> ) , initially Lt Gen Antonio Rosetti and later Lt Gen Andrea <unk> , both of the Italian Air Force . 
 To simplify the chain of command and coordinate activities , NATO established the Combined Air Operations Center ( CAOC ) in Vicenza , Italy , which assumed practical day @-@ to @-@ day control of Deny Flight and reported to the commander of the <unk> . Each squadron participating in the operation sent a liaison officer to the CAOC to ensure coordination . The initial director of the CAOC was Lt Gen James Chambers of the US Air Force . In November 1994 , Major General Hal <unk> replaced him . In practice , most tactical level decisions about Deny Flight were made by the director of the CAOC , and he had the authority to order NATO pilots to engage violators of the no @-@ fly zone . 
 Twelve NATO countries provided forces to Operation Deny Flight : Belgium , Canada , Denmark , France , Germany , Italy , the Netherlands , Norway , Spain , Turkey , the United Kingdom and the United States . Together , these twelve states contributed a total of 4 @,@ 500 personnel who were based at air bases in five countries : France , Germany , Greece , Italy , and the United Kingdom and on aircraft carriers in the region . Eight of the participating countries contributed a total of 239 aircraft to the operation , of which nearly half , 108 , came from the United States . Within the United States , the US Navy and US Marine Corps provided the most support for the operation , and together they flew 70 % of all of the air defense sorties flown during Deny Flight . American aircraft also provided the majority of the airstrikes during the conflict ; of the 1 @,@ 150 bombs dropped by NATO forces , 88 % came from American aircraft . 
 = = Impact and legacy = = 
 Operation Deny Flight lasted for 983 days and included 100 @,@ 420 sorties carried out by 4 @,@ 500 personnel from 12 NATO countries . It included the first combat engagement in NATO history , the Banja Luka incident , and many of NATO 's first out of area operations . As such , Deny Flight " represented a momentous act , if only in symbolic terms , in that the alliance assumed a combat mission in a <unk> capacity and out @-@ of @-@ area " . Beyond this symbolic effect , Deny Flight had important consequences for NATO military policy , international relations , and the war in Bosnia . 
 = = = Effect on military policy = = = 
 As one of the first major combat tests of NATO <unk> , Deny Flight provided several important military lessons . Most importantly , Deny Flight helped to prove the effectiveness , or drive the development of several technologies . For example , during the operation , the F / A @-@ 18D Hornet was proven to be a " highly resourceful multirole platform " for the United States Marine Corps . Deny Flight was also important in the move towards precision @-@ guided munitions , as nearly 70 % of the munitions dropped by NATO during the conflict were precision @-@ guided , versus only 8 % during the Gulf War . For the Royal Navy , Deny Flight led to a re @-@ evaluation of the Sea Harrier and a number of upgrades to it . In particular , the Royal Navy added the Paveway II laser @-@ guided bomb to the Harrier , giving it a precision capability , and upgraded electronics aboard the aircraft in response to the necessities of combat in Bosnia . The lessons of Bosnia also led the Royal Air Force to deploy the Harrier GR7 aboard Royal Navy carriers for future operations in order to deliver more offensive force projection capability . 
 The four NATO aircraft shot down during Operation Deny Flight also forced NATO members to consider new defensive measures for their aircraft , including increased stealth capabilities . Deny Flight also demonstrated the necessity of better communications and integration among forces operating together , and led to some calls for technical training of UN personnel to work with NATO military systems . Finally , the rules of engagement established under Deny Flight also played an important role in shaping the rules of engagement for later NATO operations other than war , including Operation Joint Endeavor , and even NATO operations in Afghanistan . 
 = = = Effect on the Atlantic relationship = = = 
 Operation Deny Flight , and other NATO operations during the Bosnian War , resulted in significant tension within NATO and the Atlantic relationship . Deny Flight and other early operations " forced the Allies to consider the question of NATO 's military responsibility for territory outside of its traditional defense perimeter , and it was one over which they were deeply divided " . Disagreements between the United States and its European allies over when and how to use air power " made intra @-@ alliance diplomacy more problematic " during the period . Many of these problems in the relationship were the result of concerns from European nations who had forces on the ground in UNPROFOR that might be taken hostage . The fact that the United States pushed for air strikes without placing its own forces on the ground in Bosnia greatly exacerbated this problem . 
 Deny Flight also helped set the path for future UN @-@ NATO relations . Throughout the operation , NATO " felt the frustration of having its wings clipped by a parallel UN authority " , while United Nations officials worried about the effect that NATO air strikes would have on the perceived neutrality of the United Nations . Frustration with the " dual key " procedure of authorization for NATO action also led NATO officers to reject such an arrangement in the future . Admiral Leighton Smith , the commander of NATO 's forces during Deny Flight , expressed this sentiment quite bluntly , saying " Don 't ever have another dual key . " These difficulties in negotiating the UN @-@ NATO relationship during Deny Flight were a major factor in the decision to place later NATO forces in the Balkans under the sole control of the NATO chain of command . While many of these effects on UN @-@ NATO relations were negative , Deny Flight also had positive implications . During the operation , NATO and the UN exchanged liaison officers for the first time in their respective histories , establishing a precedent for military cooperation between the two . The communication and coordination failures during Deny Flight also instilled " a desire for mutual understanding and common solutions " between the two organizations . This desire for cooperation was crucial to the establishment of IFOR , and later UN @-@ NATO cooperation in Bosnia and elsewhere . 
 = = = Effect on the Bosnian War = = = 
 Deny Flight also played a significant role in shaping the war in Bosnia , although its exact impact is debated . While Richard Holbrooke , the American special envoy for Bosnia , recognized Operation Deliberate Force as " a historic development in post @-@ Cold War relations " and as a crucial element in ending the war in Bosnia , the actual impact of Deny Flight on the course of the conflict was more muted . None of the air strikes in Deny Flight were on the scale of those in Deliberate Force , and they did not significantly change the balance of power . Notably , however , Deny Flight was successful in that it " neutralised the Bosnian Serbs ' advantage in fixed @-@ wing air @-@ power " . Deny Flight also paved the way for Operation Deliberate Force . According to Robert E. Hunter , then the US Ambassador to NATO , Deny Flight was crucial to the process of building " consensus support for increasingly robust use of airpower over Bosnia " , which eventually culminated in Operation Deliberate Force . 
 While the material impact of Deny Flight was minimal , it did have a significant political impact . From the very beginning , according to Michael Beale , " the operation 's implied objective was to demonstrate UN and NATO determination to stabilize the situation in Bosnia so that a peaceful settlement could be achieved " . Given the many violations of Deny Flight by helicopters , and the frequent failure of coordination between NATO and the UN , it is uncertain whether Deny Flight accomplished this mission . Nonetheless , NATO 's limited air strikes under Deny Flight " demonstrated its determination to protect United Nations personnel " and Bosnian civilians , according to Michael R. Gordon , chief military correspondent for The New York Times . This determination eventually held the key to peace . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Beale , Michael ( 1997 ) . Bombs over Bosnia : The Role of Airpower in Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina . Maxwell Air Force Base , Montgomery : Air University Press . OCLC <unk> . 
 Boot , Max ( 2006 ) . War Made New . New York : Gotham Books . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 222 @-@ 4 . OCLC <unk> . 
 <unk> , Mark ( 2003 ) . Responsibility of Command . Maxwell Air Force Base : Air University Press . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 115 @-@ 5 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Burg , Steven ; Shoup , Paul ( 1999 ) . The War in Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina . Armonk : M.E. Sharper . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 308 @-@ 3 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Davis , Bradley ( 2000 ) . " The Planning Background " . Deliberate Force . Maxwell Air Force Base : Air University Press . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 076 @-@ 0 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Foster , Edward ( 1995 ) . NATO 's Military in the Age of Crisis Management . London : Royal United Services Institute for Defence Studies . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 099 @-@ 3 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Holbrooke , Richard ( 1999 ) . To End a War . New York : Modern Library . ISBN 0 @-@ 375 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Moore , Rebecca ( 2007 ) . NATO 's New Mission . Westport : Praeger Security International . ISBN 0 @-@ 275 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . OCLC <unk> . 
 National Defense University ( April 1997 ) . Allied command structures in the new NATO . National Defense University Press . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 033 @-@ 1 . 
 Ripley , Tim ( 2001 ) . Conflict in the Balkans , 1991 – 2000 . London : Osprey Publishing . ISBN 1 @-@ 84176 @-@ 290 @-@ 3 . 
 Rohde , David ( 1997 ) . A Safe Area , Srebrenica : Europe 's Worst Massacre Since the Second World War . London : Pocket Books . ISBN 0 @-@ 671 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . OCLC <unk> . 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 Allin , Dana ( 2002 ) . NATO 's Balkan Interventions . Adelphi Paper 347 . International Institute for Strategic Studies . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 " Bosnian Serb leader parlays with Carter , promises peace moves " . Deutsche Presse @-@ Agentur . December 15 , 1994 . 
 Cohen , Roger ( November 22 , 1994 ) . " NATO , Expanding Bosnia Role , Strikes a Serbian Base in Croatia " . The New York Times . 
 Cohen , Roger ( December 9 , 1995 ) . " Serbs Release 55 Canadians But Renew Attack on Enclave " . The New York Times . Retrieved 2009 @-@ 04 @-@ 28 . 
 " Deny Flight shootdown may put USAF on the offensive " . Jane 's Defence Weekly . June 24 , 1995 . 
 " Flexing Joint Muscle : Mixed air groups aboard carriers " . Jane 's Navy International . December 1997 . 
 Gordon , Michael ( April 11 , 1994 ) . " Conflict in the Balkans : NATO ; Modest Air Operation in Bosnia Crosses a Major Political Frontier " . The New York Times . Retrieved 2009 @-@ 02 @-@ 17 . 
 Gordon , Michael ( April 5 , 1994 ) . " No ' Green Light ' for Serb Attacks , Clinton Says " . The New York Times . Retrieved 2009 @-@ 02 @-@ 17 . 
 Gordon , Michael R. ( 1 March 1994 ) . " Conflict in the Balkans : NATO Craft Down 4 Serb Warplanes Attacking Bosnia " . The New York times . Retrieved 2012 @-@ 11 @-@ 17 . 
 <unk> , Dick ( 1997 ) . " Before and after Dayton : The UN and NATO in the former Yugoslavia " . Third World Quarterly . 
 Owen , Robert ( Summer 1997 ) . " The Balkans Air Campaign Study : Part 1 " . Airpower Journal . 
 " RAF Harriers could add teeth to RN carriers " . Jane 's Defense Weekly . June 26 , 1996 . 
 " Ratko <unk> 's very personal war " . BBC World Service . July 26 , 2008 . Retrieved 2009 @-@ 03 @-@ 08 . 
 Safire , William ( November 23 , 1995 ) . " Essay : Biting Bosnia 's Bullet " . The New York Times . Retrieved 2009 @-@ 02 @-@ 16 . 
 Cohen , Roger ( 29 August 1995 ) . " Shelling Kills Dozens in Sarajevo ; U.S. Urges NATO to Strike Serbs " . The New York Times . Retrieved 2012 @-@ 11 @-@ 16 . 
 Simmons , Dean ( May 1997 ) . " Air operations over Bosnia " . United States Naval Institute Proceedings . 
 Slick , Anthony ( May 1995 ) . " Working the swing role into the 21st <unk> F / A @-@ 18D " . Marine Corps Gazette . 
 Spence , Mike ( October 2000 ) . " Lessons for combined rules of engagement " . United States Naval Institute . Proceedings . 
 Starr , Barbara ( August 14 , 1993 ) . " Deny Flight forces poised for Bosnia strikes " . Jane 's Defence Weekly . 
 Starr , Barbara ( January 28 , 1995 ) . " The Jane 's Interview " . Jane 's Defence Weekly . 
 <unk> , Chuck ( November 19 , 1994 ) . " Napalm and Cluster Bombs Dropped on Bosnian Town " . The New York Times . Retrieved 2009 @-@ 04 @-@ 28 . 
 Williams , Daniel ; <unk> , Ann ( December 15 , 1994 ) . " Carter <unk> Bosnia Peace Initiative " . The Washington Post . 
 Wallander , Celeste ( Autumn 2000 ) . " Institutional Assets and <unk> : NATO After the Cold War " . International Organization . ( subscription required for viewing ) 
 = = = Web resources = = = 
 " Operation Deny Flight " . <unk> Fact Sheets . NATO Regional Headquarters Allied Forces Southern Europe . Retrieved 2011 @-@ 04 @-@ 17 . 
 " Resolution 816 " ( PDF ) . United Nations Security Council Resolutions . UN Security Council . Retrieved 2009 @-@ 02 @-@ 17 . 
 = Blue @-@ faced honeyeater = 
 The blue @-@ faced honeyeater ( <unk> cyanotis ) , also colloquially known as the <unk> , is a passerine bird of the honeyeater family , Meliphagidae . 
 It is the only member of its genus , and it is most closely related to honeyeaters of the genus Melithreptus . Three subspecies are recognised . At around 29 @.@ 5 cm ( 11 @.@ 6 in ) in length , the blue @-@ faced species is large for a honeyeater . Its plumage is distinctive , with olive upperparts , white underparts , and a black head and throat with white nape and cheeks . Males and females are similar in external appearance . Adults have a blue area of bare skin on each side of the face readily distinguishing them from juveniles , which have yellow or green patches of bare skin . 
 Found in open woodland , parks and gardens , the blue @-@ faced honeyeater is common in northern and eastern Australia and southern New Guinea . It appears to be sedentary in parts of its range and locally nomadic in other parts ; however , the species has been little studied . Its diet is mostly composed of invertebrates , supplemented with nectar and fruit . They often take over and renovate old babbler nests , in which the female lays and incubates two or rarely three eggs . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 The blue @-@ faced honeyeater was first described by ornithologist John Latham in his 1801 work Supplementum Indicis Ornithologici , sive Systematis Ornithologiae . However , he described it as three separate species , seemingly not knowing it was the same bird in each case : The blue @-@ eared grackle ( <unk> cyanotis ) , the blue @-@ cheeked bee @-@ eater ( Merops <unk> ) , and as the blue @-@ cheeked thrush ( Turdus <unk> ) . It was as the blue @-@ cheeked bee @-@ eater that it was painted between 1788 and 1797 by Thomas Watling , one of a group known collectively as the Port Jackson Painter . 
 It was reclassified in the genus <unk> , which was erected by William Swainson in 1825 , who observed the " Blue @-@ faced <unk> " as the only insectivorous member of the genus and posited it was a link between the smaller honeyeaters and the <unk> of the genus <unk> . The generic name is derived from the Ancient Greek <unk> / <unk> ( " inside " ) and <unk> / <unk> " to drink " or " suck " . The specific epithet , cyanotis , means " blue @-@ eared " and combines <unk> / <unk> " blue " with <unk> , a Latinised form of <unk> , the Greek genitive of ous / <unk> " ear " . Swainson spelt it <unk> in an 1837 publication , and George Gray wrote <unk> in 1840 . 
 The blue @-@ faced honeyeater is generally held to be the only member of the genus , although its plumage suggests an affinity with honeyeaters of the genus Melithreptus . It has been classified in that genus by Glen Storr , although others felt it more closely related to wattlebirds ( Anthochaera ) or miners ( Manorina ) . A 2004 molecular study has resolved it as close to Melithreptus after all . Molecular clock estimates indicate the blue @-@ faced honeyeater diverged from the Melithreptus honeyeaters somewhere between 12 @.@ 8 and 6 @.@ 4 million years ago , in the Miocene epoch . It differs from them in its much larger size , brighter plumage , more gregarious nature and larger patch of bare facial skin . 
 Molecular analysis has shown honeyeaters to be related to the Pardalotidae ( pardalotes ) , Acanthizidae ( Australian warblers , scrubwrens , thornbills , etc . ) , and the Maluridae ( Australian fairy @-@ wrens ) in a large Meliphagoidea superfamily . 
 Early naturalist George Shaw had called it the blue @-@ faced honey @-@ sucker in 1826 . Other common names include white @-@ <unk> honeyeater , and blue @-@ eye . Its propensity for feeding on the flowers and fruit of bananas in north Queensland has given it the common name of banana @-@ bird . A local name from Mackay in central Queensland is pandanus @-@ bird , as it is always found around Pandanus palms there . It is called morning @-@ bird from its dawn calls before other birds of the bush . Gympie is a Queensland bushman 's term . Thomas Watling noted a local indigenous name was der @-@ ro @-@ gang . John Hunter recorded the term <unk> ( pron . " co @-@ <unk> " ) , but the term was also applied to the black @-@ shouldered kite ( Elanus axillaris ) . It is called ( minha ) <unk> , where minha is a qualifier meaning ' meat ' or ' animal ' , in Pakanh and ( inh- ) <unk> in Uw Oykangand and Uw Olkola , where inh- is a qualifier meaning ' meat ' or ' animal ' , in three aboriginal languages of central Cape York Peninsula . 
 Three subspecies are recognised : 
 E. c. albipennis was described by John Gould in 1841 and found in north Queensland , west though the Gulf of Carpentaria in the Northern Territory and across into the top of Western Australia . It has white on the wings and a discontinuous stripe on the nape . The wing patch is pure white in the western part of its range and is more cream towards the east . It has a longer bill and shorter tail than the nominate race . Birds also decrease in size with decreasing latitude , consistent with Bergmann 's rule . Molecular work supports the current classification of this subspecies as distinct from the nominate subspecies cyanotis . 
 E. c. cyanotis , the nominate form , is found from Cape York Peninsula south through Queensland and New South Wales , into the Riverina region , Victoria , and southeastern South Australia . 
 E. c. <unk> is found in southwestern New Guinea and Cape York , and was described in 1909 by Dutch naturalist Eduard van Oort . It is much smaller than the other subspecies . The original name for this subspecies was <unk> , but the type specimen , collected in Cooktown , was found to be an intergrade form . The new type was collected from Merauke . This subspecies intergrades with cyanotis at the base of the Cape York Peninsula , and the zone of intermediate forms is narrow . The white wing patch is larger than that of cyanotis and smaller than that of albipennis . Only one bird ( from Cape York ) of this subspecies was sampled in a molecular study , and it was shown to be genetically close to cyanotis . 
 = = Description = = 
 A large honeyeater ranging from 26 to 32 cm ( 10 to 12 @.@ 5 in ) and averaging 29 @.@ 5 cm ( 11 @.@ 6 in ) in length , the adult blue @-@ faced honeyeater has a wingspan of 44 cm ( 17 @.@ 5 in ) and weighs around 105 g ( 3 @.@ 7 oz ) . In general shape , it has broad wings with rounded tips and a medium squarish tail . The sturdy slightly downcurved bill is shorter than the skull , and measures 3 to 3 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 to 1 @.@ 4 in ) in length . It is easily recognised by the bare blue skin around its eyes . The head and throat are otherwise predominantly blackish with a white stripe around the nape and another from the cheek . The upperparts , including mantle , back and wings , are a golden @-@ olive colour , and the margins of the primary and secondary coverts a darker olive @-@ brown , while the underparts are white . Juveniles that have just fledged have grey head , chin and central parts of their breasts , and brown upperparts , and otherwise white underparts . After their next moult , they more closely resemble adults and have similar plumage , but are distinguished by their facial patches . The bare facial skin of birds just fledged is yellow , sometimes with a small patch of blue in front of the eyes , while the skin of birds six months and older has usually become more greenish , and turn darker blue beneath the eye , before assuming the adult blue facial patch by around 16 months of age . The blue @-@ faced honeyeater begins its moult in October or November , starting with its primary flight feathers , replacing them by February . It replaces its body feathers anywhere from December to June , and tail feathers between December and July . 422 blue @-@ faced honeyeaters have been banded between 1953 and 1997 to monitor movements and longevity . Of these , 109 were eventually recovered , 107 of which were within 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) of their point of banding . The record for longevity was a bird banded in May 1990 in Kingaroy in central Queensland which was found dead on a road after 8 years and 3 @.@ 5 months in September 1998 , around 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) away . 
 The blue @-@ faced honeyeater produces a variety of calls , including a piping call around half an hour before dawn , variously described as ki @-@ <unk> , <unk> , queet , <unk> , or <unk> . Through the day , it makes squeaking noises while flying , and harsh squawks when mobbing . Its calls have been likened to those of the yellow @-@ throated miner ( Manorina flavigula ) , but are deeper . Blue @-@ faced honeyeaters make a soft chirping around nestlings and family members . 
 A distinctive bird , the blue @-@ faced honeyeater differs in coloration from the duller @-@ plumaged <unk> , miners and wattlebirds , and it is much larger than the similarly coloured Melithreptus honeyeaters . Subspecies albipennis with its white wing patch has been likened to a khaki @-@ backed butcherbird in flight . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The blue @-@ faced honeyeater is found from the Kimberleys in northwestern Australia eastwards across the Top End and into Queensland , where it is found from Cape York south across the eastern and central parts of the state , roughly east of a line connecting Karumba , Blackall , <unk> and <unk> National Park . It has a patchy distribution in New South Wales , occurring in the Northern Rivers and Northern Tablelands regions , and along the coast south to <unk> Heads . To the south it is generally absent from the Central and South Coast , and is instead found west of the Great Divide across South West Slopes and Riverina and to the Murray River . It is common in northern Victoria and reaches Bordertown in southeastern South Australia , its range continuing along the Murray . It is also found in the Grampians region , particularly in the vicinity of Stawell , Ararat and St Arnaud , with rare reports from southwestern Victoria . The species occasionally reaches Adelaide , and there is a single record from the Eyre Peninsula . The altitude ranges from sea level to around 850 m ( 2 @,@ 790 ft ) , or rarely 1 @,@ 000 m ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) . 
 In New Guinea , it is found from Merauke in the far southeast of Indonesia 's Papua province and east across the Trans @-@ Fly region of southwestern Papua New Guinea . It has also been recorded from the Aru Islands . 
 The blue @-@ faced honeyeater appears to be generally sedentary within its range , especially in much of the Northern Territory , Queensland and New South Wales . However , in many places ( generally south of the Tropic of Capricorn ) , populations may be present or absent at different times of the year , although this appears to result from nomadic rather than seasonal migratory movements . Around Wellington in central New South Wales , birds were recorded over winter months , and were more common in autumn around the <unk> River . Birds were present all year round near Inverell in northern New South Wales , but noted to be flying eastwards from January to May , and westwards in June and July . In <unk> in southeastern Queensland , birds were regularly recorded flying north and east from March to June , and returning south and west in July and August , and were absent from the area in spring and summer . 
 They live throughout rainforest , dry sclerophyll ( Eucalyptus ) forest , open woodland , Pandanus thickets , paperbarks , mangroves , watercourses , and wetter areas of semi @-@ arid regions , as well as parks , gardens , and golf courses in urban areas . The understory in eucalypt @-@ dominated woodland where the blue @-@ faced honeyeater is found is most commonly composed of grasses such as Triodia , but sometimes it is made up of shrubs or small trees such as grevilleas , paperbarks , wattles , Cooktown ironwood ( <unk> <unk> ) or <unk> plum ( Terminalia <unk> ) . One study in Kakadu National Park found that blue @-@ faced honeyeaters inhabited mixed stands of eucalypts and Pandanus but were missing from pure stands of either plant . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 The social organisation of the blue @-@ faced honeyeater has been little studied to date . Encountered in pairs , family groups or small flocks , blue @-@ faced honeyeaters sometimes associate with groups of yellow @-@ throated miners ( Manorina flavigula ) . They mob potential threats such as goshawks ( Accipiter spp . ) , rufous owls ( Ninox rufa ) , and Pacific <unk> ( <unk> orientalis ) . There is some evidence of cooperative breeding , with some breeding pairs recorded with one or more helper birds . Parents will dive at and harass intruders to drive them away from nest sites , including dogs , owls , goannas , and even a <unk> night heron ( Nycticorax <unk> ) . A study published in 2004 of remnant patches of forest in central Queensland , an area largely cleared for agriculture , showed a reduced avian species diversity in areas frequented by blue @-@ faced honeyeaters or noisy miners . 
 This effect was more marked in smaller patches . The study concluded that conserved patches of woodland containing the two aggressive species should be larger than 20 ha ( 44 acres ) to preserve diversity . 
 Social birds , blue @-@ faced honeyeaters can be noisy when they congregate . When feeding in groups , birds seem to keep in contact with each other by soft chirping calls . In Mackay , a bird would fly up 10 or 12 metres ( 33 or 39 ft ) above the treetops calling excitedly to its flock , who would follow and fly around in what was likened to an aerial corroboree , seemingly at play . A single bird was recorded aping and playing with an immature Australian magpie ( Cracticus tibicen ) in Proserpine , Queensland . The blue @-@ faced honeyeater has been reported to be fond of bathing ; a flock of 15 – 20 birds were observed diving into pools one bird at a time , while others were perched in surrounding treetops preening . 
 The parasite <unk> <unk> ( a worldwide species not otherwise recorded from Australia ) was isolated from a blue @-@ faced honeyeater collected in North Queensland in 1916 . The <unk> nematode <unk> ( <unk> ) <unk> has also been isolated from this among other honeyeater species . The nasal mite Ptilonyssus <unk> has been isolated from the noisy friarbird ( Philemon corniculatus ) and blue @-@ faced honeyeater . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The blue @-@ faced honeyeater generally forages in the branches and foliage of trees , in small groups of up to seven birds . Occasionally larger flocks of up to 30 individuals have been reported , and the species has been encountered in a mixed @-@ species foraging flock with the little friarbird ( Philemon <unk> ) . The bulk of their diet consists of insects , including cockroaches , termites , grasshoppers , bugs such as <unk> , scale ( <unk> ) and shield bugs ( Pentatomidae ) , beetles such as bark beetles , <unk> ( subfamily <unk> ) , click beetles ( genus <unk> ) , darkling beetles ( genera <unk> and <unk> ) , leaf beetles ( genus <unk> ) , ladybirds of the genus <unk> , weevils such as the pinhole borer ( Platypus australis ) , and members of the genera <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , as well as flies , moths , bees , ants and spiders . Birds have been reported preying on small lizards . Prey are caught mostly by sallying , although birds also probe and glean . In Kakadu National Park , birds prefer to hunt prey between the leaf bases of the screw palm Pandanus spiralis . 
 The remainder of their diet is made up of plant material such as pollen , berries , nectar , from such species as <unk> ( Xanthorrhoea ) and scarlet gum ( Eucalyptus phoenicea ) , and cultivated crops such as bananas or particularly grapes . In general , birds prefer feeding at cup @-@ shaped sources such as flowers of the Darwin woollybutt ( Eucalyptus miniata ) , Darwin stringybark ( E. <unk> ) and long @-@ fruited bloodwood ( Corymbia <unk> ) , followed by brush @-@ shaped inflorescences , such as banksias or melaleucas , gullet @-@ shaped inflorescences such as grevilleas , with others less often picked . 
 Usually very inquisitive and friendly birds , they will often invade a campsite , searching for edible items , including fruit , insects , and remnants from containers of jam or honey , and milk is particularly favoured . Parent birds feed the young on insects , fruit and nectar , and have been recorded regurgitating milk to them as well . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The blue @-@ faced honeyeater probably breeds throughout its range . The breeding season is from June to January , with one or two broods raised during this time . The nest is an untidy deep bowl of sticks and bits of bark in the fork of a tree , <unk> or bird 's nest ferns , or <unk> . Pandanus palms are a popular nest site in Mackay . They often renovate and use the old nests of other species , most commonly the grey @-@ crowned babbler ( <unk> temporalis ) , but also the chestnut @-@ crowned babbler ( P. ruficeps ) , other honeyeaters including noisy ( Philemon corniculatus ) , little and silver @-@ crowned <unk> ( P. <unk> ) , the noisy miner ( Manorina melanocephala ) and the red wattlebird ( Anthochaera carunculata ) , and <unk> such as the Australian magpie and butcherbird species , and even the magpie @-@ lark . In Coen , an old babbler nest in a paperbark ( Melaleuca ) which had been lined with messmate bark had been occupied by blue @-@ faced honeyeaters and re @-@ lined with strips of paperbark . Two or rarely three eggs are laid , 22 × 32 mm ( 1 × 1 ⅓ in ) and buff @-@ pink splotched with red @-@ brown or purplish colours . The female alone incubates the eggs , over a period of 16 or 17 days . 
 Like those of all passerines , the chicks are altricial ; they are born blind and covered only by sparse tufts of brown down on their backs , shoulders and parts of wings . By four days they open their eyes , and pin feathers emerge from their wings on day six , and the rest of the body on days seven and eight . Both parents feed the young , and are sometimes assisted by helper birds . The Pacific koel and pallid cuckoo ( Cuculus pallidus ) have been recorded as brood parasites of the blue @-@ faced honeyeater , and the laughing kookaburra recorded as preying on broods . 
 = = Aviculture = = 
 Keeping blue @-@ faced honeyeaters in an aviary in New South Wales requires a Class 2 Licence . Applicants must show they have appropriate housing , and at least two years ' experience of keeping birds . Blue @-@ faced honeyeaters are exhibited at Lincoln Park Zoo in Chicago , Philadelphia Zoo , and Birmingham Zoo ( Alabama ) in the United States , Chessington Zoo in England , Edinburgh Zoo in Scotland and Taronga Zoo in Sydney , Australia . 
 = Sexuality of Adolf Hitler = 
 Adolf Hitler 's sexuality has long been a matter of historical and scholarly debate . There is evidence that he had romantic encounters with a number of women during his lifetime , as well as evidence of his antipathy to homosexuality , and no evidence of homosexual encounters . His name has been linked to a number of possible female lovers , two of whom committed suicide . Another died of complications eight years after a suicide attempt , and one made a failed suicide attempt . 
 Hitler created a public image as a celibate man without a domestic life , dedicated entirely to his political mission and the nation . His relationship with Eva Braun , which lasted nearly 14 years , was hidden from the public and all but his inner circle . Braun biographer Heike Görtemaker notes that the couple enjoyed a normal sex life . Hitler and Braun married in late April 1945 , less than 40 hours before committing suicide together . 
 Two wartime reports by the Allies attempted to analyze Hitler psychologically . Walter C. Langer 's 1943 report for the American Office of Strategic Services ( OSS ) describes Hitler as having repressed homosexual tendencies and opined that he was an impotent coprophile . Psychologist Henry Murray wrote a separate psychoanalytical report for the OSS in 1943 that drew similar conclusions . Otto Strasser , one of Hitler 's opponents in the Nazi Party , also told his post @-@ war interrogators a similar story . British historian Sir Ian Kershaw describes Strasser 's statement as " anti @-@ Hitler propaganda " . 
 In research following Hitler 's death , a variety of claims have been made about Hitler 's sexual orientation : that he was gay , bisexual , or asexual . <unk> evidence is lacking , but most historians believe he was heterosexual . There is at least one claim that Hitler had an illegitimate child ( named Jean @-@ Marie Loret ) with one of his lovers . Mainstream historians , such as Ian Kershaw , dismiss this as unlikely or impossible . 
 = = Historical accounts = = 
 Hitler 's sex life has long been the subject of speculation and rumours , many of which were invented or " spiced up " by his political enemies . While the sexual preferences of many members of Hitler 's inner circle are known , conclusive evidence of Hitler 's sexuality is lacking . The evidence that exists about Hitler 's private life is largely from people in his inner circle , such as his adjutants , his secretaries , Albert Speer , the Richard Wagner family , and others . There is evidence that he had infatuations with a number of women during his lifetime , as well as evidence of his antipathy to homosexuality , and no evidence that he engaged in homosexual behavior . British historian Sir Ian Kershaw describes him as being repelled by personal contact and sexual activity , including homosexuality and prostitution , especially as a young man in Vienna . He was afraid of contracting a sexually transmitted infection . 
 Hermann <unk> claimed to have seen in Hitler 's First World War military record an item concerning a court martial that found Hitler guilty of pederastic practices with an officer . <unk> also claimed that in Munich Hitler was found guilty of a violation of Paragraph 175 , which dealt with pederasty . No evidence of either of these two charges has been found . 
 Hitler had a few brief relationships when young . He was deeply attached to his half @-@ niece Geli Raubal , 19 years his junior . She began living at his residence after her mother became Hitler 's housekeeper in 1925 . Although the exact nature and extent of their relationship is unknown , Kershaw describes it as a latent " sexual dependence " . It was rumoured among contemporaries that they were in a romantic relationship . Geli committed suicide with Hitler 's gun in his Munich apartment in September 1931 . Her death was a source of deep , lasting pain for Hitler . Ernst Hanfstaengl , one of the members of Hitler 's inner circle in the early years in Munich , wrote that " I felt Hitler was a case of a man who was neither fish , flesh nor fowl , neither fully homosexual nor fully heterosexual ... I had formed the firm conviction that he was impotent , the repressed , masturbating type . " Nevertheless , Hanfstaengl was convinced enough of Hitler 's heterosexuality that he unsuccessfully tried to encourage a romantic relationship between Hitler and Martha Dodd , daughter of the American ambassador . According to Hanfstaengl , filmmaker Leni Riefenstahl tried to begin a relationship with Hitler early on , but he turned her down . 
 Hitler 's regime persecuted homosexuals , sending an estimated 5 @,@ 000 to 15 @,@ 000 to concentration camps ; some 2 @,@ 500 to 7 @,@ 500 of these died . After the Night of the Long Knives ( 1934 ) , Hitler described the homosexuality of Ernst Röhm and other SA leaders as corrupt and immoral . In August 1941 Hitler declared that " homosexuality is actually as infectious and as dangerous as the plague " , and supported Reichsführer @-@ SS Heinrich Himmler 's efforts to remove gay men from the military and the SS . Male homosexuality was illegal , and offenders were sent to prison or directly to concentration camps . 
 Hitler created a public image as a celibate man without a domestic life , dedicated entirely to his political mission and the nation . He considered himself to be attractive to women , partly because of his position of power . Hitler 's friend Albert Speer recalled him stating a preference for unintelligent women who would not challenge him about his work or prevent him from relaxing in his leisure time . Kershaw speculates that Hitler preferred younger women who were easy to dominate and mold . He notes that at least three of Hitler 's close female associates ( Eva Braun , Geli Raubal , and Maria Reiter ) were far younger than himself : Braun was 23 years younger , Raubal was 19 years younger , and Reiter was 21 years his junior . 
 His relationship with Braun , which lasted nearly 14 years , was hidden from the public and all but his inner circle . Within that circle ( most of whom survived the war ) , he was open about Braun , and they lived together at Berchtesgaden as a couple . Hitler 's valet , Heinz Linge , stated in his memoirs that Hitler and Braun had two bedrooms and two bathrooms with interconnecting doors at the Berghof , and Hitler would end most evenings alone with her in his study before they retired to bed . She would wear a " dressing gown or house @-@ coat " and drink wine ; Hitler would have tea . Braun biographer Heike Görtemaker notes that the couple enjoyed a normal sex life . Braun 's friends and relatives described her giggling over a 1938 photograph of Neville Chamberlain sitting on a sofa in Hitler 's Munich flat with the remark : " If only he knew what goings @-@ on that sofa has seen . " 
 Hitler 's letters provide evidence that he was fond of her , and worried when she participated in sports or was late returning for tea . His secretary Traudl Junge stated that during the war , Hitler telephoned Braun every day . He was concerned for her safety when she was staying in the Munich home he had bought her . Junge further asked Hitler once why he never married . Hitler replied , " ... I wouldn 't have been able to give enough time to my wife " . Hitler told her that he didn 't want children , as they would have had " ... a very hard time , because they 're expected to possess the same gifts as their famous parents and they can 't be forgiven for being mediocre " . In the end , Hitler and Braun married in the Berlin Führerbunker in late April 1945 , less than 40 hours before committing suicide together . 
 = = Langer 's and Murray 's wartime OSS reports = = 
 In 1943 , the American Office of Strategic Services ( OSS ) received A Psychological Analysis of Adolf Hitler : His Life and Legend by Walter C. Langer , commissioned to help the Allies understand the dictator . The report , later expanded into book form as The Mind of Adolf Hitler : The Secret Wartime Report ( 1972 ) , describes Hitler as having repressed homosexual tendencies and states that he was an impotent coprophile . Psychologist Henry Murray wrote a separate psychoanalytical report for OSS also in 1943 , entitled Analysis of the Personality of Adolph Hitler : With Predictions of His Future Behavior and Suggestions for Dealing with Him Now and After Germany 's Surrender . He also dealt with Hitler 's alleged coprophilia , but overall diagnosed Hitler a schizophrenic . One of Hitler 's opponents in the Nazi Party , Otto Strasser , told OSS interrogators that the Nazi dictator forced Geli Raubal to urinate and defecate on him . Kershaw contends that stories circulated by Strasser as to alleged " sexual deviant practices ought to be viewed as ... anti @-@ Hitler propaganda " . 
 = = Recent allegations = = 
 In research following his death , a variety of claims have been made about Hitler 's sexuality : that he was gay , bisexual , or asexual , or may have engaged sexual activity with his half @-@ niece , Geli Raubal . 
 The 1995 book The Pink Swastika , by Scott Lively and Kevin Abrams , asserts that most of the top Nazis were homosexual and that there is evidence that homosexuals are violent and dangerous . Mainstream historians have criticized the book for its inaccuracies and manipulation of facts . Bob Moser , writing for the Southern Poverty Law Center , says the book was promoted by anti @-@ gay groups and that historians agree its premise is " utterly false " . 
 Jack <unk> Porter of the University of Massachusetts Lowell wrote in 1998 : " Did Hitler despise homosexuals ? Was he ashamed of his own homosexual identity ? These are areas of <unk> that are beyond known knowledge . My own feelings are that Hitler was asexual in the traditional sense and had bizarre sexual fetishes " . 
 Historian Lothar Machtan argues in The Hidden Hitler ( 2001 ) that Hitler was homosexual . The book speculates about Hitler 's experiences in Vienna with young friends , his adult relationships with ( among others ) Röhm , Hanfstaengl , and Emil Maurice , and includes a study of the Mend Protocol , a series of allegations made to the Munich Police in the early 1920s by Hans Mend , who served with Hitler during World War I. The American journalist Ron Rosenbaum is highly critical of Machtan 's work , saying his " evidence falls short of being conclusive and often falls far short of being evidence at all " . Most scholars dismiss Machtan 's claims , and believe Hitler was heterosexual . In 2004 , HBO produced a documentary film based on Machtan 's theory , titled Hidden Fuhrer : Debating the Enigma of Hitler 's Sexuality . 
 = = Possible relationships = = 
 Adolf Hitler 's name has been linked romantically with a number of women other than Eva Braun . 
 = Drink You Away = 
 " Drink You Away " is a song recorded by American singer and songwriter Justin Timberlake for his fourth studio album , The 20 / 20 Experience – 2 of 2 ( 2013 ) . It was written and produced by Timberlake , Timothy " Timbaland " Mosley and Jerome " J @-@ Roc " Harmon , with additional writing from James Fauntleroy . It was sent to US country radio stations on November 23 , 2015 as the fourth and final single from the album . Musically , it was defined by critics as a multi @-@ genre song including classic @-@ rock , country @-@ pop , gospel @-@ blues and Memphis soul . Lyrically , on the track , Timberlake compares love to alcoholism while making references to several alcoholic brands including Jack Daniel 's and Jim Beam . As of May 2016 , the song has sold over 600 @,@ 000 copies in the US . 
 " Drink You Away " received generally positive response from contemporary critics , with some of them labeling the song as a highlight and one of the most impressive moments on the album . Timberlake performed the song at the 2013 American Music Awards and it was part of the set list of The 20 / 20 Experience World Tour ( 2013 – 15 ) . In November 2015 , the singer together with Chris Stapleton gave a rendition of track at the 2015 Country Music Association Awards ; following it , " Drink You Away " sold 76 @,@ 000 digital copies and debuted at number five on the US Hot Digital Songs chart . It also peaked at number 85 on the Canadian Hot 100 chart . 
 = = Production and release = = 
 " Drink You Away " was written by Timberlake , Timothy " Timbaland " Mosley , Jerome " J @-@ Roc " Harmon and James Fauntleroy . The song was produced by Timbaland , Timberlake and Harmon while Jones provided additional production . It was recorded the Larrabee Studios in North Hollywood , Los Angeles . Timberlake arranged and produced his vocals . Harmon provided keyboards for the song , while Ives played the guitar . The track was engineered by Chris Godbey and mixed by Jimmy Douglass , Godbey and Timberlake ; for the process they were assisted by Alejandro Baima . The keyboards were provided by Harmon . It was sent to country radio in the United States on November 23 , 2015 , as the fourth and final single from the The 20 / 20 Experience – 2 of 2 ( 2013 ) . Regarding the single release , Sony Music Nashville executive vice president , promotion / artist development Steve Hodges stated , " we received several requests from key programmers and we decided to get them a shortened version [ of " Drink You Away " ] so they didn 't have to air the longer cut from the album , " adding " our promotion staffs will not be actively working the single , we simply wanted to make the song easily accessible for country radio . Now they have it and can play it if they 'd like " in an interview for Billboard . 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " Drink You Away " runs for a duration of five minutes and thirty @-@ one seconds , while its radio edit lasts for four minutes and fifteen seconds . Chris Bosman of Time magazine described the track as a country @-@ pop . On the other hand , Greg Kot of Chicago Tribune thought that it was a gospel @-@ blues song , while according to The A.V. Club 's Annie Zaleski it is a classic @-@ rock " homage " . Kira Willis of Starpulse.com noted that " Drink You Away " is an " unabashed " Memphis soul song , " steeped in a gritty country riff . " Its instrumentation includes organ and acoustic guitar ; elements of pop and rock music can be heard in the song 's guitar . 
 Lyrically , the song features references to several alcoholic drinks which can be seen in the lyrics , " I can 't drink you away . I 've tried Jack , I 've tried Jim ... Now , tell me baby , do they make a medicine for heartbreak . " Brad Stern of MTV News described it as a " plethora of alcohol references , and a whole lot of bluesy sorrow . " According to Stacy @-@ Ann Ellis of Vibe magazine , the song 's lyrics continue the " druggy love analogy " which Timberlake started with some of the lyrical themes on The 20 / 20 Experience ( 2013 ) most particularly on , " Pusher Love Girl " ; she noted that he is " trying to drown a bitter memory of her by opening up a bar tab and taking Tennessee whiskies to the head . " Eric Henderson of Slant Magazine described " Drink You Away " as a " honky @-@ <unk> " song on which the singer compares his love to alcoholism . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 HitFix 's Melinda Newman gave " Drink You Away " an A grade and called it " the best " and " the most captivating track " on The 20 / 20 Experience – 2 of 2 , " with potential to be ' 2 of 2 's ' " " Mirrors " . Similarly , Stern of MTV News thought that the song was one of the biggest surprises and one of the most impressive tracks on the album . Lewis Corner of Digital Spy labeled it as a " highlight " on the album and encouraged Timberlake to further explore the " Tennessee swagger " present on the track . 
 PopMatters ' Brice Ezell called the song a " hat trick " on the album and also described it as one of its most " weirdest " and " successful " moments . According to him , the way Timberlake lists the beverages in the lyrics it 's an unorthodox style for the singer and in addition it differs musically from the rest of the material on the album , however , " for whatever reason , though , it works " . He also noted that the song would suit better on a Montgomery Gentry LP . Kory Grow of Rolling Stone described it as a " a big genre @-@ bending , feel @-@ good sing @-@ along that really actually does feels good . " Jason King for Spin called the song " organ @-@ laced " and thought it was " a surefire hit , a country <unk> lifted to heaven by Timberlake ’ s quilted , hermetic harmonies . " 
 Ryan Dombal of Pitchfork Media thought that " his <unk> falls flat " on the song which he further described as " plastic blues " and compared it to the works of the American country singer , Kid Rock . Variety 's Andrew Barker described " Drink You Away " as one of the " lows " on the album and compared it to the music of Rock and Lynyrd Skynyrd . Stephen <unk> of Exclaim ! concluded that the track , " relies too heavily on repetition " . 
 = = = Commercial = = = 
 Following Timberlake 's performance at the Country Music Association Awards , for the issue dated November 21 , 2015 , the song sold 76 @,@ 000 digital copies and appeared at number five on the US Hot Digital Songs chart . It has since peaked at number 5 . For the chart dated February 6 , 2016 , the song debuted at number 60 on Billboard 's Country Airplay chart and climbed 38 @-@ 36 on the Mainstream Top 40 radio airplay chart . The single is his 26th entry on the latter as a solo artist . It has also peaked at number 17 on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . AS of May 2016 , it has sold 609 @,@ 085 copies in the United States . 
 " Drink You Away " also peaked at number 85 on the Canadian Hot 100 chart . In South Korea , following the release of the parent album , the song sold 2 @,@ 358 digital copies and peaked at number 96 on the Gaon Digital Chart . 
 = = Live performances and covers = = 
 Timberlake performed " Drink You Away " for the first time at the 2013 American Music Awards held at the Nokia Theatre in Los Angeles ; Rolling Stone 's Grow ranked the performance at number five out of 16 performances that night . The song was part of the setlist of The 20 / 20 Experience World Tour ( 2013 – 15 ) . Timberlake and Chris Stapleton performed the song together along with the latter 's " Tennessee Whiskey " at the Country Music Association Awards on November 4 , 2015 . Rolling Stone magazine praised it as " the best performance of the entire show " , while The New York Times editor Katie Rogers highlighted Timberlake 's crossover appeal . Entertainment Weekly declared it as one of the best performances of 2015 and wrote , " In an unapologetic display of talent , Nashville met Motown during country music ’ s biggest night for a hands @-@ in @-@ the @-@ air , take @-@ us @-@ to @-@ church mash @-@ up that was everything you hope for from an all @-@ star duet . " 
 American country music artist Craig Morgan has performed the song at several of his concerts . David Fanning 's cover of " Drink You Away " peaked at number 58 on the Country Airplay chart . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of The 20 / 20 Experience – 2 of 2 . 
 Locations 
 Vocals recorded and mixed at Larrabee , North Hollywood 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Banksia ericifolia = 
 Banksia ericifolia , the heath @-@ leaved banksia ( also known as the lantern banksia or heath banksia ) , is a species of woody shrub of the Proteaceae family native to Australia . It grows in two separate regions of Central and Northern New South Wales east of the Great Dividing Range . Well known for its orange or red autumn inflorescences , which contrast with its green fine @-@ leaved heath @-@ like foliage , it is a medium to large shrub that can reach 6 m ( 20 ft ) high and wide , though is usually half that size . In exposed heathlands and coastal areas it is more often 1 – 2 m ( 3 @.@ 3 – 6 @.@ 6 ft ) . 
 Banksia ericifolia was one of the original Banksia species collected by Joseph Banks around Botany Bay in 1770 and was named by Carl Linnaeus the Younger , son of Carolus Linnaeus , in 1782 . A distinctive plant , it has split into two subspecies : Banksia ericifolia subspecies ericifolia of the Sydney region and Banksia ericifolia subspecies macrantha of the New South Wales Far North Coast which was recognized in 1996 . 
 Banksia ericifolia has been widely grown in Australian gardens on the east coast for many years , and is used to a limited extent in the cut flower industry . Compact dwarf cultivars such as Banksia ' Little Eric ' have become more popular in recent years with the trend toward smaller gardens . 
 = = Description = = 
 Banksia ericifolia grows as a large shrub up to 6 metres ( 20 feet ) in height , though often smaller , around 1 – 2 metres ( 3 @.@ 3 – 6 @.@ 6 ft ) , in exposed places such as coastal or mountain heathlands . The grey @-@ coloured bark is smooth and fairly thin with lenticels ; however it can thicken significantly with age . The linear dark green leaves are small and narrow , 9 – 20 mm ( 1 ⁄ 4 – 3 ⁄ 4 in ) long and up to 1 mm wide , generally with two small teeth at the tips . The leaves are crowded and alternately arranged on the branches . New growth generally occurs in summer and is an attractive lime green colour . 
 Flowering is in autumn , or in winter in cooler areas ; the inflorescences are flower spikes 7 – 22 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 – 8 @.@ 7 in ) high and 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) broad or so . Each individual flower consists of a tubular perianth made up of four fused tepals , and one long wiry style . Characteristic of the taxonomic section in which it is placed , the styles are hooked rather than straight . The styles ' ends are initially trapped inside the upper perianth parts , but break free at anthesis , when the flowers open . The spikes are red or gold in overall colour , with styles golden , orange , orange @-@ red or burgundy . Some unusual forms have striking red styles on a whitish perianth . Very occasionally , forms with all yellow inflorescences are seen . Though not terminal , the flower spikes are fairly prominently displayed emerging from the foliage ; they arise from two- to three @-@ year @-@ old nodes . 
 Old flower spikes fade to brown and then grey with age ; old flower parts soon fall , revealing numerous small dark grey to dull black finely furred follicles . Oblong in shape and 15 – 20 mm ( 9 ⁄ 16 – 13 ⁄ 16 in ) in diameter , the follicles are ridged on each valve and remain closed until burnt by fire . Banksia ericifolia responds to fire by seeding , the parent plant being killed . As plants take several years to flower in the wild , it is very sensitive to too @-@ frequent burns and has been eliminated in some areas where these occur . With time and the production of more cones with seed @-@ containing follicles , however , plants can store up to 16 @,@ 500 seeds at eight years of age . Some plants produce multiple flower spikes , possibly of varying sizes , from a single point of origin . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 B. ericifolia was first collected at Botany Bay on 29 April 1770 , by Sir Joseph Banks and Dr Daniel Solander , naturalists on the Endeavour during Lieutenant ( later Captain ) James Cook 's first voyage to the Pacific Ocean . However , the species was not published until April 1782 , when Carolus Linnaeus the Younger described the first four Banksia species in his Supplementum Plantarum . Linnaeus distinguished the species by their leaf shapes and named them accordingly . Thus the species with leaves reminiscent of heather ( at the time classified in the genus Erica ) was given the specific name <unk> , from the Latin <unk> , meaning " heather " , and folium , meaning " leaf " . This spelling was later adjusted to " ericifolia " ; thus the full name for the species is Banksia ericifolia L.f. , with the initials L.f. identifying Carolus Linnaeus the Younger . 
 While many Banksia species have undergone much taxonomic change since publication , the distinctive B. ericifolia has remained largely unchanged as a species concept . Consequently , the species has no taxonomic synonyms ; it does , however , have three nomenclatural synonyms . The first synonym , Banksia <unk> Salisb , was published by the English botanist Richard Anthony Salisbury in his 1796 Prodromus stirpium in <unk> ad Chapel Allerton <unk> . It was intended as a replacement name for B. <unk> , but Salisbury gave no reason why such a replacement was necessary . The name was therefore superfluous , and hence illegitimate . The second synonym arose from Otto Kuntze 's 1891 challenge of the name Banksia L.f. , on the grounds that Banksia J.R.Forst & G. Forst had been published before it , for the genus now known as Pimelea . Kuntze transferred all Banksia species to the new genus name Sirmuellera , in the process publishing Sirmuellera ericifolia ( L.f. ) Kuntze . The challenge failed , however ; indeed , his entire treatise was widely rejected . Finally , in 1905 James Britten mounted a similar challenge , proposing to transfer all Banksia species into Isostylis ; B. ericifolia L.f. thus becoming Isostylis ericifolia L.f. ( Britten ) . This challenge also failed . 
 A recent change to the species ' taxonomy is the recognition , in 1981 , of an infraspecific taxon . The existence of different forms of B. ericifolia was first recognised in 1979 by the amateur botanist Alf Salkin , who noted three distinct forms of the species , with one being a possible hybrid with Banksia spinulosa var. cunninghamii . Salkin gave his northern form the provisional infraspecific name " microphylla " , but when Alex George published a formal description in his 1981 The genus Banksia L.f. ( Proteaceae ) , he named it B. ericifolia var. macrantha . In 1996 , it was promoted to subspecific rank as B. ericifolia subsp. macrantha . 
 = = = Placement within Banksia = = = 
 Banksia ericifolia has traditionally been described as lying within series Spicigerae of Banksia , together with Banksia spinulosa and various western Hairpin @-@ like Banksias such as B. seminuda and B. brownii . This series is placed in Banksia sect . Oncostylis according to Alex George 's taxonomy of Banksia , but directly into Banksia subg . Banksia in Thiele 's arrangement based on cladistic analysis . Kevin Thiele additionally placed it in a subseries <unk> , but this was not supported by George . 
 Under George 's taxonomic arrangement of Banksia , B. ericifolia 's placement may be summarised as follows : 
 Genus Banksia 
 Subgenus Banksia 
 Section Banksia 
 Section Coccinea 
 Section Oncostylis 
 Series Spicigerae 
 B. spinulosa - B. ericifolia - B. verticillata - B. seminuda - B. littoralis - B. occidentalis - B. brownii 
 Series Tricuspidae 
 Series Dryandroidae 
 Series Abietinae 
 Subgenus Isostylis 
 Molecular research by American botanist Austin Mast suggests that B. spinulosa and B. ericifolia may be more closely related to Banksia ser . Salicinae , with includes Banksia integrifolia and its relatives . 
 In 2005 , Mast , Eric Jones and Shawn Havery published the results of their cladistic analyses of DNA sequence data for Banksia . They inferred a phylogeny markedly different from the accepted taxonomic arrangement , including finding Banksia to be paraphyletic with respect to Dryandra . A full new taxonomic arrangement was not published at the time , but early in 2007 Mast and Australian botanist Kevin Thiele initiated a rearrangement by transferring Dryandra to Banksia , and publishing B. subg . Spathulatae for the species having spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons ; in this way they also redefined the autonym B. subg . Banksia . They foreshadowed publishing a full arrangement once DNA sampling of Dryandra was complete ; in the meantime , if Mast and Thiele 's nomenclatural changes are taken as an interim arrangement , then B. ericifolia is placed in B. subg . Spathulatae . 
 Hybrids with B. spinulosa var. spinulosa have been recorded in the wild , at Pigeon House Mountain in Morton National Park . Banksia ' Giant Candles ' was a chance garden hybrid between B. ericifolia and B. spinulosa var. cunninghamii . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 Two geographically distinct forms are recognised : 
 Banksia ericifolia subsp. ericifolia 
 The nominate race is found in the Sydney basin , south to the Illawarra and north to Collaroy , as well as the Blue Mountains . The seedling leaves have 2 – 6 teeth on each margin , while the perianths are 19 – 22 mm ( 3 ⁄ 4 – 3 ⁄ 4 in ) long and pistils are 30 – 35 mm ( 1 1 ⁄ 4 – 1 1 ⁄ 2 in ) long . Salkin noted that this subspecies often grew in association with Banksia spinulosa var. cunninghamii and that there were plants with longer leaves some 20 – 25 mm ( ¾ – 1 in ) long with entire , curled margins . He gave them the name " longifolia " and suspected these may have been hybrids . 
 Banksia ericifolia subsp. macrantha 
 The northern race is found on the New South Wales north coast , from Crowdy Head northwards to the Queensland border . Described as a distinct subspecies in 1996 by Alex George from material he collected at Byron Bay in 1975 , it is distinguished by finer foliage , more crowded leaves and larger flowers , with the perianths 26 – 28 mm ( 1 @.@ 0 – 1 @.@ 1 in ) long and pistils 46 – 48 mm ( 1 3 ⁄ 4 – 2 in ) long . The seedling leaves have one , or occasionally two teeth on each margin . Salkin observed that the inflorescences tended to be terminal rather than axial , and others have noted them to be sometimes taller than the nominate subspecies . Crowdy Bay , in particular , hosts specimens with spikes up to 26 cm ( 10 in ) in height . 
 = = = Name and symbolism = = = 
 In 1992 , B. ericifolia was adopted as the official plant of Sydney , and is sometimes seen in amenity plantings and parks around the city . It was known as <unk> ( pron . " wa @-@ tang @-@ <unk> " ) to the local Eora and Darug inhabitants of the Sydney basin . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 In nature , the variety ericifolia is found on acidic sandstone @-@ based soils ; either in elevated heathland within 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) of the coast around the Sydney basin , from Collaroy south to Jervis Bay , or elevated sandstone soils in mountainous areas such as the Blue Mountains and the <unk> . These heathlands are often moist , with access to some form of underground water , and can even be quite swampy . It can form dense thickets with the Dagger Hakea ( Hakea teretifolia ) and Scrub She @-@ oak ( Allocasuarina distyla ) . Other plants it associates with include the Coast Tea @-@ tree ( Leptospermum laevigatum ) and smaller plants such as <unk> pungens . The inflorescences are a feature of autumn <unk> in sandstone areas , such as the Kings Tableland walk in the Blue Mountains , Jennifer Street Boardwalk in Little Bay , and Royal National Park . 
 The northern subspecies macrantha is found in two distinct regions on the far north coast of New South Wales ; the first from Crowdy Bay on the Mid North Coast northwards to Hat Head National Park north of Port Macquarie , and then from <unk> National Park north to <unk> just south of the Queensland border . This variety is more strictly coastal with most populations being found within two kilometres of the coast , or in swampy areas . It may be associated with Banksia oblongifolia . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Like other banksias , B. ericifolia plays host to a wide variety of pollinators and is a vital source of nectar in autumn , when other flowers are scarce . It has been the subject of a number of studies on pollination . A 1998 study in Bundjalung National Park in Northern New South Wales found that B. ericifolia inflorescences are foraged by a variety of small mammals , including marsupials such as Antechinus flavipes ( yellow @-@ footed antechinus ) , and rodents such as Rattus <unk> ( pale field rat ) and <unk> <unk> ( grassland mosaic @-@ tailed rat ) . These animals carry pollen loads comparable to those of nectarivorous birds , making them effective pollinators . A 1978 study found Rattus fuscipes ( bush rat ) to bear large amounts of pollen from B. ericifolia and suggested the hooked styles may play a role in pollination by mammals . Other visitors recorded include Apis mellifera ( European honeybee ) . 
 A great many bird species have been observed visiting this Banksia species . A 1985 study in the Sydney area of B. ericifolia var. ericifolia found numerous birds visiting the inflorescences , including the honeyeaters eastern spinebill ( Acanthorhynchus tenuirostris ) , white @-@ cheeked honeyeater ( Phylidonyris nigra ) , New Holland honeyeater ( Phylidonyris novaehollandiae ) , white @-@ naped honeyeater ( Melithreptus lunatus ) , yellow @-@ faced honeyeater ( Lichenostomus chrysops ) , red wattlebird ( Anthochaera carunculata ) and little wattlebird ( Anthochaera chrysoptera ) , as well as the <unk> ( Zosterops lateralis ) . The beautiful <unk> ( <unk> bella ) also associates with this species . Some mammals were recorded in this study but were found to bear no pollen . Exclusion of certain pollinators showed that birds and insects were important for fertilisation . Additional species seen in The Banksia Atlas survey include white @-@ eared honeyeater ( Lichenostomus leucotis ) , white @-@ plumed honeyeater ( Lichenostomus penicillatus ) , crescent honeyeater ( Phylidonyris pyrrhoptera ) , noisy miner ( Manorina melanocephala ) , and species of friarbird for B. ericifolia var. ericifolia and brown honeyeater ( Lichmera indistincta ) , tawny @-@ crowned honeyeater ( Gliciphila melanops ) and black @-@ faced cuckoo @-@ shrike ( <unk> novaehollandiae ) for B. ericifolia var. macrantha . 
 Insects recovered from inflorescences include the banksia boring moth ( Arotrophora <unk> ) , younger instars of which eat flower and bract parts before tunneling into the rachis as they get older and boring into follicles and eating seeds . This tunneling itself damages the architecture of the spike and prevents seed development . Other seed predators include unidentified species of moth of the genus <unk> , as well as <unk> <unk> , Chalarotona <unk> and Chalarotona <unk> , <unk> trinervis , <unk> <unk> and an unidentified weevil species . 
 Like most other Proteaceae , B. ericifolia has proteoid roots — roots with dense clusters of short lateral rootlets that form a mat in the soil just below the leaf litter . These enhance solubilisation of nutrients , allowing nutrient uptake in low @-@ nutrient soils such as the phosphorus @-@ deficient native soils of Australia . The species lacks a lignotuber , and so is killed by fire and regenerates from seed . 
 Banksia ericifolia depends on fire for regeneration ; if fires are too infrequent , populations age and eventually die out . However , too @-@ frequent fires also threaten this species , which takes around six years to reach maturity and flower . One study estimated an optimum fire interval of 15 – 30 years . For a large part of its distribution Banksia ericifolia grows near areas of human habitation on Australia 's eastern coastline . Bushland near urban areas is subject to both arson and prescribed burns , drastically reducing fire intervals and resulting in the disappearance of the species from some areas . The hotter a fire the more quickly seed is released ; timing of rains afterwards is also critical for seedling survival . 
 Banksia ericifolia is listed in Part 1 Group 1 of Schedule 13 of the National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974 ; this means that as a common and secure species it is exempted from any licensing or tagging requirements under the 2002 – 2005 management plan to minimise and regulate the use of protected and threatened plants in the cut @-@ flower industry in New South Wales . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 Banksia ericifolia was one of the first Banksia species to be cultivated , having been introduced into cultivation in England in 1788 . By 1804 , it had flowered in several collections . That year a painting of the plant by Sydenham Edwards was featured in Curtis 's Botanical Magazine , accompanied by text describing the species as " a handsome shrub [ that ] thrives freely " . 
 Banksia ericifolia inflorescences attract a variety of birds to the garden . Tough enough to be used as a street plant in parts of Sydney , B. ericifolia is a fairly easy plant to grow in the conditions it likes , namely a sandy , well drained soil and a sunny aspect . It requires extra water over dryer periods until established , which may take up to two years , as it comes from an area with rainfall in predominantly warmer months . It is resistant to Phytophthora cinnamomi dieback , like most eastern banksias As it grows naturally on acid soils , Banksia ericifolia is particularly sensitive to iron deficiency . Known as chlorosis , this problem manifests as yellowing of new leaves with preservation of green veins ; it can occur on plants grown in soils of high pH . This can happen especially where soil contains quantities of cement , either as landfill or building foundations , and can be treated with iron chelate or sulfate . 
 Flowering may take some years from seed ; a minimum of four years is average . Buying an advanced plant may hasten this process , as will getting a cutting @-@ grown plant . Banksia ericifolia can be propagated easily by seed , and is one of the ( relatively ) easier banksias to propagate by cutting . Named cultivars are by necessity propagated by cuttings as this ensures that the plant produced bears the same attributes as the original plant . 
 Regular pruning is important to give the plant an attractive habit and prevent it from becoming leggy . Hard @-@ pruning below green growth is not advisable with this banksia ; since it lacks a lignotuber , it does not have dormant buds below the bark that respond to pruning or fire and therefore is unable to sprout from old wood as readily as commonly cultivated lignotuberous species , such as B. spinulosa and B. robur . 
 = = = Cultivars = = = 
 For many years the horticulture industry focussed on registered selections of Banksia spinulosa , but since the late 1990s more and more cultivars of Banksia ericifolia have come on the market , including colour variants and dwarf forms . The latter are particularly attractive as the original plant may reach 6 metres in height , and the new cultivars help enthusiasts choose a plant that is right for their conditions and tastes . Banksia ericifolia is also grown for the cut flower industry in Australia , though not to the degree that the western Australian species such as B. coccinea and B. menziesii are . 
 There are a number of commercial varieties available from Australian retail nurseries ; however none have yet been registered under plant breeders ' rights legislation , and only one ( ' Limelight ' ) is registered with the Australian Cultivar Registration Authority . The lack of official names has led to some varieties bearing several different names . 
 Banksia ericifolia ' <unk> Aussie ' is a white @-@ budded terminal @-@ flowering form to 2 m with bronzed foliage ; the inflorescences have honey @-@ coloured pistils . It has been propagated by Victorian nurseryman Rod Parsons of Carawah Nursery in <unk> Creek . A new release in 2003 , its provenance is unknown ; seed had been given to Rod 's father by an <unk> member many years ago . 
 Banksia ericifolia ' Golden Girl ' is a golden yellow @-@ flowered form which grows to 1 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 8 m ( 4 @.@ 9 – 5 @.@ 9 ft ) in height with blue @-@ grey foliage . It has hidden wide fat flowers to 8 cm high and has been propagated by Rod Parsons of Carawah Nursery . Released in 2003 , its provenance is unknown ( seed donated to Rod 's father by an <unk> member many years ago . ) 
 Banksia ericifolia ' Kanangra Gold ' , propagated by Kuranga Nursery in Melbourne , is a gold flowered form to 4 m ( 13 ft ) from the Kanangra @-@ Boyd region of the Blue Mountains . It is bushy and flowers are much paler than the regular orange or red forms . 
 Banksia ericifolia ' Limelight ' , registered with Australian Cultivar Registration Authority ( ACRA ) in 1987 , is a large plant to 5 m ( 16 ft ) with bright lime green foliage and orange blossoms . It is seldom seen due to the current focus on smaller forms for smaller gardens . 
 Banksia ericifolia ' Little Eric ' is a dwarf form reaching 1 or 2 m ( 3 @.@ 3 or 6 @.@ 6 ft ) ; the inflorescences have maroon styles and whitish perianth . It is propagated by Richard Anderson of Merricks Nursery on the Mornington Peninsula southeast of Melbourne , the original having arisen as a chance garden seedling . 
 Banksia ericifolia ' Purple Pygmy ' , also called B. ' Port Wine ' , is a dwarf form propagated by Kuranga Nursery that grows to 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) with purplish foliage with claret flowers . It only flowers rarely and is difficult to propagate . Also , due to low demand it is only propagated in low numbers . 
 Banksia ericifolia ' Red Rover ' is a dwarf cultivar reaching 1 @.@ 8 m ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) with a more open habit than other forms of similar size . This form has lime green foliage and scarlet @-@ red flowers and was propagated by Rod Parsons of Carawah Nursery from a garden selection and released in 2004 . 
 Banksia ericifolia ' St Pauls ' is a dwarf form that grows to 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) with conspicuous red inflorescences which has been available from time to time from <unk> Nursery in Sydney 's western suburbs . It was originally propagated from a plant cultivated at St Pauls ' secondary school ( a local high school ) . 
 Banksia ericifolia ' White Candles / Christmas Candles ' , also known as B. ericifolia ' Ruby Clusters ' , originated from a plant growing in the Sutherland Shire in Sydney 's south . It has an unusual red style / white body colour combination somewhat reminiscent of B. coccinea . The buds are white and contrast with the red styles that emerge through them . It is an open shrub to 3 – 4 m ( 9 @.@ 8 – 13 @.@ 1 ft ) . 
 Banksia ericifolia macrantha ' <unk> Honey ' , so called because its flowers are the colour of creamed honey , is a pale flowered variant originally found at Crowdy Head on the New South Wales north coast . Propagated by Kuranga nursery , it grows to 4 or 5 m ( 13 or 16 ft ) with a more open habit . It is notable in that it is the only cultivar of the northern subspecies of Banksia ericifolia currently available . 
 = FN P90 = 
 The FN P90 is a personal defense weapon ( PDW ) designed and manufactured by FN Herstal in Belgium . Created in response to NATO requests for a replacement for 9 × 19mm Parabellum firearms , the P90 was designed as a compact but powerful firearm for vehicle crews , operators of crew @-@ served weapons , support personnel , special forces and counter @-@ terrorist groups . 
 Designed by FN in conjunction with the FN Five @-@ seven pistol and FN 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm ammunition , development of the weapon began in 1986 , and production commenced in 1990 ( from which the " 90 " in its name is derived ) , whereupon the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm ammunition was redesigned and shortened . A modified version of the P90 with a magazine adapted to use the new ammunition was introduced in 1993 , and the Five @-@ seven pistol was subsequently introduced as a companion weapon using the same 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm ammunition . 
 Featuring a compact <unk> design with an integrated reflex sight and fully ambidextrous controls , the P90 is an unconventional weapon with a futuristic appearance . Its design incorporates several innovations such as a unique top @-@ mounted magazine and FN 's small @-@ caliber , high @-@ velocity 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm ammunition . 
 The P90 is currently in service with military and police forces in over 40 nations , such as Austria , Brazil , Canada , France , Greece , India , Malaysia , Poland , and the United States . In the United States , the P90 is in use with over 200 law enforcement agencies , including the U.S. Secret Service . While developed and initially marketed as a PDW , it can also be considered a submachine gun or compact assault rifle . The standard selective fire P90 is restricted to military and law enforcement customers , but since 2005 , a semi @-@ automatic version has been offered to civilian shooters as the PS90 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The P90 and its 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm ammunition were developed by FN Herstal in response to NATO requests for a replacement for the 9 × 19mm Parabellum cartridge and associated pistols and submachine guns . NATO called for two types of weapons chambered for a new cartridge — one a shoulder @-@ fired weapon , and the other a handheld weapon . According to NATO , these new weapons , termed personal defense weapons ( <unk> ) , were to provide " personal protection in last @-@ resort situations when the user is directly endangered by the enemy [ ... ] . " In 1989 , NATO published document D / 296 , outlining a number of preliminary specifications for these weapons : 
 The new cartridge was to have greater range , accuracy , and terminal performance than the 9 × 19mm cartridge . Additionally , it was to be capable of penetrating body armor . 
 The shoulder @-@ fired personal defense weapon was to weigh less than 3 kg ( 6 @.@ 6 lb ) , with a magazine capacity of at least 20 rounds . 
 The handheld personal defense weapon ( pistol ) was to weigh less than 1 kg ( 2 @.@ 2 lb ) , although a weight of 700 g ( 1 @.@ 5 lb ) was deemed desirable ; it was to have a magazine capacity of at least 20 rounds . 
 Both weapons were to be sufficiently compact to be carried hands @-@ free on the user 's person at all times , whether in the cab of a vehicle or the cockpit of an aircraft , and were to perform effectively in all environments and weather conditions . 
 FN Herstal was the first small arms manufacturer to respond to NATO 's requirement ; FN started by developing a shoulder @-@ fired personal defense weapon , the P90 , along with a small caliber , high velocity 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm cartridge type . The original 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm cartridge , called the SS90 , went into production with the P90 in 1990 . The SS90 propelled a 1 @.@ 5 g ( 23 grain ) plastic @-@ core projectile from the P90 at a muzzle velocity of roughly 850 m / s ( 2 @,@ 800 ft / s ) . Shortly after its introduction , the P90 was adopted and used in service with the Belgian special forces group in the 1991 Gulf War . 
 Following the P90 's introduction , FN revised the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm ammunition . The new variation , designated the SS190 , used a projectile 2 @.@ 7 mm ( 0 @.@ 11 in ) shorter in length than that of the SS90 . This allowed it to be used more conveniently in the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm FN Five @-@ seven pistol , which was under development at that time . The SS190 projectile had a greater weight , and a more conventional construction with an aluminium and steel core . The first prototypes of the SS190 were created in 1992 , and the design was finalized in 1993 , replacing the SS90 . A modified version of the P90 , with a magazine adapted to use the shortened ammunition , was then introduced in the same year . Several special cartridge variations were developed , such as the L191 tracer round and the SB193 subsonic round for use with a sound @-@ suppressed P90 . 
 = = = NATO evolution = = = 
 In 2002 and 2003 , NATO conducted a series of tests with the intention of standardizing a PDW cartridge as a replacement for the 9 × 19mm Parabellum cartridge . The tests compared the relative merits of the FN 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm cartridge and the HK 4 @.@ 6 × 30mm cartridge , which was created by German small arms manufacturer Heckler & Koch as a competitor to the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm . The results of the NATO tests were analyzed by a group formed of experts from Canada , France , the United Kingdom , and the United States , and the group 's conclusion was that the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm was " undoubtedly " the more efficient cartridge . However , the German delegation and others rejected the NATO recommendation that 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm be standardized , halting the standardization process indefinitely . As a result , both the 4 @.@ 6 × 30mm and 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm cartridges ( and the associated weapons ) have been independently adopted by various NATO countries , according to preference ; the P90 is currently in service with military and police forces in over 40 countries throughout the world . 
 = = = Present = = = 
 Further development of the P90 platform led to the creation of the P90 TR model , which has a MIL @-@ STD @-@ 1913 triple rail interface for mounting accessories . This model was introduced in late 1999 and continues to be offered alongside the standard P90 . More recently , the P90 has been offered to civilian shooters as the PS90 , a semi @-@ automatic carbine intended for personal protection and sporting use . 
 = = Design = = 
 The P90 is a selective fire , straight blowback @-@ operated weapon with a cyclic rate of fire of 900 RPM ( rounds per minute ) . The weapon is chambered for FN 's 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm ammunition . Its unusual shape is based on extensive ergonomic research . The weapon is grasped by means of a <unk> in the frame that acts as a pistol grip , as well as an oversized trigger guard that acts as a <unk> for the shooter 's support hand . The P90 fires from a closed bolt for maximum accuracy , and its design makes extensive use of polymers for reduced weight and cost . Overall , the weapon is relatively lightweight , weighing 2 @.@ 5 kg ( 5 @.@ 6 lb ) empty , or 3 kg ( 6 @.@ 6 lb ) with a loaded 50 @-@ round magazine . 
 The P90 is notable for being fully ambidextrous — it can be operated by right or left @-@ handed shooters with equal ease , and without making any modifications to the weapon . FN Herstal has described it as the " first fully ambidextrous individual automatic weapon . " The charging handle , magazine release and backup iron sights are symmetrically distributed on both sides of the weapon , and the firing selector is located directly at the foot of the trigger , where it can be operated from either side by the shooter 's trigger finger or support hand thumb . When fired , the P90 ejects spent cartridge casings downward through a chute located behind the grip , so spent cases are kept out of the shooter 's line of sight . 
 The P90 can be fitted with a sling for greater ease of carry , and since the weapon has a fixed stock ( as opposed to having a collapsing or folding stock ) , it can be quickly deployed when needed . The weapon 's smooth , rounded contours prevent it from snagging on the shooter 's clothing or equipment , and a small vertical protrusion is provided at the front end of the weapon 's frame to prevent the shooter 's hand from accidentally slipping in front of the muzzle while shooting . A hollow compartment inside the rear of the weapon 's frame — accessed by removing the <unk> — allows for convenient storage of a cleaning kit . 
 The P90 was designed to have a length no greater than a man 's shoulder width , to allow it to be easily carried and maneuvered in tight spaces , such as the inside of an armored vehicle . To achieve this , the weapon 's design uses the unconventional <unk> configuration , in which the action and magazine are located behind the trigger and alongside the shooter 's face so that there is no wasted space in the stock . The P90 's dimensions are minimized by its unique horizontally mounted feeding system , wherein the box magazine sits parallel to the barrel on top of the weapon 's frame . The weapon overall has an extremely compact profile — it is the most compact fixed @-@ stock submachine gun to be made . The standard version of the weapon has an overall length of 500 mm ( 19 @.@ 7 in ) , a height of 210 mm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) , and a width of 55 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) . 
 The P90 requires minimal maintenance , and it can be disassembled quickly and easily . It is a modular firearm , consisting of four main component groups : the barrel and optical sight group , the moving parts group , the frame and trigger group , and the hammer group . The P90 's barrel is cold hammer @-@ forged and chrome @-@ lined , with an overall length of 263 mm ( 10 @.@ 4 in ) . The barrel has eight rifling grooves with a right @-@ hand twist rate of 1 : 231 mm ( 1 : 9 @.@ 1 in ) , and it is equipped with a diagonally cut flash suppressor that also acts as a recoil compensator . The stated service life of the barrel is 20 @,@ 000 rounds . 
 The P90 uses an internal hammer striking mechanism and a trigger mechanism with a three @-@ position rotary dial fire control selector , located at the foot of the trigger . The dial has three settings : S – safe , 1 – semi @-@ automatic fire , and A – fully automatic fire . When set on A , the P90 's fire selector provides a two @-@ stage trigger operation similar to that of the Steyr AUG assault rifle — pulling the trigger back slightly produces semi @-@ automatic fire , and pulling the trigger fully to the rear produces fully automatic fire . 
 = = = Ammunition = = = 
 Particularly significant to the design of the P90 is the small @-@ caliber , high @-@ velocity bottlenecked cartridge it uses . The 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm cartridge was created by FN Herstal in response to a NATO requirement that called for a replacement for the 9 × 19mm Parabellum cartridge , which is commonly used in pistols and submachine guns . The 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm cartridge weighs 6 @.@ 0 g ( 93 grains ) — roughly half as much as a typical 9 × 19mm cartridge — allowing the same number of rounds to be carried for less weight , or allowing more rounds to be carried for the same weight . Since the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm cartridge has a relatively small diameter , an unusually high number of cartridges can be contained in a magazine . The cartridge has a loud report and produces considerable muzzle flash ( when fired from a pistol ) , but it produces roughly 30 percent less recoil than the 9 × 19mm cartridge , improving controllability . Due to its high velocity , the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm exhibits an exceptionally flat trajectory . 
 One of the design intents for the standard 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm cartridge type , the SS190 , was that it have the ability to penetrate Kevlar protective vests — such as the NATO CRISAT vest — that will stop conventional pistol bullets . Fired from the P90 , the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm SS190 has a muzzle velocity of roughly 716 m / s ( 2 @,@ 350 ft / s ) and is capable of penetrating the CRISAT vest at a range of 200 m ( 219 yd ) , or a Level IIIA Kevlar vest at the same range . FN states an effective range of 200 m ( 219 yd ) and a maximum range of 1 @,@ 800 m ( 1 @,@ 969 yd ) for the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm cartridge when fired from the P90 . 
 In testing conducted by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police ( RCMP ) in 1999 , the SS190 fired from the P90 at a distance of 25 m ( 27 yd ) exhibited an average penetration depth of 25 cm ( 9 @.@ 85 in ) in ballistic gelatin covered with a Level II vest . The SS190 exhibited penetration depths ranging from 28 to 34 cm ( 11 to 13 @.@ 5 in ) when fired from the P90 into bare ballistic gelatin , in tests conducted by Houston Police Department SWAT . In testing , the SS190 and similar 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm projectiles consistently turn base over point ( " tumble " ) as they pass through ballistic gelatin and other media , using the 21 @.@ 6 @-@ mm ( .85 in ) projectile length to create a larger wound cavity . However , some are skeptical of the bullet 's terminal performance , and it is a subject of debate among civilian shooters in the United States . 
 The 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm projectile potentially poses less risk of collateral damage than conventional pistol bullets , because the projectile design limits overpenetration , as well as risk of ricochet . The lightweight projectile loses much of its kinetic energy after traveling only 400 m ( 437 yd ) , whereas a conventional pistol bullet such as the 9 × 19mm retains significant energy beyond 800 m ( 875 yd ) , posing greater risk of collateral damage in the event of a miss . This range exceeds the engagement distances expected for the 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm cartridge 's intended applications , so the cartridge 's limited energy at long range is not considered to be disadvantageous . Since the SS190 projectile does not rely on fragmentation or the expansion of a hollow point , the cartridge ( and 5 @.@ 7 × 28mm weapons ) is considered suitable for military use under the Hague Convention of 1899 , which prohibits the use of expanding bullets in warfare . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The P90 uses a unique horizontally mounted feeding system — patented in the United States — that contributes to the weapon 's compact profile and unusual appearance . U.S. Patent 4 @,@ 905 @,@ 394 ( " Top mounted longitudinal magazine " ) was awarded in 1990 , naming René <unk> as the sole inventor . The detachable box magazine is mounted parallel to the P90 's barrel , fitting flush with the top of the weapon 's frame , and it contains 50 rounds of ammunition which lie in two rows facing left , offset 90 ° from the bore axis . As the cartridges are pushed back by spring pressure and arrive at the rear end of the magazine , they are fed as a single row into a spiral feed ramp and rotated 90 degrees , aligning them with the chamber . The magazine body is composed of polymer , and it is semi @-@ transparent to allow the shooter to see the amount of ammunition remaining at any time . 
 = = = Sights and accessories = = = 
 The P90 was originally equipped with the Ring Sights HC @-@ 14 @-@ 62 reflex sight , but the current weapon is instead fitted with the Ring Sights MC @-@ 10 @-@ 80 sight , which was specifically designed for it . The HC @-@ 14 @-@ 62 has a polymer housing and uses a forward @-@ aimed fiber optic collector to illuminate the white daytime reticle , which consists of a large circle of about 180 minutes of arc ( MOA ) , with a 20 MOA circle surrounding a 3 @.@ 5 MOA dot in the center . The MC @-@ 10 @-@ 80 has an anodized aluminium housing , and has a similar black reticle . The night reticle for both the HC @-@ 14 @-@ 62 and the MC @-@ 10 @-@ 80 consists of an open T that is primarily illuminated by a tritium module , and , in the HC @-@ 14 @-@ 62 , ambient light drawn in by an upward @-@ facing collector . The sight is adjustable for both windage and elevation , and it can be used in conjunction with night vision equipment . As backup in case the reflex sight is damaged , a set of fixed iron sights is provided on each side of the reflex sight housing . 
 The P90 has provisions for mounting a number of different types of accessories , including tactical lights and laser aiming devices . A sling can be attached to the P90 for greater ease of carry , or it can be fitted with various sound suppressors such as the Gemtech <unk> , which was designed specifically for the weapon in cooperation with FN Herstal . This stainless steel suppressor with a black oxide finish is built according to MIL @-@ <unk> , including saltwater corrosion resistance . It has a length of 184 mm ( 7 @.@ 2 in ) , a diameter of 35 mm ( 1 @.@ 4 in ) and a weight of 680 g ( 1 @.@ 5 lb ) . When subsonic ammunition is used in conjunction with the suppressor , it reduces the sound signature of the P90 by 33 dB . A small case collector pouch for the P90 is available which fits over the ejection port and collects spent cases as they are ejected downward ; the pouch will collect up to one hundred cases before filling . 
 = = Variants = = 
 = = = Military models = = = 
 P90 TR 
 The P90 TR ( Triple Rail ) model , also known as the " flat @-@ top , " was introduced in late 1999 . It features a receiver @-@ mounted triple MIL @-@ STD @-@ 1913 ( Picatinny ) rail interface system , or " Triple Rail , " for mounting accessories . There is one full @-@ length accessory rail integrated into the top of the receiver , and two rail stumps are included on the sides of the receiver . The top rail will accept various optical sights with no tools or additional mounting hardware required , and the side rails serve to mount secondary accessories , such as tactical lights or laser aiming devices . 
 P90 USG 
 The P90 USG ( United States Government ) model is similar to the standard P90 , except the reflex sight housing is aluminium , and the sight has a revised reticle . The black reticle consists of a tiny dot inside of a small ring , which is joined by three posts that glow red in low light conditions due to tritium @-@ illumination . The USG reflex sight can be removed and replaced with a special MIL @-@ STD @-@ 1913 ( Picatinny ) rail mount for attaching a different sight . 
 P90 Laserex models 
 The P90 LV ( Laser Visible ) and P90 IR ( <unk> ) models , both of which were introduced in late 1995 , have an integrated laser sight manufactured by Laserex Technologies in Australia . The P90 LV model projects an 8 mW visible laser intended to be used as a low @-@ light shooting aid or for <unk> effect , while the P90 IR model projects a 4 @.@ 5 mW infrared laser that can only be seen with night vision equipment . Both laser systems are compact , consisting of a small , flat panel integrated into the front end of the weapon 's frame . 
 The Laserex P90 laser systems have a weight of 131 g ( 0 @.@ 29 lb ) , and they are activated by means of a green pressure switch located on the underside of the weapon 's pistol grip . The lasers can be configured for three different internal settings : Off – disabled to prevent accidental activation , Training – low intensity for eye safety and extended battery life in training , or Combat – high intensity for maximum visibility . The Laserex P90 laser systems have a battery life of 250 hours when used on the Training setting , or a life of 50 hours when used on the Combat setting . 
 = = = Semi @-@ automatic models = = = 
 The PS90 is a carbine version of the P90 , intended for civilian shooters for personal protection and sporting use ; it was introduced in 2005 , and continues to be offered in several configurations . The PS90 will accept the standard 50 @-@ round P90 magazines , but the gun is supplied with a magazine that is blocked to a capacity of 10 or 30 rounds , allowing it to be sold in jurisdictions where magazine capacities are restricted by law . 
 In order to be legal for purchase by civilians without obtaining a tax stamp for a Short <unk> Rifle ( SBR ) as defined by the United States National Firearms Act , the PS90 carbine has an extended 407 mm ( 16 in ) barrel and is semi @-@ automatic , with a trigger pull of approximately 31 – 36 newtons ( 7 @.@ 0 – 8 @.@ 1 lbf ) . The lengthened barrel has eight rifling grooves , with a right @-@ hand twist rate of 1 : 229 mm ( 1 : 9 in ) and a rifled length of 376 mm ( 14 @.@ 8 in ) ; the muzzle is equipped with a fixed " birdcage " type flash suppressor . 
 Despite the added barrel length , the PS90 is relatively compact and lightweight , with an overall length of 667 mm ( 26 @.@ 3 in ) , and a weight of 3 @.@ 4 kg ( 7 @.@ 5 lb ) with a fully loaded 50 @-@ round magazine . Due to the added barrel length , the PS90 can achieve a muzzle velocity of up to 777 m / s ( 2 @,@ 550 ft / s ) with SS195LF ammunition , or up to 930 m / s ( 3 @,@ 050 ft / s ) with third @-@ party ammunition . 
 PS90 Standard 
 The PS90 Standard is the current model of the PS90 offered by FN Herstal . It features a MIL @-@ STD @-@ 1913 ( Picatinny ) rail fitted to the top of the receiver , which allows the shooter to mount their preferred optical sight . The rail includes a set of integrated iron sights , as backup in case the primary sight is damaged . The PS90 Standard is available with either an olive drab or black frame . 
 PS90 TR 
 The PS90 TR is now discontinued . It featured a " Triple Rail " receiver assembly identical to that of the P90 TR . The top of the receiver consisted of an MIL @-@ STD @-@ 1913 ( Picatinny ) rail , allowing the shooter to mount his or her preferred optical sight . Two polymer side rails — one on each side of the receiver — were included for mounting secondary accessories , such as lasers or tactical lights . Like the PS90 Standard , the PS90 TR was available with either an olive drab or black frame . As of 2013 , the PS90 TR model is no longer listed by FNH USA . 
 PS90 USG 
 The PS90 USG is now discontinued . In the same fashion as the P90 USG , this model has an aluminium reflex sight housing with a revised reticle . The black reticle consists of a tiny dot inside of a small ring , which is joined by three posts that glow red in low light conditions due to tritium @-@ illumination . The USG reflex sight can be removed and replaced with a special MIL @-@ STD @-@ 1913 ( Picatinny ) rail mount for attaching a different sight , and like other models of the PS90 , the USG is available with either an olive drab or black frame . As of 2011 , the PS90 USG model is no longer listed by FNH USA , but the USG reflex sight is still offered as a standalone accessory . 
 = = Users = = 
 Despite being originally intended as a defensive weapon for military personnel whose primary role is not fighting with small arms ( such as vehicle drivers ) , most sales of the P90 have been to special forces and counter @-@ terrorist groups who use it for offensive roles . The P90 first saw operational use in the 1991 Gulf War , where it was used by the Belgian special forces group . 
 In 1997 , suppressed P90s were used in combat by the Peruvian special forces group ( Grupo de Fuerzas <unk> ) in Operation Chavín de <unk> , the hostage rescue siege that ended the Japanese embassy hostage crisis . The operation was a success : all 14 <unk> revolutionaries were killed , and 71 hostages were rescued . The <unk> revolutionaries who had taken the hostages were equipped with body armor , but it was defeated by the Peruvian special forces ' P90s . In 2011 , P90s were used by Muammar Gaddafi 's military forces in the 2011 Libyan civil war , and some of these examples were captured and used in the war by Libyan rebel forces . 
 By 2009 , the P90 was in service with military and police forces in over 40 countries . In the United States , Houston Police Department was the first local law enforcement agency to adopt the P90 , acquiring it for their SWAT team in 1999 . In 2003 , the Houston SWAT team became one of the first agencies in the country to use the weapon in a shootout . By 2009 , the P90 was in use with over 200 law enforcement agencies in the United States , including the Secret Service and Federal Protective Service . In response , the National Rifle Association added the P90 and PS90 to its NRA Tactical Police Competition standards , allowing law enforcement agencies to compete in the event using either weapon . 
 Military and law enforcement organizations using the P90 include : 
 = Rufus Does Judy at Carnegie Hall = 
 Rufus Does Judy at Carnegie Hall is the sixth album ( and first live album ) by the Canadian @-@ American singer @-@ songwriter Rufus Wainwright , released through Geffen Records in December 2007 . The album consists of live recordings from his sold @-@ out June 14 – 15 , 2006 , tribute concerts at Carnegie Hall to the legendary American actress and singer Judy Garland . Backed by a 36 @-@ piece orchestra conducted by Stephen Oremus , Wainwright recreated Garland 's April 23 , 1961 , concert , often considered " the greatest night in show business history " . Garland 's 1961 double album , Judy at Carnegie Hall , a comeback performance with more than 25 American pop and jazz standards , was highly successful , initially spending 95 weeks on the Billboard charts and garnering five Grammy Awards ( including Album of the Year , Best Album Cover , Best Solo Vocal Performance – Female and Best Engineering Contribution – Popular Recording ) . 
 For his album , Wainwright was also recognized by the Grammy Awards , earning a 2009 nomination for Best Traditional Pop Vocal Album . While the tribute concerts were popular and the album was well received by critics , album sales were limited . Rufus Does Judy at Carnegie Hall managed to chart in three nations , peaking at number 84 in Belgium , number 88 in the Netherlands and number 171 on the United States ' Billboard 200 . 
 Guests on the album include Wainwright 's sister Martha Wainwright ( " Stormy Weather " ) , his mother Kate McGarrigle ( piano , " Over the Rainbow " ) , along with one of Garland 's daughters , Lorna Luft ( " After You 've Gone " ) . Related to the album , the February 25 , 2007 tribute concert filmed at the London Palladium was released on DVD as Rufus ! Rufus ! Rufus ! Does Judy ! Judy ! Judy ! : Live from the London Palladium on December 4 , 2007 . 
 = = Conception and development = = 
 According to Pitchfork Media , Wainwright " started listening to the Carnegie Hall album in the weeks and months after September 11 , craving some cheap showbiz cheer , but wound up discovering something deeper " . The subsequent War on Terrorism and invasion of Iraq caused Wainwright to become " traumatized and disillusioned with anything American " . Claiming he was reminded of how great " the US used to be " , Wainwright said the following of his appreciation for the album during that turbulent time in American history : 
 Somehow that album , no matter how dark things seemed , made everything brighten . She had this capacity to lighten the world through the innocence of her sound . Her anchor to the material was obviously through her devotion to music . You never feel that she didn 't believe every word of every song she ever sang . 
 I find the political and socioeconomic environment we live in very oppressive and very worrying , but every time I put on that live album , I was immediately put in a better mood . I was given a sense of hope and a sense of escape , only because so much of modern @-@ day culture and radio — and what 's prized by our society — is so empty . And then of course I would sing along . 
 Wainwright observed while driving in his car that " it [ would ] be funny to redo this as a song cycle " . Soon afterwards , he took the idea to New York @-@ based theatrical producer Jared Geller ( who would later co @-@ produce the tribute concert with David Foster ) , hoping to turn a dream into a reality . Geller initially thought the idea was " insane " , but he and Wainwright continued discussing options . Eventually , Geller agreed to assist with the production and the two found space in Wainwright 's schedule to book Carnegie Hall a year in advance . Once the venue was booked , staging elements such as lighting , microphone location and amplification were discussed . Stephen Oremus signed on as the conductor of the 36 @-@ piece orchestra and Phil Ramone took charge of the recording . Rehearsals began in April 2006 , and while it would have been easier to practice in rehearsal rooms , large theaters such as the Lynch at the John Jay College of Criminal Justice and the Museum of Jewish Heritage were utilized because " Rufus wanted a feel for performing this material on a stage " . As a result of financial restrictions , full orchestra rehearsals took place only two days before the show and the day of each performance ( practice with smaller groups of instruments began a few months before the concerts ) . 
 = = Tribute concerts = = 
 Due to popular demand , Wainwright 's tribute was performed a total of six times . After tickets for the first show ( June 14 , 2006 at Carnegie Hall in New York City ) sold out , a second show was added at the same venue for the following night ( June 15 ) . Increased demand resulted in three concerts in Europe : February 18 , 2007 at the London Palladium in London , February 20 at L 'Olympia in Paris and February 25 once again at the London Palladium . The final performance was on September 23 , 2007 at the Hollywood Bowl in Los Angeles , California . 
 = = = Promotion , celebrity participation = = = 
 Part of the success of the tribute concerts can be attributed to the amount of press attention received and the eagerness of other artists to participate in the event . As written by Gaby Wood of The Guardian , Wainwright " sparkled on the cover of Time Out New York " and was " adored in the pages of The New York Times " following the Carnegie Hall shows . In fashion designer Marc Jacobs ' menswear boutique in Greenwich Village , " virtually nothing was for sale except T @-@ shirts advertising the show " ( the bright orange shirts contained the text " RUFUS RUFUS RUFUS " and " world 's greatest entertainer " , mimicking promotional material used for Garland 45 years earlier ) . Film director Sam Mendes planned to create a documentary about Wainwright 's re @-@ creation and the work leading up to it , though the project fell through . Dutch designers Viktor & Rolf outfitted Wainwright and his family members for the concerts . To return the favor Wainwright wrote the song " Ode to Antidote " and allowed its use in the promotion of the design duo 's cologne , " Antidote " . He also helped premiere the cologne at the after @-@ party for his first Garland tribute and later performed " Over the Rainbow " at the premiere of their Spring 2007 fashion line . Wainwright wore clothing by Tom Ford at the Hollywood Bowl concert . To promote the album , Wainwright 's website linked to an online store where fans could purchase merchandise , including several shirt designs , concert posters , programs and other collectibles . Like the shirts sold by Marc Jacobs , much of the promotional material mimicked posters used for Garland 's concert years before . 
 Celebrities attending the Carnegie Hall shows included Justin Bond ( " Kiki " of Kiki and Herb ) , Patricia Field , Gina Gershon , Joel Grey , Marc Jacobs , Michael Kors , Tony Kushner , Ann Magnuson , Sarah Jessica Parker , Kate Pierson , Fred Schneider , the <unk> Schouler boys , Chloë Sevigny , John Waters and Viktor & Rolf . Famous faces turned out at the concerts in Europe as well , including Julian Barratt , Keane frontman Tom Chaplin , Julia Davis , David Furnish , Mark Gatiss , Richard E. Grant , Jeremy Irons , Lulu , Paul Morley , Siân Phillips , Imogen Stubbs and Teddy Thompson . Celebrities at the Hollywood Bowl show included Jamie Lee Curtis , Jimmy Fallon , Jake Gyllenhaal , Debbie Reynolds and Rod Stewart . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Songs = = = 
 The songs on the album are identical to those performed on Garland 's 1961 album , Judy at Carnegie Hall , except Wainwright 's album included " Get Happy " as a bonus track in the UK and on iTunes in the US . " Hail [ ing ] from a golden era dotted with trolley cars , Cadillacs , and glitzy jazz clubs " , the set list included more than 25 American swing tunes , jazz and pop standards , including two Rodgers and Hart classics ( " This Can 't Be Love " , " You 're Nearer " ) , three from brothers George and Ira Gershwin ( " Who Cares ? ( As Long as You Care for Me ) " , " How Long Has This Been Going On ? " and " A Foggy Day " ) , two from duo Howard Dietz and Arthur Schwartz ( " Alone Together " , " That 's Entertainment ! " ) , Harold Arlen , Irving Berlin , Noël Coward and more . Wainwright performed the songs nearly identically to Garland , even " <unk> [ ing ] " the lyrics purposely on " You Go to My Head " to mimic the mistake made by Garland years before . 
 = = = Orchestrations = = = 
 Stephen Oremus , musical director for the tribute concerts , faced the task of resurrecting Mort Lindsey 's original arrangements written for a 36 @-@ piece orchestra . Although it is no longer common to have orchestras so large ( Oremus acknowledged that even Wicked on Broadway only had 22 pieces ) , Wainwright and Oremus insisted the full 36 @-@ piece ensemble should be utilized to create " as exact a replica as [ they could ] muster " . Some of the arrangements had to be reconstructed , since the music was not available , and most of the songs had to be transposed , since Wainwright was performing them in a different key . 
 = = Gay elements = = 
 Garland was a gay icon , even before Wainwright was born . Gay identification with Garland was being discussed in the mainstream as early as 1967 . Time magazine , in reviewing Garland 's 1967 Palace Theatre engagement , disparagingly noted that a " disproportionate part of her nightly claque seems to be homosexual " . It goes on to say that " [ t ] he boys in the tight trousers " would " roll their eyes , tear at their hair and practically levitate from their seats " during Garland 's performances . Time then attempted to explain Garland 's appeal to the homosexual , consulting psychiatrists who opined that " the attraction [ to Garland ] might be made considerably stronger by the fact that she has survived so many problems ; homosexuals identify with that kind of hysteria " and that " Judy was beaten up by life , embattled , and ultimately had to become more masculine . She has the power that homosexuals would like to have , and they attempt to attain it by idolizing her . " 
 Garland always had a large base of fans in the gay community , which includes Wainwright , who identifies as gay and came out to his parents at the age of 14 . A connection is frequently drawn between the timing of Garland 's death and funeral , in June 1969 , and the Stonewall riots , the flashpoint of the modern Gay Liberation movement . <unk> or not , the proximity of Garland 's death to Stonewall has become a part of LGBT history and lore . Wainwright , having been called the " first post @-@ liberation era gay pop star " , was obsessed with The Wizard of Oz ( 1939 ) as a child and would dress in his mother 's gown , " pretend [ ing ] to be either the Wicked Witch – melting for hours on end – or the Good Witch , depending on his mood " . Wainwright also claims his mother ( Canadian folk musician Kate McGarrigle ) forced him to perform " Over the Rainbow " for guests while growing up , a song he often included in his concert repertoire as an adult . 
 Wainwright never intended to impersonate Garland or create a drag act , but rather to inhabit the songs and expose them to a new generation . However , there was a certain camp style present , of which Wainwright stated the following : " I think that any gay person in the world would be seduced at one point by a certain kind of camp . For certain people it 's kind of a saving grace . " Regarding the tribute concerts and homosexuality , Wainwright admitted : 
 I don 't think it would have been possible for anyone other than a gay male to do this concert . In a weird way , a gay man has some sort of perspective on it , I believe . 
 While Wainwright did not dress in drag at any of the tribute shows in New York or Europe , he did return to the stage in " Judy drag " for an encore at the Hollywood Bowl performance , " bedecked in a double @-@ breasted tuxedo jacket sans pants , black stockings , high heels , earrings , lipstick and a tilted fedora " . He also took " Get Happy " from the set and performed the tune " Summer Stock " -style during part of his Release the Stars tour to mimic the look of Garland during her performance ( pictured on right ) . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Overall , reception of the album was positive . Stephen Holden of Blender called Wainwright 's tribute " a fabulous stunt in which a gay singer channeled the spirit of the ultimate gay icon " , and declared the album was " as good an introduction to the great American songbook as any " . Pitchfork Media 's Stephen <unk> wrote that Wainwright " elegantly outdoes [ Garland ] on a couple of the ballads " and also compliments guest performer Martha Wainwright , " who turns in a stunning , showstopping ' Stormy Weather ' in an appropriately brazen bid to steal the show " . In his review for Rolling Stone , Robert Christgau stated it was " a relief to hear him essay the show tunes and Tin Pan Alley chestnuts of this tribute album " . Furthermore , he wrote that the songs " expand [ Wainwright 's ] melodic compass " , allowing him to " bring something new to them too – namely , sexuality in the sensuality as opposed to gender @-@ preference sense " . Dave Hughes of Slant Magazine had positive comments about the album : " That Wainwright has the temerity to cover such a bona fide classic — and the chops to pull it off without breaking a limb or his brain — speaks both to his ambition and to his prodigious abilities . " 
 The album did receive some criticism . After noting Garland 's lifelong attempt to master pitch and articulation , Christgau claimed Wainwright 's habit of " slid [ ing ] past notes and draw [ ing ] out the final syllables of lines are signatures indistinguishable from tics " . Entertainment Weekly 's Chris Willman wrote that Wainwright 's " delicate upper range is nicely attuned to some of the ballads , but anything that requires belting is pretty much a loss " . Mark Edwards of The Times called Wainwright 's performance an acquired taste , stating his " trademark delivery " is " lazy and somewhat slurred " . Dave Hughes ' review pointed out Wainwright 's " problem with the brassy high notes in an otherwise energetic take on ' That 's Entertainment ' " , but admits it would be unfair to hold this against him since Garland 's live performance was not perfect either . Hughes appropriately notes , " Ain 't nobody perfect " . 
 = = Chart performance and recognition = = 
 Despite the popularity of Wainwright 's tribute concerts , an abundance of press regarding the album , and generally favorable critical reception , album sales were limited . However , Rufus Does Judy at Carnegie Hall reached a peak position of number 84 in Belgium , number 88 in the Netherlands and number 171 on the United States ' Billboard 200 . The album was nominated for a 2009 Grammy Award for Best Traditional Pop Vocal Album , but lost to Natalie Cole 's Still Unforgettable . In 2012 , AfterElton.com included the album on its list of " 10 Great Pop Culture Moments from Famous Canadians " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Disc 1 
 Overture : " The Trolley Song " / " Over the Rainbow " / " The Man That Got Away " 
 ( Ralph Blane , Hugh Martin ) / ( Harold Arlen , Yip Harburg ) / ( Arlen , Ira Gershwin ) – 4 : 15 
 " When You 're Smiling ( The Whole World Smiles With You ) " ( Mark Fisher , Joe Goodwin , Larry Shay ) – 3 : 44 
 Medley : " Almost Like Being in Love " / " This Can 't Be Love " ( Alan Jay Lerner , Frederick Loewe ) / ( Richard Rodgers , Lorenz Hart ) – 6 : 10 
 " Do It Again " ( George Gershwin , Buddy <unk> ) – 5 : 15 
 " You Go to My Head " ( J. Fred Coots , Haven Gillespie ) – 2 : 40 
 " Alone Together " ( Howard Dietz , Arthur Schwartz ) – 3 : 21 
 " Who Cares ? ( As Long as You Care for Me ) " ( G. Gershwin , I. Gershwin ) – 2 : 08 
 " Puttin ' on the Ritz " ( Irving Berlin ) – 1 : 56 
 " How Long Has This Been Going On ? " ( G. Gershwin , I. Gershwin ) – 5 : 46 
 " Just You , Just Me " ( Jesse Greer , Raymond Klages ) – 2 : 03 
 " The Man That Got Away " ( Arlen , I. Gershwin ) – 4 : 59 
 " San Francisco " ( Walter <unk> , Gus Kahn , Bronisław <unk> ) – 4 : 53 
 Disc 2 
 " That 's Entertainment ! " ( Dietz , Schwartz ) – 2 : 27 
 " I Can 't Give You Anything But Love " ( Dorothy Fields , Jimmy McHugh ) – 8 : 11 
 " Come Rain or Come Shine " ( Arlen , Johnny Mercer ) – 3 : 56 
 " You 're Nearer " ( Rodgers , Hart ) – 1 : 58 
 " A Foggy Day " ( G. Gershwin , I. Gershwin ) – 2 : 55 
 " If Love Were All " ( Noël Coward ) – 2 : 33 
 " Zing ! Went the Strings of My Heart " – ( James F. Hanley ) – 3 : 48 
 " Stormy Weather " ( Arlen , Ted Koehler ) – 6 : 45 ( performed by Martha Wainwright ) 
 Medley : " You Made Me Love You " / " For Me and My Gal " / " The Trolley Song " ( Joseph McCarthy , James V. Monaco , Roger Edens ) / ( George W. Meyer , Edgar Leslie , E. Ray Goetz ) / ( Blane , Martin ) – 4 : 37 
 " Rock @-@ a @-@ Bye Your Baby with a Dixie Melody " ( Sam M. Lewis , Fred Schwartz , Joe Young ) – 5 : 45 
 " Over the Rainbow " ( Arlen , Harburg ) – 4 : 47 ( featuring Kate McGarrigle ) 
 " Swanee " ( Irving Caesar , G. Gershwin ) – 1 : 54 
 " After You 've Gone " ( Henry Creamer , Turner Layton ) – 2 : 57 ( featuring Lorna Luft ) 
 " Chicago " ( Fred Fisher ) – 4 : 30 
 Bonus track 
 " Get Happy " ( Arlen , Koehler ) – 3 : 12 ( offered in the UK and on the US iTunes version ) 
 Track listing adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Allmusic . 
 = Macintosh Classic = 
 The Macintosh Classic is a personal computer manufactured by Apple Inc .. Introduced on October 15 , 1990 , it was the first Apple Macintosh to sell for less than US $ 1 @,@ 000 . Production of the Classic was prompted by the success of the Macintosh Plus and the Macintosh SE . The system specifications of the Classic were very similar to its predecessors , with the same 9 @-@ inch ( 23 cm ) monochrome CRT display , 512 × 342 pixel resolution , and 4 megabyte ( MB ) memory limit of the older Macintosh computers . Apple 's decision to not update the Classic with newer technology such as a <unk> CPU , higher RAM capacity or color display ensured compatibility with the Mac 's by @-@ then healthy software base as well as enabled it to fit the lower price Apple intended for it . Nevertheless , the Classic featured several improvements over the aging Macintosh Plus , which it replaced as Apple 's low @-@ end Mac computer . It was up to 25 percent faster than the Plus and included an Apple SuperDrive 3 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 9 cm ) floppy disk drive as standard . 
 The Classic was an adaptation of Jerry <unk> 's and Terry Oyama 's 1984 Macintosh 128K industrial design , as had been the earlier Macintosh SE . Apple released two versions that ranged in price from $ 1 @,@ 000 to $ 1 @,@ 500 . Reviewer reactions were mixed ; most focused on the slow processor performance and lack of expansion slots . The consensus was that the Classic was only useful for word processing , spreadsheets and databases . The price and the availability of education software led to the Classic 's popularity in education . It was sold alongside the more powerful Macintosh Classic II in 1991 until its discontinuation the next year . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 After Apple co @-@ founder Steve Jobs left Apple in 1985 , product development was handed to Jean @-@ Louis Gassée , formerly the manager of Apple France . Gassée consistently pushed the Apple product line in two directions , towards more " openness " in terms of expandability and interoperability , and towards higher price . Gassée long argued that Apple should not market their computers towards the low end of the market , where profits were thin , but instead concentrate on the high end and higher profit margins . He illustrated the concept using a graph showing the price / performance ratio of computers with low @-@ power , low @-@ cost machines in the lower left and high @-@ power high @-@ cost machines in the upper right . The " high @-@ right " goal became a mantra among the upper management , who said " fifty @-@ five or die " , referring to Gassée 's goal of a 55 percent profit margin . 
 The high @-@ right policy led to a series of machines with ever @-@ increasing prices . The original Macintosh plans called for a system around $ 1 @,@ 000 , but by the time it had morphed from Jef Raskin 's original vision of an easy @-@ to @-@ use machine for composing text documents to Jobs ' concept incorporating ideas gleaned during a trip to Xerox PARC , the Mac 's list price had ballooned to $ 2 @,@ 495 . From there , the price of Mac systems continued to climb : the Macintosh Plus was slightly more expensive at $ 2 @,@ 599 , the SE was $ 2 @,@ 900 or $ 3 @,@ 900 depending on the model , and a basic Macintosh II with a 40 MB hard drive was at least $ 5 @,@ 500 ( at launch , with the price increasing in late 1988 ) . More modern machines cost even more : the Macintosh <unk> was $ 5 @,@ 369 , the IIci $ 6 @,@ 269 , and the <unk> $ 9 @,@ 900 - all without monitors or keyboards . Color CRTs were relatively expensive in the late 1980s ; Apple 's 14 @-@ inch 640 × 480 monitor had a list price of $ 999 and Apple 's ADB keyboards , while high quality , were similarly expensive . The only inexpensive machine in the lineup by the late 1980s was the several @-@ year @-@ old Mac Plus , which was now selling for around $ 1 @,@ 800 . 
 With the " low @-@ left " of the market it had abandoned years earlier booming with Turbo <unk> , and being ignored on the high end for UNIX workstations from the likes of Sun and SGI , Apple 's fortunes of the 1980s quickly reversed . The Christmas season of 1989 drove this point home , with the first decrease in sales in years , and an accompanying 20 percent drop in Apple 's stock price for the quarter . 
 In January 1990 , Gassée resigned and his authority over product development was divided among several successors . Many Apple engineers had long been pressing for lower @-@ cost options in order to build market share and increase demand across the entire price spectrum . With Gassée out , a rush started to quickly introduce a series of low @-@ cost machines . Three market points were identified , a very low @-@ cost machine aimed at costing $ 1 @,@ 000 , a low @-@ cost machine with color graphics , and a more upscale color machine for small business use . In time , these would develop as the Classic , Macintosh LC , and Macintosh <unk> . Unlike the ' 020 and ' 030 based models , the Macintosh Classic has the original Macintosh startup sound . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 MacWEEK magazine reported on July 10 , 1990 , that Apple had paid $ 1 million to Modular Computer Systems Inc . , a subsidiary of Daimler @-@ Benz AG , for the right to use the " Classic " name as part of a five @-@ year contract . Apple did not renew the contract when it ended . MacWEEK speculated the Macintosh Classic would use the same 8 megahertz ( MHz ) Motorola 68000 microprocessor and 9 @-@ inch ( 23 cm ) display as its predecessors and that the Classic would be priced from $ 1 @,@ 500 to $ 2 @,@ 150 . 
 On December 12 , 1990 , John Sculley ( then Apple CEO ) introduced the Classic at a press conference , announcing that pricing would start at $ 1 @,@ 000 and saying , " To reach new customers , we didn 't just lower the prices of our existing products . We redesigned these computers from the ground up with the features customers have told us they value most . " Apple 's new pricing strategy caused concern among investors , who thought it would reduce profit margins . Brodie Keast , an Apple product marketing manager , said , " We are prepared to do whatever it takes to reach more people with Macintosh .... The plan is to get as aggressive on price as we need to be . " After the release of the Classic , Apple 's share price closed at $ 27 @.@ 75 per share , down 50 cents from October 12 , 1990 , and far below its previous 12 @-@ month high of $ 50 @.@ 37 . 
 The Classic was released in Europe and Japan concurrently with the United States release . In Japan , the Classic retailed for 198 @,@ 000 yen ( $ 1 @,@ 523 ) , more than in the US but matching the price of the Toshiba <unk> laptop computer . 
 After spending $ 40 million marketing the Classic to first @-@ time buyers , Apple had difficulty meeting the high demand . Apple doubled its manufacturing space in 1990 by expanding its Singapore and Cork , Ireland factories , where the Classic was assembled . Air freight , rather than sea shipping , was used to speed delivery . The shortage caused concern among dealers , who blamed Apple 's poor business planning . 
 Macintosh Classics and LCs had been given to Scholastic Software 12 weeks before they were officially announced , and Scholastic planned to release 16 new Macintosh products in 1991 . Peter Kelman , Scholastic 's publisher , predicted that the Macintosh would become " the school machine of the nineties . " The Classic was sold to schools for $ 800 . This and the availability of education software led to the Classic 's popularity in the education sector . 
 = = Features = = 
 The low @-@ end model had 1 MB memory , no hard disk , and cost $ 999 , while the $ 1 @,@ 499 model contained an additional 1 MB memory expansion card and a 40 MB hard disk . The Classic featured several improvements over the Macintosh Plus , which it replaced as Apple 's low @-@ end Mac computer : it was up to 25 percent faster than the Plus and included an Apple SuperDrive 3 @.@ 5 " floppy disk drive as standard . The SuperDrive could read and write to Macintosh , MS @-@ DOS , OS / 2 , and <unk> disks . Also , the Classic was the last compact Mac to use the Motorola 68000 central processing unit ( CPU ) . 
 The Classic used the System 6 @.@ 0 @.@ 7 operating system with support for all versions up to System 7 @.@ 5 @.@ 5 . A hidden Hierarchical File System ( HFS ) disk volume contained in the read @-@ only memory ( ROM ) included System 6 @.@ 0 @.@ 3 . The Mac Classic could be booted into System 6 @.@ 0 @.@ 3 by holding down the Command + Option + X + O keys during boot . 
 Some dealers included a software bundle called <unk> with the Classic . Also sold separately for $ 349 , this included T / Maker 's <unk> word processor , Ashton @-@ Tate 's Full Impact spreadsheet program , <unk> database , and Silicon Beach Software 's <unk> 2 @.@ 0 paint and draw program . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Macintosh Classic was the final adaptation of Jerry <unk> 's and Terry Oyama 's Macintosh 128K industrial design , bringing back some elements of the original , while retaining little of the Snow White design language used in the Macintosh SE 's design . The only remnant of the SE was the stripe across the front panel ( bezel ) for the floppy drive ; the distinctive front bezel lines of the SE were not used on the Classic , and the vertical lines around its base were replaced by four horizontal vent lines , more reminiscent of the original design . Also , the curve of the front bezel was increased to the same 50 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 3 m ) radial curve as on the front of both the Macintosh LC and Macintosh <unk> . The screen brightness dial on this bezel was also removed in favor of a software control . This broad , curved front bezel became a signature of Apple product design for much of the 1990s . 
 The logic board , the central circuit board of the computer , was based on the Macintosh SE design . Its size , however , was reduced using surface mount technology to 9 × 5 inches ( 23 × 13 cm ) , half the size of the SE board . This redesign , and the absence of expansion slots , kept manufacturing costs low . This lack of expansion abilities , along with the small screen size and Macintosh 's popularity in the burgeoning field of desktop publishing led to such oddities as video displays which connected through the SCSI port by users seeking to connect a larger full- or dual @-@ page display to their Mac . The Classic design was used once more in 1991 for the Classic II , which succeeded the Classic and replaced the Macintosh SE / 30 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Some reviewers of the Macintosh Classic focused on the processor performance and lack of expansion slots . Liza Schafer of Home Office Computing praised the Classic 's ease of use and price , but criticized the 9 @-@ inch ( 230 mm ) display because a full US letter page ( 8 1 ⁄ 2 × 11 inches ) would not fit at full size , and warned those who required high @-@ end graphics and desktop publishing capabilities against buying the Classic . Schafer concluded : " The Classic 's value is more impressive than its performance , but its performance will get you working on that novel , database , or spreadsheet . " PC Week criticized the lack of a faster processor , stating , " The 7 @.@ 8 MHz speed is adequate for text applications and limited graphics work , but it is not suitable for power users . As such , the Classic is appropriate as a home computer or for limited computing on the road . " Similarly , PC User 's review concluded , " The slow processor and lack of expansion slots on the Macintosh Classic offset the low prices " . MacWEEK described it as a " fine , inexpensive replacement for the Macintosh Plus that best embodies the original Macintosh vision six and a half years later " . Computer Gaming World was more skeptical , doubting that consumers would purchase a black @-@ and @-@ white computer with no hard drive that was only slightly faster than the Mac Plus . 
 In the February 1991 edition of Electronic Learning , Robert McCarthy wrote : " Teachers , educational administrators and software developers are enthusiastic about the new , lower cost Apple Macintosh computers " . Steve Taffe , manager of instructional strategy at <unk> , a developer and publisher of educational software , explained his excitement about the Classic : " [ it ] is terrific – both because it 's a Mac and because of that low price . Everyone can now afford a Macintosh . " Scholastic , an education software developer , was also confident of Apple 's ability to compete with MS @-@ DOS machines , stating : " They are just as cost @-@ effective and as powerful as MS @-@ DOS computers , but the Apples will have a superior comfort @-@ level . " Sue Talley , Apple 's manager of strategic planning in education , said of the Classic : " we see it going into applications where you need a fair number of powerful stations , but where color is not a big issue . " Talley mentioned that it was most suited for writing labs and other basic productivity uses . Many schools decided not to buy the Macintosh Classic because of the lack of a color monitor , an option which the higher priced Macintosh LC had . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 = = Timeline of compact Macintosh models = = 
 = Hippolyte De La Rue = 
 Air Commodore Hippolyte Ferdinand ( Frank ) De La Rue , CBE , DFC ( 13 March 1891 – 18 May 1977 ) was a senior commander in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . Joining the Mercantile Marine as a youth , he became a pilot in Britain 's Royal Naval Air Service during World War I. In 1918 , he was given command of No. 223 Squadron in the newly formed Royal Air Force . The following year he took charge of No. 270 Squadron RAF in Egypt . Returning to Australia , De La Rue joined the short @-@ lived Australian Air Corps in 1920 , and became a founding member of the RAAF in March 1921 . <unk> in maritime aviation , he led seaplane formations based at Point Cook , Victoria , during the 1920s and early 1930s . 
 De La Rue was appointed commanding officer of No. 1 Flying Training School at Point Cook in 1933 . He was promoted to group captain in 1937 and took command of RAAF Station Richmond , New South Wales , the following year . At the outbreak of World War II , De La Rue was slated to lead an air expeditionary force to Great Britain , but this plan was abandoned after Australia committed itself to the Empire Air Training Scheme . Promoted to temporary air commodore , he served as Air Officer Commanding Western Area from 1941 to 1943 , and finished the war as Inspector of Administration at RAAF Headquarters , Melbourne . Nicknamed " Kanga " , De La Rue retired from the Air Force in 1946 , and died in 1977 at the age of eighty @-@ six . 
 = = Early life and World War I = = 
