 Born on 13 March 1891 in Auburn , a suburb of Sydney , De La Rue was the son of jeweller Edmond Emile De La Rue and his wife Ellen . Following a " limited " education , he joined the Merchant Navy in 1908 , becoming a second officer by 1914 . De La Rue transferred to the Royal Navy 's Transport Service shortly after the outbreak of World War I , operating on troop ships between England and France . He saw service at Gallipoli as navigator on <unk> , from the Allied landings on 25 April 1915 until the withdrawal in December . In July 1916 , he transferred once again , to the Royal Naval Air Service ( RNAS ) as a temporary flight sub @-@ lieutenant , and was awarded his wings in November . 
 Training as a seaplane pilot in Hampshire , De La Rue was posted to Wales in February 1917 . Later that year , he claimed an unconfirmed sinking of a German submarine while on coastal patrol . Promoted flight lieutenant in January 1918 , De La Rue became an honorary captain in the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) that April , following the merger of the RNAS and the Royal Flying Corps . He was posted to No. 223 Squadron in Otranto , Italy , later taking command of the unit . While piloting a Short seaplane escorting Allied bombers on a raid against the port city of Durrës , Albania , he rescued the crew of another seaplane that had been forced down in the Austrian @-@ held harbour . He was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross for his actions , as well as the Italian Silver Medal of Military Valor . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 De La Rue was posted to Alexandria , Egypt , in January 1919 to command No. 270 ( Seaplane ) Squadron . Offered a permanent commission in the RAF that August , he nevertheless returned to Australia and sought employment through Lieutenant Colonel Stanley Goble , an ex @-@ RNAS pilot then seconded to the Navy Office . Goble , desiring a specialist seaplane pilot for naval cooperation work , arranged a captain 's commission in the recently established Australian Air Corps , successor to the wartime Australian Flying Corps . On 17 June 1920 , in an Airco DH.9 , De La Rue accompanied Captain Adrian Cole on a flight to an altitude of 27 @,@ 000 feet ( 8 @,@ 200 m ) , setting an Australian record that stood for more than ten years . Later that month , flying an Avro 504L floatplane , he became the first person to land an aircraft on the Yarra River in Victoria . In July he was put in charge of trials of the Avro 504L aboard the Royal Australian Navy 's flagship , HMAS Australia . De La Rue joined the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) as a flight lieutenant in 1921 , becoming one of the original twenty @-@ one officers on its strength when it was formed ( as the Australian Air Force ) that March . Going by the first name of Frank , he was also popularly known throughout the service as " Kanga " . In August 1921 , he underwent the RAAF 's " No. 1 Course " at the Australian Army 's Central Training Depot in Holsworthy , New South Wales ; his fellow inductees included Flying Officers George Jones , Arthur Murphy , and Raymond Brownell . 
 During the 1920s , De La Rue held a series of postings at RAAF Point Cook , Victoria , and at Air Force Headquarters , Melbourne . In May 1922 , then in charge of the Seaplane Flight , he crashed an Avro 504L into Port Phillip ; his rescuers claimed that his main concern following the mishap was the state of the corduroy trousers he was wearing . He lost the RAAF 's sole Bristol Scout in another accident less than a year later . De La Rue married Clara Stone in a Presbyterian ceremony at Scots Church , Melbourne , on 1 October 1923 ; the couple would have a daughter . He had another escape in August 1925 when he crashed a Sopwith Pup into a hangar ; a witness said that De La Rue , who was " renowned for his fiery Gallic temper " , strode from the wreckage and began to violently abuse the aircraft . By 1926 , he was the examining officer on the flight instructors course at No. 1 Flying Training School ( No. 1 FTS ) , Point Cook . On exchange in Britain during 1929 – 30 , De La Rue underwent familiarisation with aircraft carriers , and served on the staff of No. 201 ( Flying Boat ) Squadron , based on the south coast of England . Upon his return to Australia in 1931 , he was given command of the RAAF 's Seaplane Squadron at Point Cook . Promoted wing commander in December 1932 , De La Rue led No. 1 FTS from early 1933 . He was promoted group captain in January 1937 , and took over as commanding officer ( CO ) of Headquarters RAAF Station Richmond , New South Wales , from Group Captain Cole in January the following year . 
 = = World War II = = 
 De La Rue and his staff at Headquarters Richmond worked " flat out " in the days prior the outbreak of World War II to get the base to a fit state of readiness and , immediately after hostilities were declared on 3 September , to liaise with the Central War Room in Melbourne passing instructions to squadrons . The following day , Richmond 's first wartime sortie took place , a flight of three Avro Ansons and three Supermarine Seagulls patrolling the ocean off Sydney . Within a month the Chief of the Air Staff ( CAS ) , Air Vice Marshal Goble , proposed despatching a six @-@ squadron air expeditionary force to Great Britain , with De La Rue , then the RAAF 's seventh most senior officer , in charge . Air Marshal Richard Williams , Goble 's long @-@ time rival for leadership of the Air Force in the 1920s and ' 30s , later contended that the CAS was unduly favouring his fellow RNAS veteran and seaplane specialist to lead what would have been the RAAF 's largest formation to date , particularly considering that other contenders for the role such as Group Captains Cole , Frank McNamara , and Henry Wrigley had greater landplane experience than De La Rue . The concept was in any case abandoned soon after , as Australia concentrated on participation in the Empire Air Training Scheme . Some time in the latter half of 1940 , De La Rue was seeing dinner guests off the base at RAAF Richmond , and attempted to re @-@ enter the perimeter via the main gate . Wearing civilian clothes and without his security pass , he was challenged and then locked up by the guards , who did not recognise him or believe his assurances that he was their commander . De La Rue was finally released by the orderly officer but was still fuming the next morning ; only the advice of the base warrant officer ( disciplinary ) , who had congratulated the guards on their diligence , prevented the CO from taking action against all concerned . 
 After completing his tenure at Richmond , De La Rue briefly took the role of senior air staff officer ( SASO ) at Central Area Command in October 1940 . The following month , his name was put forward to establish an RAAF depot in London to look after the interests of the many thousands of Australian airmen disembarking there , but financial considerations led to the plan being scuppered temporarily . In fact , RAAF Overseas Headquarters would be formed on 1 December 1941 , with Air Marshal Williams appointed Air Officer Commanding ( AOC ) . Meanwhile , De La Rue also missed out on a potential posting to the Middle East that was suggested by the British but turned down by the Australian government . Promoted acting air commodore , he became the inaugural AOC Western Area , headquartered in Perth , on 9 January 1941 . Among the units he controlled in this position were No. 14 ( General Reconnaissance ) Squadron , No. 25 ( General Purpose ) Squadron , No. 35 ( Transport ) Squadron , and No. 77 ( Fighter ) Squadron . De La Rue worked assiduously to prepare the latter for operations , as it was the only fighter squadron able to defend Perth and Fremantle . He also lobbied RAAF Headquarters for a force of long @-@ range PBY Catalina flying boats to augment the Lockheed Hudsons of No. 14 Squadron , but none were offered to him . De La Rue was made a temporary air commodore in July 1941 . By February 1942 , he was the eighth most senior officer in the RAAF . Handing over Western Area Command to Air Commodore Ray Brownell in January 1943 , De La Rue became Inspector of Administration at RAAF Headquarters , in which post he saw out the rest of the war . On 8 June 1944 , he was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire . 
 = = Later life = = 
 De La Rue was summarily retired from the RAAF after the war , along with a number of other senior commanders and veterans of World War I , partly to make way for the advancement of younger and equally capable officers , and also due to his suspect health . In recommending early retirement , the CAS , Air Vice Marshal George Jones , noted that De La Rue possessed " fairly good Service knowledge " and was of strong character , but that " sometimes his efforts [ were ] ill @-@ directed " . De La Rue was , furthermore , above the statutory retiring age for his substantive rank of group captain . He was officially discharged on 1 April 1946 . An honorary air commodore from 1956 , his chief hobby in retirement was painting in water colours . On 31 March 1971 , he was among a select group of surviving foundation members who attended a celebratory dinner at the Hotel Canberra to mark the RAAF 's Golden Jubilee ; his fellow guests included Air Marshal Sir Richard Williams , Air Vice Marshals Henry Wrigley and Bill Anderson , and Wing Commander Sir Lawrence Wackett . Frank De La Rue died at his home in Kew , a suburb of Melbourne , on 18 May 1977 . He was survived by his daughter , and cremated . 
 = Final Fantasy = 
 Final Fantasy ( ファイナルファンタジー , Fainaru Fantajī ) is a science fiction and fantasy media franchise created by Hironobu Sakaguchi , and developed and owned by Square Enix ( formerly Square ) . The franchise centers on a series of fantasy and science fantasy role @-@ playing video games ( RPGs ) . The eponymous first game in the series , published in 1987 , was conceived by Sakaguchi as his last @-@ ditch effort in the game industry ; the title was a success and spawned sequels . The video game series has since branched into other genres such as tactical role @-@ playing , action role @-@ playing , massively multiplayer online role @-@ playing , racing , third @-@ person shooter , fighting , rhythm and anime . 
 Although most Final Fantasy installments are stand @-@ alone stories with different settings and main characters , they feature identical elements that define the franchise . Recurring elements include plot themes , character names , and game mechanics . Plots center on a group of heroes battling a great evil while exploring the characters ' internal struggles and relationships . Character names are frequently derived from the history , languages , pop culture , and mythologies of cultures worldwide . 
 The series has been commercially and critically successful ; it is Square Enix 's best selling video game franchise , with more than 115 million units sold , and is one of the best @-@ selling video game franchises of all time . The series is well known for its innovation , visuals , and music , such as the inclusion of full motion videos , photo @-@ realistic character models , and orchestrated music by Nobuo Uematsu . Final Fantasy has been a driving force in the video game industry , and the series has affected Square Enix 's business practices and its relationships with other video game developers . It has also introduced many features now common in role @-@ playing video games and has been credited with helping to popularize console @-@ based RPGs in markets outside Japan . 
 = = Titles = = 
 = = = Games = = = 
 The first installment of the series premiered in Japan on December 18 , 1987 . Subsequent titles are numbered and given a story unrelated to previous games ; consequently , the numbers refer more to volumes than to sequels . Many Final Fantasy games have been localized for markets in North America , Europe , and Australia on numerous video game consoles , personal computers ( PC ) , and mobile phones . Future installments will appear on seventh and eighth generation consoles ; upcoming titles include Final Fantasy XV . As of January 2014 , the series includes the main installments from Final Fantasy to Final Fantasy XIV , as well as direct sequels and spin @-@ offs , both released and confirmed as being in development . Most of the older titles have been remade or re @-@ released on multiple platforms . 
 = = = = Main series = = = = 
 Three Final Fantasy installments were released on the Nintendo Entertainment System ( NES ) . Final Fantasy was released in Japan in 1987 and in North America in 1990 . It introduced many concepts to the console RPG genre , and has since been remade on several platforms . Final Fantasy II , released in 1988 in Japan , has been bundled with Final Fantasy in several re @-@ releases . The last of the NES installments , Final Fantasy III , was released in Japan in 1990 ; however , it was not released elsewhere until a Nintendo DS remake in 2006 . 
 The Super Nintendo Entertainment System ( SNES ) also featured three installments of the main series , all of which have been re @-@ released on several platforms . Final Fantasy IV was released in 1991 ; in North America , it was released as Final Fantasy II . It introduced the " Active Time Battle " system . Final Fantasy V , released in 1992 in Japan , was the first game in the series to spawn a sequel : a short anime series titled Final Fantasy : Legend of the Crystals . Final Fantasy VI was released in Japan in 1994 , but it was titled Final Fantasy III in North America . 
 The PlayStation console saw the release of three main Final Fantasy games . The 1997 title Final Fantasy VII moved away from the two @-@ dimensional ( 2D ) graphics used in the first six games to three @-@ dimensional ( 3D ) computer graphics ; the game features polygonal characters on pre @-@ rendered backgrounds . It also introduced a more modern setting , a style that was carried over to the next game . It was also the second in the series to be released in Europe , with the first being Final Fantasy Mystic Quest . Final Fantasy VIII was published in 1999 , and was the first to consistently use realistically proportioned characters and feature a vocal piece as its theme music . Final Fantasy IX , released in 2000 , returned to the series ' roots by revisiting a more traditional Final Fantasy setting rather than the more modern worlds of VII and VIII . 
 Three main installments , as well as one online game , were published for the PlayStation 2 ( PS2 ) . The 2001 title Final Fantasy X introduced full 3D areas and voice acting to the series , and was the first to spawn a direct video game sequel ( Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 , published in 2003 ) . The first massively multiplayer online role @-@ playing game ( MMORPG ) in the series , Final Fantasy XI , was released on the PS2 and PC in 2002 , and later on the Xbox 360 . It introduced real @-@ time battles instead of random encounters . Final Fantasy XII , published in 2006 , also includes real @-@ time battles in large , interconnected playfields . The game is also the first in the main series to utilize a world used in a previous game , namely the land of Ivalice , which had previously featured in Final Fantasy Tactics and Vagrant Story . 
 In 2009 , Final Fantasy XIII was released in Japan , and in North America and Europe the following year , for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 . It is the flagship installment of the Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy series and became the first mainline game to spawn two direct sequels ( XIII @-@ 2 and Lightning Returns ) . It was also the first game released in Chinese & High Definition along with being released on two consoles at once . Final Fantasy XIV , a MMORPG , was released worldwide on Microsoft Windows in 2010 , but it received heavy criticism when it was launched , prompting Square Enix to send an apology for the players , and to re @-@ release the game under the title A Realm Reborn , this time to the Playstation 3 as well , in 2013 . At E3 2013 , Final Fantasy XV ( originally a spin @-@ off titled Versus XIII ) was officially unveiled as an upcoming title for PlayStation 4 and Xbox One and currently scheduled for release in 2016 . Like XIII , XV uses the mythos of the Fabula Nova Crystallis series , although in many other respects the game stands on its own and has since been distanced from the series by its developers . 
 = = = = Remakes , sequels and spin @-@ offs = = = = 
 Final Fantasy has spawned numerous spin @-@ offs and metaseries . Several are , in fact , not Final Fantasy games , but were rebranded for North American release . Examples include the SaGa series , rebranded The Final Fantasy Legend , and its two sequels , Final Fantasy Legend II and Final Fantasy Legend III . Final Fantasy Mystic Quest was specifically developed for a United States audience , and Final Fantasy Tactics is a tactical RPG that features many references and themes found in the series . The spin @-@ off Chocobo series , Crystal Chronicles series , and Kingdom Hearts series also include multiple Final Fantasy elements . In 2003 , the Final Fantasy series ' first direct sequel , Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 , was released . Final Fantasy XIII was originally intended to stand on its own , but the team wanted to explore the world , characters and mythos more , resulting in the development and release of two sequels in 2011 and 2013 respectively , creating the series ' first official trilogy . Dissidia Final Fantasy was released in 2009 , a fighting game that features heroes and villains from the first ten games of the main series . It was followed by a prequel in 2011 . Other spin @-@ offs have taken the form of subseries — Compilation of Final Fantasy VII , Ivalice Alliance , and Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy . 
 = = = Related media = = = 
 = = = = Film and television = = = = 
 Square Enix has expanded the Final Fantasy series into various media . Multiple anime and computer @-@ generated imagery ( CGI ) films have been produced that are based either on individual Final Fantasy games or on the series as a whole . The first was an original video animation ( OVA ) titled Final Fantasy : Legend of the Crystals , a sequel to Final Fantasy V. The story was set on the same world as the game , although 200 years in the future . It was released as four 30 @-@ minute episodes , first in Japan in 1994 and later in the United States by Urban Vision in 1998 . In 2001 , Square Pictures released its first feature film , Final Fantasy : The Spirits Within . The film is set on a future Earth invaded by alien life forms . The Spirits Within was the first animated feature to seriously attempt to portray photorealistic CGI humans , but was considered a box office bomb and garnered mixed reviews . 
 In 2005 , Final Fantasy VII : Advent Children , a theatrical CGI film , and Last Order : Final Fantasy VII , a non @-@ canon OVA , were released as part of the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII . Advent Children was animated by Visual Works , which helped the company create CG sequences for the games . The film , unlike The Spirits Within , gained mixed to positive reviews from critics and has become a commercial success . Last Order , on the other hand , was released in Japan in a special DVD bundle package with Advent Children . Last Order sold out quickly and was positively received by Western critics , though fan reaction was mixed over changes to established story scenes . 
 A 25 @-@ episode anime television series titled Final Fantasy : Unlimited was released in 2001 based on the common elements of the Final Fantasy series . It was broadcast in Japan by TV Tokyo and released in North America by ADV Films . 
 Two animated tied ins for Final Fantasy XV were announced at the Uncovered Final Fantasy XV fan and press event , forming part of a larger multimedia project dubbed the Final Fantasy XV Universe . Brotherhood : Final Fantasy XV is a series of five 10 @-@ minute @-@ long episodes developed by A @-@ 1 Pictures and Square Enix detailing the backstories of the main cast . Kingsglaive : Final Fantasy XV , a CGI movie set for release prior to the game in Summer 2016 , is set during the game 's opening and follows new and secondary characters . 
 = = = = Other media = = = = 
 Several video games have either been adapted into or have had spin @-@ offs in the form of manga and novels . The first was the novelization of Final Fantasy II in 1989 , and was followed by a manga adaptation of Final Fantasy III in 1992 . The past decade has seen an increase in the number of non @-@ video game adaptations and spin @-@ offs . Final Fantasy : The Spirits Within has been adapted into a novel , the spin @-@ off game Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles has been adapted into a manga , and Final Fantasy XI has had a novel and manga set in its continuity . Seven novellas based on the Final Fantasy VII universe have also been released . The Final Fantasy : Unlimited story was partially continued in novels and a manga after the anime series ended . The Final Fantasy X and Final Fantasy XIII series have also had novellas and audio dramas released . 
 Two titles , Final Fantasy Tactics Advance and Final Fantasy : Unlimited , have been adapted into radio dramas . 
 = = Common elements = = 
 Although most Final Fantasy installments are independent , many gameplay elements recur throughout the series . Most titles feature recycled names often inspired from various cultures ' history , languages and mythology , including Asian , European , and Middle @-@ Eastern . Examples include weapon names like Excalibur and Masamune — derived from Arthurian legend and the Japanese swordsmith Masamune respectively — as well as the spell names Holy , Meteor , and Ultima . Beginning with Final Fantasy IV , the main series adopted its current logo style that features the same typeface and an emblem designed by Japanese artist Yoshitaka Amano . The emblem relates to a title 's respective plot and typically portrays a character or object in the story . Subsequent remakes of the first three games have replaced the previous logos with ones similar to the rest of the series . 
 = = = Plot and themes = = = 
 The central conflict in many Final Fantasy games focuses on a group of characters battling an evil , and sometimes ancient , antagonist that dominates the game 's world . Stories frequently involve a sovereign state in rebellion , with the protagonists taking part in the rebellion . The heroes are often destined to defeat the evil , and occasionally gather as a direct result of the antagonist 's malicious actions . Another staple of the series is the existence of two villains ; the main villain is not always who it appears to be , as the primary antagonist may actually be subservient to another character or entity . The main antagonist introduced at the beginning of the game is not always the final enemy , and the characters must continue their quest beyond what appears to be the final fight . 
 Stories in the series frequently emphasize the internal struggles , passions , and tragedies of the characters , and the main plot often recedes into the background as the focus shifts to their personal lives . Games also explore relationships between characters , ranging from love to rivalry . Other recurring situations that drive the plot include amnesia , a hero corrupted by an evil force , mistaken identity , and self @-@ sacrifice . Magical orbs and crystals are recurring in @-@ game items that are frequently connected to the themes of the games ' plots . Crystals often play a central role in the creation of the world , and a majority of the Final Fantasy games link crystals and orbs to the planet 's life force . As such , control over these crystals drives the main conflict . The classical elements are also a recurring theme in the series related to the heroes , villains , and items . Other common plot and setting themes include the Gaia hypothesis , an apocalypse , and conflicts between advanced technology and nature . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The series features a number of recurring character archetypes . Most famously , every game since Final Fantasy II , including subsequent remakes of the original Final Fantasy , features a character named Cid . Cid 's appearance , personality , goals , and role in the game ( non @-@ playable ally , party member , villain ) vary dramatically . However , two characteristics many versions of Cid have in common are 1 ) being a scientist or engineer , and 2 ) being tied in some way to an airship the party eventually acquires . Every Cid has at least one of these two traits . 
 Biggs and Wedge , inspired by two Star Wars characters of the same name , appear in numerous titles as minor characters , sometimes as comic relief . The later titles in the series feature several males with effeminate characteristics . Recurring creatures include Chocobos and Moogles . Chocobos are large , often flightless birds that appear in several installments as a means of long @-@ distance travel for characters . Moogles , on the other hand , are white , stout creatures resembling teddy bears with wings and a single antenna . They serve different capacities in games including mail delivery , <unk> , party members , and saving the game . Chocobo and Moogle appearances are often accompanied by specific musical themes that have been arranged differently for separate titles . 
 = = = Gameplay = = = 
 In Final Fantasy games , players command a party of characters as they progress through the game 's story by exploring the game world and defeating opponents . Enemies are typically encountered randomly through exploring , a trend which changed in Final Fantasy XI and Final Fantasy XII . The player issues combat orders — like " Fight " , " Magic " , and " Item " — to individual characters via a menu @-@ driven interface while engaging in battles . Throughout the series , the games have used different battle systems . Prior to Final Fantasy XI , battles were turn @-@ based with the protagonists and antagonists on different sides of the battlefield . Final Fantasy IV introduced the " Active Time Battle " ( ATB ) system that augmented the turn @-@ based nature with a perpetual time @-@ keeping system . Designed by Hiroyuki Ito , it injected urgency and excitement into combat by requiring the player to act before an enemy attacks , and was used until Final Fantasy X , which implemented the " Conditional Turn @-@ Based " ( CTB ) system . This new system returned to the previous turn @-@ based system , but added nuances to offer players more challenge . Final Fantasy XI adopted a real @-@ time battle system where characters continuously act depending on the issued command . Final Fantasy XII continued this gameplay with the " Active Dimension Battle " system . Final Fantasy XIII 's combat system , designed by the same man who worked on X , was meant to have an action @-@ oriented feel , emulating the cinematic battles in Final Fantasy VII : Advent Children . 
 Like most RPGs , the Final Fantasy installments use an experience level system for character advancement , in which experience points are accumulated by killing enemies . Character classes , specific jobs that enable unique abilities for characters , are another recurring theme . Introduced in the first game , character classes have been used differently in each title . Some restrict a character to a single job to integrate it into the story , while other games feature dynamic job systems that allow the player to choose from multiple classes and switch throughout the game . Though used heavily in many games , such systems have become less prevalent in favor of characters that are more versatile ; characters still match an archetype , but are able to learn skills outside their class . 
 Magic is another common RPG element in the series . The method by which characters gain magic varies between installments , but is generally divided into classes organized by color : " White magic " , which focuses on spells that assist teammates ; " Black magic " , which focuses on harming enemies ; " Red magic " , which is a combination of white and black magic , " Blue magic " , which mimics enemy attacks ; and " Green magic " which focuses on applying status effects to either allies or enemies . Other types of magic frequently appear such as " Time magic " , focusing on the themes of time , space , and gravity ; and " Summoning magic " , which evokes legendary creatures to aid in battle and is a feature that has persisted since Final Fantasy III . Summoned creatures are often referred to by names like " Espers " or " Eidolons " and have been inspired by mythologies from Arabic , Hindu , Norse , and Greek cultures . 
 Different means of transportation have appeared through the series . The most common is the airship for long range travel , accompanied by chocobos for travelling short distances , but others include sea and land vessels . Following Final Fantasy VII , more modern and futuristic vehicle designs have been included . 
 = = Development and history = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 In the mid @-@ 1980s , Square entered the Japanese video game industry with simple RPGs , racing games , and platformers for Nintendo 's Famicom Disk System . In 1987 , Square designer Hironobu Sakaguchi chose to create a new fantasy role @-@ playing game for the cartridge @-@ based NES , and drew inspiration from popular fantasy games : Enix 's Dragon Quest , Nintendo 's The Legend of Zelda , and Origin Systems 's Ultima series . Though often attributed to the company allegedly facing bankruptcy , Sakaguchi explained that the game was his personal last @-@ ditch effort in the game industry and that its title , Final Fantasy , stemmed from his feelings at the time ; had the game not sold well , he would have quit the business and gone back to university . Despite his explanation , publications have also attributed the name to the company 's hopes that the project would solve its financial troubles . In 2015 , Sakaguchi explained the name 's origin : the team wanted a title that would abbreviate to " FF " , which would sound good in Japanese . The name was originally going to be Fighting Fantasy , but due to concerns over trademark conflicts with the roleplaying gamebook series of the same name , they needed to settle for something else . As the word " Final " was a famous word in Japan , Sakaguchi settled on that . According to Sakaguchi , any title that created the " FF " abbreviation would have done . 
 The game indeed reversed Square 's lagging fortunes , and it became the company 's flagship franchise . Following the success , Square immediately developed a second installment . Because Sakaguchi assumed Final Fantasy would be a stand @-@ alone title , its story was not designed to be expanded by a sequel . The developers instead chose to carry over only thematic similarities from its predecessor , while some of the gameplay elements , such as the character advancement system , were overhauled . This approach has continued throughout the series ; each major Final Fantasy game features a new setting , a new cast of characters , and an upgraded battle system . Video game writer John Harris attributed the concept of reworking the game system of each installment to Nihon Falcom 's Dragon Slayer series , with which Square was previously involved as a publisher . The company regularly released new titles in the main series . However , the time between the releases of Final Fantasy XI ( 2002 ) , Final Fantasy XII ( 2006 ) , and Final Fantasy XIII ( 2009 ) were much longer than previous titles . Following Final Fantasy XIV , Square Enix stated that it intended to release Final Fantasy games either annually or biennially . This switch was to mimic the development cycles of Western games in the Call of Duty , Assassin 's Creed and Battlefield series , as well as maintain fan @-@ interest . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 For the original Final Fantasy , Sakaguchi required a larger production team than Square 's previous titles . He began crafting the game 's story while experimenting with gameplay ideas . Once the gameplay system and game world size were established , Sakaguchi integrated his story ideas into the available resources . A different approach has been taken for subsequent titles ; the story is completed first and the game built around it . Designers have never been restricted by consistency , though most feel each title should have a minimum number of common elements . The development teams strive to create completely new worlds for each title , and avoid making new games too similar to previous ones . Game locations are conceptualized early in development and design details like building parts are fleshed out as a base for entire structures . 
 The first five games were directed by Sakaguchi , who also provided the original concepts . He drew inspiration for game elements from anime films by Hayao Miyazaki ; series staples like the airships and chocobos are inspired by elements in Castle in the Sky and Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind , respectively . Sakaguchi served as a producer for subsequent games until he left Square in 2001 . Yoshinori Kitase took over directing the games until Final Fantasy VIII , and has been followed by a new director for each new title . Hiroyuki Ito designed several gameplay systems , including Final Fantasy V 's " Job System " , Final Fantasy VIII 's " Junction System " and the Active Time Battle concept , which was used from Final Fantasy IV until Final Fantasy IX . In designing the Active Time Battle system , Ito drew inspiration from Formula One racing ; he thought it would be interesting if character types had different speeds after watching race cars pass each other . Ito also co @-@ directed Final Fantasy VI with Kitase . Kenji Terada was the scenario writer for the first three games ; Kitase took over as scenario writer for Final Fantasy V through Final Fantasy VII . Kazushige Nojima became the series ' primary scenario writer from Final Fantasy VII until his resignation in October 2003 ; he has since formed his own company , <unk> . Nojima partially or completely wrote the stories for Final Fantasy VII , Final Fantasy VIII , Final Fantasy X , and Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 . He also worked as the scenario writer for the spin @-@ off series , Kingdom Hearts . Daisuke Watanabe co @-@ wrote the scenarios for Final Fantasy X and XII , and was the main writer for the XIII games . 
 Artistic design , including character and monster creations , was handled by Japanese artist Yoshitaka Amano from Final Fantasy through Final Fantasy VI . Amano also handled title logo designs for all of the main series and the image illustrations from Final Fantasy VII onward . Tetsuya Nomura was chosen to replace Amano because Nomura 's designs were more adaptable to 3D graphics . He worked with the series from Final Fantasy VII through Final Fantasy X ; for Final Fantasy IX , however , character designs were handled by <unk> Murase , Toshiyuki Itahana , and Shin Nagasawa . Nomura is also the character designer of the Kingdom Hearts series , Compilation of Final Fantasy VII , and Fabula Nova Crystallis : Final Fantasy . Other designers include Nobuyoshi Mihara and Akihiko Yoshida . Mihara was the character designer for Final Fantasy XI , and Yoshida served as character designer for Final Fantasy Tactics , the Square @-@ produced Vagrant Story , and Final Fantasy XII . 
 = = = Graphics and technology = = = 
 Because of graphical limitations , the first titles on the NES feature small sprite representations of the leading party members on the main world screen . Battle screens use more detailed , full versions of characters in a side @-@ view perspective . This practice was used until Final Fantasy VI , which uses detailed versions for both screens . The NES sprites are 26 pixels high and use a color palette of 4 colors . 6 frames of animation are used to depict different character statuses like " healthy " and " fatigued " . The SNES installments use updated graphics and effects , as well as higher quality audio than in previous games , but are otherwise similar to their predecessors in basic design . The SNES sprites are 2 pixels shorter , but have larger palettes and feature more animation frames : 11 colors and 40 frames respectively . The upgrade allowed designers to have characters be more detailed in appearance and express more emotions . The first title includes non @-@ player characters ( NPCs ) the player could interact with , but they are mostly static in @-@ game objects . Beginning with the second title , Square used predetermined pathways for NPCs to create more dynamic scenes that include comedy and drama . 
 In 1995 , Square showed an interactive SGI technical demonstration of Final Fantasy VI for the then next generation of consoles . The demonstration used Silicon Graphics 's prototype Nintendo 64 workstations to create 3D graphics . Fans believed the demo was of a new Final Fantasy title for the Nintendo 64 console ; however , 1997 saw the release of Final Fantasy VII for the Sony PlayStation . The switch was due to a dispute with Nintendo over its use of faster but more expensive cartridges , as opposed to the slower and cheaper , but much higher capacity Compact Discs used on rival systems . Final Fantasy VII introduced 3D graphics with fully pre @-@ rendered backgrounds . It was because of this switch to 3D that a CD @-@ ROM format was chosen over a cartridge format . The switch also led to increased production costs and a greater subdivision of the creative staff for Final Fantasy VII and subsequent 3D titles in the series . 
 Starting with Final Fantasy VIII , the series adopted a more photo @-@ realistic look . Like Final Fantasy VII , full motion video ( FMV ) sequences would have video playing in the background , with the polygonal characters composited on top . Final Fantasy IX returned to the more stylized design of earlier games in the series , although it still maintained , and in many cases slightly upgraded , most of the graphical techniques used in the previous two games . Final Fantasy X was released on the PlayStation 2 , and used the more powerful hardware to render graphics in real @-@ time instead of using pre @-@ rendered material to obtain a more dynamic look ; the game features full 3D environments , rather than have 3D character models move about pre @-@ rendered backgrounds . It is also the first Final Fantasy game to introduce voice acting , occurring throughout the majority of the game , even with many minor characters . This aspect added a whole new dimension of depth to the character 's reactions , emotions , and development . 
 Taking a temporary divergence , Final Fantasy XI used the PlayStation 2 's online capabilities as an MMORPG . Initially released for the PlayStation 2 with a PC port arriving six months later , Final Fantasy XI was also released on the Xbox 360 nearly four years after its original release in Japan . This was the first Final Fantasy game to use a free rotating camera . Final Fantasy XII was released in 2006 for the PlayStation 2 and uses only half as many polygons as Final Fantasy X , in exchange for more advanced textures and lighting . It also retains the freely rotating camera from Final Fantasy XI . Final Fantasy XIII and Final Fantasy XIV both make use of Crystal Tools , a middleware engine developed by Square Enix . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The titles in the series feature a variety of music , but frequently reuse themes . Most of the games open with a piece called " Prelude " , which has evolved from a simple , 2 @-@ voice arpeggio in the early games to a complex , melodic arrangement in recent installments . Victories in combat are often accompanied by a victory fanfare , a theme that has become one of the most recognized pieces of music in the series . The basic theme that accompanies Chocobo appearances has been rearranged in a different musical style for each installment . A piece called " Prologue " ( and sometimes " Final Fantasy " ) , originally featured in the first game , is often played during the ending credits . Although leitmotifs are common in the more character @-@ driven installments , theme music is typically reserved for main characters and recurring plot elements . 
 Nobuo Uematsu was the chief music composer of the Final Fantasy series until his resignation from Square Enix in November 2004 . Other composers include Masashi Hamauzu , Hitoshi Sakimoto and Junya Nakano . Uematsu was allowed to create much of the music with little direction from the production staff . Sakaguchi , however , would request pieces to fit specific game scenes including battles and exploring different areas of the game world . Once a game 's major scenarios were completed , Uematsu would begin writing the music based on the story , characters , and accompanying artwork . He started with a game 's main theme , and developed other pieces to match its style . In creating character themes , Uematsu read the game 's scenario to determine the characters ' personality . He would also ask the scenario writer for more details to scenes he was unsure about . Technical limitations were prevalent in earlier titles ; Sakaguchi would sometimes instruct Uematsu to only use specific notes . It was not until Final Fantasy IV on the SNES that Uematsu was able to add more subtlety to the music . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Overall , the Final Fantasy series has been critically acclaimed and commercially successful , though each installment has seen different levels of success . The series has seen a steady increase in total sales ; it sold over 10 million units worldwide by early 1996 , 45 million by August 2003 , 63 million by December 2005 , and 85 million by July 2008 . In June 2011 , Square Enix announced that the series had sold over 100 million units , and by March 2014 , it had sold over 110 million units . Its high sales numbers have ranked it as one of the best @-@ selling video game franchises in the industry ; in January 2007 , the series was listed as number three , and later in July as number four . 
 Several games within the series have become best @-@ selling titles . At the end of 2007 , the seventh , eighth , and ninth best @-@ selling RPGs were Final Fantasy VII , Final Fantasy VIII , and Final Fantasy X respectively . Final Fantasy VII has sold more than 9 @.@ 5 million copies worldwide , earning it the position of the best @-@ selling Final Fantasy title . Within two days of Final Fantasy VIII 's North American release on September 9 , 1999 , it became the top @-@ selling video game in the United States , a position it held for more than three weeks . Final Fantasy X sold over 1 @.@ 4 million Japanese units in pre @-@ orders alone , which set a record for the fastest @-@ selling console RPG . The MMORPG , Final Fantasy XI , reached over 200 @,@ 000 active daily players in March 2006 and had reached over half a million subscribers by July 2007 . Final Fantasy XII sold more than 1 @.@ 7 million copies in its first week in Japan . By November 6 , 2006 — one week after its release — Final Fantasy XII had shipped approximately 1 @.@ 5 million copies in North America . Final Fantasy XIII became the fastest @-@ selling game in the franchise , and sold one million units on its first day of sale in Japan . Final Fantasy XIV : A Realm Reborn , in comparison to its predecessor , was a runaway success , originally suffering from servers being overcrowded , and eventually gaining over one million unique subscribers within two months of its launch . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The series has received critical acclaim for the quality of its visuals and soundtracks . In 1996 , Next Generation ranked it as the 17th top game series of all time , speaking very highly of its graphics , music and stories . It was awarded a star on the Walk of Game in 2006 , making it the first franchise to win a star on the event ( other winners were individual games , not franchises ) . <unk> commented that the series has sought perfection as well as having been a risk taker in innovation . In 2006 , GameFAQs held a contest for the best video game series ever , with Final Fantasy finishing as the runner @-@ up to The Legend of Zelda . In a 2008 public poll held by The Game Group plc , Final Fantasy was voted the best game series , with five titles appearing in their " Greatest Games of All Time " list . 
 Many Final Fantasy games have been included in various lists of top games . Several games have been listed on multiple IGN " Top Games " lists . Eleven games were listed on Famitsu 's 2006 " Top 100 Favorite Games of All Time " , four of which were in the top ten , with Final Fantasy X and Final Fantasy VII coming first and second , respectively . The series holds seven Guinness World Records in the Guinness World Records Gamer 's Edition 2008 , which include the " Most Games in an RPG Series " ( 13 main titles , seven enhanced titles , and 32 spin @-@ off titles ) , the " Longest Development Period " ( the production of Final Fantasy XII took five years ) , and the " Fastest @-@ Selling Console RPG in a Single Day " ( Final Fantasy X ) . The 2009 edition listed two titles from the series among the top 50 consoles games : Final Fantasy XII at number 8 and Final Fantasy VII at number 20 . 
 However , the series has garnered some criticism . IGN has commented that the menu system used by the games is a major detractor for many and is a " significant reason why they haven 't touched the series . " The site has also heavily criticized the use of random encounters in the series ' battle systems . IGN further stated the various attempts to bring the series into film and animation have either been unsuccessful , unremarkable , or did not live up to the standards of the games . In 2007 , Edge criticized the series for a number of related titles that include the phrase " Final Fantasy " in their titles , which are considered inferior to previous titles . It also commented that with the departure of Hironobu Sakaguchi , the series might be in danger of growing stale . 
 Several individual Final Fantasy titles have garnered extra attention ; some for their positive reception and others for their negative reception . Final Fantasy VII topped GamePro 's " 26 Best RPGs of All Time " list , as well as GameFAQs " Best Game Ever " audience polls in 2004 and 2005 . Despite the success of Final Fantasy VII , it is sometimes criticized as being overrated . In 2003 , GameSpy listed it as the seventh most overrated game of all time , while IGN presented views from both sides . Dirge of Cerberus : Final Fantasy VII shipped 392 @,@ 000 units in its first week of release , but received review scores that were much lower than that of other Final Fantasy games . A delayed , negative review after the Japanese release of Dirge of Cerberus from Japanese gaming magazine Famitsu hinted at a controversy between the magazine and Square Enix . Though Final Fantasy : The Spirits Within was praised for its visuals , the plot was criticized and the film was considered a box office bomb . Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles for the GameCube received overall positive review scores , but reviews stated that the use of Game Boy Advances as controllers was a big detractor . The predominantly negative reception of the original version of Final Fantasy XIV caused then @-@ president Yoichi Wada to issue an official apology during a Tokyo press conference , stating that the brand had been " greatly damaged " by the game 's reception . 
 = = Impact and legacy = = 
 The Final Fantasy series and several specific games within it have been credited for introducing and popularizing many concepts that are today widely used in console RPGs . The original title is often cited as one of the most influential early console RPGs , and played a major role in legitimizing and popularizing the genre . Many console RPGs featured one @-@ on @-@ one battles against monsters from a first @-@ person perspective . Final Fantasy introduced a side view perspective with groups of monsters against a group of characters that has been frequently used . It also introduced an early evolving class change system , as well as different methods of transportation , including a ship , canoe , and flying airship . Final Fantasy II was the first sequel in the industry to omit characters and locations from the previous title . It also introduced an activity @-@ based progression system , which has been used in later RPG series such as SaGa , Grandia , and The Elder Scrolls . Final Fantasy III introduced the job system , a character progression engine allowing the player to change character classes , as well as acquire new and advanced classes and combine class abilities , at any time during the game . Final Fantasy IV is considered a milestone for the genre , introducing a dramatic storyline with a strong emphasis on character development and personal relationships . Final Fantasy VII is credited as having the largest industry impact of the series , and with allowing console role @-@ playing games to gain mass @-@ market appeal . 
 The series affected Square 's business on several levels . The commercial failure of Final Fantasy : The Spirits Within resulted in hesitation and delays from Enix during merger discussions with Square . Square 's decision to produce games exclusively for the Sony PlayStation — a move followed by Enix 's decision with the Dragon Quest series — severed their relationship with Nintendo . Final Fantasy games were absent from Nintendo consoles , specifically the Nintendo 64 , for seven years . Critics attribute the switch of strong third @-@ party titles like the Final Fantasy and Dragon Quest games to Sony 's PlayStation , and away from the Nintendo 64 , as one of the reasons behind PlayStation being the more successful of the two consoles . The release of the Nintendo GameCube , which used optical disc media , in 2001 caught the attention of Square . To produce games for the system , Square created the shell company The Game Designers Studio and released Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles , which spawned its own metaseries within the main franchise . Final Fantasy XI 's lack of an online method of subscription cancellation prompted the creation of legislation in Illinois that requires internet gaming services to provide such a method to the state 's residents . 
 The series ' popularity has resulted in its appearance and reference in numerous facets of popular culture like anime , TV series , and webcomics . Music from the series has permeated into different areas of culture . Final Fantasy IV 's " Theme of Love " was integrated into the curriculum of Japanese school children and has been performed live by orchestras and metal bands . In 2003 , Uematsu became involved with The Black Mages , a rock group independent of Square that has released albums of arranged Final Fantasy tunes . Bronze medalists Alison Bartosik and Anna Kozlova performed their synchronized swimming routine at the 2004 Summer Olympics to music from Final Fantasy VIII . Many of the titles ' official soundtracks have been released for sale as well . Numerous companion books , which normally provide in @-@ depth game information , have been published . In Japan , they are published by Square and are called Ultimania books . 
 = Muhanna ibn Isa = 
 Husam ad @-@ Din Muhanna ibn Isa ( also known as Muhanna II ; d . 1335 ) was the lord of Palmyra and amir al @-@ ʿarab ( commander of the Bedouins ) under the Mamluk Sultanate . He served between 1284 and his death , but was dismissed and reinstated four times during this period . As the chieftain of the Al Fadl , a clan of the Tayy tribe , which dominated the Syrian Desert , Muhanna wielded considerable influence among the Bedouin . He was described by historian Amalia Levanoni as " the eldest and most senior amir " of the Al Fadl during his era . 
 Muhanna was first appointed amir al @-@ ʿarab to replace his father Isa ibn Muhanna in 1284 . He was imprisoned by Sultan al @-@ Ashraf Khalil in 1293 , but released two years later . In 1300 , he commanded a wing of the Mamluk army in the Third Battle of Homs against the Mongol Ilkhanate . He defected to the latter in the early years of Sultan an @-@ Nasir Muhammad 's reign ( 1310 – 1341 ) , ushering in a policy of playing off the Mamluks and the Mongols to further his own interests . An @-@ Nasir eventually banished Muhanna and his tribe to the depths of the Syrian Desert . Through mediation by the Ayyubid prince , al @-@ Afdal Muhammad , Muhanna reconciled with an @-@ Nasir in 1330 and remained loyal to the Mamluks until his death five years later . 
 Muhanna was succeeded by his son Musa , and his descendants filled the office of amir al @-@ ʿarab for the next seven decades with minor interruption . Throughout his reign , Muhanna was granted numerous iqtaʿat ( fiefs ) by an @-@ Nasir , including Palmyra , Salamiyah , Sarmin and Douma . Muhanna later criticized an @-@ Nasir 's generous iqtaʿ distribution to the Bedouin tribes , believing it would ultimately degrade the character of the Bedouin and in turn , weaken the Muslim armies . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 Muhanna , also known as Muhanna II , belonged to the Al Fadl clan , a branch of the large Arab tribe of Tayy . His grandfather Muhanna ibn Mani ' ibn Haditha ibn <unk> ibn Fadl ibn Rabi 'a al @-@ Ta 'i or " Muhanna I " was the head of the clan and sometimes referred to as the " king of the Arabs " by the Mamluk government ; his son Isa became the first lord of Palmyra as a reward for supporting the Mamluk sultan Qalawun in the Second Battle of Homs in 1281 . 
 = = Lord of Palmyra = = 
 = = = First and second reigns = = = 
 Muhanna succeeded his father ' Isa as lord of Palmyra and amir al @-@ ʿarab in 1284 , after receiving the appointment from Sultan Qalawun . Muhanna visited Qalawun 's successor , Sultan al @-@ Ashraf Khalil , in Cairo in 1291 . In 1293 , after celebrating the wedding of his granddaughter , Muhanna and his sons and brothers met al @-@ Ashraf Khalil at the wells of <unk> , near Homs , where the sultan had been on a hunting expedition . Al @-@ Ashraf Khalil had Muhanna and his family arrested and imprisoned in the Cairo Citadel . Muhanna was replaced by his distant cousin , Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr , from the Al Ali branch of Al Fadl . Muhanna was released with his family and restored as amir al @-@ ʿarab and lord of Palmyra two years later by Sultan al @-@ Adil Kitbugha . In 1298 , Muhanna performed the Hajj pilgrimage to Mecca . 
 Muhanna later commanded the right wing of the Mamluk army during the Third Battle of Homs in 1299 / 1300 , during which the Mamluks were defeated by the Mongol Ilkhanids . In 1311 , the Mamluk na 'ib ( governor ) of Aleppo , Qarasunqur , defected to the Ilkhanids and was given refuge by Muhanna , who unsuccessfully attempted to mediate between Qarasunqur and Sultan an @-@ Nasir Muhammad ( r . 1310 – 1341 ) . These circumstances together with Muhanna 's suspicions of an @-@ Nasir 's negative disposition toward him prompted Muhanna and Qarasunqur to seek safe haven in Ilkhanid @-@ held Iraq . To that end , in 1312 , Muhanna sent his son Musa to confer with Öljaitü of the Ilkhanate , and afterward he defected to the latter with his son Sulayman ; unlike his father , Musa remained loyal to the Mamluks . Öljaitü gave Muhanna iqtaʿat ( fiefs ) in al @-@ <unk> , south of Baghdad . An @-@ Nasir Muhammad consequently dismissed Muhanna from his principality and appointed his brother Fadl ibn Isa the lord of Palmyra . 
 = = = Third reign = = = 
 Muhanna arrived at the Ilkhan 's court in 1316 , but then decided to go back to Palmyra where he was contacted by the sultan who summoned him to his court in Cairo . Muhanna avoided meeting the sultan , and sent his brothers and sons instead . He was able to gain the sultan 's forgiveness and was restored to his position in 1317 . The defection and subsequent reconciliation with an @-@ Nasir marked the first episode in Muhanna 's policy of extracting maximum gain from both the Mamluks and the Ilkhanids . According to contemporary historian Abu 'l Fida , who maintained good ties with the Al Fadl , Muhanna pursued a policy whereby both the Mamluks and Ilkhanids accorded him iqtaʿat , money and robes of honor while he stayed effectively neutral , " not going to this party or that ; a case the like of which had never happened before " . Moreover , Fadl too participated in this policy with Muhanna , albeit discreetly ; the contemporary historian al @-@ Umari wrote " Muhanna and Fadl were agreed at heart , but openly they were otherwise " . 
 An @-@ Nasir sought to keep the Al Fadl loyal to him and prevent their defection to the Ilkhanate , as well as ensure they would not disrupt peaceful travel on the roads . To accomplish this , an @-@ Nasir adopted an unprecedented policy among Mamluk sultans by distributing large iqtaʿat and grants to the Bedouin , namely the Al Fadl . Moreover , an @-@ Nasir granted Al Fadl members ' requests for possession of particularly lucrative iqtaʿat belonging to the Mamluk emirs ( commanders / princes ) of Aleppo , Hama and Damascus ( the Mamluk emirs were typically compensated with other iqtaʿat ) . In addition to Palmyra , Sarmin and Salamiyah , Muhanna was also given the town of Douma in the Ghouta near Damascus as an iqta . Muhanna criticized an @-@ Nasir for the lavish distribution of iqtaʿat to his tribesmen out of belief that such excesses would ruin the character of the Bedouin and ultimately weaken the Muslim armies . He also asserted to an @-@ Nasir that " even if he [ sic ] wished to change this situation ... you will no longer be able to do so " since the tribesmen would not willingly forfeit their new properties . 
 Muhanna later reestablished contact with the Ilkhanate , causing the sultan to banish him with his whole tribe in 1320 . On an @-@ Nasir 's order , the Mamluk army in Syria drove the Al Fadl from their home district of Salamiyah and pursued them eastward up to the Euphrates fortress towns of al @-@ Rahba and Anah . According to Ibn Abi al @-@ Fada 'il , Muhanna was punished because he went back on an agreement his son Sulayman made with an @-@ Nasir in 1319 . The agreement stipulated that the Al Fadl would receive 250 @,@ 000 silver dirhams and the iqtaʿat of <unk> 'at and Bosra in return for joining the Mamluk army as auxiliaries in an upcoming campaign against Ilkhanid @-@ held Sinjar ; an @-@ Nasir gave them the iqtaʿat and money , but when the Mamluk army arrived , Muhanna 's forces stopped it at ' Urd near Palmyra and refused it passage through Al Fadl territory . The tribe was exiled from their encampments in the Palmyrene steppe and were forced to live deep in the Syrian Desert . 
 = = = Final reign and death = = = 
 Ten years later , Muhanna contacted the Ayyubid emir al @-@ Afdal Muhammad of Hama ( vassal of the Mamluks ) , and requested that he intercede with the sultan on Muhanna 's behalf ; an @-@ Nasir ultimately forgave Muhanna , reinstating him in 1330 . This marked the end of Muhanna 's policy of playing the Mamluks and Ilkhanids against each other . Thereafter , Muhanna remained loyal to the sultanate until his death near al @-@ Salamiyah in June 1335 , at around age 80 . According to historian A. S. Tritton , " there was public lamentation " for Muhanna 's death and " black was worn " in mourning . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Historian Amalia Levanoni described Muhanna as " the eldest and most senior amir " of the Al Fadl during his era . By 1352 , Muhanna 's descendants amounted to 110 men , all with with their own clans , iqtaʿ and princely titles . According to Levanoni , Muhanna 's warning to an @-@ Nasir about the effects of distributing and subsequently seizing iqtaʿat " came true only a short time " after Muhanna 's death , when his son and successor , Musa , threatened to start a Bedouin revolt and defect to the Ilkhanate if an @-@ Nasir did not return iqtaʿat confiscated from the Al Fadl . 
 = The Little Fire Chief = 
 The Little Fire Chief is a 1910 American silent short comedy produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film focuses on a young boy , Willie Stone , who follows a parade of firemen and attempts to join them as their leader . The firemen find it humorous and allow him to play with them . The fire alarm sounds and Willie attempts to join them , but is too slow . On their way back , Willie holds them up and his sister appears . A fireman named Jack , who has affections for the woman , convinces Willie to be relieved of his " command " by promising to call him later . Marie Eline played the role of Willie Stone , but the other two credits are claimed to have been William Garwood and Mignon Anderson . The rest of the cast and credits are unknown . The film was released on November 8 , 1910 and does not appear to have had any reviews in the usual trade publications . The film was advertised nationally and was claimed to have been popular in Vancouver , Canada . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Moving Picture World from October 29 , 1910 . It states : " Willie Stone is only six years old , but he yearns to be a fireman . He is much impressed with the parade of firemen he sees in his hometown , so much so in fact that he <unk> deserts his sister on the streets to follow the ' smoke eaters . ' But Willie is only a little boy , and despite his enthusiasm , he is soon weary and <unk> . His plight , added to his tears , attracts the attention of a kindly fireman who is driving with his engine back to quarters . The lad 's discomfort is soon forgotten , for the fireman gives him a ride back to the engine house . There Willie gravely applies to the captain for a position on the uniformed force , and is jokingly accepted . But he does not see the humor in it and follows the other men to the <unk> , where he takes part in their sports . " 
 " But in the midst of the happiest day of his life , an alarm is sounded , and the firemen hastily slide down the pole to their duty . The new fireman , however , is not the kind to be deserted . Grabbing the helmet , the insignia of his office , he follows the others , but it is too late to go to the fire . He arrives in time to hold them up on their way back , but is captured by his weeping sister . He does not wish to leave his command , but his friend , fireman Jack Allen , finally induces him to go on the promise that he , Jack , will call later . Perhaps one reason Jack is so accommodating is because he likes [ his ] sister . Jack pays ardent court to her , and the flame of their affection [ s ] resists all of young Willie 's efforts to put it out . He didn 't really mean to try , but he assuredly poured cold water on Jack , for it was in the line of what he regarded as his duty . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Marie Eline as Willie Stone 
 William Garwood as Jack Allen ( unconfirmed ) 
 Mignon Anderson as Willie Stone 's sister ( unconfirmed ) 
 In December 1912 , a notice in the The Monroe News @-@ Star announced the showing of this film and also gave the key roles of the players . Though the credits cannot be confirmed , the " Thanhouser Kid " ( Marie Eline ) , William Garwood and Mignon Anderson were given as the featured players . This would indicate that Garwood played Jack Allen and the sister was played by Anderson if the information is accurate . 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . He was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil or Lucius J. Henderson . Cameramen employed by the company during this era included Blair Smith , Carl Louis Gregory , and Alfred H. Moses , Jr. though none are specifically credited . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . The cast credits for this production are fragmentary like many 1910 Thanhouser productions . In late 1910 , the Thanhouser company released a list of the important personalities in their films . The list includes G.W. Abbe , Justus D. Barnes , Frank H. Crane , Irene Crane , Marie Eline , Violet Heming , Martin J. Faust , Thomas Fortune , George Middleton , Grace Moore , John W. Noble , Anna Rosemond , Mrs. George Walters . The role of Willie Stone was played by Marie Eline . This film was another example of Eline cast in the role of a boy . Eline 's with the first such credit was as a young Italian boy in The Two Roses . Eline would also star as Hans in The Little Hero of Holland . If the cast information provided by the The Monroe News @-@ Star is accurate , it represents the earliest credit of Mignon Anderson for the Thanhouser Company . If it is not , the first known credit for would be four months later in Robert Emmet in March 1911 . The film would also be an early credit of William Garwood , who was among the most important actors at Thanhouser . He joined the company in late 1909 and remained until 1911 before returning in 1912 . His previous and first credited work with Thanhouser was Jane Eyre . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel comedy , approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet long was released on November 8 , 1910 . The film had a wide national release , advertising theaters are known in Montana , Texas , Kansas , South Dakota , Indiana , Pennsylvania , Maryland , Louisiana , and Missouri . The film was also shown in Vancouver , Canada by the Province Theatre . 
 Bowers does not cite any trade publication reviews for this film , making it unlikely that the film was given attention in The New York Dramatic Mirror , The Moving Picture World or The Moving Picture News publications . The film was apparently a success at the Province Theater when it was shown in Vancouver . It is possible that non @-@ advertisement reviews of the film may exist in other publications . 
 = Soyuz TM @-@ 30 = 
 Soyuz TM @-@ 30 ( Russian : Союз <unk> @-@ 30 , Union TM @-@ 30 ) , also known as Mir EO @-@ 28 , was a Soyuz mission , the 39th and final human spaceflight to the Mir space station . The crew of the mission was sent by MirCorp , a privately funded company , to reactivate and repair the station . The crew also resupplied the station and boosted the station to an orbit with a low point ( perigee ) of 360 and a high point ( apogee ) of 378 kilometers ( 223 and 235 miles , respectively ) . The boost in the station 's orbit , which was done by utilizing the engines of the Progress M1 @-@ 1 and M1 @-@ 2 spacecraft , made transit between Mir and the International Space Station impossible , as desired by NASA . The mission was the first privately funded mission to a space station . 
 The mission was part of an effort by MirCorp to refurbish and privatize the aging Mir space station , which was nearing the end of its operational life . Further commercially funded missions beyond Soyuz TM @-@ 30 were originally planned to continue the restoration efforts of the then 14 @-@ year @-@ old space station , but insufficient funding and investment ultimately led to the de @-@ orbit of the station in early 2001 . 
 = = Crew = = 
 Soyuz TM @-@ 30 was the first spaceflight for flight commander Zalyotin , who became a cosmonaut in 1990 and completed his general training two years later in 1992 . TM @-@ 30 was the third visit to space made by flight engineer Kaleri , who became a cosmonaut in 1984 and completed general training in 1986 . He served as flight engineer aboard the Soyuz TM @-@ 14 and TM @-@ 24 missions to Mir in 1992 and 1996 @-@ 7 , respectively . 
 = = = Backup crew = = = 
 While Soyuz TM @-@ 30 was in orbit , a second privately funded mission was being planned to continue the restoration efforts aboard Mir . The crew assigned to this mission , although never flown , was reported to have been the backup crew for TM @-@ 30 , cosmonauts Salizhan Sharipov and Pavel Vinogradov . 
 = = Background = = 
 Soyuz TM @-@ 30 was intended by MirCorp to be the first in a series of missions to refurbish the 14 @-@ year @-@ old Mir space station for commercial use . Although the mission was scheduled to last approximately two months , commander Sergei Zalyotin said before the flight that if additional funds became available the mission could be extended until August , when another crew would replace them . The other possible scenario , which occurred in reality , was again to leave the station uninhabited , as had been done several months before the mission . Towards the end of Soyuz TM @-@ 30 plans were formed to send another privately funded mission to continue with MirCorp 's maintenance efforts ; cosmonauts Salizhan Sharipov and Pavel Vinogradov were tentatively assigned as the crew . 
 = = Mission highlights = = 
 Soyuz TM @-@ 30 launched at 05 : 01 : 29 UT on April 4 , 2000 . Docking occurred on April 6 at 06 : 31 : 24 UT . Although the Soyuz docking system is automated under normal conditions , the final few meters of the approach to the station were executed in manual mode . The decision to switch to manual mode came after the cosmonauts noticed a small deviation in the spacecraft 's approach to the targeted docking port . At about 09 : 32 UT on the day of docking , the crew prepared to open the hatches between the Soyuz spacecraft and the station . After entering the station the crew stabilized the atmosphere inside Mir and undertook routine maintenance work . 
 On April 25 , an unmanned Progress resupply mission , Progress M1 @-@ 2 , launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome to the station to deliver supplies to the crew . Progress M1 @-@ 2 docked with Mir on April 27 . On April 26 , the Progress M1 @-@ 1 spacecraft , which had been docked since February and was used by the Russian Federal Space Agency to boost the station to a higher orbit , undocked and de @-@ orbited over the Pacific Ocean east of New Zealand . 
 The mission 's only Extra @-@ Vehicular Activity , or spacewalk , took place on May 12 , between 10 : 44 and 15 : 36 UTC . The primary objectives of the spacewalk were to repair damage to Mir 's exterior components and record panoramas of the station 's hull in order for experts on Earth to analyze the effects of space on the station itself . The cosmonauts inspected a malfunctioning solar array on the Kvant @-@ 1 module of the station . They discovered that a burnt @-@ through wire connecting the array with its steering system was preventing its proper rotation . The array was subsequently deemed a loss . 
 On June 15 , 2000 , the TM @-@ 30 spacecraft undocked from the station at about 21 : 24 UT . The de @-@ orbit burn occurred at about 23 : 52 UT and landing followed at about 00 : 44 UT on June 16 , about 45 kilometers ( 28 mi ) southeast of <unk> in Kazakhstan . 
 = = Milestones = = 
 Soyuz TM @-@ 30 was the first privately funded manned space expedition but several other firsts were also achieved , including the first privately funded extra @-@ vehicular activity , and the first privately funded unmanned resupply mission to a space station , utilizing the Progress @-@ M1 spacecraft . Soyuz TM @-@ 30 also managed to delay the de @-@ orbit of Mir , which was originally scheduled to occur some time in 2000 , but ultimately occurred in March 2001 . 
 = John and Christopher Wright = 
 John ( Jack ) Wright ( January 1568 – 8 November 1605 ) , and Christopher ( Kit ) Wright ( 1570 ? – 8 November 1605 ) , were members of the group of provincial English Catholics who planned the failed Gunpowder Plot of 1605 , a conspiracy to assassinate King James I by blowing up the House of Lords . Their sister married another plotter , Thomas Percy . Educated at the same school in York , the Wrights had early links with Guy Fawkes , the man left in charge of the explosives stored in the undercroft beneath the House of Lords . As known recusants the brothers were on several occasions arrested for reasons of national security . Both were also members of the Earl of Essex 's rebellion of 1601 . 
 John was one of the first men to join the conspiracy , which was led by Robert Catesby . Christopher joined in March 1605 . At about midnight on 4 November Fawkes was discovered and arrested , following which John , Christopher and the rest of the conspirators travelled across the Midlands , attempting to gain support for a popular uprising . Eventually the group opted to wait for the authorities at Holbeche House , on the border of Staffordshire . On 8 November the Sheriff of Worcester arrived with a large group of armed men , and both brothers were killed in the ensuing firefight . 
 = = Family and life before 1604 = = 
 John and Christopher Wright were born to Robert Wright and his second wife , Ursula Rudston , daughter of Nicholas and Jane Rudston of Hayton . John was baptised at <unk> in Yorkshire , on 16 January 1568 , and Christopher was born in 1570 . Their sister , Martha , married Thomas Percy in 1591 . 
 The brothers were pupils at St Peter 's School in York , along with Guy Fawkes , whose name has become synonymous with the Gunpowder Plot . Although outwardly conformist , the school 's headmaster John <unk> came from a notable family of Yorkshire recusants , and his predecessor at St Peter 's had spent 20 years in prison for his recusancy . Three Catholic priests , Oswald Tesimond , Edward <unk> and Robert Middleton , were also educated at St Peter 's . John and Christopher were both married , to Dorothy and Margaret respectively . John had a daughter , born some time in the late 1590s . 
 As a precautionary measure , in 1596 they were each arrested during Queen Elizabeth I 's illness . They were incarcerated at the White Lyon prison in 1601 for their involvement in the Earl of Essex 's rebellion . Both were skilled swordsmen , and John was renowned for his courage . The Jesuit priest Oswald Tesimond wrote that he possessed a " good physique and sound constitution . Rather on the tall side , his features were pleasing . He was somewhat taciturn in manner , but very loyal to his friends , even if his friends were few " . Christopher 's appearance was slightly different from that of his brother , " not like him in face , as being fatter and a lighter coloured hair and taller of person " . According to Father John Gerard , John 's involvement with Essex coincided with his conversion to Catholicism . Gerard also noted that John 's household , <unk> Hall in Lincolnshire , was a place where " he had Priests come often , both for his spiritual comfort and their own in corporal helps " , although the government 's description , " a Popish college for traitors " , was somewhat less favourable . Following his conversion John became " a man of exemplary life " . Two years later , as the queen 's health waned , a nervous government ensured that John and Christopher were again imprisoned , the English antiquarian William Camden describing them as men " hunger @-@ starved for innovation " . Christopher may have travelled to Spain in 1603 using the alias Anthony Dutton , seeking Spanish support for English Catholics , although biographer Mark Nicholls mentions that Dutton 's role may have been attributed to Christopher by Fawkes and Thomas Wintour , held in the Tower of London after the failure of the plot . 
 = = Gunpowder Plot = = 
 Early in 1604 Robert Catesby , a Catholic convert who had lost patience with King James I 's lack of toleration of Catholics , invited his cousin Thomas Wintour to a meeting at which John was also present . Catesby proposed to blow up " the Parliament House with gunpowder " , killing the king and his government , as in " that place , have they done us all the mischief " . Catesby had not then given up hope on foreign help , and so he sent Wintour to the continent to meet with the Constable of Castille . Wintour also met with Welsh spy Hugh Owen , who introduced him to Guy Fawkes , a man with whose name Catesby was familiar . A fifth conspirator , Thomas Percy , joined them several weeks later . Percy was related to the Wright family by marriage , having wed John 's sister , Martha . The group met on 20 May 1604 at the Duck and Drake inn , in the fashionable Strand district of London . After the meeting they swore an oath of secrecy on a prayer book and celebrated Mass in another room with Father John Gerard , who was ignorant of their purpose . 
 From these early meetings , according to biographer Mark Nicholls , John exhibited " little sign of doubt or scruple thereafter " . He remained close to the heart of the conspiracy , moving his family to Lapworth in Warwickshire , and stabling horses there . By March 1605 Christopher had joined the conspiracy as well , but in October that year , as the plan was nearing its culmination , its existence was revealed to the authorities by an anonymous letter delivered to William Parker , 4th Baron Monteagle , warning him to stay away from Parliament . Uncertain of its meaning Monteagle delivered the letter to the English Secretary of State , Robert Cecil , 1st Earl of Salisbury . Monteagle 's servant was closely related to Christopher 's wife , Margaret , and thus the plotters soon became aware of its existence . Catesby , by then at White Webbs near Enfield Chase with the Wright brothers , decided that the letter did not constitute a sufficiently serious threat to the scheme , and he decided to forge ahead . On 4 November Percy visited his patron , Henry Percy , 9th Earl of Northumberland , to see if he could discern what rumours surrounded the letter . He returned to London and assured John , Thomas Wintour and Robert Keyes that they had nothing to be concerned about . That same evening John probably set off for the Midlands with Catesby and his servant Thomas Bates , while the others moved into their positions , ready for the planned explosion the following day . At about midnight the authorities made a search of the House of Lords , and in the chamber 's undercroft they discovered and arrested Fawkes , who was guarding the gunpowder the conspirators had placed there . 
 As news of Fawkes 's capture spread , particularly through the great houses of the Strand , Christopher deduced what had occurred and went to Thomas Wintour at the Duck and Drake inn , exclaiming " the matter is discovered " . Wintour ordered him to verify the news , and on confirming that the government were seeking Thomas Percy ( for whom Fawkes , using the alias " John Johnson " , claimed to be working ) , ordered him to alert Percy . Christopher and Percy left London together , heading for Dunstable . 
 With the group mostly reintegrated , they spent the next two days moving across Warwickshire and Worcestershire , attempting to drum up support for a rebellion that as time passed became ever more unlikely . On 6 November , the same day they were helping to raid Warwick Castle for supplies , the brothers were identified by the Lord Chief Justice Sir John Popham as suspects . This prompted the authorities to issue a public proclamation on 7 November naming them and several of their fellow conspirators as wanted men . The group tried unsuccessfully to recruit more rebels at Hewell Grange , but on 7 November , tired and desperate , they decided to make their stand at Holbeche House , on the border of Staffordshire . On the arrival the following morning of the Sheriff of Worcester and his company of men , a gun battle broke out and Catesby , Percy , and both Wright brothers were shot . With medical attention they might have survived , but " the baser sort " among the sheriff 's men hurriedly stripped them of their clothes ( Christopher 's boots were pulled off to reach his silk stockings ) , and left them to die . 
 = Inner Hebrides = 
 The Inner Hebrides ( Scottish Gaelic : Na h @-@ Eileanan a @-@ <unk> , " the inner isles " ) is an archipelago off the west coast of mainland Scotland , to the south east of the Outer Hebrides . Together these two island chains form the Hebrides , which experience a mild oceanic climate . The Inner Hebrides comprise 35 inhabited islands as well as 44 uninhabited islands with an area greater than 30 hectares ( 74 acres ) . The main commercial activities are tourism , crofting , fishing and whisky distilling . In modern times the Inner Hebrides have formed part of two separate local government jurisdictions , one to the north and the other to the south . Together , the islands have an area of about 4 @,@ 130 km2 ( 1 @,@ 594 sq mi ) , and had a population of 18 @,@ 948 in 2011 . The population density is therefore about 4 @.@ 6 per km2 ( 12 per square mile ) . 
 There are various important prehistoric structures , many of which pre @-@ date the first written references to the islands by Roman and Greek authors . In the historic period the earliest known settlers were Picts to the north and Gaels in the southern kingdom of Dál Riada prior to the islands becoming part of the Suðreyjar kingdom of the Norse , who ruled for over 400 years until sovereignty was transferred to Scotland by the Treaty of Perth in 1266 . Control of the islands was then held by various clan chiefs , principally the MacLeans , MacLeods and MacDonalds . The Highland Clearances of the 19th century had a devastating effect on many communities and it is only in recent years that population levels have ceased to decline . 
 Sea transport is crucial and a variety of ferry services operate to mainland Scotland and between the islands . The Gaelic language remains strong in some areas ; the landscapes have inspired a variety of artists ; and there is a diversity of wildlife . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The islands form a disparate archipelago . The largest islands are , from south to north , Islay , Jura , Mull , Rùm and Skye . Skye is the largest and most populous of all with an area of 1 @,@ 656 km2 ( 639 sq mi ) and a population of just over 10 @,@ 000 . 
 The southern group are in Argyll , an area roughly corresponding with the heartlands of the ancient kingdom of Dál Riata and incorporated into the modern unitary council area of Argyll and Bute . The northern islands were part of the county of Inverness @-@ shire and are now in the Highland Council area . 
 = = = Physical = = = 
 The ten largest islands are as follows . 
 The geology and geomorphology of the islands is varied . Some , such as Skye and Mull , are mountainous , whilst others like Tiree are relatively low @-@ lying . The highest mountains are the Cuillins of Skye , although peaks over 300 metres ( 980 ft ) are common elsewhere . Much of the coastline is machair , a fertile low @-@ lying dune pastureland . Many of the islands are swept by strong tides , and the Corryvreckan tide race between <unk> and Jura is one of the largest whirlpools in the world . 
 There are various smaller archipelagoes including the <unk> Islands , <unk> Islands , Slate Islands , Small Isles , Summer Isles and Treshnish Islands . 
 = = = Human = = = 
 The inhabited islands of the Inner Hebrides had a population of 18 @,@ 257 at the 2001 census , and this had grown to 18 @,@ 948 in 2011 . During the same period Scottish island populations as a whole grew by 4 % to 103 @,@ 702 . There are a further 44 uninhabited Inner Hebrides with an area greater than 74 acres ( 30 ha ) . Records for the last date of settlement for the smaller islands are incomplete , but most of them were inhabited at some point during the Neolithic , Iron Age , Early Historic or Norse periods . In common with the other main island chains of Scotland , many of the smaller and more remote islands were abandoned during the 19th and 20th centuries , in some cases after continuous habitation since prehistoric times . These islands had been perceived as relatively self @-@ sufficient agricultural economies , but a view developed among both islanders and outsiders that the more remote islands lacked the essential services of a modern industrial economy . However , the populations of the larger islands grew overall by more than 12 % from 1981 @-@ 2001 . 
 The main commercial activities are tourism , crofting , fishing and whisky distilling ( centred on Islay but also including Talisker in Skye , Isle of Jura Single Malt and Tobermory and <unk> in Mull ) . Overall , the area is relatively reliant on primary industries and the public sector ; there is a dependence on self @-@ employment and micro @-@ business , and most parts are defined by Highlands and Islands Enterprise as economically " Fragile Areas " . However , the islands are well placed to exploit renewable energy , particularly onshore and offshore wind ; and the Sleat peninsula of Skye is an example of a more economically robust area . Some of the islands have development trusts that support the local economy . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 The influence of the Atlantic Ocean and the North Atlantic Current creates a mild oceanic climate . Temperatures are generally cool , averaging 6 @.@ 5 ° C ( 44 ° F ) in January and 15 @.@ 4 ° C ( 60 ° F ) in July at <unk> on the Trotternish peninsula of Skye . Snow seldom lies at sea level and frosts are fewer than on the mainland . Winds are a limiting factor for vegetation : a speed of 128 km / h ( 80 mph ) has been recorded ; south @-@ westerlies are the most common . Rainfall is generally high at between 1300 – 2000 mm ( 50 – 80 in ) per annum , and the mountains and hills are wetter still . Tiree is one of the sunniest places in the country and had 300 days of sunshine in 1975 . Trotternish typically has 200 hours of bright sunshine in May , the sunniest month . 
 = = Prehistory = = 
 The Hebrides were originally settled in the Mesolithic era and have a diversity of prehistoric sites . A flint arrowhead found in a field near Bridgend , Islay has been dated to 10 @,@ 800 BC . This find may indicate the presence of a summer hunting party rather than permanent settlement . Burnt hazelnut shells and microscopic charcoal found at Farm Fields , Kinloch on Rùm indicate a settlement of some kind and this is amongst the oldest evidence of occupation in Scotland . 
 Evidence of large @-@ scale Mesolithic nut processing , radiocarbon dated to circa 7000 BC , has been found in a midden pit at <unk> on Colonsay . The dig discovered the remains of hundreds of thousands of burned hazelnut shells and gives an insight into communal activity and forward planning in the period . The nuts were harvested in a single year and pollen analysis suggests that the hazel trees were all cut down at the same time . The scale of the activity , unparalleled elsewhere in Scotland , and the lack of large game on the island , suggests the possibility that Colonsay contained a community with a largely vegetarian diet for the time they spent on the island . 
 Three stone hearths and traces of red ochre found on Jura and dated to 6000 BC are the earliest stone @-@ built structures found so far in Scotland . However , in general the Neolithic sites in the Inner Hebrides lack the scale and drama of those found in Orkney and the Western Isles . There are numerous Iron Age sites including the remains of Dun <unk> fort on Skye , which are similar in layout to that of both a broch and a complex Atlantic roundhouse . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The earliest extant written reference to these islands appears in Pliny the Elder 's Natural History , where he states that there are 30 " Hebudes " . Ptolemy , writing about 80 years later , around AD 140 @-@ 150 and drawing on the earlier naval expedition of Agricola , refers to the <unk> ( " Eboudai " ) ( " Ebudes " or " <unk> " in Latin translation ) of which he writes that there were only five , thus possibly specifically meaning the Inner Hebrides . Pliny probably took his information from Pytheas of Massilia who visited Britain sometime between 322 and 285 BC . It is possible that Ptolemy did so also , as Agricola 's information about the west coast of Scotland was of poor quality . 
 Watson ( 1926 ) states that the meaning of Ptolemy 's " Eboudai " is unknown and that the root may be pre @-@ Celtic . Other early written references include the flight of the <unk> people from Ireland to " Domon and to <unk> in the north of Alba " , which is mentioned in the 12th century Lebor Gabála Érenn . Domon , meaning the " deep sea isle " refers to the Outer Hebrides and <unk> , meaning " east of , on or near Domon " is thus the Inner Hebrides . 
 The individual island and place names in the Outer Hebrides have mixed Gaelic and Norse origins . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Dál Riata = = = 
 Although Ptolemy 's map identifies various tribes such as the <unk> that might conceivably have lived in the Inner Hebrides in the Roman era , the first written records of life begin in the 6th century AD when the founding of the kingdom of Dál Riata is recorded . This encompassed roughly what is now Argyll and Bute and Lochaber in Scotland and County Antrim in Ireland . 
 In Argyll it consisted initially of three main kindreds : Cenél Loairn in north and mid @-@ Argyll , Cenél nÓengusa based on Islay and Cenél nGabráin based in Kintyre . By the end of the 7th century a fourth kindred , Cenél Comgaill had emerged , based in eastern Argyll . 
 The figure of Columba looms large in any history of Dál Riata and his founding of a monastery on Iona ensured that Dál Riata would be of great importance in the spread of Christianity in northern Britain . However , Iona was far from unique . Lismore in the territory of the Cenél Loairn , was sufficiently important for the death of its abbots to be recorded with some frequency and many smaller sites , such as on Eigg , <unk> and Tiree , are known from the annals . The kingdom 's independent existence ended in the Viking Age , and it eventually merged with the lands of the Picts to form the Kingdom of Alba . 
 North of Dál Riata the Inner Hebrides were nominally under Pictish control although the historical record is sparse . 
 = = = Norse rule = = = 
 According to Ó Corráin ( 1998 ) " when and how the Vikings conquered and occupied the Isles is unknown , perhaps unknowable " although from 793 onwards repeated raids by Vikings on the British Isles are recorded . " All the islands of Britain " were devastated in 794 with Iona being sacked in 802 and 806 . In 870 Dumbarton was besieged by Amlaíb Conung and Ímar , " the two kings of the Northmen " . It is therefore likely that Scandinavian hegemony was already significant on the western coasts of Scotland by then . In the 9th century the first references to the Gallgáedil ( i.e. " foreign Gaels " ) appear . This term was variously used in succeeding centuries to refer to individuals of mixed Scandinavian @-@ Celtic descent and / or culture who became dominant in south @-@ west Scotland , parts of Northern England and the isles . 
 The early 10th century are an obscure period so far as the Hebrides are concerned but <unk> mac Sitric , who fought at the Battle of Brunanburh in 937 is recorded as a King of the Isles from c . 941 @-@ 980 . 
 It is difficult to reconcile the records of the Irish annals with Norse sources such as the Orkneyinga Saga but it is likely that Norwegian and Gallgáedil Uí Ímair warlords fought for control for much of period from the 9th to the 12th centuries . In 990 Sigurd the Stout , Earl of Orkney took command of the Hebrides , a position he retained for most of the period until he was killed at the Battle of Clontarf in 1014 . There is then a period of uncertainty but it is possible that Sigurd 's son Thorfinn the Mighty became ruler circa 1035 until his own death some two decades later . 
 By the late 12th century Irish influence became a significant feature of island life and Diarmait mac Maíl na mBó , the High King of Ireland took possession of Mann and the Isles until 1072 . The records for the rulers of the Hebrides are obscured again until the arrival of Godred Crovan as King of Dublin and the Isles . The ancestor of many of the succeeding rulers of Mann and the Isles , he was eventually ousted by Muirchertach Ua Briain and fled to Islay , where he died in the plague of 1095 . It is not clear the extent to which Ui Briain dominance was now asserted in the islands north of Man , but growing Irish influence in these seas brought a rapid and decisive response from Norway . 
 Magnus Barelegs had re @-@ established direct Norwegian overlordship by 1098 . A second expedition in 1102 saw incursions into Ireland but in August 1103 he was killed fighting in Ulster . The next king of the isles was Lagmann Godredsson and there followed a succession of Godred Crovan 's descendants who , ( as vassals of the kings of Norway ) ruled the Hebrides north of Ardnamurchan for the next 160 years . However , their control of the southern Inner Hebrides was lost with the emergence of Somerled , the self @-@ styled Lord of Argyle . 
 For a while Somerled took control of Mann and the Hebrides in toto , but he met his death in 1164 during an invasion of the Scottish mainland . At this point Godred the Black , grandson of Godred Crovan re @-@ took possession of the northern Hebrides and the southern isles were distributed amongst Somerled 's sons , his descendant 's eventually becoming known as the Lords of the Isles , and giving rise to Clan MacDougall , Clan Donald and Clan <unk> . However , both during and after Somerled 's life the Scottish monarchs sought to take a control of the islands he and his descendants held . This strategy eventually led to an invasion by Haakon Haakonarson , King of Norway . After the stalemate of the Battle of Largs , Haakon retreated to Orkney , where he died in 1263 . Following this expedition , the Hebrides and Mann and all rights that the Norwegian crown " had of old therein " were yielded to the Kingdom of Scotland as a result of the 1266 Treaty of Perth . 
 = = = Clans and Scottish rule = = = 
 The Lords of the Isles , a phrase first recorded in 1336 , would continue to rule the Inner Hebrides as well as part of the Western Highlands as subjects of the King of Scots until John MacDonald , fourth Lord of the Isles , squandered the family 's powerful position . Through a secret treaty with Edward IV of England , negotiated at Ardtornish Castle and signed in 1462 , he made himself a servant of the English crown . When James III of Scotland found out about the treaty in 1476 , he issued a sentence of forfeiture for MacDonald 's lands . Some were restored for a promise of good behaviour , but MacDonald was unable to control his son Aonghas Óg , who defeated him at the Battle of Bloody Bay fought of the coast of Mull near Tobermory in 1481 . A further rebellion by his nephew , Alexander of Lochalsh provoked an exasperated James IV to forfeit the lands for the last time in 1493 . 
 The most powerful clans on Skye in the post – Norse period were Clan MacLeod , originally based in Trotternish , and Clan MacDonald of Sleat . Following the disintegration of the Lordship of the Isles , the Mackinnons also emerged as an independent clan , whose substantial landholdings in Skye were centred on Strathaird . The MacDonalds of South Uist were bitter rivals of the MacLeods , and an attempt by the former to murder church @-@ goers at Trumpan in retaliation for a previous massacre on Eigg , resulted in the Battle of the <unk> Dyke of 1578 . 
 After the failure of the Jacobite rebellion of 1745 , Flora MacDonald became famous for rescuing Prince Charles Edward Stuart from the Hanoverian troops . Her story is strongly associated with their escape via Skye and she is buried at Kilmuir . She was visited by Samuel Johnson and James Boswell during their 1773 Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland and written on her gravestone are Johnson 's words that hers was " A name that will be mentioned in history , and if courage and fidelity be virtues , mentioned with honour " . In the wake of the rebellion the clan system was broken up and islands of the Hebrides became a series of landed estates . 
 = = = British era = = = 
 With the implementation of the Treaty of Union in 1707 the Hebrides became part of the new Kingdom of Great Britain , but the clans ' loyalties to a distant monarch were not strong . A considerable number of <unk> " came out " in support of the Jacobite Earl of Mar in the " 15 " and again in the 1745 rising including Macleod of Dunvegan and MacLea of Lismore . The aftermath of the decisive Battle of Culloden , which effectively ended Jacobite hopes of a Stuart restoration , was widely felt . The British government 's strategy was to estrange the clan chiefs from their kinsmen and turn their descendants into English @-@ speaking landlords whose main concern was the revenues their estates brought rather than the welfare of those who lived on them . This may have brought peace to the islands , but in the following century it came at a terrible price . 
 The early 19th century was a time of improvement and population growth . Roads and quays were built , the slate industry became a significant employer on Easdale and surrounding islands , and the construction of the Crinan and Caledonian canals and other engineering works such as Telford 's " Bridge across the Atlantic " improved transport and access . However , in the mid @-@ 19th century , the inhabitants of many parts of the Hebrides were devastated by the clearances , which destroyed communities throughout the Highlands and Islands as the human populations were evicted and replaced with sheep farms . The position was exacerbated by the failure of the islands ' kelp industry that thrived from the 18th century until the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815 and large scale emigration became endemic . The " Battle of the Braes " involved a demonstration against lack of access to land and the serving of eviction notices . This event was instrumental in the creation of the Napier Commission , which reported in 1884 on the situation in the Highlands . Disturbances continued until the passing of the 1886 Crofters ' Act and on one occasion 400 marines were deployed on Skye to maintain order . 
 For those who remained new economic opportunities emerged through the export of cattle , commercial fishing and tourism . Nonetheless emigration and military service became the choice of many and the archipelago 's populations continued to dwindle throughout the late 19th and 20th centuries . Jura 's population fell from 1300 in 1831 to less than 250 by 1961 and Mull 's from 10 @,@ 600 in 1821 to less than 3 @,@ 000 in 1931 . Lengthy periods of continuous occupation notwithstanding , some of the smaller islands were abandoned - the Treshnish Isles in 1934 , Handa in 1948 , and Eilean <unk> in the 1880s among them . 
 Nonetheless , there were continuing gradual economic improvements , among the most visible of which was the replacement of the traditional thatched blackhouse with accommodation of a more modern design and in recent years , with the assistance of Highlands and Islands Enterprise many of the island 's populations have begun to increase after decades of decline . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Scheduled ferry services between the Inner Hebrides and the Scottish mainland operate on various routes including : <unk> , Kintyre to Gigha ; <unk> , Kintyre to Islay ; Oban to Mull , Coll and Tiree and Colonsay ; Mallaig to Armadale , Skye and Eigg , Muck , Rùm & Canna ; and Glenelg to Kyle Rhea on the Sleat peninsula , Skye . 
 Some ferries reach the Inner Hebrides from other islands such as the <unk> to Luing route , <unk> on the Ross of Mull to Iona , Sconser to Raasay and Port Askaig to <unk> , Jura . There is also a service to and form the Outer Hebrides from Tarbert , Harris and Lochmaddy on North Uist to Uig , Skye and from Castlebay , Barra to Tiree . 
 National Rail services are available for onward journeys , from stations at Oban , which has direct services to Glasgow and from Kyle of Lochalsh to Inverness . There are scheduled flights from Broadford Airfield Skye , Colonsay Airport , Islay Airport near Port Ellen and Tiree Airport . 
 The archipelago is exposed to wind and tide , and there are numerous sites of wrecked ships . Lighthouses are sited as an aid to navigation at various locations . Dubh Artach lighthouse is located on a remote rock and warns seafarers away from the area itself and the nearby Torran Rocks . Originally it was considered to be an impossible site for a light , but the loss of the steamer <unk> with all thirty @-@ three hands on her maiden voyage in 1863 and of an astonishing 24 vessels in the area in a storm on 30 – 31 December 1865 encouraged positive action . Skerryvore is another remote lighthouse in the vicinity and at a height of 48 metres ( 157 ft ) it is the tallest in Scotland . 
 = = Gaelic language = = 
 There are about 4 @,@ 000 Gaelic speakers in the Inner Hebrides equal to 20 % of the population of the archipelago . 
 There have been speakers of Goidelic languages in the Inner Hebrides since the time of Columba or before and the modern variant of Scottish Gaelic ( Gàidhlig ) remains strong in some parts . However , the Education ( Scotland ) Act 1872 led to generations of Gaels being forbidden to speak their native language in the classroom , and is now recognised as having dealt a major blow to the language . Children were being beaten for speaking Gaelic in school as late as the 1930s . More recently the Gaelic Language ( Scotland ) Act was enacted by the Scottish Parliament in 2005 in order to provide continuing support for the language . 
 By the time of the 2001 census Kilmuir parish in Skye had 47 % Gaelic Speakers , with Skye overall having an unevenly distributed 31 % . At that time Tiree had 48 % of the population Gaelic @-@ speaking , Lismore 29 % , Islay 24 % , Coll 12 % , Jura 11 % , Mull 13 % and Iona 5 % . Students of Scottish Gaelic travel from all over the world to attend Sabhal Mòr Ostaig , a Scottish Gaelic college based on Skye . 
 = = The arts = = 
 Hebridean landscapes have inspired a variety of musicians , writers and artists . The Hebrides , also known as Fingal 's Cave , is a famous overture written by Felix Mendelssohn inspired by his visit to Staffa . Contemporary musicians associated with the islands include Ian Anderson , Donovan and Runrig . Enya 's song " <unk> " from Shepherd Moons is based on a traditional <unk> song . 
 The poet Sorley MacLean was born on Raasay , the setting for his best known poem , Hallaig . George Orwell wrote much of the novel 1984 whilst living at Barnhill on Jura and J.M. Barrie wrote a screenplay for the 1924 film adaptation of Peter Pan whilst on Eilean Shona . Cressida Cowell , the author of How to Train Your Dragon , spent childhood summers in the Inner Hebrides and has stated that they are " one of the most beautiful places on Earth " and " the kind of place where you expect to see dragons overhead " . 
 = = Wildlife = = 
 In some respects the Hebrides generally lack biodiversity in comparison to mainland Britain , with for example only half the number of mammalian species the latter has . However , these islands have much to offer the naturalist . Observing the local abundance found on Skye in the 18th century Samuel Johnson noted that : 
 At the tables where a stranger is received , neither plenty nor delicacy is wanting . A tract of land so thinly inhabited , must have much wild @-@ fowl ; and I scarcely remember to have seen a dinner without them . The moor @-@ game is every where to be had . That the sea abounds with fish , needs not be told , for it supplies a great part of Europe . The Isle of Sky has stags and <unk> , but no hares . They sell very numerous droves of oxen yearly to England , and therefore cannot be supposed to want beef at home . Sheep and goats are in great numbers , and they have the common domestic fowls . " 
 In the modern era avian life includes the corncrake , red @-@ throated diver , rock dove , kittiwake , tystie , Atlantic puffin , goldeneye , golden eagle and white @-@ tailed sea eagle . The last named was re @-@ introduced to Rùm in 1975 and has successfully spread to various neighbouring islands , including Mull . There is a small population of red @-@ billed chough concentrated on the islands of Islay and Colonsay . 
 Mountain hare ( apparently absent from Skye in the 18th century ) and rabbit are now abundant and predated on by wild cat and pine marten . Red deer are common on the hills and the grey seal and common seal are present around the coasts of Scotland in internationally important numbers , with colonies of the former found on Oronsay and the Treshnish Isles and the latter most abundant in the Firth of Lorn . The rich fresh water streams contain brown trout , Atlantic salmon and water shrew . Offshore minke whales , killer whales , basking sharks , porpoises and dolphins are among the sea life that can be seen and edible crab and oyster are also found , in for example , the Sound of Scalpay . There are nationally important horse mussel and <unk> beds in the sea lochs . 
 Heather moor containing ling , bell heather , cross @-@ leaved heath , bog myrtle and fescues is abundant and there is a diversity of arctic and alpine plants including alpine pearlwort and mossy cyphal . 
 = Loca ( Shakira song ) = 
 " Loca " ( English : " Crazy " ) is a song by Colombian singer @-@ songwriter Shakira , taken from her seventh studio album , Sale el Sol ( 2010 ) . It was released by Epic Records as the lead single from the album . The Spanish @-@ language version features Dominican rapper El Cata , and was released on 10 September 2010 , while the English @-@ language version features British rapper Dizzee Rascal , and was released on 13 September 2010 . It was written and produced by Shakira , with additional songwriting from Edward Bello , Armando Pérez , and Dylan Mills . The song is a Latin pop and merengue track that lyrically describes Shakira 's eccentric infatuation with a man . In August 2014 , a senior US district judge found " Loca " to have been indirectly plagiarised from " Loca con su Tiguere " , a mid @-@ 1990s song composed by Dominican songwriter Ramon " Arias " Vasquez . The case was dismissed in August 2015 after it was found that Vasquez had fabricated the evidence he had presented in court . 
 Upon its release , " Loca " received generally favourable reviews from music critics , who complimented the inclusion of merengue music on the recording . The English version of the song became a worldwide commercial success and peaked inside the top five of the record charts of countries including Austria , Belgium , France , Hungary and Italy . The Spanish version peaked atop the charts of Spain and Switzerland , and became a hit on the Latin record charts in the United States , topping the Billboard Hot Latin Songs , Latin Pop Airplay , and Tropical Songs charts . " Loca " received record certifications in various countries around the world , including a diamond certification in Colombia and multi @-@ platinum certifications in Italy , Mexico , and Spain . 
 Its accompanying music video was filmed in Barcelona , Spain in August 2010 , and was released the following month . It features Shakira interacting with a beach crowd , and dancing in front of the sea wearing a golden bikini . It generated a favourable response from critics , many of whom praised its concept for matching the vibe of the song . For additional promotion , Shakira performed " Loca " on several television shows and on her The Sun Comes Out World Tour . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Loca " was written by American rapper Armando Pérez , better known by his stage name Pitbull , Dominican rapper Edward Bello , and Shakira , for the singer 's ninth studio album Sale el Sol ( 2010 ) . The album marked the first time she worked with Bello , who is better known by his stage name El Cata , and their collaboration started after Shakira expressed her desire to experiment with merengue music , saying " I grew up listening to merengue — that was a big part of my life , and I was missing it " . Merengue is a type of music and dance originating in the Dominican Republic , and after being referred to Bello by Pitbull , Shakira travelled to the country and began recording sessions with him in his " tiny " studio in Santo Domingo . Bello talked about his collaboration with Shakira , saying " If I was thinking that this little studio was going to be in the world ’ s vision at this time , I wouldn 't believe it " . " Loca " is a Latin @-@ pop song composed of horn @-@ laden merengue beats combined with techno dance percussion beats . Lyrically , the song is about Shakira expressing her erratic and obsessive behaviour towards her lover , more so than his other leading lady , prominently heard in the lines " She 'd die for your love / But your love 's only mine , boy " and " I 'm crazy but you like it " . 
 Two versions of the song are present on the album ; the English @-@ language version features vocals from English rapper Dizzee Rascal ( who also wrote the lyrics of his parts ) , while the Spanish @-@ language version features El Cata . Speaking about the collaboration , Dizzee Rascal said that " I know it sounds a bit mad now , but you 'll see it and see what 's going on " . He further said " It 's me doing something different man , on a merengue tip . " In an interview with Billboard , Dizzee Rascal said about Shakira that , " she 's a bit of a trendsetter -- she does loads of different things on a major scale " and added " You 'd expect her to use an American rapper [ for the song ] , but she chose me . It meant a lot . " He then commented about the song that , " I 'd like to be in that Spanish market . I got into the whole reggaeton thing when it came out , so I always wanted to get around to something like that " . " Loca " served as the lead single from Sale el Sol . The Spanish version of the song , featuring El Cata , was released on 10 September 2010 . The English version , featuring Dizzee Rascal , debuted later on 13 September 2010 . 
 = = = Plagiarism case = = = 
 On 19 August 2014 , Alvin Hellerstein , senior judge of the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York , concluded that the Spanish version of " Loca " had been indirectly plagiarised from " Loca con su Tiguere " , a mid @-@ 1990s song composed by Dominican songwriter Ramon " Arias " Vasquez . He testified that he had met Bello in 2006 and had introduced him to two of his songs , including " Loca con su Tiguere " . According to Vasquez , Bello was impressed by the song and asked him to record it . However , Bello claimed that the song was originally his and was based on his relationship with his ex @-@ wife as opposed to Vasquez 's claim that " Loca con su Tiguere " was based on his sister 's relationship with a street @-@ tough boyfriend . Hellerstein ruled in favour of Vasquez and found the two songs to be similar in structure and rhythm . As the Spanish version of " Loca " features Bello singing numerous portions , the judge reasoned that it too was plagiarised from Vasquez 's song . After a trial phase , <unk> Latin and Sony / ATV Discos ( the distributors of the Spanish version of " Loca " in the United States ) will pay damages to <unk> Music , the owner of the rights to Vasquez 's song and the plaintiff in the lawsuit . 
 On 10 August 2015 , the case was dismissed by Hellerstein after Sony Music brought forth new evidence suggesting that Vasquez had fabricated the cassette tape that he had earlier produced in court to prove that the song was originally recorded by him . Hellerstein said the evidence given by Sony Music provided " competent and substantial proof " that the cassette tape was fake . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon its release , " Loca " received generally favourable reviews from music critics . A reviewer from Billboard complimented Shakira for displaying her unpredictable musical choices by having Dizzee Rascal sing over a merengue beat , which they termed as a " jarring combination " . Robert Copsey from Digital Spy also reviewed the song positively , and labelled the song " bizarre yet thoroughly enjoyable " . Jennifer Schaffer from Stanford Daily marked Dizzee Rascal 's rap as the highlight of the song . James Reed from The Boston Globe termed it as an " irresistible merengue hybrid " and deemed the Spanish version of the song as an album essential . Michelle Morgante , again from The Boston Globe , was impressed by the song 's effectiveness in both its Spanish and English version , which she commented is " lost in some of Shakira 's other attempts at language switching " . Allison Stewart from The Washington Post , however , claimed that there was " little appreciable difference " between the two versions of the song . 
 The Spanish version of the song was nominated for " Top Latin Song " at the 2011 Billboard Music Awards . Two other songs by Shakira , " Gypsy " and " Waka Waka ( This Time for Africa ) " , were also nominated , and the award was won by the latter song . In the same year , at the Latin Billboard Music Awards , the Spanish version was nominated for " Hot Latin Song of the Year , Vocal Event " and " Latin Digital Download of the Year " , but lost both . At the 2011 Premios 40 Principales awards ceremony , the Spanish version of the song was nominated for " Mejor Canción Internacional en Español " ( " Best International Song in Spanish " ) . The Spanish version of the song was nominated for " La Más Pegajosa " ( " Catchiest Tune " ) and " Mi Ringtone " ( " My Ringtone " ) at the 2011 Premios Juventud awards , but lost both categories to American rapper Pitbull 's song " Bon , Bon " . The English version of the song received a nomination in the category of " Best Latin / Reggaeton Track " at the 26th Annual International Dance Music Awards in 2011 . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 The English version of " Loca " became a worldwide commercial success . After debuting at number 17 on the Austrian Singles Chart , it peaked at number two and spent a total of 20 weeks on the chart . In this region , it was certified gold by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) for selling 15 @,@ 000 units . In the French @-@ speaking Wallonia region of Belgium , the song peaked atop the Ultratop chart for two weeks , and spent a total of 26 weeks in the region . It was Shakira 's fourth single to reach number one in the country . The Belgian Entertainment Association ( BEA ) certified it gold for sales of 10 @,@ 000 units . " Loca " also reached number one on the Czech Airplay Chart for a total of seven consecutive weeks . In France , the song entered the singles chart at number four and peaked at number two , spending a total of 49 weeks in the region . However , it managed to reach number one on the French digital songs chart . It was the eighth best @-@ selling single in 2010 in France , with sales of 143 @,@ 337 units . " Loca " peaked at number four on both the Hungarian Singles and Dance charts . The song entered the top 20 of the Italian Singles Chart at number one , becoming Shakira 's first single since " Beautiful Liar " to accomplish the feat , and stayed atop the chart for six weeks . In this region , it was certified double @-@ platinum by the Federazione Industria Musicale Italiana ( FIMI ) for selling 60 @,@ 000 units . In the United States , " Loca " peaked at number 32 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart . On the Hot Dance Club Songs chart , it became Shakira 's first single since " Did It Again " to peak at number one . 
 The Spanish version of " Loca " peaked at number two on the Monitor Latino chart in Mexico , and was certified double @-@ platinum by the Asociación Mexicana de Productores de Fonogramas y Videogramas ( AMPROFON ) for selling 120 @,@ 000 units . It entered the Spanish Singles Chart at number 10 and peaked at number one for 12 weeks . It stayed on the chart for a total of 47 weeks , and was certified double @-@ platinum by the Productores de Música de España ( PROMUSICAE ) for sales of 80 @,@ 000 units . The song entered the Swiss Singles Chart at number two and peaked at number one for four weeks ; it spent a total of 40 weeks on the chart . In this region , IFPI certified " Loca " platinum for selling 30 @,@ 000 units . The Spanish version became a huge hit on the Latin record charts in the United States . It reached number one on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs , and also peaked atop the Latin Pop Airplay and Tropical Songs chart . " Loca " was Shakira 's eighteenth top 10 single on the Hot Latin Songs chart , making her the third @-@ ranking female artist with the highest number of top 10 singles on the chart , behind Gloria Estefan and Ana Gabriel . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video was filmed near the beaches in Barcelona , Spain in August 2010 , and was directed by Jaume de Laiguana , who had previously worked with Shakira on the videos for the songs " No " and " Gypsy " . The music video was shot in " guerrilla @-@ style " , utilizing hand @-@ held cameras to shoot many of the scenes . Shakira talked about the video , saying " I decided to just do something more spontaneous , and be myself and be free and feel free about it because that is what this song is about " . The music video was released on 29 September 2010 , and the Spanish and English versions of the video were individually released on iTunes on 11 October 2010 , and 13 October 2010 , respectively . 
 The video starts with Shakira roller @-@ skating with many fans surrounding her . After roaming about the city , including numerous scenes of dancing , she publicly changes her wardrobe and hitches a ride on a motorbike . Further on , she dances and jumps into a fountain . During the next verse , she is seen belly dancing with a man by the beach and , near the end of the video , she dives into the sea along with many fans and celebrates . Scenes of Shakira dancing wearing a gold triangle bikini and gold sequined pants are also interspersed throughout the video . Dizzee Rascal also makes an appearance during his part of the song . 
 Walter Frazier from Billboard reviewed the video positively , and appreciated Shakira 's craziness in the video . James Montgomery from MTV gave the video a very positive review , calling it a " rare video " which perfectly complimented the nature of the song . The music video was nominated for " Best Short Form Music Video " at the 12th Latin Grammy Awards in 2011 , but lost to the video of Calle 13 's " Calma Pueblo " . At the 2011 Premios Nuestra Tierra award ceremony , the music video won the award for " Mejor Video Musical Para Artista Colombiano " ( " Best Music Video for Colombian Artist " ) . It was nominated at the 2011 Premios Juventud for Mi Video Favorito ( My Favorite Video ) . Having received 100 million views on YouTube , the music video was given a <unk> Award . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Shakira performed the English version of " Loca " first on 23 September 2010 on the Late Show with David Letterman . Shakira appeared on Lopez Tonight to talk about " Loca " and taught host George Lopez the dance steps of the song . She performed it on Dancing With The Stars on 19 October - the release date of the album . Shakira also performed the song on November 9 at the finale of the German version of the X @-@ Factor . 
 Shakira performed the song with Dizzee Rascal together for the first time on the MTV Europe Music Awards 2010 on 7 November . Gabi Gregg from MTV chose the performance as the best on the show , praising Shakira 's dance moves and noting that " she actually sounds the same live as she does recorded " . Jillian Mapes from Billboard included the performance on her list of " 5 Must @-@ See Moments at the 2010 MTV European Music Awards " . Shakira performed the Spanish version of the song live during the 12th Latin Grammy awards ceremony . The song was included on the setlist of The Sun Comes Out World Tour in 2010 and 2011 . During the performances , Shakira wore a pair of neon leopard @-@ print pants and performed a dance routine with " intricate and urban choreographies " . On 25 October 2010 , Shakira was leaving the Honda Centre parking lot in California after a concert , but got out of her limo and performed " Loca " with two dancers on top of a car . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 Digital download ( English Version ) 
 " Loca " ( featuring Dizzee Rascal ) – 3 : 11 
 Digital download ( Spanish Version ) 
 " Loca " ( featuring El Cata ) – 3 : 04 
 CD single 
 " Loca " ( featuring Dizzee Rascal ) – 3 : 11 
 " Loca " ( featuring Dizzee Rascal ) ( Gucci <unk> aka Brodinski & The Shoes Discothèque Remix ) – 4 : 07 
 Digital EP 
 " Loca " ( featuring Dizzee Rascal ) ( JS Mix ) - 3 : 13 
 " Loca " ( featuring Dizzee Rascal ) ( Sticky Drums Remix By Gucci <unk> Aka Brodinski and the Shoes ) - 3 : 14 
 " Loca " ( featuring Dizzee Rascal ) ( Freemasons Radio Edit ) - 3 : 01 
 " Loca " ( featuring Dizzee Rascal ) ( Music Video ) - 3 : 24 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = HTC First = 
 The HTC First is an Android smartphone released by HTC on April 12 , 2013 . It was unveiled on April 4 , 2013 , as part of a press event held by Facebook — serving as a successor to a pair of Facebook @-@ oriented devices HTC released in 2011 , it is the first Android device to be pre @-@ loaded with Facebook 's own user interface layer , Facebook Home in lieu of HTC 's own Sense . 
 While considered compelling by critics for a mid @-@ range phone due to its display quality and its optional use of stock Android beneath the default Facebook Home overlay , the HTC First was panned by critics for its poor camera and lack of removable storage , and was also affected by the similarly underwhelming reception faced by the Facebook Home software . AT & T , the exclusive U.S. carrier of the First , only reportedly sold over 15 @,@ 000 units of the device , while both <unk> and Time named it among the biggest failures in the technology industry for 2013 . 
 = = Development = = 
 In 2011 , HTC released two low @-@ end smartphones that provided integration with the social networking service Facebook , the keyboard @-@ equipped HTC Status , and the larger slate HTC Salsa . The two phones featured Facebook 's apps pre @-@ loaded , along with Facebook integration within the HTC Sense interface and a dedicated Facebook key that could be used to provide quick access to sharing functions . Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg endorsed the two devices in a pre @-@ taped statement during their unveiling , and promised the possibility of more " Facebook phones " in the near future . Later that year , details began surfacing about a collaboration between Facebook and HTC known as " Buffy " ( after the television series Buffy the Vampire Slayer ) , a fork of Android that would be " deeply social " . 
 The specifications of the phone was first leaked out by an HTC insider towards the end of 2012 that had claimed the device was then called " Opera UL " with a <unk> screen , and an Adreno 305 graphics processor with the Snapdragon 1 @.@ 4 GHz CPU system on chip , which was later known to match the actual specifications of the final device . 
 In early 2013 , reports indicated that HTC was preparing to unveil a Facebook @-@ oriented smartphone with the revised codename " Myst " ; this mid @-@ range device was reportedly pre @-@ loaded with a new Facebook @-@ developed user interface layer known as " Facebook Home " . <unk> of the new device leaked on April 3 , 2013 , revealing the design of the phone and its official name as the HTC First . Both Facebook Home and the HTC First were unveiled at a Facebook news conference held the following day on April 4 , 2013 . AT & T exclusively released the device in the United States on April 12 , 2013 . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 = = = Hardware = = = 
 The HTC First is a mid @-@ range smartphone which uses a dual @-@ core , 1 @.@ 4 GHz Qualcomm Snapdragon 400 processor with support for LTE , a 2000 mAh battery , 1 GB of RAM and 16 GB of non @-@ expandable storage . The First uses a 4 @.@ 3 @-@ inch 720p Super LCD display , and includes a 5 @-@ megapixel rear @-@ facing camera , and a 1 @.@ 6 @-@ megapixel front @-@ facing camera . The HTC First 's exterior uses a rounded , minimal design with three capacitive buttons below its screen , and was available in black , light blue , red , and white color finishes . 
 = = = Software = = = 
 The HTC First runs Android 4 @.@ 1 @.@ 2 " Jelly Bean " and Facebook Home , a new interface layer developed by Facebook that heavily integrates with the service . Facebook Home consists of a home screen and lock screen replacement known as Cover Feed ( which aggregates content posted by friends on Facebook along with notifications from other apps ) , the ability to message users ( via either Facebook or SMS ) from any app using the " Chat Heads " overlay , and an overall experience that is oriented towards social interaction . The HTC First was also the first smartphone to include the recently acquired Instagram as a pre @-@ loaded app . Although support for Facebook Home is not limited to the HTC First ( it was also released for select HTC and Samsung models as well , and the Chat Heads feature was added to the standalone Facebook Messenger app ) , integration with certain system functions ( such as the ability to display non @-@ Facebook notifications on the lock screen ) is exclusive to the First due to technical limitations . 
 If Facebook Home is disabled , the device reverts to a stock Android 4 @.@ 1 experience ; the First was the first HTC device since the T @-@ Mobile G2 to offer a stock Android interface and not ship with the company 's HTC Sense software . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The HTC First was released to mixed reviews . Dieter Bohn of The Verge gave the HTC First a 7 @.@ 9 out of 10 , receiving high marks in most categories except for its camera . Its design was considered to have a comfortable size and shape by contrast to larger flagship Android phones , and a display that was noted for its high resolution , good color reproduction and " ridiculous " viewing angles ( but still being hard to use in direct sunlight ) . The First 's camera was considered to be better than expected for a low @-@ end phone , but produced " muddy " photos and " [ felt ] like a throwback to an earlier age when smartphones were nigh @-@ useless in the dark . " Facebook Home 's functionality was considered to be good for casual users , but the ability to switch back to a stock Android 4 @.@ 1 interface was considered " stunning " and a good compromise for the lack of Nexus devices with LTE support at the time . 
 Alex Roth of TechRadar gave the HTC First a 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 , praising its build quality and operating system ( feeling that the First could " develop a sort of second life as the mid @-@ range of choice among Google geeks " due to its use of stock Android and LTE support ) and considering it to possibly be " the last decent dual @-@ core handset ever made " , but considered Facebook Home to be a " glorified screensaver " , and also criticized the camera 's low quality and the lack of a dedicated shutter button ( which Roth believed would have made sense on a Facebook @-@ oriented phone ) . 
 On May 13 , 2013 , reports surfaced that AT & T had only sold 15 @,@ 000 units of the First since its launch , and was planning to discontinue the device in response to the poor reception of Facebook Home from both users and AT & T 's sales representatives . The reports came shortly after AT & T had lowered the First 's price from $ 99 @.@ 99 to $ 0 @.@ 99 on a two @-@ year contract as a promotion ; however , AT & T denied any possible connection to the device being possibly discontinued . In response to the issues , the release of the First on the British carriers EE and Orange was indefinitely delayed so Facebook could focus on making improvements to the Home software . 
 In December 2013 , Time named the HTC First as one of the 47 " lamest moments in tech " for 2013 , and <unk> similarly named it one of the " Top 10 Tech Failures " of 2013 , stating that " like Carrie Underwood in the remade Sound of Music Live ! , the HTC First smartphone started out as an intriguing concept that attempted to shoehorn something very popular ( Facebook ) into a familiar vehicle ( a smartphone ) . And like that live television event , it wound up being an undeniable disaster . " 
 = The Hunting Party ( album ) = 
 The Hunting Party is the sixth studio album by American rock band Linkin Park . The album , produced by band members Mike Shinoda and Brad Delson , was released by Warner Bros. Records and Machine Shop on June 13 , 2014 . It is the first album since Meteora ( 2003 ) not to be produced with Rick Rubin , after producing the band 's previous three studio albums . The title The Hunting Party is a contextual metaphor : Linkin Park is the party that is hunting to bring back the energy and soul of rock . 
 The Hunting Party is a departure from the electronic rock sound of the band 's previous two studio albums . The album , described by Shinoda as simply " a rock record " , serves a statement by the band against contemporary mainstream and active rock bands , accused by him as " trying to be other bands and playing it safe " . Packaged by an artwork by Brandon Parvini based on an original drawing by James Jean , the album took under a year to record and produce , with material being improvisationally written by the band . The album also features guest appearances from Page Hamilton of Helmet , Daron Malakian of System of a Down , Tom Morello of Rage Against the Machine , and Rakim , marking the first time Linkin Park has collaborated with other artists on a studio album . 
 The album was promoted by the band and Warner Bros , with multiple promotional teasers and interviews produced and published in the lead @-@ up to the album 's release and listening parties of the album being held worldwide on multiple dates . The band embarked on the Carnivores Tour , a double @-@ headline tour with Thirty Seconds to Mars , as well as The Hunting Party Tour , in support of the album . Five singles from The Hunting Party have been released ; " Guilty All the Same " in March 2014 , " Until It 's Gone " in May 2014 , and " Wastelands " , " Rebellion " and " Final Masquerade " in June 2014 . 
 The album has received generally positive reviews , where it has been praised as bringing back the heavier rock sound resembling their older albums . It debuted at number three on Billboard 200 , and has placed at number four on Revolver 's list of " The 20 Best Albums of 2014 " . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 2010 and 2012 respectively , Linkin Park released their fourth and fifth studio albums A Thousand Suns and Living Things . The albums , both produced by Rick Rubin and Mike Shinoda , marked a shift in the band 's musical direction from a nu metal @-@ oriented sound , recognized with Hybrid Theory ( 2000 ) and Meteora ( 2003 ) , to a more experimental and " cutting edge " sound . The electronica @-@ influenced albums were commercially successful . 
 Production on the band 's sixth studio album began as a result of a series of events in which Shinoda decided to drop the electronic and experimental sound of the band 's previous two studio albums . Shinoda had originally recorded and produced demos , which continued the sound of A Thousand Suns and Living Things , for the band 's sixth studio album during the band 's Living Things World Tour in 2013 . He presented the demos to his bandmates , which received positive reception from the rest of the band , and to Rubin , who was also positive towards the demos , though describing them to Shinoda as more " poppy " than he expected . However , Shinoda , after listening to the demos again after the end of the tour , felt a strong negativity towards his material , especially after Rubin 's statements . In a Warner Music interview , Shinoda stated that " I don 't even believe in this music . This is a mistake ; I don 't like what I 'm making . I kind of went backwards into the process and scrapped all of it and started new stuff . " 
 Following A Thousand Suns and Living Things , albums which were created with leaving behind a sound that was " not new and not cool anymore " in mind , the band 's sixth studio album was approached as a return to the band 's early sound , with the electronic sounds of their previous two studio albums being dropped in favor of the band 's traditional rock instrumentation . Using Hybrid Theory as a template , the band composed and recorded it in context of modern times , in 2014 rather than 2000 . Guitarist Brad Delson jokingly stated that the album was an " alternative Hybrid Theory " and " maybe its prequel " , with the album being inspired by artists the band listened to before they started their musical career . Shinoda told Rolling Stone about the ideas surrounding The Hunting Party : " We 're not 18 @-@ year @-@ old kids making a loud record – we 're 37 @-@ year @-@ old adults making a loud record . And what makes a 37 @-@ year @-@ old angry is different than what made us angry back in the day . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 The band took a different method in writing new material for The Hunting Party as opposed to their previous albums . While for all their previous albums they used the traditional method of writing , demoing and rerecording in the studio , songs were instead written and composed in the studio itself , with no material being written or composed beforehand . Delson spoke about the methods used on the album in an interview with Premier Guitar , saying that " Something unintentional might be the coolest sound I make all day , and knowing how to allow those mistakes to happen and to shape them potentially makes for some great music . " 
 The album has been described as alternative metal , nu metal , hard rock and rap rock by professional reviewers . Shinoda described the album 's sound as a 1990s style of rock record " It 's a Rock record ; " it 's loud and it 's Rock , but not in the sense of what you 've heard before , which is more like ' 90s Hardcore @-@ Punk – Thrash " . He described the " weak " status of modern rock in the music industry as an inspiration in recording a heavier rock album ; to try to bring the sound of the 1990s back to the forefront . In an interview with MusicRadar , Delson stated that the album would feature more guitar solos . He further stated that " this is from someone who was quoted early on as saying I hated them . Not that I hated them as a listener ; I just don ’ t want to play any ; I shirked guitar solos . Early on , I felt as though the songs we were making aesthetically didn 't want them . This new batch of songs , to me , always want solos . I feel like every song has one . " 
 = = Recording = = 
 The Hunting Party was recorded at the Larrabee Sound Studios , located in Hollywood , Los Angeles . During the recording for the band 's sixth studio album , the band would spend five or six days a week at the Larrabee Studios working on the record . The Hunting Party was also recorded in part at EastWest Studios , also located in Hollywood . There , drummer Rob Bourdon and Shinoda would record drums and percussion for the album . The band would also record other material for the album at EastWest on occasion . 
 In an interview with Rolling Stone , Shinoda said that the album was difficult for drummer Rob Bourdon , where he had to push himself to meet the music speed and style . He commented that " It 's probably the hardest stuff he 's ever played on one of our albums . He had to physically work his way up to it . He had to go running , lift weights , work with a trainer " , eventually Bourdon feels that he had become a better drummer at the end of each day after recording . Shinoda later told Q magazine that Bourdon had to seek help from a chiropractor after he had broken his back recording material for the new album . Shinoda told Q that " Rob was killing himself . He played 10 hours a day for seven days straight and blew his back . " 
 Orange , Bogner and <unk> brand amplifiers were used on the record by Delson , providing a " core sound " described by engineer Ethan Mates as " a small collection of core tones to be used in a sonically consistent way throughout the record " . Chandler brand amps were also used for overdubs and " higher parts " . Delson spoke about his studio setup for The Hunting Party , stating that " It 's great to have a setup where I can run combinations of heads and cabs simultaneously to get the most appropriate tone , or do something more straightforward like record just one cabinet with two mikes " . 
 Lead singer Chester Bennington arrived late in the recording process of the album , having been chosen to replace Scott Weiland in the band Stone Temple Pilots , and then proceeded to record High Rise and tour with the band for most of 2013 . When he eventually joined the band in the studio , he was surprised to find the band had reverted to their heavier rock @-@ centric sound . Bennington stated in an interview with Kerrang ! : " Mike wrote tons while I was touring with Stone Temple Pilots last year . When I got home , there was a lot for me to catch up with , and he was playing me things and I was like , ' Dude , this is fucking awesome ! ' I was really surprised how heavy it was " . 
 The album features four guest artists ; Rakim from the hip hop duo Eric B. & Rakim on " Guilty All the Same " , Page Hamilton from the American alternative metal band Helmet on " All for Nothing " , Daron Malakian from System of a Down for the song " Rebellion " and Tom Morello of Rage Against the Machine fame on the song " <unk> " . Bennington commented on the collaborations , stating that " We really felt like if we need to be inspired and move in another direction . I think when we got Page in , Mike had written this chorus and sang it , and his voice had this tone , and it was unlike anything I 'd heard from him before . And I was like , " Dude this is crazy , this sounds like a Helmet song ! It 's cool ! " And we were like , " Dude , why don 't we see if we can get like Page in here ? " You know ? And if that 's why the song says it 's feeling like it should be , then why don 't we just go straight to the source " . 
 = = Packaging = = 
 = = = Artwork = = = 
 The album cover for The Hunting Party features a 3D modeled artwork by Brandon Parvini , who had previously designed the artworks for Living Things and the band 's singles during the album 's release cycle . The artwork was based off an original drawing , entitled " Archer " , by visual artist James Jean that was created for the album . It is one of many artworks by Jean to be used in the packaging of the album , which also features , in deluxe editions of the album , a lithograph , T @-@ shirt and a 36 @-@ page art book by him . Jean 's traditional style , notably different to the artwork created for The Hunting Party had been previously described by Dana Jennings of The New York Times as " suffused with a dreamy romanticism and lyricism worthy of Maxfield Parrish , even as Mr. Jean subverts those and other isms . " 
 Linkin Park had professed that they have been fans of James Jean 's art for a while , describing discussions between the band and Jean as having " started naturally " . Joe Hahn served as a creative director for the artwork of The Hunting Party , instructing Jean to " create a universe inhabited by powerful characters and defined by strange landscapes " , with a general concept of having a unique " character " for each track on the album . Delson also contributed ideas of " internal and external struggles " , metaphorically depicted on a battlefield , where images such as " flesh tearing and transforming into different forms and brittle shards of crystal erupting from organic matter " would recur . Shinoda explained : " We try to approach our art — packaging , merchandise , tour visuals , videos , anything — in a holistic way . All the parts are interconnected , and by creating great imagery that can be used in multiple contexts , we can immerse the fans in a universe that is consistent and unique to each release . It 's always a work in progress , but I feel like we 've learned a lot and continue to make it better each time . " 
 James Jean was invited by Shinoda and Delson to listen to the band 's rough material created early on during the recording sessions for The Hunting Party . He acknowledged the band 's change of musical direction from A Thousand Suns and Living Things , and was inspired by the material to create artworks that were " charged with [ the band 's ] intensity as well as their rationale for that change " . However , Joe Hahn banned Jean from listening to any more material after Jean had performed some of the songs from memory on his piano . Jean originally sketched each individual artwork for The Hunting Party in a personal sketchbook , where it felt more intimate and less precious to Jean . The <unk> of the images was intentional , as the artworks would eventually be made into 3D @-@ modelled artworks where lighting and texture would be added to each character . 20 artworks were made in the space of a month by Jean for Brandon Parvini and his team to transform into 3D @-@ modelled artworks , with Parvini choosing exactly which artworks would be modelled for The Hunting Party . 
 = = = Title = = = 
 The title of the album , The Hunting Party , is a contextual metaphor . The album , a return to the band 's original harder rock @-@ centric sounds , represents the band 's desire to not only create something different from other rock bands , but to also bring back the " energy and soul " of rock itself , and that Linkin Park are the party that will hunt for that energy and soul . Shinoda elaborated on the title of the album in an interview with Kerrang ! explaining : " We got so sick of other bands trying to be other bands and playing it safe the whole time , so the album name comes from a theory about culture becoming too passive , everyone just standing around waiting for opportunities to come to them instead of going out and getting theirs . I 'm aware there are always going to be heavier bands than us , but The Hunting Party is Linkin Park going out and getting it for ourselves . " The inspiration for the title came from a news article Shinoda read online about a Japanese writer 's concerns about today 's growing society . The writer described the young men of today as " herbivores " , and explained how they are essentially grazing , waiting for an opportunity to come to them , rather than hunting for it . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 On March 6 , 2014 , the band premiered " Guilty All the Same " , which features Rakim , from the album through Shazam . The track was later released by Warner Bros. on March 7 , 2014 as the lead single promoting the then @-@ unannounced sixth studio album by the band . A music video for " Guilty All the Same " also premiered on YouTube on March 25 , 2014 . The music video , a continuation of the band 's collaboration with Xbox , was made entirely with the in @-@ game engine of Team Dakota 's 2014 sandbox video game Project Spark . Additionally , the course made for the music video was made openly available by the band , giving players of Project Spark on Microsoft Windows and the Xbox One the opportunity of editing and remixing the course . 
 While information about Linkin Park 's sixth studio album had leaked beforehand , including the album 's title and release date , The Hunting Party was officially unveiled by the band and Warner Bros. Records on April 9 , 2014 . The track listing of the album was additionally unveiled by Shinoda and Linkin Park 's management team on April 27 , 2014 . " Until It 's Gone " became the second track to be unveiled , and was released as the album 's second single on May 6 , 2014 . Pre @-@ orders for the album were also opened on the same day , with " Guilty all the Same " and " Until It 's Gone " released early on the album 's iTunes Store page . A music video for " Until It 's Gone " was then released on June 11 , 2014 . " Wastelands " was released on the iTunes Store on June 1 , 2014 , and later as a single on June 2 . On June 3 , 2014 , Bennington appeared on Zane Lowe 's BBC Radio 1 to premiere the song , " Rebellion " . An official lyric video was released alongside a release of the track on the iTunes Store the same day . It was later released as a single on June 4 , and was released as the album 's fourth retail single on October 13 . On June 8 , 2014 , Linkin Park premiered the third single " Final Masquerade " on MTV . 
 A listening session for the album took place on May 23 , 2014 in Los Angeles . Further listening sessions for Linkin Park Underground members were announced for June 4 , 2014 in various locations worldwide . The band , additionally , hosted the tenth and eleventh editions of the <unk> summit , a convention for Underground members , during the album cycle . The tenth edition was held at the Darien Lake Performing Arts Center in Darien , New York on August 21 , 2014 , and the eleventh edition was held at the Cynthia Woods Mitchell Pavilion in The Woodlands , Texas on September 5 , 2014 . 
 The band 's first live performance of the The Hunting Party album cycle was on May 24 , 2014 at the <unk> Day music festival , in which they headlined . The band performed " Guilty All the Same " , " Until It 's Gone " and " Wastelands " for the first time . The band also performed as headliners at Rock in Rio Lisboa VI on May 30 , 2014 . During the performance , Shinoda tossed promotional singles containing the studio version of " Wastelands " out into the open audience , days before the song 's official single release . Linkin Park are also set to embark on a double @-@ headline tour of North America with Thirty Seconds to Mars in support of both The Hunting Party and Thirty Seconds to Mars ' 2013 album Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams . The tour , dubbed the Carnivores Tour , spanned 25 dates in August and September 2014 , with American rock band AFI serving as opening act during the entire tour . The band is currently holding another tour named as " The Hunting Party Tour " , which started in May 30 , 2014 . However , some of the shows on the tour were cancelled due to Bennington breaking his leg . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Upon its release , The Hunting Party received generally positive reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , the album has received an aggregated score of 65 / 100 , which indicates " generally favorable reviews " , based on 15 reviews . Dave Simpson of The Guardian gave the album a positive review . Upon giving the album three stars , he praised the band 's return to their original sound , stating that " Shinoda 's desire to make a punk rock record and Bennington 's more ethereal electropop segments don 't always make comfortable bedfellows , but Rob Bourdon 's terrific drumming means the energy never lets up " . Despite labeling some tracks of the record like " Until It 's Gone " as cliché , he commented positively on the music and writing of others such as " <unk> " and " Rebellion " . He further wrote , " Linkin Park certainly know their audience , and here delicately navigate the gulf between their own aspirations and a fanbase who will celebrate the band 's loud return to rocking hard . " Chris Schulz of The New Zealand Herald also gave the album a positive review , describing the record as " Loud , spontaneous and free " , attributes that , he states , " aren 't normally associated with Linkin Park , but The Hunting Party takes just seconds to prove the sixth release from the Californian precision @-@ metal act is a different beast " . He continues to compare the album with the band 's recent discography , describing their previous three albums as having " sagged with overwrought ballads and pretentious soft @-@ rock " , while The Hunting Party " gets on with the task of rap @-@ rocking like it 's 1999 all over again . " 
 David Renshaw at NME opined that " It might not kill the Mumford and Butler clones , but The Hunting Party is an energetic effort at least . " Renshaw also praises Daron Malakian 's guest spot , but considers Tom Morello 's contribution a disappointment . AllMusic reviewer Stephen Thomas Erlewine observes " Far from sounding as if they 're grasping at straws , Linkin Park seem rejuvenated , proving there is value in the cliché of returning to roots . " Dan Epstein from Revolver described the album as " ... not only the hardest and heaviest thing they 've ever released , but it 's also their first album to pack the sort of guitar firepower that would actually appeal to your average headbanger . " Epstein concludes by stating that it 's proof that bands don 't need to get softer in order to mature . At Billboard , Kenneth Partridge states " ... these Cali rap @-@ rock commandos go rogue , flinging missiles in all directions . They attack record companies , politicians , rule makers , exes , and anyone else in sight , all the while rediscovering the savage fun of super @-@ loud guitars . " Neil McCormick from The Daily Telegraph stated " ... it is sleek , exciting and committed enough to suggest there is life in the rock beast yet . " Jordan Blum at PopMatters rated it a 5 / 10 , describing it as a " solid album " , but considers it " too repetitive , uninspired , and generic " , compared to the three previous albums . Rolling Stone reviewer Jon Dolan states that " on Album Six they 're back with a retro @-@ neo @-@ aggro sound that would 've been too intense for modern @-@ rock radio in 1999 ... these dudes can still bring it like backward @-@ ball @-@ cap warriors hopped up on Mountain Dew and Dad 's fourth divorce . " 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 The album debuted at number three on the Billboard 200 chart behind Lana Del Rey 's Ultraviolence and Sam Smith 's In the Lonely Hour , with first @-@ week sales of 110 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . This was the first week of 2014 where three albums sold more than 100 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . In its second week , the album dropped to number nine on the chart , selling 29 @,@ 000 copies . In its third week the album sold 16 @,@ 000 more copies bringing its total album sales to 155 @,@ 000 in the United States . As of December 2014 , the album has sold 274 @,@ 000 copies in the United States and 900 @,@ 000 copies worldwide . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The Hunting Party was featured in a number of year end " best of " lists . The album also was nominated for the " 2014 Rock Album of the Year " by Loudwire , but lost to " Islander " ' s Violence & Destruction by a close margin of 0 @.@ 29 % of votes . Whereas the band won the " Best Rock Band of 2014 " and " Best Live Act of 2014 " . The song Rebellion from the album got a nomination for " 2014 Rock Song of the Year " where it lost to Three Days Grace 's " Painkiller " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Linkin Park , except where noted . 
 Notes 
 ^ a Live from Mexico is Linkin Park 's 2012 live performance in Monterrey , Mexico , originally recorded for MTV World Stage . 
 = = The Hunting Party ( Acapellas + Instrumentals ) = = 
 The Hunting Party ( Acapellas + Instrumentals ) is the second instrumental and a cappella tracks performed by Linkin Park , taken from The Hunting Party . The album was released on iTunes and Amazon through Warner Bros. and Machine Shop on August 12 , 2014 . Produced by Shinoda and Delson , the album serves as a sequel to Living Things ( Acapellas and Instrumentals ) ( 2012 ) . 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = = = Other charted songs = = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Letters from an American Farmer = 
 Letters from an American Farmer is a series of letters written by French American writer J. Hector St. John de Crèvecœur , first published in 1782 . The considerably longer title under which it was originally published is Letters from an American Farmer ; Describing Certain Provincial Situations , Manners , and Customs not Generally Known ; and <unk> Some Idea of the Late and Present Interior Circumstances of the British Colonies in North America . The twelve letters cover a wide range of topics , from the emergence of an American identity to the slave trade . 
 Crèvecœur wrote Letters during a period of seven years prior to the American Revolutionary War , while farming land near Orange County , New York . It is told from the viewpoint of a fictional narrator in correspondence with an English gentleman , and each letter concerns a different aspect of life or location in the British colonies of America . The work incorporates a number of styles and genres , including documentary , as well as sociological observations . 
 Although only moderately successful in America , Letters was immediately popular in Europe upon its publication in 1782 . Prompted by high demand , Crèvecœur produced an expanded French version that was published two years later . The work is recognised as being one of the first in the canon of American literature , and has influenced a diverse range of subsequent works . 
 = = Biographical background = = 
 Born in Caen , Normandy to an aristocratic family , Michel @-@ Guillaume Hector St. John de Crèvecœur received a Jesuit education at the Jesuit Collège Royal de Bourbon . In 1754 , having left school , Crèvecœur visited relatives in England where he became engaged ; this visit would mark the beginning of a lifelong admiration for the culture and politics of the country . Shortly after this , possibly due to the death of his fiancée , he joined a French regiment in Canada engaged in the French and Indian War ( 1754 – 1763 ) . After being wounded in the Battle of the Plains of Abraham ( 1759 ) , Crèvecœur resigned his commission and began traveling widely across Pennsylvania and New York . 
 In 1765 , Crèvecœur became an official resident of New York and naturalized as a British subject , adopting the name J. Hector St. John . After working as a surveyor and trader during the subsequent four years , in which he traveled extensively , he purchased farm @-@ land in Orange County , New York and married Mehitabel Tippett . During the following seven years , Crèvecœur wrote Letters from an American Farmer and corresponded with William Seton ( possibly referenced in the book as " Mr F. B. " , and to whom the French edition was dedicated ) . 
 As local hostilities between the loyalists and revolutionaries escalated in the build @-@ up to the American Revolutionary War ( 1775 – 1783 ) , Crèvecœur decided to return to France ; scholars have suggested that he did so in order to secure his legal claim to his patrimony . Upon his arrival in New York City in 1778 , Crèvecœur found himself under suspicion of being a Revolutionary spy and was detained ; whilst in detention , he suffered a nervous collapse . He was released to travel in September 1780 , and traveled to London after landing in Ireland . There , he sold the manuscript of Letters to publishers Davies & Davis before leaving for France . 
 = = Summary = = 
 Letter I : " Introduction " — Introduction of the fictional persona of James , an American farmer , and the commencement of his correspondence via letters with ' Mr F. B. ' , an English gentleman . Doubting his writing abilities , he receives advice from his wife and the local minister . 
 Letter II : " On the Situation , Feelings , and Pleasures of an American Farmer " — Description of the creatures , plants , and activities on and around the farm owned by James . It comments on the differences between the American model of society and that of European countries . 
 Letter III : " What Is an American ? " — Comparison between the physical environment and the societies that emerge from it . <unk> the conditions and aspects of the new American country and what constitutes the identity of its citizens . 
 Letters IV – VIII — Widely referred to as the " Nantucket sequence " or " Nantucket letters " . These letters describe various aspects of the Quaker society on the island of Nantucket and Martha 's Vineyard : 
 Letter IV : " Description of the island of Nantucket ; with the manners , customs , policy and trade , of the inhabitants " 
 Letter V : " Customary education and employment of the inhabitants of Nantucket " 
 Letter VI : " Description of the island of Martha 's Vineyard , and of the whale @-@ fishery " 
 Letter VII : " Manners and customs at Nantucket " 
 Letter VIII : " Peculiar customs at Nantucket " 
 Letter IX : " Description of Charles Town ; Thoughts on Slavery ; on Physical Evil ; a Melancholy Scene " — An account of " Charles Town " ( now Charleston ) , particularly on the institution of slavery in the town and in the Southern United States . It argues about the destruction that revolves around the slave @-@ master relationships and makes an appeal to the North , in particular , that slavery is a truly evil practice in the midst of the new nation of America . 
 Letter X : " On snakes and on the humming @-@ bird " — Extensive detailing of a wide variety of snakes , including the cultural practices surrounding them ; it also mentions their habits and stories that have been told in America , warning people about certain ones . At the end of this letter , the discussion turns to the hummingbirds found around James ' land and their habits and varieties . 
 Letter XI : " From Mr. <unk> — — n Al — — z , a Russian gentleman describing a visit he paid , at my request , to Mr. John Bertram , the <unk> Pennsylvanian botanist " — Narrated by a Russian gentleman , describing his visit to the famous Pennsylvanian botanist , Mr. John Bertram . The narrator tells of the new methods of fertilizing and irrigation that Bertram has invented and used on his own plants . 
 Letter XII : " <unk> of a Frontier Man " — Description of the impending American Revolutionary War and James ' turmoil at being caught between forces — American and British — beyond his own control , including anxiety over to whom he owes his allegiance . Also considered is the way of life of Native Americans , with whom James and his family intend to live at the close of the book . 
 = = Structure , genre and style = = 
 Letters is structured around the fictional correspondence via letters between James — an American farmer living in the Quaker colony of Pennsylvania — and an English gentleman , Mr F. B. However , it 's only James ' letters that are presented , as the addressee 's answers are absent . The work consists of twelve letters that address a wide range of issues concerning life in the British colonies in America in the years prior to the American Revolutionary War . The " Introductory Letter " ( Letter I ) introduces the fictional narrator James , and each subsequent letter takes as its subject matter either a certain topic ( Letter III " What is an American ? " ) or a particular location that James visits ( Letters IV , VI and IX describe Nantucket , Martha 's Vineyard and Charles Town respectively ) , though certain themes span or are referred to within several letters . The exception to this is Letter XI , which is written by a Russian gentleman ( " Mr. <unk> — — n Al — — z " ) describing his visit to the botanist John Bartram , but who is presumed to also be writing to Mr F. B. Arranged as a series of discontinuous letters , the work can appear superficially disconnected , although critics have identified various levels of coherence and organization . 
 The text incorporates a broad range of genres , ranging from documentary on local agricultural practices to sociological observations of the places visited and their inhabitants ; Norman <unk> describes it as " an example of the American tradition of book @-@ as @-@ anthology and authorship @-@ as @-@ editing " . Whereas early readings of the text tended to consider it " as a straightforward natural and social history of young America " , critics now see it as combining elements of fiction and non @-@ fiction in what Thomas Philbrick has termed a " complex artistry " . In addition to its usual classification as a form of epistolary , philosophical travel narrative — comparable to Montesquieu 's Persian Letters — the text has been considered as a Novel , and as a romance . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Shift of tone = = = 
 Letters has been said to exhibit a " model of decline " , as the optimistic tone of the early letters is disrupted and the text become increasingly pessimistic ; there is a movement from a " joy , pride , wonder " at the spectacle of America , to the " images of the inhuman brutality of slavery " . However , there is disagreement over whether this model of decline is produced by James ' own disillusionment , or whether it is evidence of Crèvecœur 's voice interceding into the narrative ; further , critics disagree over where in the narrative the disillusionment occurs , variably placing it in the third , eighth and ninth letters . 
 = = = Relationship with the environment = = = 
 Among the most significant and recurring themes of Letters is that of the individual and society 's relationship with their environment ; the work has been read as an " impassioned , unqualified defense of American agrarianism " . The theme appears especially in Letter II , III and in the letters describing Nantucket and Martha 's Vineyard , where James ' views are expressive of the doctrine of environmental determinism , that human growth , development and activities are controlled by the physical environment . In Letter III he says : 
 Men are like plants : the goodness and flavour of the fruit proceeds from the peculiar soil and exposition in which they grow . We are nothing but what we derive from the air we breathe , the climate we inhabit , the government we obey , the system of religion we profess , and the nature of our employment . 
 Anna Carew @-@ Miller suggests that what the text articulates on this subject is " the [ cultural ] myth that a man 's relationship with the land confirms his masculinity and dignity as a citizen . " 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 When Crèvecœur offered his manuscript essays to the London publishers Davies & Davis in 1782 , they were initially skeptical about the potential for the Letters to be successful . However , the work proved to be instantly popular in England for a variety of reasons . Proponents of political reform such as William Godwin and Thomas Paine approved of the radical anti @-@ government implications of its message . Romantic writers admired , and were influenced by , its evocation of the natural landscape and the individual 's relationship to it . More widely , in the final years of the Revolutionary War , the public was eager for the documentary detail Letters provided about America . The popularity of the book led to a second edition being called for only a year later . 
 In continental Europe , Letters proved equally popular . Dutch and German translations were rapidly produced , and prompted by constant demand , editions appeared in such places as Dublin , Paris and Maastricht . In lieu of a second volume of letters , Crèvecœur produced an expanded French version ( Lettres d 'un <unk> américain ) that was published in 1784 . The French version , which removed the fictional persona of James , is presented as a series of documents that have been neutrally edited , providing greater documentary detail but at the expense of artistry . 
 In the twentieth century there was a revival of interest in the text . Critic David Carlson suggests that it was " Not aesthetics , but the politics of nationalism appears to have been the primary force behind <unk> 's critical resurrection " — the Letters being among the first works to depict an American " melting pot " . Letters , particularly Letter III ( " What is an American ? " ) , is frequently anthologized , and the work is recognized as being one of the first in the canon of American literature . 
 = = = Modern editions = = = 
 = Rogue River ( Oregon ) = 
 The Rogue River ( <unk> : yan @-@ <unk> @-@ chit ’ <unk> @-@ <unk> ~ -li ~ ’ , Takelma : tak @-@ <unk> ) in southwestern Oregon in the United States flows about 215 miles ( 346 km ) in a generally westward direction from the Cascade Range to the Pacific Ocean . Known for its salmon runs , whitewater rafting , and rugged scenery , it was one of the original eight rivers named in the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act of 1968 . Beginning near Crater Lake , which occupies the caldera left by the explosive volcanic eruption of Mount Mazama , the river flows through the geologically young High Cascades and the older Western Cascades , another volcanic province . Further west , the river passes through multiple exotic terranes of the more ancient Klamath Mountains . In the Kalmiopsis Wilderness section of the Rogue basin are some of the world 's best examples of rocks that form the Earth 's mantle . Near the mouth of the river , the only dinosaur fragments ever discovered in Oregon were found in the Otter Point Formation , along the coast of Curry County . 
 People have lived along the Rogue River and its tributaries for at least 8 @,@ 500 years . European explorers made first contact with Native Americans ( Indians ) toward the end of the 18th century and began beaver trapping and other activities in the region . Clashes , sometimes deadly , occurred between the natives and the trappers and later between the natives and European @-@ American miners and settlers . These struggles culminated with the Rogue River Wars of 1855 – 56 and removal of most of the natives to reservations outside the basin . After the war , settlers expanded into remote areas of the watershed and established small farms along the river between Grave Creek and the mouth of the Illinois River . They were relatively isolated from the outside world until 1895 , when the Post Office Department added mail @-@ boat service along the lower Rogue . As of 2010 , the Rogue has one of the two remaining rural mail @-@ boat routes in the United States . 
 Dam building and removal along the Rogue has generated controversy for more than a century ; an early fish @-@ blocking dam ( Ament ) was dynamited by vigilantes , mostly disgruntled salmon fishermen . By 2009 all but one of the main @-@ stem dams downstream of a huge flood @-@ control structure 157 miles ( 253 km ) from the river mouth had been removed . Aside from dams , threats to salmon include high water temperatures . Although sometimes too warm for salmonids , the main stem Rogue is relatively clean , ranking between 85 and 97 ( on a scale of 0 to 100 ) on the Oregon Water Quality Index ( OWQI ) . 
 Although the Rogue Valley near Medford is partly urban , the average population density of the Rogue watershed is only about five people per square mile ( 12 per km2 ) . Several historic bridges cross the river near the more populated areas . Many public parks , hiking trails , and campgrounds are near the river , which flows largely through forests , including national forests . Biodiversity in many parts of the basin is high ; the Klamath @-@ Siskiyou temperate coniferous forests , which extend into the southwestern Rogue basin , are among the four most diverse of this kind in the world . 
 = = Course = = 
 The Rogue River begins at Boundary Springs on the border between Klamath and Douglas counties near the northern edge of Crater Lake National Park . Although it changes direction many times , it flows generally west for 215 miles ( 346 km ) from the Cascade Range through the Rogue River – Siskiyou National Forest and the Klamath Mountains to the Pacific Ocean at Gold Beach . Communities along its course include Union Creek , Prospect , Trail , Shady Cove , Gold Hill , and Rogue River , all in Jackson County ; Grants Pass , and Galice in Josephine County , and Agness , Wedderburn , and Gold Beach in Curry County . Significant tributaries include the South Fork Rogue River , Elk Creek , Bear Creek , the Applegate River , and the Illinois River . Arising at 5 @,@ 320 feet ( 1 @,@ 622 m ) above sea level , the river loses more than 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) in elevation by the time it reaches the Pacific . 
 It was one of the original eight rivers named in the National Wild and Scenic Rivers Act of 1968 , which included 84 miles ( 135 km ) of the Rogue , from 7 miles ( 11 @.@ 3 km ) west of Grants Pass to 11 miles ( 18 km ) east of the mouth at Gold Beach . In 1988 , an additional 40 miles ( 64 km ) of the Rogue between Crater Lake National Park and the unincorporated community of Prospect was named Wild and Scenic . Of the river 's total length , 124 miles ( 200 km ) , about 58 percent is Wild and Scenic . The Rogue is one of only three rivers that start in or east of the Cascade Range in Oregon and reach the Pacific Ocean . The others are the Umpqua River and Klamath River . These three Southern Oregon rivers drain mountains south of the Willamette Valley . The Willamette River and its tributaries drain north along the Willamette Valley into the Columbia River , which starts in British Columbia rather than Oregon . 
 = = = Discharge = = = 
 The United States Geological Survey ( USGS ) operates five stream gauges along the Rogue River . They are located , from uppermost to lowermost , near Prospect , Eagle Point , Central Point , Grants Pass , and Agness . Between 1960 and 2007 , the average discharge recorded by the Agness gauge at river mile ( RM ) 29 @.@ 7 or river kilometer ( RK ) 47 @.@ 8 was 6 @,@ 622 cubic feet per second ( 188 m3 / s ) . The maximum discharge during this period was 290 @,@ 000 cubic feet per second ( 8 @,@ 200 m3 / s ) on December 23 , 1964 , and the minimum discharge was 608 cubic feet per second ( 17 m3 / s ) on July 9 and 10 , 1968 . This was from a drainage basin of 3 @,@ 939 square miles ( 10 @,@ 202 km2 ) , or about 76 percent of the entire Rogue watershed . The maximum flow occurred between December 1964 and January 1965 during the Christmas flood of 1964 , which was rated by the National Weather Service as one of Oregon 's top 10 weather events of the 20th century . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 Draining 5 @,@ 156 square miles ( 13 @,@ 350 km2 ) , the Rogue River watershed covers parts of Jackson , Josephine , Curry , Douglas , and Klamath counties in southwestern Oregon and Siskiyou and Del Norte counties in northern California . The steep , rugged basin , stretching from the western flank of the Cascade Range to the northeastern flank of the Siskiyou Mountains , varies in elevation from 9 @,@ 485 feet ( 2 @,@ 891 m ) at the summit of Mount McLoughlin in the Cascades to 0 feet ( 0 m ) , where the basin meets the ocean . The basin borders the watersheds of the Williamson River , Upper Klamath Lake , and the upper Klamath River on the east ; the lower Klamath , Smith , and Chetco rivers on the south ; the North Umpqua , South Umpqua , Coquille , and Sixes rivers on the north , and the Pacific Ocean on the west . 
 In 2000 , Jackson County had a population of about 181 @,@ 300 , most of them living in the Bear Creek Valley cities of Ashland ( 19 @,@ 500 ) , Talent ( 5 @,@ 600 ) , Phoenix ( 4 @,@ 100 ) , Medford ( 63 @,@ 200 ) , Central Point ( 12 @,@ 500 ) , and Jacksonville ( 2 @,@ 200 ) . Others in Jackson County lived in the cities of Shady Cove ( 2 @,@ 300 ) , Eagle Point ( 4 @,@ 800 ) , Butte Falls ( 400 ) and Rogue River ( 1 @,@ 800 ) . Josephine County had a population of 75 @,@ 700 , including the cities of Grants Pass ( 23 @,@ 000 ) and Cave Junction ( 1 @,@ 400 ) . Gold Beach ( 1 @,@ 900 ) is the only city in Curry County ( 21 @,@ 100 ) in the Rogue River basin . Only small , sparsely inhabited parts of the watershed are in Klamath and Douglas counties in Oregon and Siskiyou and Del Norte counties in California . The watershed 's average population density is about 32 people per square mile ( 12 @.@ 4 / km2 ) . 
 Many overlapping entities including city , county , state , and federal governments share jurisdiction for parts of the watershed . About 60 percent of the basin is publicly owned and is managed by the United States Forest Service , the Bureau of Land Management ( BLM ) , and the United States Bureau of Reclamation . Under provisions of the federal Clean Water Act , the Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) , assisted by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality ( DEQ ) and other agencies in both states are charged with controlling water pollution in the basin . United States National Forests and other forests cover about 83 percent of the basin ; another 6 percent is grassland , 3 percent shrub , and only 0 @.@ 2 percent wetland . Urban areas account for slightly less than 1 percent and farms for about 6 percent . 
 Precipitation in the Rogue basin varies greatly from place to place and season to season . At Gold Beach on the Pacific Coast it averages about 80 inches ( 2 @,@ 000 mm ) a year , whereas at Ashland , which is inland , it averages about 20 inches ( 510 mm ) . The average annual precipitation for the entire basin is about 38 inches ( 970 mm ) . Most of this falls in winter and spring , and summers are dry . At high elevations in the Cascades , much of the precipitation arrives as snow and infiltrates permeable volcanic soils ; snowmelt contributes to stream flows in the upper basin during the dry months . Along the Illinois River in the lower basin , most of the precipitation falls as rain on shallow soils ; rapid runoff leads to high flows during winter storms and low flows during the dry summer . Average monthly temperatures for the whole basin range from about 68 ° F ( 20 ° C ) in July and August to about 40 ° F ( 4 ° C ) in December . Within the basin , local temperatures vary with elevation . 
 = = Geology = = 
 = = = High and Western Cascades = = = 
 Arising near Crater Lake , the Rogue River flows from the geologically young High Cascades through the somewhat older Western Cascades and then through the more ancient Klamath Mountains . The High Cascades are composed of volcanic rock produced at intervals from about 7 @.@ 6 million years ago through geologically recent events such as the catastrophic eruption of Mount Mazama in about 5700 BCE . The volcano hurled 12 to 15 cubic miles ( 50 to 63 km3 ) of ash into the air , covering much of the western U.S. and Canada with <unk> deposits . The volcano ’ s subsequent collapse formed the caldera of Crater Lake . 
 Older and more deeply eroded , the Western Cascades are a range of volcanoes lying west of and merging with the High Cascades . They consist of partly altered volcanic rock from vents in both volcanic provinces , including varied lavas and ash tuffs ranging in age from 0 to 40 million years . As the Cascades rose , the Rogue maintained its flow to the ocean by down @-@ cutting , which created steep narrow gorges and rapids in many places . Bear Creek , a Rogue tributary that flows south to north , marks the boundary between the Western Cascades to the east and the Klamath Mountains to the west . 
 = = = Klamath Mountains = = = 
 Much more ancient than the upstream mountains are the exotic terranes of the Klamath Mountains to the west . Not until plate tectonics separated North America from Europe and North Africa and pushed it westward did the continent acquire , bit by bit , what became the Pacific Northwest , including Oregon . The Klamath Mountains consist of multiple terranes — former volcanic islands and coral reefs and bits of subduction zones , mantle , and seafloor — that merged offshore over vast stretches of time before colliding with North America as a single block about 150 to 130 million years ago . Much of the Rogue River watershed , including the Rogue River canyon , the Kalmiopsis Wilderness , the Illinois River basin , and Mount Ashland , are composed of exotic terranes . 
 Among the oldest rocks in Oregon , some of the formations in these terranes date to the Triassic , nearly 250 million years ago . Between 165 and 170 million years ago , in the Jurassic , faulting consolidated the Klamath terranes offshore during what geologists call the Siskiyou orogeny . This three- to five @-@ million @-@ year episode of intense tectonic activity pushed sedimentary rocks deep enough into the mantle to melt them and then forced them to the surface as granitic plutons . Belts of plutons , which contain gold and other precious metals , run through the Klamaths and include the Ashland pluton , the <unk> batholith east of Oregon Caves National Monument , the Grants Pass pluton , the Gold Hill pluton , the Jacksonville pluton , and others . Miners have worked rich deposits of gold , silver , copper , nickel , and other metals in several districts of the Klamaths . Placer mining in the mid @-@ 19th century soon led to lode mining for gold . Aside from a mine in eastern Oregon , the Greenback Mine along Grave Creek , a Rogue tributary , was the most productive gold mine in Oregon . 
 In Curry County , the lower Rogue passes through the Galice Formation , metamorphosed shale and other rocks formed when a small oceanic basin in the merging Klamath terranes was thrust over other Klamath rocks about 155 million years ago . The lowest part of the seafloor of the Josephine Basin , as this ancient sea came to be called , rests on top of the Kalmiopsis Wilderness , where it is known as the Josephine ophiolite . Some of its rocks are peridotite , reddish @-@ brown when exposed to oxygen but very dark green inside . According to geologist Ellen Morris Bishop , " These odd tawny <unk> in the Kalmiopsis Wilderness are among the world ’ s best examples of rocks that form the mantle . " <unk> peridotite appears as serpentine along the west side of the Illinois River . Chemically unsuited for growing plants , widespread serpentinite in the Klamaths supports sparse vegetation in parts of the watershed . The Josephine peridotite was a source of valuable chromium ore , mined in the region between 1917 and 1960 . 
 At the mouth of the Rogue River , along the coast of Curry County , is the Otter Point Formation , a mélange of metamorphosed sedimentary rocks such as shales , sandstones , and chert . Although the rocks formed in the Jurassic , evidence suggests that they faulted north as part of the Gold Beach Terrane after the Klamaths merged with North America . Oregon ’ s only dinosaur fragments , those of a hadrosaur or duck @-@ billed dinosaur , were found here . In the mid @-@ 1960s , a geologist also discovered the beak and teeth of an ichthyosaur in the Otter Point Formation . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = First peoples = = = 
 Archeologists believe the first humans to inhabit the Rogue River region were nomadic hunters and gatherers . Radiocarbon dating suggests that they arrived in southwestern Oregon at least 8 @,@ 500 years ago , and at least 1 @,@ 500 years before the first contact with whites the natives established permanent villages along streams . The home villages of various groups shared many cultural elements , such as food , clothing , and shelter types . Intermarriage was common , and many people understood dialects of more than one of the three language groups spoken in the region . The Native Americans ( Indians ) included <unk> people near the coast and , further upstream , groups of Shasta Costa , Dakubetede , Takelma , Shasta , and Latgawa . Houses in the villages varied somewhat , but were often about 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) wide and 15 to 20 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 to 6 @.@ 1 m ) long , framed with posts sunk into the ground , and covered with split sugar pine or red cedar planks . People left the villages during about half of the year to gather camas bulbs , sugar @-@ pine bark , acorns , and berries , and hunted deer and elk to supplement their main food , salmon . The total early @-@ 1850s native population of southern Oregon , including the Umpqua , Coos , Coquille , and Chetco watersheds as well as the Rogue , is estimated to have been about 3 @,@ 800 . The population before the arrival of explorers and European diseases is thought to have been at least one @-@ third larger , but " there is insufficient evidence to estimate aboriginal populations prior to the time of first white contact ... " . 
 = = = Culture clash = = = 
 The first recorded encounter between whites and coastal southwestern Oregon Indians occurred in 1792 when British explorer George Vancouver anchored off Cape Blanco , about 30 miles ( 48 km ) north of the mouth of the Rogue River , and Indians visited the ship in canoes . In 1826 , Alexander Roderick McLeod of the Hudson 's Bay Company ( HBC ) led an overland expedition from HBC 's regional headquarters in Fort Vancouver to as far south as the Rogue . 
 In 1827 an HBC expedition led by Peter Skene Ogden made the first direct contact between whites and the inland Rogue River natives when he crossed the Siskiyou Mountains to look for beaver . Friction between Indians and whites was relatively minor during these early encounters ; however , in 1834 an HBC expedition led by Michel Laframboise was reported to have killed 11 Rogue River natives , and shortly thereafter a party led by an American trapper , Ewing Young , shot and killed at least two more . The name Rogue River apparently began with French fur trappers who called the river La Riviere aux <unk> because they regarded the natives as rogues ( <unk> ) . In 1835 , Rogue River people killed four whites in a party of eight who were traveling from Oregon to California . Two years later , two of the survivors and others on a cattle drive organized by Young killed the first two Indians they met north of the Klamath River . 
 The number of whites entering the Rogue River watershed greatly increased after 1846 , when a party of 15 men led by Jesse Applegate developed a southern alternative to the Oregon Trail ; the new trail was used by emigrants headed for the Willamette Valley . Later called the Applegate Trail , it passed through the Rogue and Bear Creek valleys and crossed the Cascade Range between Ashland and south of Upper Klamath Lake . From 90 to 100 wagons and 450 to 500 emigrants used the new trail later in 1846 , passing through Rogue Indian homelands between the headwaters of Bear Creek and the future site of Grants Pass and crossing the Rogue about 4 @.@ 5 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) downstream of it . Despite fears on both sides , violence in the watershed in the 1830s and 1840s was limited ; " Indians seemed interested in speeding whites on their way , and whites were happy to get through the region without being attacked . " 
 In 1847 , the Whitman massacre and the Cayuse War in what became southeastern Washington raised fears among white settlers throughout the region and led to the formation of large volunteer militias organized to fight Indians . Along the Rogue , tensions intensified in 1848 at the start of the California Gold Rush , when hundreds of men from the Oregon Territory passed through the Rogue Valley on their way to the Sacramento River basin . After Indians attacked a group of returning miners along the Rogue in 1850 , former territorial governor Joseph Lane negotiated a peace treaty with <unk> , a leader of the Takelma Indians . It promised protection of Indian rights and safe passage through the Rogue Valley for white miners and settlers . 
 The peace did not last . Miners began prospecting for gold in the watershed , including a Bear Creek tributary called Jackson Creek , where they established a mining camp in 1851 at the site of what later became Jacksonville . Indian attacks on miners that year led to U.S. Army intervention and fighting near Table Rock between Indians and the combined forces of professional soldiers and volunteer miner militias . John P. Gaines , the new territorial governor , negotiated a new treaty with some but not all of the Indian bands , removing them from Bear Creek and other tributaries on the south side of the main stem . At about the same time , more white emigrants , including women and children , were settling in the region . By 1852 , about 28 donation land claims had been filed in the Rogue Valley . Further clashes in 1853 led to the Treaty with the Rogue River ( 1853 ) that established the Table Rock Indian Reservation across the river from the federal Fort Lane . As the white population increased and Indian losses of land , food sources , and personal safety mounted , bouts of violence upstream and down continued through 1854 – 55 , culminating in the Rogue River War of 1855 – 56 . 
 Suffering from cold , hunger , and disease on the Table Rock Reservation , a group of Takelma returned to their old village at the mouth of Little Butte Creek in October 1855 . After a volunteer militia attacked them , killing 23 men , women , and children , they fled downriver , attacking whites from Gold Hill to Galice Creek . Confronted by volunteers and regular army troops , the Indians at first repulsed them ; however , after nearly 200 volunteers launched an all @-@ day assault on the remaining natives , the war ended at Big Bend ( at RM 35 or RK 56 ) on the lower river . By then , fighting had also ended near the coast , where , before retreating upstream , a separate group of natives had killed about 30 whites and burned their cabins near what later became Gold Beach . 
 Most of the Rogue River Indians were removed in 1856 to reservations further north . About 1 @,@ 400 were sent to the Coast Reservation , later renamed the Siletz Reservation . To protect 400 natives still in danger of attack at Table Rock , Joel Palmer , the Oregon Superintendent of Indian Affairs , ordered their removal , involving a forced march of 33 days , to the newly established Grande Ronde Reservation in Yamhill County , Oregon . 
 = = = Mail boats = = = 
 After the Rogue River War , a small number of newcomers began to settle along or near the Rogue River Canyon . These pioneers , some of whom were white gold miners married to native <unk> women from the Klamath River basin , established gardens and orchards , kept horses , cows , and other livestock , and received occasional shipments of goods sent by pack mule over the mountains . Until the 1890s , these settlers remained relatively isolated from the outside world . In 1883 , one of the settlers , Elijah H. Price , proposed a permanent mail route by boat up the Rogue River from Ellensburg ( later renamed Gold Beach ) to Big Bend , about 40 miles ( 64 km ) upstream . The route , Price told the government , would serve perhaps 11 families and no towns . Although the Post Office Department resisted the idea for many years , in early 1895 it agreed to a one @-@ year trial of the water route , established a post office at Price 's log cabin at Big Bend , and named Price postmaster . Price 's job , for which he received no pay during the trial year , included running the post office and making sure that the mail boat made one round @-@ trip a week . He named the new post office Illahe . The name derives from the Chinook Jargon word <unk> , meaning " land " or " earth " . 
 Propelled by rowing , poling , pushing , pulling , and sometimes by sail , the mail boat delivered letters and small packages , including groceries from Wedderburn , where a post office was established later in 1895 . In 1897 , the department established a post office near the confluence of the Rogue and the Illinois rivers , 8 miles ( 13 km ) downriver from Illahe . The postmaster named the office Agnes after his daughter , but a transcription error added an extra " s " and the name became Agness . Upriver , a third post office , established in 1903 , was named Marial after another postmaster 's daughter . Marial , at ( RM ) 48 ( RK 77 ) , is about 13 miles ( 21 km ) upriver from Illahe and 21 miles ( 34 km ) from Agness . To avoid difficult rapids , carriers delivered the mail by mule between Illahe and Marial , and after 1908 most mail traveling beyond Agness went by mule . The Illahe post office closed in 1943 , and when the Marial post office closed in 1954 , " it was the last postal facility in the United States to still be served only by mule pack trains . " 
 The first mail boat was an 18 @-@ foot ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) , double @-@ ended craft made of cedar . By 1930 , the mail @-@ boat fleet consisted of three 26 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 9 m ) boats , equipped with 60 @-@ horsepower Model A Ford engines and designed to carry 10 passengers . By the 1960s , rudderless jetboats powered by twin or triple 280 @-@ horsepower engines , began to replace propeller @-@ driven boats . The jetboats could safely negotiate shallow riffles , and the largest could carry nearly 50 passengers . Rogue mail @-@ boat excursions , which had been growing more popular for several decades , began in the 1970s to include trips to as far upriver as Blossom Bar , 20 miles ( 32 km ) above Agness . As of 2010 , jet boats , functioning mainly as excursion craft , still deliver mail between Gold Beach and Agness . The Rogue River mail boat company is " one of only two mail carriers delivering the mail by boat in the United States " ; the other is along the Snake River in eastern Oregon . 
 = = = Commercial fishing = = = 
 For thousands of years , salmon was a reliable food source for Native Americans living along the Rogue . Salmon migrations were so huge that early settlers claimed they could hear the fish moving upstream . These large runs continued into the 20th century despite damage to spawning beds caused by gold mining in the 1850s and large @-@ scale commercial fishing that began shortly thereafter . The fishing industry fed demands for salmon in the growing cities of Portland and San Francisco and for canned salmon in England . 
 By the 1880s , Robert Deniston Hume of Astoria , had bought land on both sides of the lower Rogue River and established such a big fishing business that he became known as the Salmon King of Oregon . His fleet of gillnetting boats , controlling most of the anadromous fish population of the river , plied its lower 12 miles ( 19 km ) . During his 32 @-@ year tenure , Hume 's company caught , processed , and shipped hundreds of tons of salmon from the Rogue . Upriver commercial fishermen also captured large quantities of fish . On a single day in 1913 , Grants Pass crews using five drift boats equipped with gill nets caught 5 @,@ 000 pounds ( 2 @,@ 300 kg ) of salmon . 
 In 1877 , in connection with his commercial fishery , Hume built a hatchery at Ellensburg ( Gold Beach ) , which released fish into the river . In its first year of operation , Hume collected 215 @,@ 000 salmon eggs and released about 100 @,@ 000 fry . After the first hatchery was destroyed by fire in 1893 , Hume he built a new hatchery in 1895 , and in 1897 he co @-@ operated with the United States Fish Commission in building and operating an egg @-@ collecting station at the mouth of Elk Creek on the upper Rogue . In 1899 , he built a hatchery near Wedderburn , across the river from Gold Beach , and until the time of his death in 1908 he had salmon eggs shipped to it from the Elk Creek station . 
 Based on variations in the size of the yearly catch , Hume and others believed his methods of fish @-@ propagation to be successful . However , as salmon runs declined over time despite the hatcheries , recreational fishing interests began to oppose large @-@ scale operations . In 1910 , a state referendum banned commercial fishing on the Rogue , but this decision was reversed in 1913 . As fish runs continued to dwindle , the state legislature finally closed the river to commercial fishing in 1935 . 
 As of 2010 , the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife ( <unk> ) operates the Cole M. Rivers Hatchery near the base of the dam at Lost Creek Lake , slightly upstream of the former Rogue – Elk Hatchery built by Hume . It raises rainbow trout ( steelhead ) , Coho salmon , spring and fall Chinook salmon , and summer and winter steelhead . The United States Army Corps of Engineers ( USACE ) built the hatchery in 1973 to offset the loss of fish habitat and spawning grounds in areas blocked by construction of the Lost Creek Dam on the main stem and the Applegate and Elk Creek dams on Rogue tributaries . It is the third @-@ largest salmon and steelhead hatchery in the United States . 
 = = = Celebrities = = = 
 In 1926 , author Zane Grey bought a miner 's cabin at Winkle Bar , near the river . He wrote Western books at this location , including his 1929 novel Rogue River Feud . Another of his books , Tales of Fresh Water Fishing ( 1928 ) , included a chapter based on a drift @-@ boat trip he took down the lower Rogue in 1925 . The Trust for Public Land bought the property at Winkle Bar and transferred it in 2008 to the BLM , which made it accessible to the public . 
 In the 1930s and 1940s many other celebrities , attracted by the scenery , fishing , rustic lodges , and boat trips , visited the lower Rogue . Famous visitors included actors Clark Gable , Tyrone Power , and Myrna Loy , singer Bing Crosby , author William Faulkner , journalist Ernie Pyle , radio comedians Freeman <unk> and Charles Correll , circus performer Emmett Kelly , and football star Norm van Brocklin . Bobby Doerr , a Hall of Fame baseball player , married a teacher from Illahe , and made his home along the Rogue . From 1940 to 1990 , actress and dancer Ginger Rogers owned the 1 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 400 ha ) Rogue River Ranch , operated for many years as a dairy farm , near Eagle Point . The historic <unk> Ginger Rogers Theater in Medford was named after her . Actress Kim Novak and her veterinarian husband bought a home and 43 acres ( 17 ha ) of land in 1997 near the Rogue River in Sams Valley , where they raise horses and llamas . 
 = = Dams = = 
 The William L. Jess Dam , a huge flood @-@ control and hydroelectric structure , blocks the Rogue River 157 miles ( 253 km ) from its mouth . Built by the USACE between 1972 and 1976 , it impounds Lost Creek Lake . The dam , which is 345 feet ( 105 m ) high and 3 @,@ 600 feet ( 1 @,@ 100 m ) long , prevents salmon migration above this point . When the lake is full , it covers 3 @,@ 428 acres ( 1 @,@ 387 ha ) and has an average depth of 136 feet ( 41 m ) . Ranked by storage capacity , its reservoir is the seventh @-@ largest in Oregon . 
 Other dams have impeded fish passage at one time or another between the William L. Jess Dam and Grants Pass . After decades of controversy about water rights , costs , migratory fish , and environmental impacts , removal or modification of remaining middle @-@ reach dams as well as a partly finished dam on Elk Creek , a major tributary of the Rogue , began in 2008 . The de @-@ construction projects were all meant to improve salmon runs by allowing more fish to reach suitable spawning grounds . 
 In 1904 , brothers C.R. and Frank Ray built the Gold Ray Dam , a log structure , to generate electricity near Gold Hill . They installed a fish ladder . The California @-@ Oregon Power Company , which later became Pacific Power , acquired the dam in 1921 . Replacing the log dam in 1941 with a concrete structure 35 feet ( 11 m ) high , it added a new fish ladder and a fish @-@ counting station . The company closed the hydroelectric plant in 1972 , although the fish ladder remained , and biologists from the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife used the station to count migrating salmon and steelhead . Jackson County , which owned the dam , had it removed with the help of a $ 5 million federal grant approved in June 2009 . The dam was demolished in the summer of 2010 . 
 In 2008 , the city of Gold Hill removed the last of the Gold Hill Dam , a diversion dam slightly downstream of the Gold Ray Dam . Originally built to provide power for a cement company , it was 3 to 14 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 to 4 @.@ 27 m ) high and 900 feet ( 270 m ) long . The dam and a diversion canal later delivered municipal water to the city until Gold Hill installed a pumping station to supply its water . 
 Savage Rapids Dam was 5 miles ( 8 km ) upstream from Grants Pass . Built in 1921 to divert river flows for irrigation , the dam was 39 feet ( 12 m ) tall and created a reservoir that seasonally extended up to 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) upstream . Its removal began in April 2009 , and was completed in October 2009 . Twelve newly installed pumps provide river water to the irrigation canals serving 7 @,@ 500 acres ( 3 @,@ 000 ha ) of the Grants Pass Irrigation District ( <unk> ) . 
 In 2008 , USACE removed part of the Elk Creek Dam and restored Elk Creek to its original channel . Construction on the dam had been halted by a court injunction in the 1980s after about 80 feet ( 24 m ) of the proposed height of 240 feet ( 73 m ) was reached . Further controversy delayed the notching for two decades . Elk Creek enters the Rogue River 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) downstream from Lost Creek Lake . 
 Historically , other dams along the river 's middle reaches were removed or destroyed during the first half of the 20th century . The Ament Dam , built in 1902 by the Golden Drift Mining Company to provide water for mining equipment , was slightly upriver of Grants Pass . After the company failed to keep promises to provide irrigation and electric power to the vicinity and because the dam was a " massive fish killer " , vigilantes destroyed part of the dam with dynamite in 1912 . The damaged dam was completely removed before construction of the Savage Rapids Dam in 1921 . 
 In 1890 , the Grants Pass Power Supply Company had built a log dam 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) high , across the river near the city . Salmon could pass the dam during high water , but most were blocked : " For half a mile below the dam , the river was crowded with fish throughout the summer . " After a flood destroyed this dam in 1905 , it was replaced by a 6 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) dam that , like its predecessor , lacked a fish ladder . By 1940 , the dam had deteriorated to the point that it no longer blocked migratory fish . 
 In addition to the dams on the Rogue main stem , at one time or another " several hundred dams were built on tributaries within the range of salmon migration " , most of which supplied water for mining or irrigation . Before 1920 , many of these dams made no provision for fish passage ; public pressure as well as efforts by turn @-@ of @-@ the @-@ century cannery owner R.D. Hume led to the installation of fish ladders on the most destructive dams . As of 2005 , there were about 80 non @-@ hydroelectric dams , mostly small irrigation structures , in the Rogue basin . In addition to Lost Creek Lake on the main stem , large reservoirs in the basin include Applegate Lake , Emigrant Lake , and Fish Lake . 
 The only artificial barrier on the main stem of the Rogue upstream of Lost Creek Lake is a diversion dam at Prospect at RM 172 ( RK 277 ) . The concrete dam , 50 feet ( 15 m ) high and 384 feet ( 117 m ) wide , impounds water from the Rogue and nearby streams and diverts it to power plants , which return the water to the river further downstream . PacifiCorp operates this system , called The Prospect Nos. 1 , 2 , and 4 Hydroelectric Project . Built in pieces between 1911 and 1944 , it includes separate diversion dams on the Middle Fork Rogue River and Red Blanket Creek , and a 9 @.@ 25 @-@ mile ( 14 @.@ 89 km ) water @-@ transport system of canals , flumes , pipes , and penstocks . 
 = = Bridges = = 
 Among the many bridges that cross the Rogue River is the Isaac Lee Patterson Bridge , which carries U.S. Route 101 over the river at Gold Beach . Designed by Conde B. McCullough and built in 1931 , it is " one of the most notable bridges in the Pacific Northwest " . Named a National Historic Civil Engineering Landmark in 1982 by the American Society of Civil Engineers , the 1 @,@ 898 @-@ foot ( 579 m ) structure was the first in the U.S. to use the Freyssinet method of stress control in concrete bridges . It features 7 open @-@ spandrel 230 @-@ foot ( 70 m ) arch spans , 18 deck @-@ girder approach spans , and many ornate decorative features such as Art Deco entrance pylons . 
 Several historic bridges cross the Rogue between Gold Hill and Grants Pass . The Gold Hill Bridge , designed by McCullough and built in 1927 , is the only open @-@ spandrel , barrel @-@ arch bridge in Oregon . Its main arch is 143 feet ( 44 m ) long . Also designed by McCullough , the Rock Point Bridge carries U.S. Route 99 and Oregon Route 234 over the river near the unincorporated community of Rock Point . The 505 @-@ foot ( 154 m ) structure has a single arch . Built in 1920 for $ 48 @,@ 400 , it replaced a wooden bridge at the same site . The bridge was closed in September 2009 for repairs to its deck and railings . The project is expected to cost $ 3 @.@ 9 million . 
 Caveman Bridge in Grants Pass is a 550 @-@ foot ( 170 m ) , three @-@ arch concrete structure . Designed by McCullough and built in 1931 , it replaced the Robertson Bridge . The city calls the structure Caveman because the Redwood Highway ( U.S. Route 199 ) that crosses the bridge passes near Oregon Caves National Monument , about 50 miles ( 80 km ) south of Grants Pass . 
 Slightly downstream of Grants Pass , the Robertson Bridge , built around 1909 , is a 583 @-@ foot ( 178 m ) three @-@ span , steel , through @-@ truss structure moved downriver in 1929 to make way for the Caveman Bridge . It carries the Rogue River Loop Highway ( Oregon Route 260 ) over the river west of the city . The bridge was named for pioneers who settled in the area in the 1870s . 
 = = Pollution = = 
 To comply with section 303 ( d ) of the federal Clean Water Act , the EPA or its state delegates must develop a list of the surface waters in each state that do not meet approved water @-@ quality criteria . To meet the criteria , the DEQ and others have developed Total Maximum Daily Load ( TMDL ) limits for pollutants entering streams and other surface waters . The Oregon 303 ( d ) list of pollutants for 2004 – 06 indicated that some reaches of the surface waters in the Rogue River Basin did not meet the standards for temperature , bacteria , dissolved oxygen , sedimentation , pH and nuisance weeds and algae . All of the listed stream reaches were in Oregon ; none in the California part of the basin was listed as impaired on that state 's 303 ( d ) list in 2008 . 
 The EPA approved temperature TMDLs for three Rogue River tributaries : Upper Sucker Creek in 1999 , Lower Sucker Creek in 2002 , and Lobster Creek in 2002 . It approved temperature , sedimentation , and biological criteria TMDLs for the Applegate River basin in 2004 , and temperature , sedimentation , fecal coliform , and Escherichia coli ( E. coli ) TMDLs for the Bear Creek watershed in 2007 . In 1992 it had approved pH , aquatic weeds and algae , and dissolved oxygen TMDLs for the Bear Creek watershed . In December 2008 , DEQ developed two TMDLs for the Rogue River basin ( except the tributaries with their own TMDLs ) ; a temperature TMDL was meant to protect salmon and trout from elevated water temperatures , and a fecal contamination TMDL was intended to safeguard people using surface waters for recreation . 
 The DEQ has collected water @-@ quality data in the Rogue basin since the mid @-@ 1980s and has used it to generate scores on the Oregon Water Quality Index ( OWQI ) . The index is meant to provide an assessment of water quality for general recreational uses ; OWQI scores can vary from 10 ( worst ) to 100 ( ideal ) . Of the eight Rogue basin sites tested during the water years 1997 – 2006 , five were ranked good , one was excellent , and two — Little Butte Creek and Bear Creek , in the most populated part of the Rogue basin — were poor . On the Rogue River itself , scores varied from 92 at RM 138 @.@ 4 ( RK 222 @.@ 7 ) declining to 85 at RM 117 @.@ 2 ( RK 188 @.@ 6 ) but improving to 97 at RM 11 @.@ 0 ( RK 17 @.@ 7 ) . By comparison , the average OWQI score for the Willamette River in downtown Portland , the state 's largest city , was 74 between 1986 and 1995 . 
 = = Flora and fauna = = 
 Most of the Rogue River watershed is in the Klamath Mountains ecoregion designated by the EPA , although part of the upper basin is in the Cascades ecoregion , and part of the lower basin is in the Coast Range ecoregion . Temperate coniferous forests dominate much of the basin . The upper basin , in the High Cascades and Western Cascades , is in places " identified as containing extremely high species richness within many groups of plants and animals " . Common tree species in the forests along the upper Rogue include incense cedar , white fir , and Shasta red fir . 
 Further downstream a diverse mix of conifers , broadleaf evergreens , and deciduous trees and shrubs grow in parts of the basin . In more populated areas , orchards , cropland , and pastureland have largely replaced the original vegetation , although remnants of oak savanna , prairie vegetation , and seasonal ponds survive at Table Rocks north of Medford . Oak woodlands , grassland savanna , ponderosa pine , and Douglas @-@ fir thrive in the relatively dry foothills east of Medford ; areas in the foothills of the Illinois Valley support Douglas @-@ fir , madrone , and incense cedar . Parts of the Illinois River watershed have sparse vegetation including Jeffrey pine and oak and <unk> species that grow in serpentine soils . The Klamath @-@ Siskiyou region of northern California and southwestern Oregon , including parts of the southwestern Rogue basin , is among the four most diverse temperate coniferous forests in the world . Considered one of the global centers of biodiversity , it contains about 3 @,@ 500 different plant species . The Klamath @-@ Siskiyou region is one of seven International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) areas of global botanical significance in North America and has been proposed as a World Heritage Site and UNESCO Biosphere Reserve . 
 The lower Rogue passes through the Southern Oregon Coast Range , where forests include Douglas @-@ fir , western hemlock , tanoak , Port Orford cedar , and western redcedar , and at lower elevations Sitka spruce . Coastal forests extending from British Columbia in the north to Oregon ( and the Rogue ) in the south are " some of the most productive in the world " . The coastal region , where it has not been altered by humans , abounds with ferns , lichens , mosses , and herbs , as well as conifers . 
 The Rogue River contains " extremely high @-@ quality salmonid habitat and has one of the finest salmonid fisheries in the west . However , most stocks are less abundant than they were historically ... " . <unk> found in the Rogue River downstream of Lost Creek Lake include Coho salmon , spring and fall Chinook salmon , and summer and winter steelhead . Other native species of freshwater fish found in the watershed include coastal cutthroat trout , Pacific lamprey , green sturgeon , white sturgeon , Klamath smallscale sucker , speckled dace , prickly sculpin , and riffle sculpin . <unk> species include redside shiner , largemouth bass , smallmouth bass , black crappie , bluegill , catfish , brown bullhead , yellow perch , carp , goldfish , American shad , Umpqua pikeminnow , and species of trout . Coho salmon in the watershed belong to an Evolutionarily Significant Unit ( ESU ) that was listed by the National Marine Fisheries Service as a threatened species in 1997 and reaffirmed as threatened in 2005 . The state of Oregon in 2005 listed Rogue spring Chinook salmon as potentially at risk . 
 Trees and shrubs growing in the riparian zones along the Rogue River include willows , red alder , white alder , black cottonwood , and Oregon ash . A few of the common animal and bird species seen along the river are American black bear , North American river otter , black @-@ tailed deer , bald eagle , osprey , great blue heron , water ouzel , and Canada goose . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 = = = Boating = = = 
 <unk> Sneakers : A <unk> 's Guide to Oregon 's Rivers lists several whitewater runs of varying difficulty along the upper , middle , and lower Rogue River and its tributaries . The longest run , on the main stem of the river downstream of Grants Pass , is " one of the best @-@ known whitewater runs in the United States " . Popular among kayakers and rafters , the 35 @-@ mile ( 56 km ) run consists of class 3 + rapids separated by more gentle stretches and deep pools . Its entire length is classified Wild and Scenic . 
 The Wild section of the lower Rogue River runs for 33 @.@ 8 miles ( 54 @.@ 4 km ) between Grave Creek and Watson Creek . To protect the river from overuse , a maximum of 120 commercial and noncommercial users a day are allowed to run this section . To enter it , boaters must obtain a special @-@ use permit allocated through a random @-@ selection process and pick it up at the Smullin Visitor Center , about 20 miles ( 32 km ) west of Interstate 5 on the Merlin – Galice Road , at the Rand Ranger Station downstream of Galice . Other sections of the river are open to jetboats . A Gold Beach company offers commercial <unk> trips of up to 104 miles ( 167 km ) round @-@ trip on the lower Rogue River . Another company offers <unk> excursions on the Hellgate section of the river below Grants Pass . 
 = = = Hiking = = = 
 The Upper Rogue River Trail , a National Recreation Trail , closely follows the river for about 40 miles ( 64 km ) from its headwaters at the edge of Crater Lake National Park to the boundary of the Rogue River National Forest at the mountain community of Prospect . Highlights along the trail include a river canyon cut through pumice deposited by the explosion of Mount Mazama about 8 @,@ 000 years ago ; the Rogue Gorge , lined with black lava , and Natural Bridge , where the river flows through a 250 @-@ foot ( 76 m ) lava tube . Between Farewell Bend and Natural Bridge , the trail passes through the Union Creek Historic District , a site with early 20th @-@ century resort buildings and a former ranger station that are listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 The Lower Rogue River Trail , a National Recreation Trail of 40 miles ( 64 km ) , runs parallel to the river from Grave Creek to Illahe , in the Wild Rogue Wilderness , 27 miles ( 43 km ) northwest of Grants Pass . The roadless area through which the trail runs is managed by the Siskiyou National Forest and the Medford District of the federal Bureau of Land Management and covers 224 square miles ( 580 km2 ) including 56 square miles ( 150 km2 ) of designated federal wilderness . Backpackers use the trail for multiple @-@ day trips , while day hikers take shorter trips . In addition to scenery and wildlife , features include views of rapids and " frantic boaters " , lodges at Illahe , Clay Hill Rapids , Paradise Creek , and Marial , and the Rogue River Ranch and museum . Hikers can take jet boats from Gold Beach to some of the lodges between May and November . The trail connects to many shorter side trails as well as to the 27 @-@ mile ( 43 km ) Illinois River Trail south of Agness . Hikers can also take trips along the Rogue that combine backpacking and rafting . 
 Rogue River Trail 1168 continues west 12 miles ( 19 km ) along the north side of the river from Agness to the Morey Meadow Trailhead . Forest Road <unk> provides a hiking route between the trailhead and the Lobster Creek Bridge , 5 miles ( 8 km ) further west . The Rogue River Walk , a 6 @-@ mile ( 10 km ) trail along the south side of the river continues west to a trailhead about 5 miles ( 8 km ) east of Gold Beach . 
 = = = Fishing = = = 
 Sport fishing on the Rogue River varies greatly depending on the location . In many places , fishing is good from stream banks and gravel bars , and much of the river is also fished from boats . Upstream of Lost Creek Lake , the main stem , sometimes called the North Fork , supports varieties of trout . Between Lost Creek Lake and Grants Pass there are major fisheries for spring and fall Chinook salmon , and Coho salmon from hatcheries , summer and winter steelhead , and large resident rainbow trout . The river between Grants Pass and Grave Creek has productive runs of summer and winter steelhead and Chinook , as well as good places to fish for trout . From Grave Creek to Foster Bar , all but the lower 15 miles ( 24 km ) of which is closed to jetboats , anglers fish for summer and winter steelhead , spring and fall Chinook , and Coho . Near Agness , the river produces large catches of immature steelhead known as " half @-@ pounders " that return from the ocean to the river in August in large schools . The lower river has spring and fall Chinook , as well as perch , lingcod , and crab near the ocean . 
 = = = Parks = = = 
 Parks along the Rogue River , which begins in the northwest corner of Crater Lake National Park , include Prospect State Scenic Viewpoint , a forested area 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) south of Prospect with a hiking trail leading to waterfalls and the Rogue River . The Joseph H. Stewart State Recreation Area has campsites overlooking Lost Creek Lake . Casey State Recreation Site offers boating , fishing , and picnic areas along the river 29 miles ( 47 km ) northeast of Medford . <unk> State Recreation Site is a day @-@ use park along the river at the base of Table Rocks and adjacent to the Denman Wildlife Area , about 9 miles ( 14 km ) north of Medford . Valley of the Rogue State Park , 12 miles ( 19 km ) east of Grants Pass , is built around 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) of river shoreline . 
 Between Grants Pass and the Hellgate Recreation Area , Josephine County manages two parks , Tom Pearce and Schroeder , along the river . Hellgate , 27 miles ( 43 km ) long , begins at the confluence of the Rogue and Applegate rivers about 7 miles ( 11 km ) west of Grants Pass . This stretch of the Rogue , featuring class I and II rapids , 11 access points for boats , 4 parks and campgrounds managed by Josephine County , ends at Grave Creek , where the Wild Rogue Wilderness begins . Indian Mary Park , part of the Josephine County park system , has tent sites , yurts , and spaces for camping vehicles on 61 acres ( 25 ha ) along the Merlin – Galice road at Merlin . The other three Josephine County parks in the Hellgate Recreation Area are Whitehorse , across from the mouth of the Applegate River ; Griffin , slightly downstream of Whitehorse , and <unk> , downstream of Indian Mary . 
 = HMS Diamond ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Diamond was a D @-@ class destroyer built for the Royal Navy in the early 1930s . The ship spent the bulk of her career on the China Station . She was briefly assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet in 1939 before she was transferred to West Africa for convoy escort duties . Diamond returned to the Mediterranean Fleet in early 1940 where she generally escorted convoys to and from Malta . The ship participated in the Battle of Cape Spartivento in November . Diamond was sunk by German aircraft on 27 April 1941 whilst evacuating Allied troops from Greece . 
 = = Description = = 
 Diamond displaced 1 @,@ 375 long tons ( 1 @,@ 397 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 890 long tons ( 1 @,@ 920 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 329 feet ( 100 @.@ 3 m ) , a beam of 33 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 6 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving two shafts , which developed a total of 36 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 27 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by three Admiralty 3 @-@ drum boilers . Diamond carried a maximum of 473 long tons ( 481 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 5 @,@ 870 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 870 km ; 6 @,@ 760 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 145 officers and men . 
 The ship mounted four 45 @-@ calibre 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch Mark IX guns in single mounts . For anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defence , Diamond had a single 12 @-@ pounder ( 3 @-@ inch ( 76 @.@ 2 mm ) ) gun between her funnels and two 40 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) QF 2 @-@ pounder Mark II guns mounted on the side of her bridge . She was fitted with two above @-@ water quadruple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch torpedoes . One depth charge rail and two throwers were fitted ; 20 depth charges were originally carried , but this increased to 35 shortly after the war began . 
 = = Career = = 
 Diamond was ordered on 2 February 1931 under the 1930 Naval Estimates , and was laid down at Vickers @-@ Armstrong 's yard at Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness on 29 September 1931 . She was launched on 8 April 1932 and completed on 3 November 1933 , at a total cost of £ 223 @,@ 509 , excluding equipment supplied by the Admiralty , such as weapons , ammunition and wireless equipment . The ship was initially assigned to the 1st Destroyer Flotilla in the Mediterranean and made a brief deployment to the Persian Gulf and Red Sea in September – November 1933 . Diamond was refitted at Devonport Dockyard between 3 September and 27 October 1934 for service on the China Station with the 8th ( later the 21st ) Destroyer Flotilla and arrived there in January 1935 , where she remained for the next four years . 
 The ship began a refit at Singapore on 7 August 1939 and she was transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet after it was completed in November . Diamond arrived at Malta on 19 December , but she was transferred to the South Atlantic Station the following month . She departed Malta on 8 January 1940 , bound for Freetown where she joined the 20th Destroyer Division for escort duties . In April the ship returned to the Mediterranean where Diamond was assigned to the newly formed 10th Destroyer Flotilla after a short refit at Malta . 
 She was slightly damaged by air attacks on 11 and 17 June near Malta after the Italians declared war on the Allies on 10 June . Together with her sisters Dainty , Defender , the Australian destroyer Stuart , and the light cruisers Capetown and Liverpool , she escorted Convoy AN.2 from Egypt to various ports in the Aegean Sea in late July . Diamond bombarded the Italian seaplane base at Bomba , Libya on 23 August . A week later she escorted four transports to Malta with Dainty and the destroyers Jervis and Juno as part of Operation Hats . The ship escorted Convoy <unk> during Operation Collar . After reaching Malta on 26 November , Diamond joined Force D and sailed to rendezvous with Force H , coming from Gibraltar . The next day , after the British forces had combined , they were spotted by the Italians and the inconclusive Battle of Cape Spartivento was fought . 
 During Operation Excess , Diamond and Defender escorted Convoy <unk> to Malta in January 1941 . In mid @-@ April she escorted a convoy of four freighters from Malta to Alexandria . 
 = = Loss = = 
 On the evening of 26 April , Diamond was in the Argolic Gulf with three light cruisers , three other destroyers and two troopships . The force began evacuating British , Australian and New Zealand troops from Nauplia . The cruisers HMS Calcutta and HMS Orion and destroyers HMS Hotspur and HMS Isis embarked nearly 2 @,@ 500 troops and , at 03 : 00 the next morning , Calcutta ordered the evacuation force to sail . One of the troop ships , the Dutch ocean liner Slamat , disobeyed and continued to embark troops . Slamat embarked 500 troops before she eventually obeyed orders at 04 : 15 , and the convoy sailed for Crete . 
 Near the mouth of the Argolic Gulf a Staffel of nine Luftwaffe Junkers Ju 87 Stuka dive @-@ bombers from Jagdgeschwader 77 attacked the convoy at either 06 : 45 or 07 : 15 . Slamat was hit , set afire and began to abandon ship . Calcutta ordered Diamond to go alongside Slamat to rescue survivors while the rest of the convoy continued to try to reach Souda Bay in Crete . At 08 : 15 Diamond reported that she was still rescuing survivors and still under air attack . By then three destroyers had reinforced the convoy so Calcutta sent one of them , HMS Wryneck , to assist Diamond . Slamat was afire from stem to stern when Diamond fired a torpedo that sank her in a coup de grâce . Diamond reported at 09 : 25 that she had rescued most of the survivors and was proceeding to Souda Bay . An hour later Wryneck signalled a request for aircraft cover . 
 At about 13 : 15 , an air attack by German Messerschmitt Bf 109 fighters and Junkers Ju 88 bombers sank both destroyers within minutes . Wryneck launched her whaler , and each destroyer launched her three Carley floats . Survivors in the whaler set off east past Cape <unk> , towing two Carley floats and their occupants . In the evening the wind increased , causing the floats to strike the boat , so Waldron reluctantly cast them adrift . 
 After 1900 hrs on 27 April the Vice Admiral , Light Forces , Henry Pridham @-@ Wippell , became concerned that Diamond had not returned to Souda Bay and was not answering radio signals . Wryneck had been ordered to keep radio silence so no attempt was made to radio her . Pridham @-@ Wippell sent the destroyer HMS Griffin to the position where Slamat had been lost . She found 14 survivors in two Carley floats that night , more floats and another four survivors in the morning , and took the survivors to Crete . 
 The last living survivor from Slamat , Royal Army Service Corps veteran George Dexter , states that after Wryneck was sunk he and three other men were rescued by the cruiser HMS Orion . 
 Survivors in Wryneck 's whaler reached Crete in three stages . On 28 April they aimed for the island of Milos in the Aegean Sea , but were too exhausted so they landed at <unk> Rock , about 13 nautical miles ( 24 km ) southeast of Milos . There they met a caïque full of Greek refugees and British soldiers evacuated from Piraeus , who were sheltering by day and sailing only by night to avoid detection . In the evening everyone left <unk> and headed south for Crete , with most people in the caïque and five being towed in the whaler . On 29 April the caïque sighted a small landing craft that had left Porto Rafti near Athens . She took aboard everyone from the caïque and whaler , and the next day they reached Souda Bay . 
 = Glenn Anderson = 
 Glenn Chris Anderson ( born October 2 , 1960 ) is a retired Canadian professional ice hockey player who played 16 seasons in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) for the Edmonton Oilers , Toronto Maple Leafs , New York Rangers , and St. Louis Blues . Anderson was known to have a knack for stepping up in big games , which garnered him the reputation of a " money " player . His five playoff overtime goals rank third in NHL history , while his 17 playoff game @-@ winning goals put him fifth all @-@ time . During the playoffs , Anderson accumulated 93 goals , 121 assists , and 214 points , the fourth , ninth , and fourth most in NHL history . Anderson is also first all @-@ time in regular season game winning goals in Oilers history with 72 . 
 At a young age , Anderson admired the European aspects of the game . He was known to have a liking for participating in international tournaments , more so than his NHL contemporaries . When he was drafted by the Oilers in 1979 , he chose to play for Team Canada at the 1980 Winter Olympics instead of immediately joining the Oilers . Anderson won gold at the 1984 and the 1987 Canada Cup and he was a silver medalist at the 1989 Ice Hockey World Championships . During his NHL career , Anderson was part of six Stanley Cup winning teams ( he won five as a member of the Oilers and one as a member of the Rangers ) and he was a participant at four All @-@ Star Games . He is one of only seven Oilers players to have won all five Cups in franchise history . Anderson was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame on November 10 , 2008 and his jersey number , 9 , was retired by the Oilers on January 18 , 2009 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Anderson was born in Vancouver , but was raised in Burnaby , British Columbia . His father , Magnus , is the son of a Norwegian immigrant , and his mother , Anne , is of Ukrainian origin . He has two brothers ( Allan and David ) and a sister ( Pam ) . As a young child , Anderson did not enjoy the game of ice hockey . His first ever goal came against his own team . However , as he grew older , and better at the game , Anderson 's love of the game increased . 
 Growing up , Anderson played hockey against his neighbours , most notably the Berrys . Anderson and his brothers had a friendly rivalry against the Berry brothers and their father . The father , Don Berry , was a player with the Penticton Vees when they won gold at the 1955 World Ice Hockey Championships . Unusual for a boy born and raised in Canada , Anderson 's hockey idol was not Canadian . Instead , his favourite player was Russian Alexander Yakushev , whom he had watched play during the 1972 Summit Series . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Anderson and one of the Berrys , Ken Berry , began their junior hockey career together with the Bellingham Blazers of the British Columbia Junior Hockey League ( BCJHL ) during the 1977 – 78 season . In 64 games , Anderson recorded 62 goals , 69 assists , and 131 points , the third most goals and eighth most points in the league . To top off his lone season in the BCJHL , he was named to the league 's Second All @-@ Star Team . 
 In 1978 – 79 , Anderson and Berry were recruited to play for the hockey team of the University of Denver in the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) by Marshall Johnston , the university team 's head coach . Anderson played in 41 games , and led the team in points with 55 . During his time in university , Anderson struggled with his schoolwork and was , at times , stopped from participating in tournaments . However , at the end of the year , Anderson managed to pass his courses . 
 During the 1979 NHL Entry Draft , Anderson was drafted 69th overall by the Edmonton Oilers of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . Anderson opted to not join the Oilers immediately as he wished to play for Team Canada during the 1980 Winter Olympics in Lake Placid . Father David Bauer , who was in charge of the national team program , accepted both Anderson and Berry to the team . The influence that Father David Bauer had on Anderson was significant as Anderson would cite him as a major reason for his future success . The team toured around the world playing against different opponents in preparation for the Olympics . The practice Anderson received during this time helped " greatly improve " his skills . Anderson scored four points in six games during the tournament as Canada was eliminated by the Soviet Union by a score of 6 – 4 . Canada finished 6th and the loss deeply saddened Anderson as he " cried for two hours straight " . 
 = = = Edmonton Oilers ( 1980 – 1991 ) = = = 
 The Canadian National Team program was discontinued in the fall of 1980 . Facing a choice of whether to rejoin the University of Denver , or to join the Oilers , Anderson chose the latter , signing a contract worth $ 250 @,@ 000 with the team . Making his professional debut with the Oilers , Anderson recorded 30 goals , 23 assists , and 53 points in 58 games in his first season . The Oilers made the playoffs that year where they defeated the Montreal Canadiens in the preliminary round , three games to none . This was deemed a huge upset since the Canadiens had finished eleven spots higher than the Oilers in the overall standings . The Oilers moved on to the quarter @-@ finals where they were defeated in six games by the eventual Stanley Cup champions , New York Islanders . During the playoff run , Anderson scored 12 points in 9 games , establishing himself as a " fierce " playoff performer . Anderson 's sophomore season saw him record career highs in both assists and points with 67 and 105 , respectively . His team jumped from fourth place to first place in the Smythe Division . In the playoffs , the Oilers were the victims of one of the biggest upsets in hockey history . Facing the Los Angeles Kings , a team they had finished 48 points ahead in the regular season , the Oilers were defeated in five games in a best of five series . 
 The following season , Anderson tallied 48 goals and 56 assists for a total of 104 points to help the Oilers remain atop their division . In the playoffs , the Oilers managed to advance to the Stanley Cup Finals for the first time in franchise history . Anderson and his team were matched up against the Islanders who were looking for a fourth consecutive Stanley Cup victory . During the Finals , Anderson had several noted run @-@ ins with Islanders goaltender Billy Smith . During game one , a slash on Anderson 's knee earned Smith a two @-@ minute slashing penalty . Anderson 's knee swelled up and prevented him from practicing the next day . In game four , when the two crashed into each other , Smith 's dive resulted in referee Andy Van <unk> handing a five @-@ minute penalty to Anderson . Van <unk> later said that Smith was making a fool of him . The season ended in disappointment for the Oilers as they were defeated in four games in a best of seven series . Anderson 's team would cite the loss as a valuable lesson in their quest for their first Stanley Cup . 
 The Oilers again repeated as division champions in 1983 – 84 . Anderson set a career high in goals with 54 and he made his first All @-@ Star Game appearance . In the playoffs , the Oilers made their second consecutive Finals appearance . Once again , Anderson and his team faced the Islanders who were now looking to become the second team in NHL history to win five consecutive Stanley Cups . This time though , the Oilers emerged victorious in five games . This marked the ending of the Islanders ' dynasty and the beginning of the Oilers ' dynasty . Anderson scored 17 points in the playoffs . 
 At the beginning of the 1984 – 85 season , Anderson signed an eight @-@ year contract with the Oilers which would pay him $ 400 @,@ 000 per season . He had suggested he might have played in Europe if the Oilers had not provided a satisfactory deal . Anderson recorded 42 goals and 81 points and once more his team were the division champions . Anderson was also selected to play in the All @-@ Star Game . For the third straight season , the Oilers reached the Finals . The Oilers defeated their opponent , the Philadelphia Flyers , in five games . Anderson set a career high in assists with 16 during the playoff run . The 1985 – 86 season saw Anderson score 54 goals , 48 assists , adding up to 102 points . This was the second time Anderson had reached the 50 goal plateau in his career and the third time he had reached the 100 point plateau . It would be the last time in his career he would reach either plateau . He was also selected to play in his third consecutive All @-@ Star Game . For the fifth consecutive season , the Oilers sat atop the Smythe Division . However , the Oilers were eliminated in the division finals by the Calgary Flames on an own goal by defenceman Steve Smith . The loss did not seem to faze Anderson and his team , as they won their third Cup the next season by beating the Flyers once again , but this time in seven games . Anderson set career highs in goals ( 14 ) , points ( 27 ) and PIM ( 59 ) during the playoff run . 
 The Oilers failed to win the division title in 1987 – 88 for the first time since the 1981 – 82 season , as they finished runner @-@ up to the Calgary Flames . Anderson scored 88 points during the season , and he was selected to play in the All @-@ Star Game . This would be Anderson 's last appearance at the All @-@ Star Game . In the midst of the 1988 playoffs , Anderson 's friend , Dr. George <unk> , died after falling into Anderson 's pool . Glen Sather , the head coach and general manager of the Oilers , was worried that Anderson 's play would be affected by this tragedy . However , his friend 's death did not seem to affect his on @-@ ice production . He scored 9 goals , and 16 assists for a total of 25 points to help the Oilers win their fourth Cup . His 16 assists tied a career high . However , the death of Anderson 's friend seemed to have caught on to him the next season . Anderson was battling with depression . To make matters worse , Wayne Gretzky , his longtime teammate , had been traded to a different team . Anderson scored 64 points in 73 games , the lowest output since his rookie season . At one time , Anderson considered retiring . In the playoffs , the Oilers were ousted in the first round by the Kings , Gretzky 's new team . After being eliminated from the playoffs , Anderson chose to play for Team Canada at the World Championships in Sweden . Anderson credits his time in Sweden for rejuvenating his love of the game . 
 Looking to rebound after a disappointing season , Anderson and his team made a surprise appearance in the Finals . The Oilers defeated their opponents , the Boston Bruins , in five games to win their fifth Stanley Cup . Anderson scored 22 points and became one of only seven players to be a part of the entire Oilers dynasty . In 1990 – 91 , Anderson recorded 55 points , his lowest point totals since his rookie season . Wanting to rebuild the team with a younger core , the Oilers were involved in a blockbuster trade at the end of the season with the Toronto Maple Leafs that included seven players . Anderson , along with Grant Fuhr and Craig Berube , were sent to Toronto in exchange for Scott Thornton , Vincent <unk> , Luke Richardson , Peter Ing and future considerations . 
 During his time with the Oilers , Anderson scored 417 goals , 489 assists , and 906 points , ranking him third , fourth , and fourth most respectively in franchise history . His 183 playoff points are fourth all @-@ time in franchise history and his 126 powerplay goals are the most in franchise history . 
 = = = Late career ( 1991 – 1997 ) = = = 
 Anderson spent two seasons and part of another with the Maple Leafs . He recorded consecutive 20 @-@ goal seasons , and he reached the career milestone of 1000 points with them . During the Maple Leafs playoff run in 1992 – 93 , Anderson recorded 18 points in 21 games , including an overtime goal in Game 5 of the Western Conference Finals against the Kings , which gave the Leafs a 3 @-@ 2 series lead but turned out to be their last win of the season . In Game 6 , Anderson took a costly penalty in the last minute of the third period , which resulted in Gretzky 's overtime @-@ winner . The Kings then won Game 7 in Toronto to advance to the Finals . 
 In 1993 – 94 , Anderson played 73 games with the Maple Leafs before being traded to the New York Rangers . In New York , Anderson was reunited with many of his former teammates from his days in Edmonton . The Rangers featured six former Oilers , including future Hall of Famer and Anderson 's long @-@ time linemate Mark Messier . The Rangers qualified for the playoffs and were able to advance to the Finals . Matched up against the Vancouver Canucks , the Rangers defeated them in seven games . This was the Rangers ' first Stanley Cup victory since 1940 and the end of the longest Stanley Cup drought in NHL history . After being held scoreless in the previous rounds , Anderson scored his only three playoff goals in the Finals , two of them being game @-@ winners . This would be Anderson 's sixth and last Stanley Cup victory . 
 Due to the 1994 – 95 NHL lockout , Anderson went to Europe to play hockey . He played with the Augsburger Panther of the Deutsche Eishockey Liga in Germany and the <unk> Rauma of the SM @-@ liiga in Finland , as well as the Canadian National Team . After the lockout was resolved , Anderson signed as a free agent with the St. Louis Blues and played 42 regular season and playoff games combined . At the end of the season , Anderson did not re @-@ sign with the Blues . After playing part of the next season with Augsburger and the National Team again , Anderson signed with the Canucks as a free agent for the reported sum of $ 400 @,@ 000 . His reasons for joining the team were because of former Oiler teammate Esa Tikkanen already playing there , and a desire to finish his career in his hometown . However , Anderson never played for the Canucks as the Oilers picked him up on re @-@ entry waivers . Anderson expressed his disappointment at these turn of events , as he wanted to play in Vancouver instead . He spent 17 games with the Oilers , before being put on waivers that same season . The Blues claimed him , and he spent his last days in the NHL with them . The 1996 – 97 season saw Anderson return to Europe and play with HC La Chaux @-@ de @-@ Fonds of the National League A in Switzerland and with Bolzano HC of the <unk> in Italy . Anderson played a combined 25 games in both leagues before retiring . 
 = = International career = = 
 Anderson was known to have a liking for participating in international competitions . His first test at the international stage was during the 1980 Winter Olympics in Lake Placid , New York . Canada finished sixth in the tournament while Anderson scored four points in six games . Later on , Anderson credited the practice he received in preparation for the Olympics as a key to his future success in the NHL . 
 Anderson was chosen to participate in the 1984 Canada Cup . The roster included eight of Anderson 's teammates from the Edmonton Oilers . Canada advanced to the finals and defeated Sweden 2 – 0 in a best of three series to win the Cup . Anderson scored five points during the tournament . The 1987 Canada Cup also saw Anderson participate . Once more , Canada reached the finals , but this time they were up against the Soviet Union . The finals required all three games as Canada defeated the Soviet Union . All three games needed overtime and had a final score of 6 – 5 . Anderson recorded three points during the tournament . 
 In 1989 , Anderson played at the Ice Hockey World Championships for the first time . With four points in six games , Anderson helped Canada win the silver medal , as the Soviets took home the gold . Three years later , Anderson made his second and final appearance at the World Ice Hockey Championships , this time in Czechoslovakia . Canada was eliminated by Finland in the quarterfinals by a score of 4 – 3 . Anderson registered three points during the tournament . 
 Wanting to participate in the Olympics again , Anderson did what he could to play at the 1994 Winter Olympics in Lillehammer , Norway . He negotiated a clause with his team , the Toronto Maple Leafs , to grant him the right to play for Team Canada . This was not enough as Anderson also had to obtain permission from the league . The league had instituted a policy that only players with less than one year of National Hockey League experience could join and therefore turned down his request . The league 's decision caused an outrage in Canada . Canada won silver as they lost the gold medal game to Sweden . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Anderson was noted for his aggressive " to the net " playing style , typifying the NHL power forward in the early 1980s . He credits coach Clare Drake 's drills during his time with the Olympic team for his love of driving the net . He also liked to stay behind the net and pass to his teammates in front of the goal for scoring chances . Noted as a " money " player , Anderson was able to elevate his game in high pressure situations . He scored five playoff overtime goals and 17 playoff game @-@ winning goals , good for third and fifth all @-@ time in NHL history . During the playoffs , Anderson accumulated 93 goals , 121 assists , and 214 points , the fourth , ninth , and fourth most in NHL history . In addition , his 72 regular season game @-@ winning goals with the Oilers put him first all time in franchise history . 
 Anderson was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame on November 10 , 2008 in the players category . His jersey number 9 was retired on January 18 , 2009 , by the Oilers , before a game against the Phoenix Coyotes . The date for Anderson 's number retirement was specifically selected because his former Oilers teammates , Wayne Gretzky and Grant Fuhr , were serving as the Coyotes ' head coach and goaltending coach respectively at the time . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Anderson 's post @-@ playing career was mired by a bitter legal battle over child support . He was accused of reneging on child support payments to a woman whom he had fathered a child with out of wedlock . The case has since been settled . It was reported that the bad publicity from this case had kept Anderson out of the Hockey Hall of Fame for a long time . 
 He resides in Manhattan with his wife Susan , and daughter Autumn . Anderson plays in charity and old @-@ timers games , and owns a hockey school in Connecticut . He also runs a fantasy camp , which gives fans a chance to play hockey alongside him . On occasions , Anderson appears as an analyst for the New York Rangers . Anderson started a company called Glenn Anderson 's Cell @-@ City . It specializes in car phones . 
 Anderson was a participant in season one of Battle of the Blades . His partner , Isabelle Brasseur , and he were the second pair to be eliminated from the competition . For their efforts , Brasseur 's charity , the Heart and Stroke Foundation of Canada , and Anderson 's charity , the Cross Cancer Institute , each received a $ 12 @,@ 500 donation . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = Dominik Hašek = 
 Dominik Hašek ( Czech pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ] , audio ; born January 29 , 1965 ) is a retired Czech ice hockey goaltender . In his 16 @-@ season National Hockey League ( NHL ) career , he played for the Chicago Blackhawks , Buffalo Sabres , Detroit Red Wings and the Ottawa Senators . During his years in Buffalo , he became one of the league 's finest goaltenders , earning him the nickname " The Dominator " . His strong play has been credited with establishing European goaltenders in a league previously dominated by North Americans . He is a two @-@ time Stanley Cup champion , both with the Red Wings . 
 Hašek was one of the league 's most successful goaltenders of the 1990s and early 2000s . From 1993 to 2001 , he won six Vezina Trophies . In 1998 he won his second consecutive Hart Memorial Trophy , becoming the first goaltender to win the award multiple times . During the 1998 Winter Olympics in Nagano , Japan , he led the Czech national ice hockey team to its first and only Olympic gold medal . The feat made him a popular figure in his home country and prompted hockey legend Wayne Gretzky to call him " the best player in the game " . While with the Red Wings in 2002 , Hašek became the first European @-@ trained starting goaltender to win the Stanley Cup . In the process , he set a record for shutouts in a postseason year . 
 Hašek is considered an unorthodox goaltender , with a distinct style that has labeled him a " <unk> " . He is best known for his concentration , foot speed , flexibility , and unconventional saves , such as covering the puck with his blocker rather than his trapper . Hašek holds the highest career save percentage of all time ( 0 @.@ <unk> ) and is seventh in goals against average ( first in the modern era ) ( 2 @.@ 202 ) , and the third @-@ highest single @-@ season save percentage ( 0 @.@ <unk> in 1998 – 99 ) . The record was broken by Tim Thomas in the 2010 @-@ 11 season and again by Brian Elliott in the 2011 @-@ 12 season who now holds the record at <unk> . Hašek is the only goalie to face the most shots per 60 minutes and have the highest save percentage in one season . He did it twice , while with the Buffalo Sabres ( 1996 and 1998 ) . 
 At the time of his retirement , he was the oldest active goalie in the NHL at 43 , and the second @-@ oldest active player in the league after Red Wings teammate Chris Chelios , who was 46 . Hašek announced his retirement on June 9 , 2008 , but on April 21 , 2009 , he announced a comeback to professional hockey and signed a contract with HC Pardubice of the Czech Extraliga . On June 7 , 2010 , he signed with Spartak Moscow of the KHL and played the last season of his career with this team . Hašek announced his retirement on October 9 , 2012 . Hašek was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame on November 17 , 2014 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hašek started playing hockey at the age of six in his native Czechoslovakia . As he explains : 
 In 1980 , Hašek joined the top hockey league in the country , the Czechoslovak Extraliga , with his hometown team , HC Pardubice . He became the youngest hockey player in history to play at the professional level at age 16 . He helped to win two league titles in 1987 and 1989 . The next year , he was drafted by the Czech army to play for Dukla Jihlava . After making his mark and eventually playing for the Czechoslovakian National team , Hašek entered the NHL draft and was drafted by the Chicago Blackhawks in 1983 . At the time , NHL teams were wary of drafting players from behind the Iron Curtain who were often unwilling to play in the NHL or barred from doing so by their countries . Consequently , Hašek was picked in the 10th round ( 199th overall ) and was the seventeenth goalie selected . Hašek did not even know he had been drafted until several months later . 
 Until 1990 , Hašek played in his native Czechoslovakia for HC Pardubice and HC Jihlava . He was named the top ice hockey player of the Czechoslovak Extraliga in 1987 , 1989 and 1990 , and Goaltender of the Year from 1986 through 1990 . His American career began with the Indianapolis Ice of the IHL , where he played parts of two seasons . His NHL debut with the Blackhawks finally came in the 1990 – 91 season , seven years after the 1983 NHL Entry Draft . 
 = = NHL career = = 
 = = = Chicago Blackhawks ( 1990 – 1992 ) = = = 
 In Chicago , Hašek spent time as the backup to Ed Belfour , and played only 25 games over two seasons with the Blackhawks , splitting time between the Blackhawks and the Indianapolis Ice of the IHL . On November 6 , 1990 , wearing the number 34 ( 31 was worn by backup goaltender Jacques Cloutier that year ) , Hašek made his first NHL start in a 1 – 1 tie against the Hartford Whalers . His first victory came on March 8 , 1991 , in a 5 – 3 performance over the Buffalo Sabres , and on January 9 , 1992 , he recorded his first shutout in a 2 – 0 win against the Toronto Maple Leafs . During this time with the Blackhawks , his goaltending coach was Vladislav Tretiak , who was selected in the 1983 draft but was barred from playing in the NHL by the Soviet government . Hašek appeared in game 4 of the 1992 Stanley Cup Finals against the Pittsburgh Penguins , after Belfour allowed two goals on four shots in the opening 6 : 33 , and had 21 saves . Although the Penguins won to clinch the Stanley Cup , Hašek 's performance attracted the attention of the Sabres , who had considered trading for him earlier that season . 
 = = = Buffalo Sabres ( 1992 – 2001 ) = = = 
 After the Stanley Cup finals appearance , Chicago decided to stay with Belfour and Jimmy Waite . Hašek was traded to the Buffalo Sabres for goalie Stephane Beauregard and future considerations , which later materialized into a draft pick used to obtain Éric Dazé . In Buffalo , wearing number 39 , he was initially the backup goaltender , first playing behind Tom Draper and then Grant Fuhr . When Fuhr was injured partway through the season , Hašek was elevated to starter and soon developed into a top tier goaltender . In 1994 , he won his first Vezina Trophy , was runner @-@ up for the Hart Trophy and shared the William M. Jennings Trophy with Fuhr . Hašek played 58 games with a league @-@ best 1 @.@ 95 goals against average ( GAA ) , seven shutouts , and a <unk> save percentage . He followed this feat by again winning the Vezina Trophy and again placing as a Hart finalist in 1995 . 
 Hašek 's success in the 1996 – 97 season was overshadowed by a conflict with then @-@ head coach Ted Nolan . The conflict created a tense , clique @-@ like atmosphere in the Sabres ' clubhouse . In game three of the first round series against the Ottawa Senators , Hašek removed himself in the second period and was replaced by Steve Shields . Hašek suffered a mild sprain of his right MCL , and the team doctor pronounced him day @-@ to @-@ day . However , the media and some teammates speculated Hašek was using his injury to bail out on the team . One such individual was Buffalo News columnist Jim Kelley , who wrote a column which detailed Hašek 's injury and his conflict with Nolan , and questioned the goaltender 's mental toughness . When Kelley approached Hašek for an interview after a loss in game five of the best @-@ of @-@ seven series , Hašek attacked the journalist and received a three @-@ game suspension and a $ 10 @,@ 000 ( US ) fine as a result of the incident . With Steve Shields in goal , the Sabres fought back against the Senators and took the series in seven games . However , Hašek claimed his knee was still injured and did not play in the five @-@ game loss in the following series against the Philadelphia Flyers . 
 Though General Manager John Muckler was named " Executive of the Year " , he was fired for his constant feuding with Nolan . Hašek , who sided with Muckler , stated in an interview during the 1997 NHL Awards Ceremony that the team would benefit from replacing Nolan . Despite winning the Jack Adams Award as top coach and being popular with the Sabres fanbase , Nolan was only offered a one @-@ year contract extension by replacement GM Darcy Regier . He rejected this under the grounds that it was too short , and decided to part ways with the franchise . This upset many fans , who blamed Nolan 's departure on Hašek 's alleged attempt to rid him . For the first six weeks of the next season he was booed so vigorously that arena workers would play tapes of a crowd cheering to help balance it out . As the season progressed , Hašek played well and won back many fans . He won the Vezina Trophy again , as well as the Lester B. Pearson Award and the Hart Trophy for league MVP . He became one of the few goaltenders in NHL history to win the Hart , alongside Al Rollins and José Théodore , and Hall of Famers Jacques Plante , Chuck Rayner and Roy Worters . 
 Hašek played a career high 72 games in the 1997 – 98 season , and set a team record with 13 shutouts . Six of these shutouts came in December , which tied the all @-@ time NHL record for most in one month . He again won the Lester B. Pearson Award , the Hart Trophy , and the Vezina Trophy , becoming the first goalie in NHL history to win the Hart twice . He donated the $ 10 @,@ 000 prize money after winning the Pearson Award in 1998 to the Variety Club of Buffalo . In the off @-@ season he signed a three @-@ year , $ 26 million deal , securing the highest goaltender salary contract at that time . 
 In 1999 , Hašek averaged a career best 1 @.@ 87 GAA and .937 save percentage , capturing him his third consecutive Vezina , and fifth overall . He was also a finalist for the Hart and Pearson trophies . Though the Sabres did not have a stellar regular season and finished with the seventh seed in the Eastern Conference , they defeated the Ottawa Senators , Boston Bruins and Toronto Maple Leafs in the playoffs en route to a best @-@ of @-@ seven Stanley Cup Final against the Presidents ' Trophy @-@ winning Dallas Stars . The Sabres eventually lost the series four games to two , with the decisive sixth game being one of the longest Stanley Cup playoff games in NHL history . Hašek and Ed Belfour made 50 and 53 saves , respectively , in a sudden @-@ death triple @-@ overtime duel that only ended when Brett Hull scored a controversial Cup @-@ winning goal with his foot in the goal crease . 
 The goal was not reviewed immediately , so officials did not notice Hull 's foot in the crease until minutes later . After video reviews showed Hull 's position , the goal was still upheld , leaving the Sabres infuriated . Hašek commented , " Maybe [ the video goal judge ] was in the bathroom . Maybe he was sleeping . Maybe he doesn 't know the rule . " The following season , NHL commissioner Gary Bettman announced that video replays would no longer be used to judge if players are in the crease or not , and that it would be a judgment call by the officiating crew . After the season ended , Hašek contemplated retirement because of a combination of injuries and a desire to become more involved in his family life . The announcement stunned many of his teammates , particularly Mike <unk> and Jason Woolley . 
 In the 1999 – 2000 season , Hašek was hampered by a nagging groin injury . He missed forty games and failed to win a major NHL award for the first time in several years . Though he healed in time for the playoffs , the Sabres were eliminated in the first round in five games by the Philadelphia Flyers . In 2000 – 01 — his final season with Buffalo — Hašek set a modern era record by collecting his sixth Vezina Trophy . He also won his second William M. Jennings Trophy . The Sabres played Philadelphia in the first round of the playoffs again , where Hašek outplayed his 1998 Olympic back @-@ up Roman <unk> . In the clinching sixth game , Hašek recorded a shutout against the Flyers . In the second round , the Sabres played a seven @-@ game series against Mario Lemieux 's Pittsburgh Penguins , which culminated with the Penguins winning the final game in overtime . 
 = = = First tenure with the Detroit Red Wings ( 2001 @-@ 2002 ; 2003 @-@ 2004 ) = = = 
 Before the start of the next season , Hašek was traded to the Detroit Red Wings in an attempt to lower the Sabres ' payroll and to send Hašek to a more competitive team . He was dealt for Vyacheslav Kozlov , a first round selection in the 2002 NHL Entry Draft and future considerations , which eventually became the draft pick of Jim Slater . During his first season with Detroit , Hašek posted a career high 41 wins with just 15 losses , helping the Red Wings earn the President 's Trophy with the league 's best record . In the playoffs , he led the Wings past the Vancouver Canucks , the St. Louis Blues , the Colorado Avalanche and eventually the Carolina Hurricanes in the finals to win the Stanley Cup . During the conference finals against Colorado , he became the first goalie to be awarded an assist on an overtime game @-@ winning goal in the post @-@ season after passing the puck to Wings captain Steve Yzerman , who then assisted Fredrik <unk> in scoring the final goal of the third game of that series . He also set a record for most shutouts in a post @-@ season with six , broken the year after by Martin Brodeur with seven . 
 That summer , Hašek officially announced his retirement so that he could spend time with his family and other hobbies . However , after Detroit 's first round loss to the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim in the following season , he expressed his desire to play again . This created a difficult situation for the Red Wings , who had two years left on Curtis Joseph 's three @-@ year $ 24 million contract , which had a no @-@ trade clause . Detroit was also under pressure knowing that the rival Colorado Avalanche would be looking for a goalie to replace Patrick Roy after his retirement . With Manny Legace also on the Wings ' roster , Detroit now had three potential starting goalies . 
 In the 2003 – 04 season Hašek injured his groin after playing just 14 games . On January 9 , he and the team agreed he should rest his injury for two to four weeks . Hašek privately told general manager Ken Holland that he would not accept any pay while he was injured . On February 10 , he announced that he was not going to continue to play that season , surprising the Red Wings management . He eventually revealed that he refused about $ 3 million of his $ 6 million salary . In April 2004 , he underwent groin surgery in Prague , and returned to his hometown of Pardubice to recuperate . 
 = = = Ottawa Senators ( 2005 – 2006 ) = = = 
 After his contract with the Wings expired , Hašek announced his intention to play for a Stanley Cup contender , and specifically named the Ottawa Senators as a possibility . On July 6 , 2004 , after trading Patrick Lalime to the St. Louis Blues , the Senators signed Hašek to a one @-@ year deal . 
 During the 2004 – 05 NHL lockout , Hašek toured with the Primus Worldstars . Similar to the tour Wayne Gretzky and IMG formed during the 1994 – 95 NHL lockout , the Primus Worldstars Tour ran December 7 – 23 , playing in seven different countries ( Riga , Latvia ; Moscow and St Petersburg , Russia ; Bratislava , Slovakia ; Bern , Switzerland ; Karlstad , <unk> and <unk> , Sweden ; Oslo , Norway ; Katowice , Poland ) in ten scheduled games . The tour competed against all @-@ star teams or club teams of each country . 
 Hašek played increasingly well for the Senators up until the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin . During the season , he reached 300 career wins , and his GAA and save percentage were the second @-@ best in the league . Upon departure to Turin , Hašek 's equipment was accidentally left behind in Ottawa . This caused Hašek to miss a number of practices with the Czech National team . At the Winter Olympics , he injured his right adductor muscle while making a save in the first qualifying match against Germany , forcing him to leave the game after only 9 minutes and 25 seconds . Hašek 's injury caused him to miss the rest of the regular season and post @-@ season , despite several rumours that he would return in time for the playoffs . He said that if he were to be re @-@ signed , he would play for a base salary of $ 500 @,@ 000 with bonuses . 
 After the Senators were eliminated in the second round , they opted not to re @-@ sign Hašek , despite Hašek 's willingness to take a pay cut . 
 = = = Return to the Red Wings ( 2006 – 2008 ) = = = 
 On July 31 , 2006 , at the age of 41 , Hašek joined the Red Wings for the second time . He signed a one @-@ year $ 750 @,@ 000 US contract , with added bonuses if the team succeeded in the playoffs . He posted 38 wins and a 2 @.@ 05 GAA while leading the Red Wings to the number one seed in the Western Conference . He also broke his own personal record by going 181 minutes and 17 seconds without allowing a goal . Midway through the regular season , the team announced that to avoid injury and preserve Hašek for the playoffs , he would not play on consecutive nights . He played his first consecutive nights of the season on April 21 and 22 against the Calgary Flames in games 5 and 6 of the Western Conference Quarterfinals . Hašek won both games , clinching the series for Detroit . In the next round against the San Jose Sharks , the Red Wings were on the road and down two games to one , but Hašek held the Sharks to three goals in the next three games . His 28 @-@ save shutout in game six tied him for sixth place on the all @-@ time NHL playoff shutouts list and sent the Red Wings to the Western Conference finals against the Anaheim Ducks . However , Hašek and the Red Wings lost in six games to the Ducks , who eventually defeated the Ottawa Senators for the Stanley Cup . 
 Hašek contemplated retirement in the 2007 offseason , but on July 5 , 2007 , he signed a one @-@ year contract with Detroit worth $ 2 million with up to $ 2 million in bonuses , reportedly turning down $ 5 million for salary cap room for the rest of the Red Wings ' roster . 
 During the 2007 – 08 season , he was replaced by backup Chris Osgood , who had originally been traded away from the Red Wings to make way for Hašek before the 2001 @-@ 02 season . When Hašek recovered and got back into his stride , Detroit chose to alternate goaltenders in tandem instead of designating either as the backup . Detroit coach Mike Babcock announced Hašek to start in the 2008 playoffs . Through the first two games against the Nashville Predators , the Red Wings were victorious , but after a lackluster performance in the next two , Osgood was in goal for the remainder of the playoffs . Despite expressing disappointment at losing his starting position , Hašek maintained his professionalism in practice and continued to support his teammates , with Darren McCarty citing a close relationship between Hašek and Osgood . Eventually the Red Wings beat the Pittsburgh Penguins in six games for the Stanley Cup . 
 On June 9 , 2008 , Hašek announced his retirement from the NHL , only five days after winning his second Stanley Cup with the Detroit Red Wings , saying he lacked the motivation for another year in the NHL . With Osgood , the two were awarded the William M. Jennings Trophy for least goals against on a team in the season . 
 = = Final years in Europe and retirement = = 
 In April 2009 , Hašek once again came out of retirement and signed a one @-@ year contract with HC Moeller Pardubice , the club where he started his long career . In the 2009 – 10 season he led his team to win Czech league title . Hašek had three shutouts in the playoffs , one in the finals , while his Pardubice lost just one game in the playoffs before claiming 12 consecutive wins . For the 2010 – 2011 hockey season , Hašek signed a one @-@ year contract with HC Spartak Moscow . 
 On May 15 , 2012 , Czech website <unk> reported that Hašek had discussed playing for <unk> <unk> after their promotion to the Czech Extraliga . On May 25 , 2012 , Czech sport website <unk> reported that Hašek was considering a return to the NHL , possibly with the Buffalo Sabres , Detroit Red Wings or Tampa Bay Lightning . However , the start of the 2012 – 13 NHL season was delayed due to the 2012 – 13 NHL lockout and Hašek announced his retirement on October 9 , 2012 . 
 On January 13 , 2015 , the Sabres retired Hašek 's # 39 jersey prior to a game against the Detroit Red Wings , becoming the seventh retired number in Sabres ' history . 
 = = International play = = 
 Hašek 's most memorable international performance came in the 1998 Winter Olympics , where he led the Czech national team to the gold medal . He allowed six goals in total , with only two of them coming in the medal round . Against Team Canada in the semifinals , Hašek stopped Theoren Fleury , Ray Bourque , Joe Nieuwendyk , Eric Lindros and Brendan Shanahan in a dramatic shootout win . He then shut out the Russian team 1 – 0 in the final game , stopping 20 shots . He was later announced as the best goaltender in the Olympics . After he won the gold , he was quoted as saying : 
 His play made him one of the most popular figures in the Czech Republic , so much so that residents chanted " Hašek to the castle ! " in the streets . In response to this , Hašek called the country 's president Václav Havel and jokingly told him that his job was not in jeopardy . He also helped to inspire an opera ( titled Nagano ) about the Czech team 's gold medal victory , and in 2003 , Petr <unk> and Lenka <unk> named an asteroid ( <unk> <unk> ) in his honour . 
 In the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin , Italy , Hašek played for just nine minutes and twenty @-@ five seconds , until he injured his right adductor muscle . Despite his absence , the Czechs managed to earn the bronze medal with backup goaltender Tomáš Vokoun , which Hašek received as well . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Hašek had an unorthodox goaltending style . He was extraordinarily flexible and was jokingly described in a MasterCard commercial as having " a Slinky for a spine " . In order to cover the bottom of the net , where most goals are scored , Hašek dropped down on almost every shot . His " flopping " style was derived from him flailing in the crease , using every part of his body , including his head , to stop the puck . Hašek occasionally dropped his stick and covered the puck with his stick hand , whereas most goaltenders would use the glove hand instead . In response to the speculation he received from his style , Hašek explained : 
 Hašek 's unique style attracted fans to games . Because of his flexibility , Hašek could make difficult saves that other goalies could not — an opposing coach once referred to them as " miracle saves " . These types of saves include toe @-@ stops , snagging pucks from behind his back , and a desperation maneuver known as the " Hašek roll " . Hašek was also known for his strict regimen of conditioning . During the off @-@ season between May and September 2006 , he lost a considerable amount of weight to increase his flexibility . Hašek was one of the last goaltenders to wear a helmet @-@ and @-@ cage combo rather than a contemporary hybrid goalie mask . The last was his former teammate Chris Osgood who left the NHL three years after Hašek . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Hašek and his former wife Alena have a son named Michael ( born 1990 ) and a daughter named Dominika ( born 1994 ) . He divides much of his free time playing squash and inline hockey , where he plays defense . When he was younger , Hašek played competitive football as a midfielder , and was a junior tennis champion in Eastern Bohemia . His brother Martin is also a competitive athlete and played for the Czech Republic football team AC Sparta Prague before retiring and eventually deciding to coach . Cousin Ivan Hašek also played professional football . Hobby @-@ wise , Hašek claims that he has been a fan of professional wrestling since his Buffalo days , and says that he mostly follows his favorite wrestlers , Stone Cold Steve Austin and Don " The Rock " Muraco . 
 Because of his formal education , Hašek stands out among Czech sportsmen . He earned a university degree after studying history and the Czech language in the Faculty of Education at the University of Hradec Králové , which qualified him to be a teacher , and led him to teach high school classes . Hašek also has a brand of sportswear named Dominator Clothing , which was launched shortly after the Nagano Olympics in 1998 . It also had two locations in Michigan for a short time . Unfortunately , sales was short , and Dominator brand was forced to end in 2008 . In May 2001 , Hašek founded the Dominik Hašek Youth Hockey League / Hašek 's Heroes , and donated over $ 1 million to help underprivileged children in Buffalo play hockey . In 1998 , he also organized a charity hockey game in Prague , and donated the profits to hospitals in the Czech Republic . 
 Hašek is known to appreciate humor to keep team spirits up , and often jokes about his resemblance to Cosmo Kramer of Seinfeld . In the late 1990s , he was featured in a <unk> commercial that praised his flexibility . On November 26 , 2006 , Mark Parisi 's comic panel off the mark featured a comic about Hašek 's childhood . 
 In November 2012 Hašek announced divorce after 23 years of marriage . 
 Throughout his long career , Hašek has been represented by agent Ritch Winter . 
 = = = Inline hockey game incident = = = 
 During an inline hockey game on May 18 , 2003 , Hašek was accused of assaulting another player . He was playing as a defender for Bonfire <unk> when he crosschecked Martin <unk> . The prosecutor in the case , Lenka Strnadová , ruled two months later that there was no evidence that Hašek intended bodily harm and recommended the case be treated as a misdemeanor , punishable only by fine ( $ 95 USD maximum ) , rather than a felony where jail time would have been possible . Hašek 's lawyer Pavel <unk> announced in a statement that media reports about the incident were exaggerated , with <unk> not having sustained any documented injuries . In October 2003 , the country 's top prosecutor overruled Strnadová , saying her ruling was unlawful because the case had not been properly investigated . The Pardubice prosecution then investigated the case again , and reached the same decision as Strnadová . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Milestones = = = 
 Hašek earned his 300th National Hockey League win on October 15 , 2005 , in a 5 – 1 home victory with the Ottawa Senators over the Boston Bruins . He stopped 34 of 35 shots and was holding a shutout until Bruins forward Pat Leahy jammed a loose puck under him three minutes into the third period . He became the twenty @-@ second goaltender to reach the milestone . He is the oldest goaltender in NHL history to post a 30 @-@ win season , and in 1997 , he became the second goaltender to win the Lester B. Pearson Award for most outstanding player in the league ( Mike Liut won the Lester B. Pearson Trophy as the league 's MVP as determined by his peers in 1981 ) . He is also the only goaltender to win the Hart Trophy twice for most valuable player , and was only one Vezina Trophy away from tying Jacques Plante 's record of seven . Hašek 's personal best shutout streak is 181 minutes , 17 seconds . 
 = = = Records = = = 
 In nine seasons with the Buffalo Sabres , Hašek acquired over 25 franchise records , including most all @-@ time games played , wins , shutouts and lowest goals against average . He also holds the Sabres ' record for most shutouts in a single season with 13 in 1997 – 98 , and lowest goals against average in a single season with a total of 1 @.@ 87 in 1998 – 99 . During the Detroit Red Wings ' championship run in 2002 , Hašek set franchise records for most games played , minutes played , wins and shutouts in a playoff year . He holds several notable NHL records : 
 One of the most impressive single @-@ game performances by any player in NHL history came on April 27 , 1994 . Hašek made 70 saves in a <unk> shutout . The opposing goalie was Martin Brodeur , then a rookie , who made 49 saves before being beaten by Dave Hannan and the Sabres beat New Jersey 1 – 0 . Hašek 's 70 saves set a record , which still stands , for the most saves in a game without allowing a goal . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 Bolded numbers indicate season leader 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 † Note : As of the 2005 – 06 season , ties have been replaced by an overtime or shootout loss . 
 = = = Playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 Bolded numbers indicate tournament leader 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = NHL = = = 
 = = = Nominations = = = 
 = = = Czechoslovak and Czech awards = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Transactions = = 
 June 8 , 1983 – Drafted by Chicago in the 10th round , 199th overall 
 August 7 , 1992 – Traded to Buffalo for Stephane Beauregard and a fourth round pick ( Éric Dazé ) 
 March 19 , 1998 – Agreed with Buffalo on a three @-@ year , twenty @-@ six million dollar contract 
 June 30 , 2001 – Traded to Detroit for Vyacheslav Kozlov , a first round pick in 2002 ( Daniel <unk> ) and future considerations 
 June 25 , 2002 – Announced retirement from professional hockey 
 July 8 , 2003 – Returned to Detroit as an active player 
 July 6 , 2004 – Signed as a free agent by Ottawa 
 July 27 , 2005 – Contract option exercised by Ottawa for 2005 – 06 season 
 July 31 , 2006 – Signed as a free agent by Detroit 
 July 5 , 2007 – Signed as a free agent by Detroit 
 June 9 , 2008 – Again announced retirement from professional hockey 
 April 21 , 2009 – Signed as a free agent by HC Pardubice of the Czech Extraliga 
 June 7 , 2010 – Signed as a free agent by Spartak Moscow of the KHL 
 October 9 , 2012 - Announced retirement from professional hockey for the third time . 
 = 2012 – 13 Harvard Crimson men 's basketball team = 
 The 2012 – 13 Harvard Crimson men 's basketball team represents Harvard University during the 2012 – 13 NCAA Division I men 's basketball season . The Crimson , led by sixth year head coach Tommy Amaker , played their home games at Lavietes Pavilion and are members of the Ivy League . 
 Harvard entered the season as the two @-@ time defending Ivy League Champion , but its roster was greatly changed due to graduation and the 2012 Harvard cheating scandal that led to the withdrawal of two star players . With reduced expectations , the team entered the season expected to finish second in conference . During the season , the team swept the three opponents that are also from Boston . The win against Boston College , gave Amaker his sixth victory against no defeats over Atlantic Coast Conference foes . Despite the team 's turmoil , it prevailed to win the 2012 – 13 Ivy League men 's basketball season regular season championship , earning the team an automatic bid to the 2013 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament , where it won the school 's first ever NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament game . The tournament victory over # 3 seed New Mexico was also the school 's first victory over a top 10 ranked team . 
 The team was led by Wesley Saunders who was unanimous First Team All @-@ Ivy and Ivy League Rookie of the Year Siyani Chambers who was also a first team honoree . Both Steve Moundou @-@ Missi and Laurent Rivard earned honorable mention All @-@ Ivy recognition . Harvard tied an Ivy League single @-@ season team record with 13 combined Player of the Week and Rookie of the Week Awards . 
 = = Roster = = 
 = = Preseason = = 
 Prior to the season , Harvard won all four games on its international training trip to Italy . The team announced that senior Christian Webster and junior Laurent Rivard would serve as captain . The Crimson only returned one starter from the prior year . Harvard 's two captains from the prior season , Keith Wright and Oliver McNally were seniors . Wright had been the Ivy League Men 's Basketball Player of the Year in 2011 . Wright , the Crimson all @-@ time leader in blocked shots , signed with Uppsala Basket of the Swedish Basketball League , and McNally , signed with the Moncton Miracles of the National Basketball League of Canada . The team welcomed five freshmen and ten returning players . 
 The Ivy League media selected Harvard as the preseason runner @-@ up to Princeton , giving the team the only first place vote that did not go to Princeton . Jeff Goodman of CBS Sports also selected Princeton first and Harvard second with his preseason predictions , noting that Harvard had been his preseason favorite until the September cheating scandal that involved about 125 athletes and students ensnared Kyle Casey and Brandyn Curry , leading to their withdrawal . Casey and Curry had been first @-@ team and second @-@ team All @-@ Ivy selections respectively for the 2011 – 12 Ivy League men 's basketball season , respectively . Both players withdrew from school in hopes of preserving their final year of athletic eligibility following the investigation . 
 Harvard appeared on 14 televised games in the regular season . Of these 14 , six came on the NBC Sports Network . In addition , the team had four games broadcast on four different ESPN networks . Its February 23 game against Yale was televised by CBS Sports . 
 = = Schedule = = 
 Harvard 's November 14 contest against Massachusetts was televised on ESPN as part of the network 's Tip @-@ Off Marathon . Harvard lost the contest 67 – 64 . On December 4 , the team defeated Boston College for its fifth consecutive victory against Boston College Eagles men 's basketball , making Amaker a perfect 6 – 0 against the Atlantic Coast Conference . The team also defeated cross @-@ town rivals MIT and Boston University as well as in @-@ state rival Holy Cross . Harvard 's contest against Columbia that was originally scheduled for February 9 at 7 : 00 PM at Levien Gymnasium in Manhattan was postponed until February 10 at 2 : 00 PM due to the February 2013 nor 'easter ( also known as Winter Storm Nemo ) . 
 Harvard had cruised to a 9 – 1 record in conference play and then fell to 7 – 2 Princeton on March 1 . The following night , Princeton defeated Dartmouth and Harvard lost to Penn to give Princeton the lead in the conference race . Harvard earned the Ivy League Championship with wins on March 8 and 9 over Columbia and Cornell to finish at 11 – 3 in conference as Princeton was swept on the same nights to Yale and Brown to fall to 9 – 4 in conference . 
 On March 21 in the 2013 NCAA Tournament , Harvard earned the school 's first NCAA Tournament victory and its first victory over a top 10 opponent when it defeated number three seeded New Mexico ( # 10 AP Poll / # 10 Coaches ' Poll ) . The victory was the first by an Ivy League team in the tournament since the 2009 – 10 Cornell Big Red men 's basketball team advanced to the Sweet Sixteen . Two days later , the team lost to Arizona , ending its season . 
 N.B. Source : 
 = = = In season = = = 
 Each week the Ivy League selects a player of the week and a rookie of the week . Led by Wesley Saunders ' 5 Ivy League Player of the Week Awards and Siyani Chambers ' 6 Rookie of the Week Awards , Harvard tied the Ivy League record with 13 single @-@ season weekly recognitions . 
 = = = All @-@ Ivy = = = 
 Siyani Chambers was named the unanimous choice for Ivy League Rookie of the Year and the first freshman to be first team All @-@ Ivy . Chambers and Saunders were the first Harvard teammates selected together as first team All @-@ Ivy . The following players earned Ivy League postseason recognition : 
 First Team All @-@ Ivy 
 ^ Wesley Saunders , ( So . , G / F - Los Angeles ) 
 Siyani Chambers , ( Fr . , G - Golden Valley , Minn . ) 
 Honorable Mention All @-@ Ivy 
 Steve Moundou @-@ Missi , ( So . , F - <unk> , Cameroon ) 
 Laurent Rivard , ( Jr . , G - Saint @-@ Bruno @-@ de @-@ <unk> , Québec , Canada ) 
 ^ Unanimous Selection 
 On March 12 , the U.S. Basketball Writers Association named Saunders to its 2012 – 13 Men 's All @-@ District I ( ME , VT , NH , RI , MA , CT ) Team , based upon voting from its national membership . The National Association of Basketball Coaches announced their Division I All ‐ District teams on March 26 , recognizing the nation ’ s best men ’ s collegiate basketball student @-@ athletes . Selected and voted on by member coaches of the NABC , 240 student @-@ athletes , from 24 districts were chosen . The selections on this list were then eligible for the State Farm Coaches ’ Division I All @-@ America teams . Saunders and Chambers were among the District 13 first team selections . 
 = Alice in Wonderland ( 2010 film ) = 
 Alice in Wonderland is a 2010 American fantasy film directed by Tim Burton from a screenplay written by Linda Woolverton . The film stars Johnny Depp , Anne Hathaway , Helena Bonham Carter , Crispin Glover , Matt Lucas , and Mia Wasikowska and features the voices of Alan Rickman , Stephen Fry , Michael Sheen , and Timothy Spall . Based on Lewis Carroll 's fantasy novels , Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland and Through the Looking @-@ Glass , and inspired by Walt Disney 's 1951 animated film of the same name , the film tells the story of a nineteen @-@ year @-@ old Alice Kingsleigh , who is told that she can restore the White Queen to her throne , with the help of the Mad Hatter . She is the only one who can slay the Jabberwocky , a dragon @-@ like creature that is controlled by the Red Queen and terrorizes Underland 's inhabitants . 
 The film was produced by Walt Disney Pictures and shot in the United Kingdom and the United States . The film premiered in London at the Odeon Leicester Square on February 25 , 2010 , and was released in Australia on March 4 , 2010 , and the following day in the United Kingdom and the United States through the Disney Digital 3D , RealD 3D , and IMAX 3D formats well as in conventional theaters . 
 Alice in Wonderland received mixed reviews upon release ; although praised for its visual style and special effects , the film was criticized for its lack of narrative coherence and overuse of computer @-@ generated imagery ( CGI ) . At the 83rd Academy Awards , Alice in Wonderland won Best Art Direction and Best Costume Design , and was also nominated for Best Visual Effects . The film generated over $ 1 billion in ticket sales and became the fifth highest @-@ grossing film of all time during its theatrical run . The film started a trend of many live action fairytale films being green @-@ lit ( Disney alone had since released similar fantasy films like Oz the Great & Powerful , Maleficent and Cinderella , the latter also featuring Helena Bonham Carter ) . A sequel , titled Alice Through the Looking Glass , was released on May 27 , 2016 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Troubled by a strange recurring dream and mourning the loss of her beloved father , nineteen @-@ year @-@ old Alice Kingsleigh attends a garden party at Lord Ascot 's estate . There she is confronted by an unwanted marriage proposal to Hamish Ascot and the stifling expectations of the society in which she lives . Unsure of how to proceed , she pursues a rabbit wearing a blue waistcoat and accidentally falls into a large rabbit hole under a tree . She emerges in a forest where she is greeted by the White Rabbit , the Dormouse , the Dodo , the Talking Flowers , and Tweedledee and Tweedledum . They argue over her identity as " the right Alice " who must slay the Red Queen 's Jabberwocky and restore the White Queen to power , as foretold by Absolem the Caterpillar and his prophetic scroll . The group is then ambushed by the Bandersnatch and a group of playing @-@ card soldiers led by the Knave of Hearts . Alice , Tweedledum and Tweedledee escape into the woods . The Knave steals the Caterpillar 's scroll . The Dormouse leaves the others behind with one of the Bandersnatch 's eyes in her possession . Tweedledum and Tweedledee are then captured by the Red Queen 's Jubjub bird . 
 The Knave informs the Red Queen that Alice threatens her reign , and the soldiers and Bayard the Bloodhound are ordered to find Alice immediately . Meanwhile , the Cheshire Cat guides Alice to the March Hare and the Hatter . The Hatter helps Alice avoid capture by allowing himself to be seized instead . Later , Alice is found by Bayard the Bloodhound ; but Alice insists upon helping the Hatter . At the Queen 's citadel , the Red Queen is unaware of Alice 's true identity and therefore welcomes her as a guest . Alice learns that the <unk> Sword , the only weapon capable of killing the Jabberwocky , is locked inside the den of the Bandersnatch . The Knave crudely attempts to seduce Alice , but she rebuffs him , and a jealous Red Queen orders Alice beheaded . Alice obtains the sword and befriends the Bandersnatch by returning its eye . She then escapes on the back of the grateful Bandersnatch and delivers the sword to the White Queen . The Cheshire Cat saves the Hatter from the executioner , and the Hatter calls for rebellion against the Red Queen . The rebellion is quickly put down by the Jubjub bird , but the resistance flees to the White Queen 's castle , and both armies prepare for battle . Former caterpillar Absolem advises Alice to fight the Jabberwocky just before completing his transformation into a pupa . 
 On the appointed day , the White and Red Queens gather their armies on a chessboard @-@ like battlefield and send Alice and the Jabberwocky to decide the battle in single combat . Encouraged by the advice of her late father , Alice fights the Jabberwocky among the ruins surrounding the battlefield and finally jumps from the remains of a spiral staircase onto the Jabberwocky 's neck and beheads it . The White Queen sends the Red Queen and the Knave into exile . After the Hatter performs a celebration dance called <unk> , the White Queen gives Alice a vial of the Jabberwocky 's purple blood whose power will bring her whatever she wishes . She decides to rejoin the everyday world . Back in England , Lord Ascot takes Alice as his apprentice with the idea of establishing oceanic trade routes to Hong Kong . As the story closes , Alice prepares to set off on a trading ship . A light @-@ blue butterfly lands on her shoulder , and Alice recognizes him as Absolem . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Johnny Depp as Tarrant <unk> , The Mad Hatter . Wasikowska said that the characters " both feel like outsiders and feel alone in their separate worlds , and have a special bond and friendship . " Burton explained that Depp " tried to find a grounding to the character ... as opposed to just being mad . " Burton also said that , " In a lot of versions it 's a very one @-@ note kind of character and you know [ Depp 's ] goal was to try and bring out a human side to the strangeness of the character . " The orange hair is an allusion to the mercury poisoning suffered by <unk> who used mercury to cure felt ; Depp believes that the character " was poisoned ... and it was coming out through his hair , through his fingernails and eyes " . Depp and Burton decided that the Hatter 's clothes , skin , hair , personality and accent would change throughout the film to reflect his emotions . In an interview with Depp , the character was paralleled to " a mood ring , [ as ] his emotions are very close to the surface " . The Hatter is " made up of different people and their extreme sides " , with a gentle voice much like the character 's creator Lewis Carroll reflecting the lighter personality and with a Scottish Glaswegian accent ( which Depp modeled after Gregor Fisher 's Rab C. Nesbitt character ) reflecting a darker , more dangerous personality . Illusionary dancer David " Elsewhere " Bernal doubled for Depp during the " <unk> " sequence near the end of the film . 
 Mia Wasikowska as Alice Kingsleigh . When creating the character , screenwriter Linda Woolverton researched how young women were expected to behave in the Victorian era and then made her the opposite . Wasikowska read Carroll 's books as a child and re @-@ read them to prepare for her role . She also watched Jan Švankmajer 's Alice . She said , " When we were kids , my mum would pop it in the VCR player . We would be disturbed , and wouldn 't really understand it , but we couldn 't look away because it was too intriguing . So I had kept that feeling about Alice , a kind of haunting feeling . " Although facing pressures to conform to society 's expectations , Alice grows into a stronger @-@ willed and empowered heroine who chooses her own path ; Independent columnist Liz Hoggard praised Alice as a role model for girls , describing the character as " stubborn , brave , [ and ] non @-@ girlie " . <unk> Ella Challen portrayed Alice as a six @-@ year @-@ old . 
 Helena Bonham Carter as <unk> of <unk> , the Red Queen . She is an amalgamation of two Carroll characters : the Red Queen and the Queen of Hearts . Her first name is a play on the word irascible , as she is easily irritated and quick to anger . Bonham Carter 's head was digitally increased to three times its original size on screen . The character hates animals , choosing to use them as servants and furniture . The actress took inspiration from her young daughter Nell , a toddler , stating that , " The Red Queen is just like a toddler , because she 's got a big head and she 's a tyrant . " 
 Anne Hathaway as <unk> of <unk> , the White Queen . She was one of few characters that did not require digital manipulation . Hathaway summed up her character with a caption on a magnet of Happy Bunny holding a knife ; " Cute but psycho . Things even out . " According to Hathaway , " She comes from the same gene pool as the Red Queen . She really likes the dark side , but she 's so scared of going too far into it that she 's made everything appear very light and happy . But she 's living in that place out of fear that she won 't be able to control herself . " Hathaway described her interpretation of the White Queen as " a punk @-@ rock vegan pacifist " , with inspiration drawn from Debbie Harry , Greta Garbo , and the artwork of Dan Flavin . Burton said that the White Queen 's appearance was inspired by Nigella Lawson . 
 Crispin Glover played <unk> <unk> , the Knave of Hearts . The character is arrogant and tricky , and while following the Red Queen 's every order , he is the only one capable of calming her dramatic mood swings . Glover said , " The Red Queen has a fair amount of short @-@ tempered reactions to things that people do , and so [ the Knave ] has to be quite diplomatic . " The Red Queen believes he is her lover , but this proves to be false . 
 Matt Lucas portrayed both Tweedledee and Tweedledum . Burton commented on the mixture of animation and Lucas , saying that " It 's a weird mixture of things which gives his characters the disturbing quality that they so richly deserve . " The characters are portrayed through a combination of CGI and live @-@ action , with Lucas ' face digitally composited to a full animated body . While performing the character , Lucas had to wear a teardrop @-@ shaped motion capture suit and walk on stilts . In order to play both characters , Lucas was doubled by Ethan Cohn . 
 Frances de la Tour as Imogene , Alice 's aunt . She is suffering from severe delusions and is constantly awaiting her fictional fiancé whom she believes to be a prince . 
 Leo Bill as Hamish Ascot , the would @-@ be fiancé of Alice . 
 Marton Csokas makes a cameo appearance as Alice 's deceased father in the film 's opening scene and Alice 's mother is played by Lindsay Duncan . Lord and Lady Ascot are played by Tim Pigott @-@ Smith and Geraldine James respectively . Eleanor Tomlinson and Eleanor <unk> play the <unk> sisters , who bear a strong resemblance to Tweedledum and Tweedledee . Jemma Powell appears briefly as Alice 's sister , Margaret , while Margaret 's unfaithful husband Lowell is played by John Hopkins . 
 = = = Voice cast = = = 
 Michael Sheen voiced <unk> <unk> , the White Rabbit . Sheen said the character " is such an iconic character that [ he ] didn 't feel like [ he ] should break the mold too much . " Burton said the quality he wanted most in his clock @-@ watching bunny was a <unk> , also commenting that " [ in ] any incarnation of the [ White Rabbit ] through the years , there 's that sort of nervousness of a rabbit . " 
 Alan Rickman voiced Absolem , the Caterpillar . Rickman was originally going to have his face composited onto the animated Caterpillar . He was filmed recording his voice in the studio , but the idea was eventually scrapped . The animators did , however , try to give Absolem 's face characteristics similar to Rickman 's . 
 Stephen Fry voiced Cheshire , the Cheshire Cat . Burton stated that the character had a creepy quality in addition to tapping into his own hatred of cats . The role was intended to be played by Michael Sheen but he changed his role to the White Rabbit due to scheduling conflicts . 
 Barbara Windsor voiced <unk> , the Dormouse . Burton said that he sought after Windsor for the role because he was a fan of her TV show EastEnders . Her voice sealed the deal for her role as the character . 
