 That night was an exceptionally clear night with a nearly full moon . Between 1 and 2 am on April 6 , with the fleet headed in a generally southerly direction , Andrew Doria and Glasgow spotted each other about 8 leagues ( 20 to 24 nautical miles ) southeast of Block Island . Glasgow was heading westerly , destined for Charleston . Captain Howe came about to investigate the fleet , and over the next 30 minutes closed to within hailing distance . Commodore Hopkins gave no signals during this time , so the fleet formed no battle line which resulted in a battle that Captain Nicholas Biddle of the Andrew Doria later described as " helter @-@ skelter " . 
 Howe first came upon the Cabot , whose captain was Esek Hopkins ' son , John . The younger Hopkins , when hailed for identification , replied , " The Columbus and Alfred , a 22 @-@ gun frigate . " An overzealous seaman on his ship then tossed a grenade onto the Glasgow 's deck , and the battle was engaged . Cabot , a lightly armed brig , fired one ineffective broadside of six @-@ pounders . Glasgow countered with two broadsides with its heavier weaponry , killing Cabot 's master , wounding Hopkins , and disabling her steering . As she drifted away , the Alfred came up to engage Glasgow , and the two engaged in a broadside duel . A shot from Glasgow early in the action broke the lines to Alfred 's tiller ; her temporary loss of steering exposed her to raking fire . Her drift also made it difficult for the Andrew Doria to join the action , who also had to maneuver to avoid the drifting Cabot . The Providence held back , and Columbus was eventually able to join the action late , but her fire was so wild that little to no damage was done to Glasgow . 
 With Glasgow now exposed to fire from three ships , Howe decided to break off the battle in order to avoid being boarded , and made sail for Newport . Despite extensive damage to sail and rigging , he pulled away from the pursuing fleet , which was fully laden with its captured goods . After several hours of chase , lasting into daylight , Hopkins called off the chase to avoid an encounter with the British squadron at Newport . His only prize was Glasgow 's tender , which the fleet brought to anchor in New London , Connecticut on April 8 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Glasgow suffered only four casualties , one killed and three wounded . This count demonstrated the poor quality of the Continental fleet 's gunnery : all of the casualties were due to musket fire . Aboard the Cabot there were four killed and seven wounded , and the Alfred had six each killed and wounded ; Andrew Doria 's drummer was also wounded . 
 Although Continental Congress President John Hancock praised Hopkins for the fleet 's performance , its failure to capture the Glasgow gave opponents of the Navy in and out of Congress opportunities for criticism . Nicholas Biddle wrote of the action , " A more imprudent , ill @-@ conducted affair never happened . " Abraham Whipple , captain of the Columbus , endured rumors and accusations of cowardice for a time , but eventually asked for a court martial to clear his name . Held on May 6 by a panel consisting of officers who had been on the cruise , he was cleared of cowardice , although he was also criticized for errors of judgment . John Hazard , captain of the Providence , was not so fortunate . Charged with a variety of offenses by his subordinate officers , including neglect of duty during the Glasgow action , he was convicted by court martial and forced to surrender his commission . 
 Commodore Hopkins came under scrutiny from Congress over matters unrelated to this action . He had violated his written orders in sailing to Nassau instead of Virginia and the Carolinas , and he had distributed the goods taken during the cruise to Connecticut and Rhode Island without consulting Congress . He was censured for these transgressions , and dismissed from the Navy in January 1778 after further controversies , including the fleet 's failure to sail again ( a number of its ships suffered from crew shortages , and also became trapped at Providence , Rhode Island by the British occupation of Newport late in 1776 ) . 
 Glasgow , suffering from the battle and having dumped her dispatches , returned to Newport . She was found to be in bad enough shape that she was made as seaworthy as possible and sent to Portsmouth for repairs . Her mission was reassigned to Nautilus , another ship in the Newport squadron . 
 = Celebration ( Madonna album ) = 
 Celebration is the third greatest hits album by American singer @-@ songwriter Madonna , and the final release under her contract with Warner Bros. Records , her record company since 1982 . The release follows her two previous greatest hits albums , The Immaculate Collection ( 1990 ) and GHV2 ( 2001 ) . The compilation was released in many different formats including a one @-@ disc edition and a deluxe double disc . A compilation DVD , entitled Celebration : The Video Collection , was released to accompany the audio versions . The album includes three new tracks , the title track which is included on all versions , " Revolver " which is included on the deluxe editions and " It 's So Cool " which is included as a bonus track on some of the iTunes Store deluxe digital versions . A fourth track , " Broken " , was recorded for the album but not used ; eventually it was released in 2012 as a limited edition promotional vinyl single for fanclub members . 
 Celebration was appreciated by contemporary critics who noted the vastness of Madonna 's back @-@ catalogue . The album debuted at the top of the charts in Belgium , Canada , Ireland , Italy , Mexico and the United Kingdom . Madonna became tied with Elvis Presley as the solo artist with the most number @-@ one albums in the United Kingdom . In the United States , it debuted at number seven in the Billboard 200 ; in other nations , it also debuted within the top ten , peaking in the top three in most of them . The title track was released as the first single of the album . It became Madonna 's 40th number @-@ one song on Billboard 's Hot Dance Club Songs chart . " Revolver " was released as the second single from the album in some territories , but did not achieve significant commercial success . 
 = = Background = = 
 On March 18 , 2009 , Madonna 's publicist Liz Rosenberg announced the plans for the release of a greatest hits package by September . She also added that Madonna had plans to go to the studio and record new material for the album . The next day , Madonna 's manager , Guy Oseary , asked fans on his Twitter for input regarding the track listing of the greatest hits album . It was later confirmed that she wrote three new tracks for the album , with Paul Oakenfold being confirmed as producer for two of the new songs . Attitude magazine reported in an interview with Oakenfold that the tracks he produced with Madonna are called " Broken ( I 'm Sorry ) " and " Celebrate " . He stated that the new music is " lyrically classic Madonna with an edgy modern sound . " Her official website also confirmed the presence of the track " Revolver " , featuring rapper Lil Wayne , when they announced the final track listing for the CD and DVD on August 26 , 2009 . With The Times , Madonna shared her thoughts on the release : 
 The song comes first . And all of those other things that people remember , the imagistic things , are secondary , or certainly not as important . But I think I ’ ve become pretty good at sussing out when people 's opinions of my work are coming from what they think of me personally . You just have to do your thing and then let it go out into the world . The rest , you 're not in control . 
 On July 22 , 2009 , Warner Bros. Records officially announced the release date as September 28 , 2009 and confirmed the name of the album as Celebration through Madonna 's official website . The compilation was available in a case of two , as well as a single CD . The songs on the album were re @-@ mastered and chosen by Madonna and her fans , while covering the whole expanse of her career . A DVD titled Celebration : The Video Collection was released which included several music videos of Madonna that have never appeared on a DVD before . It includes the completed video of the single " Celebration " . The cover for Celebration was created by street pop artist Mr. Brainwash who is best known for " throwing modern cultural icons into a blender and turning it up to eleven " . Celebration was made available for pre @-@ order on iTunes Store on September 1 , 2009 , to coincide with the music video release of " Celebration " . The standard ( 1 disc ) and deluxe editions ( 2 discs ) are available , as well as an iTunes exclusive Premium Edition which includes each track available on the 2 @-@ Disc Edition , as well as a new track entitled " It 's So Cool " , and thirty MP4 music videos . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Celebration received a score of 84 / 100 at Metacritic , indicating " universal acclaim " from music critics . Sarah Crompton from The Daily Telegraph gave the collection four out of five stars and said : " Madonna 's Celebration shows just how consistently she delivers the goods , with tracks such as ' Music ' , ' Ray of Light ' , ' Frozen ' and ' Don 't Tell Me ' " , with " only a couple of [ songs ] which feel dispensable . " Eric Henderson of Slant Magazine gave the compilation four out of five stars and commented that " functionally , what Madonna and fans are really celebrating with the release of Celebration is the hard proof that Madonna 's back catalogue is now so immense and so varied that she can release a behemoth , two @-@ disc greatest hits package that <unk> in 36 songs and still manages to significantly short @-@ change the singer 's legacy " , though also noticing that " the album is missing songs , doesn 't always include the right ones , [ and ] seems to have been sequenced by a not particularly intuitive Genius playlist . " Tim Sendra from Allmusic praised that " the collection does a fine job of living up to the title — it 's certainly a celebration of Madonna 's career and includes some of the most celebratory and thrilling pop music ever created . " While reviewing the double @-@ disc deluxe edition version of the album , he commented : " The 34 @-@ track double @-@ disc Deluxe Edition has an easier time of it than the single @-@ disc 18 @-@ track release does . " 
 Rob Sheffield from Rolling Stone noted that " Celebration kicks off with pure bliss and never lets up . It 's a dizzying , <unk> spin through the Madonna years , years it makes you feel lucky to be living through . Her hitmaking genius is unmatched and [ ... ] undiminished . " , though calling the omission of " Angel " " just plain <unk> . " Lean Greenblatt from Entertainment Weekly commented that the album " holds up surprisingly well " . Joey Guerra from Houston Chronicle praised the album saying " every song on Celebration defines a moment in time , a radio sing @-@ along , a twirl under the glitterball . It 's a pulsing testament to Madonna 's often @-@ overlooked pop prowess , from the scrappy electro beginnings of ' Everybody ' and ' Burning Up ' to the retro @-@ disco swirl of ' Beautiful Stranger ' and ' Hung Up ' , still a hands @-@ in @-@ the @-@ air highlight . " 
 Alan Woodhouse from NME was unfavorable in his review about the compilation , reckoning Madonna 's career as two distinct phases , them being her " 80s output " and her later career , or " <unk> two " , summarising by saying that " Madonna clearly thinks this collection represents a celebration of her longevity [ ... ] in reality all it does it expose her more recent failings " , though Woodhouse also called it " unfair to say Madge hasn ’ t touched magic since 1990 " before naming " Hung Up " and " Ray of Light " . Douglas Wolk , from Pitchfork Media , reviewed the album in the same light , also comparing her early work with the later days , stating that " ' Hung Up ' is really the only song from the post @-@ GHV2 period that 's lodged in the American pop consciousness " , concluding with saying that " [ Madonna ] deserves a retrospective more interesting than this haphazard piece of contract @-@ filling product . " , though being positive about the opening sequence , calling that " incredibly strong , a convincing argument for her genius . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , Celebration debuted at number seven , with 72 @,@ 000 copies sold in its first week . It was present on the chart for a total of 12 weeks and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on November 23 , 2009 , indicating shipment of 500 @,@ 000 units . In April 2010 , the album got a boost in sales from the Glee episode titled The Power of Madonna . The album re @-@ entered the Billboard 200 at position 85 with sales of 6 @,@ 000 and a 219 % gain . In February 2012 after her appearance on the Super Bowl XLVI halftime show , the album again entered the Billboard 200 at number 24 with sales of 16 @,@ 000 copies and a 1 @,@ 341 % gain from previous week . In Canada , the album debuted at the top of the Canadian Albums Chart , with sales of 17 @,@ 000 copies . In Australia and New Zealand , Celebration debuted at numbers eight and two on the official charts , respectively . It was certified gold in both Australia and New Zealand , by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) and Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) , indicating <unk> of 35 @,@ 000 and 7 @,@ 500 copies respectively . The album also debuted at number one position on the <unk> Chart @-@ Track albums chart in Ireland , earning a platinum certification from the Irish Recorded Music Association ( IRMA ) for shipment of 15 @,@ 000 copies of the album . 
 In the United Kingdom , Celebration debuted at number one , selling 77 @,@ 000 copies in the first week . It became Madonna 's eleventh number @-@ one release on the UK Albums Chart , tying her with Elvis Presley as the solo act with the most number @-@ one albums in the British chart history . The album was certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for shipment of 300 @,@ 000 copies across the United Kingdom . According to the Official Charts Company , Celebration has sold 370 @,@ 231 copies in the United Kingdom as of February 2013 . From 2009 to 2012 , the album had three separate chart runs within the top 100 of the albums chart . It re @-@ entered the chart again on March 1 , 2015 , at number 38 with sales of 2 @,@ 476 copies , following the release of her single " Living for Love " from 13th studio album , Rebel Heart . The album also reached the top of the charts in Belgium ( Flanders ) , Denmark , Germany and Italy , while in Austria , Belgium ( Wallonia ) , Finland , Netherlands , Norway , Portugal , Spain , Sweden and Switzerland the album debuted within the top ten of the official charts . In France the album debuted atop the French Compilation Albums Chart , and receiving a platinum certification from Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique ( SNEP ) for shipment of 100 @,@ 000 copies . It also debuted at number one on Billboard 's European Top 100 Albums chart , topping the chart for four consecutive weeks . Celebration was certified double platinum by Federazione Industria Musicale Italiana ( FIMI ) for shipments of 120 @,@ 000 copies . In total , Celebration sold over a million copies across Europe , earning a platinum certification from the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) . In Japan , Celebration reached a peak of number three on the Oricon albums chart and was placed at number 47 on the Oricon year end rankings , selling 177 @,@ 194 copies , and earning a gold certification . In terms of units , it is estimated that Celebration has sold about four million copies worldwide . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Celebration " was the first single from the compilation . A first preview of the song was added on the performance for " Holiday " on her 2009 leg of the Sticky & Sweet Tour . It was to be released to radio stations on August 3 , 2009 . However , the single leaked on to the internet , so the date was changed to July 31 , 2009 . The digital download was also released on this date due to the leak . Remixes of the song were released to dance clubs on July 24 , 2009 . " Celebration " received mixed reviews from contemporary critics . The song reached the top of the charts in countries like Finland , Italy and Sweden , while reaching the top @-@ ten in other European nations . It became Madonna 's fifty @-@ fifth entry to the Billboard Hot 100 and her fortieth number @-@ one song on the Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart . 
 On December 11 , 2009 it was confirmed by Madonna 's official website that " Revolver " would be released as the second and final single off the album in some territories . The digital maxi single was released in many countries on December 29 , 2009 , followed by a CD maxi single in the US in late January 2010 and a 12 " vinyl single in early February 2010 . Contemporary critics gave a mixed review of the song . Some praised the chorus line " My love 's a revolver " while others felt that it was underwhelming and not on par with Madonna 's previous songs . " Revolver " has charted in the lower regions of the official charts of Belgium , Canada , Finland and the United Kingdom while reaching number four on the Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart of United States . This was Madonna 's last single of the 2000s . 
 The track , " It 's So Cool " , debuted on the official charts of Finland , Italy and Sweden at numbers 8 , 20 and 30 respectively , due to digital downloads . " Broken " , the fourth song recorded for the album but not used , was written and produced by Madonna and Oakenfold , with additional writing from Ian Green and Ciaran Gribbin . " Broken " was given to Madonna 's fanclub Icon 's official members as a free 12 " vinyl , as a part of their membership . It was eventually given to members in late 2012 . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Formats = = 
 CD Standard edition – 18 tracks edition , this version contains the album edit version of " Frozen " and not the full album version which is on the deluxe edition 
 CD Deluxe edition – 36 tracks edition on two discs 
 LP – 36 tracks edition on four LP vinyl discs 
 Digital download – 18 tracks edition , this version contains the album edit version of " Frozen " and not the full album version which is on the deluxe edition 
 Digital Deluxe – 37 tracks edition with bonus remix of " Celebration " 
 iTunes Store Deluxe edition – 38 tracks edition including a bonus track remix of " Celebration " and " It 's So Cool " 
 iTunes Deluxe video edition – 68 tracks edition , including 38 audio tracks ( including bonus material : " It 's So Cool " and a remix of " Celebration " ) and 30 music videos 
 Amazon Deluxe edition – 38 tracks edition with two bonus remixes of " Celebration " 
 DVD – 47 music videos on two DVD discs 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Uncanny Stories ( magazine ) = 
 Uncanny Stories was a pulp magazine which published a single issue , dated April 1941 . It was published by Abraham and Martin Goodman , who were better known for " weird @-@ menace " pulp magazines that included much more sex in the fiction than was usual in science fiction of that era . The Goodmans published Marvel Science Stories from 1938 to 1941 , and Uncanny Stories appeared just as Marvel Science Stories ceased publication , perhaps in order to use up the material in inventory acquired by Marvel Science Stories . The fiction was poor quality ; the lead story , Ray Cummings ' " Coming of the Giant Germs " , has been described as " one of his most appalling stories " . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Although science fiction had been published before the 1920s , it did not begin to coalesce into a separately marketed genre until the appearance in 1926 of Amazing Stories , a pulp magazine published by Hugo Gernsback . After 1931 , when Miracle Science and Fantasy Stories was launched , no new science fiction magazines appeared until <unk> , when Abraham and Martin Goodman , two brothers who owned a publishing company with multiple imprints , launched Marvel Science Stories . The Goodmans ' magazines included several " weird @-@ menace " pulps — a genre known for incorporating sex and sadism , with story lines that placed women in danger , usually because of a threat that appeared to be supernatural but was ultimately revealed to be the work of a human villain . The influence of the " sex and sadism " side of the Goodman 's portfolio of magazines was apparent in Marvel Science Stories : it was not strictly a weird @-@ menace pulp , but authors were sometimes asked to add more sex to their stories than was usual in the science fiction field at the time . 
 Marvel Science Stories ceased publication with its April 1941 issue , and the Goodmans brought out the only issue of Uncanny Stories the same month . Like Marvel Science Stories , it was edited by Robert O. Erisman . The quality of the fiction was very poor — sf historian Mike Ashley comments that Ray Cummings ' lead story , " Coming of the Giant Germs " , was " one of his most appalling stories " . Ashley speculates that the only reason the magazine was issued was to use up some remaining material that had been acquired for Marvel Science Stories , perhaps because at this time the Goodmans were beginning to focus much more on the growing comic @-@ book market . 
 In addition to Ray Cummings , contributors included David H. Keller , F.A. Kummer , R. DeWitt Miller , and Denis <unk> . The story titles were not as strongly oriented towards sex as some of the other Goodman publications , which included titles such as " Blood @-@ Brides of the <unk> Corpses " , but Erisman did spice up some of the titles : for example , he changed Keller 's story " The Chestnut Mare " to " Speed Will Be My Bride " . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 Uncanny Stories was in pulp format , 112 pages , and priced at 15 cents ; the only issue was numbered volume 1 , number 1 . The publisher was <unk> Publications of New York ; the editor was Robert O. Erisman . 
 = Paper Dove = 
 " ' Paper Dove " is the twenty @-@ second and final episode of the first season of the American crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium . It premiered on the Fox network on May 16 , 1997 . The episode was written by Ted Mann and Walon Green , and directed by Thomas J. Wright . " Paper Dove " featured guest appearances by Barbara Williams and Mike Starr . 
 Millennium Group consultant Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) takes his family for holiday in Virginia , not realizing that he has been followed by an old stalker who is manipulating a local serial killer to lure Black into action . " Paper Dove " is a two @-@ part episode , with the story continuing in the second season opening episode " The Beginning and the End " . 
 " Paper Dove " features the first appearances of Maxine Miller and Ken Pogue , who would become minor recurring guests in the series ' third season ; it also marks the first on @-@ screen appearance of the " Polaroid Man " , credited as " The Figure " , who had been an unseen presence since " Pilot " . The episode 's central antagonist is based on a composite of several real life murders , including Edmund Kemper and Jeffrey Dahmer . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Millennium Group member Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) travels with his wife Catherine ( Megan Gallagher ) and daughter Jordan ( Brittany Tiplady ) to visit Catherine 's parents in Arlington County , Virginia . Also present are Catherine 's sister Dawn ( Barbara Williams and her husband Gil . In Maryland , Henry Dion ( Mike Starr ) follows a woman home and murders her ; he is later visited by a strange man hiding his face behind dark glasses — it becomes apparent that this is the man who has been sending Black threatening polaroid pictures . Dion thanks the man ( Paul Raskin ) for finding the victim for him , but is chided for not committing the murder while Black was in the area . Dion takes the corpse into the woods to bury it , all the while speaking to it as though in conversation . 
 Catherine 's father , Tom Miller ( Ken Pogue ) , tells Black about two friends of his whose son was convicted of killing his wife . The father , C. R. Hunziger , is dying of pancreatic cancer , but maintains his distance from his son over the crime ; his wife Adele , however , still believes her son to be innocent . Black visits the terminal Hunziger , hoping to change his mind , but the elderly man holds his position . Adele gives Black a folder full of documents relating to the case , which Black reviews . His knowledge of offender profiling leads him to believe that the convicted man , Malcom , is innocent ; however the conviction was secured with a substantial level of physical evidence . 
 Black also learns of the murder in Maryland , and connects it to the killings of four other women in the locale . Ignoring the protestations of his wife , Black leaves to investigate the parkland where one of the earlier bodies was uncovered . A park ranger discusses that case with him , telling Black that the body was found by an unidentified rambler . Black believes this man was the murderer . Elsewhere , Dion returns home , where he is belittled and emasculated by his overbearing mother , Marie ( Linda Sorensen ) . 
 Black and several former colleagues of his from the Federal Bureau of Investigation decide to taunt the killer into coming forward , giving a press release describing him as cowardly . A furious Dion calls the police to rebut this , betraying his identity . Police arrive at his home to arrest him , finding him sitting , covered in blood , on the kitchen floor beside his mother 's body . He is apprehended , clearing Malcom Hunziger of wrongdoing . Black and his family return home to Seattle . Black carries his daughter from the airport to their car , while Catherine waits to collect their luggage . The man who had helped Dion stands to one side , watching the family . As Black returns to help Catherine with the suitcases , she has disappeared , leaving behind only an origami dove given to her by her mother . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Paper Dove " was written by Ted Mann and Walon Green , and directed by Thomas J. Wright . Wright had previously directed four episodes of the first season — " Dead Letters " , " The Wild and the Innocent " , " The Thin White Line " and " Powers , Principalities , Thrones and Dominions " — and would go on to direct a further twenty @-@ one episodes over the series ' run . Wright would also go on to direct " Millennium " , the series ' crossover episode with its sister show The X @-@ Files . " Paper Dove " was Mann 's last script for the series , having penned three others earlier in the season ; the episode was also the only one to have been written by Green . 
 The character of Henry Dion appears to be a composite of several real life serial killers . His fondness for conversing with his victims ' bodies and the gregarious demeanour shown during this seems to be based on Milwaukee @-@ based murderer Jeffrey Dahmer , who would also , like Dion , document his victims photographically . The habit of photographing victims , and the notion of killing women to use them as props , stems from killer Henri Nadeau , who murdered several women in order to use them as mannequins for his photography . The use of an overbearing matriarchal figure as a stressor harkens to Edmund Kemper , who was driven to kill young women by his hatred of his mother , who he eventually murdered before turning himself in ; both Dion and Kemper cut their mother 's vocal folds from their throats after killing them . 
 Maxine Miller and Ken Pogue both make their first appearances as Catherine Black 's parents Justine and Tom Miller in this episode ; the pair would later reprise their respective roles in several episodes of the third season , including " The Innocents " , " Exegesis " , and " Seven and One " . The character played by Paul Raskin , credited here as " The Figure " , would return in the second season opening episode " The Beginning and the End " , which continues the storyline from " Paper Dove " , although the character would by then be credited as " Polaroid Man " , played instead by Doug Hutchison . The character had been a presence in the series since " Pilot " , but had previously only been alluded to without being seen . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Paper Dove " was first broadcast on the Fox Network on May 16 , 1997 . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 6 @.@ 6 during its original broadcast , meaning that 6 @.@ 6 percent of households in the United States viewed the episode . This represented approximately 6 @.@ 4 million households , and left the episode the sixty @-@ third most @-@ viewed broadcast that week . 
 The episode received mostly positive reviews from critics . The A.V. Club 's Todd VanDerWerff rated the episode a B + , calling it " a damned odd episode to end a season on , if still an effective one " . VanDerWerff felt that " Paper Dove " represented " the deepest the show has pulled us into a killer ’ s subconscious " , making it " one of the most bone @-@ chilling episodes Millennium has come up with so far " . VanDerWerff compared elements of the episode , most notably the relationship between the character of Henry Dion and his mother , to the works of filmmaker David Lynch , particularly his television series Twin Peaks . Bill Gibron , writing for DVD Talk , rated the episode 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 , noting that it " caps off the series sensationally " . Gibron also praised Starr 's guest role , describing it as " a stellar interpretation " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated " Paper Dove " four stars out of five . Shearman felt that the series found a comfortable " tonal nuance " in the episode that worked for it , but felt that by the end of the first season none of the supporting cast had been developed well enough to play against Henriksen 's Frank Black , noting " there are half a dozen actors who could be termed regulars ... but without exception they remain functional ciphers " . 
 = Dunnottar Castle = 
 Dunnottar Castle ( Scottish Gaelic : Dùn <unk> , " fort on the shelving slope " ) is a ruined medieval fortress located upon a rocky headland on the north @-@ east coast of Scotland , about 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) south of Stonehaven . The surviving buildings are largely of the 15th and 16th centuries , but the site is believed to have been fortified in the Early Middle Ages . Dunnottar has played a prominent role in the history of Scotland through to the 18th @-@ century Jacobite risings because of its strategic location and defensive strength . Dunnottar is best known as the place where the Honours of Scotland , the Scottish crown jewels , were hidden from Oliver Cromwell 's invading army in the 17th century . The property of the <unk> from the 14th century , and the seat of the Earl Marischal , Dunnottar declined after the last Earl forfeited his titles by taking part in the Jacobite rebellion of 1715 . The castle was restored in the 20th century and is now open to the public . 
 The ruins of the castle are spread over 1 @.@ 4 hectares ( 3 @.@ 5 acres ) , surrounded by steep cliffs that drop to the North Sea , 50 metres ( 160 ft ) below . A narrow strip of land joins the headland to the mainland , along which a steep path leads up to the gatehouse . The various buildings within the castle include the 14th @-@ century tower house as well as the 16th @-@ century palace . Dunnottar Castle is a scheduled monument , and twelve structures on the site are listed buildings . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early Middle Ages = = = 
 A chapel at Dunnottar is said to have been founded by St Ninian in the 5th century , although it is not clear when the site was first fortified , but in any case the legend is late and highly implausible . Possibly the earliest written reference to the site is found in the Annals of Ulster which record two sieges of " Dún <unk> " in 681 and 694 . The earlier event has been interpreted as an attack by <unk> , the Pictish king of Fortriu , to extend his power over the north @-@ east coast of Scotland . The Scottish Chronicle records that King Domnall II , the first ruler to be called rí Alban ( King of Alba ) , was killed at Dunnottar during an attack by Vikings in 900 . King <unk> of Wessex led a force into Scotland in 934 , and raided as far north as Dunnottar according to the account of Symeon of Durham . W. D. Simpson speculated that a motte might lie under the present caste , but excavations in the 1980s failed to uncover substantive evidence of early medieval fortification . The discovery of a group of Pictish stones at <unk> , a nearby sea stack , has prompted speculation that " Dún <unk> " was actually located on the adjacent headland of <unk> , 0 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 31 mi ) to the north . 
 = = = Later Middle Ages = = = 
 During the reign of King William the Lion ( ruled 1165 – 1214 ) Dunnottar was a center of local administration for The Mearns . The castle is named in the Roman de Fergus , an early 13th @-@ century Arthurian romance , in which the hero Fergus must travel to Dunnottar to retrieve a magic shield . In May 1276 a church on the site was consecrated by William Wishart , Bishop of St Andrews . The poet Blind Harry relates that William Wallace captured Dunnottar from the English in 1297 , during the Wars of Scottish Independence . He is said to have imprisoned 4 @,@ 000 defeated English soldiers in the church and burned them alive . In 1336 Edward III of England ordered William Sinclair , 8th Baron of Roslin , to sail eight ships to the partially ruined Dunnottar for the purpose of rebuilding and fortifying the site as a forward resupply base for his northern campaign . Sinclair took with him 160 soldiers , horses , and a corps of masons and carpenters . Edward himself visited in July , but the English efforts were undone before the end of the year when the Scottish Regent Sir Andrew Murray led a force that captured and again destroyed the defences of Dunnottar . 
 In the 14th century Dunnottar was granted to William de Moravia , 5th Earl of Sutherland ( <unk> ) , and in 1346 a licence to crenellate was issued by David II . Around 1359 William Keith , Marischal of Scotland , married Margaret Fraser , niece of Robert the Bruce , and was granted the barony of Dunnottar at this time . Keith then gave the lands of Dunnottar to his daughter Christian and son @-@ in @-@ law William Lindsay of <unk> , but in 1392 an <unk> ( exchange ) was agreed whereby Keith regained Dunnottar and Lindsay took lands in Fife . William Keith completed construction of the tower house at Dunnottar , but was excommunicated for building on the consecrated ground associated with the parish church . Keith had provided a new parish church closer to Stonehaven , but was forced to write to the Pope , Benedict XIII , who issued a bull in 1395 lifting the excommunication . William Keith 's descendents were created Earls Marischal in the mid 15th century , and they held <unk> until the 18th century . 
 = = = 16th century rebuilding = = = 
 Through the 16th century the <unk> improved and expanded their principal seats : at Dunnottar and also at Keith Marischal in East Lothian . James IV visited Dunnottar in 1504 , and in 1531 James V exempted the Earl 's men from military service on the grounds that Dunnottar was one of the " principall <unk> of our realme " . Mary , Queen of Scots , visited in 1562 after the Battle of <unk> , and returned in 1564 . James VI stayed for 10 days in 1580 , as part of a progress through Fife and Angus , during which a meeting of the Privy Council was convened at Dunnottar . During a rebellion of Catholic nobles in 1592 , Dunnottar was captured by a Captain Carr on behalf of the Earl of Huntly , but was restored to Lord Marischal just a few weeks later . 
 In 1581 George Keith succeeded as 5th Earl Marischal , and began a large scale reconstruction that saw the medieval fortress converted into a more comfortable home . The founder of Marischal College in Aberdeen , the 5th Earl valued Dunnottar as much for its dramatic situation as for its security . A " palace " comprising a series of ranges around a quadrangle was built on the north @-@ eastern cliffs , creating luxurious living quarters with sea views . The 13th @-@ century chapel was restored and incorporated into the quadrangle . An impressive stone gatehouse was constructed , now known as Benholm 's Lodging , featuring numerous gun ports facing the approach . Although impressive , these are likely to have been fashionable embellishments rather than genuine defensive features . 
 = = = Civil wars = = = 
 In 1639 William Keith , 7th Earl Marischal , came out in support of the Covenanters , a Presbyterian movement who opposed the established Episcopal Church and the changes which Charles I was attempting to impose . With James Graham , 1st Marquess of Montrose , he marched against the Catholic James Gordon , 2nd Viscount Aboyne , Earl of Huntly , and defeated an attempt by the Royalists to seize Stonehaven . However , when Montrose changed sides to the Royalists and marched north , Marischal remained in Dunnottar , even when given command of the area by Parliament , and even when Montrose burned Stonehaven . 
 Marischal then joined with the <unk> faction , who had made a deal with the king , and led a troop of horse to the Battle of Preston ( 1648 ) in support of the royalists . Following the execution of Charles I in 1649 , the Engagers gave their allegiance to his son and heir : Charles II was proclaimed king , arriving in Scotland in June 1650 . He visited Dunnottar in July 1650 , but his presence in Scotland prompted Oliver Cromwell to lead a force into Scotland , defeating the Scots at Dunbar in September 1650 . 
 = = = The Honours of Scotland = = = 
 Charles II was crowned at Scone Palace on 1 January 1651 , at which the Honours of Scotland ( the regalia of crown , sword and sceptre ) were used . However , with Cromwell 's troops in Lothian , the honours could not be returned to Edinburgh . The Earl Marischal , as Marischal of Scotland , had formal responsibility for the honours , and in June the Privy Council duly decided to place them at Dunnottar . They were brought to the castle by Katherine Drummond , hidden in sacks of wool . Sir George Ogilvie ( or Ogilvy ) of Barras was appointed lieutenant @-@ governor of the castle , and given responsibility for its defence . 
 In November 1651 Cromwell 's troops called on Ogilvie to surrender , but he refused . During the subsequent blockade of the castle , the removal of the Honours of Scotland was planned by Elizabeth Douglas , wife of Sir George Ogilvie , and Christian Fletcher , wife of James Granger , minister of Kinneff Parish Church . The king 's papers were first removed from the castle by Anne Lindsay , a kinswoman of Elizabeth Douglas , who walked through the besieging force with the papers sewn into her clothes . Two stories exist regarding the removal of the honours themselves . Fletcher stated in 1664 that over the course of three visits to the castle in February and March 1652 , she carried away the crown , sceptre , sword and sword @-@ case hidden amongst sacks of goods . Another account , given in the 18th century by a tutor to the Earl Marischal , records that the honours were lowered from the castle onto the beach , where they were collected by Fletcher 's servant and carried off in a creel ( basket ) of seaweed . Having smuggled the honours from the castle , Fletcher and her husband buried them under the floor of the Old Kirk at Kinneff . 
 Meanwhile , by May 1652 the commander of the blockade , Colonel Thomas Morgan , had taken delivery of the artillery necessary for the reduction of Dunnottar . Ogilvie surrendered on 24 May , on condition that the garrison could go free . Finding the honours gone , the <unk> imprisoned Ogilvie and his wife in the castle until the following year , when a false story was put about suggesting that the honours had been taken overseas . Much of the castle property was removed , including twenty @-@ one brass cannons , and Marischal was required to sell further lands and possessions to pay fines imposed by Cromwell 's government . 
 At the Restoration of Charles II in 1660 , the honours were removed from Kinneff Church and returned to the king . Ogilvie quarrelled with Marischal 's mother over who would take credit for saving the honours , though he was eventually rewarded with a baronetcy . Fletcher was awarded 2 @,@ 000 merks by Parliament but the sum was never paid . 
 = = = Whigs and Jacobites = = = 
 Religious and political conflicts continued to be played out at Dunnottar through the 17th and early 18th centuries . In 1685 , during the rebellion of the Earl of Argyll against the new king James VII , 167 Covenanters were seized and held in a cellar at Dunnottar . The prisoners included 122 men and 45 women associated with the Whigs , an anti @-@ Royalist group within the Covenanter movement , and had refused to take an oath of allegiance to the new king . The Whigs were imprisoned from 24 May until late July . A group of 25 escaped , although two of these were killed in a fall from the cliffs , and another 15 were recaptured . Five prisoners died in the vault , and 37 of the Whigs were released after taking the oath of allegiance . The remaining prisoners were transported to Perth Amboy , New Jersey , as part of a colonisation scheme devised by George Scot of <unk> . Many , like Scot himself , died on the voyage . The cellar , located beneath the " King 's Bedroom " in the 16th @-@ century castle buildings , has since become known as the " Whigs ' Vault " . 
 Both the Jacobites ( supporters of the exiled Stuarts ) and the Hanoverians ( supporters of George I and his descendents ) used Dunnottar Castle . In 1689 during Viscount Dundee 's campaign in support of the deposed James VII , the castle was garrisoned for William and Mary with Lord Marischal appointed captain . Seventeen suspected Jacobites from Aberdeen were seized and held in the fortress for around three weeks , including George Liddell , professor of mathematics at Marischal College . In the Jacobite Rising of 1715 George Keith , 10th Earl Marischal , took an active role with the rebels , leading cavalry at the Battle of Sheriffmuir . After the subsequent abandonment of the rising Lord Marischal fled to the Continent , eventually becoming French ambassador for Frederick the Great of Prussia . Meanwhile , in 1716 , his titles and estates including Dunnottar were declared forfeit to the crown . 
 = = = Later history = = = 
 The seized estates of the Earl Marischal were purchased in 1720 for £ 41 @,@ 172 , by the York Buildings Company who dismantled much of the castle . In 1761 the Earl briefly returned to Scotland and bought back Dunnottar only to sell it five years later to Alexander Keith , an Edinburgh lawyer who served as Knight Marischal of Scotland . Dunnottar was inherited in 1852 by Sir Patrick Keith @-@ Murray of Ochtertyre , who in turn sold it in July 1873 to Major Alexander Innes of Cowie and <unk> for about £ 80 @,@ 000 . It was purchased by <unk> Pearson , 1st Viscount Cowdray , in 1925 after which his wife embarked on a programme of repairs . Since that time the castle has remained in the family , and has been open to the public , attracting 52 @,@ 500 visitors in 2009 . 
 Dunnottar Castle , and the headland on which is stands , was designated as a scheduled monument in 1970 . In 1972 twelve of the structures at Dunnottar were listed . Three buildings are listed at category A as being of " national importance " : the keep ; the entrance gateway ; and Benholm 's Lodging . The remaining listings are at category B as being of " regional importance " . The Hon. Charles Anthony Pearson , the younger son of the 3rd Viscount Cowdray , currently owns and runs Dunnottar Castle which is part of the 210 @-@ square @-@ kilometre ( 52 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ) <unk> Estates . Portions of the 1990 film Hamlet , starring Mel Gibson and Glenn Close , were shot there . 
 = = Description = = 
 Dunnottar 's strategic location allowed its owners to control the coastal terrace between the North Sea cliffs and the hills of the Mounth , 3 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 2 mi ) inland , which enabled access to and from the north @-@ east of Scotland . The site is accessed via a steep , 800 @-@ metre ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) footpath ( with modern staircases ) from a car park on the coastal road , or via a 3 @-@ kilometre ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) cliff @-@ top path from Stonehaven . Dunnottar 's several buildings , put up between the 13th and 17th centuries , are arranged across a headland covering around 1 @.@ 4 hectares ( 3 @.@ 5 acres ) . The dominant building , viewed from the land approach , is the 14th @-@ century keep or tower house . The other principal buildings are the gatehouse ; the chapel ; and the 16th @-@ century " palace " which incorporates the " Whigs ' Vault " . 
 = = = Defences = = = 
 The approach to the castle is overlooked by outworks on the " Fiddle Head " , a promontory on the western side of the headland . The entrance is through the well @-@ defended main gate , set in a curtain wall which entirely blocks a cleft in the rocky cliffs . The gate has a portcullis and has been partly blocked up . Alongside the main gate is the 16th @-@ century Benholm 's Lodging , a five @-@ storey building cut into the rock , which incorporated a prison with apartments above . Three tiers of gun ports face outwards from the lower floors of Benholm 's Lodging , while inside the main gate , a group of four gun ports face the entrance . The entrance passage then turns sharply to the left , running underground through two tunnels to emerge near the tower house . Simpson contends that these defences are " without exception the strongest in Scotland " , although later writers have doubted the effectiveness of the gun ports . Cruden notes that the alignment of the gun ports in Benholm 's Lodging , facing across the approach rather than along , means that they are of limited efficiency . The practicality of the gun ports facing the entrance has also been questioned , though an inventory of 1612 records that four brass cannons were placed here . 
 A second access to the castle leads up from a rocky cove , the aperture to a marine cave on the northern side of the Dunnottar cliffs into which a small boat could be brought . From here a steep path leads to the well @-@ fortified postern gate on the cliff top , which in turn offers access to the castle via the Water Gate in the palace . Artillery defences , taking the form of earthworks , surround the north @-@ west corner of the castle , facing inland , and the south @-@ east , facing seaward . A small sentry box or guard house stands by the eastern battery , overlooking the coast . 
 = = = Tower house and surrounding buildings = = = 
 The late 14th @-@ century tower house has a stone @-@ vaulted basement , and originally had three further storeys and a garret above . Measuring 12 by 11 metres ( 39 by 36 ft ) , the tower house stood 15 metres ( 49 ft ) high to its gable . The principal rooms included a great hall and a private chamber for the lord , with bedrooms upstairs . Beside the tower house is a storehouse , and a blacksmith 's forge with a large chimney . A stable block is ranged along the southern edge of the headland . Nearby is Waterton 's Lodging , also known as the Priest 's House , built around 1574 , possibly for the use of William Keith ( died 1580 ) , son of the 4th Earl Marischal . This small self @-@ contained house includes a hall and kitchen at ground level , with private chambers above , and has a projecting spiral stair on the north side . It is named for Thomas Forbes of Waterton , an attendant of the 7th Earl . 
 = = = The palace = = = 
 The palace , to the north @-@ east of the headland , was built in the late 16th century and early to mid @-@ 17th century . It comprises three main wings set out around a quadrangle , and for the most part is probably the work of the 5th Earl Marischal who succeeded in 1581 . It provided extensive and comfortable accommodation to replace the rooms in the tower house . In its long , low design it has been compared to contemporary English buildings , in contrast to the Scottish tradition of taller towers still prevalent in the 16th century . Seven identical lodgings are arranged along the west range , each opening onto the quadrangle and including windows and fireplace . Above the lodgings the west range comprised a 35 @-@ metre ( 115 ft ) gallery . Now roofless , the gallery originally had an elaborate oak ceiling , and on display was a Roman tablet taken from the Antonine Wall . At the north end of the gallery was a drawing room linked to the north range . The gallery could also be accessed from the Silver House to the south , which incorporated a broad stairway with a treasury above . 
 The basement of the north range incorporates kitchens and stores , with a dining room and great chamber above . At ground floor level is the Water Gate , between the north and west ranges , which gives access to the postern on the northern cliffs . The east and north ranges are linked via a rectangular stair . The east range has a larder , brewhouse and bakery at ground level , with a suite of apartments for the Countess above . A north @-@ east wing contains the Earl 's apartments , and includes the " King 's Bedroom " in which Charles II stayed . In this room is a carved stone inscribed with the arms of the 7th Earl and his wife , and the date 1654 . Below these rooms is the Whigs ' Vault , a cellar measuring 16 by 4 @.@ 5 metres ( 52 by 15 ft ) . This cellar , in which the Covenanters were held in 1685 , has a large eastern window , as well as a lower vault accessed via a trap @-@ door in the floor . Of the chambers in the palace , only the dining room and the Silver House remain roofed , having been restored in the 1920s . The central area contains a circular cistern or fish pond , 16 metres ( 52 ft ) across and 7 @.@ 6 metres ( 25 ft ) deep , and a bowling green is located to the west . At the south @-@ east corner of the quadrangle is the chapel , consecrated in 1276 and largely rebuilt in the 16th century . Medieval walling and two 13th @-@ century windows remain , and there is a graveyard to the south . 
 = Raid on Griessie = 
 The Raid on Griessie was a British attack on the Dutch port of Griessie ( later renamed Gresik ) on Java in the Dutch East Indies in December 1807 during the Napoleonic Wars . The raid was the final action in a series of engagements fought by the British squadron based in the Indian Ocean against the Dutch naval forces in Java , and it completed the destruction of the Dutch squadron with the scuttling of three ships of the line , the last Dutch warships in the region . The British squadron — under the command of Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Edward Pellew — sought to eliminate the Dutch in an effort to safeguard the trade route with China , which ran through the Straits of Malacca and were in range of Dutch raiders operating from the principal Javan port of Batavia . In the summer of 1806 , British frigates reconnoitred Javan waters and captured two Dutch frigates , encouraging Pellew to lead a major attack on Batavia that destroyed the last Dutch frigate and several smaller warships . Prior to the Batavia raid however , Dutch Rear @-@ Admiral Hartsinck had ordered his ships of the line to sail eastwards , where they took shelter at Griessie , near Sourabaya . 
 On the morning of 5 December 1807 , a second raiding squadron under Pellew appeared off Griessie and demanded that the Dutch squadron in the harbour surrender . The Dutch commander — Captain Cowell — refused , and seized the boat party that had carried the message . Pellew responded by advancing up the river and exchanging fire with a Dutch gun battery on Madura Island , at which point the governor in Surabaya overruled Captain Cowell , released the seized boat party and agreed to surrender the ships at anchor in Gresik harbour . By the time Pellew reached the anchorage , however , Cowell had scuttled all of the ships in shallow water , and Pellew was only able to set the wreckage on fire . Landing shore parties , the British destroyed all military supplies in the town and demolished the battery on Madura . With the destruction of the force in Griessie , the last of the Dutch naval forces in the Pacific were eliminated . British forces returned to the region in 1810 with a large scale expeditionary force that successfully invaded and captured Java in 1811 , temporary removing the last Dutch colony east of Africa . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1804 , at the start of the Napoleonic Wars , a powerful French squadron operating from Batavia harbour on the Dutch island colony of Java attacked a large and valuable British merchant convoy sailing from China near the Straits of Malacca in the Battle of Pulo Aura . The French attack was a failure , but the threat posed to British trade passing through the Strait of Malacca by French or Dutch warships had been clearly demonstrated . Determined to eliminate this threat , the commander of Royal Navy forces in the Indian Ocean — Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Edward Pellew — ordered frigates to reconnoitre Dutch naval activity in the East Indies during the summer of 1806 . The Dutch maintained a small squadron in the region under Rear @-@ Admiral Hartsinck , principally intended to operate against pirates , consisting of three 68 @-@ gun ships of the line , three frigates and a number of smaller vessels . Despite the obsolete nature of many of these ships , they nevertheless constituted a threat to British trade and Pellew 's frigates raided Dutch harbours and merchant shipping extensively during their patrols . 
 At the Action of 26 July 1806 , a Dutch convoy sailing along the southern coast of Celebes was attacked and defeated by one of Pellew 's reconnaissance frigates , HMS Greyhound . Among the captured ships was the Dutch frigate Pallas and two large merchant vessels . Three months later , the frigate HMS Caroline entered Batavia harbour itself , seizing the Dutch frigate Maria Riggersbergen at the Action of 18 October 1806 . These successes encouraged Pellew to conduct a larger scale operation , launching a major Raid on Batavia harbour on 27 November 1806 . As his large squadron sailed into the bay , the surviving Dutch ships were driven on shore to avoid capture , boarding parties under Admiral Pellew 's son Captain Fleetwood Pellew completing the destruction by setting the wrecks on fire . 
 A number of vessels , including all of the Dutch ships of the line , had escaped the raid . Hartsinck had sought to divide his forces shortly before Pellew 's attack and consequently sent a number of vessels eastwards along the Javan coast under an American @-@ born Dutch officer named Captain Cowell . Cowell 's force eventually sheltered in a protected anchorage at the town of Griessie near Sourabaya , 570 mi ( 500 nmi ; 920 km ) to the west of Batavia . There the squadron rapidly deteriorated so that one ship of the line — <unk> — had to be broken down into a sheer hulk and two others — Pluto and Revolutie — were disarmed , their cannon transferred into batteries on shore . 
 Admiral Pellew was unable to return to Java early in 1807 , as his ships were dispersed on separate operations across the Indian Ocean , some deploying as far west as the Red Sea . However , during the summer responsibility for the blockade of the French island bases of Île Bonaparte and Isle de France ( now Mauritius ) passed from Pellew to Rear @-@ Admiral Albemarle Bertie at the Cape of Good Hope and Pellew was once again free to concentrate against the remainder of the Dutch squadron . During the absence of his main force , Admiral Pellew had sent two frigates into Javan waters : Caroline under Captain Peter Rainier and HMS Psyche under his son Captain Fleetwood Pellew . These ships rapidly established the location and the state of the Dutch ships of the line , and then separated to raid Dutch merchant shipping , Psyche having considerable success at Semarang on 31 August when Captain Pellew destroyed two Dutch vessels , and captured three , including the Dutch 24 @-@ gun corvette Scipio , which the British renamed <unk> . 
 = = Pellew at Griessie = = 
 When news of the Dutch whereabouts reached Admiral Pellew at Malacca , he immediately assembled a force from nearby warships , including his flagship HMS Culloden under Commander George Bell , ship of the line HMS Powerful under Fleetwood Pellew , [ Note A ] the frigates Caroline under Commander Henry Hart and HMS Fox under Captain Archibald Cochrane and the small vessels HMS Victor under Lieutenant Thomas <unk> , HMS <unk> under Lieutenant Richard Buck , HMS <unk> under Lieutenant William Fitzwilliam Owen and HMS <unk> under Lieutenant Thomas <unk> . The squadron was accompanied by the transport Worcester , which carried 500 men from the 30th Regiment of Foot under Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Lockhart for any landing operations that might be required . 
 Sailing from Malacca on 20 November , Pellew 's squadron passed along the Javan coast for 15 days , reaching <unk> Point on 5 December and sending a boat under a flag of truce into Griessie with instructions for the Dutch commander to surrender his ships . Captain Cowell refused , and ordered the boat party to be arrested . He then sent a Dutch officer aboard Culloden to inform Pellew of his actions . In response , Pellew determined to attack the port and ordered that Culloden and Powerful be lightened by the removal of unnecessary stores to enable them to sail into the shallow straits . On 6 December , the British squadron moved steadily towards Griessie through the Madura Strait , coming under fire from heated cannonballs from a battery of nine cannon situated at <unk> on Madura Island . Returning fire with his full squadron , Pellew rapidly silenced the battery without loss or significant damage to his ships and as the squadron approached Griessie , a message from the civilian governor in Sourabaya reached Pellew , reversing Cowell 's orders , releasing the captured boat party and unconditionally surrendering the ships in the harbour . 
 On 7 December , Pellew agreed formal terms for the surrender of Revolutie , Pluto , <unk> and the Dutch East Indiaman <unk> that were anchored in Griessie . However , when British boats entered the harbour it was discovered that Cowell had issued orders for all four ships to be scuttled , their wrecks protruding from the shallow water . Unable to remove the ships , Pellew ordered their remains burnt , while British landing parties spread throughout the town , burning the military stores and destroying the cannon that had been removed from the ship . Another landing party took possession of the remains of the battery at <unk> and demolished it . British operations were complete by 11 December and Pellew then ordered the squadron to withdraw and return to India . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The final operation of Pellew 's Java campaign , completed with minimal casualties on either side , saw the eradication of the Dutch naval presence in the East Indies for the remainder of the war . With the Dutch removed , British attention turned to the French Indian Ocean islands , which were blockaded and captured during the Mauritius campaign of 1809 – 1811 . Once Mauritius had been captured , British forces returned to the East Indies , expeditionary forces overwhelming the Dutch defenders on several islands , Java falling last . By that time , Pellew was serving in the Mediterranean and British control of the Indian Ocean was assured , the British remaining in possession of the East Indies until they were returned to the Netherlands following the capture of Napoleon and the Anglo @-@ Dutch Treaty of 1814 signed at the Convention of London . The East Indies were handed over in 1816 after Napoleons final defeat at the Battle of Waterloo in 1815 . 
 = El Hatillo Municipality , Venezuela = 
 El Hatillo Municipality ( Spanish : <unk> El Hatillo ) is an administrative division of the State of Miranda , Venezuela ; along with Baruta , Chacao , Libertador and Sucre , it is one of the five municipalities of Caracas , the capital of Venezuela . It is located in the southeastern area of Caracas , and in the northwestern part of the State of Miranda . 
 The seat of the municipal government is El Hatillo Town , founded in 1784 by Don Baltasar de León , who was instrumental in the area 's development . Although the town had its origins during the Spanish colonisation , the municipality was not established until 1991 . In 2000 – the year after a new constitution was enacted in Venezuela – some of the municipality functions were delegated to a consolidated mayor 's office called Alcaldía Mayor , which also has some authority over the other four municipalities of Caracas . 
 El Hatillo preserves some of its colonial architecture , including an 18th @-@ century parish church and a unique Romanian Orthodox Church . The municipality also has a rich artistic culture , with at least two important musical festivals celebrated yearly , and numerous holiday celebrations reflecting the heritage of El Hatillo . The culture , the pleasant temperature , the rural landscape , and the gastronomy of the municipality have made it a place of interest for visitors to the city , and a desirable place to live . The municipality receives a part of its income from tourism , an activity that is promoted by the government . 
 Although commercial areas are growing rapidly , agriculture remains a foundation of the economy in the rural areas of the southern part of El Hatillo . The business sector remains mostly underdeveloped , causing heavy employee movement in and out of the municipality – a problem that has made the transportation infrastructure of El Hatillo very congested . 
 = = History = = 
 In the 16th century , when the Spanish colonisation in the area began , El Hatillo was inhabited by the <unk> , an indigenous people possibly related to the Kalina ( Caribs ) . Cacique <unk> was the leader of these tribes , known for resisting the Spanish colonisation . As the colonisation developed , the indigenous inhabitants were killed ; by order of Caracas 's founder Diego de Losada , <unk> was also murdered . 
 In 1752 , Don Baltasar de León García arrived to El Hatillo from Cádiz , Spain , having just completed a prison term at La <unk> , Spain , for opposing ( with his father ) the monopoly rules of Guipuzcoana Company , which was in charge of maintaining exclusive trade between Spain and Venezuela . Don Baltasar founded El Hatillo Town , becoming one of the most significant contributors to its early development . Don Baltasar focused on making El Hatillo a strong , united and independent community , aiming to establish the area as a distinct parish from Baruta , on which El Hatillo depended . He accomplished this on June 12 , 1784 , when the governor and the bishop agreed to declare El Hatillo autonomous and under the direction of Don Baltasar , in front of 180 Canary @-@ descendant families ; this date is accepted as the foundation date of El Hatillo Town . 
 That same year , Don Baltasar and his brother @-@ in @-@ law donated their properties to the town , and an engineer assisted in the urban planning , which included grid streets and a parish church . The church was built to honor Santa Rosalía de Palermo , who Baltasar believed had saved him from a plague that killed his father in prison . In 1803 , at the age of 79 , Don Baltasar was unexpectedly killed in a horse accident . 
 In 1809 , landlord and Lieutenant Colonel Manuel Escalona achieved the separation of El Hatillo from Petare , another suburb of Caracas , making it a different <unk> de Justicia – a type of administrative division at the time . On April 19 , 1810 , Escalona enjoined the town to the movement of independence under Simón Bolívar , becoming another important person in the history of the municipality . 
 Ana Francisca Pérez García , Don Baltasar 's wife , was a noteworthy woman in El Hatillo , attending to community children , elders and ill citizens . She donated a considerable amount of money for the construction of a hospital in Petare after the 1812 earthquake ; this hospital is currently known as the Pérez de León de Petare Hospital . 
 One of the most ambitious urbanisation projects in El Hatillo since its founding was the neighborhood called La Lagunita . In the 1950s and 1960s , La Lagunita S.A. constructed a " functional , futuristic and comfortable " residential zone . To encourage people to settle in the area , each parcel included a membership to Lagunita Country Club , which was officially opened in 1964 . Brazilian landscape designer Roberto <unk> Marx contributed to this project , constructed on the 4 @.@ 3 million m ² hacienda that once belonged to former Venezuelan president , Eleazar López Contreras . La Lagunita has since become a wealthy neighborhood of El Hatillo . 
 Although El Hatillo has been independent from Petare since 1809 , it later became part of Sucre Municipality , where Petare is located . On November 19 , 1991 , Miranda 's Legislative Assembly gave El Hatillo full autonomy , making it an independent municipality ; this decision was issued in Gaceta Oficial on January 17 , 1992 . In 1993 , Mercedes Hernández de Silva was elected the first mayor of El Hatillo . Since 2000 , the Alcaldía Mayor manages some of the functions of the municipality . 
 = = Geography = = 
 El Hatillo Municipality lies at the southeast area of the city of Caracas and at the northwest corner of the State of Miranda ; it is one of the state 's 21 municipalities . El Hatillo is also within the jurisdiction of the Alcaldía Mayor , which has power over three adjacent municipalities of Miranda , and over Libertador Municipality in the Capital District . These five municipalities make up the city of Caracas . El Hatillo has a land size of 114 square kilometres ( 44 sq mi ) – the third largest municipality in the capital . 
 The municipality 's natural southern boundary is the Turgua range , spanning east to west and separating El Hatillo from the Baruta and Paz Castillo municipalities . Parallel to Turgua in the north is the Sabaneta range ; the <unk> stream runs between the two ranges . North of the Sabaneta range , the <unk> stream feeds into the <unk> stream , which ends in the Guaire river . 
 La Guairita stream flows into the Guaire in northeastern El Hatillo . The Guaire river is the eastern limit of the municipality , separating it from Sucre and Paz Castillo in the southeastern sector of El Hatillo . La Guairita serves as the northern boundary between El Hatillo and the municipalities of Baruta and Sucre . Limiting Baruta to the west , the boundaries of the municipality follow El Volcán , <unk> , La Mata and other peaks until they meet Turgua range in southeastern El Hatillo . 
 The tallest peak in El Hatillo is Picacho de El Volcán ( Spanish for " Peak of the Volcano " ) , at 1 @,@ 490 meters ( 4 @,@ 888 ft ) above sea level , from where radio , television and telecommunication antennas serve Caracas . Despite its name , the mountain has had no recorded volcanic history . Other significant mountains in El Hatillo are Gavilán at 1 @,@ 148 metres ( 3 @,@ 766 ft ) , Topo de El <unk> at 1 @,@ 245 metres ( 4 @,@ 085 ft ) and Topo de Piedras <unk> at 1 @,@ 196 metres ( 3 @,@ 924 ft ) . 
 = = = Environment = = = 
 El Hatillo , at a higher altitude than the neighboring municipalities of Caracas , has slightly cooler weather than nearby downtown Caracas . The average temperature is between 21 and 24 degrees Celsius ( 70 – 75 ° F ) . At the highest elevations , the temperature can decrease to 18 ° C ( 64 ° F ) and the atmosphere may have constant fog . The mean precipitation is 997 @.@ 3 millimeters a year ( 39 inches ) ; annual values can range from 800 to 1 @,@ 500 millimeters ( 32 in to 59 in ) . The average humidity index is 75 % ; similar to the rest of Venezuela , the rainy season is May through November , while all other months are considered the dry season . The winds are north <unk> trade winds . 
 Concentrated near water bodies , the vegetation in most of El Hatillo is dense forests , occupying around 30 % of the surface . Smaller plants like shrubs take around 9 % and herbs occupy a similar percentage . In 1972 , the forests of El Hatillo were declared a protected zone of the metropolitan area of Caracas . 
 The municipality is home to a wide range of bird species , with more than two hundred registered , including sparrowhawks , eagles , falcons , and owls . Birdwatching in the area is promoted by the authorities of Miranda , who have also supported conservation of these species . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 In the 16th century , the indigenous <unk> were killed by the explorers ; when the development of El Hatillo began , Spaniards from the Canary Islands settled in the area . Families from Madeira , Portugal also immigrated to El Hatillo , working largely in agriculture in La Unión neighborhood . As of 2001 , 86 % of the inhabitants of El Hatillo were born in Venezuela ; the largest group not born in Venezuela was from Colombia with 4 @.@ 2 % of the population , followed by Spain with 2 @.@ 0 % , Italy with 1 @.@ 0 % , the United States with 1 @.@ 0 % , and Portugal with 0 @.@ 8 % . 
 In the 2001 National Institute of Statistics census , El Hatillo Municipality had 54 @,@ 225 inhabitants , but demographics show a rapidly rising population . With the progressive demographic increase , El Hatillo 's population is no longer exclusive to any particular ethnic group . In 2001 there were 997 births in El Hatillo , equivalent to a rate of 18 @.@ 4 births per one thousand citizens . The death rate for that same year was 2 @.@ 9 per one thousand citizens . 2001 data shows that there is an average of 21 @.@ 3 years of potential life lost . The main cause of death according to 1999 data was cancer , followed by heart disease and murder . 
 Data for 2000 shows that the largest age group to be 15- to 19 @-@ year @-@ olds , representing 9 @.@ 5 % of El Hatillo 's population ; for every 100 females there are 94 @.@ 2 males . The unemployment rate in 2001 was 6 @.@ 1 % , ranking fourth lowest among the twenty @-@ one municipalities in Miranda . 
 As of 2001 , there were 18 @,@ 878 homes in El Hatillo , of which 13 @,@ 545 were occupied ; the remaining homes were either unoccupied , occasionally used , under construction , or for sale . An average of four people made up each household . Regarding wealth , 74 @.@ 7 % of the population was above poverty level , 21 @.@ 5 % was poor , and 3 @.@ 8 % were extremely poor . According to the 2001 census , each household in the municipality received an average of 1 @,@ 316 @,@ 906 Venezuelan bolívares ( 1316 @.@ 906 bolívares <unk> ) per month , equal to US $ 1 @,@ 832 at the time , or US $ 21 @,@ 984 per year . 
 = = = Neighborhoods = = = 
 Although there are no defined limits for the neighborhoods of El Hatillo , the government website divides the municipality into urban and rural . Concentrated in the northern region of the municipality , the urban neighborhoods are El Hatillo Town , El Calvario , La Lagunita , Alto Hatillo , La <unk> , Las Marías , <unk> , Los <unk> , Los Naranjos , Los <unk> , La Cabaña , Cerro Verde , Llano Verde , Colinas , Vista El Valle , Los Olivos , and El <unk> . The rural localities of the municipality are located in southern El Hatillo ; these are La Unión , <unk> , Turgua , La <unk> , Sabaneta , La Mata , <unk> , and Altos de Halcón . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The economy of El Hatillo Municipality consists of three sectors : the commercial sector , which has been growing along with the population increase and is primarily represented by shopping malls and retail stores around the urban areas ; agricultural , in the southern half of the municipality and existing since the founding of El Hatillo ; and tourism , which contributes significantly to El Hatillo 's income and is promoted by the government . 
 El Hatillo is an accessible day visit destination for people from Caracas ; the municipality is only 15 km ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) southeast of downtown Caracas but in the mountains removed from the congested Caracas valley ; thus , development has focused on day tourism . The central town square – Plaza Bolívar – and its surroundings are well maintained , and the municipal government offers bus trips around the narrow streets for viewing the colonial architecture of the town . Handcrafted souvenirs and products are popular purchases , offered at local artisan shops , and there are numerous restaurants . There are at least three cultural centers in the municipality that attract tourists and residents to music festivals and art expositions . 
 To support the increasing population , numerous shopping malls have been built in the municipality . Neighborhoods like La Lagunita , Los Naranjos and El Hatillo Town now offer large scale shopping malls with multiplex movie theaters . Since the 1980s , the older typical houses of El Hatillo Town have been converted to shops and restaurants , while preserving their colonial architecture . 
 Employment possibilities within El Hatillo – a bedroom community of Caracas – are reduced ; businesses in the municipality are almost strictly commercial , and the economy has not expanded in other directions . Office space underdevelopment has resulted from a lack of land for large scale office construction , making it costly to locate large offices or businesses in the area . Those seeking employment in offices or larger businesses must look outside of El Hatillo , contributing to the high traffic to , from , and in El Hatillo . 
 = = Law and government = = 
 Venezuelan law specifies that municipal governments have four main functions : executive , legislative , comptroller , and planning . The executive function is managed by the mayor , who is in charge of representing the municipality 's administration . The legislative branch is represented by the Municipal Council , composed of seven councillors , charged with the deliberation of new decrees and local laws . The comptroller tasks are managed by the municipal comptroller 's office , which oversees accountancy . Finally , planning is represented by the Local Public Planning Council , which manages development projects for the municipality . 
 El Hatillo has had five mayors through 2014 . Mercedes Hernández de Silva was the first mayor of the municipality , serving from 1993 until 1996 . Succeeding her , Flora <unk> was Mayor from 1996 until 2000 . That same year , Alfredo Catalán was elected mayor and reelected in 2004 . On November 23 , 2008 Myriam Do Nascimento was elected mayor . She served in that capacity until 2013 , when David <unk> succeeded her as mayor . 
 The 2007 president of the Municipal Council is Leandro Pereira , supported by the political party Justice First . All but one of the seven councillors belong to political parties opposed to President Hugo Chávez 's administration . There is also a Legislative Commission , presided over by councillor Salvador <unk> in 2007 . The commission 's job is to assist the municipality in legal matters , such as the creation of new laws and decrees . 
 On March 8 , 2000 – the year after a new constitution was introduced in Venezuela – it was decreed that the Metropolitan District of Caracas would be created , and that some of the powers of El Hatillo Municipality would be delegated to the Alcaldía Mayor , which would also govern the Baruta , Libertador , Sucre and Chacao municipalities . Each of the five municipalities is divided into parishes ; El Hatillo has only one , the Santa Rosalía de Palermo Parish , sometimes called Santa Rosalía de El Hatillo Parish or simply El Hatillo Parish . 
 In December 2006 , as a part of a constitutional reform , Chávez proposed a reorganisation of the municipal powers . Chávez mentioned his reform plans again in his January 2007 presidential inauguration , suggesting a new form of subdivision — communal cities — in which mayors and municipalities would be replaced by communal powers . 
 = = = Crime = = = 
 Relative to the other Caracas municipalities , El Hatillo has the region 's lowest crime rate . Data from 2003 shows that 53 @,@ 555 crimes occurred within the five municipalities of Caracas , but only 418 ( about 0 @.@ 78 % ) took place within El Hatillo . El Hatillo 's population is significantly lower than that of its sister municipalities ; viewing 2003 crime data relative to 2001 census data , El Hatillo had an annual rate of 7 @.@ 7 crimes for every one thousand citizens , while the average of the five Caracas municipalities was 19 @.@ 4 for every one thousand citizens . The main police force in El Hatillo is the municipal police , sometimes referred to as Poli @-@ Hatillo . Other police forces can also intervene in the municipality , including the Metropolitan Police , and the Miranda State Police . 
 = = Education = = 
 The municipality has one higher education facility – Nueva Esparta University , a 30 @,@ 000 square meters ( 323 @,@ 000 sq ft ) institution located in Los Naranjos . Nueva Esparta school was founded in 1954 , but the private university was not constructed until 1989 . 
 El Hatillo offers free public education , with a total of seventeen primary education schools ; eleven are public and six are private . Nineteen preschools exist : ten public and nine private . Data for secondary education is incomplete ; there are five private secondary schools in the municipality , but the number of public secondary schools is unavailable . Government data shows each educational stage separately , but an individual facility may contain preschool , primary and secondary education . The 2001 census shows enrollment of 8 @,@ 525 students during the 2000 – 2001 school year ; by the end of the school year , 8 @,@ 149 had passed . 
 = = Culture = = 
 The most significant icon in the culture of El Hatillo is Santa Rosalía de Palermo . The church adjacent to the plaza in the center block of El Hatillo Town is named after this saint , and the only parish in the municipality also carries her name . The community is largely Catholic ; local shops carry many religious handcrafted products , and the municipality is the site of the Santa Rosa de Lima Seminary , formerly San José Seminary . In El Hatillo – and throughout Venezuela – images of Jesus and Mary are part of the art and culture . 
 Don Baltasar de León and his wife , Ana Francisca , are remembered for founding and developing El Hatillo . Manuel Escalona is recognised for including El Hatillo in the 19th century independence movement ; as in the rest of Venezuela , Simón Bolívar is considered a hero . 
 = = = Heritage = = = 
 Santa Rosalía de Palermo – born in Palermo , Italy – is the patron saint of El Hatillo . Rosalía was recognised in 1624 when her remains were discovered in a cave , brought to the Cathedral of Palermo , and displayed through the streets of Palermo during a plague . Within three days , the plague ended ; Rosalía was credited with saving many from the plague and proclaimed patron saint of the city . 
 Years later , El Hatillo 's founder also believed that Santa Rosalía had protected him from an infection . During the Guipuzcoana scandal in Venezuela , Baltasar 's father , Juan Francisco de León , and his sons were held prisoners in Cádiz . Juan Francisco died as a consequence of smallpox , but Don Baltasar completed his years in prison and then moved to El Hatillo . Baltasar brought the legacy of Santa Rosalía de Palermo to El Hatillo , believing she protected him from the pestilence that killed his father in Cádiz . 
 Part of El Hatillo 's culture has grown around Santa Rosalía ; she is believed to be the one who takes care of the people and protects El Hatillo from any pandemic that could hit the area . Don Baltasar 's most evident inclusion of Rosalía into El Hatillo 's culture occurred at least twice : first in 1776 , when El Calvario chapel was built and dedicated to the Saint ; and then in 1784 , when a bigger parish church named Iglesia Santa Rosalía de Palermo was constructed . 
 = = = Regional celebrations = = = 
 In addition to the nationwide activities celebrating Christmas , the New Year , Carnival , and Easter , El Hatillo has a number of celebrations unique to the region . Since the 1766 founding of El Hatillo , a week @-@ long festival honoring Santa Rosalía de Palermo ( Spanish : Fiestas <unk> en honor a Santa Rosalía de Palermo ) is held in September featuring parades , Catholic masses , and traditional games , concluding with the traditional release of balloons accompanied by fireworks . On Holy Thursday , an image of the crucified Christ is decorated with flowers and paraded around El Hatillo 's Plaza Bolívar in the Jesus Christ Procession . Since 1938 , Carnival has been celebrated in El Hatillo with dancing , parades , and the election of a Carnival Queen in Plaza Bolívar . The founding of El Hatillo is commemorated on June 12 with organised activities including traditional games , mass , and balloons . A tradition having religious and agricultural significance has been celebrated every May since the beginning of the twentieth century . The third Sunday of May is the festival of Dama <unk> , in which residents pay homage to the women of El Hatillo , with typical food and gifts . 
 = = = Art = = = 
 The Cultural and Social Center El Hatillo , El Hatillo Art Center , and El Hatillo Atheneum are the local centers of artistic activity . In 2006 , Dave Samuels inaugurated the annual International Music Festival of El Hatillo at the El Hatillo Art Center ; Samuels was followed by Simón Díaz , Steve Smith , Serenata <unk> , Mike Stern and other notable musicians . Since 1999 , the El Hatillo Jazz Festival has attracted visitors to the municipality to hear national and foreign jazz artists . 
 El Hatillo 's art culture is rich with handcrafted products . Pottery is a common souvenir for tourists , and there are many artisans devoted to ceramics and pottery in the municipality . The Turgua Group is an artist collective of almost twenty potters and blacksmiths , founded in 1992 by Guillermo Cuellar , an internationally known potter . The group has two exhibitions a year , which have expanded from pottery exposition to jewelry , photography , woodwork , drawing and weaving . 
 In May 2005 , the local government collaborated with the Japanese Embassy to organise Japan Cultural Week , an exposition held in the Art Center featuring bonsai , origami , kimonos , martial arts , anime and other manifestations of the Japanese culture . The event offered free workshops for learning these Japanese arts . Continuing cultural promotion in the municipality , the III Salón de Fotografía El Hatillo – a photography contest for children , amateur and professional photographers – was organised in October 2005 . 
 = = = Cuisine = = = 
 The cuisine industry in El Hatillo has grown along with the commercial development of the municipality . A September 2006 article in <unk> – a weekly Venezuelan magazine – described the culinary arts of El Hatillo , noting that El Hatillo offers the usual Venezuelan table , as well as new gastronomic developments . The TV chef <unk> Blanco opened the Culinary Art Gallery in El Hatillo , where diners can enjoy a variety of food . There are also typical <unk> restaurants and cafés , as well as other restaurants with a fusion of foreign and national food . According to <unk> , a well @-@ known local restaurant called " Mauricio 's " mixes Swiss and French food with Caribbean gastronomy . El Hatillo also offers many varieties of confectionery , such as churros , pastry and ice cream . There are a variety of other restaurants in El Hatillo , offering such diverse cuisine as German and Thai food . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 Lagunita Country Club is one of the most important sports facilities in the municipality . The club offers tennis and swimming , but it is best known for its golf course , the home of the 1974 WGC @-@ World Cup . Designed by Dick Wilson , the club began with temporary headquarters in 1959 , opening officially in 1964 . Lagunita Country Club played an important role in the development of La Lagunita neighborhood – an ambitious urban project , which has become one of the wealthiest areas of Caracas . 
 <unk> is another club located in El Hatillo ; according to the Venezuelan Census of Cultural Heritage , this equestrian facility from the 1930s was originally used for horse trips , but it later became a place for the training and caring of horses . The Club <unk> is internationally known for its equestrian training . 
 Located at the highest point of the Municipality lies El Volcan , a small mountain of about 1500 meters from sea level . This mountain has a Downhill course that has about 500 meters of vertical drop , it is used by hundreds of riders a day during dry and wet weather , mostly on weekends . The course is open to the public and riding is neither specifically allowed nor prohibited by law . The trails are also used by hikers all week long . Shuttles are about 10 Venezuelan <unk> per trip , they run from the parking lot of a <unk> drug store in La <unk> , up to the summit using public avenues and paved roads , taking from 15 minutes to 30 minutes depending on traffic on the area . The course apart from being used mostly for recreational purpose , also has been used for irregularly scheduled downhill races due to the lack of organisation in the riders community . 
 = = = Tourism and recreation = = = 
 The hub of activity in El Hatillo Town is Bolívar Plaza ( Spanish : Plaza Bolívar ) , a garden square encompassing the central block in the town of El Hatillo . Constructed in 1785 , the Plaza was originally called Plaza Mayor or Plaza del Mercado . In 1911 , a bust honoring Manuel Escalona was placed in the square , which was renamed in his honor . In 1952 , the bust was replaced with a statue of Simón Bolívar , and the plaza was again renamed after the Venezuelan hero . Across from the Bolívar Square is the 18th century Santa Rosalía de Palermo Church , which was declared a National Historic Monument in 1960 . 
 Between El Hatillo and La Lagunita is the smaller Manuel Escalona Plaza ( Spanish : <unk> Manuel Escalona ) , another urban monument displaying the bust of Escalona that formerly occupied Bolívar Square . Sucre Plaza ( Spanish : Plaza Sucre ) – graced since 1915 with a ceiba tree at its center – is in the southern part of town ; this was historically where people tied their mules while frequenting The Four Corners , and it is also known as Plaza La Ceiba . The Four Corners ( Spanish : Las Cuatro <unk> ) was a convenient social gathering spot in El Hatillo , comprising a general store , hardware shop , gambling place and bar . 
 La Lagunita is the site of the San Constantino and Santa Elena Romanian Orthodox Church . The building is an architectural work from the 16th century , brought from Romania , made completely from oak and fir woods , and detailed with more than 40 @,@ 000 individually placed and carved tiles . It is one of only 15 churches of its type remaining in the world , and one of only two outside of Romania , the other being in Switzerland . 
 For children , the <unk> hacienda in La Lagunita houses the <unk> , where visitors can see and touch exotic animals . The zoo is recognised for offering unique employment opportunities ; the workers are from families with few resources , and the staff include the mentally ill . The Baby Zoo is another place for children to interact with animals ; visitors can feed and touch the animals , ride horses and rent the location for special events . More interaction with nature can be experienced by visiting the Morro la Guairita park in El <unk> – commonly known as the Indian Caves ( Spanish : Cuevas del Indio ) – a system of 22 natural openings in the mountain , and the only place in Caracas where rock climbing is permitted . Guided tours are available , and views of El Ávila can be enjoyed while ascending the park . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 The mountainous terrain and geographic features of El Hatillo have made it difficult to extend the Caracas Metro to southeast Caracas , so the main transportation methods in the municipality are private vehicles and road public transportation . An extension of the Metro – Line 5 – has been proposed , but construction has not been initiated as of 2007 ; phase 2 of Line 4 is still under construction . Urban planning in the municipality has been unorganised ; news archives show that at least since 1998 , neighbors have been complaining about the dense traffic caused by new residential and commercial construction , yet new or enhanced alternative roads to resolve the traffic problems have not been completed . A south beltway suggested 25 years ago has not been constructed due to its high cost . However , as of January 2006 , a new route that will connect La Lagunita with <unk> – a neighborhood in northeast Caracas – is under construction and is planned to be completed in 2010 ; according to Mayor Catalán , 23 % of El Hatillo 's inhabitants will eventually use this transit way . Its cost was estimated in early 2006 as US $ 19 @,@ 572 @,@ 000 . 
 Local solutions – such as the proposed Metro extension line and the road connecting La Lagunita and <unk> – may improve the traffic congestion around El Hatillo , but the traffic issue affects all of Caracas . It is estimated that one million vehicles transit Caracas daily , causing a collapse of the transportation network . Automobiles travel at an average speed of 15 km / h ( 9 mph ) on the streets and highways of Caracas . There are numerous factors contributing to the traffic problem in Caracas . According to the Venezuelan Society of Transportation Engineers , a city should allocate 20 % of its public area to transportation ; in Caracas , less than 12 % is allocated . In 2004 , fifty thousand new vehicles were sold in Caracas . In 2005 , sixty thousand more were sold , and as of November , 2006 , seventy thousand more had been sold . In five years , 250 thousand more cars are circulating in Caracas on roadways that have not increased proportionally to the increase in the number of cars . Further , public transportation is not fully reliable ; an average trip in the city using mass transit takes around ninety minutes . 
 = Tabloid Junkie = 
 " Tabloid Junkie " is a pop song performed by American recording artist Michael Jackson . The song appeared as the eleventh track on Jackson 's ninth studio album , entitled HIStory : Past , Present and Future , Book I , which was released in 1995 as a two @-@ disc set . The song was written , composed , and produced by Michael Jackson , Jimmy Jam ( James Harris III ) and Terry Lewis . 
 The song received generally positive reviews from music critics . " Tabloid Junkie " is a pop @-@ rock song , with lyrics that pertain to media bias and negative coverage of rumors about Jackson and his personal life , similar to previous songs recorded by Jackson . " Tabloid Junkie " is the seventh song on HIStory : Past , Present And Future , Book I to be aimed at the media . The track was not released as a single . 
 = = Background = = 
 Similarly to " Leave Me Alone " ( 1987 ) and HIStory : Past , Present and Future , Book I album tracks , " They Don 't Care About Us " , " Scream " and " This Time Around " , amongst others , " Tabloid Junkie " , co @-@ written by Jackson , shows Jackson 's dissatisfaction with the media , particularly the tabloids , because of the bias and negative media coverage of false rumors and the 1993 child sexual abuse accusations made against him . Ever since the late 1980s , Jackson and the press did not have a good relationship . In 1986 , the tabloids ran a story claiming that Jackson slept in a hyperbaric oxygen chamber to slow the aging process , with a picture of him lying down in a glass box ; Jackson stated that the story was untrue . When Jackson bought a pet chimpanzee Bubbles , the media viewed it as evidence of Jackson 's increasing detachment from reality . 
 It was reported that Jackson had offered to buy the bones of Joseph " The Elephant Man " Merrick ; Jackson stated that the story was false . These stories inspired the nickname " Wacko Jacko " , which Jackson acquired the following year , and would come to despise . Jackson stopped leaking untrue stories to the press , so the media began making up their own . In 1989 , Jackson released the song and music video " Leave Me Alone " , a song about his perceived victimization at the hands of the press . The video shows Jackson poking fun at both the press and himself . In the video , there are newspapers with bizarre headlines , Jackson dancing with the bones of " The Elephant Man " , and an animated nose with a scalpel chasing it across the screen . 
 In August 1993 , the relationship between Jackson and the press soured entirely when he was accused of child sexual abuse . Although never charged with a crime , Jackson was subject to intense media scrutiny while the criminal investigation took place . Complaints about the coverage included the media using sensational headlines to draw in readers and viewers when the content itself did not support the headline , accepting leaked material from the police investigation and of Jackson 's alleged criminal activity in return for money , a lack of objectivity and using headlines that strongly implied Jackson 's guilt . At the time , Jackson said of the media coverage , " I will say I am particularly upset by the handling of the matter by the incredible , terrible mass media . At every opportunity , the media has dissected and manipulated these allegations to reach their own conclusions . " Jackson began taking painkillers , Valium , Xanax and Ativan to deal with the stress of the allegations made against him . When he left the United States to go into rehabilitation , the media showed him little sympathy . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Tabloid Junkie " is credited as a pop — funk song , that is similar to New Jack Swing . Throughout the song , Jackson sings in a quick @-@ voice , which some music critics viewed as Jackson " not singing " but " <unk> " . It is a plea to the public to not believe everything in the tabloids ; and the lyrics are about media bias and sensational journalism about Jackson and in general . This can be heard in lyrics such as , " Just because you read it in the magazine or see it on the TV screen don 't make it factual " . 
 Jackson uses the song to criticize journalists , commenting " with your pen you torture men " , describing how he was affected by the media coverage about him , and " speculate to break the one you hate " , describing how reporters used sensational writing to mislead people and cast him in a negative view . 
 " Tabloid Junkie " is played in the key of A ♭ minor and in common time signature . It has heavy beats throughout with Jackson beatboxing throughout . Jackson 's voice range is from C ♭ 4 to B ♭ 7 . The songs tempo is moderate and its metronome is 111 beats per minute . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Tabloid Junkie " received primarily positive reviews from contemporary music critics . James Hunter , a writer for Rolling Stone , described " Tabloid Junkie " , as well as " Scream " , another track from the album , as being " two adventurous Jam and Lewis thumpers " that " work completely " , commenting that " Jackson 's slippery voice is caught in mammoth funk @-@ rock constructions " . Hunter noted that the " choruses of ' Tabloid Junkie ' in particular sing out with quick @-@ voiced warnings about the failings of media truth . " Robert Christgau , a film and music critic , who gave the album * * Honorable Mention ( ) , listed " Tabloid Junkie " as being one out of two of the albums highlights . Jim Farber , of the New York Daily News , commented that " Tabloid Junkie " sounded " like virtual satires " of the " beat @-@ heavy sound devised " by Jam and Lewis in the 1980s . 
 David Browne , of Entertainment Weekly , noted that " Tabloid Junkie , " comes as " close to transcendence as anywhere on the album " and described the chorus , " Just because you read it in the magazine or see it on the TV screen don 't make it factual " as Jackson 's " <unk> , most driven refrain in years . " Although Browne praised the song , he commented , " The rest of the song , however , is mucked up with fake tabloid @-@ TV snippets about his ' life , ' and on the verses Jackson 's delivery is so terse ( he 's not singing , he 's <unk> ) that his lyrics are all but obliterated . Handed a golden opportunity , he throws it all away — but then , it wouldn 't be the first time . " Deepika Reedy , of The Daily Collegian , described the " rust in songs " like " Tabloid Junkie " as having a " raw aspect " that Jackson " hasn 't approached since a near @-@ miss with ' Billie Jean ' . " Patrick Macdonald , of The Seattle Times , noted that " Tabloid Junkie " was a " disingenuous attack on sensational news stories " about Jackson , remarked that most of stories were " planted " by Jackson himself . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Album track : 
 " Tabloid Junkie " - 4 : 32 
 = Slade 's Case = 
 Slade 's Case was a case in English contract law that ran from 1596 to 1602 . Under the medieval common law , claims seeking the repayment of a debt or other matters could only be pursued through a writ of debt in the Court of Common Pleas , a problematic and archaic process . By 1558 the lawyers had succeeded in creating another method , enforced by the Court of King 's Bench , through the action of assumpsit , which was technically for deceit . The legal fiction used was that by failing to pay after promising to do so , a defendant had committed deceit , and was liable to the plaintiff . The conservative Common Pleas , through the appellate court the Court of Exchequer Chamber , began to overrule decisions made by the King 's Bench on assumpsit , causing friction between the courts . 
 In Slade 's Case , a case under assumpsit , which was brought between judges of the Common Pleas and King 's Bench , was transferred to the Court of Exchequer Chamber where the King 's Bench judges were allowed to vote . The case dragged on for five years , with the judgment finally being delivered in 1602 by the Chief Justice of the King 's Bench , John Popham . Popham ruled that assumpsit claims were valid , a decision called a " watershed " moment in English law , with archaic and outdated principles being overwritten by the modern and effective assumpsit , which soon became the main course of action in contract cases . This is also seen as an example of judicial legislation , with the courts making a revolutionary decision Parliament had failed to make . 
 = = Background = = 
 Under the medieval common law , there was only one way to resolve a dispute seeking the repayment of money or other contract matters ; a writ of debt , which only the Court of Common Pleas could hear . This was archaic , did not work against the executors of a will and involved precise pleading ; a minor flaw in the documents put to the court could see the case thrown out . By the middle of the 16th century lawyers had attempted to devise an alternative using the action of assumpsit , which was technically a type of trespass due to deceit . The argument was based on the idea that there was an inherent promise in a contract to pay the money , and that by failing to pay the defendant had deceived the plaintiff . By 1558 the lawyers had succeeded , with the Court of King 's Bench agreeing to hear cases under this piece of legal fiction . The judges of the Common Pleas , however , a more traditional group , rejected this argument and only accepted cases where an actual promise had been made in addition to the contract . 
 The action of assumpsit had several advantages over a writ of debt ; the plaintiff could count on always having a jury , while in writs of debt the defendant could rely on wager of law , where he produced twelve people to swear he did not owe the plaintiff money and had the case dismissed . In addition , it worked for executory agreements , not just normal contracts . In 1585 a new form of the Court of Exchequer Chamber was set up , an appellate court where the Common Pleas judges held a majority , and regularly began to reverse King 's Bench judgments which were based on assumpsit . This , and the conflict between the King 's Bench and the Common Pleas as a whole , was problematic ; a plaintiff at assizes could not be sure which sort of judge his case would come before , lending uncertainty to the law . Boyer suggests that , in this environment , the Chief Justice of the King 's Bench John Popham deliberately provoked the Common Pleas to resolve the matter , and did so through Slade 's Case . 
 = = Facts = = 
 John Slade was a grain merchant , who claimed that Humphrey Morley had agreed to buy a crop of wheat and rye from him , paying £ 16 , and had reneged on the agreement . He brought the case before the Assizes in 1596 , where it was heard by two judges ; one of the Common Pleas , and one of the King 's Bench . It was heard under assumpsit , and the jury found that Morley indeed owed Slade money . Before a judgment could be issued , Popham had the case transferred to an older version of the Court of Exchequer Chamber , which , sitting in Serjeant 's Inn , allowed the King 's Bench judges to sit . 
 Edward Coke was counsel for Slade , arguing that the King 's Bench had the power to hear assumpsit actions , along with Laurence Tanfield , while Francis Bacon and John Doddridge represented Morley . The quality of legal argument was high ; Bacon was a " skillful , subtle <unk> " capable of distinguishing the precedent brought up by Coke , while Doddridge , a member of the Society of Antiquaries , knew the records even better than Coke did . Coke , rather than directly confronting opposing counsel , made a twofold argument ; firstly , that the fact that the King 's Bench had been allowed to hear assumpsit actions for so long meant that it was acceptable , based on institutional inertia , and second that , on the subject of assumpsit being used for breaches of promise , that the original agreement included an implied promise to make payment . 
 The case continued for five years ; at one point , the judges let the matter continue for three years because they could not reach a decision . Eventually , in November 1602 , Popham issued a judgment on behalf of the court which stated " Firstly , that every contract executory implies in itself a promise or <unk> . Secondly , that although upon such a contract an action of debt lies , the plaintiff may well have an action in the case upon the assumpsit . " Coke , in his report of the case ( published in 1604 ) reports that the judgment was unanimous , while more modern commentators such as Boyer assert that it was narrow , most likely 6 to 5 , with the dividing line being between the King 's Bench judges and Common Pleas . 
 = = Judgment = = 
 Lord Popham CJ held that Slade could sue , and was successful . He said the following . 
 = = Significance = = 
 The impact of the case was immediate and overwhelming . Ibbetson considers Slade 's Case to be a " watershed " moment , in which the archaic and conservative form of law was overwritten by a modern , more efficient method . <unk> became the dominant form of contract cases , with the door " opened wide " to plaintiffs ; Boyer suggests this was perhaps " too wide " . In his Commentaries on the Laws of England , William Blackstone explained that this was the reason why the Statute of Frauds was subsequently passed in 1677 : 
 The case is particularly notable as an example of judicial legislation , with the judges significantly modernising the law and moving it forward in a way Parliament had not considered . As a side impact , Coke 's arguments were the first to define consideration . The conservative outlook of the Common Pleas soon changed ; after the death of Edmund Anderson , the more activist Francis Gawdy became Chief Justice of the Common Pleas , and other Common Pleas judges , many of whom were uncertain but had followed Anderson 's lead in the case , changed their mind . 
 = The Last of Us Remastered = 
 The Last of Us Remastered is an action @-@ adventure survival horror video game developed by Naughty Dog and published by Sony Computer Entertainment . An enhanced port of 2013 's The Last of Us , Remastered was released for the PlayStation 4 worldwide in July 2014 . Among minor gameplay additions , the game features enhanced graphics and rendering upgrades including increased draw distance , an upgraded combat mechanic and higher frame rate . 
 The game is set twenty years after an outbreak destroyed much of civilization , exploring the possibility of a fungus infecting humans . The single @-@ player story follows Joel , tasked with escorting the young Ellie across a post @-@ apocalyptic United States , in an attempt to create a potential cure against the infection to which Ellie is immune . Players make their way through various locations , fighting against the Infected and hostile human survivors . The multiplayer lets up to eight players engage in cooperative or competitive game matches . To accommodate Remastered 's technical enhancements , Naughty Dog spent months developing the game , beginning upon the release of The Last of Us . 
 The game received critical acclaim . Reviewers were impressed with the graphics upgrades , praising all of the enhancements and additions . It also became a commercial success , selling over one million units within its first month . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The Last of Us Remastered changes little from the basic gameplay of the original version . As such , it is an action @-@ adventure survival horror game that uses a third @-@ person perspective . The game involves gunfights , melee combat and a cover system . For most of the game , players control Joel ; Ellie and other companions are controlled by the artificial intelligence . Remastered uses the DualShock 4 's touchpad to navigate inventory items , and the light bar signals health , scaling from blue to orange and red when taking damage . In addition , audio recordings found in the game world can be heard through the controller 's speaker ; the original version forced players to remain in a menu while the recordings were played . The game 's Photo Mode allows players to capture images of the game by pausing gameplay and adjusting the camera freely . In the menu , players have the ability to watch all cutscenes with audio commentary featuring creative director Neil Druckmann , Troy Baker and Ashley Johnson , who portrayed Joel and Ellie , respectively . 
 = = Development = = 
 In March 2014 , information concerning a release of The Last of Us on PlayStation 4 was leaked . This was followed by the appearance of the game , titled The Last of Us Remastered on the PlayStation Store on April 9 , 2014 ; Naughty Dog announced the game on the same day . This enhanced version of the game features an increased draw distance , character models of higher resolution , improved lighting and shadows , and an upgraded combat mechanic . It runs a native 1080p resolution at 60 frames per second , with the option to lock the game at 30 frames per second . At E3 2014 , Sony announced that the game would be released on July 29 , 2014 . Some of the downloadable content from The Last of Us is bundled with Remastered , including Left Behind and some multiplayer maps , while others require a separate purchase . 
 In Remastered , character textures were increased by a factor of four , shadows were doubled and a new lighting process was implemented . The motion blur when turning the camera , used to hide slower loading textures , was reduced , and the game 's environments look " crisper " . In addition , new settings were introduced to allow players to customize the game 's audio channels , and the loading times were reduced , due to the game streaming from the hard drive as opposed to the disc . One of the biggest developmental challenges was fitting all content onto one Blu @-@ ray Disc . The changing of the in @-@ game textures , and the inclusion of Left Behind , were the cause for this difficulty . According to lead developer Christian <unk> , Remastered " looked broken up until a week before shipping " . 
 Development on Remastered began shortly following the release of The Last of Us in June 2013 . Though initially under light development , the team began working harder on Remastered when they saw the demand for it ; work on the game 's code did not begin until a larger team was introduced to Remastered in February 2014 . As development on the original game ended , the programmers expected that the game would be ported to the PlayStation 4 , but planning and preparation did not begin until The Last of Us had launched . The team aimed at creating a " true " remaster , maintaining the " same core experience " and not changing any large story or gameplay elements . For the game 's frame rate , the team was initially split , with some preferring 30 frames per second rather than 60 ; when the game was running at the latter , the whole team became convinced . The team that worked on Remastered was significantly smaller than the team for The Last of Us ; in particular , the team did not include any designers , which led to various design issues remaining from the original game . Druckmann attributed this to the fact that Remastered was developed as a recreation of the original , altering only technical and graphical aspects . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Like the original version , The Last of Us Remastered was met with critical acclaim . Metacritic calculated an average score of 95 out of 100 , indicating " universal acclaim " , based on 69 critics . GameRankings assigned an average score of 96 % based on 43 reviews . 
 The game 's enhanced graphics received positive reactions . Colin Moriarty of IGN felt that the graphical fidelity of Remastered was an improvement over The Last of Us , despite the latter being " the most beautiful game [ he 'd ] seen on any console " . GamesRadar 's David Houghton echoed this statement , calling the visuals " jaw @-@ dropping " . VideoGamer.com reiterated the graphical improvement over the original game , particularly praising the increased draw distance and improved lighting technology . Liam Martin of Digital Spy also felt that the lighting system improves the gameplay and makes the game " feel even more dangerous " . Game Informer 's Tim Turi stated that the game is " even more breathtaking " than The Last of Us . Matt Swider of TechRadar appreciated the minor detail changes and the technical improvements . The Independent 's Jack Fleming felt that the original game 's visual flaws were enhanced in Remastered , but greatly complimented the updated graphics regardless . 
 Many reviewers considered the technical enhancements , such as the increased frame rate , a welcome advancement from the original game . Turi of Game Informer felt that the frame rate " dramatically elevate [ s ] " the game above the original . Jim Sterling of The Escapist complimented the upgraded frame rate , commenting that the original frame rate is a " noticeably inferior experience " . IGN 's Moriarty stated that , though the change was initially " jarring " , he appreciated it through further gameplay . Tom Hoggins of The Daily Telegraph echoed these statements , feeling as though the increased frame rate heightened the intensity of the gameplay . Metro 's David Jenkins felt that the increased frame rate is almost imperceptible , though stating that it is " definitely an improvement " . Philip Kollar of Polygon appreciated the game 's improved textures and loading times . 
 The addition of Photo Mode was well received . TechRadar 's Swider named the mode as a standout feature , while IGN 's Moriarty complimented the availability to capture " gorgeous " images using the feature . The adjustment of the controls received praise , with Moriarty of IGN particularly approving the DualShock 4 's triggers . Swider of TechRadar felt that the additional controls result in a better functioning game , while Digital Spy 's Martin felt that it improves the game 's combat , commenting that it " increase [ s ] this sense of immersion " . Reviewers also appreciated the inclusion of the DLC and the audio commentary . These features led The Escapist 's Sterling to dub Remastered as " the definitive version of the game " . 
 By August 2014 , The Last of Us Remastered had sold one million copies . It is one of the best @-@ selling PlayStation 4 games . The game was nominated for Best Remaster at The Game Awards 2014 , and received an honorable mention for Best Technology at the 15th Annual Game Developers Choice Awards . 
 = Leigh , Greater Manchester = 
 Leigh is a town in the Metropolitan Borough of Wigan , Greater Manchester , England , 7 @.@ 7 miles ( 12 km ) southeast of Wigan and 9 @.@ 5 miles ( 15 @.@ 3 km ) west of Manchester city centre . Leigh is situated on low @-@ lying land to the north west of Chat Moss . 
 Historically a part of Lancashire , Leigh was originally the centre of a large ecclesiastical parish covering six vills or townships . When the three townships of Pennington , Westleigh and Bedford merged in 1875 forming the Leigh Local Board District , Leigh became the official name for the town although it had been applied to the area of Pennington and Westleigh around the parish church for many centuries . The town became an urban district in 1894 when part of Atherton was added . In 1899 Leigh became a municipal borough . The first town hall was built in King Street and replaced by the present building in 1907 . 
 Originally an agricultural area noted for dairy farming , domestic spinning and weaving led to a considerable silk and , in the 20th century , cotton industry . Leigh also exploited the underlying coal measures particularly after the town was connected to the canals and railways . Leigh had an important engineering base . The legacy of Leigh 's industrial past can be seen in the remaining red brick mills – some of which are listed buildings – although it is now a mainly residential town , with Edwardian and Victorian terraced housing packed around the town centre . Leigh 's present @-@ day economy is based largely on the retail sector . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Toponymy = = = 
 Leigh is derived from the Old English leah which meant a place at the wood or woodland clearing , a glade and subsequently a pasture or meadow , it was spelt Legh in 1276 . Other recorded spellings include Leech , 1264 ; <unk> , 1268 ; <unk> , 1305 ; <unk> , 1417 ; Lech , 1451 ; Legh , 16th century . As its name denotes it was a district rich in meadow and pasture land , and the produce of its dairies , the Leigh cheese , was formerly noted for its excellence . Westleigh , the west clearing , has been named <unk> in 1237 , <unk> in 1238 and also <unk> in Legh in 1292 . Pennington has been spelt <unk> and <unk> in 1246 and 1360 , <unk> in 1305 , <unk> in 1351 and 1442 and <unk> in 1443 , the ending ton or tun denotes an enclosure , farmstead or manor in Old English . Bedford , the ford of Beda , probably through Pennington Brook gave its name to this part of Leigh . Spellings include <unk> from 1200 – 21 and <unk> in 1200 and 1296 . 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The earliest signs of human activity in Leigh are evidenced by a Neolithic stone axe found in Pennington and a bronze spearhead from south of Gas Street . A single Roman coin was found at Butts in Bedford . After the Roman departure from Britain , and into the history of Anglo @-@ Saxon England , nothing was written about Leigh . However evidence for the presence of Saxons in what was a sparsely populated and isolated part of the country is provided by local township place names that incorporate the Old English suffix leah , such as Leigh , Tyldesley , Shakerley and Astley . 
 = = = Townships = = = 
 In the 12th century the ancient parish of Leigh was made up of six townships , including Pennington , Bedford , Westleigh , Atherton , Astley , and Tyldesley cum Shakerley . Weekly markets were held by the parish church and a cattle fair held twice @-@ yearly . 
 Bedford manor was mentioned in documents in 1202 when it was held by Sir Henry de <unk> whose family held it until the 16th century , but never actually lived there . The <unk> , landowners from the 14th century , were another prominent Bedford family . Richard Shuttleworth married a daughter of the <unk> from Westleigh and brought part of the Westleigh inheritance to Bedford . This family lived at Shuttleworth House , or <unk> Farm as it is also known , which is south of the Bridgewater Canal near to the old manor house , Bedford Hall , which survives today as a Grade II listed building . Another prominent Bedford family , the Sales of Hope Carr Hall , had a great deal of influence in Bedford for over 400 years , and owned more land than the <unk> . The family were recusants and secretly kept the " old faith " when Roman Catholicism was subject to civil or criminal penalties . Hope Carr Hall was moated as was nearby Brick House . 
 The manor house of Westleigh was at Higher Hall and existed in Richard I 's time ( 1189 – 1199 ) . In 1292 <unk> , the heiress of the manor , married Richard de Urmston , and the manor passed to the Urmston family and remained there until the last of the male <unk> died in 1659 . It was later abandoned because of mining subsidence and Westleigh Old Hall became the manor by repute . The <unk> and the Marsh families lived here . Westleigh Old Hall was another Leigh hall that had a moat . 
 The Pennington family owned Pennington Hall from about 1200 until they were replaced by the family of Bradshaw or <unk> in 1312 . The <unk> held the manor until 1703 when John , the last of the male line died . Pennington Hall was rebuilt in 1748 by the then owner Samuel Hilton and in 1807 sold to the Gaskell family of <unk> , Wakefield , who let it to a succession of tenants . Around 1840 James Pownall , one of the founder members of the silk manufacturing firm of <unk> and Pownall was tenant . Later occupants were Charles Jackson , cotton manufacturer , Jabez Johnson , and F.W. <unk> founder of <unk> 's Mill in 1862 , The last resident was brewer , George Shaw . On 3 December 1919 George Shaw & Co Ltd offered the hall and grounds to the people of Leigh . The gift was accepted and opened to the public on 25 August 1920 . The hall was converted to a museum and art gallery in 1928 but was demolished in 1963 . The grounds are now Pennington Park . 
 = = = Civil War = = = 
 Leigh was divided in its allegiance during the English Civil War , some of the population supporting the Royalists ' cause while others supported the Parliamentarians . A battle was fought in the town on 2 December 1642 , when a group of <unk> , men from neighbouring Atherton , beat back and then routed Cavalier troops under the command of James Stanley , the 7th Earl of Derby . Sir Thomas Tyldesley of <unk> and Morleys Hall , Astley , was killed on 25 August 1651 at the Battle of Wigan Lane and is buried in the Tyldesley Chapel in Leigh Parish Church . The Earl of Derby passed through Leigh again in 1651 , when he spent his last night in the King 's Arms , before going on to his execution outside Ye Olde Man & Scythe Inn in Bolton . 
 = = = Industrial Revolution = = = 
 At the end of the 16th century , although agriculture and the dairy industry , particularly the production of Leigh cheese , sometimes known as Leigh Toaster , were important , spinning and weaving began to develop as a cottage industry . Work was brought from Manchester by agents who brought work weekly often to an inn , and where they collected the finished cloth . At first this work was done to supplement the income of local farmers and their families . The cloth woven in Leigh was fustian , a sort of rough corduroy , and by the end of the 17th century middlemen , fustian masters , were dealing directly with weavers and selling the finished cloth in Manchester . It is a tradition in the town that a local man , Thomas Highs , was the inventor of a spinning jenny and the water frame in the 1760s , the latter invention being pirated by Richard Arkwright , who subsequently made a fortune from the patent royalties . These 18th @-@ century improvements to the spinning process meant that weavers were in great <unk> but as power looms were introduced in factories in Manchester there was less work for the handloom weavers and there was serious unemployment in the town . In 1827 silk weaving began in Leigh , either as the result of a dispute or a labour shortage in the Middleton silk industry . William Walker was a middleman who opened the first silk mill in Leigh in 1828 , and others quickly followed , including James Pownall and Henry Hilton , whose mill survived until 1926 . Several cotton mills were built in Leigh after the mid @-@ 1830s , and some silk mills converted to cotton after 1870 . 
 The <unk> <unk> took place on 14 August 1839 . The <unk> had called for a strike at a time when there was social unrest over high levels of unemployment and the high cost of living . A mob of at least 2 @,@ 000 gathered in Leigh . About 400 – 500 workers from Chowbent threatened to burn down Hayes Mill . A detachment of troops from Haydock was called out and special constables sworn in by the local magistrate . The Riot Act was read by Squire Thomas Withington of Culcheth Hall and for a while the mob dispersed but reassembled later . Many were injured in the fighting that took place and arrests were made . Those arrested were severely punished , while others ensured that radicalism continued in Leigh , leading eventually to electoral reform and universal suffrage . 
 The large multi @-@ storey spinning mills came later , and five survive today . There were mill complexes at <unk> Lane and Firs Lane in Westleigh , Pennington and Bedford . Leigh Spinners is a Grade II * listed building . Mather Lane Mill close to the Bridgewater Canal is a Grade II listed building . More than 6 @,@ 000 people were employed in textiles in Leigh in 1911 . 
 = = = Coal mining = = = 
 There had been drift mines in Westleigh since the 12th century but during the second half of the 19th century it became possible to mine the deeper seams and coal began to be an important industry and coal mining became the largest user of labour after the textile industry in Leigh . Parsonage Colliery , the last mine to be sunk in Leigh , was one of the deepest mines in the country , going down to over 3 @,@ 000 ft ( 900 m ) . The extent of the mining in Parsonage Colliery increased in the 1960s with the driving of a tunnel ( the Horizon Tunnel ) , which accessed previously inaccessible seams around 6 ft ( 2 m ) high that were easy to work on compared to the previous seams of coal of 3 ft ( 1 m ) or less . The seams were wet , and a series of pumps was used to remove the water into underground canals before it was finally pumped into the canal at Leigh . The winding engine at Parsonage was a steam engine , fuelled by methane extracted from the mine , while the neighbouring Bickershaw Colliery had a superior electric system . In 1974 , the two were linked underground , and all coal was wound up at Bickershaw , which had better winding facilities , while Parsonage was used for supplies . The entire Lancashire Coalfield is now closed to deep mining , although several open @-@ cast mines are still in operation elsewhere in the county . 
 Mining disasters in Leigh included the explosion of firedamp which caused the deaths of 38 miners at Bedford Colliery on 13 August 1886 . There were several accidents at Bickershaw Colliery , but the most serious was in 1932 , when 19 men were drowned in the sump at the bottom of the shaft after an <unk> of the cage . 
 List of coal mines operating in Leigh 
 = = = Manufacturing = = = 
 Other notable industry included the tractor factory of David Brown Limited , which was located in Leigh following the acquisition in 1955 of Harrison , McGregor and Guest 's Albion range of farm machinery products . Rope @-@ manufacture was another local industry : Mansley 's Rope works on Twist Lane made rope by hand , using a rope walk . The factory burnt down in 1912 . Anchor Cables had a large works close to the Bridgewater Canal . The company was bought by Callender 's Cables , in 1903 , later to become British Insulated Callender 's Cables ( <unk> ) , and now part of Balfour Beatty . Another major 20th century employer was Sutcliffe Speakman , which made activated carbon and brick @-@ making equipment . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Leigh is covered by four electoral wards , Atherleigh , Leigh East , Leigh South and Leigh West , of the Metropolitan Borough of Wigan . Each ward elects three councillors to the 75 @-@ member metropolitan borough council , Wigan 's local authority . As of 2009 , all twelve ward councillors for Leigh , including Leader of the Council , Lord Smith of Leigh , are members of the Labour Party who control the council . 
 Historically , Leigh 's townships formed part of the Hundred of West Derby , a judicial division of southwest Lancashire . Pennington , Westleigh and Bedford were three of the six townships or vills that made up the ancient parish of Leigh . The townships existed before the parish . 
 Under the terms of the Poor Law Amendment Act 1834 the townships formed part of the Leigh Poor Law Union , which was established on 26 January 1837 and was responsible for an area covering the whole of the ancient parish of Leigh and part of Winwick . There were workhouses in Pennington , Culcheth , Tyldesley and Lowton , but they were replaced by Leigh Union workhouse at Atherleigh in the 1850s . In 1875 Leigh Local Board of Health was established , covering the areas of the former Bedford , Pennington and Westleigh Local Boards of Health . In 1894 the area of the Local Board , together with part of Atherton township , became Leigh Urban District , which was granted honorific borough status in 1899 becoming the Municipal Borough of Leigh . In 1969 there was an exchange of very small areas with Golborne Urban District . Following the Local Government Act 1972 , the Municipal Borough of Leigh was abolished and its territory granted as part of the Metropolitan Borough of Wigan , a local government district of Greater Manchester . In 1998 , an area ( Lately Common ) was further ceded to the Warrington borough – one of the few parts of England to have been in three different counties since the mid @-@ 20th century : Lancashire , then Greater Manchester , then Cheshire . 
 Leigh 's MP is Andy Burnham who has represented the parliamentary seat for Leigh for the Labour Party since the 2001 General Election . Between 10 June 2009 and the 2010 General Election he was Secretary of State at the Department of Health . At the 2010 General Election Burnham retained the Leigh seat with 24 @,@ 295 votes and a majority of 15 @,@ 011 , representing 51 @.@ 3 % of the vote . Burnham was re @-@ elected MP for the Leigh constituency in 2015 with 24 @,@ 312 votes which was 53 @.@ 9 % of the total vote cast . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Leigh is low @-@ lying ; land to the south and east , close to Chat Moss , is 50 feet ( 15 m ) above mean sea level . The highest land , to the north and west , rises gently to 125 feet ( 38 m ) . Astley and Bedford Mosses are fragments of the raised bog that once covered a large area north of the River Mersey and along with Holcroft and Risley Mosses are part of Manchester Mosses , a European Union designated Special Area of Conservation . The area is in the River Mersey Basin ; drained into the Mersey by several streams , including the Westleigh and Pennington Brooks that join others flowing through Bedford to form the Glaze Brook . The southeast of the town has alluvial and peaty soils , but the rest is loam overlaying sandstone , or coal measures in the north . There is <unk> limestone in Bedford and neighbouring Astley . Mining subsidence and flooding have caused the formation of " flashes " to the south and west of the town , the largest of which is south of the Leeds and Liverpool Canal in Pennington . Pennington Flash Country Park is a 490 @-@ acre ( 200 ha ) country park and nature reserve with a 170 @-@ acre ( 69 ha ) flash or lake . 
 Leigh is crossed by the Bolton to St Helens Road high road , an old packhorse route that became a Turnpike Trust in 1762 . The <unk> road bypasses the town centre using the line of the Bolton and Leigh Railway . The Bridgewater Canal and the Leigh Branch of the Leeds and Liverpool Canal cross the town west to east , the canals meeting at Leigh Bridge just south of the town centre . In the 1930s the A580 " East Lancashire Road " was built crossing to the south of the town . 
 = = Demography = = 
 At the time of the United Kingdom Census 2001 , according to the Office for National Statistics , the Urban Subdivision of Leigh was part of the Greater Manchester Urban Area and had a total resident population of 43 @,@ 006 , of which 20 @,@ 990 ( 48 @.@ 8 % ) were male and 22 @,@ 016 ( 51 @.@ 2 % ) were female , with 18 @,@ 270 households . The settlement occupied 884 hectares ( 3 @.@ 41 sq mi ) , compared with 858 hectares ( 3 @.@ 31 sq mi ) in the 1991 census . Its population density was 48 @.@ 65 people per hectare compared with an average of 40 @.@ 20 across the Greater Manchester Urban Area . The median age of the population was 37 , compared with 36 within the Greater Manchester Urban Area and 37 across England and Wales . 
 The majority of the population of Leigh were born in England ( 95 @.@ 92 % ) ; 2 @.@ 10 % were born elsewhere within the United Kingdom , 0 @.@ 95 % within the rest of the European Union , and 1 @.@ 47 % elsewhere in the world . 
 Data on religious beliefs across the town in the 2001 census show that 85 @.@ 5 % declared themselves to be Christian , 7 @.@ 6 % said they held no religion , and 0 @.@ 6 % reported themselves as Muslim . 
 Most of Leigh is within the Warrington & Wigan Travel to Work Area ( TTWA ) , whilst part of the eastern side of the town is within the Manchester TTWA . The entire town is within the Manchester Larger Urban Zone . 
 At the time of the 2001 Census , there were 19 @,@ 051 people ( 44 @.@ 3 % ) in employment who were resident within Leigh . Of these , 18 @.@ 36 % worked within the wholesale and retail trade , including repair of motor vehicles ; 21 @.@ 60 % worked within manufacturing industry ; and 11 @.@ 99 % worked within the health and social work sector . 45 @.@ 16 % of households owned a single car or van , with 30 @.@ 77 % owning none . The average car ownership per household was 0 @.@ 98 , compared with 0 @.@ 93 across the Greater Manchester Urban Area . 
 = = = Population change = = = 
 = = Economy = = 
 Leigh has a traditional town centre with daily outdoor and indoor markets . Part of the town centre is pedestrianised and there are local independent and multiple retailers . The Spinning Gate Centre in the centre of town has about thirty retail units . A retail park developed on the old Parsonage Colliery site is within walking distance of the town centre . 
 Opened in 2008 Leigh Sports Village has an 11 @,@ 000 @-@ capacity stadium ( anchored by Leigh Centurions and shared with the reserves of Blackburn Rovers ) , an athletics arena for Leigh Harriers , facilities for Leigh East Rugby League Club , a college campus , hotel , leisure retail and business facilities for the community . In 2011 a Morrisons store opened at the sports village . 
 Another regeneration project on the site of the former Bickershaw Colliery complex which closed in 1992 will redevelop the site and canal side with a country park and housing . In 2011 " The Loom " a £ <unk> retail development opened on the north side of the Bridgewater Canal with a seven @-@ screen cinema , Tesco Extra store , Nando 's , Frankie and Benny 's and The Real China restaurants . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 Major landmarks in Leigh are the red sandstone parish church and across the civic square , Leigh Town Hall and its associated shops on Market Street . The Grade II listed Obelisk that replaced the original market cross is also situated here . Many town centre buildings including the Boar 's Head public house are in red Ruabon or Accrington bricks , often with gables and terracotta dressings . There are several large multi @-@ storey cotton mills built along the Bridgewater Canal that are a reminder of Leigh 's textile industry but most are now underused and deteriorating despite listed building status . Leigh 's War Memorial by local architect J.C. Prestwich is at the junction of Church Street and Silk Street and is a Grade II listed structure . St Joseph 's Church and St Thomas 's Church on opposite sides of Chapel Street are both imposing churches using different materials and styles . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Historically Leigh was well connected to the local transport infrastructure , but with the closure of the railway in 1969 this is no longer the case . Public transport is co @-@ ordinated by the Transport for Greater Manchester . There are bus services operated by First Greater Manchester , Jim Stones , Maytree Travel , Diamond Bus North West , Stagecoach Manchester and Network Warrington from Leigh bus station to many local destinations including Wigan , Bolton , Warrington , Manchester and St Helens . There had been suggestions to reopen the railway via Tyldesley to Manchester , but a guided busway scheme was chosen for the route ; this decision was not universally popular . 
 = = = Canals = = = 
 The Bridgewater Canal was extended from Worsley to the middle of Leigh in 1795 . In 1819 the fifth Leeds and Liverpool Canal Act was passed for the construction of the Leigh Branch and by 1820 the Leigh branch canal was cut from the Leeds and Liverpool Canal at Poolstock , Wigan to meet the Bridgewater at Leigh Bridge , giving access from Leigh to all parts of Lancashire , Yorkshire and the Midlands . 
 = = = Railways = = = 
 Leigh was the southern terminus of the 7 @.@ 5 miles ( 12 km ) long Bolton and Leigh Railway . George Stephenson carried out the survey for the line . It opened between Bolton and William Hulton 's coal mines at <unk> for freight on 1 August 1828 and to the terminus at the Leeds and Liverpool Canal at Leigh in March 1830 . Passengers were carried from 13 June 1831 . The first locomotive on the line was an 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 called the Lancashire Witch . The railway station was at Westleigh . Later the line was extended southwards to Pennington . Atherleigh opened in 1935 . The line was closed to passenger traffic on 29 March 1954 , and later closed completely . 
 In 1861 the London and North Western Railway revived powers granted to the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway to build a railway from Manchester via Eccles and Tyldesley to Wigan with a branch to Kenyon Junction on the Liverpool to Manchester Line via Leigh and Pennington . There was a station , originally named Bedford Leigh to serve the town . The railway crossed the town on a viaduct which has since been largely demolished . It was closed in May 1969 , leaving the town without a railway : after the reopening of Mansfield and Corby railway stations , Leigh is now one of the largest towns in Great Britain without a railway station . Numerous colliery lines crossed the town , but with the closure of the collieries these were no longer required . 
 The nearest railway station is at Atherton , 3 miles ( 5 km ) miles to the north , with trains to Wigan and Manchester operated by Northern , leaving the bus station as Leigh 's only public transport link . 
 = = = Trams and trolley buses = = = 
 In 1900 , a Bill authorising the South Lancashire Tramways Company to construct over 62 miles ( 100 km ) of tramway in southern Lancashire was given Royal Assent . However , by November 1900 the South Lancashire Electric Traction and Power Company had acquired the shares . The first section of tramway opened on 20 October 1902 between Lowton and Four Lanes Ends via Leigh and Atherton . The company got into financial difficulty and in turn became Lancashire United Tramways later Lancashire United Transport . On 16 December 1933 , the last tram service ran from Leigh to Four Lane Ends and the next day trolley buses took over . An Act of 4 August 1920 authorised Leigh Municipal Borough to run buses . A garage built on Windermere Road was soon outgrown and replaced by one on Holden Road . The corporation had a fleet of 70 vehicles during World War II . 
 Work on the Leigh @-@ Salford @-@ Manchester Bus Rapid Transit guided busway commenced in 2012 and the busway opened in 2016 . 
 = = Education = = 
 Leigh Grammar School existed in 1655 but its foundation is unclear . The building was next to the churchyard , but the school moved to Manchester Road in 1931 . Leigh Girls ' Grammar School was established in 1921 , but both schools were abolished by the then Secretary of State for Education , Shirley Williams , in the 1976 Education Act . Leigh high schools include Bedford High School , and Westleigh High School . Pupils also attend schools in Atherton , Lowton , Golborne and Astley . Wigan and Leigh College provides post @-@ 16 education . 
 = = Religion = = 
 The St Mary the Virgin Church has been in existence since the 12th century and probably much earlier . It was once known as the Church of St Peter at Westleigh in Leigh , and straddles the boundary between the old townships of Westleigh and Pennington , the nave and churchyard being in Westleigh and the chancel in Pennington . Its early history is tied up with the Westleigh and Urmston families . The dedication changed to St Mary the Virgin in the 14th century . The church tower , said to have been built in 1516 , is all that remains of the medieval structure , which was replaced by the present church after becoming unsafe . Paley and Austin of Lancaster designed the present church , the foundation stone was laid in 1871 and the church consecrated in 1873 . The church is built in red sandstone it is a Grade II listed building . 
 There are now parish churches in each of the old townships . The first St Thomas 's Church in Bedford was consecrated in 1840 and replaced by the present church in 1909 . The church is built of Accrington red brick with Runcorn red sandstone facings , it was designed by J. S. Crowther . Christ Church , Pennington , designed by architect E. H. <unk> , was built in Yorkshire stone and was consecrated in 1854 . The site to the south of the canal was a rapidly growing area at this time . It is Grade II listed . Westleigh St Paul , founded in 1847 is on Westleigh Lane . Westleigh St Peter , a Grade II * listed building by Paley and Austin , built in brick with red sandstone dressings , was founded 1881 is on Firs Lane . 
 The first Catholic chapel was built in Bedford on the corner of Mather Lane and Chapel Street in 1778 and this lasted until it was replaced in 1855 by St Joseph 's Church by architect Joseph Hansom . A growing Catholic population in the area led to the building of Our Lady of the Rosary in Plank Lane in 1879 , Twelve Apostles in 1879 and Sacred Heart in 1929 . Other denominations catered for include Wesleyan , Independent , Primitive , Welsh and United Methodists . There are also Unitarian , Baptist and Jehovah 's Witness places of worship in the town . 
 = = Sport = = 
 Leigh has a professional rugby league team – Leigh Centurions – whose main claim to fame is beating Leeds 24 – 7 in the 1971 Challenge Cup final at Wembley Stadium . The club played in the Super League in the 2005 season . Leigh has several amateur clubs , including Leigh East and Leigh Miners Rangers . 
 The town had a semi @-@ professional football team , Leigh Genesis ( formerly Leigh RMI ) , which ceased operations at a senior level in June 2011 . The most successful amateur club is Leigh Athletic , which currently plays in the Manchester Football League . 
 Leigh also has an athletics club , Leigh Harriers AC , founded in 1909 , and a Rugby Union club , Leigh RUFC , based at Round Ash Park , which gained promotion in 2007 , to RFU league North 2 ( West ) , and is current holder of the Lancashire Trophy which it won in May 2008 for the third consecutive year . Attached to the club is a crown green bowling section which runs several teams in local bowling leagues . Leigh has two cricket clubs : Leigh Cricket Club play in the ECB Premier League Liverpool Competition , and Westleigh Cricket Club , have two senior and 4 junior teams playing in the Bolton and District Cricket Association . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Many of Leigh 's old halls have been demolished but the sites of Lilford Park , once the grounds of Atherton Hall , a gift to Leigh from Lord Lilford in 1914 and Pennington Park , the grounds of Pennington Hall which was demolished in 1963 after being used as a museum , are open to the public . 
 Leigh 's wealth as an industrial town resulted in many outlets for the entertainment of its population , including theatres , cinemas and public houses . In 1908 the Hippodrome Theatre on Leigh Road was built on the site of Walker 's silk mill of 1827 , this subsequently became a cinema , first the Odeon , later the Classic . Another theatre , the Theatre Royal , was built on Lord Street which later became the Leigh Casino Club . The Palace Cinema was built in 1913 on Railway Road and the assembly rooms above the Conservative Club , were converted to a cinema known as the <unk> in 1908 . Brewery Lane is a reminder that there was once a brewery in Bedford belonging to George Shaw & Co . The old Leigh College and Library on Railway Road was built between 1894 and 1896 by the Leigh Literary Society to designs by J. C. Prestwich and J. H. Stephen . The present library was built in 1971 between the parish church and town hall . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Sir John Lennard @-@ Jones , Sir Peter Maxwell Davies and Pete Shelley were old pupils of Leigh Grammar School . Rhythm and blues singer and musician Georgie Fame was born in Leigh in 1943 . Thomas Burke , operatic tenor , was born in 1890 and attended St Joseph 's School . The author of " Goodbye , Mr Chips " , James Hilton was also born in Leigh . A local businessman of the same name became chairman of Leigh RLFC after World War II and the club 's former ground , Hilton Park , was named after him . The female sculptor Mary Pownall ( 1862 @-@ 1937 ) was born and raised in Leigh . 
 = 2006 Riga summit = 
 The 2006 Riga summit or the 19th NATO Summit was a NATO summit held in the Olympic Sports Centre , Riga , Latvia from 28 to 29 November 2006 . The most important topics discussed were the War in Afghanistan and the future role and borders of the alliance . Further , the summit focused on the alliance 's continued transformation , taking stock of what has been accomplished since the 2002 Prague Summit . NATO also committed itself to extend further membership invitations in the upcoming 2008 Bucharest Summit . This summit was the first NATO summit held on territory of a former USSR republic . 
 = = Security measures = = 
 The summit was held in the Olympic Sports Centre , Riga . Roads in the center of Riga were closed down and parking was not allowed at the airport or at several roads , out of fear for car bombs . About 9000 Latvian police officers and soldiers took care of the Summit 's security , while more than 450 other airmen from seven European NATO countries were called upon to ensure a no @-@ fly zone above the summit in an operation called Operation Peaceful Summit . This enhanced ongoing Baltic Air Policing activities with additional aircraft , communications and maintenance support . 
 = = Summit = = 
 All agreements were not actually made in the North Atlantic Council meeting , but in fact it was made in Istanbul Summit , 2003 , except for the signing of the missile defense contract which happened on 28 November . The Council meeting was held on 29 November . 
 = = = Main topics = = = 
 While the tensions between NATO members from the build @-@ up to the invasion of Iraq had dissipated , the NATO summit , and the months preceding the summit , were marked by divisions between the United States and the United Kingdom on the one side and France , Germany , Italy and Spain on the other . Two rifts existed , one about the military contributions to the war in Afghanistan , and the other concerning whether or not NATO should assume a more global role . 
 = = = = War in Afghanistan = = = = 
 Before and during the summit US president George W. Bush , British prime minister Tony Blair , Canadian prime minister Stephen Harper and Dutch Prime Minister Jan Peter Balkenende made a plea to European NATO members to make more troops available for deployment in Afghanistan , remove the national caveats ( i.e. national restrictions on how , when and where forces can be used ) and start sending its troops into the conflict @-@ ridden south of the country . According to Supreme Allied Commander Europe ( SACEUR ) General James L. Jones it was not the lack of combat troops and the caveats were the problem , but the lack of adequate helicopters and military intelligence to support airlift and on @-@ the @-@ ground operations . 
 While the NATO countries in question refused to participate in the fighting in the south , they agreed to remove some of these national caveats , and in an emergency situation all national caveats should cease to exist , meaning that every ally should come to the aid of the forces that require assistance . A number of NATO member states also pledged to provide additional assets , including fighters , helicopters , infantry companies as well as training teams that will mentor the Afghan National Army . NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer said that the removal of some of the caveats meant that some 20 @,@ 000 of the 32 @,@ 000 NATO troops in ISAF are made " more usable " for combat duties and that 90 % of the formal mission requirements were now filled . Military sources however told reporters at the summit that these caveats never existed in emergency situations , adding that it would be a strange alliance where one country 's soldiers refused to support their allies in an emergency . NATO leaders also backed a French proposal to set up a " contact group " to coordinate action concerning Afghanistan , but the United States had reservations about France 's proposal to include Iran , which has considerable influence over the west of Afghanistan , in the proposed contact group due to the dispute over Iran 's nuclear programme . The group was modelled on the one set up for the Yugoslav Wars in the 1990s . 
 Political scientist Joseph Nye commented that " while the Riga summit relaxed some of these caveats to allow assistance to allies in dire circumstances , Britain , Canada , the Netherlands , and the US are doing most of the fighting in southern Afghanistan , while French , German , and Italian troops are deployed in the quieter north . It is difficult to see how NATO can succeed in stabilizing Afghanistan unless it is willing to commit more troops and give commanders more flexibility . " The controversy surrounding the differences in contributions to Afghanistan indeed remained after the summit . For instance , during March 2007 British commanders accused the NATO members that refused to fight in the conflict @-@ ridden south ( in non @-@ emergency situations ) as causing " huge resentment " and a sense of betrayal , and undermined the credibility of the alliance . They added that despite the earlier pleas for reinforcements or to have " operational caveats " removed , some countries , notably France and Germany , were still not heeding their requests . 
 Besides the above discussion about contributions and caveats , the summit was noticed to paint an optimistic picture of the war in Afghanistan and Afghanistan 's future . For instance , NATO Secretary @-@ General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer said that " real progress " had been made in Afghanistan and that this was the main highlight of the summit . He strongly disagreed with visions of " doom and gloom , " and added that five years after the defeat of the Taliban regime , Afghanistan had become a democratic society that is " no longer a threat to the world . " He also believed that the defeat of the insurgency was only a matter of time , stating that the war in Afghanistan " is winnable , it is being won , but it is not yet won because , of course , we have many challenges in Afghanistan . " In his opinion , these challenges included besides military engagement mainly reconstruction and development work . 
 = = = = Role of NATO = = = = 
 The second , more fundamental rift , concerned a discussion about whether NATO should form close relationships with countries far beyond NATO 's borders , in particular Australia , Japan and South Korea . The United States and some other NATO members pressed for a closer relationship with these countries . R. Nicholas Burns , Under Secretary for Political Affairs explained the US proposal : " We seek a partnership with them so that we can train more intensively ( ... ) and grow closer to them because we are deployed with them . Australia , South Korea and Japan are in Afghanistan . They have all been in Iraq ( ... ) [ and ] in the Balkans . " It was however not clear how far this plan would have gone in practice , but the US insisted they were not seeking to turn NATO into a global alliance : membership would not be offered to the prospective new partners . The idea of a " global " NATO however was strongly opposed by France , which considers NATO a regional defence alliance that should not spread its wings too far over the globe . The French Defence Minister Michele Alliot @-@ Marie summarized the position of France as follows : " The development of a global partnership could ... dilute the natural solidarity between Europeans and North Americans in a fuzzy entity [ and it would ] send a bad political message , that of a campaign launched by the West against those who don 't share their ideas . What a pretext we would offer to those who promote the idea of a clash of civilisations . " The summit did not reach a satisfying consensus on the future role of NATO and it was considered an exercise in " <unk> over cracks " , much more than it was ever a serious effort to decide on the future borders and core purposes . As a consequence the debate continued after the summit . 
 = = = Other topics = = = 
 = = = = Kosovo = = = = 
 At the Riga summit , NATO members confirmed the role of NATO @-@ led KFOR in the ensuring of a stable security environment there . This is perceived to be a reference to the possible United Nations decision in favour of independence . Because Serbia strongly opposes the break @-@ away of Kosovo , the resulting tensions between Serbia and Kosovo could create instability in the region . 
 = = = = Enhanced cooperation with non @-@ members = = = = 
 Enhanced cooperation with non @-@ member states closer at home was less controversial and two offers were made : an extension of Partnership for Peace membership , and a training initiative . 
 Partnership for Peace ( PfP ) membership was offered to Bosnia and Herzegovina , Montenegro and Serbia . NATO hoped that this would bring these countries more into the Euro @-@ Atlantic community as the PfP is a programme of practical bilateral cooperation between individual Partner countries and NATO , thereby allowing Partner countries to choose their own priorities for cooperation . It is expected that PfP membership is for these three countries the first step towards NATO membership . As a result , the PfP offer sparked the anger of the UN tribunal trying suspected war criminals from the Balkans . 
 NATO launched a Training Cooperation Initiative offering to share NATO training expertise with its Mediterranean Dialogue ( MD ) countries ( Mauritania , Morocco , Algeria , Tunisia , Egypt , Israel and Jordan ) and Istanbul Cooperation Initiative ( ICI ) countries . The initial phase included expanding those countries ' participation in relevant existing NATO training and education programmes , and the establishment of a Middle East faculty at the NATO Defense College in Rome . As a second phase , NATO would consider supporting the establishment of a Security Cooperation Centre in the region , to be owned by the MD and ICI countries , with regional funding and NATO assistance . Senior NATO staff have tended to highlight this project as evidence of NATO 's forward thinking and its desire to avoid becoming party to a " clash of civilizations " . 
 = = = = Comprehensive Political Guidance = = = = 
 Comprehensive Political Guidance ( CPG ) , a policy document that had been agreed by Defence Ministers in June 2006 and an addition to the 1999 Strategic Concept document , was formally endorsed during the summit . The CPG intends to provide a framework and political direction for NATO 's continuing transformation in the coming 10 to 15 years . More specifically , the document expresses the belief that the principal threats to the Alliance in the coming decades are terrorism , proliferation , failing states , regional crises , misuse of new technologies , and disruption of the flow of vital resources . According to this document , the Alliance should adapt to these new threats and sets out the Alliance vis @-@ a @-@ vis capability issues , planning disciplines and intelligence for the next 10 to 15 years , including among others the need for joint expeditionary forces and the capability to deploy and sustain them over long periods of time . The document further underlined that NATO 's forces should be able to conduct a variety of missions , from high to low intensity , and emphasized the likelihood that NATO will need to carry out a greater number and range of smaller operations . The CPG also confirmed the principle that 40 % of the member states ' military forces must be <unk> , and 8 % must constantly be on operations abroad . This principle makes it , among other things , possible to effectively compare the contributions made by various states , irrespective of the size of their populations . 
 The CPG policy document is regarded as self @-@ contradictory for at least two reasons . Firstly , it identified the two greatest threats to NATO as terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction ( WMD ) , whilst simultaneously reaffirming the 1999 Strategic Concept as " remaining valid " despite the fact that it barely mentioned these threats . Secondly , the document states that collective defence remains the core purpose of NATO , but at the same time emphasizes potential NATO contributions to conflict prevention and crisis management , and the potential planning and management of missions like that in Afghanistan . The Riga Declaration even described the capability for such missions as NATO 's " top priority " . Additionally , Jaap de Hoop Scheffer wanted and expected a new Strategic Concept to be debated and agreed upon by 2008 , reinforcing already existing views that the CPG will most likely last much less than the 10 to 15 years as the guiding policy document . 
 = = = = Energy security = = = = 
 The Riga summit was the first NATO summit which underscored the need for energy security , following the Russia @-@ Ukraine gas dispute . The " Riga Summit Declaration " ( par . 45 ) stated that " Alliance security interests can also be affected by the disruption of the flow of vital resources " and that it supported " a coordinated , international effort to assess risks to energy infrastructures and to promote energy infrastructure security . " It further states that NATO leaders " direct the Council in Permanent Session to consult on the most immediate risks in the field of energy security , in order to define those areas where NATO may add value to safeguard the security interests of the Allies and , upon request , assist national and international efforts . " Radio Free Europe reports that an unnamed diplomatic source told that several NATO leaders , including Latvian president Vaira <unk> @-@ Freiberga , had tried to make arrangements for bilateral talks concerning this topic with Russian president Vladimir Putin during the summit , but Putin instead attended the CIS energy summit in Minsk , Belarus on 28 November 2006 . In contrast , The Independent reported that the summit was marred by a diplomat fracas over an invitation to President Vladimir Putin and that he was eventually not invited , and that Putin as a result threatened that he would visit Latvia for the first time since independence during the summit in order to upstage the summit . It was even proposed that Putin could honour French president Jacques Chirac , who was at the summit and whose 74th birthday coincided with the summit , by visiting Latvia . He later made clear that this would not go ahead . 
 = = = = 2008 membership invitations = = = = 
 The NATO Heads of State and Government congratulated the efforts of the three Balkan states currently in NATO 's Membership Action Plan : Albania , Croatia and Macedonia , and declared that the Alliance intends to extend further invitations to these countries during the 2008 Bucharest Summit , on condition that these countries meet NATO standards . The Alliance also affirmed that NATO remained open to new European members under Article X of the North Atlantic Treaty , but remained largely silent on the prospects of Georgia and Ukraine , two countries that had declared membership as a goal , as the summit limited itself to noting the efforts of both countries to conduct an " intensified dialogue " with NATO . Nevertheless , Estonian Prime Minister Andrus <unk> said after the summit that he had discussed Georgia 's membership with US president Bush on 28 November . He further added that in his view Georgia had " very good chances " to join NATO if the planned reforms would continue and that a Membership Action Plan , the next necessary step on Georgia 's way towards membership , was only " a small step away " . Preceding the summit , it was expected that Ukraine was on a fast track to membership : it was believed that Ukraine would have received an invitation to a Membership Action Plan during the summit , followed by an invitation to join in 2008 and membership in 2010 . According to political scientist Taras Kuzio the summit showed that Georgia rapidly moved ahead of Ukraine in its drive to join NATO , even though it joined the Intensified Dialogue program a year later than Ukraine , because president of Ukraine Viktor Yushchenko failed to support a pro @-@ Western Orange revolution coalition following the Ukraine 's parliamentary elections of March 2006 . In other words , Ukraine showed more ambivalence in its desire to join NATO , whereas in Georgia the pro @-@ Western Rose Revolution coalition remained united . 
 = = = = NATO Response Force = = = = 
 NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer announced that the NATO Response Force was finally fully operational since all capabilities necessary were in place . The force is believed to be capable of performing missions worldwide across the whole spectrum of operations ( such as evacuations , disaster management , counterterrorism , and acting as " an initial entry force " ) and can number up to 25 @,@ 000 troops and should be able to start to deploy after five days ' notice and sustain itself for operations lasting 30 days or longer if resupplied . The heads of state and government also agreed to share the costs of airlift for the short notice deployments of the Response Force . 
 = = = = 2010 Theatre Missile Defence = = = = 
 In September 2006 , NATO selected an international consortium led by Science Applications International Corporation ( SAIC ) to build an Integration Test Bed for the Alliance 's future Active Layered Theatre Missile Defence ( ALTBMD ) capability . After two months of negotiations , ALTBMD Programme Manager , General ( Ret ) Billard , and SAIC contracting Officer , Mr. Robert <unk> , signed the contract on the first day of NATO 's Riga Summit . This decision was based on an unpublished report agreed upon earlier by NATO ministers following a study into the feasibility of theatre missile defences . 
 This programme is one of three programmes that NATO is pursuing in the area of missile defence . The contract puts the Alliance on track for having , by 2010 , a system to protect troops on missions against ballistic missiles . The contract is worth approximately 75 million EUR for work that would be conducted over a period of six years . The theatre missile defence would be a multi @-@ layered system of systems , comprising early warning system sensors , radar and various interceptors . While NATO member countries would provide the sensors and weapon systems , NATO itself would develop a commonly funded NATO architecture to integrate all of these elements . The development of the ALTBMD system was agreed by NATO members in large part because it is limited . NATO members are deeply divided about the multi @-@ tiered <unk> architecture promoted by the US Missile Defense Agency ( MDA ) . 
 = = Views on the summit = = 
 For the three former USSR republics Latvia , Estonia and Lithuania such a high @-@ level event was held for the first time in the region . As a consequence it held a symbolic meaning . It is perceived to have increased the visibility of these three Baltic states as NATO members . 
 = Chicago bid for the 2016 Summer Olympics = 
 The Chicago bid for the 2016 Summer Olympics and Paralympics was an unsuccessful bid , first recognized by the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) on September 14 , 2007 . The IOC shortlisted four of the seven applicant cities — Madrid , Spain ; Tokyo , Japan ; Rio de Janeiro , Brazil ; and Chicago , United States ; over Baku , Azerbaijan ; Doha , Qatar ; and Prague , Czech Republic — on June 4 , 2008 , during a meeting in Athens , Greece . This was followed by an intensive bidding process which finished with the election of Rio de Janeiro at the 121st IOC Session in Copenhagen , Denmark , on October 2 , 2009 . 
 In Chicago 's bid , the games would have been held from July 22 to August 7 , with the Paralympics held between August 12 and August 28 . The bid plan emphasized use of Chicago Park District parks to host the games , but other existing facilities such as Soldier Field and McCormick Place would have hosted events . The bid included a plan for North Side , Downtown Loop and South Side celebration locations that would have had high @-@ definition LED screens for <unk> visitors . The bid noted that there was a very high concentration of event locations and training facilities close to each other and that the majority of event sites were clustered together . Thus , the vast majority of athletes would have been close to their competitions . 
 Chicago earned a general score of 7 @.@ 0 during the Applicant phase , after a detailed study of the Applicant Files received by the IOC Working Group on January 14 , 2008 . Between April 4 and April 7 , 2009 , the IOC Evaluation Commission , led by Nawal El Moutawakel , arrived in Chicago to assess the conditions of the city . The Commission attended technical presentations , participated in question @-@ and @-@ answer sessions about the Candidature File , and made inspections in all the existing venues across the city . Though considered a favorite entering the voting process , and despite personal appeals from such high @-@ profile Chicagoans as U.S. President Barack Obama , Michelle Obama , Hillary Clinton , and Oprah Winfrey , Chicago was eliminated on the first ballot in IOC voting on October 2 , 2009 , with 18 votes in a three @-@ round exhaustive ballot of the IOC . 
 The United States Olympic Committee ( USOC ) selected Chicago over Houston , Los Angeles , Philadelphia and San Francisco as its candidate city to host the 2016 Summer Olympics and 2016 Summer Paralympics on April 14 , 2007 . This is the city 's third failure , after two failed attempts for the 1952 and the 1956 Summer Olympics ( and fourth overall attempt , as Chicago won the 1904 Olympics , but they were moved to St Louis as the World 's Fair was there and threatened to host a competing competition if the Olympics were not moved ) . Numerous Olympic Games in North America , including the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver , Canada , hurt Chicago 's bid . It would have been the ninth Olympics hosted in the United States , after the 1904 , 1932 , 1984 and 1996 Summer Olympics ; and the 1932 , 1960 , 1980 and 2002 Winter Olympics . 
 = = USOC city selection = = 
 Initially , five American cities vied for the 2016 Olympics : Chicago , Houston , Los Angeles , Philadelphia , and San Francisco . The USOC 's chairman at the time , Peter Ueberroth , visited all potential host cities during April and May 2006 . He visited Chicago on May 10 . On July 26 , 2006 , the United States Olympic Committee ( USOC ) narrowed its list of American applicant cities to three : Chicago , Los Angeles and San Francisco . San Francisco withdrew its application on November 13 , 2006 after the San Francisco 49ers pulled out of a deal for the construction of a new stadium that would be the centerpiece of the games . 
 The final stage of the USOC internal selection occurred on April 14 , 2007 , at Washington , D.C. ' s Embassy Row Hotel , where the two remaining bid cities , Chicago and Los Angeles , made a last 40 @-@ minute presentation to the USOC board members . At about 21 : 00 UTC , Chicago was announced as the winner of the United States bid for the 2016 Olympic Games by Ueberroth . 
 = = Bid details = = 
 Chicago has had prior experience with Olympic bids . In 1901 , the city was unanimously chosen by the IOC to stage the 1904 Summer Olympics , but the Games were moved to St. Louis to coincide with the 1904 World 's Fair . Chicago also bid for the 1952 and 1956 Summer Olympics , without success . Mayor of Chicago Richard M. Daley visited Beijing – host city of the 2008 Summer Olympics – on May 15 , 2006 , where he collected information on hosting . The bidding process for the 2016 Olympic Games was officially launched on May 16 , 2007 . 
 In June 2007 , Olympic bid committee Chairman and CEO , Patrick G. Ryan announced that David P. Bolger was appointed chief operating officer and Rick Ludwig as chief financial officer . 
 The Chicago 2016 Olympic bid committee announced the details of the Olympic bid application on January 15 , 2008 . 22 of the 27 Olympic venues will be in four clusters within 15 km of the Olympic Village . Five new venues and eleven temporary venues would have been built for the games at a cost $ 49 @.@ 3 million ; these construction costs , and the costs of the games were to be borne by the private sector , with the government financing the infrastructure . 
 The bid committee filed a 600 @-@ page candidacy file with the IOC in Lausanne , Switzerland on February 12 , 2009 . The file responded to 227 questions given to each candidate city . On February 13 , the candidacy file with the final version of Chicago 's 2016 Olympic plan was publicly released . 
 Chicago 's bid was supported by major preliminary corporate commitments , philanthropic efforts by wealthy Chicagoans , promised planning participation by a wide range of community and government leaders , and the enthusiasm of the citizenry . Local support for the bid on the South Side , particularly in the Washington Park and Woodlawn community areas , was divided . Ben <unk> , a Chicago Reader columnist , was one of the strongest critics of the Chicago 2016 bid . However , 2007 opinion polls indicated 76 percent public support . In 2009 , as the final selection approached , opponents of the bid became vocal even though organizers seemed to be pleased with the bid 's progress and presentation . Peter Ueberroth stated , " Chicago is going in the right direction , and we are impressed by that . " 
 Long @-@ time Chicago resident and current President of the United States Barack Obama was a supporter of Chicago 's bid since its inception and noted his support during his Presidential election victory speech in Grant Park . President Barack Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama traveled to Denmark to support Chicago 's bid for the 2016 Summer Olympics . Michael Jordan was an unofficial spokesman for Chicago 's bid . Chicago media mogul Oprah Winfrey and Olympic champion Michael Phelps had been widely promoting the bid since the 2008 Summer Olympics . 
 The bid plan emphasized use of Chicago Park District parks ( Washington Park , Burnham Park , Lincoln Park , Douglas Park and Grant Park ) . In addition , existing facilities such as Soldier Field and McCormick Place would have hosted events . In addition to the event sites , the bid included North side , downtown Loop and South Side celebration locations in Lincoln and Grant Parks as well as the Midway Plaisance respectively that would have had <unk> for <unk> visitors . The bid noted the high concentration of event locations ; the majority of event sites would have been clustered together . 
 = = = Financing = = = 
 Ueberroth and members of the national committee met with Daley on May 10 , 2006 , for the initial assessment . Daley appointed business executive Patrick G. Ryan of Aon Corporation , part @-@ owner of the Chicago Bears , to lead the city 's bid process , especially in areas of corporate participation in fundraising . 
 Mayor Daley said on May 10 , 2006 that the Olympics " cannot become a financial burden to the taxpayers of Chicago and Illinois . " " The goal is to have the Olympics be totally privately funded and we have unparalleled support from the business community , " a mayoral spokeswoman said in July 2006 . Daley insisted that no tax money would be used to pay for the city to host the 2016 Summer Olympic Games and said funding from the private sector and federal dollars for security and infrastructure would cover the costs . " Tax money isn 't paying for it , " Daley said on February 7 , 2009 . " The federal government pays for security , which is the highest cost of the Olympics ... The other thing they pay for is infrastructure ... There 's no city tax money whatsoever ... We are very strong in that position ... in the regard to having that be sponsored by the private sector and others . " In previous years , Daley opposed possible bids for the 2008 and 2012 Olympic Games owing to former international committee financial @-@ guarantee requirements . The 2016 financial guarantee requirements were not initially formalized . 
 Early cost estimates hovered at $ 5 billion , with $ 1 @.@ 1 billion for the lakeside Olympic Village and an additional estimated $ 366 million for a temporary 80 @,@ 000 seat Olympic Stadium to be built in Washington Park . Nonetheless , the proposed budget was small in comparison to the Beijing Olympics , which are estimated to have cost $ 40 billion . Further , the 2004 Olympic games in Athens , initially budgeted to cost $ 2 @.@ 4 billion , in fact cost $ 9 billion . On April 11 , 2007 , former Governor of Illinois Rod Blagojevich proposed $ 150 million in state funding to help secure the bid to the USOC for Chicago . Current Governor Pat Quinn stated that he would be willing to support any funding necessary to secure the Olympics for Chicago . By April 14 , over $ 35 million in cash and $ 13 million in goods had been pledged , including donations in excess of $ 100 @,@ 000 from at least 225 individuals and corporations . Chicago had strong allies to pursue federal funds for security and transportation : U.S. Senator Dick Durbin was the second in command among Democratic Senators as the Whip , and former Senator Barack Obama had become the President of the United States . The city announced a $ 500 million insurance policy against cost overruns and revenue shortfalls . 
 = = = Venues = = = 
 Despite the current lack of an Olympic stadium , Chicago has dozens of existing sport venues : Soldier Field , United Center , U.S. Cellular Field , Wrigley Field , Allstate Arena in Rosemont , Sears Centre in Hoffman Estates , and Toyota Park in Bridgeview . Venues at Loyola University Chicago , Northwestern University , the University of Chicago , the University of Illinois at Chicago , Chicago State University , Northern Illinois University , and the University of Illinois at Urbana – Champaign , among others , were also available and had been mentioned in early news reports as possibilities . Northerly Island and the lakefront along Lake Michigan would have hosted all beach and water events . The McCormick Place convention center , the second largest in the world , was the planned venue for indoor events like judo and weightlifting , as well as hosting all press offices , while Archery and the medals podium were slated for Grant Park . 
 Preliminary soccer matches would have been played in several venues , of which a few were slated to have been temporarily renamed in line with the IOC prohibition against corporate naming rights sponsorships to be used for venue names . These venues included MetLife Stadium in East Rutherford , New Jersey ( which would have been temporarily renamed " New York Field " for the Olympics ) ; the Rose Bowl in Pasadena , California ; Lincoln Financial Field ( " Philadelphia Field " ) in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania ; the Edward Jones Dome in St. Louis , Missouri ( " St. Louis Dome " ) ; FedExField in Landover , Maryland ( " Landover Field " ) ; and TCF Bank Stadium ( " Minneapolis Stadium " ) , a new stadium which opened in September 2009 on the campus of the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis , Minnesota . 
 Swimming events were originally planned to be held in the West Side 's Douglas Park , but in a December 2008 plan revision the swimming events would have moved to Washington Park and a velodrome for track and BMX cycling events would have moved from Northerly Island to Douglas Park . The Cycling hub will be in Madison , Wisconsin . 
 While some venues might have changed at short notice , the Chicago 2016 Bid Book indicated that the following venues would have been permanently constructed : an Aquatic Center , the Olympic Stadium ( to a limited long @-@ term degree ) , a Canoe / <unk> / Rowing area at Monroe Harbor , a Canoe / Kayak @-@ Slalom Course , a velodrome in Douglas Park , and Field Hockey Fields in Jackson Park . 
 = = = = Rowing = = = = 
 The Monroe Harbor would have been enlarged with a $ 60 @-@ million breakwater to accommodate an approximately 2 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) course for rowing events . This would have enabled rowing competitions to take place on a course running from Northerly Island to about Randolph Street . This course would have featured a picturesque Chicago Loop skyline backdrop for television viewing , which by 2016 might have included the Chicago Spire , if it was completed . In order to accommodate the Olympics , all non @-@ Olympic watercraft would have been required to vacate Monroe Harbor for a year . Canoeing events would have been held in the former location of Meigs Field on Northerly Island near the Adler Planetarium . Historically , this site staged some venues for the 1933 World 's Fair . 
 = = = = Stadium = = = = 
 The Olympic Stadium would have been built in Washington Park , a site listed on the National Register of Historic Places in the Washington Park community area of the same name on the city 's south side . Chicago initially proposed building a temporary 80 @,@ 000 @-@ seat track stadium adjacent to Soldier Field and having the two stadiums host dual Opening and Closing Ceremonies . However , the final proposal called for a $ 366 million temporary stadium to be built in Washington Park . The stadium would have been replaced by a 10 @,@ 000 seat multi @-@ use venue after the games . The smaller post @-@ Olympic stadium would have been more in line with public interest in restoring the historic park after the games . The new stadium would have featured a high @-@ tech reflective sheathing material to accommodate huge TV picture projections on its outside walls . The temporary stadium would not have had concessions inside the stadium , unlike permanent local venues , although concessions were planned outside the stadium . The stadium would have featured a basic oval shape , but it would also have adhered to Olympic design rules which dictate that there must be an overhanging lip at one end to cover dignitaries and the media . IOC president Jacques Rogge praised Chicago 's design in November 2007 as a possible " blueprint for the future " , reflecting the desire of the IOC to make the games both more affordable and to have a smaller ecological footprint on the host city . 
 = = = = Olympic Village = = = = 
 The Olympic Village for housing athletes during the games would have been a $ 1 @.@ 1 @-@ billion series of newly constructed lakefront buildings that would have been converted to rental and condominium units after the games . The village was to be located immediately south of McCormick Place , which was expected to host 11 event venues , on a current truck parking lot between South Lake Shore Drive and the Illinois Central Railroad tracks in the Near South Side and Douglas community areas . At the time , the parking lot was being used to stage events at McCormick Place . The village was slated to have <unk> over Lake Shore Drive . This location was meant to enable 88 % of the Olympic athletes to be within 15 minutes of their competition venue . 
 Initially , the Olympic Village was to be located entirely on the McCormick Place truck yards , but in November 2006 , The Michael Reese Hospital site became listed for sale . Planners determined that the Hospital site would likely have been superior in terms of lower cost and more successful urban planning implementation . In November 2007 , Mayor Daley announced a plan to acquire the 37 @-@ acre ( 150 @,@ 000 m2 ) site , and the following June the hospital decided that it would cease operations . In July 2008 the city announced its official bid for the property : The city planned to borrow $ 85 million to buy the Michael Reese Hospital campus , near 31st and King Drive , from its current owner , Medline Industries . Medline would only get $ 65 million , because the company agreed to make a $ 20 million “ charitable contribution ” back to the city . The city would use that $ 20 million to pay up to five years of interest on its $ 85 million debt , demolish the hospital , and clean up the site . Then sometime in the next couple years it planned to sell the site for at least $ 85 million to a developer or developers , who in turn were expected to build a complex big enough to house about 15 @,@ 000 Olympians . After the games the developer would sell or rent out the units . 
 In September 2008 , the city realized it had underestimated demolition and environmental cleanup costs , which put the transaction at risk . Additionally in September the Associated Press reported a recalcitrant property owner may force the hospital site to be abandoned . These problems needed resolution by the bid committee by February 2009 , the date which bid books were due . That month , the city requested a renegotiation of terms and within a week Michael Reese hospital filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy . In December 2008 , new terms for the deal became public . Although original financing plans included no taxpayer funding , the late deal was only possible with $ 500 million of taxpayer participation via a guarantee by the city to cover possible revenue shortfall and $ 45 million for Chicago Police Department costs . In addition , in early 2008 , records were uncovered that show the campus of Michael Reese Hospital to have been designed , in large part , by one of the twentieth century 's most well @-@ respected modernist architects , Walter Gropius . Thus , the plan for the Olympic Village battled the growing belief that preserving the old hospital campus would be better from an urban planning and historic preservation standpoint , and also rose questions about financing the village . In addition , the planned demolition of 28 buildings put the sustainability record the city was attempting to create in question . 
 = = = Sports culture = = = 
 Chicago benefited from a strong sports culture . On August 1 , 2006 , it was named Best Sports City in the US by Sporting News . Chicagoans are famous for their rabid support of their home teams : the Chicago Bears , Chicago Bulls , Chicago Cubs , Chicago White Sox , Chicago Blackhawks , Chicago Wolves , and more recently , Chicago Sky ( WNBA ) , Chicago Fire , the Chicago Red Stars ( the new women 's soccer team ) , and the Chicago Machine . Other events such as the Chicago Marathon , one of the five World Marathon Majors , will also play a part in Chicago 's Olympic @-@ planning process . 
 = = = Experience = = = 
 Chicago has hosted major and historic world gatherings in the past , including the famous 1893 World 's Columbian Exposition , the 1933 Century of Progress Exposition and the 1959 Pan American Games , as well as matches for the 1994 FIFA World Cup soccer tournament . Chicago has also hosted the most United States presidential nominating conventions . Chicago was scheduled to host the 1904 Summer Olympics , but the games were instead relocated to St. Louis to coincide with its Louisiana Purchase Exposition , more commonly known as the Saint Louis World 's Fair . Chicago was also the first host of the Special Olympics in 1968 . 
 More recently , Chicago hosted the Gay Games VII in July 2006 , and the 2007 AIBA Boxing Championships in October 2007 . The championships were a qualifying event for the 2008 Summer Olympics and a chance for Chicago to showcase its staging skills to IOC members . AIBA head Dr. Ching @-@ kuo Wu enthused the tournament was the " best ever " , especially considering the short six @-@ month lead time Chicago had to organize the games . 
 = = = Logo = = = 
 On May 16 , 2007 , Chicago was informed that its logo , a representation of a torch with the flames reminiscent of Chicago 's skyline , violated IOC rules against using Olympic torch imagery . Bidding rules prohibit logos containing the Olympic symbol , motto , flag or other imagery including a flame , torch or medal . Chicago agreed to revise the logo . The current redesigned logo was released on September 19 , 2007 . Using the same color palette , a unique six @-@ pointed Chicago star represents a compass pointing in all directions reaching out to the world . Each point represents an Olympic value : Hope , Respect , Harmony , Friendship , Excellence and Celebration . The warm colors initially represented in the flame ( or top ) of the image refer to the sun , the cool colors represent the green parklands and blue waters of Lake Michigan . Initially beneath the logo were the words " Applicant City " . Both logos were designed by Chicago @-@ based design firm <unk> Partners . 
 Chicago not only changed its logo , but relaunched its campaign . It changed its motto from " Stir the soul " to " Let friendship shine " . Chicago used social media more than any other city bidding , and was keen to make 2016 a ‘ New Media Olympics ’ . It established a number of groups on Facebook , and on September 29 , 2009 the bid 's official page surpassed 100 @,@ 000 members ; it also used Flickr and Twitter . 
 Chicago City Council alderman Edward M. Burke proposed that a fifth star be added to the Flag of Chicago if the city won its bid for the Olympic games in 2016 . 
 = = = Bid factors = = = 
 The bid relied on Chicago 's strength in medical services and doping control , security , accommodations , transportation , technology and media operations . The city 's transportation infrastructure includes the Chicago Transit Authority , which operates a vast network of buses and elevated / subway ' L ' trains , and the Metra and South Shore Line commuter rail services that connects more than 230 suburban destinations to Chicago . These transportation options would have allowed public transit access to the Games for city residents and people throughout northeastern Illinois into northern Indiana and southern Wisconsin . 
 Chicago 's main airport , O 'Hare International Airport is the second @-@ busiest airport in the world . The Chicago region is served by two other major commercial airports , Midway and Milwaukee 's General Mitchell International Airport , along with several smaller airports . The city is served by all major worldwide airlines , and O 'Hare is an international hub for both American and United Airlines , while Midway is a hub for domestic carrier Southwest Airlines . There is also a considerable network of rail lines and interstate highways in the region . Chicago has over 30 @,@ 000 hotel rooms in the immediate downtown area alone , and it has the largest skilled @-@ labor workforce in the US catering to conventions and other large @-@ scale media events . 
 Chicago is in the Central Time Zone ( UTC − 5 during the summer months ) , which is very is well @-@ suited to North American television coverage . The NBC television network with its sister cable broadcasters is by far the largest media vendor and contract purchaser of the Olympic Games . 
 = = Domain name dispute = = 
 Trademark controversies arose for " <unk> " and " <unk> " , when both were registered in 2004 by entrepreneur Stephen Frayne Jr . , an MBA student at the Kellogg School of Management ; he also claimed around 40 other domain names whose city / year format mimicked the way Olympic Games are marketed . Frayne 's stated intent for the site was a " comprehensive , balanced discussion " of the benefits and pitfalls of holding the Olympics in Chicago ; the Chicago 2016 committee contended that his real intent was to profit from cybersquatting . The Chicago Olympic bid organization , which had been using <unk> as its official web site , sought control of <unk> through a complaint filed with an international arbitration organization . Attempts by the USOC to have the World Intellectual Property Organization ( WIPO ) release the names failed . Frayne sued in the U.S. District Court in Chicago , seeking an injunction against the arbitration proceedings . On September 25 , 2008 , the WIPO arbitration panel granted Frayne 's motion to suspend and terminate proceedings setting up a battle in the federal court in the Northern District of Illinois . 
 The Olympic bid candidature documentation published by the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) states that each bid must " ... provide documentation indicating that appropriate measures have been taken to register domain names that are of value to your candidature such as ' [ City ] 2016 ' followed by extensions .com <unk> <unk> as well as the country code concerned . " 
 = = Outcome = = 
 = = = Outlook = = = 
 Chicago made the Candidate city shortlist in June 2008 as one of four finalists to host the 2016 Olympic games . Its technical ranking by the IOC was 7 @.@ 0 ; generally beyond the 6 @.@ 0 minimum threshold , but trailing behind Tokyo and Madrid 's bids . ( Technical qualities are only part of the final selection process . ) The final selection from Madrid , Spain ; Rio de Janeiro , Brazil was made on October 2 , 2009 , in Copenhagen , Denmark . 
 In 2007 , USOC head Peter Ueberroth contended that Chicago was in " third or fourth place " , with a need to focus more on the international relations rather than just having a stronger technical bid . In September 2009 , the IOC gave a written evaluation of the venues , budgets , transportation plans and public support . Chicago 's bid was not federally underwritten , unlike other bid cities , which concerned the IOC , given declining tax revenue during a major recession in the US economy . Nevertheless , with Chicago 's strong hosting of the AIBA Boxing Championships which exposed the city to many IOC members , the city was cited as a current favorite , and one member claimed the Games were " theirs to lose . " Chicago also successfully hosted the 2006 Gay Games , another multinational sporting event . Both events were planned with short lead times . 
 In April 2009 , the Chicago 2016 bid committee was the first of the four finalists to host the 13 @-@ member IOC Evaluation Commission . They presented twenty films to the committee . Among the video spokespersons were Hillary Clinton ( raised in suburban Chicago ) and Michael Jordan . In addition to meeting with bid organizers , the IOC commission met with bid opposition groups when they visited . After the IOC commission left Chicago , the Chicago City Council approved an Olympic Community Agreement ordinance that was drafted by Alderman Toni Preckwinkle . The agreement committed 30 percent of Olympic Village units to affordable housing conversion and guarantees women and minorities a portion of Olympic @-@ related contracts . Former Illinois Senate President Emil Jones derided the agreement as an inadequate deal . Some Chicago residents opposed to the Chicago bid , particularly because of the financial implications of the undertaking to Chicago residents , launched a website called " <unk> " to persuade the IOC to give the Olympics to Rio instead . In a public poll , Chicago residents were almost evenly divided on the bid , with 47 % supporting and 45 % not supporting . 
 = = = IOC vote = = = 
 On October 2 , 2009 , Chicago was knocked out in the first round of voting , and the Olympics went to Rio de Janeiro , despite some high profile backers , such as US President Barack Obama and Chicago @-@ based television hostess Oprah Winfrey , going to Copenhagen to support the bid . 
 Since balloting is secret and IOC members rarely share their voting tendencies , there has been much speculation as to why Chicago lost the Olympic bid so early in the process . Michelle Higgins on The New York Times blog argued that an overly restrictive passport and visa policy was one such reason . CBS 2 Chicago 's website suggested that anti @-@ Americanism may have contributed . Bid CEO Patrick Ryan was quoted in the Chicago Sun @-@ Times as saying " bloc voting " and assumptions by others in the IOC that Chicago had enough votes to make it to the second round of voting led to its early demise . The same article hinted at fractious relations , noted by The Seattle Times , between the IOC and USOC over the corporate background of the USOC executives and the " inordinate " share of revenue that they receive . 
 = Interstate 470 ( Kansas ) = 
 Interstate 470 ( I @-@ 470 ) is a 13 @.@ 72 @-@ mile ( 22 @.@ 08 km ) loop highway that bypasses the downtown area of Topeka , Kansas . I @-@ 470 begins at an interchange with Interstate 70 in western Topeka and heads generally southeast , running concurrent with U.S. Route 75 ( US @-@ 75 ) . The concurrency with US @-@ 75 ends 5 @.@ 74 miles ( 9 @.@ 24 km ) later at the Burlingame Road interchange . I @-@ 470 becomes part of the Kansas Turnpike at its junction with Interstate 335 . From there , the highway heads generally northeast through the southeastern sections of Topeka . After traveling 7 @.@ 03 miles ( 11 @.@ 31 km ) as the Kansas Turnpike , I @-@ 470 reaches its eastern terminus with Interstate 70 . The highway has annual average daily traffic values as high as 43 @,@ 000 west of Gage Boulevard to as low as 10 @,@ 370 near the eastern terminus with Interstate 70 . As an interstate highway , Interstate 470 is a part of the United States National Highway System . The non @-@ turnpike portions of the highway are maintained by the Kansas Department of Transportation , while the turnpike portion is maintained by the Kansas Turnpike Authority . 
 The Kansas Turnpike was opened in the 1950s , comprising the eastern portion of the route . In the late 1950s construction began on the western portion of I @-@ 470 , and on October 21 , 1960 , the western section of I @-@ 470 was dedicated and opened to traffic . In 1982 , Interstate 470 was designated as " Martin Luther King Jr . Memorial Highway " . The routing of I @-@ 470 has not changed since the completion of the highway . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Free segment = = = 
 Interstate 470 begins on the west side of Topeka at an interchange with I @-@ 70 , US @-@ 40 , and K @-@ 4 . US @-@ 75 approaches the interchange from the east and joins I @-@ 470 . The two routes head southeastward along the western edge of the city . Along this stretch of the Interstate , there are three interchanges ; Huntoon / Wanamaker , 21st , and 29th / Fairlawn . Because of both the southeast @-@ to @-@ northwest alignment of the road and the proximity of two cross @-@ streets , the Huntoon / Wanamaker and 29th / Fairlawn interchanges are each made up of two half @-@ diamond interchanges , with entrances and exits on two different streets depending on direction . At the Huntoon / Wanamaker interchange , traffic leaving eastbound I @-@ 470 is deposited onto Huntoon Street . Vehicles merging onto eastbound I @-@ 470 must access the entrance ramp from Wanamaker Road . The intersection of Huntoon and Wanamaker is adjacent to the freeway . The 29th / Fairlawn interchange is constructed similarly to the Huntoon / Wanamaker interchange , while the 21st Street interchange is a standard diamond interchange . Through southern Topeka , I @-@ 470 / US @-@ 75 curve to the east @-@ southeast where they intersect Gage Boulevard . Further southeast , US @-@ 75 splits away from I @-@ 470 at a complex interchange with Burlingame Road . Just east of the US @-@ 75 interchange , a trumpet interchange provides access to Topeka Boulevard . 
 = = = Kansas Turnpike segment = = = 
 The highway then passes through a toll plaza and merges onto the Kansas Turnpike , starting the tolled portion of the highway . This junction also marks the northern end of I @-@ 335 . I @-@ 470 and the Kansas Turnpike head northeast towards I @-@ 70 . The tollway continues northeastward through southeastern Topeka , passing near to Lake Shawnee and eventually reaching I @-@ 470 's terminus at I @-@ 70 , which the turnpike carries east . 
 = = Maintenance = = 
 The non @-@ turnpike portion of the freeway is maintained by the Kansas Department of Transportation ( KDOT ) . As part of this role , KDOT surveys traffic on Kansas highways in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) . In 2011 , KDOT calculated that as few as 10 @,@ 400 vehicles used I @-@ 470 daily along the Kansas Turnpike near the I @-@ 70 interchange and as many as 41 @,@ 300 vehicles used I @-@ 470 daily between the Gage Boulevard interchange and the 29th Street interchange . The portions of I @-@ 470 that are part of the Kansas Turnpike fall under the purview of the Kansas Turnpike Authority , which is responsible for operating and maintaining the Kansas Turnpike . Being part of the Interstate Highway System , the entirety of I @-@ 470 is listed on the National Highway System , a system of roads that are important to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 The section of I @-@ 470 that now runs along the Kansas Turnpike was opened in 1956 , and was the first part of I @-@ 470 to be built . After the founding of the Interstate Highway System that same year , several Interstate freeways were planned through Topeka , including I @-@ 70 and I @-@ 470 . Construction began on I @-@ 470 after I @-@ 70 's completion to Topeka . The segment of the I @-@ 470 freeway from the I @-@ 70 interchange to the Kansas Turnpike , most of which is concurrent with US @-@ 75 , was built by Koss Construction Company and was under construction until 1960 . On October 21 , 1960 , the western section of I @-@ 470 was dedicated by the state highway department and the Kansas Turnpike Authority and opened to traffic . Since completion of the freeway , the route has not been changed . In 1982 , Interstate 470 was dedicated as " Martin Luther King Jr . Memorial Highway " . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The exits on the Kansas Turnpike portion of I @-@ 470 follow the Turnpike 's mileposts . The entire route is in Topeka , Shawnee County . 
 = Pizza cheese = 
 Pizza cheese encompasses several varieties and types of cheeses and dairy products that are designed and manufactured for use specifically on pizza . These include processed and modified cheese such as mozzarella @-@ like processed cheeses and mozzarella variants . The term can also refer to any type of cheese suitable for use on pizza . The most popular cheeses used in the preparation of pizza are mozzarella ( accounting for about 30 % ) , <unk> , cheddar and Parmesan . Emmental , Romano and ricotta are often used as toppings , and processed pizza cheeses manufactured specifically for pizza are mass @-@ produced . Some mass @-@ produced pizza cheeses are frozen after manufacturing and shipped frozen . 
 Processed pizza cheese is manufactured to produce optimal qualities in browning , melting , stretchiness and fat and moisture content . Several studies and experiments have analyzed the impact of vegetable oil , manufacturing and culture processes , denatured whey proteins and other changes to create ideal and economical pizza cheeses . In 1997 it was estimated that annual production of pizza cheese products was 2 billion pounds in the United States and 200 million pounds in Europe , and in 2000 demand for the product in Europe was increasing by 8 % per year . The trend of steadily @-@ increasing production and consumption of mozzarella and pizza cheese continued into the first decade of the 21st century in the United States . 
 = = Varieties and types = = 
 The International Dictionary of Food and Cooking defines pizza cheese as " a soft spun @-@ curd cheese similar to Mozzarella made from cow 's milk ... " that is " ... used particularly for pizzas and contains somewhat less water than real Mozzarella ... " Most are at least 95 percent Mozzarella , with different moisture and fat densities . Cheese for frozen pizzas may be comminuted , in which the cheese is processed into minute granules or fragments . Low @-@ moisture Mozzarella can be formulated specifically for pizza . Cheese may be processed into blocks , from which the product can be grated , made into granules or sliced for use on pizza or other foods . Pizza cheese frequently consists of a blend of two or more cheeses , such as low @-@ moisture Mozzarella or Provolone . Low @-@ moisture Mozzarella was first manufactured in dairy factories in the Midwestern United States , and was originally called " pizza cheese " . Compared to standard Mozzarella , low @-@ moisture Mozzarella has a firmer texture , is easier to grate , has better browning and melting characteristics , and is less perishable . 
 Globally , Mozzarella is the most popular pizza cheese . However , it has been estimated that in the United States only 30 % of all pizza cheese used is actual Mozzarella . Provolone is the second most popular one . Cheddar may be mixed with Mozzarella to preserve <unk> . <unk> Parmesan may be added to the top of a pizza , and typically does not melt well when cooked . A diverse variety of processed pizza cheeses are produced , including analogue cheese . Provel is one example . Other pizza cheeses include Emmental , Romano and Ricotta for <unk> or as a topping . 
 Several cheeses may be mixed together in its formulation , and each has individual browning and blistering characteristics . For example , a combination of Mozzarella and Cheddar may blister less when cooked compared to other combinations , because cheddar has less elasticity , while Mozzarella and <unk> may brown less compared to other combinations . 
 = = = Processed pizza cheeses = = = 
 <unk> and processed pizza cheese dairy products that are designed to melt well and remain chewy are used on many mass @-@ produced pizzas in North America and the United Kingdom . These types of cheeses are referred to as analogue ( or analog ) pizza cheese In the book Technology of <unk> , editors Law and <unk> state that analogue pizza cheese appears to be the leading type of cheese analogue produced globally . Each year in the United States , 700 million frozen pizzas are sold , three @-@ quarters of which contain cheese substitutes . 
 Analogue pizza cheeses may be formulated for processing with less sophisticated cheese @-@ making equipment than is required for Mozzarella cheese , such as using simple mixing and molding . They tend to have a soft texture and once melted , may have a slightly " stringy " quality when pulled or bitten into . They may lack in a fusion , or melting together of the shredded product when cooked , in which the cheese gels together . New stabilizer systems have been developed that have helped to enable the creation of analogue pizza cheeses . 
 An example of a processed pizza cheese is Provel , which uses Cheddar , Swiss , and Provolone cheeses as <unk> . Some analogue types are made with casein , a by @-@ product of milk , and vegetable oil , rather than milk fat . <unk> @-@ based Mozzarella @-@ like imitation processed cheeses prepared using rennet are also used as a Mozzarella substitute on frozen pizzas . 
 In some instances , the production of analogue pizza cheese can be similar to the production of cream cheese , although production may be different and homogenization may be avoided . In some varieties , the product is heated to remain at a specific temperature and for a specific amount of time , which causes the proteins in the mix to gelatinize . During this process , salts in the mix serve to <unk> it and thus improve the <unk> of the final product . The heated product is then placed in packaging such as bags @-@ in @-@ boxes while still hot , as it is more easily handled in this state compared to when in a solid state . During packaging , these types of pizza cheeses are then quick @-@ cooled to avoid browning of the product , which can occur vis @-@ a @-@ vis the Maillard reaction . 
 = = Research and development = = 
 Manufacturers and academics have conducted studies and experiments in an effort to improve the stretchiness , melting characteristics , browning , fat content and water retention of pizza cheese . Several patents exist for specialized varieties of pizza cheese and for its processing . A study by <unk> and <unk> found that the addition of a thin layer of vegetable oil atop low- and reduced @-@ fat pizza cheese increased <unk> and reduced browning and dehydration when the product was cooked , but the texture remained overly chewy and tough . A study by Perry ( et al . ) found various methods to heighten the melt of low @-@ fat pizza cheese by increasing its moisture , including the use of pre @-@ acidification , fat @-@ <unk> , and <unk> starter cultures as well as higher pasteurization temperatures . 
 Manufacturers aim for a moisture content of 50 @-@ to @-@ 52 percent and a fat @-@ in @-@ dry @-@ matter content of 35 @-@ to @-@ 40 percent . A study published in the International Journal of Food & Science Technology found that a 12 @.@ 5 : 87 @.@ 5 blend of vetch milk and bovine milk improved stretchiness and melting characteristics . Vetch is a legume that has seeds which are similar to lentils . An experiment published in the International Journal of Dairy Technology suggested that the level of galactose , a monosaccharide sugar that is less sweet than glucose and fructose , can be reduced using different culture techniques . An article in the International Journal of Food Engineering found that <unk> citrate , a food additive used to preserve and add flavor to foods , slightly improved the preferred qualities of pizza cheese . Research published in Dairy Industries International suggested that denatured whey proteins increased moisture retention , but that the improvements were very slight and not economically worthwhile relative to the minor improvements . 
 Some consumers prefer pizza cheese with less browning , which can be achieved using low @-@ moisture part @-@ skim Mozzarella with a low galactose content . Some varieties derived from skim mozzarella variants were designed not to require aging or the use of fermentation starter . Others can be produced through the direct acidification of milk , which may be used in place of bacterial fermentation . 
 = = Production and business = = 
 In the United States , the production and consumption of Mozzarella and pizza cheese in the United States steadily increased in the mid @-@ 20th century , and this trend has continued into the first decade of the 21st century . In the U.S. , several hundred million pounds of pizza cheese is consumed annually . In 1997 , it was estimated that annual production of the product was 1 million tons ( 2 billion pounds ) in the United States and 100 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 98 @,@ 000 long tons ; 110 @,@ 000 short tons , 220 @,@ 460 @,@ 000 pounds ) in Europe . It has been estimated that 30 % of all pizza cheese used in the United States is Mozzarella cheese . As of 2000 , demand for the product was growing in Europe by 8 percent per year . 
 Mass @-@ produced pizza cheese is used by the foodservice industry , quick service restaurants , and other industries and businesses . The world 's largest manufacturer of pizza cheese , <unk> Foods Company , processes 600 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 590 @,@ 000 long tons ; 660 @,@ 000 short tons , 1 @,@ 322 @,@ 760 @,@ 000 pounds ) a year . <unk> Foods holds patents for some specialized Mozzarella production processes that enable the quick manufacture of the product . One such product is a frozen shredded cheese used for pizza that is created in a few hours from milk . Other U.S. companies also mass @-@ produce pizza cheese , which is shipped in a frozen state . As of 2000 , <unk> is the largest producer of pizza cheese in Europe . Some retail and commercially mass @-@ produced frozen pizzas have cheese stuffed into the pizza crust . 
 = = Use by region = = 
 Significant amounts of pizza cheese are used in Europe , Australia , New Zealand and the United States . Whole milk mozzarella is popular in pizzas in the East and Southwest regions of the U.S. , while one survey showed that Provolone was more popular on the east and west coast . Cheddar may be used more in the Eastern and Southern regions of the U.S. Provel cheese is typically used in the preparation of St. Louis @-@ style pizza in the U.S. 
 = Bridgeoporus = 
 Bridgeoporus is a fungal genus in the family Polyporaceae . A monotypic genus , it contains the single polypore species Bridgeoporus nobilissimus , first described to science in 1949 . Commonly known both as the noble polypore and the fuzzy <unk> , this fungus produces large fruit bodies ( or conks ) that have been found to weigh up to 130 kilograms ( 290 lb ) . The upper surface of the fruit body has a fuzzy or fibrous texture that often supports the growth of algae , bryophytes , or vascular plants . 
 This species is found in the Pacific Northwest region of North America where it grows on large ( at least 1 m diameter ) specimens of noble fir ( Abies procera ) , Pacific silver fir ( Abies amabilis ) , or western hemlock ( Tsuga heterophylla ) . Bridgeoporus nobilissimus causes a brown rot in its tree hosts . Genetic analysis shows that the fungus is more prevalent than fruit body distribution indicates . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Bridgeoporus nobilissimus was named for William Bridge Cooke , who originally described the species as Oxyporus nobilissimus in 1949 . The fungus was discovered in Clackamas County , Oregon , in 1943 by brothers Ali and Fred Sandoz . Foresters called the species Fomes <unk> @-@ <unk> , referring to the collectors and the fuzzy surface texture of the conk . Several collections were made in Oregon and Washington in subsequent years . A large specimen was collected in Lewis County , Washington in 1946 that weighed about 300 pounds ( 140 kg ) and measured 56 inches ( 140 cm ) by 37 inches ( 94 cm ) . Cooke learned of the fungus in 1948 while visiting Daniel Elliot Stuntz , who kept one of the large fruit bodies that he and Alexander H. Smith had previously collected in Mount Rainier National Park . This fruit body served as the type collection . 
 Species of genus Oxyporus cause white rot in their host trees . Cooke placed the fungus in this genus by despite not knowing definitively what type of rot it caused ; he considered it to be closely related to Oxyporus <unk> . In 1955 , polypore specialist Josiah Lincoln Lowe transferred O. nobilissimus to Fomes , before the concept of this genus was narrowed . In 1996 the new genus Bridgeoporus was circumscribed by Harold <unk> , Tom Volk and Joseph Ammirati to accommodate this species , in order to rectify incompatibilities with placements in Fomes and Oxyporus . In particular , genus Oxyporus features true cystidia arising from the subhymenium ( the supportive hyphae underlying the hymenium ) , whereas B. nobilissimus has pseudocystidia ( sterile structures arising deep in the subhymenium and protruding into the hymenium ) . 
 Phylogenetic analyses of mitochondrial small @-@ subunit rDNA sequences suggests that B. nobilissimus , which belongs in the <unk> clade , is closely related to the genera Oxyporus and <unk> . The <unk> clade includes wood @-@ decaying species previously classified variously in the families <unk> , Polyporaceae and <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 Bridgeoporus nobilissimus has perennial , imbricate , sessile fruit bodies that measure 30 – 140 cm ( 12 – 55 in ) by 25 – 95 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 – 37 @.@ 4 in ) by 30 – 100 cm ( 12 – 39 in ) . From 1966 to 1990 , this species was designated the largest pore fungus in the Guinness Book of World Records . Three fruit body shapes are associated with the fungus , depending largely on the location of the fruiting on the host tree . Hoof @-@ shaped and shelf @-@ like conks are located on the sides of hosts ; short , oblong @-@ topped conks with tapering pore surfaces occur on the main roots of the host ; and centrally <unk> ( conical ) conks are found on the tops of stumps . The cap surface of young fruit bodies are covered with a dense mat of white mycelial fibers ( up to several millimeters long ) that in age darken in color and often become stuck together at their tips . Although the surface is typically brown or darker , it may appear green due to epiphytic associations with algae such as <unk> or <unk> species . Bryophytes or sometimes vascular plants grow on the upper surface of the conk . The texture of the fruit body is fibrous ; it is rubbery and tough when fresh , but becomes hard and brittle when it is dry . The pores on the underside of the fruit body are round , approximately 2 per mm . The tubes comprising the pores becomes <unk> , layering over each other with each successive year of growth . There is a 2 – 3 mm @-@ thick layer of sterile tissue between pore layers , and mature tube layers are 2 – 7 mm long . 
 Microscopically , B. nobilissimus is characterized by hyphae with a septum , pseudocystidia originating from the trama , closely appressed hyphae in bundles ( fascicles ) on the upper surface of the fruit body . The spore @-@ bearing cells , the basidia , are 12 – 18 by 4 – 10 µm in size , pear @-@ shaped , and four @-@ spored . The roughly ovoid Basidiospores are 5 @.@ 5 – 6 @.@ 5 by 3 @.@ 5 – 4 @.@ 5 µm , hyaline , smooth , and have thin walls . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The fruit bodies ( also called conks ) of Bridgeoporus are found singly or sometimes in overlapping layers on old trees ( 1 – 2 m ( 3 @.@ 3 – 6 @.@ 6 ft ) diameter at breast height ) of noble fir ( Abies procera ) , and more rarely Pacific silver fir ( Abies amabilis ) or western hemlock ( Tsuga heterophylla ) . It has also been recorded growing on a snag of redwood . Other tree species often found in B. nobilissimus habitats include Douglas @-@ fir ( Pseudotsuga menziesii ) , western redcedar ( Thuja <unk> ) , and western hemlock . Common shrubs at these sites include salal ( Gaultheria <unk> ) , Sitka alder ( Alnus <unk> ) , rhododendron ( Rhododendron <unk> ) , and Alaska blueberry ( Vaccinium <unk> ) . The use of molecular genetic techniques has demonstrated that the fungus also lives in Douglas fir , western hemlock , and western redcedar , although its fruit bodies have not been seen on these hosts . 
 The fungus has been found in the Cascade Range in Washington and Oregon , the Coast Range on the Olympic Peninsula in Washington , and in Redwood National Park in northern California . Specimens have been found at elevations of 1 @,@ 000 – 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 – 1 @,@ 220 m ) . Because the fungus feeds on both dead and living wood , it is both parasitic and saprophytic . B. nobilissimus fruit bodies do not occur on fallen logs or other forms of dead wood lacking roots or some connection to a root system . Conks have been found growing on the still @-@ living roots of an upturned , <unk> tree , while a once @-@ living conk died within several years after the host tree was uprooted by a fallen tree . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Threats to Bridgeoporus nobilissimus include extirpation of known and unknown habitats by logging , fire , or other disturbances , and forestry practices that lead to the loss of large @-@ diameter Abies procera and Abies amabilis trees and large @-@ diameter stumps and snags in managed forests . Due to the scarcity of its mature tree hosts , B. nobilissimus was listed in 1995 as an endangered species by the Oregon Natural Heritage Program , making it the first of the fungi to be listed as endangered by any private or public agency in the United States . It is the sole fungus in category A of the survey and management guidelines for fungi under the Northwest Forest Plan , meaning pre @-@ disturbance surveys and site management are needed before developing areas known to harbor the fungus . There were 13 known sites with the fungus before 1998 ; extensive surveying in the Pacific Northwest increased this number to 103 sites by 2006 . Although it is infrequently observed , the fungus is more abundant than fruit body appearance indicates . Using genetic markers to detect the fungus mycelium in hosts , researchers found that B. nobilissimus was present at low to moderate levels and widespread in forest stands containing at least a single visible fruit body . It was detected in trees of all sizes , and in species not previously thought to harbor the fungus . B. nobilissimus may require decades of mycelial growth in its host before fruit body production is initiated . The fungus has not been successively grown in vitro despite several attempts . 
 = Tropical Storm Cecil ( 1989 ) = 
 Severe Tropical Storm Cecil in May 1989 caused devastating floods in central Vietnam , killing 751 people . The storm developed as a tropical depression over the South China Sea on May 22 . Tracking north @-@ northwestward , the system steadily intensified , attaining peak winds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) assessed Cecil to have been slightly stronger with one @-@ minute sustained winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) . The storm made landfall near Hoi An , Vietnam late on May 24 and quickly weakened . The system later dissipated over Laos on May 26 . 
 In Vietnam , heavy rains accompanied the storm , amounting to over 510 mm ( 20 in ) in some areas , triggered catastrophic and deadly flooding . Widespread structural and agricultural losses took place in addition to the significant loss of life , with damage estimated at ₫ 300 billion ( $ 71 @.@ 7 million ) . In the wake of the flooding , some international aid was sent to Vietnam , though most relief work was conducted by the nation 's government , local agencies , and the Red Cross . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On May 20 , following Typhoon Brenda 's passage through the South China Sea , a monsoon trough extending from the area into the Bay of Bengal received enhanced low @-@ level southwesterly flow . An environment of weak wind shear in the wake of the typhoon allowed a new area of low pressure to form within the southwesterly flow on May 21 . With convection becoming persistent and the system 's overall presentation more organized by May 22 , the JTWC issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert at 0300 UTC . Around this time , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) classified the system as a tropical depression . Later that day , convection wrapped entirely around the center of circulation ; this structural improvement , combined with nearby surface observations , prompted the JTWC to designate the system as Tropical Storm Cecil . 
 Initially , Cecil was forecast to maintain a northward track into a weakness in a subtropical ridge left behind by Typhoon Brenda ; however , Cecil turned westward on May 23 due to another ridge over China . With favorable atmospheric conditions , Cecil continued to intensify through May 24 . By 0600 UTC , a ragged 75 km ( 45 mi ) wide eye developed over the center of circulation , indicating it had become a typhoon . The storm ultimately attained peak winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) while situated just off the coast of central Vietnam . However , the JMA reported Cecil to have been slightly weaker , classifying it as a severe tropical storm with ten @-@ minute sustained winds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) . Around 1800 UTC , the storm made landfall near Hoi An with winds of 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) . Once onshore , Cecil quickly weakened to a tropical depression . Turning slightly to the west @-@ northwest , the remnants of Cecil continued inland before dissipating over eastern Laos early on May 26 . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 In addition to the considerable losses that took place in Vietnam , Cecil also produced heavy rains in Laos and northeastern Thailand , resulting in flooding and crop damage . 
 = = = Vietnam = = = 
 Tropical Storm Cecil was regarded as the worst storm to strike Vietnam in 50 years . In some areas , rainfall exceeded 510 mm ( 20 in ) . Approximately 105 @,@ 600 hectares of rice and other crops were destroyed and another 78 @,@ 300 hectares were otherwise inundated . About 7 @,@ 500 metric tons of rice seeds were also lost . The hardest hit areas were in Quảng Nam Province , where damage reached ₫ 300 billion ( $ 71 @.@ 7 million ) . The storm destroyed at least 10 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed and damaged another 27 @,@ 000 buildings , leaving an estimated 336 @,@ 000 people homeless . Approximately 60 percent of the forests and forestry nurseries in the province were ruined . By June 5 , 151 people were confirmed dead across the country with another 600 missing . Eventually , the death toll was revised to 751 as all missing persons were considered dead . 
 In the wake of the storm , Vietnamese soldiers were deployed to rescue survivors . Local police forces were also stepped up to prevent looting . On June 5 government also requested international assistance to deal with the scale of the disaster . However , this was later retracted on June 16 , though spontaneous donations were appreciated . The governments of Australia and France provided Vietnam with $ 75 @,@ 188 and $ 73 @,@ 964 in funds respectively . Additionally , the Swedish Red Cross donated clothing , which was later distributed by the local Red Cross along with medicine and relief supplies . A total of ₫ 52 million ( $ 124 @,@ 000 ) worth of funds and relief supplies , including 1 @,@ 600 m ( 5 @,@ 200 ft ) of fabric , and two tons of clothing , was sent to Quang Nam province . 
 = MTV Unplugged ( Katy Perry album ) = 
 MTV Unplugged ( listed on iTunes as MTV Unplugged : Katy Perry ) is an extended play ( EP ) and live album by American singer Katy Perry , released in the United States on November 13 , 2009 by Capitol Records . After airing more than 100 MTV Unplugged specials , MTV wanted to bring back the series , in order to expose them to a younger generation . The channel recruited various mainstream and popular artists to perform as part of the series , including Perry , who particularly expressed interest in the idea as it would allow her to showcase herself as an artist and share the stories behind her songs . 
 The extended play includes rearranged versions of five songs extracted from Perry 's album One of the Boys ( 2008 ) , a previously unreleased original song and a cover version of a song by Fountains of Wayne . Alongside the audio disc , the album includes a DVD with the video recording of her performance and an exclusive interview . Upon its release , MTV Unplugged received mixed reviews from critics , who questioned the idea of giving Perry 's songs an acoustic treatment , while some deemed Perry a hard @-@ working artist . On the US Billboard 200 , the set debuted at number 168 , while on the French and Swiss album charts , it reached numbers 192 and 82 . 
 = = Background and content = = 
 After airing more than 100 specials , in May 2009 , MTV announced the relaunch of its MTV Unplugged TV series , which would feature mainstream and popular artists in an acoustic setting . Amy Doyle , the executive vice president of music and talent for MTV , stated : " Unplugged has always been a fan and artist favorite and one of the more iconic MTV performance series ever . By bringing the series to MTV.com , we 're able to deliver it to a new generation of music fans and offer a greater level of access to their favorite musicians through performances , interviews and artist @-@ chosen playlists - and it 's all viewable on demand . " The relaunch would also include airing " full @-@ song and special clips from performances " on various MTV sister channels . Perry , appeared on the program during that summer . 
 Perry thought that it would be a great opportunity to showcase herself as an artist , as well as expressing the true meaning of her songs . She stated : " I really wanted to do MTV Unplugged , obviously , because it has such a great history of showing off really who the person is ... You get to hear the real story of the songs , which is important to me " . The audience for the program was selected on a contest where fans over the age of 18 could send photos and explain why they were fans of Perry . The episode featuring Perry was recorded on July 22 , 2009 . For the recording , Perry was dressed in a pale pink chiffon evening gown , with flowers in her hair . She further said : " Some people have an idea who I am , a little piece of the cake , but I get to show off really more . I have a larger @-@ than @-@ life personality and my clothes reflect that . For MTV Unplugged , I wanted to be a mixture of Stevie Nicks and a fairy ! " . 
 MTV Unplugged consists of two discs . The first , which is a Compact Disc , contains acoustic renditions of her songs " I Kissed a Girl " , " Ur So Gay " , " Thinking of You " , " Waking Up in Vegas " , and " Lost " from One of the Boys , a cover version of a song by American power pop band Fountains of Wayne , " Hackensack " , and a new song titled " Brick by Brick " . Perry explained why she sang it during MTV Unplugged , saying that she related to the lyrics of " having a loyal lover [ or ] friend back home when she 's on the road " , though , directly , the song does not narrate any event of Perry 's life . The versions performed incorporate lighter genres than pop rock , which is embraced in One of the Boys , like jazz and lounge music , particularly in " I Kissed a Girl " . The second disc is a DVD , containing the video recording of the performance , recorded at NEP Midtown Studios , located in New York City . Aside from the live performance , it also contains an interview with the singer . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 MTV Unplugged was first released in Switzerland and the United States , respectively , in CD / DVD and digital formats , on November 13 , 2009 . Select songs and interviews from the EP were aired during MTV 's morning block , <unk> , three days later . The physical edition was released in the United States and France on November 17 , 2010 . The full video recording was released , on 27 November , on the MTV official website , while the television premiere followed at 9 PM of that day , on the high @-@ definition channel Palladia , being <unk> at midnight . In Brazil , the set was released in a DVD / CD format , packaged in an keep case . The Japan release , also as a DVD / CD package , only occurred more than one year after , on November 24 , 2010 . The album opened at number 168 on the US Billboard 200 , having dropped out from the chart on the following week . As of August 2013 , it has sold more than 55 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . It debuted at number 192 on the French Albums Chart , and higher on the Swiss Albums Chart , at number 82 . 
 Upon its release , MTV Unplugged received generally mixed reviews from contemporary music critics . AllMusic editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine gave the album three out of five stars , praising Katy for being a hard working music act and " seeming more likeable here than she did on her debut " , though he noted that her flaws were " amplified " during the performance . Sahar from Blogcritics was more positive about the set , writing that although Perry was not the " best singer out there " , she made up for it " in catchiness and ..... <unk> " . The contributor was more negative of the acoustic version of " I Kissed a Girl " and the fact that MTV cut out parts from the video recording : " What I 'd like to have seen is for MTV to make Katy Perry enter into an unscripted dialog with the fans that are there , film the whole thing and put that on a DVD – then you will really have something unplugged . For how can you truly know an artist if we don 't see such interactions ? " Becky Bain from website Idolator favored Perry 's live voice and her natural presentation , though she was ambivalent towards the decision of giving the songs an acoustic treatment . She went on to say that the MTV Unplugged versions of Perry 's songs were not able to substitute the " glossy originals " . Simon Vozick @-@ Levinson from Entertainment Weekly gave the live album a D , opining that " the stripped @-@ down treatment of MTV Unplugged does Perry 's yowling voice no favors " , and that " [ the ] songs just aren 't solid enough to stand on their own without loads of glossy production " . Catherine Lewis of The Washington Post praised Perry 's " translate her more rambunctious numbers into an acoustic format " and wrote album was " definitely a step in a good — and unexpected — direction " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Titles are obtained from the iTunes Store ; lengths are adapted from the liner notes . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits for MTV Unplugged adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = John Basilone = 
 John Basilone ( November 4 , 1916 – February 19 , 1945 ) was a United States Marine Corps Gunnery Sergeant who received the nation 's highest military award for valor , the Medal of Honor , for heroism during the Battle of Guadalcanal in World War II . He was the only enlisted Marine to receive both the Medal of Honor and the Navy Cross in World War II . 
 He served three years in the United States Army with duty in the Philippines . He enlisted in the Marine Corps in 1940 and was deployed to Guantánamo Bay , Cuba , and then to Guadalcanal where he held off 3 @,@ 000 Japanese troops after his 15 @-@ member unit was reduced to two other men . On the first day of the Battle of Iwo Jima , he was killed in action , after which he was posthumously awarded the Navy Cross for extraordinary heroism . He has received many honors including being the namesake for streets , military locations , and a United States Navy destroyer . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Basilone was born in his parents ' home on November 4 , 1916 in Buffalo , New York , the sixth of ten children . His first five siblings were born in Raritan , New Jersey , but the family was living in Buffalo when John was born ; they returned to Raritan in 1918 . His father , Salvatore Basilone , emigrated from Colle <unk> , in the province of Benevento , Italy in 1903 and settled in Raritan . His mother , Dora <unk> , was born in 1889 and grew up in Manville , New Jersey , but her parents , Carlo and Catrina , also came from Benevento . His parents met at a church gathering and married three years later . Basilone grew up in the nearby Raritan Town ( now Borough of Raritan ) where he attended St. Bernard Parochial School . After completing middle school at the age of 15 , he dropped out prior to attending high school . 
 = = Military service = = 
 = = = U.S. Army = = = 
 Basilone worked as a golf caddy for the local country club before joining the military . He enlisted in the United States Army in July 1934 and completed his three @-@ year enlistment with service in the Philippines , where he was a champion boxer . In the Army , Basilone was initially assigned to the 16th Infantry at Fort Jay , before being discharged for a day and reenlisting and being assigned to the 31st Infantry . 
 After he was released from active duty , he returned home and worked as a truck driver in Reisterstown , Maryland . After driving trucks for a few months , he wanted to go back to Manila , and believed he could get there faster in the Marines than in the Army . 
 = = = U.S. Marine Corps = = = 
 He enlisted in the Marine Corps in July 1940 from Baltimore , Maryland . He went to recruit training at Marine Corps Recruit Depot Parris Island , followed by training at Marine Corps Base Quantico and New River . The Marines sent him to Guantánamo Bay , Cuba for his next assignment , and then to Guadalcanal in the Solomon Islands as a member of D ( Dog ) Company , 1st Battalion , 7th Marines , 1st Marine Division ( D / 1 / 7 ) . 
 = = = = Guadalcanal = = = = 
 During the Battle for Henderson Field , his unit came under attack by a regiment of approximately 3 @,@ 000 soldiers from the Japanese Sendai Division . On October 24 , 1942 , Japanese forces began a frontal attack using machine guns , grenades , and mortars against the American heavy machine guns . Basilone commanded two sections of machine guns that fought for the next two days until only Basilone and two other Marines were left standing . Basilone moved an extra gun into position and maintained continual fire against the incoming Japanese forces . He then repaired and manned another machine gun , holding the defensive line until replacements arrived . As the battle went on , ammunition became critically low . Despite their supply lines having been cut off by enemies in the rear , Basilone fought through hostile ground to resupply his heavy machine gunners with urgently needed ammunition . When the last of it ran out shortly before dawn on the second day , Basilone held off the Japanese soldiers attacking his position using his pistol . By the end of the engagement , Japanese forces opposite their section of the line were virtually annihilated . For his actions during the battle , he received the United States military 's highest award for valor , the Medal of Honor . 
 Afterwards , Private First Class Nash W. Phillips , of Fayetteville , North Carolina , recalled from the battle for Guadalcanal : 
 Basilone had a machine gun on the go for three days and nights without sleep , rest , or food . He was in a good emplacement , and causing the Japanese lots of trouble , not only firing his machine gun , but also using his pistol . 
 = = = = War bond tours and marriage = = = = 
 In 1943 , after receiving the Medal of Honor , he returned to the United States and participated in war bond tours . His arrival was highly publicized and his hometown held a parade in his honor when he returned . The homecoming parade occurred on Sunday , September 19 and drew a huge crowd with thousands of people , including politicians , celebrities and the national press . The parade made national news in Life magazine and Fox Movietone News . After the parade , he toured the country raising money for the war effort and achieved celebrity status . Although he appreciated the admiration , he felt out of place and requested to return to the operating forces fighting the war . The Marine Corps denied his request and told him he was needed more on the home front . He was offered a commission , which he turned down , and was later offered an assignment as an instructor , but refused this as well . He requested again to return to the war and this time the request was approved . He left for Camp Pendleton , California , for training on December 27 . 
 While stationed at Camp Pendleton , he met his future wife , Lena Mae Riggi , who was a Sergeant in the Marine Corps Women 's Reserve . They were married at St. Mary 's Star of the Sea Church in Oceanside , on July 10 , 1944 , with a reception at the Carlsbad Hotel . They honeymooned at an onion farm near Portland . 
 = = = = Iwo Jima = = = = 
 After his request to return to the fleet was approved , he was assigned to Charlie Company , 1st Battalion , 27th Marine Regiment , 5th Marine Division during the invasion of Iwo Jima . On February 19 , 1945 , he was serving as a machine gun section leader in action against Japanese forces on Red Beach II . During the battle , the Japanese concentrated their fire at the incoming Marines from heavily fortified blockhouses staged throughout the island . With his unit pinned down , Basilone made his way around the side of the Japanese positions until he was directly on top of the blockhouse . He then attacked with grenades and demolitions , single @-@ handedly destroying the entire strong point and its defending garrison . He then fought his way toward Airfield Number 1 and aided a Marine tank that was trapped in an enemy mine field under intense mortar and artillery barrages . He guided the heavy vehicle over the hazardous terrain to safety , despite heavy weapons fire from the Japanese . As he moved along the edge of the airfield , he was killed by Japanese mortar shrapnel . His actions helped Marines penetrate the Japanese defense and get off the landing beach during the critical early stages of the invasion . He was posthumously awarded the Marine Corps ' second @-@ highest decoration for valor , the Navy Cross , for extraordinary heroism during the battle of Iwo Jima . 
 Based on his research for the book and mini @-@ series The Pacific , author Hugh Ambrose suggested that Basilone was not killed by a mortar , but by small arms fire that hit him in the right groin , the neck and nearly took off his left arm . 
 = = = = Burial = = = = 
 He was interred in Arlington National Cemetery in Section 12 , Grave 384 , grid Y / Z 23 @.@ 5 . Lena M. Basilone died June 11 , 1999 , at the age of 86 , and was buried at Riverside National Cemetery in Riverside , California . Lena 's obituary notes that she never remarried , and was buried still wearing her wedding ring . 
 = = Awards and decorations = = 
 <unk> . Basilone 's military awards include : 
 = = = Medal of Honor citation = = = 
 Basilone 's Medal of Honor citation reads as follows : 
 The President of the United States in the name of The Congress takes pride in presenting the MEDAL OF HONOR to 
 <unk> BASILONE 
 UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS 
 for service as set forth in the following CITATION : 
 For extraordinary heroism and conspicuous gallantry in action against enemy Japanese forces , above and beyond the call of duty , while serving with the 1st Battalion , 7th Marines , 1st Marine Division in the Lunga Area , Guadalcanal , Solomon Islands , on 24 and 25 October 1942 . While the enemy was hammering at the Marines ' defensive positions , Sgt. BASILONE , in charge of 2 sections of heavy machine guns , fought valiantly to check the savage and determined assault . In a fierce frontal attack with the Japanese blasting his guns with grenades and mortar fire , one of Sgt. BASILONE 'S sections , with its gun crews , was put out of action , leaving only 2 men able to carry on . Moving an extra gun into position , he placed it in action , then , under continual fire , repaired another and personally manned it , gallantly holding his line until replacements arrived . A little later , with ammunition critically low and the supply lines cut off , Sgt. BASILONE , at great risk of his life and in the face of continued enemy attack , battled his way through hostile lines with urgently needed shells for his gunners , thereby contributing in large measure to the virtual annihilation of a Japanese regiment . His great personal valor and courageous initiative were in keeping with the highest traditions of the U.S. Naval Service . 
 FRANKLIN D. <unk> 
 = = = Navy Cross = = = 
 Basilone 's Navy Cross citation reads as follows : 
 The President of the United States takes pride in presenting the NAVY CROSS posthumously to 
 <unk> <unk> BASILONE 
 UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS 
 for service as set forth in the following CITATION : 
 For extraordinary heroism while serving as a Leader of a Machine @-@ Gun Section , Company C , 1st Battalion , 27th Marines , 5th Marine Division , in action against enemy Japanese forces on Iwo Jima in the Volcano Islands , 19 February 1945 . <unk> gauging the tactical situation shortly after landing when his company 's advance was held up by the concentrated fire of a heavily fortified Japanese blockhouse , Gunnery Sergeant BASILONE boldly defied the smashing bombardment of heavy caliber fire to work his way around the flank and up to a position directly on top of the blockhouse and then , attacking with grenades and demolitions , single handedly destroyed the entire hostile strong point and its defending garrison . Consistently daring and aggressive as he fought his way over the battle @-@ torn beach and up the sloping , gun @-@ studded terraces toward Airfield Number 1 , he repeatedly exposed himself to the blasting fury of exploding shells and later in the day coolly proceeded to the aid of a friendly tank which had been trapped in an enemy mine field under intense mortar and artillery barrages , skillfully guiding the heavy vehicle over the hazardous terrain to safety , despite the overwhelming volume of hostile fire . In the forefront of the assault at all times , he pushed forward with dauntless courage and iron determination until , moving upon the edge of the airfield , he fell , instantly killed by a bursting mortar shell . Stouthearted and indomitable , Gunnery Sergeant BASILONE , by his intrepid initiative , outstanding skill , and valiant spirit of self @-@ sacrifice in the face of the fanatic opposition , contributed materially to the advance of his company during the early critical period of the assault , and his unwavering devotion to duty throughout the bitter conflict was an inspiration to his comrades and reflects the highest credit upon Gunnery Sergeant BASILONE and the United States Naval Service . He gallantly gave his life in the service of his country . 
 For the President , JAMES <unk> 
 Secretary of the Navy 
 = = Other honors = = 
 Basilone has received numerous honors , including the namesake of a United States Navy destroyer , a postage stamp and several plaques , monuments , geographical landmarks , a bust in San Diego 's Little Italy in a piazza named for him , Piazza Basilone , and a residential building at Montclair State University . In 2011 , Basilone was inducted into the New Jersey Hall of Fame . 
 = = = USS Basilone ( DD 824 ) = = = 
 The United States Navy commissioned USS Basilone , a Gearing @-@ class destroyer , in 1949 . The ship 's keel was laid down on July 7 , 1945 , in Orange , Texas , and launched on December 21 , 1945 . His widow , Sergeant Lena Mae Basilone , sponsored the ship . 
 = = = USS John Basilone ( DDG 122 ) = = = 
 The future USS John Basilone ( DDG 122 ) will be commissioned in 2019 . 
 = = = Marine Corps buildings and landmarks = = = 
 The Marine Corps has named infrastructure after him on Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton , including an entry point onto the base from Interstate 5 called " Basilone Road " ; a section of U.S. Interstate 5 running through the base called " Gunnery Sergeant John Basilone Memorial Highway " ; and a parachute landing zone called " Basilone Drop Zone " . 
 = = = Namesakes from outside the Marine Corps = = = 
 In addition to the honors bestowed from the Marine Corps , a wide variety of non @-@ military institutions have also chosen their name based on Basilone . Some of these include : the football field at Bridgewater @-@ Raritan High School is called " Basilone Field " , and on the wall of the fieldhouse next to the field is a mural honoring Basilone ; the Knights of Columbus Council # <unk> in his hometown is named in his honor ; an overpass at the Somerville Circle in Somerville , New Jersey on U.S. Highway 202 and 206 that goes under it ; the New Jersey Turnpike bridge across the Raritan River is named the " Basilone Bridge " ; the new Bridge that crosses the Raritan River in Raritan at First Avenue and Canal Street ; a memorial statue featuring him holding a water @-@ cooled Browning machine gun is located at the intersections of Old York Road and Canal Street in Raritan ( childhood friend Phillip Orlando sculpted the statue ) ; a plaque at the United States Navy Memorial in Washington , D.C. ; a bust in Little Italy San Diego at Fir and India Streets ( the war memorial is dedicated to residents of Little Italy who served in World War II and Korea , and the area is called Piazza Basilone ) ; the Order of the Sons of Italy In America Lodge # 2442 in Bohemia , New York is named in his honor ; and the Raritan Public Library has the Basilone Room where memorabilia about him is kept . In 1944 , Army Barracks from Washington State were moved to a site in front of Hansen Dam in Pacoima , California and rebuilt as 1 @,@ 500 apartments for returning GIs . This development was named the Basilone Homes and was used until about 1955 . The site is now a golf course . 
 = = = Parade = = = 
 The memorial parade for Basilone along Somerset Street in his hometown of Raritan has been held since 1981 and became a celebration of the close @-@ knit community . 
 = = = In media = = = 
 On November 10 , 2005 , the U.S. Postal Service issued the " Distinguished Marines " stamps honoring four Marine Corps heroes including Basilone . 
 The 1967 film First to Fight features Chad Everett as " Shanghai Jack " Connell , a character based on " Manila John " Basilone . 
 The Pacific ( 2010 miniseries ) : Basilone along with two other Marines became the basis of a 10 @-@ part HBO miniseries The Pacific . Actor Jon Seda stars as Basilone . 
 In Episode 6 of the 2007 PBS documentary " The War : A Ken Burns Film " showed footage of a backpack with the name J Basilone stenciled on it . 
 = Air @-@ mass thunderstorm = 
 An air @-@ mass thunderstorm , also called an " ordinary " , " single cell " , or " garden variety " thunderstorm , is a thunderstorm that is generally weak and usually not severe . These storms form in environments where at least some amount of Convective Available Potential Energy ( CAPE ) is present , but very low levels of wind shear and helicity . The lifting source , which is a crucial factor in thunderstorm development , is usually the result of uneven heating of the surface , though they can be induced by weather fronts and other low @-@ level boundaries associated with wind convergence . The energy needed for these storms to form comes in the form of insolation , or solar radiation . Air @-@ mass thunderstorms do not move quickly , last no longer than an hour , and have the threats of lightning , as well as showery light , moderate , or heavy rainfall . Heavy rainfall can interfere with microwave transmissions within the atmosphere . 
 Lightning characteristics are related to characteristics of the parent thunderstorm , and could induce wildfires near thunderstorms with minimal rainfall . On unusual occasions there could be a weak downburst and small hail . They are common in temperate zones during a summer afternoon . Like all thunderstorms , the mean @-@ layered wind field the storms form within determine motion . When the deep @-@ layered wind flow is light , outflow boundary progression will determine storm movement . Since thunderstorms can be a hazard to aviation , pilots are advised to fly above any haze layers within regions of better visibility and to avoid flying under the anvil of these thunderstorms , which can be regions where hail falls from the parent thunderstorm . Vertical wind shear is also a hazard near the base of thunderstorms which have generated outflow boundaries . 
 = = Life cycle = = 
 The trigger for the lift of the initial cumulus cloud can be insolation heating the ground producing thermals , areas where two winds converge forcing air upwards , or where winds blow over terrain of increasing elevation . The moisture rapidly cools into liquid drops of water due to the cooler temperatures at high altitude , which appears as cumulus clouds . As the water vapor condenses into liquid , latent heat is released which warms the air , causing it to become less dense than the surrounding dry air . The air tends to rise in an updraft through the process of convection ( hence the term convective precipitation ) . This creates a low @-@ pressure zone beneath the forming thunderstorm , otherwise known as a cumulonimbus cloud . In a typical thunderstorm , approximately 5 × 108 kg of water vapor is lifted into the Earth 's atmosphere . As they form in areas of minimal vertical wind shear , the thunderstorm 's rainfall creates a moist and relatively cool outflow boundary with undercuts the storm 's low level inflow , and quickly causes dissipation . Waterspouts , small hail , and strong wind gusts can occur in association with these thunderstorms . 
 = = Common locations of appearance = = 
 Also known as single cell thunderstorms , these are the typical summer thunderstorms in many temperate locales . They also occur in the cool unstable air which often follows the passage of a cold front from the sea during winter . Within a cluster of thunderstorms , the term " cell " refers to each separate principal updraft . Thunderstorm cells occasionally form in isolation , as the occurrence of one thunderstorm can develop an outflow boundary which sets up new thunderstorm development . Such storms are rarely severe and are a result of local atmospheric instability ; hence the term " air mass thunderstorm " . When such storms have a brief period of severe weather associated with them , it is known as a pulse severe storm . Pulse severe storms are poorly organized due to the minimal vertical wind shear in the storm 's environment and occur randomly in time and space , making them difficult to forecast . Between formation and dissipation , single cell thunderstorms normally last 20 – 30 minutes . 
 = = Motion = = 
 The two major ways thunderstorms move are via advection of the wind and propagation along outflow boundaries towards sources of greater heat and moisture . Many thunderstorms move with the mean wind speed through the Earth 's troposphere , or the lowest 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) of the Earth 's atmosphere . Younger thunderstorms are steered by winds closer to the Earth 's surface than more mature thunderstorms as they tend not to be as tall . If the gust front , or leading edge of the outflow boundary , moves ahead of the thunderstorm , the thunderstorm 's motion will move in tandem with the gust front . This is more of a factor with thunderstorms with heavy precipitation ( HP ) , such as air @-@ mass thunderstorms . When thunderstorms merge , which is most likely when numerous thunderstorms exist in proximity to each other , the motion of the stronger thunderstorm normally dictates future motion of the merged cell . The stronger the mean wind , the less likely other processes will be involved in storm motion . On weather radar , storms are tracked by using a prominent feature and tracking it from scan to scan . 
 = = Convective precipitation = = 
 Convective rain , or showery precipitation , occurs from cumulonimbus clouds . It falls as showers with rapidly changing intensity . Convective precipitation falls over a certain area for a relatively short time , as convective clouds such as thunderstorms have limited horizontal extent . Most precipitation in the tropics appears to be convective . <unk> and hail are good indicators of convective precipitation and thunderstorms . In mid @-@ latitudes , convective precipitation is intermittent and often associated with baroclinic boundaries such as cold fronts , squall lines , and warm fronts . High rainfall rates are associated with thunderstorms with larger raindrops . Heavy rainfall leads to fading of microwave transmissions starting above the frequency of 10 gigahertz ( GHz ) , but is more severe above frequencies of 15 GHz . 
 = = Lightning = = 
 Relationships between lightning frequency and the height of precipitation within thunderstorms have been found . Thunderstorms which show radar returns above 14 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 7 mi ) in height are associated with storms which have more than ten lightning flashes per minute . There is also a correlation between the total lightning rate and the size of the thunderstorm , its updraft velocity , and amount of graupel over land . The same relationships fail over tropical oceans , however . Lightning from low precipitation ( LP ) thunderstorms is one of the leading causes of wildfires . 
 = = Aviation concerns = = 
 In areas where these thunderstorms form in isolation and horizontal visibility is good , pilots can evade these storms rather easily . In more moist atmospheres which become hazy , pilots navigate above the haze layer in order to get a better vantage point of these storms . Flying under the anvil of thunderstorms is not advised , as hail is more likely to fall in such areas outside the thunderstorm 's main rain shaft . When an outflow boundary forms due to a shallow layer of rain @-@ cooled air spreading out near ground level from the parent thunderstorm , both speed and directional wind shear can result at the leading edge of the three @-@ dimensional boundary . The stronger the outflow boundary is , the stronger the resultant vertical wind shear will become . 
 = Ontario Highway 19 = 
 King 's Highway 19 , commonly referred to as Highway 19 , is a provincially maintained highway in the Canadian province of Ontario , connecting Highway 3 in Tillsonburg with Highway 401 southeast of Ingersoll . Highway 19 is 18 @.@ 8 km ( 11 @.@ 7 mi ) long , starting at Highway 3 in the south and ending at Highway 2 in the north ; this is similar to its original route and length of 25 @.@ 1 kilometres ( 15 @.@ 6 mi ) in 1930 . The highway began as the Plank and Gravel Road , a toll road formed by the Ingersoll and Port Burwell Road Company . It was first assigned in 1930 . Several extensions in the early 1930s took the route north to Highway 86 at Tralee . However , a significant amount of Highway 19 was decommissioned and turned over to local and county governments in 1997 and 1998 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The southern end of Highway 19 begins at Highway 3 in Tillsonburg , while the northern end terminates 400 metres north of the centreline of Highway 401 , southeast of the Ingersoll town limits . Highway 19 is situated entirely in Oxford County and serves the communities of Ostrander , Mount Elgin and Salford . Prior to 1998 , it began in Port Burwell on the shores of Lake Erie , while the northern terminus extended to Highway 86 east of Listowel in the community of Tralee . 
 The route begins on the southern edge of Tillsonburg at Highway 3 ( Talbot Road ) , travelling north along the eastern side of Big Otter Creek . This section of the highway , known as Vienna Road , lies next to a business / industrial park . At County Road 51 ( Simcoe Street ) , Vienna Road ends and Highway 19 turns west , becoming Oxford Street and crossing Big Otter Creek . At Broadway Street , Highway 19 turns northwest and passes through the downtown strip as well as beside Tillsonburg Town Centre . It continues into residential subdivisions , eventually exiting the town into the municipality of South @-@ West Oxford as it turns north at Quarter Town Line and becomes Plank Line . 
 The route enters farmland , but bisects the hamlet of Ostrander shortly thereafter . It crosses the Ontario Southland Railway , which lies roughly parallel to the entire length of the highway , before passing west of Tillsonburg Airport and curving northwest . After travelling through farmland , the route enter Mount Elgin and intersects County Road 18 ( Mt . Elgin Road ) . After , it continues through more farmland to the community of Salford , where it encounters County Road 46 ( Salford Road ) . It turns northward briefly , emerging back into agricultural surroundings for the final stretch of the route . Just southeast of Ingersoll , it encounters an interchange with Highway 401 ( Exit 218 ) ; Highway 19 ends immediately north of the westbound ramps . County Road 119 ( Harris Street ) continues northwest into the town to meet former Highway 2 . 
 = = History = = 
 The history of Highway 19 dates back to 1849 , when the Baldwin Act and the Act to <unk> Formation of Joint Stock Companies were passed . George Tillson , his sons , and his brother @-@ in @-@ law Benjamin Van Norman were the principal stockholders of the Ingersoll and Port Burwell Road Company , which they formed along with approximately 200 shareholders in September 1849 . Proceeding quickly , the company established eight toll booths along the new route , which became known as the Plank and Gravel Road due to the materials with which it was constructed . However , the greed of toll road operators resulted in diminishing upkeep , which forced the province to enact legislature allowing counties to assume ownership of the roads . It took until 1907 for Oxford County to assume the toll road ; the proprietors were compensated with $ 15 @,@ 500 ( $ 293 @,@ 300 when adjusted for inflation from 1916 ) . 
 The gradual implementation of various legislation over the following decade allowed many counties to vastly improve roads under their jurisdiction . By the time the Department of Highways ( DHO ) assumed the road from Highway 3 in Tillsonburg to Highway 2 in Ingersoll on March 12 , 1930 as King 's Highway 19 , it was once again a gravel road . A year later , on May 27 , 1931 , the highway was extended north from Woodstock to Shakespeare . As a result of this , a concurrency with Highway 2 was created between Ingersoll and Woodstock . Several months later , on July 1 , the department assumed the remainder of the Ingersoll to Port Burwell Road , extending Highway 19 south of Tillsonburg . 
 As part of a depression relief program , the DHO and Department of Labour undertook several projects in 1933 and 1934 , one of which included the Stratford to Tralee Road . On July 4 , 1934 , the DHO assumed the road as part of Highway 19 . To remedy the discontinuity , a 12 @-@ kilometre ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) concurrency with Highway 7 was established . At this point , Highway 19 had grown from its original length of 25 @.@ 1 kilometres ( 15 @.@ 6 mi ) to 148 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 92 @.@ 2 mi ) . 
 The route remained unchanged until the early 1960s , when several highways were renumbered . Highway 19 between Woodstock and Shakespeare was redesignated as Highway 59 , while Highway 100 between Thamesford and St. Marys was redesignated as Highway 19 . The concurrencies with Highway 2 and Highway 7 were relocated as a result of this renumbering ; Highway 19 became concurrent with Highway 2 between Ingersoll and Thamesford , and with Highway 7 between St. Marys and Stratford . While the length of the route was reduced <unk> as a result of this renumbering , it became more direct . 
 Between then and 1997 , no changes were made to Highway 19 . On April 1 , 1997 , the section from Highway 3 south to Port Burwell was transferred to Elgin County , Oxford County and Haldimand – Norfolk . This was followed by a second round of transfers on January 1 , 1998 , which resulted in the section north of Highway 401 being decommissioned and assumed by Oxford County and Perth County . 
 Today , the majority of the Port Burwell to Tillsonburg segment is designated as Elgin County Road 19 . A short segment in Haldimand – Norfolk and Oxford County immediately south of Tillsonburg is designated as County Highway 19 . The Ingersoll to St. Marys segment is now known as Oxford County Road 119 , while the segment north of Stratford is designated as Perth County Road 119 through Brunner , then Perth County Road 131 through Milverton . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 19 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . The entire route is located in the Regional Municipality of Oxford . 
 = Hurricane Cristobal ( 2014 ) = 
 Hurricane Cristobal was a moderately strong Atlantic tropical cyclone that affected multiple landmasses from Puerto Rico to Iceland in late August and early September 2014 . It was also the strongest Atlantic hurricane in terms of pressure since Hurricane Sandy in 2012 . Slow to develop , and plagued by unfavorable wind shear for most of its life , the storm formed on August 23 near the Caicos Islands from a long @-@ tracked tropical wave . Moving generally northward , Cristobal gradually intensified despite a ragged appearance on satellite imagery , and passed midway between Bermuda and North Carolina on August 27 . While accelerating toward the northeast the next day , Cristobal achieved its peak strength as a Category 1 hurricane . A colder environment converted Cristobal into an extratropical cyclone on August 29 , but it retained much of its strength as it sped across the northern Atlantic and struck Iceland on September 1 . 
 Before its classification as a tropical cyclone , the disturbance that would become Cristobal dropped heavy rainfall over Puerto Rico , locally reaching 13 @.@ 21 in ( 336 mm ) . Widespread flooding and scattered landslides affected the territory , with 19 major rivers exceeding minor flood stage . The system went on to douse the island of Hispaniola with torrential rains , leading to at least four drowning deaths in Haiti and the Dominican Republic . Floodwaters damaged or destroyed over 800 houses and temporarily isolated 23 communities in the Dominican Republic , while about 640 families were displaced in Haiti . Another person was killed by floodwaters in the Turks and Caicos . The hurricane generated strong surf and dangerous rip currents along the U.S. East Coast , killing two swimmers in Maryland and New Jersey and leading to large numbers of lifeguard rescues . Later , the extratropical remnants of Cristobal buffeted Iceland with heavy rain and gusty winds , causing flooding around the capital city of Reykjavík . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Hurricane Cristobal originated from a westward @-@ tracking tropical wave which emerged from the western coast of Africa on August 14 , accompanied for several days by an expanse of clouds . Some cyclonic turning was evident as the disturbance approached the Leeward Islands by August 21 , but a Hurricane Hunters flight tasked with investigating the system did not reveal a strong circulation at the surface . The system failed to consolidate as it traversed Puerto Rico and Hispaniola , but on August 23 , further reconnaissance data confirmed the formation of a tropical depression just south of the Caicos Islands . The nascent cyclone slowly moved north @-@ northwestward toward a weakness in the subtropical ridge . Moderate wind shear in the area kept convection over the depression disorganized and outflow limited , and the storm only gradually intensified . The depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Cristobal at 06 : 00 UTC on August 24 , while located just north of Mayaguana in the Bahamas , but its structure was vertically tilted and <unk> broad . 
 Weak steering currents kept Cristobal 's forward motion slow and erratic , and the storm remained heavily affected by shear , with most deep convection displaced from the center . On August 25 , the system turned toward the north @-@ northeast in response to a mid @-@ level trough to the north . Despite a ragged cloud pattern characterized by an exposed low @-@ level center and a distinct lack of banding features , Cristobal intensified into a Category 1 hurricane at 00 : 00 UTC on August 26 , as indicated by aircraft observations . The newly upgraded hurricane headed along a general northward path , and for the next couple days , pockets of dry air kept prevented further intensification . Convection fluctuated in intensity and coverage , and early on August 27 the National Hurricane Center remarked that " the satellite presentation resembles a subtropical cyclone " . However , later that same day , the hurricane showed signs of increased development while located midway between Bermuda and Cape Hatteras , North Carolina . In particular , its cloud pattern became much more symmetric , and some cloud tops cooled to – 70 ° C ( – 95 ° F ) . Around the same time , Cristobal accelerated toward the northeast as it became embedded within the mid @-@ latitude westerlies ahead of an advancing shortwave trough . 
 An area of relatively warm cloud tops at the center of a central dense overcast gave way to an eye feature evident on visible satellite imagery on August 28 . Rapidly gaining latitude , Cristobal reached its peak intensity at 18 : 00 UTC , with winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) , roughly 490 mi ( 790 km ) due south of Halifax , Nova Scotia . Shortly thereafter , the hurricane began to degrade as it moved over significantly colder waters and began to encounter further dry air , signalling the beginning of its transition to an extratropical cyclone . Cristobal 's circulation soon began to interact with a frontal boundary , and deep convection became distanced well to the north of the center . Consequently , the hurricane lost its tropical identity by 12 : 00 UTC on August 29 , just north of 44 ° N. <unk> processes preserved much of the extratropical cyclone 's intensity , allowing it to maintain hurricane @-@ force winds until August 30 . Speeding generally northeastward , the storm slowly weakened over the northern Atlantic , making landfall on Iceland on September 1 . It merged with another storm system north of the country by the next day . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Antilles = = = 
 As Cristobal 's parent wave moved over Puerto Rico , it engaged with an abnormally moist air mass to produce torrential rains totaling more than 10 in ( 250 mm ) . The highest rainfall totals were enhanced by orographic lift over mountainous terrain . A rain gauge near <unk> recorded a peak total of 13 @.@ 21 in ( 336 mm ) , the majority of which fell on August 24 . Luis Muñoz Marín International Airport near San Juan reported 5 @.@ 52 in ( 140 mm ) of precipitation . In total , 19 rivers reached minor flood stage and five reached moderate flood stage ; some of them inundated adjacent roadways and urban areas . The heavy rains triggered multiple landslides , at least one of which forced a family to evacuate . The floods cut electricity to nearly 17 @,@ 000 customers and left 7 @,@ 000 without clean drinking water after putting some 18 filtration plants out of service . In some cases , however , the rains proved beneficial , refilling reservoirs after an abnormally dry summer . Only the northwest corner of Puerto Rico escaped hydrological issues . Gusty winds caused minor damage to trees and tree branches in the territory . Moderate to heavy rainfall also affected the U.S. Virgin Islands , amounting to 5 @.@ 27 in ( 134 mm ) on Saint Thomas and 2 @.@ 22 in ( 56 mm ) on Saint Croix . 
 The island of Hispaniola also received damaging rains from the slow @-@ moving storm . La Romana , Dominican Republic , recorded 5 @.@ 04 in ( 128 mm ) of rain in 24 hours on August 23 and 24 , the result being destructive flooding . The floods isolated 23 towns from the outside world and damaged or destroyed more than 800 dwellings , especially in eastern and northeastern parts of the nation . Just over 4 @,@ 100 individuals were forced to leave their homes and seek refuge with friends and family . In Santo Domingo Province , three people required rescue from their stricken car after trying to cross the swollen Isabela River . Two people were killed in the Dominican Republic , one of them after trying to drive across a flooded river in the Hato Mayor Province . In neighboring Haiti , flooding totally destroyed four homes and heavily damaged 28 others , with a total of about 640 families left temporarily homeless . At least two people in the country were swept away by rushing waters , and many others sustained injuries . 
 Shortly after the storm 's genesis , tropical storm warnings were issued for the central and southeastern Bahamas and the Turks and Caicos Islands . The advisories were discontinued by August 25 . Heavy rain fell over the region , reaching 10 @.@ 9 in ( 280 mm ) on the island of Providenciales , where one person drowned in the ensuing floods . Floodwaters on North Caicos ran 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) deep , blocking access to some communities . Governor Peter Beckingham reported " extensive damage to people 's property and possessions " throughout the overseas territory . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 A tropical storm watch was issued for Bermuda on August 25 , and ultimately discontinued about three days later . Two cruise ships left Bermuda early to avoid the storm , and another two postponed their scheduled stops there . The threat of the storm , combined with a lack of passengers due to cruise ship diversions , resulted in the suspension of ferry service . Cristobal ultimately passed well to the northwest of the island , producing breezy conditions and heightened surf . 
 The offshore hurricane lashed the East Coast of the United States with high swells and rip currents , prompting widespread swimming restrictions and bans . A teenaged male Virginia resident died in a drowning incident at Ocean City , Maryland , less than an hour after lifeguards went off @-@ duty . In a 24 @-@ hour period , the Ocean City Beach Patrol rescued about 120 people caught in rip currents . Just off the coast , the rough seas capsized a 17 ft ( 5 @.@ 2 m ) boat , forcing the Coast Guard to rescue its three occupants . Another young male drowned at Sandy Hook , New Jersey ; a wave reportedly knocked him down in shallow water before a rip current pulled the inexperienced swimmer farther out . Dangerous swimming conditions extended north to New England beaches , leading to numerous lifeguard rescues . 
 In southern Iceland , the extratropical remnants of Cristobal produced gusty winds and heavy rainfall , leading to extensive flooding in the capital city of Reykjavík . The fire department there responded to 37 calls for flooded buildings . Reykjavík Airport and Keflavík International Airport recorded wind gusts to 58 mph ( 93 km / h ) and 62 mph ( 100 km / h ) , respectively . The adverse conditions impeded aerial surveillance of the ongoing volcanic eruptions at <unk> . 
 = Elizabeth Dilling = 
 Elizabeth Dilling ( April 19 , 1894 – May 26 , 1966 ) was an American writer and political activist . In 1934 , she published The Red Network — A Who 's Who and Handbook of Radicalism for Patriots , which catalogs over 1 @,@ 300 suspected communists and their sympathizers . Her books and lecture tours established her as the pre @-@ eminent female right @-@ wing activist of the 1930s , and one of the most outspoken critics of the New Deal . 
 Dilling was the best @-@ known leader of the World War II women 's isolationist movement , a grass @-@ roots campaign that pressured Congress to refrain from helping the Allies . She was among 28 anti @-@ war campaigners charged with sedition in 1942 ; the charges were dropped in 1946 . While academic studies have customarily ignored both the anti @-@ war " Mothers ' movement " and right @-@ wing activist women in general , Dilling 's writings secured her a lasting influence among right @-@ wing groups . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Dilling was born Elizabeth Eloise Kirkpatrick in Chicago , Illinois . Her father , Lafayette Kirkpatrick , was a surgeon of Scotch @-@ Irish ancestry ; her mother , Elizabeth Harding , was of English and French ancestry . Her father died when she was six weeks old , after which her mother added to the family income by selling real estate . Dilling 's brother , Lafayette Harding Kirkpatrick , who was seven years her senior , became wealthy by the age of 23 after developing properties in Hawaii . Dilling had an Episcopalian upbringing , and attended a Catholic girls ' school , the Academy of Our Lady . She was highly religious , and was known to send her friends 40 @-@ page letters about Christian scripture . Prone to bouts of depression , she went on vacations in the US , Canada , and Europe with her mother . 
 In 1912 , she enrolled at the University of Chicago , where she studied music and languages , intending to become an orchestral musician . She left after three years before graduating , lonely and bitterly disillusioned . In 1918 , she married Albert Dilling , an engineer studying law , who attended the same Episcopalian church as Elizabeth . The couple were well off financially , thanks to Elizabeth 's inherited money and Albert 's job as chief engineer for the Chicago Sewerage District . They lived in Wilmette , a Chicago suburb , and had two children : Kirkpatrick , born in 1920 , and Elizabeth Jane , born in 1925 . Their relationship was turbulent ; when Dilling discovered her husband was having an affair with another woman , she broke into the latter 's home at gunpoint and threatened her . Albert gave his wife $ 100 @,@ 000 not to divorce him , and although he promised not to commit adultery again , he had two further extra @-@ marital relationships before their eventual divorce . 
 The family travelled abroad at least ten times between 1923 and 1939 , an experience that focussed Dilling 's political outlook and served to convince her of American superiority . In 1923 , they visited Britain , France and Italy . Offended by the lack of gratitude from the British for American intervention in World War I , Dilling vowed to oppose any future American involvement in European conflict . They spent a month in the Soviet Union in 1931 , where local guides , who Dilling claimed were Jews , warned her that communism would take over the world and showed her a map of the US in which the cities were named after Soviet heroes . She documented her travels in home movies , filming such scenes as bathers swimming nude in a river beneath a Moscow church . She was appalled by communism 's " atheism , sex degeneracy , broken homes [ and ] class hatred " . 
 She visited Germany in 1931 , and returned in 1938 , noting a " great improvement of conditions " . She attended Nazi Party meetings , and the German government paid her expenses . She wrote that " The German people under Hitler are contented and happy . ... don 't believe the stories you hear that this man has not done a great good for this country . " In 1938 , she toured Palestine , where she filmed what she described as Jewish immigrants ruining the country , and Spain — then embroiled in the Spanish Civil War — where she filmed " Red torture chambers " and burnt @-@ out churches , " ruined by the Reds with the same satanic Jewish glee shown in Russia " . She visited Japan , which she viewed as the only Christian nation in Asia , and in 1939 , she returned to visit Spain , for a second time . 
 = = Anti @-@ communism = = 
 Our family trip to Red Russia in 1931 started my dedication to anti @-@ Communism . We were taken behind the scenes by friends working for the Soviet Government and saw deplorable conditions , first hand . We were appalled , not only at the forced labor , the squalid crowded living quarters , the <unk> ration card workers ’ stores , the mothers pushing wheelbarrows and begging children of the State nurseries besieging us . The open virulent anti @-@ Christ campaign , every @-@ where , was a shock . In public places were the tirades by loud speaker , in Russian , ( our friends translated ) . Atheist cartoons representing Christ as a villain , a drunk , and the object of a cannibalistic orgy ( Holy Communion ) : as an oppressor of labor ; again as trash being dumped from a wheelbarrow by the Soviet Five @-@ Year @-@ Plan – these lurid cartoons filled the big bulletin boards in the churches our Soviet guides took us to visit . 
 Dilling 's political activism was spurred by the " bitter opposition " she encountered upon her return to Illinois in 1931 , " against my telling the truth about Russia ... from <unk> ' intellectual ' friends and from my own Episcopal minister . " She began public speaking as a hobby , following her doctor 's advice . Iris McCord , a Chicago radio broadcaster who taught at the Moody Bible Institute , arranged for her to address local church groups . Within a year she was touring the Midwest , the Northeast and occasionally the West coast , accompanied by her husband . She showed her home movies of the Soviet Union and made the same speech several times a week to audiences sometimes as large as several hundred , hosted by organizations like the Daughters of the American Revolution ( DAR ) and the American Legion . 
 In 1932 , she co @-@ founded the Paul <unk> , an anti @-@ communist organization with headquarters in Chicago which eventually had 200 local chapters . She left in 1934 , and it folded soon after due to lack of interest . With McCord 's encouragement , her lectures were published in a local Wilmette newspaper in 1932 , and then collected in a pamphlet entitled Red Revolution : Do We Want It Here ? Dilling claimed that the DAR printed and distributed thousands of copies . 
 Beginning in early 1933 , Dilling spent twelve to eighteen hours a day for eighteen months researching and cataloging suspected subversives . Her sources included the 1920 four @-@ volume report of the Joint Legislative Committee to Investigate Seditious Activities , and Representative Hamilton Fish 's 1931 report of an anti @-@ communist investigation . The result was The Red Network — A Who 's Who and Handbook of Radicalism for Patriots , hailed with irony in The New Republic as a " handy , compact reference work " . The first half of the 352 @-@ page book was a collection of essays , mostly copied from Red Revolution . The second half contained descriptions of more than 1 @,@ 300 " Reds " ( including international figures like Albert Einstein and Chiang Kai @-@ shek ) , and more than 460 organizations described as " Communist , Radical Pacifist , Anarchist , Socialist , [ or ] <unk> controlled " . 
 Far more than the Spider @-@ Web chart of the 1920s – a chart composed by a member of the DAR that plotted suspected red @-@ affiliated organisations with progressive individuals – The Red Network revealed the power of " guilt by association , " a tactic that would be used all too often by future Red <unk> with devastating effectiveness . 
 The book was reprinted eight times and sold more than 16 @,@ 000 copies by 1941 . Thousands more were given away . It was sold in Chicago book stores and mail order from Dilling 's house . It was distributed by the KKK , the Knights of the White Camellia , the German @-@ American Bund and the Aryan Bookstores . Subscribers to Gerald <unk> 's new journal The <unk> received a copy , fundamentalist preacher and president of the Northwest Bible Training School W. B. Riley claimed he had given away hundreds of copies , and it was advertised and sold by the Moody Bible Institute . It was endorsed by officials in the DAR and the American Legion . Copies were bought by the Pinkerton Detective Agency , the New York Police Department , the Chicago Police Department and the Federal Bureau of Investigation . A Los Angeles arms manufacturer bought and <unk> 150 copies , and a tear gas manufacturer bought 1 @,@ 500 copies which it distributed to the Standard Oil Company , the National Guard and hundreds of police departments . 
