 Like other Iridomyrmex species , the meat ant is an omnivore , retrieving food sources from various insects it tends , including caterpillars and various sorts of butterflies , particularly the larvae of the Waterhouse 's hairstreak ( Jalmenus <unk> ) . Meat ants usually feed on honeydew from sap @-@ sucking insects , flower nectar , sugar and other sweet substances . In captive colonies , workers prefer to consume small pieces of grapes rather than honey solutions and other sweet foods . These ants prey on various insects and animals , collecting both live and dead invertebrates and acquire meat from dead vertebrates . Insects the meat ants prey on include giant lacewings , which they swarm up trees to kill , the butterfly genoveva azure Ogyris genoveva , Indian <unk> , almond moths , the Western Australian jarrah <unk> and the larvae of the wasp <unk> . Large and developed larvae of the cabbage butterfly ( Pieris rapae ) are attacked more effectively by meat ant workers than those of other Iridomyrmex species . On sandy beaches , this species is observed preying on the polychaete annelid worm , <unk> intermedia , causing high mortality rates on them ( rates of 30 percent ) . These ants will feed on a number of dead or alive animals , including metamorphic crucifix toads , snakes , lizards , and birds . On some occasions , swarms of workers have been found on dead foxes . The meat ant is the only known ant in Australia that feeds on fresh guano . The collection of guano by a nearby meat ant colony shows the opportunistic nature of the species . Observations show that trails of workers in groups of two to four were found collecting the guano under an active bat roost within an abandoned mine and proceeded to return it to the nest . The collection of guano by any Australian ant colony was never recorded prior to these observations , but it is unknown why meat ants collect fresh guano . 
 Meat ants are among the very few native species of Australia that are not harmed by the toxins of the cane toad , an invasive species . Most of the time , foraging workers target <unk> toads . Observations show that workers would forage around ponds and seize any <unk> . This normally starts with a single worker making contact with an individual and tracing its movements , followed by three or four workers capturing it . All the participating ants would grab a limb and sever the legs , returning the prey item back to their nest . Most of the time these tactics do not work . For example , most toadlets are able to escape the ants by displaying aversion @-@ like behaviour ; an individual may escape by struggling erratically or forcing the ants to release their grip by returning to the water . This aversion behaviour leads to most toadlets remaining in the water or staying on objects such as water lilies , pieces of bark that the ants cannot access , or moving around on moist substrates . It is unknown if meat ant predation on the toadlets affected the population , but based on the population density of the toadlets within the studied site and the foraging time and efficiency , approximately 2 @,@ 700 toadlets could be removed per day . As the <unk> population density is extremely high , the impact of meat ant predation is minor . However , the survivability of the toadlets may be affected if the ants prevent the toadlets from foraging into many areas of moist substrate . 
 Water is an important resource for colonies living in dry and arid environments , but sometimes it may not be available . To counter this , workers are able to extract a significant amount of water from the sand with 2 % – 4 % water content and 4 % from the soil . Meat ants are unable to retrieve as much water from the soil , whereas with sand they are able to attain a greater amount of water ; however , the soil contains a wide variety of particles , including clay and coarse sand , which causes water to be bound firmly . Ants may retrieve it by digging or directly suck on the soil itself at a low metabolic cost . This may be an evolved response based on tested ants , but no observations show meat ants doing this . Meat ants are known to dig into moist soil to gain access to water or where water has been spilt , either if the site is nearby their nest or far away . 
 = = = Predators = = = 
 Despite its dominance among ants , a number of animals are known to prey on meat ants . The short @-@ beaked echidna ( Tachyglossus aculeatus ) is a prominent predator of the meat ant , mostly due to the high fat levels ( up to 47 % ) in virgin queens . These queens can almost contain 47 % fat , and when no queens are available after an attack , an echidna may stop attacking the nest . However , these ants are normally consumed either in low numbers or avoided entirely . Attacking echidnas burrow down into the hole they have made and consume them while handling the bites from the ants , as they frequently scratch themselves on the head and chest . The echidna does not consume meat ants throughout the whole year ; instead , echidnas only attack meat ant nests from August to October , which is when nuptial flight ( meaning that virgin queens and males emerge to mate ) occurs . This time period makes it much easier for echidnas to prey on the winged females since they are directly above on the nest . Despite attacks , colony growth is not affected by echidnas . 
 Several birds prey on meat ants . The masked woodswallow ( A. personatus ) and the white @-@ browed woodswallow ( Artamus superciliosus ) will gather around meat ant nests and swoop at them , catching several ants before eating them . Pieces of meat ants have been found in the faeces of the red @-@ capped robin ( Petroica goodenovii ) , rufous whistler ( <unk> rufiventris ) , hooded robin ( <unk> cucullata ) and the red @-@ browed treecreeper ( <unk> <unk> ) . Meat ants that forage on <unk> viminalis trees are often eaten by the <unk> . Some large ground @-@ feeding birds , such as currawongs , magpies and ravens dig out newly established colonies after a queen has found a suitable spot to nest . Small domes of excavated soil are present at such spots , revealing the queens ' presence to these birds . As a result , many queens are consumed by birds , leaving many abandoned nest chambers . 
 The blind snake Ramphotyphlops nigrescens follow trails laid by meat ants to locate them , and the snakes are also known to feed on the brood . Various species of spiders prefer to prey on meat ants , mainly attracted by the alarm pheromone the ants release . One spider , in particular , the cursorial spider <unk> bradleyi , is a specialist predator against these ants and uses their alarm pheromones that are released during territorial disputes to locate them . These alarm signals are created by oscillating the body along the longitudinal axis , which are mostly released when an ant encounters a nest mate . 
 <unk> <unk> moths feed on meat ant broods . The larvae of these moths are parasites to leafhoppers and will move to meat ant colonies to complete their development , where they will proceed to consume the brood ; the females lay many eggs near ant trails which are close to the leafhoppers tended by ants . Other observations show that the <unk> <unk> larvae are scavengers in meat ant nests , while <unk> beetles live in burrows near nests of meat ants , where the larvae capture and prey on workers passing by . The larvae of the spitfire sawfly and <unk> <unk> are able to regurgitate a fluid against the meat ant if they are getting attacked by them ; depending on how much is regurgitated , an ant will either walk away and clean itself or become fatally affected by it . Lizards such as the thorny dragon , which is a sit and wait predator , consume meat ants , but other lizards which eat Iridomyrmex ants usually reject this species . 
 = = = Life cycle and reproduction = = = 
 Nuptial flight usually occurs during spring , in October . Reproductive females only mate with a single male and begin establishing their own colonies afterwards . Nuptial flight occurs after rain , where the males emerge from their nest first , followed by the virgin queens ; groups of 20 to 40 females emerge after the males have flown away . The alates ( the reproductive males and females ) position themselves on top of the nest in order to heat themselves , and all fly at the same time once they are warm . This process may happen multiple times unless the weather had changed , otherwise , the queens would return to their nest . Nuptial flight may continue for days until all virgin queens have withdrawn from the nest . Most of the time , a single queen will start her own colony and lay eggs that will take around 44 to 61 days to fully develop and emerge as adults , but colonies can also be founded through multiple queens cooperating with each other , adoption into an existing colony , or " budding " ( also called " satelliting " or " fractionating " ) , where a subset of the colony including queens , workers and brood ( eggs , larvae and pupae ) leave the main colony for an alternative nest site . Around 10 % of queens will have at least another queen with them during colony foundation . Many queens are killed during colony founding ; major aspects include predation by birds and other ants , even those of the same species , due to the fact they attempt to establish their nests near large colonies . However , some queens are successful , sometimes with the assistance of neighbouring workers , who help the queen dig some chambers . Other causes of queen deaths include disease and starvation . A queen 's ovaries may take four weeks to mature , and she lays around 20 eggs that may develop into larvae in less than a month . Workers have been observed laying eggs , presumably trophic eggs . The function of these unfertilised eggs are nutritional , not reproduction . 
 The number of individuals in a colony varies . A mature nest of several years old can hold between 11 @,@ 000 and 64 @,@ 000 ants , while other colonies can house around 300 @,@ 000 . In some cases , enormous colonies can have as many as a million ants . Observed colonies are known to contain nearly 70 @,@ 000 larvae and 64 @,@ 000 workers ; some can have 20 @,@ 000 males and over 1 @,@ 000 virgin queens , but others may have more virgin queens than males . The ratio of worker ants to the number of the larvae in colonies ranges from one worker for every two larvae or two larvae for every worker . The population of a nest can be affected or altered by several factors : human interference can severely damage or completely destroy nests which potentially devastates the nest population , and overshadowing is the main cause of a nest 's demise . As well as that , neighbouring nests may increase in population if damaged or abandoned sites are taken over . Meat ants also rely on their nests to withstand climatic stress in summer and winter , as foraging activity and food sources are sometimes limited in summer , and in winter plant growth is almost impossible and workers are unable to survive cold temperatures . As a result , meat ants overwinter , which is a process where some organisms wait out the winter season due to cold conditions making everyday activity and survivability almost impossible ; populations may be affected greatly . 
 Most colonies are monogyne , meaning that a colony only has a single queen , but based on observations , some nests contain more than a single queen . Some nests are known to contain two queens , with some even having as many as four in a single colony , making them polygynous ; a high proportion of queens living in polygynous nests are unrelated to one another . Some colonies are <unk> , which means that multiple queens are present in a colony , but they are tolerated by all workers birthed from different queens and treated equally . Tolerance still occurs even when new reproductive females and males are born , but recognition based on kin from queens and workers is known , hinting brood discrimination when the larvae are fed or groomed ; queens will only take care of their own brood and neglect to look after broods laid by other queens . The queens , on the other hand , will only cooperate with each other during nest founding , but will be antagonistic once there are workers present in the colony . Queens become more intolerant of each other as the colony grows , and eventually separate within the nest , resulting in the queen laying more eggs . Such cases usually happen when <unk> founding occurs , or if a queen ant is adopted by a colony , setting up aggressive relationships . Physical fights between queens in the same colony are rare . 
 As most meat ant colonies rarely have a second queen , <unk> is not always associated with polygyny , although the two are frequently associated with each other because polygynous colonies reproduce by budding . This means that the ecological factors that promote <unk> and <unk> both differ . Studies show that most meat ants are produced by a single , inseminated queen due to the high level of relatedness in all but one tested colonies . Colonies that are not closely related are the result of colony fusion ( meaning that two unrelated and separate colonies form a single entity ) . Meat ants also show nest fidelity : in polydomous colonies , workers from different nests will always mingle with others from different nests but never return to a nest they do not originate from . Instead , they return to the nest they enclosed in . This means that colonies may only <unk> through brood transfer . As discussed before , nestmates from different nests will always be aggressive towards each other , but this is due to a number of factors : genetic and spatial distance in nests can correlate with the level of aggression exhibited by the ants . However , they exhibit more aggression to ants of different species from adjoining territories . They are also aggressive to conspecific ants from distant colonies , suggesting that environmental cues play a vital role in nestmate recognition . An example is that background odours in a particular environment may impair ants from identifying their own nestmates , and may need to make more attempts to determine an ant 's identity . 
 = = = <unk> fighting = = = 
 Meat ants are highly territorial and aggressive ants which establish firm borders between neighbouring colonies . While the boundaries are not physical , worker ants maintain them by engaging in ritualised fighting with opponent ants , an interaction most colonies engage in . Fatalities are rare on both sides , but fights may cause injuries to several workers . This fighting enables territory to be contested between opposing colonies without them killing each other and costing many casualties on both sides . Due of this , it is a method of avoiding casualties and promotes <unk> communication and assessment . A drainage of the work force would occur if these boundaries acted as a conflict zone if ritualised fighting did not take place . Lethal fighting only occurs if the colony is under attack . 
 Encounters between workers last for 15 seconds . <unk> fighting only occurs with two worker ants who come into contact with each other , but if both ants are from the same colony , they break contact and groom themselves . Afterwards they walk around until they make contact with another ant . A meat ant detects a foreign worker by intense antennation ( the act of touching with the antennae ) and gaping of the mandibles , and stretch themselves upward to appear taller and larger , suggesting that meat ants will do this in a display of size @-@ matching . Workers perform a behaviour known as " front leg boxing " ; both workers have their front legs sweeping up and down , where it would flex at the <unk> joint in a paddling motion . This paddling motion is aimed at each other during the fight , going on for three to five seconds on average . From this point on , this would determine who is a " loser " and who is the " winner " . 
 The ant who lost the ritual fight will lower its body , and lean sideways from the victorious ant . The victorious ant will remain raised upward and reach down to the worker and open its mandibles wider , grasping on the opponent 's mandibles , and then tug and shake its head slightly for a few moments . However , the fight may continue if neither worker backs down , and will commence a side to side posture . Both ants circle each other and present their gasters directed to their opponent , and on some occasions , either one or both of the ants would kick outward using their legs at each other . Eventually , they will break contact and groom once appeasement has been reached and continue to search for another ant . 
 = = = Relationship with other organisms = = = 
 Meat ants have been observed blocking banded sugar ant nesting holes with pebbles and soil to prevent them from leaving their nest during the early hours of the day . Banded sugar ants counter this by preventing meat ants from leaving their nest by blocking their nesting holes with debris , a behaviour known as nest @-@ plugging . If meat ant nests are encroached by trees or other shade , banded sugar ants may invade and take over the nest , since the health of the colony may deteriorate from overshadowing . Members of an affected meat ant colony later move to a nearby satellite nest that is placed in a suitable area , while invading banded sugar ants fill nest galleries up with a black resinous material . Meat ants sometimes attract cats because of the chemicals they secrete ( <unk> , <unk> and iridomyrmecin ) . 
 Meat ants are generally intolerant of myrmecophiles ( which are insects or other organisms that share positive interspecies associations with ants ) living in their colonies , but <unk> larvae are known to dwell in colonies . Although <unk> larvae sometimes prey on workers as discussed earlier , some are inquilines and live in the nest commensally . Unused or abandoned areas inside colonies are sometimes occupied by other species of ants and in some cases , termites . Meat ants may deliberately destroy the colonies of the termite Amitermes <unk> if competition between the two intensify . 
 Meat ants play an important role in seed dispersal . A meat ant colony is capable of dispersing 334 @,@ 000 individual bellyache bush seeds per hectare , which shows a strong ant @-@ seed relationship among the two . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 Meat ants are able to kill poisonous cane toads , an introduced pest , as the toxins exuded by toad , that usually kill the cane toad 's predators , do not affect the meat ants . Due to this , scientists in Australia have considered using meat ants as a form of pest control to reduce the cane toad population . One way of doing this is by establishing meat ant nests in habitats where cane toad numbers are high . In rural Australia , meat ants are important to farmers , who place animal carcasses on ant nests to get rid of them . In a matter of weeks , the entire carcass is consumed and reduced to bones . Due to the meat ants aggression , workers will pour out of entrance holes to attack if a human or animal disturbs their nest . 
 = = = As pests = = = 
 Despite their beneficial importance to humans , meat ants are sometimes considered pests , due to these ants disturbing the soil in urban areas and entering human houses occasionally to feed on food . The nests may cause annoyance if they are built around gravel paths , tennis courts and other cleared spaces . Although meat ants enter houses occasionally , they have adapted well to urbanisation and populations can flourish in urban areas . During the early days of the city of Canberra , newly constructed suburbs provided new nest sites for meat ants . Unpaved streets , gravel paths and driveways are among the many new sites meat ants could nest in , making them a commonly encountered ant that may pose as a considerable pest to many . The abundance of food supplies from parks , plantations and home gardens also attracted meat ants to urban areas . They pose a serious problem for citrus growers in eastern Australia , because they affect the biological control of Hemiptera insects , specifically those who produce honeydew . Meat ants cannot sting , but they can induce irritating bites and secrete a defensive fluid from the end of their abdomen . Meat ants have been reported causing mortality amongst poultry . 
 Many attempted methods of eradicating meat ants have proven unsuccessful . The first investigations were made in the 1930s to control meat ant populations in urban areas by fumigation , using carbon disulfide and calcium cyanide . Although these methods successfully eradicated some nests , they were rapidly reoccupied by those living in satellite or rival nests . However , the reoccupation of these nests by incipient colonies ( young colonies beginning to develop ) does not occur . This is because colony founding is often difficult and rare when most areas are nested by mature colonies . This behaviour has led to long @-@ term maintenance and repeated treatments to ensure the nests are not resettled . In addition , not all nests can be treated , and some may remain undetected from pest controllers . In 1973 , Greaves notes that the poor penetration of insecticides into all nest galleries may be the reason why nests are reoccupied , but owing to the nest structure , the insecticides have to be poured into each individual hole as no gallery connects to one another . Missing a single gallery can mostly lead to the reoccupation of the nest site . Greaves concludes that dieldrin is the most effective insecticide to control meat ants , capable of killing the ants quickly and being the most long @-@ lasting chemical used . 
 The difficulty of eradicating meat ants has led to further studies . Two studies between 1996 and 2002 studied the effects of granular baits on meat ant colonies . Bait containing <unk> and fipronil effectively reduced the number of workers foraging . However , this was only effective when 10 g ( 0 @.@ 35 oz ) of bait was placed on citrus trees or onto mounds . The ant bait <unk> was used in a recent study to identify an effective method of eradicating meat ants , but results showed that the bait failed to reduce ant populations significantly . There was evidence that the amount of active mounds declined , but this effect was only temporary . This is due to colonies only having 5 g ( 0 @.@ 18 oz ) of bait which was insufficient to eliminate further nests , but the effect may have been more dramatic if extra bait was used . 
 = = = Cited literature = = = 
 Common , <unk> ( 1990 ) . Moths of Australia . Burwood , Victoria : BRILL . ISBN 978 @-@ 90 @-@ 04 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Hölldobler , B. ; Wilson , E.O. ( 1990 ) . The Ants . Cambridge , Massachusetts : Belknap Press of Harvard University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 674 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Trager , J.C. ( 1988 ) . Advances in <unk> ( 1st ed . ) . Leiden , Netherlands : E.J. BRILL . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 38 @-@ 1 . 
 = Giving Victims a Voice = 
 Giving Victims a Voice is a report published in January 2013 , relating to allegations of sexual abuse made against English DJ and BBC Television presenter Jimmy Savile ( 1926 – 2011 ) as part of the Operation Yewtree criminal investigation . It was initiated as a result of publicity surrounding the Jimmy Savile sexual abuse scandal . The Metropolitan Police Service ( MPS ) and the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children ( NSPCC ) jointly produced this report . It marked the end of investigations made under the operation regarding Savile alone . 
 The scandal resulted in hundreds of alleged victims of Savile and other abusers approaching the police and the NSPCC . Their claims were investigated and formed the basis of the report , which found that Savile 's alleged offences were committed across England and Scotland , in hospitals , prison facilities , schools and BBC premises . Offences were reported between 1955 and 2009 , totalling 214 alleged offences across 28 police forces . The most frequent alleged offending coincided with Savile 's peak celebrity status . Numbers of alleged victims totalled 450 , of whom 328 were minors at the time . They were aged between 8 and 47 years , majority being 13 – 16 . 
 The Director of Public Prosecutions ( DPP ) described the report as marking a " watershed moment " and apologised for " shortcomings " in the handling of prior abuse claims . The report 's publication resulted in some highlighting what could be systemic failure because of the number of complainants and institutions identified , but others criticised it for treating allegations as facts . The DPP 's Principal Legal Advisor concluded that Savile could have been prosecuted for offences against at least three victims during his lifetime . After the report , investigations were further initiated in other hospitals . Ex @-@ Metropolitan Police Commissioner Peter Spindler ( who had previously led Operation Yewtree ) estimated that there may be many more victims who had not come forward . 
 = = Background = = 
 In September and October 2012 , claims were widely publicised that the English DJ and BBC Television presenter Jimmy Savile ( 31 October 1926 – 29 October 2011 ) had committed sexual abuse . The publicity began on 5 October 2012 after an ITV Exposure documentary broadcast allegations . By 11 October , allegations had been made to 13 British police forces . On 19 October , the Metropolitan Police Service launched a formal criminal investigation , Operation Yewtree , into historic allegations of child sexual abuse by Savile and others . It described the alleged abuse as being " on an unprecedented scale " , and the number of potential victims as " staggering " . 
 Much of Savile 's career involved working with children and young people , including visiting schools and hospital wards . He spent 20 years presenting Top of the Pops before a teenage audience , and an overlapping 20 years presenting Jim 'll Fix It , in which he helped the wishes of viewers , mainly children , come true . During his lifetime , two police investigations had looked into reports about Savile , the earliest known being in 1958 , but none had led to charges ; the reports had each concluded that there was insufficient evidence for any charges to be brought relating to sexual offences . In October 2012 , it was announced that the Director of Public Prosecutions , Keir Starmer , would investigate why proceedings against Savile in 2009 were dropped . 
 The 30 @-@ page Giving Victims a Voice report , published on 11 January 2013 , is a result of an investigation undertaken jointly by the MPS and the NSPCC . Its authors were Detective Superintendent David Gray , of the Metropolitan Police Service <unk> Unit , and Peter Watt , Director of Child Protection Advice & Awareness at the NSPCC . The authors had two intentions in writing the report . These were to provide public acknowledgement to alleged victims that they were being listened to , and to learn how child protection can be improved as a result of the investigation . 
 The report marks the end of investigations regarding Savile alone , though enquiries in relation to living people are continuing . 
 = = Summary of findings = = 
 According to the report , sex offences were committed by Savile on 450 people ( 328 being minors at the time ) across England and Scotland , and also in Jersey . The vast majority of the alleged offences occurred in his home town of Leeds and his main workplace in London . The victims were mainly unacquainted with each other . Savile may have committed more than 30 rapes , with a total of 126 claims of indecent acts having been recorded . 
 Most of the alleged victims were aged 13 – 16 , with 73 % of the total being minors aged under 18 . The alleged attacks were mostly against girls aged under 16 . It also included 18 girls and 10 boys under the age of 10 . The youngest alleged victim was aged 8 years and the oldest was 47 . The report said that a dying child aged 11 – 12 was " touched inappropriately " by Savile . The report states that they were mostly opportunistic , although child grooming was involved in some cases . The first and final alleged offences were in 1955 and 2009 . The period containing the most frequent offences was between 1966 and 1976 ( when Savile was aged 40 – 50 ) , coinciding with his peak status as a celebrity . The years 1975 and 1976 each had 15 recorded offences . 
 Among other places , including BBC premises , the alleged offences occurred in hospitals ( where he volunteered as a porter ) , schools ( upon invitations related to the Jim 'll Fix It TV show ) and prison facilities . According to the report , they took place 33 times in television and radio studios . One included sexual abuse against a girl in July 2006 , at the final recording of Top of the Pops . The report said that Savile 's celebrity status meant that he must have been " hiding in plain sight " . Operation Yewtree 's senior investigating officer , DS David Gray , said Savile used Jim 'll Fix It as a means of meeting victims . 
 Most of the allegations had not previously been reported to authorities , the reasons given included fear of disbelief and distrust in the judicial system . At least seven allegations of sexual assault made to police during Savile 's lifetime were not linked by police , with Savile as the same alleged perpetrator . The Crown Prosecution Service ( CPS ) said that the allegations made to Surrey Police between 2007 and 2009 could have resulted in prosecutions being undertaken . 
 Approximately 600 people had provided information at the time of the report 's publication with 450 relating to Savile . This resulted in the formal recording of a total 214 alleged criminal offences across 28 police forces . No attacks within the West Mercia area are included in the figures , and Gray expected the number of recorded offences to rise above the 214 considered by the report . 
 The report acknowledges that agencies such as the police and the NHS have " failed victims over decades " . It describes Savile as " one of the UK 's most prolific known sexual predators ... " It concluded that " no clear evidence " was found that Savile operated in a paedophile ring , but investigations were continuing regarding the possibility of his being a member of an " informal network " . The report suggests that Savile may not have been caught partly because , during the most prolific period , police investigations into such crimes at that time " lacked the specialist skills , knowledge and the collaborative approach of later years " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 It has been suggested by The Guardian and The Sydney Morning Herald , that the report may have highlighted what could be systemic failure , because of the number of institutions identified . Yvette Cooper , Shadow Home Secretary requested that child protection experts conduct an " overarching review ... into why everyone failed to stop Savile and what should be done now " . Jonathan Brown , writing in The Independent , opined that the report " revealed a man who used his celebrity status and outwardly well @-@ intended works to gain access to and ultimately rape and sexually exploit hundreds of vulnerable young star @-@ struck victims ... " 
 Keir Starmer , Director of Public Prosecutions ( DPP ) apologised for " shortcomings " in the handling of abuse claims . He said that the allegations had been " treated ... with a degree of caution which was neither justified nor required " and described the report as marking a " watershed moment " . Prosecutions were not brought by the CPS in three cases due to the victims not supporting police action . An apology for " missing the opportunity to prosecute Savile in 2009 " was made by the CPS . Principal Legal Advisor to the DPP , Alison Levitt QC concluded that Savile could have been prosecuted during his lifetime for offences against at least three ( of the four ) victims . When interviewed under caution by Surrey police in 2009 , Savile referred to the allegations as an " occupational hazard " , saying to have previously sued five newspapers . 
 Former editor of The Daily Telegraph , Charles Moore noted that the report does not reveal the " extent of abuse " and that it " contains [ no actual evidence ] , in a sense which a court would recognise . " He commented that it " undermines justice " by " treat [ ing ] allegations as facts " , noting the report 's admission that " the information has not been corroborated " and viewing its contents as " not a contribution to the truth " . He did not feel it right to overcompensate for previously dismissive attitudes to such an extent " that every accusation must be considered true " . Referring to the 2000 BBC Two documentary When Louis Met ... Jimmy , Moore noted Savile 's response to claims of paedophilia : " How does anyone know whether I am or not ? " He concluded that this specific question ( and also concerning " future <unk> " ) is " not [ made ] easier to answer " by the " uninformative and self @-@ righteous " report . 
 Salon reported that because Savile could not face prosecution , the report offers the " closest thing to justice " for the alleged victims . Spiked criticised the report by describing it as " the peak of ' victim centred ' justice " and lacking in objectivity . Academics in Social Work Studies at the University of Edinburgh have questioned the veracity of the report . Writing in " Moral Panics , Jimmy Savile and Social Work : a 21st century morality tale " that " Giving Victims a Voice is full of scare @-@ mongering , exaggeration and elision , as allegations are presented as ' facts ' and accusations become ' offences ' , held to be incontrovertibly true " . The Lucy Faithfull Foundation stated that children must be better protected in the future . It also called for a national strategy to prevent such child sexual abuse . The BBC restated a " sincere apology to the victims " , saying it was " appalled " at Savile 's preying on its premises . 
 = = Consequences = = 
 The departure of Newsnight 's editor Peter Rippon in October 2012 was a precursor to a permanent replacement being sought by the BBC after the release of the report . In April 2013 ex @-@ Metropolitan Police Commissioner Peter Spindler , who had previously led Operation Yewtree , stated that many more victims had probably not come forward . He estimated that this number could be two or three times the 450 accounted for in the report . An inquiry by West Yorkshire Police into Savile 's " Friday Morning Club " , which was regularly attended by officers , was reported on in February 2013 . It was subsequently claimed that officers may have been groomed by Savile , partly as a result of his celebrity status . Investigations into further hospitals were underway during 2013 , and a children 's home in early 2014 . 
 The NSPCC reported that the Savile scandal had resulted in an increase in overall reports of sexual abuse by 81 % . This was measured by comparing the years immediately before and after broadcasting of the Exposure documentary . A subsequent NSPCC report was commissioned by Her Majesty 's Inspectorate of Constabulary and published in January 2014 . It reported on interviews with 26 individuals , a number of whom were abused in hospitals . Upon reporting abuse to staff at the time , they felt that their concerns were not treated sincerely . 
 = Divergence ( Star Trek : Enterprise ) = 
 " Divergence " is the sixteenth episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Enterprise . It originally aired on February 25 , 2005 in the United States on UPN . It was the fourth episode of Enterprise to be written by Judith and Garfield Reeves @-@ Stevens , and was the first episode of a Star Trek series directed by David Barrett . " Divergence " is the second part of a two part story , following on from " Affliction " . 
 Set in the 22nd century , the series follows the adventures of the first Starfleet starship Enterprise , registration NX @-@ 01 . In this episode , Columbia arrives so that Commander Tucker can be transferred to conduct repairs on Enterprise 's warp engine before it overloads . The two ships then pursue a lead to a Klingon research outpost where Phlox is under pressure to cure the virus that the Klingons created from augmented Human DNA . 
 Filming took eight days , with a two @-@ week seasonal hiatus towards the end of December . In addition to the guest stars who appeared in " Affliction " , they were joined by Wayne Grace as Admiral Krell . The episode received Nielsen ratings of 1 @.@ 7 / 3 percent , which were lower than the previous week 's episode . The critical response was negative , directed mainly at plot holes and characterisation . However , the two @-@ part story has been named as one of the best storylines seen in Enterprise . 
 = = Plot = = 
 With the ship unable to decrease speed below warp 5 , and the warp core reaching dangerous levels , Columbia and Commander Tucker rendezvous to provide assistance . However the crew realise that the transporter cannot be used at warp , so the ships will need to maneuver in close proximity in order for Tucker to be transferred . Captain Archer releases Lieutenant Reed from the brig to perform the transfer . Once on Enterprise , Tucker successfully performs a rapid non @-@ standard cold boot on the warp drive , which purges the Klingon subroutines . 
 Meanwhile , physician Antaak and a badly beaten Doctor Phlox update General K 'Vagh on their progress . K 'Vagh contacts Admiral Krell , who tells him that if a cure is not completed soon , the facility will be eradicated in order to contain the disease . Back on Enterprise , Archer questions Reed about his recent actions , and is contacted by Harris from Section 31 , a secretive agency within Starfleet . Harris reveals that Phlox is on an important mission and little else , but Reed reveals his location as Qu <unk> ; Harris contacts Krell , to inform him that Enterprise is on the way , and Krell reveals that he used Harris . Enterprise arrives at the colony , and Archer beams down to the base with <unk> to confront the Klingons and Phlox . 
 Krell 's Klingon battle @-@ cruiser and two Birds of Prey arrive in orbit and Krell orders the ships to destroy the colony . Enterprise attempts to intervene but is engaged by the Birds of Prey . Columbia arrives and joins combat with the two Birds of Prey , while Enterprise impedes the battle @-@ cruiser . Meanwhile , Phlox infects a restrained Archer , as he needs human antibodies for the cure . Antaak then transports a canister of the virus onto the battle @-@ cruiser which infects the crew , including Krell . Needing the cure from Phlox , Krell stands down the attack and the Klingon High Council soon agrees to distribute the cure throughout the Empire . Tucker then agrees to remain on @-@ board temporarily to assist with repairs . 
 = = Production = = 
 Filming began on December 14 , 2004 and ran for four days before the cast and crew went on a two @-@ week break over the holiday period . The production overlapped on December 16 with second @-@ unit filming on the episode " United " , which required most of the main cast with the exception of Billingsley as Phlox . The opportunity was taken to film the majority of the sequences with Phlox , K 'Vagh and Antaak at the same time on a different sound stage so as to not delay the production . After the break , production resumed on January 3 , 2005 . Minimal shooting was conducted on the first day for " Divergence " , as further second @-@ unit filming took place in the afternoon for " United " and for " Babel One " . On the second day , Eric Pierpoint and Wayne Grace filmed their scenes as they both appeared on only one set each . Whilst filming was scheduled for seven days , the second @-@ unit filming for " Divergence " pushed into an eighth day on January 6 , which overlapped with the production of " Bound " . 
 Judith and Garfield Reeves @-@ Stevens joined the staff as writers during season four . Prior to " Divergence " they had already written the episodes " The Forge " , " Observer Effect " and " United " . The Reeves @-@ Stevens said of " Divergence " , " we 've written a multiple @-@ starship action sequence that 's never been seen before , and that everyone 's very excited to bring to the screen . " " Divergence " was the first Star Trek credit for director David Barrett . Several guest cast members resume their roles from " Affliction " , including James Avery as K 'Vagh , John Schuck as Antaak , Terrell Tilford as <unk> and Eric Pierpoint as Harris . They were joined in " Divergence " by Wayne Grace as Krell . Grace had previously appeared across the franchise including in a voice role in the computer game Star Trek : Klingon Academy , a Cardassian in the Star Trek : Deep Space Nine episode " Wrongs Darker Than Death or Night " and as the Klingon Governor <unk> in Star Trek : The Next Generation 's " Aquiel " . Kristin Bauer made her franchise debut as <unk> . She later became better known in her appearances as Pam in HBO 's True Blood . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 " Divergence " originally aired on UPN , on February 25 , 2005 . According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode received a 1 @.@ 7 / 3 percent share . This means that it was seen by 1 @.@ 7 percent of the population , and 3 percent of all viewers watching television at the time of the broadcast . This was less than the ratings received by the previous episode , " Affliction " , which scored ratings of 1 @.@ 8 / 3 percent . It finished behind programs on NBC , ABC , CBS and Fox as well as What I Like About You and a repeat of Reba during the second half @-@ hour on The WB . 
 Michelle Erica Green , in her review for TrekNation , said that it wasn 't as good as the previous episode and thought that there were plot holes . She felt that some of the episode featured bad science , such as when Tucker was transferred between the two ships . She also criticised Archer going down to the Klingon base on his own , calling him a " putz " and said of the Klingon attack , " since when do Klingons destroy ships with deadly subroutines rather than , you know , <unk> ? " She thought the characterisation was forced , and wanted a better resolution to the events in " Affliction " which she had called " one of the greatest hours of Star Trek ever " . Jamahl Epsicokhan on his website " Jammer 's Reviews " , gave the episode a score of two out of four , saying that the battle scenes were " painfully routine " and that where the episode " runs off the rails is in these final 10 minutes " . He felt that it was a pattern of the final episodes in story arcs not having a " satisfying finish " and that " Divergence " followed in this pattern set by " The Augments " and " The Aenar " . The two part story in " Affliction " and " Divergence " were subsequently ranked the fifth best story of Enterprise by Den of Geek writer James Hunt . 
 The only home media release of the episode is on DVD as part of the season four box set . This was released in the UK on October 31 , 2005 , and on November 1 , 2005 in the United States . The Blu @-@ ray edition was released on April 1 , 2014 . 
 = In Excelsis Deo = 
 " In Excelsis Deo " is the 10th episode of the first season of The West Wing . It originally aired on NBC December 15 , 1999 , as the show 's Christmas special . Events circle around Toby getting involved in the fate of a dead Korean War veteran , reactions to a severe hate crime , and the ongoing controversy surrounding Leo 's past alcohol and prescription drug abuse . Written by Aaron Sorkin and Rick Cleveland and directed by Alex Graves , the episode contains guest appearances by Paul Austin and Raynor <unk> . It also earned Sorkin and Cleveland an Emmy , as well as one for Richard Schiff . 
 = = Plot = = 
 As the episode begins , Toby gets called by the D.C. police to identify a dead homeless man . It turns out the man ( a Korean War veteran from the 2 / 7 ) was wearing a coat that Toby donated to Goodwill , and Toby had left his business card in it . The event stays with him , and he decides to trace down the man 's next of kin . The only relative he can find is a brother , also homeless . Using the influence of the president 's office , he arranges a military funeral at Arlington . President Bartlet is informed about Toby ’ s transgression , but can only muster limited indignation and jocularly asks if the country is still in NATO . To the president 's concern that this could create precedent for other veterans to come forward , Toby replies " I can only hope , sir . " Mrs Landingham , who has just told Charlie about losing her twin sons in the Vietnam War , joins Toby and the veteran 's brother at the funeral . 
 Meanwhile , Josh – who is worried that Rep. Peter <unk> ( R ) may disclose information the Congressman has about Leo 's past treatment for alcohol and Valium abuse – approaches Sam and proposes using Sam 's prostitute friend to dig up dirt for use as leverage against <unk> 's allies when the time comes . Leo objects strongly to the plan , calling it unethical . 
 C.J. gets emotionally involved in a story about the deadly assault on a homosexual youth . She sees this as an opportunity to push hate crime legislation , but the suggestion finds little support among the others . Reporter Danny Concannon also disagrees , but this encourages her to finally accept his offer of a date , to have him convince her . 
 President Bartlet sneaks out to go shopping at a rare book store and refuses to take photographers along , much to Mandy 's chagrin . Donna has at this point been pestering Josh about her Christmas gift all day . While he doesn 't follow the list submitted , he picks up a book for her at the shop and writes a message in it that leaves her tearful but happy . 
 = = Production and real @-@ life issues = = 
 The episode 's title is taken from the angels ' song to the shepherds in Luke 2 : 14 , announcing the birth of Jesus , and is in reference to the show 's Christmas theme . The words also make up the beginning of the Great <unk> : Gloria in Excelsis Deo ( Glory to God in the highest ) . 
 It was awarded an Emmy for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series , credited to Aaron Sorkin and Rick Cleveland . In the summer of 2001 , a public argument broke out between the two on the internet forum <unk> ( later known as Television Without Pity ) . Cleveland claimed to have had the original idea , based on the experiences of his father who was a Korean War veteran , and felt offended that Sorkin had not given him a chance to honor his father ’ s memory at the award ceremony . Sorkin responded that Cleveland had not contributed significantly , and that writing credits were simply rotated among the staff writers . The argument ended amicably , with Sorkin apologizing for belittling Cleveland 's effort and the two writers expressing their admiration for each other . 
 The scene at Arlington was made with the full co @-@ operation of the Pentagon , who liked the message of the script and wanted to do what they could to help . Originally , the president was to have been in the scene as well , but this was changed because it " took away the power of Mrs. Landingham and Ziegler " ; it was felt that the scene would be more powerful without the looming presence of the chief executive . The fourth person attending the funeral is the superintendent of Arlington National Cemetery John C. Metzler , Jr . , appearing as himself . The funeral is accompanied by the song " The Little Drummer Boy " , sung by the boys ' choir . 
 The story about the hate crime against the young homosexual man is based on the real @-@ life case of Matthew Shepard . This was confirmed by Allison Janney in an interview with the gay magazine The Advocate . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Sorkin and Cleveland won an Emmy for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series , and actor Richard Schiff ( Toby Ziegler ) was awarded the prize for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series . The episode was also nominated for " Outstanding Single @-@ Camera Picture Editing for a Series " and " Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Drama Series " . Cleveland and Sorkin also won the Writers Guild of America Award for best episodic drama at the February 2001 ceremony for " In Excelsis Deo " . 
 = Hurricane Lester ( 1992 ) = 
 Hurricane Lester was the first Pacific tropical cyclone to enter the United States as a tropical storm since 1967 . The twelfth named storm and seventh hurricane of the 1992 Pacific hurricane season , Lester formed on August 20 from a tropical wave southwest of Mexico . The tropical storm moved generally northwestward while steadily intensifying . After turning to the north , approaching the Mexican coast , Lester attained hurricane status . The hurricane reached peak winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) before making landfall on west @-@ central Baja California . The system weakened while moving across the peninsula and then over northwestern Mexico . Not long after entering Arizona , Lester weakened to a tropical depression , and dissipated on August 24 , 1992 , over New Mexico . 
 In Mexico , the hurricane resulted in $ 3 million in damage ( 1992 USD , $ 4 @.@ 7 million 2011 USD ) . It also left 5 @,@ 000 people left homeless , and was responsible for three fatalities . The remnants of Lester also produced moderate rainfall and minor flooding across southern California , Colorado , Arizona and New Mexico , as well as rare August snow in the Rocky Mountains . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A weak tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on August 7 . It tracked across the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea without development due to strong wind shear . The wave then split into two , with the northern portion dissipating over Cuba on August 15 and the southern portion continuing westward . The wave crossed Central America and entered the Pacific Ocean on August 16 . Deep convection increased over the wave upon entering the Pacific , and early on August 19 it started to become better organized . After the development of a low @-@ level circulation , the system organized into Tropical Depression Fourteen @-@ E on August 20 while located about 275 miles ( 445 km ) south @-@ southwest of Manzanillo , Colima . 
 The depression gradually tracked northwestward at 15 mph ( 24 km / h ) . Although the center of the depression was initially uncertain , it slowly strengthened and steadily organized . The depression attained tropical storm status late on August 20 , upon which the storm was named Lester . The cyclone continued to the northwest , and passed directly over Socorro Island on August 21 . By early the next day , an eastward moving trough weakened the ridge to its north , resulting in a to turn to the north . Around this time , forecasters at the National Hurricane Center predicted the storm would not strengthen to hurricane intensity before making landfall . Despite this , Lester intensified into a hurricane late on August 22 while located about 240 miles ( 385 km ) west of La Paz in Baja California Sur . 
 The hurricane continued to organize and banding @-@ type eye soon formed . Early on August 23 it attained peak winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) with a minimum central pressure of 985 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 09 inHg ) . Lester weakened steadily as the storm turned to the northeast , and made landfall as a minimal hurricane near Punta Abreojos , Baja California Sur about ten hours after reaching peak intensity . It degenerated into a tropical storm while crossing the Baja California Peninsula . After passing through the northern Gulf of California , it made a second landfall near Isla Tiburon in the state of Sonora . Lester entered Arizona as a tropical storm on August 24 , the first time since Hurricane Katrina in 1967 that an Eastern Pacific tropical cyclone entered the United States with winds of at least tropical storm intensity . Lester maintained tropical storm status until it weakened into a tropical depression near Tucson , Arizona . Later that day , the low level circulation dissipated over New Mexico , and Lester ceased to exist as a tropical cyclone . The storms remnants transitioned into an extratropical cyclone as it continued to the north @-@ northeast ahead of an approaching trough , and merged with the remnants of Hurricane Andrew on August 29 over Pennsylvania . 
 = = Preparations and Impact = = 
 = = = Mexico = = = 
 The Government of Mexico issued tropical storm watches and warnings for Baja California on August 21 . The following day , a hurricane warning was issued for the peninsula from Punta Eugenia southward to Cabo San Lazaro . The government of Mexico also issued a tropical storm warning for the Sonora and Sinaloa mainland from Cabo <unk> to Los Mochis . All watches and warnings were discontinued as the storm weakened and dissipated . The threat of the hurricane prompted the evacuation of about 10 @,@ 000 residents . 
 No observations exist for the duration when Lester , as a tropical depression , moved over Socorro Island , while winds were estimated to have reached 37 mph ( 59 km / h ) . However , a station reported winds of 23 mph ( 37 km / h ) six hours after Lester passed over Socorro Island . Several ships came in contact with Lester , with one in the eye reporting hurricane @-@ force winds for 11 hours on August 22 . The ship in the eye reported rough seas , causing it to roll 33 ° to each side and thus was responsible for a large amount of cargo to go overboard . 
 Hurricane Lester produced heavy rainfall across its path through the Baja California Peninsula and Sonora . Peak rainfall occurred in Mulege with 13 @.@ 58 in ( 345 mm ) . A weather station in Presa Rodriquez reported 8 @.@ 66 inches ( 203 mm ) of precipitation , with several other locations reporting over 2 inches ( 50 mm ) . The heavy rainfall caused extensive flood damage to the west of Hermosillo , destroying some entire communities and flooding a large highway . Roads were washed out , and power lines were knocked out . Waves up to 20 ft ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) were recorded . Flash flooding from Lester caused 10 @,@ 000 people to be evacuated from their homes . In addition , mudslides killed three people , and left 5 @,@ 000 homeless . The storm resulted in $ 3 million ( 1992 USD ) , equivalent to $ 4 @.@ 7 million ( 2011 USD ) . The Mexican Army provided relief efforts to residents after the storm . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 The remnants of Lester produced heavy rainfall across the Southwestern United States . In Arizona , rainfall amounted to over 5 inches ( 125 mm ) near Phoenix and Tucson , with much of the rest of the state reporting over 1 inch ( 25 mm ) . Moderate rainfall was also reported in western New Mexico and southern Utah , while one location in southwestern Colorado reported over 5 inches ( 125 mm ) of precipitation . In the later location , rains caused flash flooding of arroyos and a mudslide along U.S. Route 180 . Additional rainfall caused moderate flooding in Denver . In addition to the rainfall , moisture from the remnants of Lester dropped 2 to 4 inches ( 50 to 100 mm ) of snow across portions of Colorado , causing traffic problems in mountainous areas . A weather station on Mt . Harvard recorded about 4 inches ( 100 mm ) of snow during Lester 's passage through Colorado . Moisture enhanced from a cold front , the remnants Lester extended through the eastern United States , with Mattoon , Illinois reporting a peak of 5 @.@ 96 inches ( 151 mm ) . In all , rain from Lester caused rainfall records in Minnesota , Nebraska , Colorado , and North Dakota . 
 = Forever ( U.S. TV series ) = 
 Forever is an American fantasy crime drama television series that aired on ABC as part of the 2014 – 15 fall television season . Created by Matt Miller , it centers on the character of Dr. Henry Morgan , an immortal New York City medical examiner who uses his extensive knowledge to assist the New York City Police Department ( NYPD ) in solving crimes and to discover a way to end his immortality . Flashbacks within each episode reveal various details of Henry 's life . 
 The series network aired a sneak preview on September 22 , 2014 , and resumed the series at 10 p.m. EST on September 23 , 2014 . Reception of the series was mixed . In the United States , television critics gave Forever mixed reviews , with critics divided over the series ' similarity to other crime dramas and the series ' premise . In contrast , voters in several online polls ranked the series as one of the best of the television season . Internationally , Forever 's broadcast was well received in France and Spain . 
 Although ABC gave the series a full @-@ season episode order on November 7 , 2014 , the network cancelled Forever after one season . ABC cited the show 's live ratings as the rationale behind the decision . Television critics believed that other factors explained the network 's decision as the show gained viewers who watched the show up to seven days later on their DVRs . Fans of the series reacted strongly , creating a social media campaign to save the series ; despite these efforts , the series remains cancelled . 
 = = Premise = = 
 Dr. Henry Morgan ( Ioan Gruffudd ) is a New York City medical examiner who studies the dead for criminal cases , and to solve the mystery of his own immortality . Since his first death 200 years ago while trying to free slaves as a doctor aboard a ship in the African slave trade , Henry disappears almost immediately each time he dies and returns to life naked in a nearby body of water . Having also stopped aging , Henry 's long life has given him broad knowledge and remarkable observation skills which impress most people he encounters , including New York Police Department Detective Jo Martinez ( Alana de la Garza ) . Only antiquarian Abe ( Judd Hirsch ) , whom Henry and his now @-@ deceased wife Abigail found as a newborn in a German concentration camp during World War II , knows that he is immortal . Henry is stalked by " Adam " , who is also an immortal , and claims to have been alive for around 2 @,@ 000 years . 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 = = = Main = = = 
 Ioan Gruffudd as Doctor Henry Morgan : 
 Born in 1779 , Henry is a New York City medical examiner who studies the dead for criminal cases and to solve the mystery of his immortality . His first death was in 1814 while trying to free slaves as a doctor aboard a ship in the African slave trade . Since that time , Henry disappears each time he dies and returns to life naked in a nearby body of water . He has been married twice ; his first wife Nora , whom he married before he became immortal , had him committed to an asylum , and his second wife , Abigail , whom he met during the Second World War and remained with until 1984 , when she left to find somewhere they could be together without being judged for Abigail 's apparently greater age . He abandoned his original career as a doctor in 1956 after he and a butcher were shot ; Henry chose to crawl away and die instead of trying to save the other man because he feared others finding out his secret . Although knowledgeable about many topics , Henry demonstrates a general lack of knowledge about modern popular culture . He also dislikes cell phones but will use one if necessary . 
 Alana de la Garza as Detective Jo Martinez : 
 Jo is a sharp , no @-@ nonsense , determined detective with the NYPD who is both intrigued and disgusted by Henry 's detailed medical knowledge when examining a corpse . She finds his behavior to be " out there " , but still relies on his insight for solving homicides . Originating from a rough background with a law @-@ breaking father , she is also a recent widow ; her husband was a lawyer who died of an unexpected heart attack while running on a treadmill on a visit to Washington a year before she met Henry . She is stationed at the 11th Precinct . 
 Joel David Moore as Lucas Wahl : 
 Henry 's assistant in the Medical Examiner 's office , who expresses uncertainty about how little he knows about his boss , and an uncanny memory for his daily activities . He studied film in college before working in the medical examiner 's office . He makes horror films in his spare time ; in the episode , " The Last Death of Henry Morgan " , Lucas confesses to using the morgue as a set for several of his movies . Lucas tends to use popular culture references in his speech , many of which Henry does not understand . 
 Donnie Keshawarz as Detective Mike Hanson : 
 Jo 's partner , who is stationed at the 11th Precinct . He was in a band when he was younger , a characteristic added at the request of <unk> TV hosts Kate <unk> , <unk> Mandl , and <unk> Rad and of fans of the series who watched the after show . He is married and has two sons . He also has a brother . During an earlier interview with <unk> TV , Keshawarz discussed Hanson 's role as Henry 's foil , namely Hanson 's orthodox methodology in solving cases and knowledge accumulated over a limited lifetime <unk> with Henry 's unorthodox ways and extensive knowledge gathered over a long life . 
 Lorraine Toussaint as Lieutenant Joanna Reece : 
 Jo and Hanson 's supervisor at the 11th Precinct . 
 Judd Hirsch as Abraham " Abe " Morgan : 
 Henry 's main confidant and adopted son , although he has claimed that he worked with Henry 's father to explain their association to strangers . At the end of World War II , he was rescued from Belsen , after surviving a death march from Auschwitz . He currently owns an antique store where Henry uses the basement for his immortality research on himself . Abe fought in the Vietnam War and has a two @-@ time ex @-@ wife named Maureen Delacroix ( Jane Seymour ) . Abe 's research into his family tree revealed that he is a distant relative of Henry 's , as one of his ancestors was the illegitimate son of Henry 's womanizing uncle . 
 = = = Recurring = = = 
 MacKenzie Mauzy as Abigail Morgan : 
 Henry 's second wife and Abe 's adopted mother . Henry met her toward the end of World War II when they were working as medical personnel near one of the Nazi concentration camps . Over the years , she worked as a nurse in addition to being a housewife . The latest time period in which Abigail has been shown is 1982 , when she was still married to Henry but looked a generation older than him ( Janet <unk> ) ; in 1984 , she vanished without a trace despite Henry 's best efforts to find her . Henry has acknowledged that the end of his relationship with Abigail caused him a lot of pain that prevents him from dating anyone for whom he has real feelings . In the episode " The Night in Question " , Henry learns from Adam that Abigail killed herself after a car crash to prevent Adam from finding Henry . Abigail appears in ten episodes . 
 Burn Gorman as Lewis Farber / " Adam " : 
 A 2 @,@ 000 @-@ year @-@ old immortal who claims that he " has been here since the beginning " and that he has not found a death for himself . Analysis of his blood revealed that he had contracted several extinct diseases , including the bubonic plague . Adam was tortured as part of the Nazis ' research into his immortality , leaving him with a hatred of the Nazis and a sympathy for other Holocaust survivors , including Abe . Adam first appeared as Henry 's appointed psychiatrist and convinced a patient that Henry could pass on his immortality . Adam continued to try to find a lost dagger , one that not only caused Adam 's first death but also was used to kill Julius Caesar . Adam appears in five episodes . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 The concept for Forever came from a conversation between series creator Matt Miller and his five @-@ year @-@ old son about death . After the conversation , Miller began to imagine what life would be like if a person was immortal but everyone else , including that person 's own children , were mortals . He created a character who viewed immortality as a curse because of the pain of seeing family and friends die and who would attempt to find a way to end his immortality . That concept informed Miller 's decision to make his character a doctor @-@ turned @-@ medical examiner who used his occupation for research into his immortality and Miller 's decision to structure the series as a procedural . The details about the character 's immortality and his ability and his desire to end it would serve as the series ' main story arc . 
 Another series @-@ long story arc explored how other people learn of Henry 's immortality . The first storyline in the arc was the season 's second story arc , Henry 's determination to learn the identity of a second immortal who knows about it . The second immortal character 's morals would contrast his protagonist 's morals , serving as an antagonist for the main character . As for the family element , Miller created a family with a 35 @-@ year @-@ old immortal having a mortal son in his 70s . Miller stated in an interview with BuddyTV writer Catherine <unk> that he had never seen that type of family on television before , and he believed that it provide the show with an emotional element . 
 To demonstrate Henry 's immortality , Miller decided that Henry would die and would feel the pain every time he died . Anything on Henry 's body would disappear with his body during each death . Miller felt that Henry 's naked rebirth in water would be an interesting way to keep the show 's protagonist alive during the series by completing the death and rebirth process ; the nakedness would create several comedic moments within the series . Miller intended to use Henry 's death and rebirth process sporadically after the first two episodes so that the series would focus on Henry 's long life . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The first person cast was Judd Hirsch as Abe . When Miller and casting director Barbara Fiorentino developed a list of actors for the role , they felt that Hirsch would be the best actor to portray Abe . Hirsch was the first person asked about the role , they sent the script to him . Hirsch liked the series ' premise , its historical aspect , its intelligence , and the idea that the audience would see life from Henry 's perspective . 
 Two days after casting Hirsch , Ioan Gruffudd was cast as Dr. Henry Morgan . Miller wanted the actors to read the script so that he could see whether the audience would believe that the man had been alive for over 200 years . The search for an actor to portray Henry was more difficult than Miller expected . Miller and Fiorentino unsuccessfully auditioned actors from New York City , Los Angeles , Canada , London , Australia , and South Africa for the role , but the role was <unk> . One day , Miller noticed Gruffudd in the carpool lane while they picked up their children from preschool . For Miller , Gruffudd 's period work , such as in the series Horatio Hornblower , made him an obvious selection for the role . Gruffudd liked the script and felt that he could portray Henry . The story , the science fiction element , and the believability also attracted Gruffudd to the role . 
 Alana de la Garza was cast as NYPD Detective Jo Martinez . The show 's procedural aspect , the series ' serialized nature , and the believability of the world interested de la Garza . She also liked the idea that , in contrast to de la Garza 's characters on other procedurals , Jo had flaws . 
 Joel David Moore , Donnie Keshawarz , and Barbara Eve Harris were the last three cast for the series . Harris was cast as NYPD Lieutenant Roark . Originally the role of Lieutenant Roark was written as a male character , but Fiorentino cast Harris in the role . Lorraine Toussaint replaced Harris after the pilot , and Toussaint 's first appearance as Lieutenant Joanne Reece was in the episode " Look Before You Leap " . To prepare for her role , Toussaint visited the morgue and viewed a few autopsies . The character of Lt. Reece was to play a larger role in the series , but her scenes were cut so that the episodes could fit time constraints . The DVDs include the deleted scenes . 
 Moore was cast as assistant medical examiner Lucas Wahl . Both Miller and Fiorentino knew Moore from his previous work with both of them . Moore and Miller met when Moore guest starred on Miller 's previous series Chuck . Both Miller and Fiorentino , a personal friend of Moore 's , discussed the pilot and the role with Moore . Moore liked the idea of Lucas providing comedic moments to the series . For Lucas ' personality , Miller asked Moore to include several of his own personality traits when portraying Lucas . 
 Keshawarz as NYPD Detective Mike Hanson . The casting department initially did not feel that Keshawarz could portray a NYPD detective , but his work on Homeland convinced them otherwise . The Arkansas @-@ raised Keshawarz imitated a New York accent for Forever . As for the character 's name , the writers did not give Hanson a first name until the fifth episode " The <unk> Break " when Jo addressed Hanson as " Mike " during a scene . Miller did not learn about the name until later when Keshawarz mentioned it to him in a conversation about the episode . 
 As for the recurring character of Henry 's stalker Adam , Miller and Fiorentino cast Burn Gorman in the <unk> as Adam . Gorman voiced the character during the pilot and the second episode . Adam made his first physical appearance in the episode " Skinny Dipper " , which aired on December 9 , 2014 . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Beginning with the pilot , Miller structured each episode by telling two stories in the episode . The first was a traditional procedural plotline . The second story was a flashback from Henry 's past . The flashback either related to the episode 's main present @-@ day storyline , such as Henry 's involvement in investigating the Jack the Ripper case , or was a scene from Henry 's backstory , such as his life in the Lower East Side 's tenements in the 1890s . Both the father @-@ son relationship between Henry and Abe and one of the two season @-@ long story arcs , Henry 's relationship with his wife Abigail , were told through flashbacks . 
 When planning an episode , the writers started with the idea for the episode and determined the main story arc . They discussed which plot element could be associated with a previous incident from Henry 's life and how the flashbacks connected the two stories . From there , they determined Abe 's viewpoint about the case or his connection to the case . Then , they planned the story on whiteboard . 
 One plot device used in the pilot , Henry 's pocket watch , proved to be difficult to use in subsequent episodes . In the beginning , the writers would have Henry 's pocket watch fall out of his pocket so that it would not disappear with the rest of his body . It became more difficult for writers to develop believable scenarios in which Henry would lose his watch , so they did not write it into the plot as frequently in later episodes . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 Miller and the filming crew had planned to film the rebirth scenes in the pilot in several bodies of water , but they could film it in only one location . During the episode 's production , Gruffudd and the crew filmed the rebirth scene against a green screen in a university swimming pool due to the strength of the East River 's current . The crew later covered Gruffudd with water . To depict Henry 's death in different years , the crew refilmed the scene with Gruffudd wearing various hair styles . The producers then edited the scene by superimposing the film of Gruffudd 's swim in the pool with film of the East River to give the illusion that the scene occurred in the river . 
 = = = Title dispute = = = 
 Forever is also the title of a 2003 novel by writer Pete Hamill , with a similar premise : an Irishman is granted the gift of immortality by an African <unk> , yet must remain in Manhattan or the gift is renounced . On May 21 , 2014 , Warner Bros. Television received a letter from <unk> requesting that the name of the series be changed . <unk> stated in the letter that Miller 's character , setting , and title were very similar to Hamill 's . The letter also stated that Sundance Studios had begun to develop a television series based on the novel . According to Warner Bros. studio representatives , Miller never read the novel when developing Forever . As of September 2014 , Hamill has no plans to proceed with a lawsuit . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Forever received mixed reviews from critics in the beginning . Rotten Tomatoes gave the show a rating of 57 % , based on 44 reviews , with an average rating of 5 @.@ 8 / 10 . The site 's consensus stated , " Forever star Ioan Gruffudd is appealing , but his charm can 't overcome the show 's gimmicky , unrealized premise . " Metacritic gave the show a score of 54 out of 100 , based on reviews from 24 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " . TV Guide 's Matt Roush felt that the series could become a hit similar to Bones and Castle . Other critics felt that the series had issues . <unk> 's Sarah Huggins liked the concept for the series and Gruffudd 's performance , but she felt that the first two episodes were inconsistent " in tone and story " . Both Variety 's Brian Lowery and Adweek 's Sam <unk> believed that Forever could not last as it faced CBS 's Person of Interest in the 10 p.m. timeslot and as Forever 's lead @-@ in , Marvel 's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , had dropped in the ratings during its first season . Lowery also believed that the lack of answers about Henry 's immortality could not sustain the series . The Hollywood Reporter 's Tim Goodman concurred , feeling that the lack of answers about Henry 's immortality could pose problems for viewers . Still others felt that the series was a derivative of other series . Brian Tallerico of RogerEbert.com felt that the series was a derivative of Sherlock Holmes . Although Hillary Busis of Entertainment Weekly felt that Forever was a derivative of other procedurals , she stated that the show was " breezy and entertaining and reasonably clever , at least when its Sherlock Scanning isn 't out of control " due to the performances of Gruffudd , de la Garza , and Hirsch and due to Miller 's conceptualization of the series . 
 When Miller pitched the show to the various networks , network executives compared the series to New Amsterdam . New Amsterdam , a short @-@ lived drama which aired on Fox in 2008 , featured a 400 @-@ year @-@ old male NYPD detective and a female partner . Miller stated that he had not heard about the series until he read some comments on an industry website . Television critics also took notice of the similarities between New Amsterdam and Forever . USA Today 's Robert Bianco thought that Forever took a " smarter , lighter approach to the subject " of immortality than New Amsterdam did . Lowery , Roush , and Busis all noted the similarities between the two series in their reviews of Forever . 
 In France , Forever became an international hit . The premiere on April 28 , 2015 attracted 7 @.@ 08 million viewers . During the series ' broadcast in France , Forever averaged an audience of about 5 @.@ 7 million viewers , or 26 @.@ 2 % of the total French audience , making it France 's most @-@ watched series on Tuesday nights . After the broadcast of the final episode , French fans of Forever joined English @-@ speaking fans in their social media campaign to save the series . 
 When Forever premiered on Spain 's Antena 3 on July 15 , 2015 , it drew 2 @,@ 316 @,@ 000 viewers . Over the course of the series , Forever averaged over 1 @.@ 679 million viewers , making it a successful series in Spain . The series ' success in spite of its cancellation in the United States prompted Rebeca Cortes of El Norte de Castilla to call Forever " the summer surprise " . 
 The German paid @-@ television channel Sat.1 Emotions began airing the first twelve episodes of Forever on February 3 , 2015 , but the series did not begin airing on Sat.1 on July 20 , 2015 . The ratings fluctuated throughout the run from the 2 @.@ 02 million viewers which watched the pilot , but ratings never dipped below 1 @.@ 44 million viewers . During Forever 's run in Germany , the series averaged 1 @.@ 82 million viewers and a 6 @.@ 3 percent audience share ; the series ' market share was lower than Sat.1 's average . Among viewers between the ages of 14 and 49 , however , the show averaged 0 @.@ 96 million viewers and a 9 @.@ 4 percent market share , which was near the network 's average . 
 = = = Awards and online polls = = = 
 Forever has been nominated for three awards and has improved ranking in two online polls . Forever received a nomination for " Best Primetime Television Program - Drama " category for the 30th annual Imagen Awards , but lost to Law & Order : SVU . In TV Guide 's Fall TV Popularity Contest , Forever placed second , receiving 76 % of <unk> readers ' votes . It received a nomination in the " Favorite New TV Drama " category for the 2015 People 's Choice Awards but lost to The Flash . About 70 @.@ 4 % of voters in the E ! Online 's " The Definitive Ranking of the Best and Worst New Shows — According to You " poll ranked the series the third best new show of the 2014 – 2015 television season . When the poll was first conducted in November 2014 , E ! Online users voted Forever as the 17th worst new show of the season ; the series received 60 % of votes stating that the voters loved the series . 
 = = Broadcast history = = 
 On May 8 , 2014 , ABC announced that the network had picked up Forever for the 2014 @-@ 2015 television season . On July 15 , 2014 , the network announced that the series would have a two @-@ day premiere , with the pilot airing on September 22 and the second episode debuting in the series ' regular timeslot at 10 p.m. the next night . Forever premiered in the United States on ABC on September 22 , 2014 . Over 8 @.@ 6 million viewers watched the episode live , and among adults 18 – 49 , it had a 1 @.@ 7 rating and a 5 share . The episode also retained a larger percentage of total viewers and of adults 18 – 49 from its lead @-@ in than Castle 's premiere on March 9 , 2009 ; Castle kept 47 % of total viewers and 49 % of adults 18 – 49 while Forever kept 67 % of total viewers and 77 % of adults 18 – 49 . The second episode , airing the next night , was ABC 's top @-@ rated episode in that timeslot since September 21 , 2010 ; it was viewed by 6 @.@ 5 million people live and had a 1 @.@ 7 rating and a 5 share . Forever 's second episode tied CBS 's Person of Interest in adults 18 – 49 and beat the series in adults 18 – 34 and in women viewers . The episode also kept all of its adults 18 – 49 audience from the pilot 's debut the night before and increased the adults 18 – 34 audience by 8 % . 
 After the first two episodes , however , the series ' live ratings dropped significantly to about 5 million live viewers . The Live + 7 @-@ Day ratings , however , increased the audience by 3 million viewers , bringing the total audience to 8 million viewers weekly . That , and Forever 's performance in the 10 p.m. timeslot being better than ABC 's performance in that timeslot during the 2013 – 2014 television season , convinced ABC to pick up additional episodes of the series . Forever received a full @-@ season order on November 7 , 2014 . 
 Forever airs a day before the U.S. on CTV in Canada . In the United Kingdom and Ireland , the show was acquired by Sky1 . It premiered on October 2 , 2014 . The series premiered on Nine Network in Australia on February 11 , 2015 . In New Zealand , TV One debuted Forever on February 16 , 2015 . 
 = = = Video on demand = = = 
 On July 1 , 2016 , The CW announced that Forever was available on the streaming channel CW Seed . 
 = = = Series cancellation = = = 
 Before the season finale aired , Miller and the writers proposed the storyline for season two to ABC and to Warner Bros. They pitched the idea of season two exploring the ramifications of Jo or another character , aside from Abe , learning about Henry 's immortality , romance , and the pleasures associated with immortality . They also planned to introduce several new characters to the series . In an interview with Entertainment Weekly 's Natalie Abrams , Miller stated that ABC appeared to like the direction of the show 's second season . On May 7 , however , ABC announced the series ' cancellation . Gruffudd 's wife Alice Evans told fans about the cancellation on Twitter ; Gruffudd posted a letter on Instagram detailing his reaction to the series ' cancellation and thanking the show 's fans for their support a few hours later . 
 In the meantime , Warner Bros. and Miller began to shop the series to other networks . On July 7 , Miller posted a letter to fans on Twitter stating that , as of that date , Warner Bros. had been unable to find another studio to produce the series and that the studio was still shopping it around to the networks . During a Twitter question @-@ and @-@ answer session on September 17 , 2015 , Miller revealed the characters that he wanted to introduce and the character who would learn of Henry 's immortality in season 2 . 
 Officially , the network cited that Forever 's live ratings was the main factor behind the series ' cancellation . The pilot episode drew 8 @.@ 26 million viewers live , but the finale drew 4 @.@ 13 million live . On average , the series drew 4 @.@ 93 million viewers live and a 1 @.@ 12 adults 18 – 49 demographic weekly . In term of the Nielsen ratings ' Live + 7 Day ratings , Forever averaged 7 @.@ 034 million viewers and drew a 1 @.@ 7 adults 18 – 49 demographic . About 3 @.@ 23 million people , or about 68 % of Forever 's audience , watched the series within seven days of the episodes original broadcast . Forever had the 19th @-@ highest lift in total viewers for the 2014 – 2015 television season . In addition , Forever had the 7th @-@ largest increase in adults 18 – 49 from DVR viewing during the season . It was among the top 20 programs that received the largest increase in adults 18 – 49 within the first three days of viewing , and it received the 14th @-@ highest increase in adults 18 – 49 from Live + 3 @-@ Day to Live + 7 @-@ Day viewing . 
 Television critics believed that live ratings was not the only factor in ABC 's cancellation of Forever . The Orange County Register 's Michael Hewitt and Adweek 's Jason Lynch noted that several of ABC 's other low @-@ rated shows , in particular ABC 's limited series American Crime , received renewals in spite of ratings that were similar to Forever 's . American Crime had an average audience of 4 @.@ 98 million viewers live and a 1 @.@ 16 adults 18 – 49 demographic weekly ; its Live + 7 Day audience , however , averaged 6 @.@ 697 million viewers and a 1 @.@ 7 adults 18 – 49 demographic . Verne Gay of Newsday , Nellie Andreeva of Deadline.com , and Stephen <unk> of the Los Angeles Times pointed out that ABC renewed series produced by ABC Studios as a part of the network 's decision to increase ownership of their series to compete with Netflix and Hulu . Forever , produced by Warner Bros. , was one of three cancellations for the network , the other two being Resurrection and <unk> . Kate Stanhope of The Hollywood Reporter and Matt Roush of TV Insider felt that Forever 's time slot was a factor for the low ratings . Stanhope mentioned that Forever was airing opposite NBC 's Chicago Fire and CBS 's Person of Interest , both established series on their respective networks while Roush believed that Forever did not have a strong lead @-@ in in . John Sica , a reporter for The Rockaway Times who had worked on the series , cited a lack of promotion and an inconsistent scheduling of episodes during Forever 's run as factors that led to the series cancellation . 
 = = = = Fan reaction = = = = 
 Before the series ' cancellation , Forever placed fourth in USA Today 's 18th annual " Save Our Shows " poll . When ABC announced the cancellation of Forever , fans were outraged , and some left angry messages on ABC 's Facebook page . Using the hashtag # <unk> , others began a social media campaign on Facebook and Twitter to save the series . An online petition on Change.org generated over 6 @,@ 500 signatures within two days of being created , and it generated over 12 @,@ 600 signatures in three days . By May 27 , it had generated nearly 27 @,@ 000 signatures . Some have had requested that Netflix or another network take over the production of the series . By November 5 , 2015 , the petition generated 107 @,@ 150 signatures . 
 The cancellation generated a discussion on social media . When TVLine posted a story about the cancellation , it generated 2 @,@ 175 comments , making it the third most talked @-@ about story in the site 's five @-@ year history . About 43 @.@ 70 % of Entertainment Weekly online readers voted as the most @-@ missed cancellation in Entertainment Weekly 's online poll . 
 A fan @-@ made , non @-@ profit , unofficial graphic novel , titled " Forever & Ever ! " , debuted on Facebook on January 5 , 2016 . According to one of the comic series ' co @-@ creators , the novel expands the fictional universe created by Miller by introducing new material and new characters . 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In Australia , the first episode was watched by 619 @,@ 000 viewers , making it the fourteenth most @-@ watched broadcast that night . The second one was viewed by 522 @,@ 000 viewers , making it the twentieth most @-@ watched . In Canada , the first and second episodes received 2 @.@ 32 and 1 @.@ 57 million viewers , respectively . In the United Kingdom , the premiere garnered 847 @,@ 000 viewers , making it the highest @-@ rated broadcast on the network that week . In New Zealand , it was the third most @-@ watched broadcast in prime time that night , with 243 @,@ 650 viewers . 
 = = Home video releases = = 
 Miller revealed that Warner Bros. would release DVDs for the series during a Twitter question @-@ and @-@ answer session on September 17 , 2015 . On November 16 , 2015 , Warner Home Entertainment of Canada announced that DVDs for the series would be released on January 19 , 2016 . The same day , Warner Bros. announced that DVDs would be made available in the United States through the company 's Warner Archive Collection . On January 4 , 2016 , Warner Bros. announced that DVDs for the series would be released in the United States on January 19 , 2016 , the same date as Canada . The DVD release will contain all 22 episodes of the series on five discs , along with deleted scenes from many of the episodes . The DVD was released on February 3 , 2016 in Region 4 . 
 = Great Seimas of Vilnius = 
 The Great Seimas of Vilnius ( Lithuanian : Didysis Vilniaus Seimas , also known as the Great Assembly of Vilnius , the Grand Diet of Vilnius , or the Great Diet of Vilnius ) was a major assembly held on December 4 and 5 , 1905 ( November 21 – 22 , 1905 O.S. ) in Vilnius , Lithuania , then part of the Russian Empire , largely inspired by the Russian Revolution of 1905 . It was the first modern national congress in Lithuania and dealt primarily not with the social issues that sparked the revolution , but with national concerns . Over 2 @,@ 000 participants took part in the Seimas . The assembly made the decision to demand wide political autonomy within the Russian Empire and achieve this by peaceful means . It is considered an important step towards the Act of Independence of Lithuania , adopted on February 16 , 1918 by the Council of Lithuania , as the Seimas laid the groundwork for the establishment of an independent Lithuanian state . 
 = = Historical background = = 
 Lithuania had been part of the Russian Empire since the partitions of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth in the late 18th century . After the unsuccessful uprising of 1863 , Lithuania was subjected to Russification policies : the Lithuanian press ban was initiated , schools were required to teach in the Russian language , Roman Catholics could not hold positions in government institutions and could own only limited amounts of land , and political rights were restricted . However , these measures had limited effects on the Lithuanian National Revival , and a sense of the Lithuanian national identity continued to grow . The first Lithuanian political parties , the Social Democratic Party of Lithuania and Lithuanian Democratic Party , included goals of political autonomy for Lithuania within the Russian Empire in their basic program . 
 After the events of Bloody Sunday in January 1905 sparked a revolution in Russia , Tsar Nicholas II was forced to make concessions . In April 1905 a decree guaranteed complete freedom of religion , and even allowed religious studies to be conducted in native languages . The most important decree , the October Manifesto , was announced on October 30 ( October 17 O.S. ) , 1905 . It guaranteed many political rights , including the right to form political parties and organize convocations . This decree formed the legal basis for the assembly in Vilnius . The October Manifesto also announced the intent to hold elections to the Russian Parliament ( Duma ) , and the Lithuanian organizers used this as an official pretext for the Seimas : they claimed that the Lithuanians needed to prepare themselves for this election . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Historians disagree about who initiated the idea of organizing a national assembly . Some credit Jonas Basanavičius , while others argue for Jonas <unk> . The organizational activities were largely taken on by the Lithuanian Christian Democrats and by Vilniaus žinios , a moderate newspaper owned by Petras Vileišis . Vilniaus žinios was the first legal Lithuanian @-@ language daily newspaper to appear after the Lithuanian press ban was lifted on May 7 , 1904 ; it was quite popular and its circulation soon reached 6 @,@ 000 copies . On October 31 ( October 18 O.S. ) , 1905 a fifteen @-@ member organizational committee , chairman Jonas Basanavičius and secretary Jonas <unk> , was given the task of convening the assembly . They published an appeal or a manifest to the Lithuanian people on November 11 ( October 29 O.S. ) in Vilniaus žinios . The appeal , signed by the chairman and the secretary , aroused much interest in the public . Invitations were extended to all persons who would be elected as representatives by their communities at volosts , and to all other educated people interested in the future of the Lithuanian state . At the end of the appeal there was an eight @-@ point agenda to be discussed at the Seimas . It did not include the question of Lithuanian autonomy . 
 On November 15 ( November 2 O.S. ) , a controversial memorandum was adopted by the organizational committee and sent to Sergei Witte , Prime Minister of the Russian Empire . It was signed by only four people : Jonas Basanavičius , who was the primary author , Donatas <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> . It consisted of an introduction , which briefly summarized the history of Lithuania , and ten points of demands and declarations . The first point was the most controversial : it declared that Kovno , Grodno , Vilna , Suwałki Governorates and parts of Courland Governorate were historically Lithuanian and that the Poles , Jews , Russians , and other groups in those areas were merely invaders , who had arrived in the recent past . Belarusians were called " <unk> Lithuanians " . The last point in the memorandum , asking that the title of Grand Duke of Lithuania not be disregarded in the Tsar 's documents , also drew criticism . Other points demanded Lithuanian autonomy , equal rights to all nationalities and social classes , full political and religious freedom , free universal education in the Lithuanian language , the introduction of the Lithuanian language to government institutions , and the attachment of the Suwałki Governorate not to Poland but to autonomous Lithuania . Many of these demands were echoed by the Seimas . 
 Those parts of the memorandum that demanded Lithuanian autonomy and protested the possible attachment of Suwałki Governorate to autonomous Poland were reprinted in the Russian publication <unk> <unk> Vestnik on November 23 ( November 10 O.S. ) . The Russian government sought to demonstrate that granting autonomy to both Poland and Lithuania would be complicated , and would probably exacerbate national conflicts . On November 26 ( November 13 O.S. ) the memorandum was also reprinted in Vilniaus žinios . It was heavily criticized by non @-@ Lithuanians for its position on minorities and by Lithuanians for making demands on behalf of the Lithuanian nation without waiting for the Seimas ' resolutions . 
 On December 4 ( November 21 O.S. ) , about 2 @,@ 000 people arrived in Vilnius ; half of them were officially elected as delegates by their local communities . Because no standard elections procedures were offered , the process of selecting the representatives varied greatly . Despite irregularities , it was the first election in the history of Lithuania . People from <unk> were most active , while participation from Samogitia and <unk> somewhat lacked . Some of the delegates came from areas that are now part of Poland and Latvia , as well as from areas that were then within the lands of the German Empire ( Lithuania Minor ) . As a result a wide variety of communities , political groups , government layers , social classes , and organizations were represented . This parliament may have been the first in Europe to include women — there were seven female delegates . 
 = = The Seimas = = 
 It took two hours of intense discussion to elect the presidium of the Seimas . Jonas Basanavičius , officially nonpartisan , was elected as the chairman and Steponas Kairys , leader of the Social Democrats , was chosen as vice @-@ chairman . Other members were Antanas Smetona , priest Petras <unk> , and Juozas <unk> ; the secretaries were <unk> Gira , Pranas <unk> , and Juozas <unk> @-@ <unk> . The organizational committee proposed a rather academic agenda geared toward cultural issues for the assembly ; this initial agenda was vetoed by the delegates . They adopted a new schedule that was more political and highlighted two main goals : holding hearings on the current situation in Lithuania , and deciding which political demands should be submitted to the Tsarist authorities . A major portion of the first day 's proceedings was devoted to reports presented by delegates from rural areas . The content of these reports was repetitious and did not carry much weight . The most important question was that of Lithuanian autonomy . 
 There were rumors that some Russian politicians were seriously considering granting autonomy to Poland , and that Polish activists wished to incorporate Lithuanian lands into their autonomous region , calling on the historic tradition of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth . In light of these rumors , the demands of the delegates were much more radical than were expected . Most demanded autonomy in ethnographic Lithuanian lands along with any border areas that would decide to join . The region would be governed by a democratically elected seimas in Vilnius and bound by federal ties with neighboring lands . The " ethnographic Lithuanian lands " at issue were not clearly defined , but resistance to tsarist authorities was to be organized in Kovno , Grodno , and Vilna Governorates ; special attention was given to Suwałki Governorate . The Seimas ' resolution , adopted on the second day , explicitly stated that Lithuanians from Suwałki Governorate had decided to join the fight for autonomous Lithuania . This was largely an attempt to prevent the potential Polish autonomous region from claiming Suwałki , then part of Congress Poland , for itself . The election to seimas was to be universal , equal , direct and secret ; all persons were to be granted suffrage without regard to sex , religion , or nationality . If the election had taken place , it would have been the first in Europe where women were granted an equal right to vote . 
 This demand was far @-@ reaching and required transformation of the empire into a federal state , placing Lithuania on a par with the Grand Duchy of Finland within the Russian constitutional system . Heated discussions continued on the means to achieve this transformation . Some argued for armed resistance , but were reminded that the previous uprisings in November of 1831 and January of 1863 had failed . Others suggested peaceful and passive resistance : refusing to pay taxes , boycotting products from monopolistic companies ( mostly those selling alcoholic beverages ) , not allowing children to attend Russian schools , evading drafts into the Russian army , and organizing factory worker strikes . The delegates , who were mostly small farmers , also discussed land reform , demanding that all land would be confiscated from large landlords and distributed to those who actually cultivated it . However , no conclusions in that area were reached as there was a perception that any resolution on land reform would encourage the peasants to rise against their landlords as it was happening in other parts of the Russian Empire . 
 At the end of the second day , the Seimas adopted a four @-@ paragraph resolution . The first paragraph declared that the Tsarist government was Lithuania 's most dangerous enemy . The second paragraph demanded autonomy ; the third outlined the means towards this goal that were deemed acceptable . The resistance was to be peaceful and passive . The fourth and final paragraph demanded that children be taught in their native language by teachers chosen by the people . The Seimas , unlike the 1917 Vilnius Conference , did not attempt to elect an institution that could carry out these resolutions and act as a Lithuanian government . After the Seimas , rural areas were left on their own without central guidance . After the resolution was adopted by the Seimas , near midnight , Jonas Basanavičius read aloud his proposal to include an attachment condemning Polish ecclesiastical authorities for suppressing the use of the Lithuanian language in churches within the diocese of Vilnius . The church matters had not been discussed during the sessions , but the majority agreed to the proposal by a show of hands . Because the attachment was not fully discussed , Social Democrats did not consider it officially adopted . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 During the night from December 5 to December 6 , Petras Vileišis printed 36 @,@ 000 copies of the resolution for distribution . After the assembly , notorious for its loud , lengthy and intense debates , the delegates returned to their communities and started to carry out its resolutions . The old Russian administrations were replaced in 125 out of the 280 volosts ( 82 in Kaunas , 33 in Suvalkai , and 10 in Vilnius Governorates ) . These communities elected their own representatives , organized their own schools where classes were taught in the Lithuanian language , and stopped paying taxes . While the first Russian responses were disorganized and confused , the authorities soon marshaled their armed forces and returned the situation back to normal . The process was relatively peaceful ; there were only a few clashes between armed groups of peasants and Tsarist military forces . Unlike in neighboring Latvia or Estonia , peasants did not rise against their landlords . A number of the most prominent activists of this movement were arrested and sent to Siberia . 
 The Lithuanian Democratic Party and <unk> <unk> used the Seimas as an opportunity to organize the Peasant Union , which largely represented the interests of large and mid @-@ size farmers . The Union helped spread the influence of the Seimas into the countryside . A few days after the Seimas , Jonas Basanavičius founded the Lithuanian National Democratic Party ( Lithuanian : <unk> <unk> <unk> partija ) , the first nationalistic party in Lithuania . 
 The plan for autonomy was not accomplished at this time , but the Seimas was an important development in the Lithuanian bid for independence . It consolidated efforts , spearheaded the organization of political parties , strengthened national conscience , and energized the rural populace . The assembly resolutely rejected ideas to restore the old Grand Duchy of Lithuania and for the first time voiced the demands for autonomy . Many of the political and religious rights that were granted by the October Manifesto were retained . A number of agricultural , educational , scientific , literary and artistic societies emerged . 
 = KFC = 
 Kentucky Fried Chicken ( KFC ) is a fast food restaurant chain that specializes in fried chicken and is headquartered in Louisville , Kentucky , United States . It is the world 's second largest restaurant chain ( as measured by sales ) after McDonald 's , with almost 20 @,@ 000 locations globally in 123 countries and territories as of December 2015 . The company is a subsidiary of Yum ! Brands , a restaurant company that also owns the Pizza Hut and Taco Bell chains . 
 KFC was founded by Harland Sanders , an entrepreneur who began selling fried chicken from his roadside restaurant in Corbin , Kentucky , during the Great Depression . Sanders identified the potential of the restaurant franchising concept , and the first " Kentucky Fried Chicken " franchise opened in Utah in 1952 . KFC popularized chicken in the fast food industry , diversifying the market by challenging the established dominance of the hamburger . By branding himself as " Colonel Sanders " , Harland became a prominent figure of American cultural history , and his image remains widely used in KFC advertising . However , the company 's rapid expansion overwhelmed the aging Sanders and , in 1964 , he sold it to a group of investors led by John Y. Brown , Jr. and Jack C. Massey . 
 KFC was one of the first fast food chains to expand internationally , opening outlets in Canada , the United Kingdom , Mexico , and Jamaica by the mid @-@ 1960s . Throughout the 1970s and 1980s , KFC experienced mixed fortunes domestically , as it went through a series of changes in corporate ownership with little or no experience in the restaurant business . In the early 1970s , KFC was sold to the spirits distributor Heublein , who were taken over by the R.J. Reynolds food and tobacco conglomerate , who sold the chain to PepsiCo . The chain continued to expand overseas however , and in 1987 KFC became the first Western restaurant chain to open in China . The chain has since expanded rapidly in China , which is now the company 's single largest market . PepsiCo spun off its restaurants division as Tricon Global Restaurants , which later changed its name to Yum ! Brands . 
 KFC 's original product is pressure fried chicken pieces , seasoned with Sanders ' recipe of 11 herbs and spices . The constituents of the recipe represent a notable trade secret . Larger portions of fried chicken are served in a cardboard " bucket " , which has become a well known feature of the chain since it was first introduced by franchisee Pete Harman in 1957 . Since the early 1990s , KFC has expanded its menu to offer other chicken products such as chicken fillet burgers and wraps , as well as salads and side dishes , such as French fries and coleslaw , desserts , and soft drinks , the latter often supplied by PepsiCo . KFC is known for its former and current slogan " Finger Lickin ' Good " , which was replaced by " Nobody does chicken like KFC " and " So good " in the interim . 
 = = History = = 
 Harland Sanders was born in 1890 and raised on a farm outside Henryville , Indiana ( near Louisville , Kentucky ) . When Sanders was five years old , his father died , forcing his mother to work at a canning plant . This left Sanders , as the eldest son , to care for his two younger siblings . After he reached seven years of age , his mother taught him how to cook . After leaving the family home at the age of 13 , Sanders passed through several professions , with mixed success . In 1930 , he took over a Shell filling station on US Route 25 just outside North Corbin , Kentucky , a small town on the edge of the Appalachian Mountains . It was here that he first served to travelers the recipes that he had learned as a child : fried chicken and other dishes such as steaks and country ham . After four years of serving from his own dining room table , Sanders purchased the larger filling station on the other side of the road and expanded to six tables . By 1936 , this had proven successful enough for Sanders to be given the honorary title of Kentucky colonel by Governor Ruby Laffoon . In 1937 he expanded his restaurant to 142 seats , and added a motel he purchased across the street , naming it Sanders Court & Café . 
 Sanders was unhappy with the 35 minutes it took to prepare his chicken in an iron frying pan , but he refused to deep fry the chicken , which he believed lowered the quality of the product . If he pre @-@ cooked the chicken in advance of orders , there was sometimes wastage at day 's end . In 1939 , the first commercial pressure cookers were released onto the market , mostly designed for steaming vegetables . Sanders bought one , and modified it into a pressure fryer , which he then used to fry chicken . The new method reduced production time to be comparable with deep frying , while , in the opinion of Sanders , retaining the quality of pan @-@ fried chicken . 
 In July 1940 , Sanders finalised what came to be known as his " Original Recipe " of 11 herbs and spices . Although he never publicly revealed the recipe , he admitted to the use of salt and pepper , and claimed that the ingredients " stand on everybody 's shelf " . After being recommissioned as a Kentucky colonel in 1950 by Governor Lawrence Wetherby , Sanders began to dress the part , growing a goatee and wearing a black frock coat ( later switched to a white suit ) , a string tie , and referring to himself as " Colonel " . His associates went along with the title change , " jokingly at first and then in earnest " , according to biographer Josh <unk> . 
 The Sanders Court & Café generally served travelers , so when the route planned in 1955 for Interstate 75 bypassed Corbin , Sanders sold his properties and traveled the US to franchise his chicken recipe to restaurant owners . Independent restaurants would pay four ( later five ) cents on each chicken as a franchise fee , in exchange for Sanders ' " secret blend of herbs and spices " and the right to feature his recipe on their menus and use his name and likeness for promotional purposes . In 1952 he had already successfully franchised his recipe to his friend Pete Harman of South Salt Lake , Utah , the operator of one of the city 's largest restaurants . 
 Don Anderson , a sign painter hired by Harman , coined the name " Kentucky Fried Chicken " . For Harman , the addition of KFC was a way of differentiating his restaurant from competitors ; a product from Kentucky was exotic , and evoked imagery of Southern hospitality . Harman trademarked the phrase " It 's finger lickin ' good " , which eventually became the company @-@ wide slogan . He also introduced the " bucket meal " in 1957 ( 14 pieces of chicken , five bread rolls and a pint of gravy in a cardboard bucket ) . Serving their signature meal in a paper bucket was to become an iconic feature of the company . 
 By 1963 there were 600 KFC restaurants , making the company the largest fast food operation in the United States . KFC popularized chicken in the fast food industry , diversifying the market by challenging the established dominance of the hamburger . 
 In 1964 , Sanders sold the company to a group of investors led by John Y. Brown Jr. and Jack C. Massey for US $ 2 million ( around US $ 15 million in 2013 ) . The contract included a lifetime salary for Sanders and the agreement that he would be the company 's quality controller and trademark . The chain had reached 3 @,@ 000 outlets in 48 different countries by 1970 . In July 1971 , Brown sold the company to the Connecticut @-@ based Heublein , a packaged food and drinks corporation , for US $ 285 million ( around US $ 1 @.@ 6 billion in 2013 ) . Sanders died in 1980 , his promotional work making him a prominent figure in American cultural history . By the time of his death , there were an estimated 6 @,@ 000 KFC outlets in 48 different countries worldwide , with $ 2 billion of sales annually . 
 In 1982 , Heublein was acquired by R. J. Reynolds , the tobacco giant . In July 1986 , Reynolds sold KFC to PepsiCo for $ 850 million ( around US $ 1 @.@ 8 billion in 2013 ) . PepsiCo made the chain a part of its restaurants division alongside Pizza Hut and Taco Bell . The Chinese market was entered in November 1987 , with an outlet in Beijing . 
 In 1991 , the KFC name was officially adopted , although it was already widely known by that initialism . Kyle Craig , president of KFC US , admitted the change was an attempt to distance the chain from the unhealthy connotations of " fried " . The early 1990s saw a number of successful major products launched throughout the chain , including spicy " Hot Wings " ( launched in 1990 ) , popcorn chicken ( 1992 ) , and internationally , the " Zinger " , a spicy chicken fillet burger ( 1993 ) . By 1994 , KFC had 5 @,@ 149 outlets in the US , and 9 @,@ 407 overall , with over 100 @,@ 000 employees . In August 1997 , PepsiCo spun off its restaurants division as a public company valued at US $ 4 @.@ 5 billion ( around US $ 6 @.@ 5 billion in 2013 ) . The new company was named Tricon Global Restaurants , and at the time had 30 @,@ 000 outlets and annual sales of US $ 10 billion ( around US $ 14 billion in 2013 ) , making it second in the world only to McDonald 's . Tricon was renamed Yum ! Brands in May 2002 . 
 By 2015 , the company was struggling , having lost business to other retailers and being surpassed by Chick @-@ fil @-@ A as the leading chicken retailer three years previously . To combat this , the company launched a new initiative with a plan to revamp its packaging , decor and uniforms , as well as expanding its menu . Additionally , beginning in May 2015 , a new series of advertisements was launched featuring Darrell Hammond as Colonel Sanders . 
 = = Operations = = 
 KFC is a subsidiary of Yum ! Brands , one of the largest restaurant companies in the world . KFC had sales of $ 23 billion in 2013 . KFC has its headquarters at 1441 Gardiner Lane , Louisville , Kentucky , in a three @-@ story colonial style building known colloquially as the " White House " due to its resemblance to the US president 's home . The headquarters contain executive offices and the company 's research and development facilities . KFC is incorporated at 1209 North Orange St , Wilmington , Delaware . 
 By December 2013 , there were 18 @,@ 875 KFC outlets in 118 countries and territories around the world . There are 4 @,@ 563 outlets in China , 4 @,@ 491 in the United States , and 9 @,@ 821 across the rest of the world . Outlets are owned by franchisees or directly by the company . Eleven percent of outlets are company owned , with the rest operated by franchise holders . Although capital intensive , company ownership allows for faster expansion of the chain . 
 Most restaurants are furnished with images of the company founder , Colonel Harland Sanders . As well as dine @-@ in and take @-@ out , many stand @-@ alone KFC outlets offer a drive @-@ through option . KFC offers a limited delivery service in a small number of markets . Units include express concessions and kiosks which feature a limited menu and operated in non @-@ traditional locations such as filling stations , convenience stores , stadia , theme parks and colleges , where a full scale outlet would not be practical . Average annual sales per unit was $ 1 @.@ 2 million in 2013 . Worldwide , the daily average number of food orders at an outlet is 250 , with most occurring within a two @-@ hour peak @-@ period . 
 As chairman and CEO of Yum ! , David C. Novak ultimately has foremost responsibility for KFC operations . Sam Su is chairman and CEO of Yum ! ' s Chinese operations , and <unk> Pant is the CEO of KFC . Richard T. <unk> is president of Yum ! , and Roger Eaton is the COO of Yum ! and the president of KFC . 
 = = = Africa = = = 
 The company hopes to expand its African operations , where it is already the regional leader among US fast food chains . The company is slowly expanding across the African continent , opening 70 outlets , but progress has been hampered by sourcing issues , such as a lack of quality suppliers . 
 = = = Asia = = = 
 KFC continues to grow in Asia . 
 In Malaysia , the first KFC restaurant was opened in 1973 on Jalan Tunku Abdul Rahman . There are 609 outlets as of June 2016 . In 1995 , <unk> <unk> KFC was founded in an effort to provide food to more than 150 orphanage every quarter . 
 In Sri Lanka , KFC was launched in 1995 at Majestic City . There were 25 KFC restaurants in Sri Lanka as of December 2014 . 
 In Singapore , the first KFC franchise was opened in Somerset Road . In 1993 , KFC Singapore was the first KFC in Asia to develop and launch the Zinger burger . In 2002 , KFC Singapore was acquired by KFC ( Malaysia ) Holdings Bhd . 
 In Bangladesh , the first KFC outlet was opened at Gulshan in 2006 . As of June 2016 , the country is home to 19 KFC outlets . 
 In Cambodia , KFC first opened on Monivong Boulevard in Phnom Penh in 2008 . 
 In Myanmar , the first KFC outlet was officially opened on <unk> Aung San Road in Yangon in 2015 . 
 = = = = China = = = = 
 KFC is the largest restaurant chain in China , with 5 @,@ 003 outlets as of 2015 . They are operated by the Yum ! China division . KFC became the first Western fast food company in China after its first outlet opened in Qianmen , Beijing , in November 1987 . 
 Local food items include rice congee and tree fungus salad , with an average of 50 different menu items per store . 
 In December 2012 , the chain faced allegations that some of its suppliers injected antiviral drugs and growth hormones into poultry in ways that violated food safety regulations . This resulted in the chain severing its relationship with 100 suppliers , and agreeing to " actively co @-@ operate " with a government investigation into its use of antibiotics . KFC China sales in January 2013 were down 41 percent against the previous year . To counter sluggish sales , the menu was revamped in 2014 . 
 In July 2014 , Chinese authorities closed down the Shanghai operations of the OSI Group , amidst allegations that it had supplied KFC with expired meat . Yum ! immediately terminated its contract with the supplier , and stated that the revelation had led to a " significant [ and ] negative " decline in sales . 
 KFC will open its first outlet in Tibet in 2016 . 
 = = = = India = = = = 
 There are 350 KFC outlets in India . The company has adapted the standard KFC offerings to Indian tastes and the menu options in India include the ever @-@ popular Hot & Crispy Chicken and Fiery Grilled bucket options , Chicken Zinger Burger , Rice <unk> , the more recently launched 5 @-@ in @-@ 1 Meal Box and a range of shakes called <unk> . The business was <unk> in October 2015 after Yum concluded a year @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ long exercise to reorganize its business under larger , well @-@ capitalized franchisees . In this regard , about a third of its outlets , operated by several of its franchisees , have been sold to a newly formed entity — Sapphire Foods India Pvt. Ltd . The new entity is owned by a consortium of four private equity funds , led by Samara Capital . The other investors are CX Partners , Goldman Sachs Group Inc. and a fourth fund , said a top executive at the local arm of the American food company . 
 The first Indian KFC was a two @-@ storey outlet on the fashionable Brigade Road in Bangalore in June 1995 . According to journalist Michael White , the company could not have chosen a " more difficult venue for its maiden entrée into the country " . Bangalore housed the headquarters of the Karnataka Rajya <unk> Sangha , one of the most influential , vocal and anti @-@ foreign investment farmers ' associations in the country . The first outlet suffered protests from left wing , anti @-@ globalisation and environmental campaigners , as well as local farmers , who objected to the chain bypassing local producers . Many Indians were concerned about the onslaught of consumerism , the loss of national self @-@ sufficiency , and the disruption of indigenous traditions . The protests came to a head in August 1995 , when the Bangalore outlet was repeatedly ransacked . The KFC outlet in Bangalore demanded , and received , a police van permanently parked outside for a year . The outlet was closed on September 13 , 1995 by local authorities , who claimed the company used illegally high amounts of monosodium glutamate ( MSG ) in its food . The outlet re @-@ opened a few hours later as the result of an appeal by KFC to the Karnataka High Court . The company stated the recipe was no different than that used in any other KFC store . Rural activist M. D. <unk> claimed KFC would adversely affect the health of the impoverished , by diverting grain from poor people to make the more profitable animal feed . Environmentalist Maneka Gandhi joined the anti @-@ KFC movement . A second outlet opened in Delhi , but was closed by the authorities throughout November , purportedly for health reasons , but more likely to avoid a repetition of the Bangalore incident . The Delhi outlet soon closed permanently . 
 KFC began to expand outside of Bangalore in 2004 , with a localized menu that was the most extensive meat @-@ free menu across the chain 's worldwide operations . It introduced a vegetarian menu that included rice meals , wraps and side dishes and , like McDonald 's , served <unk> mayonnaise and sauces . <unk> Varma , marketing director of KFC India , states " The vegetarian offerings have made the brand more relevant to a larger section of consumers and that is necessary for KFC 's growth . " KFC also began using Indian spices and cooking techniques to localize its chicken dishes . By 2008 – 09 , KFC operated 34 outlets in India . In 2014 , KFC launched the " So <unk> , So Good " menu as part of an India @-@ specific promotional strategy focused on enhancing their vegetarian range . The company has been up to a lot of innovation over the past few months with the launch of the first @-@ ever no crust , all chicken KFC <unk> in December 2016 . More recently , KFC got Mumbai 's <unk> to deliver its newly launched 5 @-@ in @-@ 1 Meal Boxes . The city 's <unk> , famed for their efficient delivery of office lunches , took on the role of KFC delivery men as part of an innovative marketing campaign . They supplied specially created 5 @-@ in @-@ 1 meal boxes to some office @-@ goers instead of their regular <unk> . The innovation efforts have continued with the launch of the Watt a Box , a practical new take on the 5 @-@ in @-@ 1 Meal Box , which can also charge phones . 
 = = = = Indonesia = = = = 
 In Indonesia KFC is the largest Western restaurant chain , with 466 outlets as of December 2013 . The chain has grown to hold an estimated 32 percent market share , and menu items include spaghetti , wraps and chicken porridge . The master franchisee is PT <unk> Indonesia . 
 The first outlet opened in Jakarta in 1979 . Salim Group , Indonesia 's largest conglomerate , became a major shareholder in 1990 , which provided the company with funds for major expansion . Its master franchisee , PT <unk> Indonesia , was publicly listed on the Indonesian Stock Exchange in 1993 . 
 = = = = Japan = = = = 
 Japan is the third @-@ largest market for KFC after China and the United States with 1 @,@ 200 outlets . 
 KFC Japan was formed in 1970 as a joint venture between the American parent and the Japanese Mitsubishi Corporation . 
 In December 1974 , KFC Japan began to promote fried chicken as a Christmas meal . Eating KFC as a Christmas time meal has since become a widely practiced custom in Japan . 
 In December 2007 , Mitsubishi assumed majority control of KFC Japan in a JP ¥ 14 @.@ 83 billion transaction . 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 = = = = United Kingdom = = = = 
 As of December 2013 , there were 784 KFC outlets in the United Kingdom . British turnover was around £ 684 @.@ 5 million in 2013 , according to Technomic . About 70 percent of outlets are run by franchisees , with the remainder company owned . The company employs 24 @,@ 000 people . Around 400 sites are drive @-@ through outlets . Average outlet turnover is between £ 1 and £ 1 @.@ 5 million . 
 Annual sales amount to 60 @,@ 000 metric tonnes of chicken , 60 percent of which is purchased from the four largest suppliers in the UK , including <unk> Group and 2 Sisters Food Group , and delivered fresh to outlets at least three times a week . The remaining 40 percent is sourced from companies in Europe , Thailand ( including <unk> <unk> Foods ) and Brazil . All of the Original Recipe chicken is sourced within the UK . 
 England had the first overseas branch of KFC which opened in Preston , Lancashire in May 1965 , and was the first American fast food restaurant chain in the country , pre @-@ dating the arrival of McDonald 's , Burger King and Pizza Hut by almost a decade . Ray Allen , an experienced Lancashire caterer , was the first franchisee . The first London branch opened in North Finchley in November 1968 . In 1971 there were 31 outlets ; by 1975 the chain had grown to 250 outlets . In the late 1970s and throughout the 1980s , <unk> began to introduce seating . KFC opened its first drive through restaurant in the UK in 1984 . By 1987 the company had almost 400 outlets . 
 In May 1997 , the " Tower Burger " , a fried chicken fillet burger with the addition of a hash brown , was first launched in the United Kingdom . In 2006 , the company stopped pre @-@ salting its fries and removed trans fats from its products . In 2012 palm oil was replaced by rapeseed oil in the fryers . Between 2004 and 2014 , KFC UK increased its offering of " portable " foods : burgers , wraps and salads . During that period , sales rose from around £ 500 million to almost £ 1 billion . In 2012 , KFC UK invested £ 9 million to install ovens in all of its outlets , so that it could offer <unk> chicken . In 2013 , KFC rolled out <unk> coffee across all of its UK outlets . As of 2014 , KFC UK is trialling serving only halal meat at 96 of its outlets . 
 = = = Middle East = = = 
 The first KFC in the Middle East opened in 1973 in Kuwait . Today there are over 700 outlets , certified halal , including the United Arab Emirates , Egypt , Qatar , Bahrain , Oman , Jordan , Lebanon , Morocco , Iraq , and Saudi Arabia . KFC Israel existed from 1993 to 2013 and featured kosher restaurants . In 2012 KFC opened in Ramallah in the Palestinian Authority [ 8 ] and later expanded to Hebron , [ 9 ] Bethlehem , [ 10 ] Jenin , [ 11 ] and three separate outlets in Ramallah : the <unk> Branch ( <unk> ) , Plaza Mall Branch and <unk> Branch . In 2013 the New York Times reported that KFC was being smuggled into Gaza through tunnels . 
 = = = North America = = = 
 = = = = United States = = = = 
 KFC sales in the United States in 2013 were estimated at $ 4 @.@ 22 billion by Technomic . 
 The basic model for KFC in the United States , not necessarily duplicated elsewhere , is a focus on low prices , a limited menu ( 29 items on average ) and an emphasis on takeout . A " very strong percentage " of sales come from African American customers . Many KFC locations are co @-@ located with either Taco Bell or Pizza Hut , or other Yum ! restaurants . When Yum ! owned Long John Silver 's and A & W Restaurants , these brands were often co @-@ branded with KFC as well . Often these locations behave like a single restaurant , offering one menu with food items from both restaurant brands . In 2003 , there were 354 KFC @-@ Taco Bell combines , offering the full KFC menu and Taco Bell items , and 13 units offering the full KFC menu and a limited number of Pizza Hut items . The concept originated in 1991 , when a KFC @-@ Taco Bell combination opened in Virginia . Some locations were also opened as combinations of KFC , Taco Bell and Pizza Hut , but this failed to catch on , and Yum ! CEO David Novak blamed a lack of franchisee commitment for its lack of success . 
 Initially , Sanders and KFC used hydrogenated vegetable oil for frying , but in the 1980s the company began to switch to cheaper oils such as palm or soybean . In the 2000s it became apparent that these oils contain relatively high levels of trans fat , which increases the risk of heart disease . By April 2007 , the chain had switched to trans fat @-@ free soybean oil in all of its US outlets . 
 In 2008 , Novak credited low US sales as being the result of a lack of new ideas and menu items . The Spring 2009 launch of Kentucky Grilled Chicken only resulted in a temporary halt to the sales decline . In 2010 KFC announced a turnaround plan that included improving restaurant operations , introducing value items and providing healthier menu options . In the same year , Advertising Age noted that KFC was losing market share to its smaller chicken restaurant rival , Chick @-@ fil @-@ A. In 2011 Bloomberg News referred to KFC US as " an also @-@ ran to McDonald 's Corp " . In 2012 , Forbes magazine described how many of the KFC outlets were " aged and uninviting " , and that the chain " hasn 't introduced an exciting new food item in ages " . 
 KFC was described in 2012 by Bloomberg Businessweek as a " muscular player " in developing regions , specifically Africa , China and India , while noting its falling market share in the US to rivals such as Chick @-@ fil @-@ A and Popeyes . Some analysts speculated that KFC would begin spinning off its ailing US operations . That year , the company began divesting control of company @-@ owned US restaurants to franchised operations , with the intention of reducing overall company ownership from 35 percent to 5 percent . 
 = = = Oceania = = = 
 There are over 600 KFC outlets in Australia , and around 100 in New Zealand . KFC was the first American style fast food chain to open in both countries . In 2013 , KFC reported an annual turnover of almost 2 billion AUD for its Australia and New Zealand operations . 
 = = = = Australia = = = = 
 Yum ! directly operates 160 KFC outlets in Australia . The largest of the 53 independent franchisees in Australia is Collins Foods , which operates 169 stores . KFC 's major poultry suppliers in Australia are <unk> , <unk> and Turi Foods . 
 The first Australian KFC was opened in 1968 in Guildford , a suburb of Sydney . The franchise was owned by a Canadian entrepreneur called Bob Lapointe . Between 1970 and 1971 , 75 outlets were opened . This had a major impact on Australian chicken production , which increased by 38 percent during the period . By 1995 there were 452 outlets , and the company employed 12 @,@ 000 staff . That year , Australia produced 35 percent of KFC 's international earnings . 
 = = = = New Zealand = = = = 
 The first KFC opened in New Zealand in 1971 at Royal Oak , a suburb of Auckland . By 1980 there were 37 outlets . In 1989 , PepsiCo acquired the 50 percent stake in KFC New Zealand that it did not already own from the local Goodman Fielder conglomerate . In 1991 New Zealand turnover topped 100 million NZD for the first time . 
 = = Products = = 
 KFC 's core product offering is pressure fried , on @-@ the @-@ bone chicken pieces seasoned with Colonel Harland Sanders ' " Original Recipe " of 11 herbs and spices . The product is typically available in either two or three piece individual servings , or in a family size cardboard bucket , typically holding between 6 and 16 chicken pieces . Poultry is divided into 9 different cuts ( 2 drumsticks , 2 thighs , 2 wings , 1 keel , and a backbone based breast cut divided into 2 pieces ) . The product is hand @-@ breaded at individual KFC outlets with wheat flour mixed with seasoning in a two- to four @-@ minute process . 
 It is then pressure fried for between seven and ten minutes ( the timing differs between countries ) in oil at 185 degrees Celsius . Following this , the chicken is left to stand for 5 minutes in order for it to sufficiently cool before it is placed in the warming oven . It is KFC policy to discard chicken if it has not been sold within 90 minutes , in order to ensure freshness . The frying oil varies regionally , and versions used include sunflower , soybean , rapeseed and palm oil . A KFC executive stated that the taste of the chicken will vary between regions depending on the oil variety used , and whether the chicken has been corn @-@ fed or wheat @-@ fed . 
 As well as its core chicken on the bone offering , KFC 's major products include chicken burgers ( including the Zinger and the Tower burgers ) ; wraps ( " Twisters " and " Boxmasters " ) ; and a variety of finger foods , including crispy chicken strips and hot wings . Popcorn Chicken is one of the most widely available KFC products , and consists of small pieces of fried chicken . In some locations , chicken nuggets are also sold . 
 KFC adapts its menu internationally to suit regional tastes , and there are over three hundred KFC menu items worldwide . Some locations , such as the UK and the US , sell grilled chicken . In predominantly Islamic countries , the chicken served is halal . In Asia there is a preference for spicy foods , such as the Zinger chicken burger . Some locations in the US sell fried chicken livers and gizzards . A small number of US outlets offer an all @-@ you @-@ can @-@ eat buffet option with a limited menu . 
 In multiracial Malaysian markets , KFC also has different limited @-@ time products to cater to different festive seasons such as <unk> <unk> <unk> for Eid al @-@ Fitr seasons and Golden Treasures for Chinese New Year in 2015 . 
 A number of territories , such as Japan , Jamaica , Trinidad , Barbados , Ecuador and Singapore sell fried seafood products under the " Colonel 's Catch " banner . In Jamaica , what was originally a seasonal offering for the Lent period was expanded to a year @-@ round offering from 2010 . 
 Value menu items are sold under the " Streetwise " name in locations such as Canada . Side dishes often include French fries , coleslaw , barbecue baked beans , corn on the cob , mashed potato , bread rolls and American biscuits . Salads include the bean salad , the Caesar salad and the garden salad . In a number of territories , KFC sell onion rings . In Asia , rice based side dishes such as congee are often sold . In Malaysia , chicken meatball soup is sold . In the US and Greece , potato wedges are sold instead of French fries . 
 McCormick & Company is KFC 's largest supplier of sauces , seasonings and marinades , and is a long @-@ term partner in new product development . 
 Due to the company 's previous relationship with PepsiCo , most territories supply PepsiCo products , but exceptional territories include Barbados , Greece , New Zealand , the Philippines , Romania , South Africa , and Turkey , which stock drinks supplied by The Coca @-@ Cola Company , and Aruba , which stocks RC Cola from the Cott Corporation . In Peru , the locally popular Inca Kola is sold . In a number of Eastern European locations and Portugal , beer is offered , in addition to soft drinks . 
 Launched in 2009 , the <unk> / <unk> range of frozen beverages containing " real bits " such as Kit Kat , Oreo and strawberry shortcake , is available in over 2 @,@ 000 outlets . Egg custard tart is a popular dessert worldwide , but other items include ice cream sundaes and tres <unk> cake in Peru . 
 In 2012 , the " KFC am " breakfast menu began to be rolled out internationally , including such items as pancakes , waffles and porridge , as well as fried chicken . 
 = = = 11 herbs and spices = = = 
 Sanders ' Original Recipe of " 11 herbs and spices " is one of the most famous trade secrets in the catering industry . The recipe is not patented , because patents eventually expire , whereas trade secrets can remain the intellectual property of their holders in perpetuity . 
 A copy of the recipe , signed by Sanders , is held inside a safe inside a vault in KFC 's Louisville headquarters , along with eleven vials containing the herbs and spices . To maintain the secrecy of the recipe , half of it is produced by Griffith Laboratories before it is given to McCormick , who add the second half . 
 A couple who bought the house formerly occupied by Colonel Sanders found scribbled notes of purportedly the secret recipe . Initially KFC wanted to file a lawsuit against the couple , but in the end , it dropped the lawsuit , claiming the scribbled notes are " nowhere close " to the original recipe . 
 = = = Equipment = = = 
 KFC initially used stove @-@ top covered cooking pots to fry its chicken . In the 1960s , the officially recommended model was the L S Hartzog developed " KFC 20 @-@ Head <unk> " , a large device that cost $ 16 @,@ 000 . The Hartzog model had no oil filtration system , meaning that filtering had to be done manually , and the pressure fryers occasionally exploded , often causing harm to employees . In 1969 , inventor and engineer Winston L. Shelton developed the " Collectramatic " pressurized fryer to overcome the problems KFC faced in quickly frying chicken to meet growing customer demand . The Collectramatic used precision time and temperature controls and self @-@ filtered the cooking oil – all while meeting Colonel Sander 's legendary high quality standards . Fred Jeffries , then vice president of purchasing at KFC , claimed that the invention helped fuel the company 's rapid expansion and success : 
 There 's no way it ( KFC ) could have grown like it did without the Collectramatic . Stores were doing about $ 200 @,@ 000 a year in sales on average with the pots . . . but they could never have done the $ 900 @,@ 000 a year it became without Win 's fryer . He ( Shelton ) helped set the stage for that with true engineering thinking . 
 Although a number of franchisees bought the Collectramatic , which had the support of Colonel Sanders from 1970 onwards , John Y. Brown had given tacit approval to franchisees to exclusively use the older L S Hartzog fryer , saying " Though those old pots were damn dangerous , at least we knew they worked ! I was mostly afraid these new fryers would break down in the middle of business . " Brown warned franchisees that they were in violation of their contract if they used the Collectramatic . Brown held his ground on the issue until he learned that his father , John Y. Brown , Sr. , who owned multiple KFC franchises , was successfully using the Collectramatic in every franchise he owned . The issue was eventually resolved after Heublein purchased KFC , acquired Hartzog and nullified the contract . The Collectramatic has been an approved pressure fryer for KFC from 1972 onwards . 
 = = Advertising = = 
 Colonel Sanders was a key component of KFC advertising until his death in 1980 . Despite his death , Sanders remains a key symbol of the company as an " international symbol of hospitality " . Early official slogans for the company included " North America 's Hospitality Dish " ( from 1956 ) and " We fix Sunday dinner seven nights a week " . The " finger lickin ' good " slogan was used from 1956 , and went on to become one of the best @-@ known slogans of the 20th century . The trademark expired in the US in 2006 . The first KFC logo was introduced in 1952 and featured a " Kentucky Fried Chicken " typeface and a logo of the Colonel . 
 Advertising played a key role at KFC after it was sold by Sanders , and the company began to advertise on US television with a budget of US $ 4 million in 1966 . In order to fund nationwide advertising campaigns , the Kentucky Fried Chicken Advertising Co @-@ Op was established , giving franchisees ten votes and the company three when deciding on budgets and campaigns . In 1969 , KFC hired its first national advertising agency , Leo Burnett . A notable Burnett campaign in 1972 was the " Get a bucket of chicken , have a barrel of fun " jingle , performed by Barry Manilow . By 1976 KFC was one of the largest advertisers in the US . 
 = = Controversies and criticism = = 
 Since the turn of the 21st century , fast food has been criticized for its animal welfare record , its links to obesity and its environmental impact . Eric Schlosser 's book Fast Food Nation ( 2002 ) and Morgan Spurlock 's film Super Size Me ( 2004 ) reflected these concerns . Since 2003 , People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals ( PETA ) has protested KFC 's choice of poultry suppliers worldwide . The exception is KFC Canada , which signed an agreement pledging to only use " animal friendly " suppliers . PETA have held thousands of demonstrations , sometimes in the home towns of KFC executives , and CEO David Novak was notably soaked in fake blood by a protester . President of KFC 's US division Gregg <unk> said PETA mischaracterized KFC as a poultry producer rather than a purchaser of chickens . In 2008 , Yum ! stated : " [ As ] a major purchaser of food products , [ Yum ! ] has the opportunity and responsibility to influence the way animals supplied to us are treated . We take that responsibility very seriously , and we are monitoring our suppliers on an ongoing basis . " 
 In 2006 , Greenpeace accused KFC Europe of sourcing the soya bean for its chicken feed from Cargill , which had been accused of clearing large swathes of the Amazon rainforest in order to grow the crop . 
 In 2010 , the Australian arm of KFC was accused of racial insensitivity over a television commercial showing an outnumbered white cricket fan handing out pieces of fried chicken to appease a dancing , drumming and singing group of black West Indies supporters . The clip found its way around the world on the internet , prompting stinging criticism in the United States where fried chicken remains closely associated with long @-@ standing racist stereotypes about black people in the once segregated south . 
 In May 2012 , Greenpeace accused KFC of sourcing paper pulp for its food packaging from Indonesian rainforest wood . Independent forensic tests showed that some packaging contained more than 50 percent mixed tropical hardwood fiber , sourced from Asia Pulp & Paper ( APP ) . APP said such fiber can be found in recycled paper , or : " It can also come from tree residues that are cleared , after a forest area has become degraded , logged @-@ over or burned , as part of a sustainable development plan . APP has strict policies and practices in place to ensure that only residues from legal plantation development on degraded or logged @-@ over forest areas and sustainable wood fiber enters the production supply chain . " KFC said : " From a global perspective , 60 percent of the paper products that Yum ! ( our parent company ) sources are from sustainable sources . Our suppliers are working towards making it 100 percent . " 
 In December 2012 , the chain was criticised in China when it was discovered that a number of KFC suppliers had been using growth hormones and an excessive amount of antibiotics on its poultry in ways that violated Chinese law . In February 2013 , Yum ! CEO David Novak admitted that the scandal had been " longer lasting and more impactful than we ever imagined . " The issue is of major concern to Yum ! , which earns almost half of its profits from China , largely through the KFC brand . In March 2013 , Yum ! reported that sales had rebounded in February , but that lower sales in December and January would result in a decline in same @-@ store sales of 20 percent in the first quarter . 
 = Kevin and Kell = 
 Kevin and Kell is a furry comedy webcomic strip by syndicated cartoonist Bill Holbrook . The strip began on September 3 , 1995 . It is one of the oldest continuously running webcomics . As of April 25 , 2015 , the website has a banner at the top stating " The World 's Longest Running Daily Webcomic Since 1995 " . 
 The strip centers on the mixed marriage between a rabbit , Kevin and a grey wolf , Kell Dewclaw . In their society , their major difference is their diet : Kevin is a herbivore and Kell is a carnivore . Their family includes three children : Lindesfarne , a hedgehog adopted from Kevin 's first marriage ; Rudy , a wolf / fox hybrid born during Kell 's first marriage ; and their only biological child Coney , a carnivorous rabbit . The comic 's plot revolves around species @-@ related humor , satire , and interpersonal conflict . 
 Kevin and Kell receives over three million page views per month and is published in The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution . Holbrook has won honors from the Web Cartoonist 's Choice Awards and the Ursa Major Awards for the strip . 
 = = Setting = = 
 Kevin and Kell takes place in a town known as Domain , populated entirely by animals . The comic describes the world they live in as created by an organization of birds , commonly referred to by fans of the strip as the " Great Bird Conspiracy " ( GBC ) . Birds were the next species after humans to reach sapience . After humans left the planet , the birds traveled back in time to create a world without humans , and gave intelligence to fauna . However , their plan failed to remove the predator @-@ prey relationship and as a result , the world created is similar to that of twenty @-@ first century Earth , but with a greater likelihood of a violent death . 
 The society in Kevin and Kell rather than identifying people by race or social class has class distinctions based on diet such as " carnivores " , " herbivores " , and " insectivores " . There is also a " Wild " where civilized animals can leave civilization and act like normal animals , walking on all fours and not wearing clothing . Predation is central to strips and jokes are made about it being commonplace . 
 Humans exist in an alternate Domain , and are referred to as creatures with no natural defenses . Most believe that they are fictional creatures ; but a few , including the Dewclaws , know that they exist . This was developed further in 2003 by the introduction of the character Danielle , a human who enters the animal world via the Bermuda Triangle and transforms into a rabbit . However , she later has a son , Francis , who is born human . The series features jokes on a variety of topics . Many draw satirical parallels between its world and ours , making fun and sometimes social commentary on politics , sports , society , class @-@ snobbery , school , technology , pop culture and corporate culture , for example ; in January 2008 the Predator 's Union was described as going on strike , in a parody of the 2007 – 08 Writers Guild of America strike . 
 = = Main characters = = 
 List of Kevin and Kell characters 
 The strip 's main characters are the Dewclaws , a blended family as a result of an interspecies marriage . The comic 's primary characters are Kevin Dewclaw , a rabbit , and his wife Kell Dewclaw , a wolf . They met in a web forum for carnivores , where Kevin was " lurking " . They began to fall in love , but it was not until they met each other in person that Kell discovered Kevin was a rabbit . The relationship they developed online leads them to continue dating and eventually marry , despite knowing that they would be outcasts from the rest of society . 
 Originally , Kevin worked as a system operator on a herbivore web forum , although he later became the co @-@ owner of his own internet service provider , Hare @-@ Link . Kell worked for Herd @-@ <unk> , a company that hunts down prey . Her job is to hunt down other animals . Originally she hunted down her own prey – any prey not eaten by her is later sold in grocery stores as " processed meat " – but she later became an executive and then CEO of the company , taking over from her old boss R.L. , a ruthless wolf whose face is never seen apart from his drooling mouth . Kell was eventually be pushed out of her executive position in a bloodless coup by R.L. , and started running her own start @-@ up company " Dewclaw 's Fine Meat Products " that exclusively doesn 't hunt rabbits . 
 The couple has three children . The eldest is Lindesfarne Dewclaw , an English hedgehog daughter Kevin adopted during his first marriage . The second eldest child is Rudy , Kell 's son from her first marriage to a fox . Rudy , a talented artist , once challenged Kevin for the position of alpha male , unable to accept a rabbit as head of the household and as his stepfather . He has since matured and has come to terms with the marriage . The youngest child is Coney , a carnivorous rabbit and their only child by birth . Although only five years old , she is a capable hunter , though Kevin 's mother , Dorothy , keeps trying to make her into an herbivore , as well having an artistic streak like her half @-@ brother , 
 Other regular characters include Fenton Fuscus , a bat who went to high school and university with Lindesfarne , to whom he is now married ; Fiona Fennec , a half @-@ red , half @-@ Fennec fox vixen who is Rudy 's girlfriend ; George Fennec , Fiona 's father who is married to Danielle , a sister of Kevin , and have a human son , Francis ( the first of its kind in this world ) since Danielle herself was human once ; and Ralph Dewclaw , Kell 's brother who was originally hostile to Kevin , but now accepts the rabbit as family after several unsuccessful hunting attempts . He now works for Kevin as part of Hare @-@ Link and is married to George 's former wife Martha . Another is Daisy , a daisy plant made intelligent by the GBC . It lives with the Dewclaws as a pet , having the same intelligence as a dog or cat in our world . 
 = = History = = 
 Kevin and Kell was one of the first comic strips to be syndicated online , although older webcomics exist . For example , Argon <unk> ! was created on June 1995 , three months before Kevin and Kell . However , Holbrook was the first syndicated cartoonist to invest heavily in online comic strips . T Campbell wrote that Holbrook brought " an air of legitimacy and professionalism that many web cartoonists lacked then and still lack now . " 
 The strip started in black and white , changing to a color @-@ scheme on June 23 , 2000 . It is colored by husband and wife team Terrence and Isabel Marks . The strip has been considered for an animated television series , the latest attempt being filmed in Spring 2011 . Kevin and Kell has appeared daily in The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution since January 2004 , after winning a contest where several new comics , ( syndicated and / or on @-@ line ) were considered and voted on by readers ; Holbrook has stated that this constitutes the " bulk of his readership " , citing the paper 's circulation . In 2009 , Kevin and Kell survived a cull of several comic strips from the paper . In an online poll , the strip was voted as the favourite of readers of The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution . 
 Holbrook currently writes two other strips ; On the Fastrack and Safe Havens . He uses a " three @-@ week schedule " , saying in several interviews , " During this week , for instance , I 'll be writing three @-@ week 's worth of Fastrack material , and drawing the 21 gags I wrote for Kevin & Kell last week . Next week I 'll write for Safe Havens while drawing the Fastrack batch . And on it goes … On a typical day I 'll begin by writing four gags by 2 : 00 , then I 'll begin drawing , usually doing about four strips . At night , after everyone goes to bed , I 'll write two gags . " 
 In 1998 , Holbrook was named " Cartoonist of the Year " at <unk> , in part for his work on Kevin and Kell . In 2001 , the strip won the award for " Best Anthropomorphic Comic " at the Web Cartoonist 's Choice Awards , and was nominated for the same award in 2002 . In 2003 , Kevin and Kell won the award for " Best Anthropomorphic Comic Strip " at the Ursa Major Awards . 
 = = Supplemental Internet non @-@ Comic @-@ Strip content = = 
 Kevin and Kell has become more than just a webcomic . It has branched out into three other popular social network mediums ( a blog , a Facebook page and a Twitter channel ) , with several of its characters ostensibly participating : 
 = = = Lindesfarne ’ s Blog : Virtual Quill = = = 
 Since February 2006 , Lindesfarne has had her own blog titled " Virtual Quill " . Originally , she was posting it as a sort of private journal , using the interdimensional portal to make sure that if it were ever seen by others , it would only be seen by humans from her native dimension ( namely , our world ) , not the dimension she 's called home for the vast majority of her life . She would post generally once a week , talking about the various events in her life and those of her friends and family , providing additional information and insights into what was shown on the strip . Many fans commented back to her as if she were a real person , but she couldn ’ t see those comments at first because her interdimensional Internet connection was one @-@ way ( write @-@ only ) . 
 But beginning on Sunday , July 27 , 2008 , she activated a " portal receiver " that enabled her to , for the first time , read the comments on her blog , and post comments back to the readers . Since then , she has shared the existence of this interdimensional blog to some of her closest family and friends , some of whom have also posted comments ( though only Lindesfarne herself posts main entries ) . As with any other prolonged contact with humans , instinct loss soon sets in , so Lindesfarne must of necessity limit her participation to only one day per week ( usually on Sundays ) . There has even been participation from characters in other strips set in other dimensions that have had crossovers with Kevin and Kell . 
 The blog has since moved from being hosted on the webcomic 's servers to Tumblr . 
 = = = Catherine Aura 's Twitter channel = = = 
 Shortly after Lindesfarne had discovered her true origin as a human , Rudy 's former schoolteacher Catherine Aura ( a turkey buzzard ) and her young son Nigel used an interdimensional portal to travel to " our " world permanently , taking both Lindesfarne 's and Danielle 's places there to restore the balance and cure the global instinct loss crisis that would otherwise have forced both of them to return to the world of humans permanently . Since the portal transforms travelers into a sapient species found in the destination world ( which is how Lindesfarne became a hedgehog and Danielle a rabbit , though both were born humans in " our " world and had counterparts of those other species in the Kevin and Kell world ) , travelers from that world usually transform into humans , but Catherine and her son transformed into dolphins instead ( indicating that dolphins are , in fact , sapient , and perhaps more so than humans ) . That was the last time they were seen in the webcomic strip . 
 However , the adventures of Catherine and Nigel are available via Catherine 's Twitter channel . She posts updates about what she and Nigel are doing , which include covertly monitoring the activities of a certain human code @-@ named " Subject A " who appears to be psychically connected to the world of Kevin and Kell as well as of another mostly human world in which the King Features @-@ syndicated comic strips On the Fastrack and Safe Havens are set . " Subject A " is noted to be writing and drawing three comic strips for both worlds ( based on his presumed psychic connection to them ) , making it plain that he is , in fact , none other than cartoonist Bill Holbrook himself . She and Nigel are having other adventures as well , including finally transforming into humans to better monitor events in our society . She has married a human sea captain , and now has a daughter , <unk> , who is a bear @-@ like human child . Recently , she has been dealing with a conspiracy by rogue birds who wish to seize the portal by violence , and to re @-@ establish bird control over the " Kevin and Kell " world . 
 = = = Rudy Dewclaw 's Facebook Page = = = 
 Since February 12 , 2012 , Rudy Dewclaw has had his own Facebook page , usually consisting of witty comments and links to the daily strips and other visuals from the Kevin and Kell website . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Since its creation , Kevin and Kell been mainly been given positive reviews , although there has also been some criticism . Resident <unk> comic reviewer " Bob " praises the way the comic is written and illustrated , and its dealings with difficult issues such as divorce and death . However , he criticizes its suburban nature , saying : " All the family crises are defused within a week or two . No one has any aspirations besides a computer @-@ related job and a quiet heterosexual romance . There seem to be no cities , no foreign nations , no art , no teenage sex . " Another review from <unk> <unk> comments on the use of satire in the comic , writing that " while the satire is usually gentle , there 's plenty of it . " 
 Brandon Sanderson 's review in The Official Time <unk> 's Guide cites the comic 's world design , longevity and a discomforting setting where intelligent animals are killed as strengths . However , Sanderson also complained that Holbrook does not enforce this aspect in the main characters , saying , " While Kell , Rudy , and others make kills every day , none of the main character herbivores ever really have to worry about being stalked and killed . When they are threatened ( such as when Lindesfarne is stalked by some cougars near the beginning of the comic 's run ) , the enemy predators are presented as dark , evil things to be defeated . … This sense of careless , off @-@ handed killing gives the comic a lot of its humor — however , to maintain that air of humor , Bill never allows the society to work its everyday worst on any of the main characters . " 
 During a review in webcomic podcast Digital Strips , commentator Daku describes Kevin and Kell as " one of the few anthropomorphic strips that I actually like , " saying that " this is as if animals had a society . " <unk> praises the quality of the artwork , but complains that the strip relies on too many animal jokes . 
 Kevin and Kell and Holbrook are both popular within the furry fandom . Holbrook was first contacted by the fandom in late 1995 , soon after the strip was published . He attended his first furry convention , ConFurence , in January 1997 . Holbrook holds an annual " Kevin and Kell patron social " at Anthrocon for people who sponsor the strip . Holbrook also works occasionally with other cartoonists , both furry and non @-@ furry , and characters from his strip make cameos in other strips . Examples include Ozy and Millie , General Protection Fault , <unk> , and Schlock Mercenary . 
 = = Products = = 
 There are 20 books containing collections of Kevin and Kell strips , including bonus strips . They are currently published by Holbrook 's own publishing label Pencil Rough Productions , with older books originally published by Plan 9 Publishing . 
 A role @-@ playing game based on Kevin and Kell was released in July 2005 by <unk> Games . Hare Link , the Internet Service Provider run by Kevin , is a real @-@ life ISP available at <unk> 
 In November 2010 , a Kevin and Kell iPhone / iPod / iPad application was released to the iTunes App Store . The app is a joint product between the developers of the app , <unk> , and Bill Holbrook . Rather than selling a limited number of strips , this app allows users to read the entire Kevin & Kell library of cartoons . The app also contains additional features and content including video , cast descriptions , and hidden surprise " easter eggs . " 
 According to Write 2 Now 's December 2010 newsletter , Holbrook and Phil Rogers are working to get the strip made into an animated cartoon series , with a pitch to cable executives , but as of this writing no deal has been made . 
 = Colegio de la Preciosa Sangre de Pichilemu = 
 Colegio de la Preciosa Sangre de Pichilemu ( Spanish pronunciation : [ <unk> ðe la <unk> <unk> ðe <unk> ] , English : " Pichilemu School of the Precious Blood " ) , often shortened to Preciosa Sangre , is a coeducational Roman Catholic private state @-@ subsidized day school , serving students in preschool ( Chile 's pre @-@ <unk> ) through twelfth grade ( <unk> medio ) , located in the commune of Pichilemu , Libertador General Bernardo O 'Higgins Region , Chile . 
 It was founded in April 1947 by the Chilean Congregation of the Precious Blood as a girls ' school under the name of Escuela Doctor Eugenio Díaz Lira . The school has been fully coeducational since March 1979 , and was renamed to its current name in 1986 . Cardenal Caro Province newspaper El Expreso de la Costa declared Preciosa Sangre to be " the best school in Pichilemu " based on the results of 2011 standardized tests , while O 'Higgins Region newspaper El <unk> called the school " a regional icon " . It is the largest school in Pichilemu , with 534 students in the 2015 school year . 
 The school offers students several extracurricular activities , in the sports , religious and humanistic areas . Cheer C.P.S. , Preciosa Sangre 's cheerleading squad , has won several national competitions , and has also participated in two international ones . The school 's English debate team , informally called Kick @-@ Ass , reached second position in a regional competition in 2011 . 
 = = History = = 
 After the commune of Pichilemu was officially created in 1891 , Agustín Ross Edwards , a wealthy Chilean writer , member of parliament , government minister and politician , wanted to turn the town into " a touristic place , an elite resort , collecting the most important characteristics of European places , which would make it unique . " For this purpose , he constructed a hotel , a post office , a park , among other structures and buildings , which attracted wealthy families from Chile and Argentina . One of those families was that of Maria Luisa Lira <unk> , widow of Wenceslao Díaz Gallegos , a well @-@ known physician ; Lira , with her ten children , came from her El <unk> estate near San Fernando , and stayed at Ross ' facilities in Pichilemu in several occasions . 
 As years passed , Lira 's family decided to visit other beach resorts ; however , one of Lira 's children , Eugenio , decided to continue visiting Pichilemu , and after he completed his medicine studies in 1904 , he constructed a summer house near the center of the town . Eugenio Díaz Lira had a close relationship with several Catholic presbyters and bishops , whom he invited to his summer residence . During his summer stays in Pichilemu , Díaz Lira also created the first medical center in the town called San Rafael . However , he fell ill , and died on 12 June 1945 in Santiago , at age 65 . 
 After his death , Díaz Lira 's wife and his daughters decided to donate his summer residence to the Chilean Congregation of the Precious Blood of Our Lord Jesus Christ . Under the request of the General <unk> of the Congregation Mother María Úrsula Montes Rojas , the house was turned into a free girls ' school , which was founded in April 1947 under the name of Escuela de <unk> Particular N ° 16 Doctor Eugenio Díaz Lira ( English : Doctor Eugenio Díaz Lira 16th Girls ' Private School ) , in honour of the late physician . The school 's main goal was to " educate girls in Catholic values , " with the " necessary training for their insertion in the society as Christian mothers and workers with a solid Human Christian formation . " The school 's first principal was Mother María Teresa <unk> Guzmán . 
 The school was recognized by the Ministry of Education of Chile by Decree 12 @,@ 946 , on 31 December 1954 . It became a coeducational school in March 1979 . During the commemoration of the centennial of the Chilean Congregation of the Precious Blood , the school was renamed to Colegio de la Preciosa Sangre , a name which " represented better the school 's founders " , on 14 November 1986 . The school was authorized to dictate secondary education classes on 30 January 1995 , and started doing so that same year , with the first class graduating in 1998 . 
 In 2012 , Governor of Cardenal Caro Province Julio Ibarra Maldonado announced the Colegio de la Preciosa Sangre , in addition to several other high schools in the province , would host professional institute IPG ( Instituto Profesional IPG ) , which would let at least 300 people from Pichilemu obtain a technical degree . Also during that year , the school 's oldest building , which hosted the preschool classes , was demolished because of the damage it suffered from the 2010 Chile earthquake , and was re @-@ constructed ; the new building was inaugurated on 10 September 2012 . 
 = = Academics = = 
 As of 2012 , Preciosa Sangre 's class schedule varies with the student grade level , up to a maximum of 08 : 00 to 18 : 00 with ten periods for high school students . Students are not allowed to leave the school during school hours . Preciosa Sangre aims to give students " integral development , academic excellence " , with emphasis in religious values . The school has a Catholic religious orientation . 
 According to Cardenal Caro Province newspaper El Expreso de la Costa , the school is " the best in Pichilemu " , considering the scores obtained in 2011 from the <unk> de Selección Universitaria ( PSU ) , a standardized test for university admissions in Chile . From the 2 @,@ 945 high schools in Chile with students taking the PSU test , Preciosa Sangre ranked <unk> nationally in 2009 . It rose to the <unk> position in 2010 , and in 2011 it placed 738th . 
 Preciosa Sangre " ranks higher than similar schools " in the Sistema de <unk> de <unk> de la Educación ( in English : Education Quality Measurement System , <unk> ) standardized tests , taken to students from fourth , eighth , tenth , and eleventh grades . The tests include reading , mathematics , history and social sciences , natural sciences , and English language . 
 Test scores 
 = = Students and faculty = = 
 In the 2015 school year , the Colegio de la Preciosa Sangre had an enrollment of 534 students from preschool ( pre @-@ <unk> ) to twelfth grade ( <unk> medio ) with an average of 38 per grade . The school serves students aged between 4 and 19 years old . In 2012 , 159 students were classified as " <unk> " under the SEP law ( Ley de <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> Scholar Subsidy Law in English ) ; " <unk> students " under the SEP law are those whose " homes ' socioeconomic status decreases their chance to participate in the educational process . " In 2012 , Preciosa Sangre 's faculty had 30 full @-@ time teachers . By 2014 , the faculty had 29 workers . 
 Admission begins each 1 November and ends on 9 December . Most people apply for entering the preschool ( pre @-@ kinder ) class , which has a maximum of 35 students . Preference is given to siblings or brothers of current or former Preciosa Sangre students . Applicants must be at least four years old , but in exceptional cases , students not meeting the prescribed age may take a test to be admitted . No payment is required for enrollment . 
 Colegio de la Preciosa Sangre is governed by the Chilean Congregation of the Precious Blood of Our Lord Jesus Christ . The school 's principal was , between 2006 and September 2012 , Mother Loreto Fuentes Parra . Mother Loreto was also the school 's director in the 1980s ; in 1987 , she was named by the Colegio Provincial de <unk> Cardenal Caro one of the best teachers in Cardenal Caro Province , in a ceremony held at the school 's hall . Since 2013 , Preciosa Sangre 's principal is Mother Elizabeth Carmen <unk> <unk> . The Pedagogical Technical Unit ( Unidad <unk> <unk> , <unk> ) is directed since 2011 by teacher Graciela Vargas Urzúa . The school has an administrative staff of 45 people . The parents ' center ( centro de padres y <unk> ) of Preciosa Sangre is presided since 2012 by Mónica Cornejo Rojas . 
 The students ' center ( centro de <unk> ) of the Colegio de la Preciosa Sangre describes itself as a " representation instance for the school 's students , acting in different roles . " Students ' centers are student organizations , whose members ( president , vice president , secretary , among others ) are elected democratically by their peers . 
 = = Activities = = 
 There are numerous extracurricular activities available to Preciosa Sangre students . Excluding those from the sports area , the activities include choir , instrumental , dancing , scientific ( <unk> ) , musical drama , handicrafts , folkloric dance ( <unk> ) , pastoral , catechesis , language , and mathematics workshops . The school also conducts a <unk> , which consists of special courses to prepare the students for the <unk> de Selección Universitaria ( PSU ) test . 
 Additionally , an activity known as the Escuela para Padres ( School for Parents ) takes place every month , in which parents are given advice on how to educate their children . 
 = = = Athletics = = = 
 As of 2012 , Preciosa Sangre offers seven workshops related to sports . These sports are run by the Club Deportivo Cultural Colegio Preciosa Sangre ( Colegio Preciosa Sangre Cultural @-@ Athletic Club ) , and include football , tennis , volleyball , basketball , gymnastics , cheerleading , and cheerleading for newbies . Preciosa Sangre 's athletic club also has hosted tournaments , including CheerPichilemu , a cheerleading competition which , in 2007 , had fifteen participating teams . The club has also organized events such as the first family marathon in Cardenal Caro Province ( Primera Gran <unk> Familiar Provincia de Cardenal Caro ) in 2011 . 
 Preciosa Sangre 's soccer and volleyball teams , Selección Colegio Preciosa Sangre or CPS Pichilemu , compete in the Liga Deportiva Cardenal Caro ( Cardenal Caro Athletic League ) , a provincial @-@ level league . The girls volleyball team placed second in the provincial league , in 2009 . 
 In 2007 , Trinidad Segura from the Colegio de la Preciosa Sangre placed first in the Women category of the Campeonato <unk> de Surf ( Student Surf Championship ) , which took place in Matanzas beach , in Navidad , and in La Puntilla beach in Pichilemu . In the Primary Students ( Men ) category , Felipe Sierra and Washington Saldías placed second and third , respectively . The competition was organized by the Commerce Chambers of Navidad and Pichilemu . 
 = = = = Cheer C.P.S. = = = = 
 The cheerleading squad of Preciosa Sangre , Cheer C.P.S. , is coached by physical education teacher Claudio Rojas Covarrubias , who founded it in 2007 . In 2009 , it consisted of 27 students . The team has won several national competitions , two of them making them eligible to participate in competitions held in the United States of America . 
 2009 US trip 
 In 2009 , Cheer C.P.S. was the only Chilean team to participate in the <unk> Nationals international tournament in Tampa , USA , reaching the first place in the Senior All @-@ Music category , and fifth in the Grand Champion category , out of more than 150 teams from several countries . Diario VI Región reported Cheer C.P.S. reached the first place of an international team , and fifth overall . The team could participate in the US competition after winning a tournament held in Viña del Mar in 2008 . 
 According to a report by former councilor of Pichilemu Washington Saldías on online newspaper Pichilemu News , there were massive celebrations after a local radio reported the team 's achievement . Upon their arrival at Chile , the squad was received at the Palace of La Moneda by Government General Secretary Minister Carolina <unk> , mayor of Pichilemu Roberto Córdova , and Members of the Parliament , before coming back to Pichilemu , on 22 April 2009 . Their return to Pichilemu was described by Diario VI Región newspaper as " historic " , by saying " at Pichilemu , a historical reception was being prepared , as a multitude of people crowded the streets and avenues at the beach resort , waiting for them , in a journey that ended at Colegio Preciosa Sangre in that city . " 
 2013 US trip 
 In 2013 , Cheer C.P.S. participated in two international tournaments after winning a national tournament in 2012 : All Star USA 2013 and <unk> Bash Series , both held in Orlando , Florida , United States . The team , composed of 28 teenagers — most of them Preciosa Sangre students — and their teacher Claudio Rojas , collected funds to travel to the United States by participating in several national tournaments and with the help of the municipality of Pichilemu and the O 'Higgins Region government . In the All Star USA 2013 competition , held on 30 March 2013 , Cheer C.P.S. made it to the second place , only surpassed by an unspecified Russian team , and cheerleader Noemí Pavez obtained the first place in the Jumping category . In the second competition , <unk> Nationals ( Jam @-@ Bash Series Orlando ) , held on 6 April 2013 , they obtained the first place in the Senior ( Co @-@ Ed ) Cheer , Best Choreography category . After taking knowledge of the news of their accomplishment , Governor of Cardenal Caro Province Julio Ibarra Maldonado said that " Pichilemu is celebrating [ their triumph ] , " something which was also reported by the local media . Upon their arrival in Chile on 9 April , they were received by President Sebastián Piñera at the Palace of La Moneda in Santiago , along with the Governor of Cardenal Caro , and Mayor of Pichilemu Roberto Córdova . The team 's achievement was described by news program 24 Horas of state channel Televisión Nacional de Chile as " coming from a distant beach resort in the region of O 'Higgins to conquer North American lands . " 
 CheerPichilemu championship 
 The cheerleading squad has also organized the CheerPichilemu tournament , hosted for the first time on 29 September 2007 at the Municipal Stadium of Pichilemu ( Estadio Municipal de Pichilemu ) . According to Pichilemu News , CheerPichilemu was " the first national open cheerleading tournament . " There were four categories in the first edition : Senior Women , Senior Co @-@ Ed , Open Women , Open Co @-@ Ed , and Couples . The competition was supported by the Tourism Chamber of Pichilemu , the local government , and several other institutions and individuals . 
 = = = English debate team = = = 
 The English debate team , informally called Kick @-@ Ass , is led by English teacher Natalia Polanco Pino . The team participated for the first time in the National English Debates Tournament organized by the English Opens Doors program from the Chilean Ministry of Education in 2011 , and made it to the regional finals , reaching the second place , losing against the San Fernando College team from San Fernando , discussing the topic " This house believes that unhealthy food should be more expensive than healthy food . " Despite they only reached the second place in the competition , they were homaged by mayor of Pichilemu Roberto Córdova Carreño , and the Provincial Education Director , Abelardo Sepúlveda Vargas , in a ceremony held at the school on 26 October of that year . 
 In the 2012 tournament , Preciosa Sangre 's team Kick @-@ Ass passed to regional finals , along with the Colchagua Province teams from Liceo Santa Cruz from Santa Cruz , and San Fernando College from San Fernando , and the Cachapoal Province teams from Liceo San José from <unk> , Liceo Bicentenario Ignacio Carrera Pinto from San Vicente de Tagua Tagua , Liceo Bicentenario Óscar Castro Zúñiga and Colegio Gabriela Mistral , both from Rancagua . The team reached fourth place in the 2012 regional finals , losing against Liceo Bicentenario Óscar Castro Zúñiga . The topic in the regional finals was " This house believes that social media should be censored . " 
 The Preciosa Sangre English debate team participated once again in 2013 . They passed to the Ministry of Education 's English Debate Tournament regional finals with 173 @.@ 5 points , the highest score of any of the Region of O 'Higgins participant schools . The Preciosa Sangre team was closely followed by the teams of Instituto San Andrés from Rancagua ( 173 points ) , San Fernando College from San Fernando ( 172 @.@ 5 points ) , and Liceo Bicentenario Óscar Castro Zúñiga , also from Rancagua ( 164 @.@ 5 points ) . Kick @-@ Ass , however , ultimately lost the regional finals against Colegio San Fernando College ; this latter reached the second national place , in August 2013 . 
 Their final participation in the Ministry 's English Debate Tournament was in 2014 . After obtaining the highest score in their region during a first round of debates , they ultimately obtained the third place in O 'Higgins Region after discussing whether " [ a ] <unk> aimed at children should be banned " . 
 = = = Olimpíadas de Actualidad = = = 
 A team from Preciosa Sangre , led by Spanish language teacher Fabián Valle Silva , participated in the Olimpíadas de Actualidad ( News Olympics ) , a competition organized by the Chilean Asociación Nacional de Prensa ( National Press Association ) , <unk> , and El <unk> newspaper . Preciosa Sangre participated for the first time in the 2012 edition , reaching the regional finals . The team placed third , losing against Colegio El Salvador from San Vicente de Tagua Tagua and the Instituto Regional Federico <unk> from Santa Cruz . 
 Preciosa Sangre participated again in the 2013 edition of the Olimpíadas de Actualidad . However , they did not make it to the second round , obtaining the 19th score ( 32 points ) from 22 participating teams . 
 = = = Other activities = = = 
 Students from Preciosa Sangre have participated in several competitions and activities besides the English Debates Tournament and the <unk> de Actualidad . One of those activities was the Modelo de la Organización de Estados Americanos ( <unk> ; Model of the Organization of American States ) , organized by the Institute of Public Affairs of the University of Chile . With the support of the Governor of Cardenal Caro , Julio Ibarra , seven students represented Preciosa Sangre in the activity , in August 2011 . The Preciosa Sangre team was led by history teacher Erna Pereira Arenas , and the students represented the country of Trinidad and Tobago . <unk> took place at the former National Congress in Santiago , and 32 other schools participated . According to Mother Loreto Fuentes Parra , principal of the school , Preciosa Sangre was one of the best three teams in the activity . 
 A team of second graders from Preciosa Sangre participated in the 2008 edition of a competition called <unk> Minera ( Mining Marathon ) , organized by the Chilean Ministries of Mining and Education . The competition was a four @-@ stage " marathon of knowledge " . From the 98 teams from the O 'Higgins Region which participated in the competition , only two were awarded a prize , one of them was Colegio de la Preciosa Sangre , whose team Los <unk> was given an honorific mention . 
 In the first edition of Sé <unk> ( Be a Reporter ) , a competition organized in 2011 by national newspaper El Mercurio and <unk> , Diego Grez <unk> from Preciosa Sangre was awarded the second place in the Opinion Column category , with an article called " ¿ Educación <unk> ? " ( " Free education ? " ) . In 2012 , the same student earned an honorific mention for his tale " Es un <unk> día " ( It 's a Beautiful Day ) from the Andrés Bello University 's <unk> de <unk> en Español ( <unk> Contest of Spanish @-@ language Tales ) . " Es un <unk> día " was published in a book commemorating the interschool contest of that year . 
 In October 2012 , a group of eleventh and twelfth grade Preciosa Sangre students , led by history teacher Erna Pereira Arenas , organized a debate ( Spanish : debate municipal ) between candidates for mayor of Pichilemu , which was held on the 23 of that month , just five days before the election took place . Candidates Mario Moraga Cáceres ( independent ) , Washington <unk> Carrasco ( <unk> Party ) , Cristián Tamayo <unk> ( independent ) , and Carlos Acuña Arévalo ( National Renewal ) participated . According to Jorge Nasser Guerra from Radio Entreolas , and an article published on Diario VI Región , Roberto Córdova Carreño , who was eventually elected , rejected to participate in the debate because he " would not attend that kind of events " , while Iván Cabrera Martínez " never responded the students ' invitation " . Some of the issues discussed in the debate were " municipal and higher education , health , urbanization , municipal corruption , " amid other topics . The debate was broadcast live on local radio stations Entreolas and Isla FM . The debate was praised by local online newspaper Pichilemu News for being " the first ever debate held in Pichilemu " and " whose <unk> took care of every detail " . 
 Every year , Preciosa Sangre celebrates its anniversary in October or November , with activities and games during two days ; those include basketball , football , and Chilean games . The school is divided in two groups or alliances ; in 2011 , there was a red and a white alliance . The celebrations conclude with the presentation of carnival floats created by every alliance , and a gala party . During the 2012 celebrations , both alliances recorded a parody of the " Gangnam Style " music video by South Korean entertainer PSY ; since the videos were uploaded to YouTube , the red alliance video reached almost 4 @,@ 000 views as of February 2013 , while in contrast , the white alliance video has only reached 1 @,@ 800 in the same time span . 
 = = Notable alumni = = 
 Among former students of the Colegio de la Preciosa Sangre de Pichilemu are Jorge Vargas González ( born 1966 ) , a local politician who served as councilor of Pichilemu between 1992 and 1996 , and later as mayor of the commune , between 1996 and 2007 ; and Rebeca <unk> Calderón ( born 1962 ) , current mayor of <unk> , in Colchagua Province , who initially took office in December 2008 and was re @-@ elected in 2012 to a second term . 
 = Ralph Vary Chamberlin = 
 Ralph Vary Chamberlin ( January 3 , 1879 – October 31 , 1967 ) was an American biologist , ethnographer , and historian from Salt Lake City , Utah . He was a faculty member of the University of Utah for over 25 years , where he helped establish the School of Medicine and served as its first dean , and later became head of the zoology department . He also taught at Brigham Young University and the University of Pennsylvania , and worked for over a decade at the Museum of Comparative Zoology at Harvard University , where he described species from around the world . 
 Chamberlin was a prolific taxonomist who named over 4 @,@ 000 new animal species in over 400 scientific publications . He specialized in arachnids ( spiders , scorpions , and relatives ) and myriapods ( centipedes , millipedes , and relatives ) , ranking among the most prolific arachnologists and <unk> in history . He described over 1 @,@ 400 species of spiders , 1 @,@ 000 species of millipedes , and the majority of North American centipedes , although the quantity of his output was not always matched with quality , leaving a mixed legacy to his successors . He also did pioneering ethnobiological studies with the Goshute and other indigenous people of the Great Basin , cataloging indigenous names and cultural uses of plants and animals . 
 Chamberlin was honored by his colleagues at the University of Utah , however , he was disliked and even considered mean by some arachnologists , including some of his former students . After retirement he continued to write , publishing on the history of education in his home state , especially that of the University of Utah . 
 Chamberlin was a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints ( LDS Church ) . In the early twentieth century , Chamberlin was among a quartet of popular Mormon professors at Brigham Young University whose teaching of evolution and biblical criticism resulted in a 1911 controversy among University and Church officials , eventually resulting in the resignation of him and two other professors despite widespread support from the student body , an event described as Mormonism 's " first brush with modernism " . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and education = = = 
 Ralph Vary Chamberlin was born on January 3 , 1879 , in Salt Lake City , Utah , to parents William Henry Chamberlin , a prominent builder and contractor , and Eliza Frances Chamberlin ( née Brown ) . Chamberlin traced his paternal lineage to an English immigrant settling in the Massachusetts Bay Colony in 1638 , and his maternal lineage to an old Pennsylvania Dutch family . Born to Mormon parents , the young Chamberlin attended Latter @-@ day Saints ' High School , and although very interested in nature , initially decided to study mathematics and art before choosing biology . His brother William , the eldest of 12 children , also shared Ralph 's scientific interests and would later teach alongside him . Ralph attended the University of Utah , graduating with a B.S. degree in 1898 , and subsequently spent four years teaching high school and some college @-@ level courses in biology as well as geology , chemistry , physics , Latin , and German at Latter @-@ day Saints ' University . By 1900 he had authored nine scientific publications . 
 In the summer of 1902 Chamberlin studied at the Hopkins Marine Station of Stanford University , and from 1902 to 1904 studied at Cornell University under a Goldwin Smith Fellowship , and was a member of the Gamma Alpha fraternity and Sigma Xi honor society . He studied under entomologist John Henry Comstock and earned his doctorate in 1905 . His dissertation was a taxonomic revision of the wolf spiders of North America , in which he reviewed all known species north of Mexico , recognizing 67 out of around 150 nominal species as distinct and recognizable . Zoologist Thomas H. Montgomery regarded Chamberlin 's monograph as one of " decided importance " in using the structure of pedipalps ( male reproductive organs ) to help define genera , and in its detailed descriptions of species . 
 = = = Early career : University of Utah = = = 
 It is to Professor Chamberlin that credit should be given for starting medical training in the University of Utah . 
 After returning from Cornell , Chamberlin was hired by the University of Utah , where he worked from 1904 to 1908 , as an assistant professor ( 1904 – 1905 ) then full professor . He soon began improving biology courses , which at the time were only of high school grade , to collegiate standards , and introduced new courses in vertebrate histology and embryology . He was the first dean of University of Utah School of Medicine , serving from 1905 to 1907 . During the summer of 1906 , his plans to teach a summer course in embryology at the University of Chicago were cancelled when he suffered a serious accident in a fall , breaking two leg bones and severing an artery in his leg . In 1907 , University officials decided to merge the medical school into an existing department , which made Chamberlin 's deanship obsolete . He resigned as dean in May , 1907 , although remained a faculty member . The medical students strongly objected , crediting the school 's gains over the past few years largely to his efforts . 
 In late 1907 and early 1908 , Chamberlin became involved in a bitter lawsuit with fellow Utah professor Ira D. Cardiff that would cost them both their jobs . Cardiff , a botanist hired in spring of 1907 , claimed Chamberlin offered him a professorship with a salary of $ 2 @,@ 000 to $ 2 @,@ 250 per year , but upon hiring was offered only $ 1 @,@ 650 by the university regents . Cardiff filed suit for $ 350 , which a court initially decided Chamberlin must pay , and Chamberlin 's wages were garnished . The two became estranged and uncommunicative . There had been tension between them for some time — Chamberlin 's supporters claimed Cardiff was involved in his dismissal as dean — and the Salt Lake Tribune noted " friction between the two men , of a different nature and not entirely due to financial matters , arose even before Professor Cardiff received his appointment " . In March 1908 the university regents fired both Chamberlin and Cardiff , appointing a single new professor to head the departments of zoology and botany . In July , upon appeal , the suit was overturned and Cardiff ordered to pay costs . Chamberlin had by then secured a job at Brigham Young University . 
 = = = Brigham Young University = = = 
 In 1908 , Chamberlin was hired to lead the Biology Department at Brigham Young University ( BYU ) , a university owned and operated by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints ( LDS Church ) , during a period which BYU president George H. Brimhall sought to increase its academic standing . LDS College professor J. H. Paul , in a letter to Brimhall , had written Chamberlin was " one of the world 's foremost naturalists , though , I think , he is only about 28 years of age . I have not met his equal ... We must not let him drift away " . Chamberlin oversaw expanded biology course offerings and led insect @-@ collecting trips with students . Chamberlin joined a pair of newly hired brothers on the faculty , Joseph and Henry Peterson , who taught psychology and education . Chamberlin and the two Petersons worked to increase the intellectual standing of the University . In 1909 Chamberlin 's own brother William H. Chamberlin was hired to teach philosophy . The four academics , all active members of the Church , were known for teaching modern scientific and philosophic ideas and encouraging lively debate and discussion . The Chamberlins and Petersons held the belief that the theory of evolution was compatible with religious views , and promoted historical criticism of the Bible , the view that the writings contained should be viewed from the context of the time : Ralph Chamberlin published essays in the White and Blue , BYU 's student newspaper , arguing that Hebrew legends and historical writings were not to be taken literally . In an essay titled " Some Early Hebrew Legends " Chamberlin concluded : " Only the childish and immature mind can lose by learning that much in the Old Testament is poetical and that some of the stories are not true historically . " Chamberlin believed that evolution explained not only the origin of organisms but of human theological beliefs as well . 
 In late 1910 , complaints from stake presidents inspired an investigation into the teachings of the professors . Chamberlin 's 1911 essay " Evolution and Theological Belief " was considered particularly objectionable by school officials . In early 1911 Ralph Chamberlin and the Peterson brothers were offered a choice to either stop teaching evolution or lose their jobs . The three professors were popular among students and faculty , who denied that the teaching of evolution was destroying their faith . A student petition in support of the professors signed by over 80 % of the student body was sent to the administration , and then to local newspapers . Rather than change their teachings , the three accused professors resigned in 1911 , while William Chamberlin remained for another five years . 
 In 1910 , Chamberlin was elected a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science . 
 = = = Pennsylvania and Harvard = = = 
 After leaving Brigham Young , Chamberlin was employed as a lecturer and George Leib Harrison Foundation research fellow at the University of Pennsylvania from 1911 to 1913 . From March 1913 to December 31 , 1925 , he was the Curator of Arachnids , Myriapods , and Worms at the Museum of Comparative Zoology at Harvard University , where many of his scientific contributions were made . Here his publications included surveys of all known millipedes of Central America and the West Indies ; and descriptions of animals collected by the Canadian Arctic Expedition ( 1913 – 1916 ) ; by Stanford and Yale expeditions to South America ; and by various expeditions of the USS Albatross . He was elected a member of the American Society of Naturalists and the American Society of Zoologists in 1914 , and in 1919 served as second vice @-@ president of the Entomological Society of America . He served as a technical expert for the U.S. Horticultural Board and U.S. Biological Survey from 1923 until the mid 1930s . 
 = = = Return to Utah = = = 
 Chamberlin returned to the University of Utah in 1925 , where he was made head of the departments of zoology and botany . When he arrived , the faculty consisted of one zoologist , one botanist , and an instructor . He soon began expanding the size and diversity of the biology program , and by the time of his retirement the faculty consisted of 16 professors , seven instructors , and three special lecturers . He was the university 's most celebrated scientist according to Sterling M. McMurrin , and his course on evolution was among the most popular on campus . He established the journal Biological Series of the University of Utah and supervised the graduate work of several students who would go on to distinguished careers , including Willis J. Gertsch , Wilton Ivie , William H. Behle and Stephen D. Durrant ; the latter three would later join Chamberlin as faculty members . From 1930 – 1939 , Chamberlin was secretary @-@ treasurer of the Salt Lake City Mosquito Abatement Board and conducted mosquito surveys of the region , identifying marshes controlled by local hunting clubs as the main source of salt marsh mosquitoes plaguing the city . From 1938 @-@ 1939 he took a year @-@ long sabbatical , during which he studied in European universities and museums , presided over a section of the International Congresses of Entomology in Berlin , and later studied biology and archaeology in Mexico and South America . In 1942 he received an honorary Doctor of Science from the University of Utah . He retired in 1948 , and in 1957 , an honor ceremony was held by the Utah Phi Sigma Society in which a portrait of Chamberlin painted by Alvin L. Gittins was donated to the University and a book of commemorative letters produced . In 1960 the University of Utah Alumni Association awarded Chamberlin its Founders Day Award for Distinguished Alumni , the university 's highest honor . 
 Wherever he has been , [ Chamberlin ] has produced unusual stimulation in students , many becoming imbued with his enthusiasm for the use of accurate , tested knowledge . Many caught the vision of what human life can mean when viewed in the light of man 's evolutionary background and interpreted in terms of his emerging intelligence which has outdistanced so many of his animal competitors in the evolutionary race . " 
 Chamberlin was noted by colleagues at Utah for being a lifelong champion of the scientific method and instilling in his students ideas that natural processes must be used to explain human existence . Angus and Grace Woodbury wrote that one of his greatest cultural contributions was his ability " to lead the naive student with fixed religious convictions gently around that wide gulf that separated him from the trained scientific mind without pushing him over the precipice of despair and illusion . " His influence continued as his students became teachers , gradually increasing societal understanding of evolution and naturalistic perspectives . His colleague and former student Stephen Durrant stated " by word , and especially by precept , he taught us diligence , inquisitiveness , love of truth , and especially scientific honesty " . Durrant compared Chamberlin to noted biologists such as Spencer Fullerton Baird and C. Hart Merriam in the scope of his contributions science . 
 = = = Personal life and death = = = 
 On July 9 , 1899 , Chamberlin married Daisy Ferguson of Salt Lake City , with whom he had four children : Beth , Ralph , Della , and Ruth . His first marriage ended in divorce in 1910 . On June 28 , 1922 , he married Edith Simons , also of Salt Lake , and with whom he had six children : Eliot , Frances , Helen , Shirley , Edith , and Martha Sue . His son Eliot became a mathematician and 40 @-@ year professor at the University of Utah . Chamberlin 's second wife died in 1965 , and Chamberlin himself died in Salt Lake City after a short illness on October 31 , 1967 , at the age of 88 . He was survived by his 10 children , 28 grandchildren , and 36 great @-@ grandchildren . 
 = = Research = = 
 Chamberlin 's work includes more than 400 publications spanning over 60 years . The majority of his research concerned the taxonomy of arthropods and other invertebrates , but his work also included titles in folklore , economics , anthropology , language , botany , anatomy , histology , philosophy , education , and history . He was a member of the American Society of Naturalists , Torrey Botanical Club , New York Academy of Sciences , Boston Society of Natural History , Biological Society of Washington , and the Utah Academy of Sciences . 
 = = = Taxonomy = = = 
 Chamberlin was a prolific taxonomist of invertebrate animals who named and described over 4 @,@ 000 species , specializing in the study of arachnids ( spiders , scorpions , and their relatives ) , and myriapods ( millipedes , centipedes , and relatives ) , but also publishing on molluscs , marine worms , and insects . By 1941 he had described at least 2 @,@ 000 species , and by 1957 had described a total of 4 @,@ 225 new species , 742 new genera , 28 new families , and 12 orders . Chamberlin 's taxonomic publications continued to appear until at least 1966 . 
 Chamberlin ranks among the most prolific arachnologists in history . In a 2013 survey of the most prolific spider systematists , Chamberlin ranked fifth in total number of described species ( 1 @,@ 475 ) and eighth in number of species that were still valid ( 984 ) , i.e. not taxonomic synonyms of previously described species . At the University of Utah Chamberlin co @-@ authored several works with his students Wilton Ivie and Willis J. Gertsch , who would both go on to become notable spider scientists : the " famous duo " of Chamberlin and Ivie described hundreds of species together . Chamberlin described or co @-@ described more than a third of the 621 spiders known to occur in his native Utah . Chamberlin was also a leading expert in North American tarantulas , describing over 60 species . Chamberlin worked with other groups of arachnids as well , including scorpions , harvestmen , and <unk> , and described several pseudoscorpions with his nephew Joseph C. Chamberlin , himself a prominent arachnologist . 
 Among fellow arachnologists , Chamberlin was regarded as influential but not particularly well @-@ liked : in many of his papers co @-@ authored with Ivie , it was Ivie himself who did most of the collecting , and describing , while Chamberlin remained first author , and a 1947 quarrel over recognition led to Ivie abandoning <unk> for many years . When arachnologist Arthur M. Chickering sent Chamberlin a collection of specimens from Panama , Chamberlin never returned them and in fact published on them , which made Chickering reluctant to collaborate with colleagues . Chamberlin is said to have eventually been banned from the Museum of Comparative Zoology by Ernst Mayr in his later years , and after Chamberlin 's death his former student Gertsch said " his natural meanness finally got him " . 
 Chamberlin 's other major area of study was myriapods . He was publishing on centipedes as early as 1901 , and between then and around 1960 was the preeminent , if not exclusive , researcher of North American centipedes , responsible for naming the vast majority of North American species , and many from around the world . In addition , he named more than 1 @,@ 000 species of millipedes , ranking among the three most prolific millipede taxonomists in history . His 1958 " Checklist of the millipeds of North America " , a compilation eight years in the making of all records and species north of Mexico , represented nearly a 600 % increase in species recorded from the previous such list published over 50 years earlier , although the work itself described no new species . Chamberlin contributed articles on millipedes , <unk> and <unk> to the 1961 edition of the Encyclopedia Britannica . 
 Although a prolific describer of species , his legacy to <unk> taxonomy has been mixed . Many of Chamberlin 's descriptions of centipedes and millipedes were often brief and / or unillustrated , or illustrated in ways which hindered their use in identification by other researchers . He described some new species based solely on location , or on subtle leg differences now known to change during molting , and many of Chamberlin 's names have subsequently been found to be , or are suspected to be , synonyms of species already described . Biologist Richard Hoffman , who worked with Chamberlin on the 1958 checklist , later described Chamberlin as " an exemplar of minimal taxonomy " , and stated his taxonomic work on Central American myriapods " introduced far more problems than progress , a pattern which was to persist for many decades to come " . Hoffman wrote Chamberlin was " an admitted ' alpha taxonomist ' whose main interest was naming new species " , although recognized Chamberlin 's work with stone centipedes as pioneering , and of a quality unmatched in Chamberlin 's later work . 
 Chamberlin studied not only arthropods but soft @-@ bodied invertebrates as well . He described over 100 new species and 22 new genera of polychaete worms in a two @-@ volume work considered one of the " great monuments " in annelid taxonomy by the former director of the Hopkins Marine Station , and published on Utah 's molluscan fauna . He was section editor on sipunculids as well as myriapods for the academic journal database Biological Abstracts . William Behle has noted he also made indirect contributions to ornithology , including leading several multi @-@ day specimen collecting trips and guiding the graduate research of Stephen Durrant , who worked on Utah game birds , and Behle himself , who studied nesting birds of the Great Salt Lake . 
 After Chamberlin 's death , his collection of some 250 @,@ 000 spider specimens was donated to the American Museum of Natural History in New York , bolstering the museum 's status as the world 's largest arachnid repository . Similarly , his collection of millipedes was deposited in the National Museum of Natural History in Washington , D.C. , helping to make that museum the world 's largest single collection of millipede type specimens — the individual specimens used to describe species . 
 = = = Great Basin cultural studies = = = 
 Early in his career , Chamberlin studied the language and habits of indigenous peoples of the Great Basin . He worked with the Goshute band of the Western Shoshone to document their uses of over 300 plants in food , beverages , medicine , and construction materials — their ethnobotany — as well as the names and meanings of plants in the Goshute language . His resulting publication , " The <unk> @-@ botany of the <unk> Indians of Utah " , is considered the first major <unk> study of a single group of Great Basin peoples . He also published surveys of Goshute animal and anatomical terms , place and personal names , and a compilation of plant names of the Ute people . One of Chamberlin 's later colleagues at the University of Utah was Julian Steward , known as the founder of cultural ecology . Steward himself described Chamberlin 's work as " splendid " , and anthropologist Virginia Kerns writes that Chamberlin 's experience with indigenous Great Basin cultures facilitated Steward 's own cultural studies : " in terms of ecological knowledge , [ Steward 's younger informants ] probably could not match the elders who had instructed Chamberlin . That made his research on Goshute ethnobotany all the more valuable to Steward . " Chamberlin gave Goshute @-@ derived names to some of the organisms he described , such as the spider <unk> , meaning " big legs " , and the worm <unk> , meaning " many hooks " , in the Goshute language . 
 = = = Other works = = = 
 Chamberlin 's work extended beyond biology and anthropology to include historical , philosophical , and theological writings . At BYU he published several articles in the student newspaper on topics such as historical criticism of the Bible and the relationship of evolutionary theory with religious beliefs . In 1925 , he wrote a biography of his brother William H. Chamberlin , a philosopher and theologian who had died several years earlier . Utah philosopher Sterling McMurrin , stated the biography " had a considerable impact " on his own life , and noted " the fact that the book adequately and persuasively presents W. H. Chamberlin 's philosophic thought shows the philosophical competence of Ralph Chamberlin " In 1932 , Chamberlin wrote " Life in Other Worlds : a Study in the History of Opinion " , one of the earliest surveys from ancient to modern times of the concept of cosmic pluralism , the idea that the universe contains multiple inhabited worlds . After retiring in 1948 , Chamberlin devoted significant attention to the history of the University of Utah . In 1949 he edited a biographical tribute to John R. Park , an influential Utah educator of the 19th century . Assembled from comments and reflections from Park 's own students , Memories of John <unk> Park was praised by University of Utah English professor B. Roland Lewis , who claimed it " warrants being read by every citizen of [ Utah ] . " Later in his career , Chamberlin produced an authoritative book , The University of Utah , a History of its First Hundred Years , which BYU historian Eugene E. Campbell called " an excellent history of this important western institution . " The University of Utah also contains an extensive account of the University of Deseret , the LDS Church @-@ founded university that preceded the University of Utah . 
 = = Religious views = = 
 Chamberlin believed wholeheartedly in Darwin 's theory of evolution including its least desirable implications such as the brutality of nature implied by natural selection and the descent of man from lower primates . It is also clear that Chamberlin was a devout Mormon ... Chamberlin believed that since science and religion were different parts of one eternal truth they could be reconciled . 
 Chamberlin was a Mormon , an active member of the The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints ( LDS Church ) . He believed that there should be no animosity between religion and science . Stake President George W. McCune described a 1922 meeting in which Chamberlin testified " to the effect that all his labors and researches in the laboratories of science , while very interesting , and to a great extent satisfying to the intellect , did not satisfy the soul of man , and that he yearned for something more , " adding Chamberlin " bore testimony that he knew that ours is the true Church of Jesus Christ . " University of Oregon doctoral student Tim S. Reid called Chamberlin clearly devout , however , Sterling McMurrin stated " spiders are different from metaphysics , and I think Ralph was not such a devout Mormon . " 
 = = Selected works = = 
 = = = Scientific = = = 
 The Meaning of Organic Evolution . Provo , Utah : Self @-@ published . 1911 @.@ pp. 1 – 138 . 
 Chamberlin , Ralph Vary ( 1919 ) . " The Annelida <unk> " . Memoirs of the Museum of Comparative Zoology at Harvard College 31 : 1 – 514 , 80 plates . 
 Chamberlin , Ralph Vary ( 1920 ) . " The <unk> of the Australian region " . Bulletin of the Museum of Comparative Zoology 64 : 1 – 235 . 
 " A hundred new species of American spiders " ( PDF ) . Bulletin of the University of Utah 32 ( 13 ) : 1 – 117 . 1942 . ( With Wilton Ivie ) 
 " Checklist of the millipeds of North America " . Bulletin of the United States National Museum 212 : 1 – 236 . 1958 . ( With Richard L. Hoffman ) 
 = = = Historical & biographical = = = 
 The Life and Philosophy of W. H. Chamberlin . Salt Lake City : Deseret News Press . 1925 . 
 Memories of John <unk> Park . Salt Lake City : University of Utah Press . 1949 . 
 Life Sciences at the University of Utah : Background and History . Salt Lake City : University of Utah Press . 1950 @.@ pp. 1 – 417 . 
 The University of Utah , a History of its First Hundred Years , 1850 to 1950 . Salt Lake City : University of Utah Press . 1960 @.@ pp. 1 – 668 . 
 The Exploration of the Colorado River in 1869 and 1871 – 1872 ( Reprinted from Utah Historical Quarterly v. 15 , 1947 ed . ) . Salt Lake City : University of Utah Press . 2009 . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 963 @-@ 0 . ( With William C. Darrah and Charles Kelly ) 
 = = Eponymous taxa = = 
 The taxa ( e.g. genus or species ) named after Chamberlin are listed below , followed by author ( s ) and year of naming , and taxonomic family . Taxa are listed as originally described : subsequent research may have reassigned taxa or rendered some as invalid synonyms of previously named taxa . 
 <unk> chamberlini <unk> , 1922 
 <unk> chamberlini Gertsch , 1933 ( <unk> ) 
 <unk> chamberlini Berland , 1942 ( <unk> ) 
 Euglena chamberlini D. T. Jones , 1944 ( <unk> ) 
 <unk> chamberlini Hoffman , 1950 ( <unk> , <unk> ) 
 <unk> Machado , 1951 ( <unk> , <unk> ) 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> , 1951 ( <unk> ) 
 <unk> chamberlini Schubart , 1951 
 <unk> Causey , 1954 ( <unk> ) 
 <unk> Wang , 1956 
 <unk> chamberlini Platnick & <unk> , 1975 ( <unk> ) 
 <unk> chamberlini Shear , 1977 ( <unk> ) 
 <unk> chamberlini Smith , 1995 ( <unk> ) 
 <unk> chamberlini Bond & <unk> , 1997 ( <unk> ) 
 Pyrgulopsis chamberlini Hershler , 1998 ( <unk> ) 
 = = = Cited works = = = 
 Durrant , Stephen D. ( 1958 ) . " The contributions to science of Ralph Vary Chamberlin " . The Biologist ( Phi Sigma Society ) 40 : 27 – 30 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Hoffman , Richard L. ( 1999 ) . " Checklist of the millipeds of North and Middle America " ( PDF ) . Virginia Museum of Natural History Special Publications 8 : 1 – 553 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Wilkinson , Ernest L. , ed . ( 1975 ) . Brigham Young University : The First One Hundred Years 1 . Provo , Utah : Brigham Young University Press . ISBN <unk> . 
 Woodbury , Angus M. ; Woodbury , Grace A. ( 1958 ) . " Ralph Vary Chamberlin : educational and cultural contributions " . The Biologist ( Phi Sigma Society ) 40 : 21 – 26 . OCLC <unk> . 
 = Lipizzan = 
 The Lipizzan or Lipizzaner ( Czech : <unk> , Croatian : <unk> , Hungarian : <unk> , Italian : <unk> , Slovene : <unk> ) , is a breed of horse closely associated with the Spanish Riding School of Vienna , Austria , where they demonstrate the haute école or " high school " movements of classical dressage , including the highly controlled , stylized jumps and other movements known as the " airs above the ground . " The horses at the Spanish Riding School are trained using traditional methods that date back hundreds of years , based on the principles of classical dressage . 
 The Lipizzan breed dates back to the 16th century , when it was developed with the support of the Habsburg nobility . The breed takes its name from one of the earliest stud farms established , located near the Karst Plateau village of Lipica ( spelled " Lipizza " in Italian ) , in modern @-@ day Slovenia . The breed has been endangered numerous times by warfare sweeping Europe , including during the War of the First Coalition , World War I and World War II . The rescue of the Lipizzans during World War II by American troops was made famous by the Disney movie Miracle of the White Stallions . Along with the Disney movie , Lipizzans have also starred or played supporting roles in many movies , TV shows , books and other media . 
 Today , eight stallions are recognized as the foundation bloodstock of the breed , all foaled the late 18th and early 19th centuries . All modern Lipizzans trace their bloodlines to these eight stallions , and all breeding stallions have included in their name the name of the foundation sire of their bloodline . There are also classic mare lines , with up to 35 recognized by various breed registries . The majority of horses are registered through the member organizations of the Lipizzan International Federation , which covers almost 11 @,@ 000 horses in 19 countries and at 9 state studs in Europe . The majority of Lipizzans reside in Europe , with smaller numbers in the Americas , Africa and Australia . Generally gray in color , the Lipizzan is a muscular breed that matures slowly and is long @-@ lived . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Most Lipizzans measure between 14 @.@ 2 and 15 @.@ 2 hands ( 58 and 62 inches , 147 and 157 cm ) . However , horses bred that are closer to the original carriage @-@ horse type are taller , approaching 16 @.@ 1 hands ( 65 inches , 165 cm ) . Lipizzans have a long head , with a straight or slightly convex profile . The jaw is deep , the ears small , the eyes large and expressive and the nostrils flared . They have a neck that is sturdy , yet arched and withers that are low , muscular and broad . They are a Baroque @-@ type horse , with a wide , deep chest , broad croup and muscular shoulder . The tail is carried high and well set . The legs are well @-@ muscled and strong , with broad joints and well @-@ defined tendons . The feet tend to be small , but are tough . 
 Lipizzan horses tend to mature slowly . However , they live and are active longer than many other breeds , with horses performing the difficult exercises of the Spanish Riding School well into their 20s and living into their 30s . 
 = = = Color = = = 
 Aside from the rare solid @-@ colored horse ( usually bay or black ) , most Lipizzans are gray . Like all gray horses , they have black skin , dark eyes , and as adult horses , a white hair coat . Gray horses , including Lipizzans , are born dark — usually bay or black — and become lighter each year as the graying process takes place , with the process being complete at between 6 and 10 years of age . Lipizzans are not actually true white horses , but this is a common misconception . A white horse is born white and has unpigmented skin . 
 Until the 18th century , Lipizzans had other coat colors , including dun , bay , chestnut , black , piebald and skewbald . However , gray is a dominant gene . Gray was the color preferred by the royal family , and so the color was emphasized in breeding practices . Thus , in a small breed population when the color was deliberately selected as a desirable feature , it came to be the color of the overwhelming majority of Lipizzan horses . However , it is a long @-@ standing tradition for the Spanish Riding School to have at least one bay Lipizzan stallion in residence , and this tradition is continued through the present day . 
 = = History = = 
 The ancestors of the Lipizzan can be traced to approximately A.D. 800 . The earliest predecessors of the Lipizzan originated in the 7th century when Barb horses were brought into Spain by the Moors and crossed on native Spanish stock . The result was the Andalusian horse and other Iberian horse breeds . 
 By the 16th century , when the Habsburgs ruled both Spain and Austria , a powerful but agile horse was desired both for military uses and for use in the fashionable and rapidly growing riding schools for the nobility of central Europe . Therefore , in 1562 , the Habsburg Emperor Maximillian II brought the Spanish Andalusian horse to Austria and founded the court stud at Kladrub . In 1580 , his brother , Archduke Charles II , established a similar stud at Lipizza ( now Lipica ) , located in modern @-@ day Slovenia , from which the breed obtained its name . The name of the village itself derives from the Slovenian word <unk> , meaning " linden tree . " 
 Spanish , Barb , and Arabian stock were crossed at Lipizza , and succeeding generations were crossed with the now @-@ extinct Neapolitan breed from Italy and other Baroque horses of Spanish descent obtained from Germany and Denmark . While breeding stock was exchanged between the two studs , Kladrub specialized in producing heavy carriage horses , while riding and light carriage horses came from the Lipizza stud . 
 Beginning in 1920 , the Piber Federal Stud , near Graz , Austria , became the main stud for the horses used in Vienna . Breeding became very selective , only allowing stallions that had proved themselves at the Riding School to stand at stud , and only breeding mares who had passed rigorous performance testing . 
 = = = Foundation horses = = = 
 Today , a maximum of eight foundation lines for Lipizzans are recognized by various registries , which refer to them as " dynasties . " They are divided into two groups . Six trace to classical foundation stallions used in the 18th and 19th centuries by the Lipizza stud , and two additional lines were not used at Lipizza but were used by other studs within the historic boundaries of the Habsburg Empire . 
 The six " classical dynasties " are : 
 Pluto : a gray Spanish stallion from the Royal Danish Stud , foaled in 1765 
 Conversano : a black Neapolitan stallion , foaled in 1767 
 Maestoso : a gray stallion from the Kladrub stud with a Spanish dam , foaled 1773 , descendants today all trace via Maestoso X , foaled in Hungary in 1819 . 
 <unk> : a dun stallion from the Kladrub stud , foaled in 1779 
 <unk> : a bay Neapolitan stallion from the Polesine , foaled in 1790 
 <unk> : a gray Arabian stallion , originally from Syria , foaled in 1810 
 There are two additional stallion lines found in Croatia , Hungary , and other eastern European countries as well as in North America . They are accepted as equal to the 6 classical lines by the Lipizzan International Federation ( LIF ) . These are : 
 <unk> : A black stallion of Baroque type and Spanish pedigree foaled about 1800 from the Croatian stud farm of <unk> , owned by Count Janković @-@ <unk> . 
 <unk> : A stallion of Spanish lines foaled 1802 , bred in Transylvania by Count Bethlen , and sold to the Hungarian stud farm <unk> . 
 There are several other stallion lines that have died out over the years , but were used in the early breeding of the horses . In addition to the foundation stallion lines , there were 20 " classic " mare lines , 14 of which exist today . However , there are up to 35 mare lines recognized by various Lipizzan organizations . 
 There are traditional naming patterns for both stallions and mares , required by Lipizzan breed registries . Stallions traditionally are given two names , with the first being the line of the sire and the second being the name of the dam . For example , " Maestoso Austria " is a horse sired by Maestoso <unk> out of a mare named Austria . The horse 's sire line tracing to the foundation sire Maestoso . The names of mares are chosen to be " complementary to the traditional Lipizzan line names " and are required to end in the letter " a " . 
 = = = Spanish Riding School = = = 
 The world @-@ famous Spanish Riding School uses highly trained Lipizzan stallions in public performances that demonstrate classical dressage movements and training . In 1572 the first Spanish Riding Hall was built , during the Austrian Empire , and is the oldest of its kind in the world . The Spanish Riding School , though located in Vienna , Austria , takes its name from the original Spanish heritage of its horses . In 1729 Charles VI commissioned the building of the Winter Riding School in Vienna and in 1735 , the building was completed that remains the home of the Spanish Riding School today . 
 = = = Wartime preservation = = = 
 The Lipizzans endured several wartime relocations throughout their history , each of which saved the breed from extinction . The first was in March 1797 during the War of the First Coalition , when the horses were evacuated from Lipica . During the journey , 16 mares gave birth to foals . In November 1797 , the horses returned to Lipica , but the stables were in ruins . They were rebuilt , but in 1805 , the horses were evacuated again when Napoleon invaded Austria . They remained away from the stud for two years , returning April 1 , 1807 . But then , following the Treaty of Schönbrunn in 1809 , the horses were evacuated three more times during the unsettled period that followed , resulting in the loss of many horses and the destruction of the written studbooks that documented bloodlines of horses prior to 1700 . The horses finally returned to Lipica for good in 1815 , where they remained for the rest of the 19th century . 
 The first evacuation of the 20th century occurred in 1915 when the horses were evacuated from Lipica due to World War I and placed at <unk> and Kladrub . Following the war , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Empire was broken up , with Lipica becoming part of Italy . Thus , the animals were divided between several different studs in the new postwar nations of Austria , Italy , Hungary , Czechoslovakia , Romania and Yugoslavia . The nation of Austria kept the stallions of the Spanish Riding School and some breeding stock . By 1920 , the Austrian breeding stock was consolidated at Piber . 
 During World War II , the high command of Nazi Germany transferred most of Europe 's Lipizzan breeding stock to Hostau , Czechoslovakia . The breeding stock was taken from Piber in 1942 , and additional mares and foals from other European nations arrived in 1943 . The stallions of the Spanish Riding School were evacuated to St. Martins , Austria from Vienna in January 1945 , when bombing raids neared the city and the head of the Spanish Riding School , Colonel Alois Podhajsky , feared the horses were in danger . By spring of 1945 , the horses at Hostau were threatened by the advancing Soviet army , which might have slaughtered the animals for horse meat had it captured the facility . 
 The rescue of the Lipizzans by the United States Army , made famous by the Disney movie Miracle of the White Stallions , occurred in two parts : The United States Third Army under the command of General George S. Patton , was near St. Martins in the spring of 1945 and learned that the Lipizzan stallions were in the area . Patton himself was a horseman , and like Podhajsky , had competed in the Olympic Games . On May 7 , 1945 , Podhajsky put on an exhibition of the Spanish Riding School stallions for Patton and Undersecretary of War Robert P. Patterson , and at its conclusion requested that Patton take the horses under his protection . 
 Meanwhile , the Third Army 's United States Second Cavalry , a tank unit under the command of Colonel Charles Reed , had discovered the horses at Hostau , where there were also 400 Allied prisoners of war , and had occupied it on April 28 , 1945 . " Operation Cowboy " , as the rescue was known , resulted in the recovery of 1 @,@ 200 horses , including 375 Lipizzans . Patton learned of the raid , and arranged for Podhajsky to fly to Hostau . On May 12 , American soldiers began riding , trucking and herding the horses 35 miles across the border into <unk> , Germany . The Lipizzans were eventually settled in temporary quarters in <unk> , until the breeding stock returned to Piber in 1952 , and the stallions returned to the Spanish Riding School in 1955 . In 2005 , the Spanish Riding School celebrated the 60th anniversary of Patton 's rescue by touring the United States . 
 During the Croatian War of Independence , from 1991 to 1995 , the horses at the Lipik stable in Croatia were taken by the Serbs to Novi Sad , Serbia . The horses remained there until 2007 , when calls began to be made for them to be returned to their country of origin . In October 2007 , 60 horses were returned to Croatia . 
 = = = Modern breed = = = 
 The Lipizzan breed suffered a setback to its population when a viral epidemic hit the Piber Stud in 1983 . Forty horses and eight percent of the expected foal crop were lost . Since then , the population at the stud increased . By 1994 there were 100 mares at the stud with and a foal crop of 56 born in 1993 . In 1994 , the rate of successful pregnancy and birth of foals increased from 27 % to 82 % as the result of a new veterinary center . In 1996 , a study funded by the European Union Indo @-@ Copernicus Project assessed 586 Lipizzan horses from eight stud farms in Europe , with the goal of developing a " scientifically @-@ based description of the Lipizzan horse " . A study of the mitochondrial DNA ( mtDNA ) was performed on 212 of the animals , and those studied were found to contain 37 of the 39 known mtDNA haplotypes known in modern horses , meaning that they show a high degree of genetic diversity . This was what had been expected , as it was known that the mare families of the Lipizzan included a large number of different breeds , including Arabians , Thoroughbreds , and other European breeds . 
 The Lipizzan International Federation ( LIF ) is the international governing organization for the breed , composed of many national and private organizations representing the Lipizzan . The organizations work together under the banner of the LIF to promote the breed and maintain standards . As of 2012 , there were almost 11 @,@ 000 Lipizzans registered with the LIF residing with private breeders in 19 countries and at 9 state studs in Europe . The largest number are in Europe , with almost 9 @,@ 000 registered horses , followed by the Americas , with just over 1 @,@ 700 , then Africa and Australia with around 100 horses each . The nine state studs that are part of the LIF represent almost one @-@ quarter of the horses in Europe . <unk> de Jos , in Romania , has the greatest number of horses , with 400 , followed by Piber in Austria ( 360 ) , Lipica in Slovenia ( 358 ) , <unk> in Hungary ( 262 ) , <unk> in Italy ( 230 ) , Đakovo @-@ Lipik in Croatia ( 220 ) and <unk> in Slovakia ( 200 ) . The other two studs are smaller , with <unk> in Bosnia having 130 horses and <unk> in Serbia having just 30 . Educational programs have been developed in order to promote the breed and foster adherence to traditional breeding objectives . 
 Because of the status of Lipizzans as the only breed of horse developed in Slovenia , via the Lipica stud that is now located within its borders , Lipizzans are recognized in Slovenia as a national animal . For example , a pair of Lipizzans is featured on the 20 @-@ cent Slovenian euro coins . Mounted regiments of Carabinieri police in Italy also employ the Lipizzan as one of their mounts . In October 2008 , during a visit to Slovenia , a Lipizzan at Lipica , named 085 <unk> <unk> XXII , was given to Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom . She decided to leave the animal in the care of the stud farm . 
 = = Training and uses = = 
 The traditional horse training methods for Lipizzans were developed at the Spanish Riding School and are based on the principles of classical dressage , which in turn traces to the Ancient Greek writer Xenophon , whose works were rediscovered in the 16th century . His thoughts on development of horses ' mental attitude and psyche are still considered applicable today . Other writers who strongly influenced the training methods of the Spanish Riding School include Federico <unk> , the founder of the first riding academy in Naples , who lived during the 16th century ; and Antoine de <unk> and François <unk> de la <unk> , two Frenchmen from the 17th and 18th centuries . The methods for training the Lipizzan stallions at the Spanish Riding School were passed down via an oral tradition until Field Marshal Franz Holbein and Johann Meixner , Senior Rider at the School , published the initial guidelines for the training of horse and rider at the School in 1898 . In the mid @-@ 20th century , Alois Podhajsky wrote a number of works that serve as textbooks for many dressage riders today . 
 The principles taught at the Spanish Riding School are based on practices taught to cavalry riders to prepare their horses for warfare . Young stallions come to the Spanish Riding School for training when they are four years old . Full training takes an average of six years for each horse , and schooling is considered complete when they have mastered the skills required to perform the " School Quadrille " . There are three progressively more difficult skill sets taught to the stallions , which are : 
 Forward riding , also called Straight riding or the <unk> - This is the name given to the skills taught in the first year of training , where a young horse learns to be saddled and bridled , learns basic commands on a longe line , and then is taught to be ridden , mostly in an arena in simple straight lines and turns , to teach correct responses to the rider 's legs and hands while mounted . The main goal during this time is to develop free forward movement in as natural a position as possible . 
 Campaign school , <unk> or Campagne , where the horse learns collection and balance through all gaits , turns and maneuvers . The horse learns to shorten and lengthen his stride , perform lateral movements to the side , and is introduced to the more complex double bridle . This is the longest training phase and may take several years . 
 High @-@ school dressage , the Haute école or <unk> Schule , which includes riding the horse with greater collection with increased use of the hindquarters , developing increased regularity , skill and finesse in all natural gaits . In this period , the horse learns the most advanced movements such as the half @-@ pass , counter @-@ canter , flying change , pirouette , passage , and <unk> . This is also when the horse may be taught the " Airs above the ground . " This level emphasizes performance with a high degree of perfection . 
 Although the Piber Stud trains mares for driving and under saddle , the Spanish Riding School exclusively uses stallions in its performances . Worldwide , the Lipizzan today competes in dressage and driving , as well as retaining their classic position at the Spanish Riding School . 
 = = " Airs above the ground " = = 
 The " airs above the ground " are the difficult " high school " dressage movements made famous by the Lipizzans . The finished movements include : 
 The <unk> : a position wherein the horse raises up both front legs , standing at a 30 @-@ degree angle entirely on its hind legs in a controlled form that requires a great deal of hindquarter strength . A less difficult but related movement is the <unk> , where the horse rises up to a 45 @-@ degree angle . 
 The <unk> : a movement where the horse balances on its hind legs and then essentially " hops , " jumping with the forelegs off the ground and hind legs together . 
 The <unk> : a jump in place where the stallion leaps into the air , tucking his forelegs under himself , and kicks out with his hind legs at the top of the jump . 
 Other movements include : 
 The <unk> and <unk> are predecessors to the <unk> . In the <unk> , the horse jumps with both fore and hind legs remaining tucked under the body and he does not kick out . In the <unk> , the horse jumps and <unk> his hind legs slightly , he does not kick out , but the soles of the hind feet are visible if viewed from the rear . 
 The <unk> : A series of successive <unk> in which the horse lowers its forefeet to the ground before rising again on hindquarters , achieving forward motion . This movement is no longer used at the Spanish Riding School . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Lipizzans have starred or played supporting roles in many movies , TV shows , books and other media . 
 The 1940 film Florian stars two Lipizzan stallions . It was based on a 1934 novel written by Felix Salten . The wife of the film 's producer owned the only Lipizzans in the US at the time that the movie was made . The rescue during World War II of the Lipizzan stallions is depicted in the 1963 Walt Disney movie Miracle of the White Stallions . The movie was the only live @-@ action , relatively realistic film set against a World War II backdrop that Disney has ever produced . In the feature film Crimson Tide , a discussion between the two main characters over whether Lipizzans came from Spain or Portugal , and whether they are born white or black , is used to represent the film 's suppressed racial conflict and the dividing of the world between two main powers during the Cold War . 
 Television programs featuring the Lipizzans include The White Horses , a 1965 children 's television series co @-@ produced by RTV Ljubljana ( now RTV Slovenija ) of Yugoslavia and BR @-@ TV of Germany , re @-@ broadcast in the United Kingdom . It followed the adventures of a teenage girl who visits a farm where Lipizzan horses are raised . Many books and poems mention or star Lipizzans . In 2011 , the Dutch writer Frank Westerman published a book on the history of the 20th century through the perspective of the Lipizzan horses , Brother Mendel 's Perfect Horse . In the 2004 novel The Star of Kazan by Eva Ibbotson , Lipizzan horses and the Spanish Riding School are key elements of both the plot and the setting . Lipizzans and the Spanish Riding School also play a crucial role in Mary Stewart 's 1965 novel Airs Above the Ground and Marguerite Henry 's 1964 children 's novel White Stallion of Lipizza . In the 1960s , the Slovene poet Edvard <unk> wrote a poem dedicated to the Lipizzan horses . On June 21 , 2011 Annie Wedekind released " Mercury 's Flight : The Story of a Lipizzaner Stallion " through Breyer Horses as part of The Breyer Horse Collection book series . In the Season 1 episode of The Angry Beavers " Fancy <unk> " Norbert confesses to Daggett that his lifelong dream is to become a Lipizzaner Stallion . Former concert promoter Gary <unk> owned The World Famous Lipizzaner Stallions until they filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy and permanently closed . A new movie based on the World War II evacuation of <unk> from a Nazi breeding farm is expected to hit theaters in December 2016 . 
 = Walter Zinn = 
 Walter Henry Zinn ( December 10 , 1906 – February 14 , 2000 ) was a nuclear physicist who was the first director of the Argonne National Laboratory from 1946 to 1956 . He worked at the Manhattan Project 's Metallurgical Laboratory during World War II , and supervised the construction of Chicago Pile @-@ 1 , the world ’ s first nuclear reactor , which went critical on December 2 , 1942 , at the University of Chicago . At Argonne he designed and built several new reactors , including Experimental Breeder Reactor I , the first nuclear reactor to produce electric power , which went live on December 20 , 1951 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Walter Henry Zinn was born in Berlin ( now Kitchener ) , Ontario , on December 10 , 1906 , the son of John Zinn , who worked in a tire factory , and Maria Anna <unk> . He had an older brother , Albert , who also became a factory worker . 
 Zinn entered Queen 's University , where he earned a Bachelor of Arts degree in mathematics in 1927 and a Master of Arts degree in 1930 . He then entered Columbia University in 1930 , where he studied physics , writing his Doctor of Philosophy thesis on " Two @-@ crystal study of the structure and width of K X @-@ ray absorption limits " . This was subsequently published in the Physical Review . 
 To support himself , Zinn taught at Queen 's University from 1927 to 1928 , and at Columbia from 1931 to 1932 . He became an instructor at the City College of New York in 1932 . While at Queen 's he met Jennie A. ( Jean ) Smith , a fellow student . They were married in 1933 and had two sons , John Eric and Robert James . In 1938 , Zinn became a naturalised United States citizen . 
 = = Manhattan Project = = 
 In 1939 , the Pupin Physics Laboratories at Columbia where Zinn worked were the center of intensive research into the properties of uranium and nuclear fission , which had recently been discovered by Lise Meitner , Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann . At Columbia , Zinn , Enrico Fermi , Herbert L. Anderson , John R. Dunning and Leo Szilard investigated whether uranium @-@ 238 fissioned with slow neutrons , as Fermi believed , or only the uranium @-@ 235 isotope , as Niels Bohr contended . Since pure uranium @-@ 235 was not available , Fermi and Szilard chose to work with natural uranium . They were particularly interested in whether a nuclear chain reaction could be initiated . This would require more than one neutron to be emitted per fission on average in order to keep the chain reaction going . By March 1939 , they established that about two were being emitted per fission on average . The delay between an atom absorbing a neutron and fission occurring would be the key to controlling a chain reaction . 
 At this point Zinn began working for Fermi , constructing experimental uranium lattices . To slow neutrons down requires a neutron moderator . Water was Fermi 's first choice , but it tended to absorb neutrons as well as slow them . In July , Szilard suggested using carbon , in the form of graphite . The critical radius of a spherical reactor was calculated to be : 
 <formula> 
 In order for a self @-@ sustaining nuclear chain reaction to occur , they needed k > 1 . For a practical reactor configuration , it needed to be at least 3 or 4 percent more ; but in August 1941 Zinn 's initial experiments indicated a disappointing value of 0 @.@ 87 . Fermi pinned his hopes of a better result on an improved configuration , and purer uranium and graphite . 
 In early 1942 , with the United States now embroiled World War II , Arthur Compton concentrated the Manhattan Project 's various teams working on plutonium at the Metallurgical Laboratory at the University of Chicago . Zinn used athletes to build Fermi 's increasingly large experimental configurations under the stands of the disused Stagg Field . In July 1942 , Fermi measured a k = 1 @.@ 007 from a uranium oxide lattice . This raised hopes that pure uranium would yield a suitable value of k . 
 By December 1942 , Zinn and Anderson had the new configuration ready at Stagg Field . Some 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) long , 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) wide and 19 feet ( 5 @.@ 8 m ) high , it contained 385 @.@ 5 long tons ( 391 @.@ 7 t ) of graphite and 46 @.@ 5 long tons ( 47 @.@ 2 t ) of uranium metal and uranium oxide . When the experiment was carried out on the afternoon of December 2 , 1942 , the reactor , known as Chicago Pile @-@ 1 , reached criticality without incident . Since the reactor had no radiation shield , it was run at a maximum power of only 200 W , enough to power a light bulb , and ran for only three months . It was shut down on February 28 , 1943 , because the US Army did not want to risk an accident near densely populated downtown Chicago . 
 The Army leased a 1 @,@ 000 acres ( 400 ha ) of the Cook County Forest Preserves known as " Site A " to the Manhattan Project , and " the Country Club " to the hundred or so scientists , guards and others who worked there . Zinn was placed in charge of Site A , under Fermi . Chicago Pile @-@ 1 was disassembled and rebuilt , this time with a radiation shield , at Site A. The reactor , now known as Chicago Pile @-@ 2 , was operational again on March 20 , 1943 . Within a few months , Fermi began designing a new reactor , which became known as Chicago Pile @-@ 3 . This was a very different type of reactor . It was much smaller , being only 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) in diameter and 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) high . It was power by 120 uranium metal rods , and moderated by 1 @,@ 200 US gallons ( 4 @,@ 500 l ; 1 @,@ 000 imp gal ) of heavy water . Once again Zinn was in charge of construction , which commenced on New Year 's Day in 1944 . Chicago Pile @-@ 3 went critical on May 15 , 1944 , and commenced operation on June 23 at its full power of 300 KW . When Fermi departed for the Hanford Site , Zinn became the sole authority at Site A. 
 On September 29 , 1944 , Zinn received an urgent call from Samuel Allison , the director of the Metallurgical Laboratory . The B Reactor at Hanford had shut down shortly after reaching full power , only to come back to life again some hours later . Norman Hilberry suspected a neutron poison was responsible . If so , it had a half life of around 9 @.@ 7 hours . Xenon @-@ 135 had a half life close to that , but had not been detected in Argonne or by the X @-@ 10 Graphite Reactor in Oak Ridge , Tennessee . Zinn quickly brought Chicago Pile @-@ 3 up to full power , and within twelve hours , had made a series of measurements that confirmed the Hanford results . 
 Over the following months , some 175 technical personnel were transferred from the Metallurgical Laboratory to Hanford and Los Alamos . Zinn 's Argonne Laboratory was reduced to a skeleton staff , but Compton would not countenance its closure . 
 = = Argonne National Laboratory = = 
 On July 11 , 1946 , the Argonne laboratory officially became the Argonne National Laboratory , with Zinn as its first director . Alvin Weinberg characterized Zinn as " a model of what a director of the then @-@ emerging national laboratories should be : sensitive to the aspirations of both contractor and fund provider , but confident enough to prevail when this was necessary . " 
 One of the first problems confronting Zinn was that of accommodation . The Federal government had promised to restore Site A to the Cook County Forest Preserves after the war , and despite intervention from the Secretary of War , Robert P. Patterson , the most the Cook County Forest Preserves Commission would agree to was that the Argonne National Laboratory could continue to occupy a portion of the lease until a new site was found . Zinn rejected alternate sites outside the Chicago area , and the Army found a new site for the laboratory 's permanent home about 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) away in DuPage County , Illinois , which became known as Site D. 
 Under Zinn , the Argonne National Laboratory adopted slightly more progressive hiring practices than other contemporary institutions . Three African American women and seven men , six of whom had worked on the Manhattan Project , were employed in research at Argonne at a time when the Los Alamos National Laboratory had no African American scientists . Argonne also appointed women to positions of authority , with Maria Goeppert @-@ Mayer as a section leader in the theoretical physics division , and Hoylande Young as director of the technical information division . 
 The Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) replaced the Manhattan Project on January 1 , 1947 , and on January 1 , 1948 it announced that the Argonne National Laboratory would be " focused chiefly on problems of reactor development . " Zinn did not seek the additional responsibility , which he realised would divert the Laboratory away from research , and divert him from other responsibilities , such as designing a fast breeder reactor . He even obtained a written assurance from Carroll L. Wilson , the AEC 's general manager , that it would not . He was therefore willing to collaborate with Alvin Weinberg to allow the Oak Ridge National Laboratory to remain involved in reactor design . Nonetheless , reactor research accounted for almost half the laboratory 's budget in 1949 , and 84 percent of its research was classified . 
 Zinn did not get along well with Captain Hyman G. Rickover , the US Navy 's Director of Naval Reactors , but nonetheless Argonne assisted in the development of nuclear marine propulsion , eventually producing two reactors , a land @-@ based prototype Mark I and a propulsion reactor , the Mark II . The STR ( Submarine Thermal Reactor ) pressurized water reactor designed at Argonne powered the first nuclear @-@ powered submarine , the USS Nautilus , and became the basis of nearly all the reactors installed in warships . 
 The other branch of reactor development at the Argonne National Laboratory , and the one closer to Zinn 's heart , was the fast breeder reactor . At the time it was believed that uranium was a scarce resource , so it would be wise to make the best use of it . The breeders were designed to create more fissile material than they consumed . By 1948 , he had become convinced that it would be unwise to build large experimental reactors near Chicago , and the AEC acquired land around Arco , Idaho , which became an outpost of Argonne . The Experimental Breeder Reactor I ( <unk> @-@ I , but known at Argonne as " ZIP " — Zinn 's Infernal Pile ) was the first reactor to be cooled by liquid metal , and the first to produce electricity . It proved the breeder concept . AEC Chairman Gordon Dean described it as a major milestone in nuclear history . 
 The BORAX Experiments were a series of destructive tests of boiling water reactors conducted by Argonne National Laboratory in Idaho . The BORAX @-@ 1 test was conducted under Zinn 's supervision in 1954 . He had the control rods removed to demonstrate that the reactor would shut down without trouble , and it immediately blew up with a loud bang and a tall column of dark smoke , a turn of events that he had not anticipated . He shouted to Harold Lichtenberg to put the control rods back in again , but Lichtenberg pointed out that one was already flying through the air . Zinn later had to testify on the experiment before the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After leaving the Argonne National Laboratory in 1956 , Zinn moved to Florida , where he founded his own consulting firm , General Nuclear Engineering , with its headquarters in Dunedin , Florida . The company was involved in the design and construction of pressurized water reactors . It was acquired by Combustion Engineering in 1964 , and he became a vice president and head of its nuclear division . He stepped down from this position in 1970 , but remained a board member until 1986 . He served as a member of the President 's Science Advisory Committee from 1960 to 1962 , and a member of the General Advisory Committee of the AEC and its successor , the Energy Research and Development Administration , from 1972 to 1975 . 
 Over the years Zinn received multiple awards for his work , including a special commendation from the AEC in 1956 , the Atoms for Peace Award in 1960 , the Enrico Fermi Award in 1969 , and the Elliott Cresson Medal from The Franklin Institute in 1970 . In 1955 he was elected as the first president of the American Nuclear Society ( ANS ) . 
 Zinn 's wife Jean died in 1964 . He married Mary Teresa Pratt in 1966 , and thereby acquired two stepsons , Warren and Robert Johnson . He died in <unk> Countryside Hospital in Safety Harbor , Florida , on February 14 , 2000 , after suffering a stroke . He was survived by his wife Mary , sons John and Robert and stepson Warren . Robert had become a professor of astronomy at Yale University . 
 = = Walter H. Zinn Award = = 
 Since 1976 , the American Nuclear Society 's Operations and Power Division , has annually presented the Walter H. Zinn Award to recognize an individual " for a notable and sustained contribution to the nuclear power industry that has not been widely recognized . " 
 = It Was Written = 
 It Was Written is the second studio album by American rapper Nas , released July 2 , 1996 on Columbia Records in the United States . Following the moderate sales success of his acclaimed debut album , Illmatic ( 1994 ) , Nas chose to focus his efforts in a more mainstream direction . Primarily produced by Trackmasters , it is a departure for him from the raw , underground tone of his debut album towards a more polished , mainstream sound . The album features mafioso and gangsta themes , and marks the first appearance of Nas 's short @-@ lived supergroup The Firm , which included rappers Foxy Brown , AZ , and Cormega . 
 The album proved to be Nas ’ s most commercially successful release , debuting at number one on the US Billboard 200 chart . It also heralded Nas ’ s mainstream popularity and followed the success of other mafioso rap albums such as Raekwon 's Only Built 4 Cuban Linx … ( 1995 ) . However , his stylistic changes and increased mainstream success fostered accusations of selling out within the hip hop community . It has been viewed by music writers as one of Nas 's best records and remains Nas ' best @-@ selling release , with over 4 million copies in the United States alone . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Following the critical acclaim of his debut album Illmatic ( 1994 ) , Nas chose to concentrate his efforts in a more mainstream direction , in contrast to the raw , unpolished and underground tone of his debut . Despite its significant impact on hip hop at the time , Illmatic did not experience the larger sales of most major releases at the time in hip hop , such as Snoop Dogg 's Doggystyle ( 1993 ) . This was due in part to Nas 's shy personality and <unk> in promoting the record . Nas began to make appearances on other artists ' work , including Kool G Rap 's " 4 @,@ 5 @,@ 6 " ( 1995 ) and Raekwon 's " Verbal Intercourse " on his album Only Built 4 Cuban Linx … ( 1995 ) , which made Nas the first non Wu @-@ Tang Clan member to appear on one of its solo recordings . He began to dub himself as Nas Escobar on these guest appearances . 
 Meanwhile , his excessive spending habits left him with little money , and Nas was forced to ask for a loan to purchase clothes to wear to the Source Awards ceremony in 1995 . The success of fellow East Coast act The Notorious B.I.G. and promoter Puff Daddy at the awards show sent a message to Nas to change his commercial approach , resulting in his hiring of Steve " The Commissioner " Stoute as manager . While Illmatic attained gold status in the United States , Stoute convinced Nas to aim his efforts in a more mainstream , commercial direction for his second album , after which Nas enlisted the production team Trackmasters , who were known at the time for their mainstream success . Other producers for the album included DJ Premier , Dr. Dre , Havoc of Mobb Deep , L.E.S. , Live Squad , and MC Serch as executive producer . Premier and L.E.S. had previously served as producers for Nas 's Illmatic . The album was mastered by Tom Coyne at Sterling Sound in New York City . The album cover was designed by artist Aimée Macauley , and the photography was taken by Danny Clinch . 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Music and style = = = 
 In contrast to Illmatic , the album contains a more detailed and elaborate production , while it shares similarity to the G @-@ funk sound , relying heavily on sampled and looped funk grooves . It Was Written has Nas experimenting with a theatrical mafioso concept under the alias of " Nas Escobar " ( inspired by the Colombian drug lord Pablo Escobar ) . The album 's subject matter has been noted for its focus on materialistic excess and other mafioso lyrical themes . Jon Pareles of The New York Times wrote of Nas 's shift in lyrical themes from Illmatic , stating he " repeatedly cites the Colombian drug kingpin Pablo Escobar and drops brand names of clothes , cars , liquor and guns . " Nas also references lines from his previous material , a common element in his music that has been analyzed by one music writer as " return [ ing ] to his professional beginnings in those references . " 
 = = = Content = = = 
 The album opens with " Album Intro " in which a slave rebellion is heard , and it contains samples of Sam Cooke 's " A Change Is Gonna Come " ( 1964 ) and The Lost Generation 's " The Sly , the Slick , and the Wicked " ( 1970 ) . ( sample ) The opening song " The Message " features production by the Trackmasters , Poke & Tone , and scratching from Kid Capri . One critic described the song as a " bloody narrative " , and cited it as " one of the most visually evocative songs of Nas ' career " . The song 's title references the classic hip hop single " The Message " ( 1982 ) by Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five . Legendary producer DJ Premier had one production credit on the jazz fusion @-@ styled " I Gave You Power " , a song which depicts a first @-@ person narrative from the perspective of a gun . The song is accompanied by falling piano notes and stuttering drums . 
 The album contains the singles " If I Ruled the World " , which features guest vocals from Lauryn Hill , and " Street Dreams " . Music critic J.R. Reynolds wrote that the former has Nas " rapping his way to anarchy in an imagined world where he kicks discipline to the curb and good times rule . " In the song , he states that he would " open every cell in Attica / send them to Africa " . The latter is an account on the impact of drugs in Nas 's neighborhood . The song contains smooth bass lines and frail drums , and it features an interpolation of the Eurythmics ' " Sweet Dreams ( Are Made of This ) " ( 1983 ) . The album also features guest appearances from Mobb Deep and The Firm , a supergroup which was initially composed of Nas , AZ , Cormega and Foxy Brown . The group makes an appearance on the song " Affirmative Action " , a tale of robbery and three characters with mob connections . Brett Berliner of Stylus Magazine described the song 's beat as " extremely mafioso , sounding straight out of Goodfellas , with strings and crescendos " , while he cited the song as " one of the best posse tracks of all time . " 
 Mobb Deep 's Havoc produced two tracks for the album , " The Set Up " , a story about revenge , and " Live Nigga Rap " , a freestyle performed by Nas and Mobb Deep with hard , gloomy percussion . " Black Girl Lost " is a sympathetic account on the struggle of African @-@ American women . It features vocals by R & B singer Joel " Jo @-@ Jo " Hailey of Jodeci . Music critic Krisex wrote of Nas 's lyricism , stating " The <unk> song woos heavy rotation while the MC makes the type of passionate <unk> that leave lyrical <unk> <unk> at his mike stand . " The song 's title comes from the book of the same name by pulp writer Donald Goines ; his literary work has served as a popular source of reference for many gangsta rap artists . " Nas Is Coming " is a collaboration between Nas and West Coast rapper Dr. Dre . One writer cited it as " more of a gangsta , mainstream tune than anything Nas has ever recorded . " The song 's opening conversation , a skit , is a discussion between Nas and Dr. Dre about hip hop artists and fans over @-@ concerned with the East Coast @-@ West Coast rivalry , and that the two are producing a song that does not revolve around or contribute to the beef . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 It Was Written was released July 2 , 1996 in the United States , Canada and Europe on Columbia Records , while featuring distribution in the United Kingdom on Simply Vinyl Records as a double vinyl LP . It Was Written proved to be Nas ’ s most commercially successful album to date , selling 268 @,@ 000 copies at the time of its chart debut . It peaked at number one on the Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums and debuted at the top of the Billboard 200 , remaining on the latter chart at number one for four consecutive weeks , in the top 20 for eleven weeks , and a total of thirty @-@ four weeks in the top 200 . 
 The album 's first single " If I Ruled the World ( Imagine That ) " peaked at number 15 on the Hot Rap Singles chart , number 17 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles & Tracks chart and number 53 on the Billboard Hot 100 singles chart . The second single " Street Dreams " hit number one on the Hot Dance Music / Maxi @-@ Singles Sales chart , as well as number one on the Hot Rap Singles chart , while it peaked at number 18 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles & Tracks and number 27 on the Billboard Hot 100 . A remix version of " Street Dreams " was released on November 26 , 1996 featuring production by Poke & Tone and guest vocals from R & B singer R. Kelly . On September 6 , 1996 , It Was Written was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , for shipments of two million copies in the United States . On January 8 , 1997 , " Street Dreams " was certified gold in sales by the RIAA for shipments of 500 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 It Was Written received generally positive reviews from critics . The Source called it an " audio anthology of ghetto stories told by one of hip @-@ hop 's most prolific writers . " Vibe magazine 's Krisex criticized the album 's " consistently aggressive attempts at pop music " , but also wrote that Nas " shines through " . Despite calling the album " adequate " and commending Nas for his lyricism and flow , Krisex concluded that It was Written " isn 't nearly as satisfying as his first one . " NME wrote that " Nas ' neat , considered lyrics treat the violence that surrounds him with a mixture of remorse , resignation and ebullience . " Christopher John Farley of Time stated " The lyrics in It Was Written could be sharper , but the music , energetic and engaging on many tracks , helps drive his message home . " Q magazine called Nas 's performance " angry , lean and full of drive . " Both the Chicago Tribune and Chicago Sun @-@ Times were favorable of the album 's sound and gave the album 3 ½ out of 4 stars . Los Angeles Times writer Cheo Coker called the album " poetic " , writing that it " demonstrates a continuing lyrical maturity that makes his already potent beats and rhymes all the more compelling " . Spin magazine preferred the " reach " of It Was Written to Nas 's " more suavely rapped debut " , praised the production , and described the songs ' choruses as " grainy , pop @-@ savvy " . 
 The album 's release followed the commercial success of other mafioso @-@ themed rap albums with similar subject matter , including Raekwon 's Only Built 4 Cuban Linx … ( 1995 ) , Jay @-@ Z 's Reasonable Doubt ( 1996 ) and AZ 's Doe or Die ( 1995 ) . Music writers criticized its mainstream , R & B and pop @-@ leaning sound , as well as the enlistment of a top production unit and popular guest artists . The album 's lyrics and themes were also poorly received and heavily dismissed as an attempt by Nas to follow the popularity of gangsta and mafioso rap . Rolling Stone 's Mark Coleman wrote negatively of Nas 's themes and called it " the latest blatant example of trashy tough @-@ guy talk " , writing " Certainly he strikes a note of creepy realism in his stories of heavyweight dealing and literally cutthroat competition . ' The Set Up ' , ' <unk> ' and ' Affirmative Action ' [ ... ] are chilling in their how @-@ many @-@ grams @-@ to @-@ a @-@ kilo detail and utter amorality . On ' Watch Dem Niggas ' , Nas cites as inspirations both the boxing coach <unk> D 'Amato and the murderous drug lord Pablo Escobar . What is this guy thinking ? " . Jon Pareles of The New York Times commented that he " continually shifts perspective " and called it " late @-@ stage gangsta rap , starting to buckle under its own contradictions . " The Village Voice 's Robert Christgau gave the album a " neither " ( ) rating , indicating " may impress once or twice with consistent craft or an arresting track or two . Then it won 't . " 
 The album was ranked number 41 in NME 's critics ' poll of 1996 , and Jim Farber of the New York Daily News named it the sixth best album of 1996 . German @-@ based magazine Spex ranked it number four on its " End of Year " list , while the UK @-@ based magazine The Face named it the twenty @-@ fourth best album of 1996 . " If I Ruled the World ( Imagine That ) " was ranked number 29 on NME 's Singles of the Year list , and number 20 on The Village Voice 's Pazz & Jop critics ' poll . It was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Rap Solo Performance in 1997 . 
 = = = Retrospect = = = 
 Since its release , It Was Written remains Nas ' best @-@ selling release to date . By 2001 , it had sold more than 2 @.@ 13 million copies . Leo Stanley of Allmusic later praised Nas 's lyricism and ghetto @-@ themed vignettes , along with the album 's detailed production . For Stylus Magazine 's On Second Thought publication , critic Brett Berliner re @-@ examined the album , discussing its initial impact , and cited it as " one of the first hip @-@ hop albums to straddle the critical and commercial divide successfully . " While comparing It Was Written to Illmatic , Berliner stated " It ’ s a seriously good album with a bit of filler , worth of almost all of the praise Illmatic got . This is Nas ’ second classic , and should be considered one of the best albums of all time . " About.com later ranked " If I Ruled the World ( Imagine That ) " number 24 on its list of 50 Great Hip Hop Songs , while it also named the song the fourth best R & B / Rap Collaboration . 
 While later reviews of the album saw It Was Written in a different light than previous reviews had , the subject matter was still seen as a major flaw of the album . Music critics perceived Nas ' violent , fantastical mafioso stories as lacking the emotion and truthfulness of his debut album . Writer Joe Katz wrote in a review of the album for Sputnikmusic , stating " The lyrics were there , but some of the emotion was gone . Maybe it was the world around Nas changing , or maybe it was changing in himself , but no one can listen to this after Illmatic and not see a change ... If Illmatic was the kind of nightmare you can 't wake up from and don 't really want too , then IWW is a regular dream , not quite " real " but enjoyable all the same . " While Illmatic is often held as Nas 's magnum opus , It Was Written was not only perceived by critics as part of a sophomore jinx , but was also the first of Nas 's subsequent work to be heavily judged and compared to the former . However , It Was Written has been noted as his commercial breakthrough by critics , as it boosted the rapper 's image in the mainstream and helped attract a much larger fan @-@ base . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 " Nas is Coming " began a brief collaboration between Nas and West Coast hip hop producer Dr. Dre . The alliance also resulted in the formation of The Firm , who make their debut on track number eight , " Affirmative Action " . The pairing of the East Coast rapper and the West Coast producer , during the period of the East Coast @-@ West Coast rivalry , brought criticism from both sides . More controversy ensued when , during the recording of The Firm 's album , Cormega was fired from the group by Nas 's manager , Steve Stoute , and replaced with a young rapper named Nature . Cormega recorded an underground single , " Fuck Nas and Nature " , which began a rivalry with Nas that persisted — with brief periods of reconciliation — to the end of 2005 . 
 In addition , West Coast @-@ based rapper Tupac Shakur took offense to the opening line of the song " The Message " , and in retaliation insulted Nas on a song titled " Against All Odds " from his posthumously @-@ released album The Don Killuminati : The 7 Day Theory ( 1996 ) . In an interview for King magazine , Nas later confirmed that the song was intended as a diss towards The Notorious B.I.G. , with the line " There 's one life , one love , so there can only be one King . " Nas and Shakur eventually met and reconciled prior to the latter 's fatal shooting . As a result of his death , Shakur did not have the opportunity to remove the insults to Nas in " Against All Odds " on The 7 Day Theory . 
 = = = Hip hop artists = = = 
 It Was Written has been credited , along with Raekwon 's Only Built 4 Cuban Linx … ( 1995 ) , with helping usher in the era of the mafioso rap . According to writer Sam Chennault , while the hip hop subgenre would " run out of steam quickly , this release is a gem . " Chennault also discussed the significance of It Was Written during the period of its release , stating " after mastering stark street corner realism on Illmatic , Nas delivered a loose concept album that was , at the time , groundbreaking in its scope , approach and execution . " According to rapper Young Noble , a close friend of Tupac Shakur , the song " I Gave You Power " served as the main inspiration for Shakur 's " Me and My Girlfriend " ( 1996 ) . American hip hop artist Lupe Fiasco has cited It Was Written as his favorite album and his primary source of inspiration . Fiasco has stated that he based his debut album Food & Liquor ( 2006 ) on the conceptual style and " moods " of It Was Written . When asked of his musical influences in an interview with <unk> , Fiasco stated " You know I really tried to go back and recreate [ Nas ’ ] It Was Written , you know what I 'm saying like that ? [ I would play ] It Was Written and then I would play my album , and it was like , ‘ Do we got [ this ] record , do we got that record ? ’ " When asked in an interview with <unk> about why he is comfortable admitting the album as a source of inspiration , Fiasco stated : 
 Cause it ’ s a classic . Like , people study @-@ you study the masters , you know what I ’ m saying ? Everybody that ’ s rapping studied someone to learn how to rap . They had a rapper who was they favorite rapper that they wanted to be like and wanted to rap like , know what I ’ m saying ? For me , I just look at it like I studied a master piece . I modeled my album after a master piece ; and not song for song ; not line for line ; not beat for beat . It was more @-@ for me it was like mood for mood . The way he set the mood on that album to me was just like incredible . And at the time in my life @-@ like , I fell in love with ‘ It Was Written ’ when I was seventeen , eighteen @-@ a very impressionable time @-@ so I was like I love that album . That ’ s my favorite Hip Hop album , so it ’ s like why not base your album on ‘ It Was Written ’ ? 
 American reggae and hip hop artist Matisyahu regards It Was Written as one of his influences as well . He cites the introduction of It Was Written , in which slaves rebel against their owner , as having a major influence on him . According to The Washington Post , " Matisyahu , too , felt enslaved . By what ? He didn 't know . Just felt the chains . The lyrics rocked him . The beat did , too . " Matisyahu stated that after listening to It Was Written , " I connected with hip @-@ hop , the hardness of it , the driving beat . It ’ s music with space , that has gaps in every little thing that happens . " 
 = = = Subsequent work by Nas = = = 
 While It Was Written earned a more favorable reputation among critics since its initial mixed reception , Nas 's subsequent releases have continued to be weighed against his critically acclaimed Illmatic , despite all of them outselling his debut . Against this standard , they have often been critically deemed as mediocre follow @-@ ups . It Was Written was the first of Nas 's albums to have been labeled as ' selling out ' by fans of Illmatic , due to his crossover sensibilities and radio @-@ friendly hits aimed at the pop charts . In addition , none of his following releases have been able to reach the sales success of It Was Written . The follow @-@ up , I Am … ( 1999 ) , fared almost as well as It Was Written , serving as Nas 's only other album to reach double platinum status . After the releases of I Am … and Nastradamus ( 1999 ) , which underwent considerable editing due to bootlegging of the recording sessions , many fans and critics feared that his career was deteriorating . Despite the chart @-@ topping success of I Am … , hip hop audiences were not ready for the more prophetic themes of Nastradamus , as it only sold 232 @,@ 000 copies by its first week ( less than half of I Am … ' s first @-@ week figures ) . 
 By 2001 , Illmatic and It Was Written were both selling at a rate of over 3 @,@ 000 copies a week , while Nastradamus was earning an average of little more than 2 @,@ 000 copies a week , despite its relative newness . Both I Am … and Nastradamus received further criticism for their commercially oriented sound . Reflecting this widespread perception in the hip hop community and adding to his ongoing feud with Jay @-@ Z at the time , Jay @-@ Z mocked him in the song " Takeover " ( 2001 ) for assuming a " Pablo Escobar " persona and having a " one hot album [ Illmatic ] every ten year average " . Nas , however , made something of a comeback with his fifth album Stillmatic ( 2001 ) and the follow @-@ up God 's Son ( 2002 ) , which both sold in excess of 1 million copies . Afterwards , his subsequent albums tended to receive more positive reviews , including the platinum @-@ selling Street 's Disciple ( 2004 ) and his untitled ninth album ( 2008 ) . Nevertheless , It Was Written has remained as Nas 's best @-@ selling album . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Chart procession and succession = = = 
 = The Banquet ( Parks and Recreation ) = 
 " The Banquet " is the fifth episode of the first season of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on May 8 , 2009 . It was written by Tucker Cawley and directed by Beth McCarthy @-@ Miller . In the episode , Leslie attends an award banquet for her mother , a veteran of local government politics , who encourages Leslie to resort to blackmail in order to get her way with a zoning board official . 
 The episode received positive reviews , with Entertainment Weekly claiming the series appears to have grown more " settled and focused " after this episode . According to Nielsen Media Research , it was watched by 4 @.@ 64 million households in its original airing , continuing a downward trend in ratings since the pilot episode , although NBC had already committed to renewing the show for a second season . " The Banquet " and the rest of the first season of Parks and Recreation was released on DVD in the United States on September 8 , 2009 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) is proud that her mother , school system employee Marlene Knope ( Pamela Reed ) , is to receive a public service award during an upcoming banquet . Ann ( Rashida Jones ) , excited to go to a social event after spending so much time taking care of her injured , <unk> boyfriend Andy ( Chris Pratt ) , is told by Leslie to dress very formally . Leslie visits an old @-@ fashioned barber , who unbeknownst to her only gives men 's haircuts ; she is given a very short , mannish hairstyle , which she is very proud of . Leslie and Ann , who is extremely overdressed in an expensive pink dress , arrive together at the banquet , where they are mistaken for a lesbian couple by many of the attendees . Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) sucks up to Marlene during his banquet speech , while Ron ( Nick Offerman ) sticks to a " fact @-@ based " speech ( " It is true that you have won this award . " ) 
 Leslie sees Jeanine Restrepo ( Loretta Fox ) , an influential zoning board member who could help Leslie with her plans to turn the Sullivan Street pit into a park . Leslie is too nervous to approach her , so she practices with Mark ( Paul Schneider ) , who teasingly pinches her nose because he says as Jeanine , " I can do whatever I want " ; Ann pinches Mark 's nose and Leslie pinches Ann 's , and Mark summarizes , " It 's fun to pretend to be zoning board members . " Marlene suggests Leslie try sucking up to Jeanine in her speech , but it comes across awkwardly when Leslie claims to " love " Jeanine . When Leslie tries to approach her later , Jeanine suggests Leslie make an appointment with her secretary . Marlene says this means Jeanine is blowing them off , and tells Leslie to blackmail Jeanine with the knowledge that her husband has a DUI offense in Illinois . Leslie shares the advice with Ann , who says she believes it is unethical and wrong ; offended , Leslie accuses Ann of pampering Andy . ( " He 's got three crutches , and one of them is you . And the other two are crutches . " ) Ann storms off . 
 Tom wants to go bar @-@ hopping with Mark , who leaves even though he is enjoying hanging out with Leslie and Ann . Tom wears a goofy orange hat at the bar , which he calls " <unk> " , or standing out in a public setting like a peacock . The two talk to women at the bar , but Mark finds them boring and he leaves Tom alone . Ron enjoys the banquet 's bacon @-@ wrapped shrimp , " my number one favorite food , wrapped around my number three favorite food " . Leslie confronts Jeanine about her husband 's DUI , but when Jeanine grows angry , Leslie is unable to go through with the blackmail ; Jeanine splashes water in Leslie 's face , and she leaves ashamed . Leslie visits Ann and apologizes , and Ann acknowledges Leslie was partially right about Andy . The two hug and Andy gets angry because he thought Leslie was " a dude " due to her haircut . Mark comes back to the banquet hall to find Ann and Leslie , but is disappointed to see the banquet is over . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Banquet " was written by Tucker Cawley and directed by Beth McCarthy @-@ Miller , a long @-@ time television director who worked with Poehler on the sketch comedy show Saturday Night Live . The " Modern Barber Shop " featured in the episode is an actual barber shop in Burbank , California . The interior is very similar to the inside of the actual barber shop . Every time McCarthy @-@ Miller visited the real Modern Barber Shop , the barber 's wife was always eating sunflower seeds next to the shop door . As a result , McCarthy @-@ Miller added an elderly woman with sunflower seeds into the episode 's barber scenes . 
 The " <unk> " element was not included into the script , but added to the episode during filming after actor Aziz Ansari mentioned to show co @-@ creator Greg Daniels that he believed the character would be interested in pickup artist tactics like those outlined in Neil Strauss ' book The Game : Penetrating the Secret Society of Pickup Artists . Ansari and Daniels asked the wardrobe for something silly for Ansari to wear in the bar , and they tried about a half @-@ dozen items before Ansari himself settled on the orange hat , which is actually a woman 's hat . The two women Mark and Tom talk to at the bar were meant to mirror Leslie and Ann from the banquet . Although they do not resemble Poehler and Jones , the two women had the same color hair ( brown and blond ) and were seated at the table in the same spots in relation to Mark that Leslie and Ann were seated around him at the banquet . 
 The scene in which water is splashed in Leslie 's face was only shot twice , because McCarthy @-@ Miller said Poehler would start anticipating it in more takes and it would not have appeared spontaneous . The first time the scene was acted , the cameras were accidentally not turned on , so only one take was usable for the episode . During the banquet for the Tellenson Awards , a video is shown of an ill Tony Tellenson ( for whom the award was named ) in his hospital room . McCarthy @-@ Miller shot the scene with minimal staff on a separate set . Multiple takes were filmed , and the severity of illness differed in each one . The final clip used in the episode shows Tellenson wearing a mask attached to an oxygen tank , which is one of the healthiest versions they filmed . The Jeanine Restrepo character was originally named Janet Restrepo , but was changed at the last moment . Poehler and the rest of the cast had already memorized the lines with the name Janet , and the actors had difficulty filming the scenes correctly as a result . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In an opening statement about the history of Pawnee , Indiana , Leslie says a pilgrim traded a baby to the Native Americans in exchange " for what is now Indianapolis " , the state capital . She said the pilgrim 's face was made into a dreamcatcher , a handmade Native American object with a willow hoop and loose web . The barber who gave Leslie her haircut also previously cut the hair of former @-@ U.S. Vice President Dan Quayle . Ron said he likes shrimp hors d <unk> wrapped in bacon so much , he would attend an event honoring pirates in Somalia to get them . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on May 7 , 2009 , " The Banquet " was watched by 4 @.@ 64 million households , according to Nielsen Media Research , continuing a downward trend in ratings since the pilot episode , although NBC had already committed to renewing the show for a second season . The episode received a 2 @.@ 3 rating / 8 share among viewers aged between 18 and 34 , and a 2 @.@ 0 rating / 6 share among viewers between 18 and 49 . The poor rating for Parks and Recreation and Southland , another then @-@ new NBC series , contributed in bringing the network down to fourth place in the ratings for the evening , behind CBS , ABC and Fox . " The Banquet " , however , received generally positive reviews . Most reviewers particularly praised the opening scene with Leslie describing the murder of Pawnee pilgrim <unk> Bixby Mark at the hands of Native Americans , who used his body parts for various purposes because , " They used every part of the pioneer " . 
 Jeremy Medina of Entertainment Weekly said he believed although the show initially needed improvement , that it had arrived at a " settled and focused " series with " The Banquet " . He praised the episode as a whole , as well as individual small moments , like Leslie 's haircut , April calling her " sir " , Ron 's affinity for bacon @-@ wrapped shrimp , Tom 's coining of the phrase " <unk> " to mean standing out in bars . Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger said " The Banquet " was funnier than other recent Parks and Recreation episodes , although he said the Leslie character continues to too closely resemble a female Michael Scott , the protagonist of The Office . Sepinwall said of the show , " I know a lot of people have already given up , but I really feel like the show is a summer 's worth of tweaking away from being good . It 's not there yet , but I see glimmers . " 
 Matt Fowler of IGN said the episode " was able to rise a few notches above the last one " and that he enjoyed Leslie 's antics and many of Tom 's antics , including his suggestions for Leslie 's introduction for her mom . He also liked the scene in which Mark pinched Leslie 's nose , which he described as " a nice , playful scene that brought some much needed humanity to her cartoonish character " . Jason Hughes of TV Squad praised the episode , particularly the characters Tom and Ann . He said of the episode , " The little things like ( Leslie 's haircut and Ann <unk> ) are what 's making this show work a little more with each episode . Finding humor in the small things of small government . " Brian Howard of The Journal News said the series is not great yet , but that " The Banquet " included glimpses of possible greatness in the future , particularly in the performances by Poehler , Jones , Ansari and Schneider . Keith Phipps of The A.V. Club said the laughs in the episode , particularly involving Leslie 's haircut and her perceived romantic relationship with Ann , were " a bit thin " . Phipps also said he found himself disliking Leslie , of whom he said , " Here she seems more stupid than pleasantly naïve . " 
 = = DVD release = = 
 " The Banquet " , along with the five other first season episodes of Parks and Recreation , was released on a one @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on September 8 , 2009 . The DVD included cast and crew commentary tracks for each episode , as well as about 30 minutes of deleted scenes . The deleted scenes included on the DVD were originally featured on the official Parks and Recreation website after the episode aired . 
 In the first , an 80 @-@ second clip , Leslie gives everyone in the department tickets to the banquet . She tries to invite Andy , and when Ann says he cannot put on pants due to his cast , Leslie asks , " Does he have a formal kilt or something ? " The second clip features 100 seconds of extended banquet sequences , including Ann 's reaction to Leslie 's haircut , Ann 's awkward attempts to make small talk with April and more of Tom 's speech to Marlene . In the third , a 30 @-@ second clip , set at the bar , Tom describes to Mark his strategy in picking up a girl : he asked her what she did for a living , then , " I just <unk> , gave her the middle finger and left . Pretty risky but I feel good about it . " In the final clip , which was 15 seconds long , an amused Tom shows a newspaper photo caption of Leslie and Ann from the banquet , with the caption , " Mr. Leslie Knope and wife Ann . " 
 = Merchants of Doubt = 
 Merchants of Doubt is a 2010 non @-@ fiction book by American historians of science Naomi Oreskes and Erik M. Conway . It identifies parallels between the global warming controversy and earlier controversies over tobacco smoking , acid rain , DDT , and the hole in the ozone layer . Oreskes and Conway write that in each case " keeping the controversy alive " by spreading doubt and confusion after a scientific consensus had been reached , was the basic strategy of those opposing action . In particular , they say that Fred Seitz , Fred Singer , and a few other contrarian scientists joined forces with conservative think tanks and private corporations to challenge the scientific consensus on many contemporary issues . 
 The George C. Marshall Institute and Fred Singer , two of the subjects , have been critical of the book , but most reviewers received it favorably . One reviewer said that Merchants of Doubt is exhaustively researched and documented , and may be one of the most important books of 2010 . Another reviewer saw the book as his choice for best science book of the year . It was made into a film , Merchants of Doubt , directed by Robert Kenner , released in 2014 . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Oreskes and Conway write that a handful of politically conservative scientists , with strong ties to particular industries , have " played a disproportionate role in debates about controversial questions " . The authors write that this has resulted in " deliberate obfuscation " of the issues which has had an influence on public opinion and policy @-@ making . 
 The book criticizes the so @-@ called Merchants of Doubt , some predominantly American science key players , above all Bill Nierenberg , Fred Seitz , and Fred Singer . All three are physicists : Singer was a rocket scientist , whereas Nierenberg and Seitz worked on the atomic bomb . They have been active on topics like acid rain , tobacco smoking , global warming and pesticides . The book claims that these scientists have challenged and diluted the scientific consensus in the various fields , as of the dangers of smoking , the effects of acid rain , the existence of the ozone hole , and the existence of anthropogenic climate change . Seitz and Singer been involved with institutions such as The Heritage Foundation , Competitive Enterprise Institute and George C. Marshall Institute in the United States . Funded by corporations and conservative foundations , these organizations have opposed many forms of state intervention or regulation of U.S. citizens . The book lists similar tactics in each case : " discredit the science , disseminate false information , spread confusion , and promote doubt " . 
 The book states that Seitz , Singer , Nierenberg and Robert Jastrow were all fiercely anti @-@ communist and they viewed government regulation as a step towards socialism and communism . The authors argue that , with the collapse of the Soviet Union , they looked for another great threat to free market capitalism and found it in environmentalism . They feared that an over @-@ reaction to environmental problems would lead to heavy @-@ handed government intervention in the marketplace and intrusion into people 's lives . Oreskes and Conway state that the longer the delay the worse these problems get , and the more likely it is that governments will need to take the draconian measures that conservatives and market fundamentalists most fear . They say that Seitz , Singer , Nierenberg and Jastrow denied the scientific evidence , contributed to a strategy of delay , and thereby helped to bring about the situation they most dreaded . The authors have a strong doubt about the ability of the media to differentiate between false truth and the actual science in question ; however , they stop short of endorsing censorship in the name of science . The journalistic norm of balanced reporting has helped , according to the authors , to amplify the misleading messages of the <unk> . Oreskes and Conway state : " small numbers of people can have large , negative impacts , especially if they are organised , determined and have access to power " . 
 The main conclusion of the book is that there would have been more progress in policymaking , if not for the influence of the contrarian " experts " , which tried on ideological reasons to undermine trust in the science base for regulation . Similar conclusions were already drawn , among others on Frederick Seitz and William Nierenberg in the book Requiem for a Species : Why We Resist the Truth about Climate Change ( 2010 ) by Australian academic Clive Hamilton . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Most reviewers received Merchants of Doubt enthusiastically . 
 Philip Kitcher in Science says that Naomi Oreskes and Erik Conway are " two outstanding historians " . He calls Merchants of Doubt a " fascinating and important study " . Kitcher says that the apparently harsh claims against Nierenberg , Seitz , and Singer are " justified through a powerful dissection of the ways in which prominent climate scientists , such as Roger Revelle and Ben Santer , were exploited or viciously attacked in the press " . 
 In The Christian Science Monitor , Will Buchanan says that Merchants of Doubt is exhaustively researched and documented , and may be one of the most important books of 2010 . Oreskes and Conway are seen to demonstrate that the doubt merchants are not " objective scientists " as the term is popularly understood . Instead , they are " science @-@ speaking mercenaries " hired by corporations to process numbers to prove that the corporations ’ products are safe and useful . Buchanan says they are salesmen , not scientists . 
 Bud Ward published a review of the book in The Yale Forum on Climate and the Media . He wrote that Oreskes and Conway use a combination of thorough scholarly research combined with writing reminiscent of the best investigative journalism , to " unravel deep common links to past environmental and public health controversies " . In terms of climate science , the authors ' leave " little doubt about their disdain for what they regard as the misuse and abuse of science by a small cabal of scientists they see as largely lacking in requisite climate science expertise " . 
 Phil England writes in The Ecologist that the strength of the book is the rigour of the research and the detailed focus on key incidents . He said , however , that the climate change chapter is only 50 pages long , and recommends several other books for readers who want to get a broader picture of this aspect : Jim Hoggan ’ s Climate Cover @-@ Up , George Monbiot ’ s Heat : How to Stop the Planet Burning and Ross <unk> ’ s The Heat is On and Boiling Point . England also said that there is little coverage about the millions of dollars which Exxon Mobil has put into funding groups actively involved in promoting climate change denial and doubt . 
 A review in The Economist calls this a powerful book which articulates the politics involved and the degree to which scientists have sometimes manufactured and exaggerated environmental uncertainties , but opines that the authors fail to fully explain how environmental action has still often proved possible despite countervailing factors . 
 Robert N. Proctor , who coined the term " <unk> " to describe the study of culturally induced ignorance or doubt , wrote in American Scientist that Merchants of Doubt is a detailed and artfully written book . He set it in the context of other books which cover the " history of manufactured ignorance " : David Michaels ’ s Doubt is their Product ( 2008 ) , Chris Mooney ’ s The Republican War on Science ( 2009 ) , David Rosner and Gerald Markowitz ’ s Deceit and Denial ( 2002 ) , and his own book Cancer Wars ( 1995 ) . 
 Robin McKie in The Guardian states that Oreskes and Conway deserve considerable praise for exposing the influence of a small group of Cold War ideologues . Their tactic of spreading doubt has confused the public about a series of key scientific issues such as global warming , even though scientists have actually become more certain about their research results . McKie says that Merchants of Doubt includes detailed notes on all sources used , is carefully paced , and is " my runaway contender for best science book of the year " . 
 Sociologist Reiner <unk> 's review in <unk> journal , acknowledges that the book is well researched and factually based , but criticizes the book as being written in a black and white manner whereas historians should write a more nuanced description . The book depicts special interests and <unk> misleading the public as being mainly responsible for stopping action on policy . He says this shows a lack of basic understanding of the political process and the mechanisms of knowledge policy , because the authors assume that public policy would follow on from an understanding of the science . While the book provides all the ( formal ) hallmarks of science , <unk> sees it less as a scholarly work than a passionate attack and overall as a problematic book . 
 William O ’ Keefe and Jeff <unk> from the George C. Marshall Institute , which was founded by Seitz , say that although Merchants of Doubt has the appearance of a scholarly work , it discredits and undermines the reputations of people who in their lifetime contributed greatly to the American nation . They say that it does this by questioning their integrity , impugning their character , and questioning their judgement . 
 = = Authors = = 
 Naomi Oreskes is Professor of History and Science Studies at Harvard University . She has degrees in geological science and a Ph.D. in Geological Research and the History of Science . Her work came to public attention in 2004 with the publication of " The Scientific Consensus on Climate Change , " in Science , in which she wrote that there was no significant disagreement in the scientific community about the reality of global warming from human causes . Erik M. Conway is the historian at NASA 's Jet Propulsion Laboratory at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena . 
 = 1812 Louisiana hurricane = 
 The 1812 Louisiana Hurricane was a major hurricane that struck New Orleans , Louisiana , during the War of 1812 . It was the worst storm of the early history of New Orleans and was very likely the hurricane which made the closest landfall known to affect the city . 
 It was first observed in the eastern Caribbean Sea on August 12 as a tropical disturbance , which later affected Jamaica as a tropical storm . After entering the Gulf of Mexico , it intensified into a hurricane , with winds estimated at over 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . The circulation affected areas from the Florida Panhandle to Natchez in the Mississippi Territory , but the worst effects were in the New Orleans area . There were around 100 deaths , many of them due to drowning . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On August 12 , a tropical disturbance entered the Caribbean Sea to the south of Antigua , believed to have been a strong tropical wave . Moving westward , it developed into a tropical storm by August 15 , based on ship observations in the region . That day , it passed to the south of Jamaica and later turned to the northwest . Due to the ongoing War of 1812 , there was a British blockade of American ships , which caused a lack of observations in the region . As a result , the storm 's track was uncertain , although it is believed that the system entered the Gulf of Mexico by August 18 ; that day , a ship reported hurricane @-@ force winds . After moving northward , the hurricane turned to the northwest off the coast of Louisiana . 
 Although meteorologist David Roth assessed the storm as making landfall on August 19 at Isle <unk> to the west of New Orleans , a research paper from the American Meteorological Society estimated that the hurricane moved ashore about 40 mi ( 60 km ) southeast of New Orleans . Modern research suggests the storm was the equivalent of a major hurricane ( a Category 3 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale ) , or with winds of at least 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) , when it made landfall . It passed just southwest of the city , becoming the closest major hurricane to New Orleans . The wind diameter was average to slightly below @-@ average , and the forward speed was normal . Due to its movement , the hurricane likely maintained much of its strength after making landfall and by the time it affected New Orleans . The hurricane gradually weakened over land , passing near Baton Rouge , Louisiana and Natchez , Mississippi on August 20 . Heavy rainfall was reported in eastern Ohio beginning on August 21 , potentially from the remnants of the storm merging with a cold front . 
 = = Effect = = 
 When the storm was moving through the Caribbean Sea , it produced rough seas and heavy rainfall . In Jamaica , gusty winds damaged crops , including to corn and plantains . 
 As the storm moved ashore in Louisiana , outer rain bands produced gale @-@ force winds and heavy damage at Pensacola , in Spanish West Florida . At Cat Island offshore of Bay St. Louis ( claimed from Spain in the same year , as part of the Mississippi Territory ) , strong winds washed several boats ashore . Hurricane conditions began in New Orleans around 8 p.m. local time on August 19 . In southeastern Louisiana , Fort St. Philip sustained heavy damage , after it was flooded . Most soldiers in the fort drowned . There was a rumor during the storm that the British took over Fort St. Philip , causing a panic in the midst of the War of 1812 ; however , the British fleet was scattered throughout the region , and many British ships were damaged . In New Orleans , the hurricane damaged 53 ships , and several boats were washed ashore along Lake Pontchartrain . The USS Louisiana , a cutter commissioned in 1804 , was wrecked during the hurricane while at port in New Orleans , and the entire crew except for the captain was killed . Debris and bodies from the ships were dispersed along the lake 's coastline . The USS Viper lost its mast while offshore during the storm . Ten people died on the ship " Harlequin " . 
 The storm produced heavy rainfall , along with a powerful storm surge . Flooding up to 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) deep was reported in New Orleans and portions of Plaquemines Parish . In the Parish , 45 people drowned , and there was heavy damage to the sugar crops . The levee system in New Orleans was heavily damaged . The strong waves washed saltwater 75 mi ( 121 km ) up the Mississippi River . High winds damaged most buildings in New Orleans , some of which were destroyed , and most trees were blown down . The city 's market house was wrecked , despite being described as " indestructible " . Damage was estimated at $ 6 million ( 1812 USD ) , and there were around 100 deaths . Further northwest near Natchez , Mississippi , the storm 's winds were strong enough to knock down trees . The barometric pressure there was 986 mbar ( 29 @.@ 1 inHg ) , although the observation was not calibrated and was later corrected to 995 mbar ( 29 @.@ 4 inHg ) to account for elevation and air temperature . 
 In the two centuries since the hurricane , the oceans rose about 0 @.@ 5 ft ( 0 @.@ 15 m ) , the wetlands around New Orleans have diminished , and the elevation has dropped due to subsidence . These have increased the threat to the city of a significant hurricane strike . The 1812 hurricane was not a worst @-@ case scenario for New Orleans , as a stronger and larger hurricane would have caused more damage . If the storm struck in 2012 , one researcher estimated the hurricane would have been among the costliest Louisiana hurricanes , comparable to Hurricane Betsy in 1965 and Hurricane Katrina in 2005 . 
 = SMS Ariadne = 
 SMS Ariadne was the fifth member of the ten @-@ ship Gazelle class of light cruisers , built by the Imperial German Navy . She was built by the Imperial Dockyard in Danzig , laid down in 1899 , launched in August 1900 , and commissioned into the High Seas Fleet in May 1901 . Armed with a main battery of ten 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns and two 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , Ariadne was capable of a top speed of 21 @.@ 5 knots ( 39 @.@ 8 km / h ; 24 @.@ 7 mph ) . 
 Ariadne served with the reconnaissance forces of the High Seas Fleet for the majority of her career . After the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , she was used to patrol the Heligoland Bight . On 28 August , the British Royal Navy attacked the patrol line , and in the ensuing Battle of Heligoland Bight , Ariadne was attacked and sunk by a pair of battlecruisers . Some 200 of her crew were killed in the battle , with only 59 survivors pulled from the sea . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Ariadne was ordered under the contract name " D " and was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen in 1899 and launched on 10 August 1900 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 18 May 1901 . The ship was 105 @.@ 1 meters ( 345 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 12 @.@ 2 m ( 40 ft ) and a draft of 4 @.@ 93 m ( 16 @.@ 2 ft ) forward . She displaced 3 @,@ 006 t ( 2 @,@ 959 long tons ; 3 @,@ 314 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two triple @-@ expansion engines . They were designed to give 8 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 6 @,@ 000 kW ) , for a top speed of 21 @.@ 5 knots ( 39 @.@ 8 km / h ; 24 @.@ 7 mph ) . The engines were powered by ten coal @-@ fired Marine @-@ type water @-@ tube boilers . Ariadne carried 560 tonnes ( 550 long tons ) of coal , which gave her a range of 3 @,@ 560 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 590 km ; 4 @,@ 100 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had a crew of 14 officers and 243 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with ten 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 40 guns in single mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , six were located amidships , three on either side , and two were placed side by side aft . The guns could engage targets out to 12 @,@ 200 m ( 40 @,@ 000 ft ) . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 000 rounds of ammunition , for 100 shells per gun . She was also equipped with two 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes with five torpedoes . They were submerged in the hull on the broadside . The ship was protected by an armored deck that was 20 to 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 to 0 @.@ 98 in ) thick . The conning tower had 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick sides , and the guns were protected by 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick shields . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After her commissioning , Ariadne was assigned to the reconnaissance forces of the High Seas Fleet . In 1905 , she was assigned to the Cruiser Division , alongside her sisters Medusa and Amazone and the armored cruiser Prinz Heinrich . She served with the fleet in German waters for the entirety of her peacetime career . After the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , Ariadne was detached from the fleet for use as a patrol vessel in the Heligoland Bight . 
 On 23 August , several British commanders submitted a plan to attack the patrol line with the light cruisers and destroyers of the Harwich Force , commanded by Commodore Reginald Tyrwhitt . These ships would be supported by submarines and Vice Admiral David Beatty 's battlecruisers and associated light forces . The plan was approved and set for 28 August . The British forces began to leave port on the evening of 26 August , beginning with the submarines assigned to the operation . Most of the surface forces went to sea early on the following morning ; the 7th Cruiser Squadron , which had been added to provide further support to the Harwich Force , left port later in the day . 
 On the morning of 28 August , Ariadne had been rotated out of the front patrol line and laid at anchor in the entrance of the Weser River in support of the cruisers and torpedo boats on patrol . After receiving reports of the British attack on the morning of the 28th , Ariadne and several other cruisers got up steam and rushed to support the German patrols . She met SMS Stettin at around 13 : 40 , but less than twenty minutes thereafter , Beatty 's battlecruisers , chasing SMS Cöln , arrived and began firing on Ariadne as well . She turned to starboard and attempted to flee . She was hit several times by the British guns , and one hit the forward boiler room . The coal bunker caught fire and five boilers were disabled ; her speed fell to 15 kn ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . Two battlecruisers closed in , until they were firing their 12 in ( 300 mm ) guns at a distance of 3 @,@ 000 m ( 9 @,@ 800 ft ) , point @-@ blank range for guns of that caliber . Ariadne returned fire as best she could , but to no effect . 
 With fires raging forward and aft , Ariadne had her forward magazine flooded so the fires would not reach the propellant charges . At 14 : 15 , the British ceased fire and allowed Ariadne to limp away . The surviving crew that was able to escape the ship assembled on the forecastle and prepared to abandon the ship . The cruiser Danzig arrived shortly before 15 : 00 and began to pick up survivors , and Stralsund joined the rescue effort shortly thereafter . At 16 : 25 , Ariadne capsized , though she remained afloat for some time before she finally sank . In all , nine officers , including her commander , and fifty enlisted men were rescued . The rescue effort was hampered by frequent explosions of ammunition stored on Ariadne 's deck , which prevented boats from getting too close to the wrecked cruiser . 
 = Tsunkatse = 
 " Tsunkatse " is the fifteenth episode of the sixth season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Voyager . The episode first aired on the UPN network on February 9 , 2000 . Directed by Mike Vejar , it was developed from a story by Gannon Kenney and turned into a teleplay by Robert Doherty . The episode featured Dwayne " The Rock " Johnson in a guest role as a Pendari fighter , and former Star Trek : Deep Space Nine actors J. G. Hertzler and Jeffrey Combs . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the Starfleet and Maquis crew of the starship USS Voyager after they were stranded in the Delta Quadrant far from the rest of the Federation . In this episode , Seven of Nine ( Jeri Ryan ) is abducted , along with Tuvok ( Tim Russ ) , while on a survey mission and forced by her captors to fight in an arena for the entertainment of others . 
 The episode had originally been called " Arena " . The crossover between Voyager and the UPN wrestling show WWF Smackdown was described as a " clever marketing ploy " by Russ , but received a negative fan reaction on broadcast . However , it received the highest ratings of the season having been watched by 4 @.@ 1 percent of all Nielsen households during sweeps month . It received mixed reviews by critics , with praise reserved for Combs and Hertzler . The fight scenes were praised by Black Belt magazine . 
