 The 15th Battalion held the following alliance : 
 United Kingdom – East Yorkshire Regiment ( 1928 – 46 ) . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 The 15th Battalion was awarded the following battle honours : 
 First World War : Somme 1916 – 18 , Pozières , Bullecourt , Messines 1917 , Ypres 1917 , Menin Road , Polygon Wood , Passchendaele , Arras 1918 , Ancre 1918 , Hamel , Amiens , Albert 1918 , Hindenburg Line , <unk> , France and Flanders 1916 – 18 , Anzac , Landing at Anzac , Defence of Anzac , Suvla , Sari Bair , Gallipoli 1915 , and Egypt 1915 – 16 . 
 Second World War : South @-@ West Pacific 1943 – 45 , Liberation of Australian New Guinea , Tambu Bay , Sio , Adele River , Mawaraka , Mivo Ford , and Lae – Nadzab . 
 In 1961 , the battalion – although no longer on the Australian Army 's order of battle – was entrusted with the battle honours awarded to the 2 / 15th Battalion for its service with the 2nd AIF during World War II . The honours it inherited at this time were : North Africa 1941 – 42 ; El Adem Road ; Alam el Halfa ; West Point 23 ; Finschhafen ; Scarlet Beach ; Bumi River ; Defence of Scarlet Beach ; Nongora ; Borneo ; Brunei ; Miri ; Defence of Tobruk ; The Salient 1941 ; El Alamein ; South @-@ West Pacific 1943 – 45 ; Lae – Nadzab ; Liberation of Australian New Guinea ; and Sio . 
 = = Commanding officers = = 
 The following officers commanded the 15th Battalion : 
 First World War 
 Lieutenant Colonel James Cannan ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Terrence McSharry ; 
 Major Burford Sampson ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Charles Johnston ; and 
 Lieutenant Colonel John Corrigan . 
 Second World War 
 Lieutenant Colonel Jack Amies ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Fredrick Edmunds ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Herbert McDonald ; and 
 Lieutenant Colonel William Oliver . 
 = Dragons of Despair = 
 Dragons of Despair is the first in a series of 16 Dragonlance adventures published by TSR , Inc . ( TSR ) between 1984 and 1988 . It is the start of the first major story arc in the Dragonlance series of Dungeons & Dragons ( D & D ) role @-@ playing game modules , a series of ready @-@ to @-@ play adventures for use by Dungeon Masters in the game . This series provides a game version of the original Dragonlance storyline later told in the Dragonlance Chronicles trilogy of novels . This module corresponds to the events told in the first half of the novel Dragons of Autumn Twilight by Margaret Weis and Tracy Hickman . Its module code is <unk> , which is used to designate it as the first part of the Dragonlance adventure series . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 As with most D & D adventures , the exact storyline varies based on the actions that the game 's players choose for their player characters ( PCs ) , although a general course of action is assumed by the adventure . The story begins with the PCs meeting up in the elven settlement of Solace after five years of unsuccessful individual quests to find any sign of " true clerics " . A series of wilderness encounters are used to direct the PCs to find the Blue Crystal Staff and take it to the ancient ruined city of Xak Tsaroth . 
 In the jungle @-@ covered subterranean ruins of Xak Tsaroth the player characters search for knowledge of the ancient gods of good , and first encounter the invading draconians . They also find baby dragons and encounter Khisanth , an ancient black dragon . The PCs follow the fleeing dragon down a well , where they must negotiate the first level of a dungeon typical of Dungeons & Dragons adventures , filled with draconians , gully dwarf slaves , and other monsters . 
 On the second level of the dungeon the PCs must confront and defeat Khisanth . This is an extremely challenging task for the <unk> but if they have her Blue Crystal Staff , they will be aided by the goddess Mishakal . The adventure ends with the PCs recovering the Disks of Mishakal , allowing for the return of true clerics to Krynn for the first time in over 300 years . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 First published in March 1984 , seven months before the first Dragonlance novel , this module is the first Dragonlance product released . In January and February there were small teaser advertisements — each less than a quarter page — in Dragon magazine , simply showing the Dragonlance logo and the text " coming soon " . 
 The scenario is the first of an epic series set on the world of Krynn . The March 1984 issue of Dragon contained a short story titled " The Test of the Twins " by Margaret Weis , along with a sidebar describing Dragonlance as " an epic adventure usable with the AD & D game system , and will be detailed through a series of TSR products – books , games , modules , and even miniature figures . " In the same issue a full @-@ page teaser advertisement showed a black @-@ and @-@ white version of the painting from the cover of Dragons of Despair with the text " Play the epic series ... Advanced Dungeons & Dragons Dragonlance " . 
 The module consisted of a 32 @-@ page book with an outer folder . The cover of Dragons of Despair features a painting by Clyde Caldwell depicting the black dragon Khisanth fighting three heroes — Goldmoon , Tanis Half @-@ Elven , and Caramon Majere — from the books upon which the adventure is based . This module features the first appearance of Draconians and <unk> ( Gully Dwarves ) in the game , and new locations such as Xak Tsaroth , Solace and Haven . It is the first appearance of the pre @-@ generated player characters ( PCs ) that form the Heroes of the Lance group of characters – Tanis Half @-@ Elven , Sturm Brightblade , Caramon Majere , Raistlin Majere , Flint Fireforge , Tasslehoff Burrfoot and Goldmoon . Riverwind is played as a non @-@ player character ( NPC ) by the Dungeon Master . Tika Waylan makes her first appearance as an NPC ; she is available for use as a PC and joins up with the Heroes of the Lance in Chapter 7 of Dragons of Flame . The villainous hobgoblin lord <unk> <unk> also makes his first appearance . 
 The original concept of the module was done by Tracy Hickman , who " designed a world and an heroic adventure to go with it " . The module was edited by Michael Williams . The module 's design staff included Tracy Hickman , Harold Johnson , Douglas Niles , Carl Smith , and Michael Williams . The module features cover art by Clyde Caldwell and interior artwork by Jeff Easley . 
 = = = Reprints and revisions = = = 
 The original series was updated to Advanced Dungeons & Dragons second edition and repackaged as the three Dragonlance Classics modules , using module code DLC . <unk> Dragonlance Classics Volume 1 reprinted Dragons of Despair , along with Dragons of Flame , Dragons of Hope , and Dragons of Desolation , in 1990 . 
 In 1999 Wizards of the Coast published a new revision of the original Dragonlance story , including Dragons of Despair , in Dragonlance Classics : 15th Anniversary Edition as part of their TSR 's Silver Anniversary line . In 2000 the entire DL module series was reprinted exactly as the originals but in a smaller size . This printing was available as two slip case sets , with Dragons of Despair included in Dragonlance Volume 1 : <unk> – <unk> . The four chapters of Dragons of Autumn , an updated version of some Dragonlance modules converting them to Dungeons & Dragons version 3 @.@ 5 , corresponds to the material in Dragons of Despair . 
 Advanced Dungeons & Dragons : Heroes of the Lance is a video game based on Dragons of Despair released in 1988 . It is a horizontally scrolling fighting game that represents the events of the module . Dragons of Despair has also been converted into the Neverwinter Nights computer game format . The adaptation requires both the Shadows of <unk> and Hordes of the Underdark expansion packs as well as the original game . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game module was positively received . It placed 25th on a 2004 list of the " The 30 Greatest D & D adventures of All Time " , the only Dragonlance module to make the list . 
 Steve Hampshire reviewed the scenario for Imagine magazine . He " enjoyed this module a lot " and felt it was " well @-@ detailed and original , and plays well " . Hampshire found it " good value " , his only problem having been reading " the rather flowery prose without being laughed down by the players " . 
 A review by Graham Staplehurst in White Dwarf magazine , issue # 60 , gave the module an 8 out of 10 overall , and noted that the lack of things such as gold and clerics in the adventure world " don 't destroy the feel of the scenario , whilst creating a very novel atmosphere " . Staplehurst felt that the adventure was " ... very much taken off from Lord of the Rings with a powerful magic item to be taken at all costs to the aggressor 's innermost defences and through them . The characters will have to get past a nice new race of humanoids as well as a couple of other monster @-@ concepts . The artwork ( aside from the cover ) is good and usable in the adventure . Another good product . " In his 1991 book Heroic Worlds , Lawrence Schick described the scenarios as " heavy @-@ handed in channelling the players to follow the plot " . 
 = Diabetic ketoacidosis = 
 Diabetic ketoacidosis ( DKA ) is a potentially life @-@ threatening complication in people with diabetes mellitus . It happens predominantly in those with type 1 diabetes , but it can occur in those with type 2 diabetes under certain circumstances . DKA results from a shortage of insulin ; in response the body switches to burning fatty acids and producing acidic ketone bodies that cause most of the symptoms and complications . 
 DKA may be the first symptom of previously undiagnosed diabetes , but it may also occur in people known to have diabetes as a result of a variety of causes , such as intercurrent illness or poor compliance with insulin therapy . Vomiting , dehydration , deep gasping breathing , confusion and occasionally coma are typical symptoms . DKA is diagnosed with blood and urine tests ; it is distinguished from other , rarer forms of ketoacidosis by the presence of high blood sugar levels . Treatment involves intravenous fluids to correct dehydration , insulin to suppress the production of ketone bodies , treatment for any underlying causes such as infections , and close observation to prevent and identify complications . 
 DKA is a medical emergency , and without treatment it can lead to death . DKA was first described in 1886 ; until the introduction of insulin therapy in the 1920s , it was almost universally fatal . It now carries a mortality of less than 1 % with adequate and timely treatment . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 The symptoms of an episode of diabetic ketoacidosis usually evolve over the period of about 24 hours . <unk> symptoms are nausea and vomiting , pronounced thirst , excessive urine production and abdominal pain that may be severe . Those who measure their glucose levels themselves may notice hyperglycemia ( high blood sugar levels ) . In severe DKA , breathing becomes labored and of a deep , gasping character ( a state referred to as " Kussmaul respiration " ) . The abdomen may be tender to the point that an acute abdomen may be suspected , such as acute pancreatitis , appendicitis or gastrointestinal perforation . Coffee ground vomiting ( vomiting of altered blood ) occurs in a minority of people ; this tends to originate from erosion of the esophagus . In severe DKA , there may be confusion , lethargy , stupor or even coma ( a marked decrease in the level of consciousness ) . 
 On physical examination there is usually clinical evidence of dehydration , such as a dry mouth and decreased skin turgor . If the dehydration is profound enough to cause a decrease in the circulating blood volume , tachycardia ( a fast heart rate ) and low blood pressure may be observed . Often , a " <unk> " odor is present , which is often described as " fruity " , often compared to the smell of pear drops whose scent is a ketone . If Kussmaul respiration is present , this is reflected in an increased respiratory rate . 
 Small children with DKA are relatively prone to cerebral edema ( swelling of the brain tissue ) , which may cause headache , coma , loss of the pupillary light reflex , and progress to death . It occurs in 0 @.@ 3 – 1 @.@ 0 % of children with DKA , and has been described in young adults , but is overall very rare in adults . It carries a 20 – 50 % mortality . 
 = = Cause = = 
 DKA most frequently occurs in those who already have diabetes , but it may also be the first presentation in someone who had not previously been known to be diabetic . There is often a particular underlying problem that has led to the DKA episode ; this may be intercurrent illness ( pneumonia , influenza , gastroenteritis , a urinary tract infection ) , pregnancy , inadequate insulin administration ( e.g. defective insulin pen device ) , myocardial infarction ( heart attack ) , stroke or the use of cocaine . Young people with recurrent episodes of DKA may have an underlying eating disorder , or may be using insufficient insulin for fear that it will cause weight gain . 
 Diabetic ketoacidosis may occur in those previously known to have diabetes mellitus type 2 or in those who on further investigations turn out to have features of type 2 diabetes ( e.g. obesity , strong family history ) ; this is more common in African , African @-@ American and Hispanic people . Their condition is then labeled " ketosis @-@ prone type 2 diabetes " . 
 Drugs in the <unk> class ( <unk> inhibitors ) , which are generally used for type 2 diabetes , have been associated with diabetic ketoacidosis with remarkably low blood sugars ( " <unk> DKA " ) . This may be because they were being used in people with type 1 diabetes , but in those with type 2 diabetes it may be as a result of an increase in glucagon levels . 
 = = Mechanism = = 
 Diabetic ketoacidosis arises because of a lack of insulin in the body . The lack of insulin and corresponding elevation of glucagon leads to increased release of glucose by the liver ( a process that is normally suppressed by insulin ) from glycogen via glycogenolysis and also through gluconeogenesis . High glucose levels spill over into the urine , taking water and solutes ( such as sodium and potassium ) along with it in a process known as osmotic diuresis . This leads to polyuria , dehydration , and compensatory thirst and polydipsia . The absence of insulin also leads to the release of free fatty acids from adipose tissue ( <unk> ) , which are converted through a process called beta oxidation , again in the liver , into ketone bodies ( acetoacetate and β @-@ hydroxybutyrate ) . β @-@ <unk> can serve as an energy source in the absence of insulin @-@ mediated glucose delivery , and is a protective mechanism in case of starvation . The ketone bodies , however , have a low pKa and therefore turn the blood acidic ( metabolic acidosis ) . The body initially buffers the change with the bicarbonate buffering system , but this system is quickly overwhelmed and other mechanisms must work to compensate for the acidosis . One such mechanism is hyperventilation to lower the blood carbon dioxide levels ( a form of compensatory respiratory alkalosis ) . This hyperventilation , in its extreme form , may be observed as Kussmaul respiration . 
 In various situations such as infection , insulin demands rise but are not matched by the failing pancreas . Blood sugars rise , dehydration ensues , and resistance to the normal effects of insulin increases further by way of a vicious circle . 
 As a result of the above mechanisms , the average adult with DKA has a total body water shortage of about 6 liters ( or 100 mL / kg ) , in addition to substantial shortages in sodium , potassium , chloride , phosphate , magnesium and calcium . Glucose levels usually exceed 13 @.@ 8 mmol / L or 250 mg / dL . 
 DKA is common in type 1 diabetes as this form of diabetes is associated with an absolute lack of insulin production by the islets of Langerhans . In type 2 diabetes , insulin production is present but is insufficient to meet the body 's requirements as a result of end @-@ organ insulin resistance . Usually , these amounts of insulin are sufficient to suppress <unk> . If DKA occurs in someone with type 2 diabetes , their condition is called " ketosis @-@ prone type 2 diabetes " . The exact mechanism for this phenomenon is unclear , but there is evidence both of impaired insulin secretion and insulin action . Once the condition has been treated , insulin production resumes and often the person may be able to resume diet or tablet treatment as normally recommended in type 2 diabetes . 
 The clinical state of DKA is associated , in addition to the above , with the release of various <unk> hormones such as glucagon and adrenaline as well as cytokines , the latter of which leads to increased markers of inflammation , even in the absence of infection . 
 Cerebral edema , which is the most dangerous DKA complication , is probably the result of a number of factors . Some authorities suggest that it is the result from <unk> fluid replacement , but the complication may develop before treatment has been commenced . It is more likely in those with more severe DKA , and in the first episode of DKA . Likely factors in the development of cerebral edema are dehydration , acidosis and low carbon dioxide levels ; in addition , the increased level of inflammation and coagulation may , together with these factors , lead to decreased blood flow to parts of the brain , which then swells up once fluid replacement has been commenced . The swelling of brain tissue leads to raised intracranial pressure ultimately leading to death . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 = = = Investigations = = = 
 Diabetic ketoacidosis may be diagnosed when the combination of hyperglycemia ( high blood sugars ) , ketones in the blood or on urinalysis and acidosis are demonstrated . In about 10 % of cases the blood sugar is not significantly elevated ( " <unk> diabetic ketoacidosis " ) . 
 Arterial blood gas measurement is usually performed to demonstrate the acidosis ; this requires taking a blood sample from an artery . Subsequent measurements ( to ensure treatment is effective ) , may be taken from a normal blood test taken from a vein , as there is little difference between the arterial and the venous pH . <unk> can be measured in the urine ( acetoacetate ) and blood ( β @-@ hydroxybutyrate ) . When compared with urine acetoacetate testing , capillary blood β @-@ hydroxybutyrate determination can reduce the need of admission , shorten the duration of hospital admission and potentially reduce the costs of hospital care . At very high levels , capillary blood ketone measurement becomes imprecise . 
 In addition to the above , blood samples are usually taken to measure urea and creatinine ( measures of kidney function , which may be impaired in DKA as a result of dehydration ) and electrolytes . Furthermore , markers of infection ( complete blood count , C @-@ reactive protein ) and acute pancreatitis ( amylase and lipase ) may be measured . Given the need to exclude infection , chest radiography and urinalysis are usually performed . 
 If cerebral edema is suspected because of confusion , recurrent vomiting or other symptoms , computed tomography may be performed to assess its severity and to exclude other causes such as stroke . 
 = = = Criteria = = = 
 Diabetic ketoacidosis is distinguished from other diabetic emergencies by the presence of large amounts of ketones in blood and urine , and marked metabolic acidosis . <unk> hyperglycemic state ( HHS , sometimes labeled " hyperosmolar non @-@ <unk> state " or <unk> ) is much more common in type 2 diabetes and features increased plasma osmolarity ( above 320 <unk> / kg ) due to profound dehydration and concentration of the blood ; mild acidosis and <unk> may occur in this state , but not to the extent observed in DKA . There is a degree of overlap between DKA and HHS , as in DKA the osmolarity may also be increased . 
 <unk> is not always the result of diabetes . It may also result from alcohol excess and from starvation ; in both states the glucose level is normal or low . Metabolic acidosis may occur in people with diabetes for other reasons , such as poisoning with ethylene glycol or paraldehyde . 
 The American Diabetes Association categorizes DKA in adults into one of three stages of severity : 
 Mild : blood pH mildly decreased to between 7 @.@ 25 and 7 @.@ 30 ( normal 7 @.@ 35 – 7 @.@ 45 ) ; serum bicarbonate decreased to 15 – 18 mmol / l ( normal above 20 ) ; the person is alert 
 Moderate : pH 7 @.@ 00 – 7 @.@ 25 , bicarbonate 10 – 15 , mild drowsiness may be present 
 Severe : pH below 7 @.@ 00 , bicarbonate below 10 , stupor or coma may occur 
 A 2004 statement by the European Society for Paediatric <unk> and the Lawson Wilkins Pediatric Endocrine Society ( for children ) uses slightly different cutoffs , where mild DKA is defined by pH 7 @.@ 20 – 7 @.@ 30 ( bicarbonate 10 – 15 mmol / l ) , moderate DKA by pH 7 @.@ 1 – 7 @.@ 2 ( bicarbonate 5 – 10 ) and severe DKA by pH < 7 @.@ 1 ( bicarbonate below 5 ) . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 Attacks of DKA can be prevented in those known to have diabetes to an extent by adherence to " sick day rules " ; these are clear @-@ cut instructions to person on how to treat themselves when unwell . Instructions include advice on how much extra insulin to take when sugar levels appear uncontrolled , an easily digestible diet rich in salt and carbohydrates , means to suppress fever and treat infection , and recommendations when to call for medical help . 
 People with diabetes can monitor their own ketone levels when unwell and seek help if they are elevated . 
 = = Management = = 
 The main aims in the treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis are replacing the lost fluids and electrolytes while suppressing the high blood sugars and ketone production with insulin . Admission to an intensive care unit or similar high @-@ dependency area or ward for close observation may be necessary . 
 = = = Fluid replacement = = = 
 The amount of fluid replaced depends on the estimated degree of dehydration . If dehydration is so severe as to cause shock ( severely decreased blood pressure with insufficient blood supply to the body 's organs ) , or a depressed level of consciousness , rapid infusion of saline ( 1 liter for adults , 10 ml / kg in repeated doses for children ) is recommended to restore circulating volume . Slower rehydration based on calculated water and sodium shortage may be possible if the dehydration is moderate , and again saline is the recommended fluid . Very mild ketoacidosis with no associated vomiting and mild dehydration may be treated with oral rehydration and subcutaneous rather than intravenous insulin under observation for signs of deterioration . 
 A special but unusual consideration is cardiogenic shock , where the blood pressure is decreased not due to dehydration but due to inability of the heart to pump blood through the blood vessels . This situation requires ICU admission , monitoring of the central venous pressure ( which requires the insertion of a central venous catheter in a large upper body vein ) , and the administration of medication that increases the heart pumping action and blood pressure . 
 = = = Insulin = = = 
 Some guidelines recommend a bolus ( initial large dose ) of insulin of 0 @.@ 1 unit of insulin per kilogram of body weight . This can be administered immediately after the potassium level is known to be higher than 3 @.@ 3 mmol / l ; if the level is any lower , administering insulin could lead to a dangerously low potassium level ( see below ) . Other guidelines recommend delaying the initiation of insulin until fluids have been administered . It is possible to use rapid acting insulin analogs injections under the skin for mild or moderate cases . 
 In general , insulin is given at 0 @.@ 1 unit / kg per hour to reduce the blood sugars and suppress ketone production . Guidelines differ as to which dose to use when blood sugar levels start falling ; some recommend reducing the dose of insulin once glucose falls below 16 @.@ 6 mmol / l ( 300 mg / dl ) but other recommend infusing glucose in addition to saline to allow for ongoing infusion of higher doses of insulin . 
 = = = Potassium = = = 
 Potassium levels can fluctuate severely during the treatment of DKA , because insulin decreases potassium levels in the blood by redistributing it into cells via increased sodium @-@ potassium pump activity . A large part of the shifted extracellular potassium would have been lost in urine because of osmotic diuresis . Hypokalemia ( low blood potassium concentration ) often follows treatment . This increases the risk of dangerous irregularities in the heart rate . Therefore , continuous observation of the heart rate is recommended , as well as repeated measurement of the potassium levels and addition of potassium to the intravenous fluids once levels fall below 5 @.@ 3 mmol / l . If potassium levels fall below 3 @.@ 3 mmol / l , insulin administration may need to be interrupted to allow correction of the hypokalemia . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The administration of sodium bicarbonate solution to rapidly improve the acid levels in the blood is controversial . There is little evidence that it improves outcomes beyond standard therapy , and indeed some evidence that while it may improve the acidity of the blood , it may actually worsen acidity inside the body 's cells and increase the risk of certain complications . Its use is therefore discouraged , although some guidelines recommend it for extreme acidosis ( pH < 6 @.@ 9 ) , and smaller amounts for severe acidosis ( pH 6 @.@ 9 – 7 @.@ 0 ) . 
 = = = Cerebral edema = = = 
 Cerebral edema , if associated with coma , often necessitates admission to intensive care , artificial ventilation , and close observation . The administration of fluids is slowed . The ideal treatment of cerebral edema in DKA is not established , but intravenous mannitol and <unk> saline ( 3 % ) are used — as in some other forms of cerebral edema — in an attempt to reduce the swelling . 
 = = = Resolution = = = 
 Resolution of DKA is defined as general improvement in the symptoms , such as the ability to tolerate oral nutrition and fluids , normalization of blood acidity ( pH > 7 @.@ 3 ) , and absence of ketones in blood ( < 1 mmol / l ) or urine . Once this has been achieved , insulin may be switched to the usual subcutaneously <unk> regimen , one hour after which the intravenous administration can be discontinued . 
 In people with suspected ketosis @-@ prone type 2 diabetes , determination of antibodies against glutamic acid decarboxylase and islet cells may aid in the decision whether to continue insulin administration long @-@ term ( if antibodies are detected ) , or whether to withdraw insulin and attempt treatment with oral medication as in type 2 diabetes . Generally speaking , routine measurement of C @-@ peptide as a measure of insulin production is not recommended unless there is genuine doubt as to whether someone has type 1 or type 2 diabetes . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 Diabetic ketoacidosis occurs in 4 @.@ 6 – 8 @.@ 0 per 1000 people with type 1 diabetes annually . In the United States , 135 @,@ 000 hospital admissions occur annually as a result of DKA , at an estimated cost of $ 2 @.@ 4 billion or a quarter to a half the total cost of caring for people with type 1 diabetes . There has been a documented increasing trend to hospital admissions . The risk is increased in those with an ongoing risk factor , such as an eating disorder , and those who cannot afford insulin . About 30 % of children with type 1 diabetes receive their diagnosis after an episode of DKA . 
 = = History = = 
 The first full description of diabetic ketoacidosis is attributed to Julius <unk> , a German pathologist working in Manchester , United Kingdom . In his description , which he gave in an 1886 lecture at the Royal College of Physicians in London , he drew on reports by Adolph Kussmaul as well as describing the main ketones , acetoacetate and β @-@ hydroxybutyrate , and their chemical determination . The condition remained almost universally fatal until the discovery of insulin in the 1920s ; by the 1930s , mortality had fallen to 29 % , and by the 1950s it had become less than 10 % . The entity of cerebral edema due to DKA was described in 1936 by a team of doctors from Philadelphia . 
 Numerous research studies since the 1950s have focused on the ideal treatment for diabetic ketoacidosis . A significant proportion of these studies have been conducted at the University of Tennessee Health Science Center and Emory University School of Medicine . Treatment options studied have included high- or low @-@ dose intravenous , subcutaneous or intramuscular ( e.g. the " Alberti regime " ) insulin , phosphate supplementation , need for a loading dose of insulin , and appropriateness of using bicarbonate therapy in moderate DKA . Various questions remain unanswered , such as whether bicarbonate administration in severe DKA makes any real difference to the clinical course , and whether an insulin loading dose is needed in adults . 
 The entity of ketosis @-@ prone type 2 diabetes was first fully described in 1987 after several preceding case reports . It was initially thought to be a form of maturity onset diabetes of the young , and went through several other descriptive names ( such as " idiopathic type 1 diabetes " , " Flatbush diabetes " , " atypical diabetes " and " type 1 @.@ 5 diabetes " ) before the current terminology of " ketosis @-@ prone type 2 diabetes " was adopted . 
 = Mind 's Eye ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Mind 's Eye " is the sixteenth episode of the fifth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . The episode first aired in the United States on April 19 , 1998 on the Fox network . It was written by Tim Minear and directed by Kim Manners . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " " story , a stand @-@ alone plot which is unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Mind 's Eye " received a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 4 and was watched by 16 @.@ 53 million viewers . The episode received moderately positive reviews , with many critics praising Taylor 's performance as Glenn . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , Mulder and Scully investigate a murder that seems to have been committed by a blind woman , Marty Glenn ( Lili Taylor ) , but Mulder suspects that she is capable of seeing images in some other way . Eventually , it is revealed that Glenn , while blind , can see the actions of her murderous father via her mind 's eye . 
 " Mind 's Eye " was inspired by the concept of " remote viewing " , or being able to see events beyond the range of normal vision . Minear sought to make Glenn the opposite of Audrey Hepburn 's character in the 1967 film Wait Until Dark , in which Hepburn played the part of an innocent but terrorized blind woman . " Mind 's Eye " marked the rare television appearance of Taylor , who primarily worked on well @-@ regarded independent films . In fact , Taylor herself requested to appear in the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Wilmington , Delaware , while Marty Glenn ( Lili Taylor ) is walking around her apartment , she experiences a vision : someone brandishing a knife approaches a man standing in front of a bathroom sink . Later , local police are called to a motel , where they find a murdered man on the bathroom floor . Marty is discovered hiding in the shower holding a bloody sponge . The police arrest her , only to realize that she is blind . Detective Lloyd Pennock ( Blu Mankuma ) calls in Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) because he believes Marty ( who has been blind since birth ) possesses a " sixth sense " that makes her capable of committing this crime . 
 During an interrogation , it becomes obvious that Marty , who is being uncooperative , possesses knowledge of the crimes that only the guilty party should know . Mulder decides to administer a polygraph while Scully looks over the crime scene . In the bathroom , Scully discovers a leather glove hidden behind an old razor disposal bin . Mulder , meanwhile , becomes convinced that Marty somehow did observe the murder . Suddenly , Marty experiences another vision : the murderer approaches a woman , Susan Forester , at a bar . In the vision , Marty is able to see the name of the bar . When her premonition ends , she requests to make a phone call ; she calls the bar and warns a man named Gotts ( Richard Fitzpatrick ) to leave Forester alone . Later , Scully shows the glove to Marty , who informs her that her fingerprints were found on it and that it fits her . Pennock concludes that the evidence is enough to charge Marty , but Mulder still does not think she did it . Scully proposes that Marty may not be blind , and an eye examination is undertaken . During the test , Marty experiences another vision and Mulder points out that the measurement mode screen used to gauge whether Marty can see has a reaction . Despite this , the examiner concludes Marty is truly blind . Mulder , however , believes Marty 's ocular reaction is a physical response to an image in her mind 's eye . After the district attorney concludes that charging a blind woman solely based on fingerprints would not be enough to convict her , Marty is released . 
 While walking home , Marty experiences a vision of Gotts attacking Forester . Marty eventually makes her way to the crime scene where she finds the victim 's body . She returns to the police station and confesses to the murders . To convince the police that she is the murderer , Marty tells Pennock where Gotts hid the heroin he stole from the first victim , but none of the prints on the heroin belong to Marty , furthering Mulder 's argument that she is , in fact , innocent . Mulder approaches Marty and tells her that he researched her mother 's murder — she died from a stab wound to the kidney , the same way Gotts kills his victims . Mulder concludes that Marty was given her ability when her then @-@ pregnant mother was killed by Gotts ; it is revealed that Gotts is actually Marty 's father and that he had spent thirty years ( her whole life ) in prison until being paroled . Marty sends Mulder and Scully to the bar that Gotts was last seen at , while Pennock takes her back to her apartment to pick up some things before entering protective custody . While packing , Marty has a vision of Gotts in the apartment lobby ; she knocks Pennock out , takes his gun and waits . Mulder figures out that Marty had been experiencing Gotts ' sight for the thirty years he was in prison ; in effect spending her whole life in prison . Mulder and Scully arrive at Marty 's apartment to find Gotts dead by his daughter 's hands . Marty is convicted of his murder and is sentenced to prison , but she is finally free of her father 's vision . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 " Mind 's Eye " was written by Tim Minear — his second credit for the series — and directed by Kim Manners . He was inspired to write the episode after hearing about the concept of " remote viewing " . Purportedly , the process allows one to view events — either through one 's eyes , or through the eyes of others — beyond the range of normal vision . Reportedly , the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency spent $ 20 million on a research project to determine if the ability exists . 
 Minear initially had trouble conceptualizing his idea , noting that " it might be a good idea for a short story , but how do you make the whole thing work visually ? " To combat this issue , Minear decided to make the remote viewer blind . He sought to make the blind woman " not Audrey Hepburn " , a reference to the 1967 film Wait Until Dark , in which Hepburn played the part of an innocent but terrorized blind woman . He later said , " I wanted to make [ Glenn ] a bitch , because the fact is that disability doesn 't necessarily ennoble a person . " After several meetings with fellow writers John Shiban , Vince Gilligan , and Frank Spotnitz — who provided storyboard support — Minear was allowed to begin work on the episode . 
 = = = Casting and filming = = = 
 " Mind 's Eye " marked the rare television appearance of Lili Taylor , who primarily worked on well @-@ regarded independent films . Taylor was cast as Glenn ; initially , the producers for the show felt that Taylor would not be interested , but she actually was a fan of the show and series co @-@ star Anderson . Taylor , in fact , had contacted the series ' casting director , Rick Milikan , and requested a role . Blu Mankuma , who played the part of Detective Pennock , had previously appeared in the first season episode " Ghost in the Machine " . Mulder 's line " even if the gloves do fit – you can still acquit " , a reference to the leather gloves of the O. J. Simpson murder case , was improvised by Duchovny during filming . 
 During the filming of the episode , art director Greg Loewen pointed out that , in her apartment , Glenn would not need lamps and ceiling lights . The lighting department for the show , however , countered that " although The X @-@ Files was a dark show , it wasn 't that dark . " The " staccato " and " nightmarish " remote visions that Glenn experiences were created in post @-@ production by visual effects supervisor Laurie Kallsen @-@ George . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Mind 's Eye " premiered on the Fox network in the United States on April 19 , 1998 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on February 10 , 1999 . It earned a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 4 , with a 16 share , meaning that roughly 10 @.@ 4 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 16 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 16 @.@ 53 million viewers . " Mind 's Eye " also was nominated for several Emmy Awards . Taylor was nominated for an award in the category of Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series — a nomination shared by fellow X @-@ Files guest star Veronica Cartwright — although Cloris Leachman won . Editor Casey O <unk> was nominated for Outstanding Single @-@ Camera Picture Editing . 
 The episode received moderately positive reviews from television critics , with many praising Taylor 's performance as Glenn . Zack Handlen from The A.V. Club gave the episode a moderately positive review and awarded it a B + . He was slightly critical that Glenn 's ability to see visions was not sufficiently expanded upon ; he ultimately called Mulder 's explanation " crap " . However , Handlen praised guest star Taylor and Duchovny , noting that " Taylor is convincing in the role , and Duchovny does a good job making his lines sound more logical than they actually are . " He ultimately concluded that the entry is " not a bad episode , exactly " but that " it 's far from a great one . " John Keegan from Critical Myth gave the episode a positive review and awarded it an 8 out of 10 . He labeled the episode " a strong stand @-@ alone installment " helped by the " powerful " chemistry between Duchovny and Taylor . He noted that " there are some interesting philosophical themes at work " . Keegan concluded that " [ t ] he lack of context within the season arc itself could have worked against it , but the episode manages to stand on its own . " 
 Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a moderately positive review and awarded it two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four . Vitaris drew comparisons between the installment and the third season episode " Oubliette " . However , she noted that because " the new episodes doesn 't have the specific connection ' Oubliette ' drew between Lucy and Mulder 's sister Samantha , it doesn 't touch the heart as deeply . " She did , however , praise Taylor 's performance , writing " it is [ Taylor ] who makes ' Mind 's Eye ' truly memorable . " Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode three stars out of five . The two called the entry " solid , if unspectacular " , noting that , once the premise is developed , " there 's really not much depth to be mined from it . " Shearman and Pearson , however , concluded that " the episode works nonetheless , thanks to a superb central performance from Lili Taylor [ who ] gives the best guest star turn of the year , lending a strength , an anger , and a redeeming humour to a blind woman who has adapted the world to her disability . " 
 = Hiram Wesley Evans = 
 Hiram Wesley Evans ( September 26 , 1881 – September 14 , 1966 ) was Imperial Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan , an American white supremacist group , from 1922 to 1939 . A native of Alabama , Evans attended Vanderbilt University and became a dentist . He operated a small , moderately successful practice in Texas until 1920 , when he joined the Klan 's Dallas chapter . He quickly rose through the ranks and was part of a group that ousted William Joseph Simmons from the position of Imperial Wizard , the national leader , in November 1922 . Evans succeeded him and sought to transform the group into a political power . 
 Although Evans had led the kidnapping and torture of a black man while leader of the Dallas Klan , as Imperial Wizard he publicly discouraged vigilante actions , fearing that they would hinder his attempts to gain political influence . In 1923 , Evans presided over the largest Klan gathering in history , attended by over 200 @,@ 000 , and endorsed several successful candidates in 1924 elections . He moved the Klan 's headquarters from Atlanta to Washington , D.C. , and organized a march of 30 @,@ 000 members — the largest march in the organization 's history — on Pennsylvania Avenue . Evans ' efforts notwithstanding , the Klan was buffeted by damaging publicity in the early 1920s , partially because of leadership struggles between Evans and his rivals , which hindered his political efforts . In the 1930s , the Great Depression significantly decreased the Klan 's income , prompting Evans to work for a construction company to supplement his pay . He resigned his position with the Klan in 1939 , after disavowing anti @-@ Catholicism . He was succeeded by his chief of staff , James A. Colescott . The next year , Evans faced accusations of involvement in a government corruption scandal in Georgia ; he was fined $ 15 @,@ 000 after legal proceedings . 
 Evans sought to promote a form of nativist , Protestant nationalism . In addition to his white supremacist ideology , he fiercely condemned Catholicism , unionism , and communism , which were associated with recent immigrants from eastern and southern Europe . He argued that Jews formed a non @-@ American culture and resisted assimilation , although he denied being an anti @-@ Semite . Historians credit Evans with refocusing the Klan on political activities and recruiting outside the Southern United States ; the Klan grew most in the Midwest and industrial cities . However , they note that the political influence and membership gains he sought were transitory . Some commentators argue that Evans was more focused on money and power than any particular ideology . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Hiram Wesley Evans was born in Ashland , Alabama , on September 26 , 1881 , and moved to Hubbard , Texas , with his family as a child . The son of Hiram Martin Evans , a judge , and his wife , Georgia Evans , the younger Evans graduated from Vanderbilt University . Shortly after , he became a dentist , receiving his license in 1900 . He married Bam Hill in 1923 ; they had three children together . 
 Evans established a small , moderately successful dentistry practice in downtown Dallas that provided inexpensive services . Rumors later arose that his dental qualifications were " a bit shady " . A Protestant , Evans attended a church belonging to the Disciples of Christ denomination . He was also a Freemason . Evans described himself as " the most average man in America " . Of average height and somewhat overweight , Evans was well dressed , a skilled speaker , and very ambitious . 
 = = Initial Klan service = = 
 Conceived by its founders as a continuation of the Reconstruction @-@ era Klan ( controversially linked to General Nathan Bedford Forrest ) , the revived Ku Klux Klan had been established in Atlanta in 1915 . Evans joined in 1920 , leaving his dental practice so that he could dedicate all his time to the group . In 1921 , Evans was elected as " exalted cyclops " , a recruiting position sometimes referred to as <unk> , in the Dallas Klan No. 66 . When he was elected , the Dallas Klan had recently received a " self @-@ ruling charter " from the Atlanta @-@ based leadership and was the group 's largest chapter . That same year , Evans was appointed to the position of " great titan " ( executive ) of the " Realm of Texas " and proceeded to lead a successful membership drive for the state 's Klan . 
 Evans initially supported violence against minorities , remembering a lynching he witnessed as a child . With the Texas Klan , he sought to create " black squads " to attack minorities . He joined several Klan members in kidnapping and torturing a black bellhop , ostensibly because they suspected he was involved in pandering prostitutes . Atlanta @-@ based leaders pressured Evans to curb racial violence in Dallas ; around that time , the Texas Klan had received significant negative publicity after castrating an African @-@ American doctor . Although Evans was not morally opposed to violence against minorities , he publicly condemned vigilante activity because he feared that it would attract government scrutiny and hinder potential Klan @-@ backed political campaigning . This change of stance led the leader of the Houston Klan to accuse him of hypocrisy . Although Evans later took credit for a decrease in lynchings in the Southern United States during the 1920s , several Klan members claimed that he surreptitiously encouraged — and presided over — acts of violence against minorities . 
 In 1921 , Evans was assigned to oversee the Klan 's national membership drive at the behest of their publicists , Elizabeth Tyler and Edward Young Clarke . In 1922 , the group 's leadership made Evans the " Imperial <unk> " , a role similar to national secretary , in which capacity he oversaw operations in 13 states . He received a base salary of $ 7 @,@ 500 and traveled throughout the country , regularly meeting with local Klan leaders . 
 = = Early national leadership = = 
 In 1922 , Evans joined a group of Klan activists , including Tyler , Clarke , and D. C. Stephenson , in a " coup " against William Joseph Simmons , the group 's leader . They deceived Simmons into agreeing to a reorganization of the Klan that removed his practical control ; Simmons said that they had claimed that if he remained the Imperial Wizard of the Klan , discord would hamper the organization . Evans gained power and was formally ensconced as Imperial Wizard of the Klan at a November 1922 " <unk> " in Atlanta , Georgia . Although a legal battle between Evans and Simmons ensued , during which time Simmons was titular " emperor " , Evans retained control . He initially said that he had been unaware of a pending coup until after his selection . However , by the end of their feud , he described Simmons as the " leader of Bolshevik Klansmen betraying the movement " and later expelled the former leader . 
 As leader of the Klan , Evans advanced a form of nativist , white supremacy that cast Protestantism as a fundamental part of American patriotism . To Evans , whiteness and Protestantism were equally valued , and sometimes conflated : he said the Klan supported the " uncontaminated growth of Anglo @-@ Saxon civilization " . He maintained that white Protestants had the exclusive right to govern the U.S. because of their descent from early colonists , whom he described as fleeing Europe for the U.S. to escape its societal bounds . He admitted that many Klan members were of rural , uneducated backgrounds but argued that power should be given to " the common people of America " . In a pamphlet entitled Ideals of the Ku Klux Klan , Evans described the Klan as follows : 
 This is a white man 's organization . 
 This is a gentile organization . 
 It is an American organization . 
 It is a Protestant organization . 
 Under Evans , the Klan supported a mix of right- and left @-@ wing political positions , which were described by Thomas Pegram of Loyola University Maryland as " too much of a patchwork to be considered an ideological system " . Klan literature spoke highly of politicians such as Woodrow Wilson , William Jennings Bryan , and Grover Cleveland . Evans borrowed numerous concepts from the writings of Lothrop Stoddard and Madison Grant , American writers of the period who promoted eugenics and scientific racism , and attempted to cast his platforms as based in science . Evans attacked immigrants by arguing that they would promote ideologies such as anarchism and communism , were threats to national unity , and were involved with bootlegging during Prohibition . He considered immigrants " ignorant , superstitious , religious devotees " intent on earning money in the U.S. before retiring to their homelands . However , he supported immigration of those he deemed " Nordic " . 
 Evans also argued against miscegenation and Catholic and Jewish immigration , on the grounds that they were threats to genetic " good stock " , a racial division which was then widely supported among white Americans . Evans opposed Catholicism because he believed that the Catholic Church sought to take control of the U.S. government ; he also questioned American Catholics ' loyalty to their country , writing that they were subject to their priests , and , as such , to the entire Roman Catholic hierarchy and the Pope . In other writings he expressed fears that the Catholic Church , in alliance with Jews and non @-@ white Protestant groups , was becoming increasingly active in politics and thus blurring the separation of church and state . 
 Under Evans ' leadership , the Klan became active in Indiana and Illinois , rather than focusing on the Southeastern U.S. as it had done in the past . It also grew in Michigan , where 40 @,@ 000 members , more than half its total , lived in Detroit . It became characterized as an organization prominent in urban areas of the Midwest , where it attracted native @-@ born Americans competing for industrial jobs with recent immigrants . It also attracted members in Nebraska , Colorado , Oregon and Washington . 
 Evans appointed Stephenson , his early collaborator , as <unk> and Grand Dragon of Indiana . The relationship between the two leaders quickly became acrimonious ; Stephenson clashed with Evans over the distribution of membership fees and became embittered after Evans refused to help fund the purchase of a school in Indiana . Although Stephenson believed that Evans deliberately thwarted his attempt to purchase the school to limit his power , Evans unexpectedly promoted Stephenson to Grand Dragon of the " northern realm " in July 1923 . The historian Leonard Joseph Moore of McGill University contends that Evans paid particular attention to the Indiana Klan out of financial self @-@ interest : it was then the largest state branch . 
 The political scientist Arnold S. Rice writes that Evans also worked on a series of changes , advertised as reforms , to the Klan structure and sought to promote a positive public opinion of the Klan ; Evans felt that his organization should be able to reach out to those who were " struggling with the moral decay and economic distress of the 20th century " . He increased the Klan 's surveillance of members before and after initiation , expelling those considered to be of " questionable morals " . He also worked to increase Klan involvement in local policing and denounced acts of violence committed by Klan members , promoting the Klan as a symbol of lawfulness . These efforts , although successful in reducing the number of attacks , were ultimately unable to sway public opinion in the Klan 's favor . 
 = = Internal conflicts under Evans ' tenure = = 
 Evans became embroiled in several internal Klan conflicts that gained media exposure . In January 1921 , he and a group of grand dragons expelled the publicist Clarke , who had been critical of Evans ' efforts to involve the Klan in electoral politics . Evans also clashed with Henry Grady , a judge from North Carolina who served in the Klan from 1922 to 1927 , reaching the rank of Grand Dragon . Before Evans gained control of the Klan , Grady had been considered a potential successor to Simmons . After Grady dismissed a Klan @-@ backed law that would have banned the Knights of Columbus , a Catholic fraternal service organization , Evans revoked his membership . Grady subsequently leaked his correspondence with Evans to the media . 
 In August 1923 , Evans participated in a Klan parade in the heavily Catholic borough of Carnegie , Pennsylvania , which was attacked by local residents . One member of the Klan was killed ; Evans declared him a martyr and hoped that the death would inspire new recruits . The incident gave a fillip to the Klan 's recruitment efforts , but increased Stephenson 's animosity toward Evans , on whom he blamed the incident . Stephenson 's proclivity for ostentation irritated Evans . Although Stephenson left his official Klan position after a short tenure , under his leadership the Klan 's northern supporters had begun to rival those in the South . He had been a skilled campaigner and demagogue , and he remained a well @-@ known advocate of the Klan 's platforms after resigning . Evans avoided publicly clashing with him , fearing that it would hurt the candidacies of Klan @-@ backed politicians : Stephenson was closely involved in the successful gubernatorial candidacy of Indiana Klan @-@ member Edward L. Jackson , and the Klan members had significant electoral gains in that state in 1924 , including the election of several candidates to the state legislature . After these victories , Stephenson showed further disdain for Evans . 
 Although membership in the Klan was limited to men , Simmons — after losing control of the national organization — attempted to create a parallel white supremacist organization for women . Evans established a women 's group and sued him . Evans won the lawsuit , leading to a public war of words with Simmons , whose lawyer was soon murdered by Evans ' press agent , an event in which Evans denied complicity . In 1924 , Evans paid Simmons $ 145 @,@ 000 for a promise to abandon the latter 's claim to Klan leadership . 
 Afterward , Evans moved the Klan 's national headquarters to Washington , D.C. , where the murder of Simmon 's lawyer had received less publicity . To Evans ' consternation , Stephenson also formed a women 's auxiliary group . Evans and Stephenson subsequently exchanged allegations of sexual impropriety . Police charged Stephenson with the kidnapping , rape and murder of a young woman ; he maintained that the charges were orchestrated by Evans . After a sensational trial , Stephenson was convicted of second degree murder and given a life sentence ; the publicity about the leader 's behavior caused thousands of members to abandon the Klan . 
 = = Klan growth and political activism = = 
 In the early years of Evans ' tenure , the Klan reached record enrollment ; estimates of its peak range from 2 @.@ 5 to 6 million members , although records are poor and the figure cannot be accurately determined . He also dramatically increased the organization 's total assets , more than doubling them from July 1922 to July 1923 . Evans changed the way that chapter leaders were paid : he insisted that they receive a fixed salary rather than commissions based on membership fees in a move that lowered their income . Although previous Imperial Wizards had lived in lavish properties , Evans initially settled in an apartment after his promotion . The sociologist Rory McVeigh of the University of Notre Dame argues that this increase in membership was owing to the Klan 's exploitation of a " favorable political context " , particularly one in which native @-@ born white @-@ settler Americans were fearful after increased immigration caused them to compete for jobs and housing in many cities . Evans had high hopes for the Klan , saying in 1923 that he aimed to reach ten million members . That year , he spoke at the largest Klan gathering in history , a Fourth of July meeting in rural Indiana that was attended by over 200 @,@ 000 . 
 Evans sought to include more members from the Southwestern U.S. in leadership ; previously the Klan had been led by people from the Southeast . In 1922 , Evans supported the successful U.S. Senate candidacy of the Texas politician Earle Bradford Mayfield , an event that demonstrated that Klan @-@ supported candidates could win prominent offices . The next year , Evans returned to Texas for the state fair , where 75 @,@ 000 people gathered for a " Klan day " celebration . He devoted funds to fighting Jack C. Walton , the anti @-@ Klan governor of Oklahoma ; to the group 's joy , Walton was impeached and removed from office in 1923 . However , the Oklahoma legislature soon passed several anti @-@ Klan bills . 
 Evans published instructions for local Klan leaders that detailed how to run meetings , recruit new members , and speak to local gatherings . He advised leaders to avoid " raving hysterically " in favor of " [ a ] scientific ... presentation of facts " . In addition , he urged them to forbid members from bringing their Klan regalia home from meetings and to perform background checks on applicants . He instructed Klan members to shun vigilantism but to assist police and attempted , with some success , to recruit police officers into the Klan . Emphasizing the difference between his organization and the more violent 19th @-@ century Ku Klux Klan , Evans formed Klan @-@ themed groups for children . As the Klan attempted to portray itself as a movement led by cultured , well @-@ educated people , its leaders spoke about education in the U.S. Evans believed that public schools could create a homogeneous society and saw education advocacy as an effective form of public relations . 
 In his writings on the subject , he cited the nation 's illiteracy rate as evidence that American public schools were failing ; he considered low teacher salaries and child labor key obstacles to reform . He supported the idea of a federal Department of Education , hoping that it would lead to improvements in public schools that would help " Americanize the foreigners " and thwart recruitment efforts of Catholic schools . Evans wrote four books in the mid to late 1920s , The Menace of Modern Immigration ( 1923 ) , The Klan of Tomorrow ( 1924 ) , <unk> in the Democracy ( 1927 ) , and The Rising Storm ( 1929 ) . 
 After the Klan gained respect and political influence in parts of the U.S. , Evans hoped to replicate this on a national scale . Political involvement was controversial among the organization 's members , and Evans issued contradictory statements on the issue , publicly disavowing it but surreptitiously attempting to sway politicians . Apart from fundamental Klan issues , different local groups often held varying political ideologies ; as such , by insisting on specific political stances , Evans would have risked alienating members . Although many of his hopes were never realized , Evans saw several Klansmen elected to high offices and , in the mid @-@ 1920s , the group was frequently discussed by political commentators . In 1924 , the group convinced Republican Party leaders to avoid criticizing them , prompting Time to put Evans on its cover . That year , the Klan supported Calvin Coolidge in his successful candidacy for president of the U.S. Although Coolidge opposed many key Klan platforms , with the exception of immigration restrictions and prohibition , he was the only major @-@ party candidate who did not condemn them . Nonetheless , Evans declared Coolidge 's victory a great success for the Klan . Although Republican leaders refrained from attacking the Klan , they were hesitant to support candidates promoted by the group . Significant discussion of the Klan also took place at the Democratic Party 's convention ; senator and Democratic presidential primary nominee Oscar Underwood decried them as " a national menace " . Evans ' attempts to elect Klansmen to public offices in 1924 saw limited success , although they achieved their goals in Indiana . 
 = = Decline of the Klan = = 
 Although the Klan had four million members in 1924 , the group 's membership quickly shrank after Stephenson 's widely publicized trial . The Indiana Klan lost more than 90 % of its members by the end of the proceedings , and there were mass resignations in other states as well . Other scandals emerged , further damaging Klan enrollment . Although the Colorado Klan had seen strong growth , Evans asked the Grand Dragon , John Galen Locke , to resign after local corruption scandals in 1925 involving Klan members who served as police . Evans ' request was poorly received by Colorado Klan members ; local enrollment subsequently plummeted . He encountered difficulties with Klan leaders in Pennsylvania in 1926 , after many of them concluded that he was too autocratic . In response , he revoked the charters of several local Klan groups and removed John Strayer , a state legislator , from his position of authority in the Klan . When the Pennsylvania groups continued to refer to themselves as the Ku Klux Klan , Evans sued them in federal court . Pennsylvania Klan members launched a detailed legal offensive against Evans and other Klan leaders , alleging misdeeds , including participation in kidnappings and lynchings . Evans ' suit was unsuccessful and , as many newspapers reported the scandalous allegations aired in court , the Pennsylvania Klan suffered a serious decline in membership and support . 
 In response to the decline in Klan membership , in 1926 , Evans organized a Klan parade in Washington , D.C. , hoping that a large turnout would demonstrate the Klan 's power . About 30 @,@ 000 members attended , making it the largest parade in the group 's history . Evans was disappointed , however , as he had expected double the attendance and the march did not staunch the drop in membership . That year , Evans attempted to rally U.S. senators to vote against a bill supporting a proposed world court . He was unsuccessful , however , and several Klan @-@ backed senators followed Calvin Coolidge and supported the bill . In 1928 , Evans opposed the candidacy of the New York Democratic governor Al Smith for president , emphasizing the threat of Smith 's Catholic faith . After the Republican Herbert Hoover won the election , Evans boldly claimed responsibility for Smith 's loss ; but most of the solidly Democratic South had rejected Hoover and voted for Smith against the Klan 's advice . 
 In 1929 , Evans acknowledged that membership levels had declined but predicted a dramatic turnaround would soon occur . His prediction was inaccurate . This loss of members resulted in a Klan that was a skeleton of its former self . Historians have attributed this loss of membership to ineptness and hypocrisy on the part of Klan leadership . McVeigh argues that the Klan 's inability to form alliances with other political groups led to the sharp loss of political power and solidarity within the group . 
 = = Changes in focus = = 
 Although many Democratic Klan members initially supported the 1932 presidential campaign of Franklin D. Roosevelt , the Klan later officially turned against him because of his acceptance of endorsements from minorities and labor unions . After Roosevelt 's election , Evans fiercely opposed the New Deal , describing it as a " great danger " to the nation ; he argued that it was a " Jewish " policy that endangered American freedom , reserving particular scorn for Treasury Secretary Henry Morgenthau , Jr . , who was Jewish . Evans ' statements about Jews were sometimes contradictory : he argued that he was not an anti @-@ Semite but maintained that Jews were materialistic and resisted assimilation . The Klan subsequently launched an offensive against organized labor . In the 1930s , Evans fiercely condemned communism and unionism . Around that time , Evans began to suspect that government agencies had been infiltrated by communists . He focused his attacks on the Congress of Industrial Organizations , claiming that they sought to " flout law and promote social disorder " . 
 Although Evans bemoaned commercialism and attributed it to the effects of liberalism , he supported capitalism and sought to form ties between business leaders and the Klan . He condemned corporate greed , alleging that wealthy elites ' desire for cheap labor led to increased immigration . In his view , corporations had changed the Eastern U.S. so that it no longer reflected " true Americanism " , a concept he believed could only be understood by " legitimate Americans " such as himself . He blamed an influx of unskilled laborers for lowering wages in the U.S. Evans believed that U.S. immigration policy should restrict the immigration of unskilled workers , except for those needed on farms . 
 In 1934 , Evans encountered public controversy after it was revealed that he intended to travel to Louisiana to campaign against the Democratic governor Huey Long , who planned to run in the 1936 presidential election . Long learned of Evans ' plans and condemned him in a speech at the Louisiana State Legislature , deriding him as a " tooth @-@ puller " and an " Imperial bastard " and warning of grave consequences should he follow through with his plans . After learning of the potential opposition , Evans cancelled his plans , although he retorted that Long – who based his campaign on Americanist themes – was " un @-@ American " . 
 = = Downfall and death = = 
 In the 1930s , the Klan 's public support nearly vanished and their membership dropped to about 100 @,@ 000 people , primarily concentrated in the South , having lost most of their members in the Midwest and West . At that time , James A. Colescott , Evans ' handpicked chief of staff , increasingly shouldered Evans ' responsibilities . After the Great Depression further damaged the Klan 's finances , the group 's leadership sold their Atlanta headquarters in 1936 . Around that time , Evans announced his intention to retire . 
 Although anti @-@ Catholicism had been a consistent platform of the Klan , before leaving the organization , Evans renounced his anti @-@ Catholicism and pronounced a " new era of religious tolerance " . In 1939 , he said that " in no other time in history has there been more need for all people who believe in the same Father and same Son to stand together . " That year , Evans also publicly expressed an interest in learning aspects of Judaism to better understand the Old Testament . Chester L. Quarles , a professor of criminal justice at the University of Mississippi , argues that Evans repudiated anti @-@ Catholicism owing to his desire to fight unions and communism and his fear of having too many enemies at one time . 
 After Evans sold the Klan 's former headquarters , it was purchased by the Catholic Church . The Cathedral of Christ the King was later built on the site . Evans attended the building 's dedication and spoke highly of the service , surprising many observers . His attendance at the service was his last significant public appearance as Imperial Wizard : he stepped down soon afterwards , having become deeply unpopular with members of the Klan , who felt that he had embraced their enemies . He resigned on June 10 , 1939 , and was replaced as Imperial Wizard by Colescott . 
 Evans ' service as Imperial Wizard proved to be a lucrative position , allowing him to maintain a large residence in a prestigious Atlanta neighborhood . In the mid @-@ 1930s , however , Klan funds dwindled , and he worked for a Georgia @-@ based construction company selling products to the Georgia Highway Board . At the same time , he was a staunch supporter of Georgia governor <unk> D. Rivers , whom he had previously employed as a lecturer . Owing to the political support that he provided the administration , Evans was allowed to sell to the highway board without bidding against other contractors . In 1940 , the state of Georgia charged Evans and a member of the state highway board with price fixing . The Attorney General of Georgia , Ellis <unk> , directed legal proceedings against Evans that resulted in a $ 15 @,@ 000 fine . 
 Meanwhile , Colescott attempted to resuscitate the waning second Klan through an " administration of action " and stricter enforcement of the Klan 's stated policies ; he also led extensive recruitment campaigns . Despite concerns by opponents that the Klan would regain full force after the conclusion of World War II , it was unable to improve its membership and was under pressure from the Internal Revenue Service for failure to pay taxes . Through a decree on April 23 , 1944 , Colescott formally disbanded the Klan . Locally sponsored groups continued to use the name , but lacked the united leadership of the earlier Klan . 
 As late as 1949 , Evans served as a commentator on Klan activities , speaking as the former Imperial Wizard . He died on September 14 , 1966 , in Atlanta , Georgia . 
 = = Appraisal = = 
 David A. Horowitz , a historian at Portland State University , credits Evans with changing the Klan " from a confederation of local vigilantes into a centralized and powerful political movement " . Fellow historian William D. Jenkins of Youngstown State University maintains that Evans was " personally corrupt and more interested in money or power than a cause " . During Evans ' tenure as Imperial Wizard , the New York Times characterized the Klan 's leadership as " shrewd schemers " . However , Rice suggests that Evans ' reforms would never have been successful , as the Klan remained a white supremacist organization that " automatically made enemies of ... anyone who happened to be foreign @-@ born , Negro , Catholic , Jewish , or opposed to bigotry and chauvinism . " 
 An editorial in The New York Times during Evans ' tenure as Klan leader described him as " severe and logical " in his writing , while the historian Richard Hofstadter described Evans ' writings as not immoderate in tone . The communications specialist Nicolas Rangel Jr. of the University of Houston – Downtown suggests that this vernacular prevented some Americans from recognizing the extremist nature of Evans ' views . 
 Evans ' ideology was attacked by numerous contemporaries ; these criticisms began early in his Klan career . David Lefkowitz , rabbi of Temple Emanu @-@ El in Dallas , assailed Evans ' assertion that Jews did not assimilate , emphasizing American experiences shared by Jews and Christians , such as military service in World War I. James Weldon Johnson , leader of the NAACP , responded to Evans ' promotion of white supremacy by contending that " all races are mixed " . Other well @-@ known adversaries of Evans included the minister and theologian Reinhold Niebuhr , who opposed the Klan in Detroit in 1925 , describing them as " one of the worst specific social phenomena which the religious pride of a people has ever developed . " The Dallas Morning News publisher George Dealey and Atlanta journalist Ralph McGill opposed him , the latter deriding him for his hypocrisy and false claims about minorities . 
 Several publications , however , gave positive coverage to Evans , although not necessarily his work with the Klan . In 1927 , the New York Times congratulated Evans on his " modest and engaging exposition of ' Americanism ' " . Although the Klan disowned Evans for reaching out to the Catholic Church , popular opinion was more positive . In 1939 , the Palm Beach Daily News described the meeting between Evans and Cardinal Dennis Joseph Dougherty as stirring both religious and secular circles ; favorable coverage of the meeting was found in several other publications . Dougherty said that he had found Evans " intensely interested in religious subjects " outside Protestantism . 
 = Hina Rabbani Khar = 
 Hina Rabbani Khar ( Urdu : <unk> <unk> <unk> ; born 19 November 1977 ) is a Pakistani stateswoman who served as the 26th Foreign Minister of Pakistan between February 2011 till March 2013 – the youngest person and the first woman to hold the position . 
 Hailing from an influential feudal family , she studied business at LUMS and Amherst before entering politics as a member of national assembly in 2002 and becoming a junior minister responsible for economic policy under the Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz . She joined the Pakistan Peoples Party and was re @-@ elected to the national assembly in 2008 . In 2009 , she became the Minister of State for Finance and Economic Affairs and the same year became the first woman to present the national budget . 
 She was appointed by Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gillani as the Foreign Minister of Pakistan in July 2011 following the resignation of Mehmood Qureshi , and served until the 2013 election . During her time at the foreign ministry she resumed talks with India , which had derailed since the Mumbai attacks . She also led an unsuccessful move to grant India most favoured nation status . While on a visit to Bangladesh , she issued an unconditional apology from Pakistan for atrocities carried out during the Liberation War of 1971 . 
 During her two year long appointment as the country 's foreign minister she attracted significant global attention on her appearance and status as Pakistan 's first women foreign minister . She was interviewed by Charlie Rose , CBS News and Washington Post among others . She served as a high @-@ ranking member of the Central Executive Committee of the Pakistan Peoples Party from 2008 until 2013 , when she retired from politics . However , she continues to remain a member of Pakistan People 's Party and a public speaker on foreign policy . She has written op @-@ ed 's for Newsweek Pakistan and was interviewed by Mehdi Hasan at the Oxford Union in December 2015 . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Hina was born into a feudal Muslim Jat family of Khar clan in Multan , Punjab , Pakistan . Khar is the daughter of powerful oligarch and retired politician Ghulam Noor Rabbani Khar . Her father was a prominent national politician and formerly served as a member of the National Assembly . She is niece of Ghulam Mustafa Khar , former Governor and Chief Minister of Punjab , and the cousin of actress and model <unk> Haq . 
 Khar is co @-@ owner of a restaurant chain named the " Polo Lounge " . The initial branch opened at the Lahore Polo Ground in 2002 . A second Polo Lounge has since opened in Islamabad 's Saidpur Village . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Khar is a graduate of the Lahore University of Management Sciences ( LUMS ) where she holds a BSc ( with honors ) in Economics conferred in 1999 . She subsequently attended the University of Massachusetts at Amherst in the United States where she earned a MSc in Business Management , attained in 2002 . 
 Khar has retained ties with her alumnus institution , LUMS , long after her graduation . In 2012 , she delivered a lecture at LUMS on " Foreign policy and Young Democracy " . In 2012 , she helped secure funding for the Abdus Salam Institute of Physics and spoke highly of notable theorist Dr. Abdus Salam at LUMS . 
 = = Career = = 
 Hina Rabbani Khar came to national prominence in the national political arena through Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz in 2004 , who appointed her to the Finance Ministry . In the 2002 general elections , she successfully contested and secured the parliamentary constituency of her father , veteran politician Ghulam Noor Rabbani Khar , after most members of her family were disqualified . With the financial support of her father , she campaigned on a newly founded PML ( Q Group ) platform against the Pakistan Muslim League . 
 Khar was elected as a member of the National Assembly , representing the NA @-@ 177 ( <unk> @-@ II ) constituency in Punjab , a constituency her father had represented previously . A new law requiring all parliamentary candidates to hold a university degree had meant he could not run that year . The Guardian wrote , " In deference to local sensibilities about the place of women , her landlord father Noor addressed rallies and glad @-@ handed voters ; Hina stayed largely at home , with not even her photo appearing on the posters . " In 2005 , she was elevated to the position of deputy minister of economic affairs under Shaukat Aziz . As deputy minister , she dealt extensively with the donor community during the 2005 earthquake that hit Northern Pakistan . 
 In 2007 , she made an unsuccessful attempt to renew her alliance with PML @-@ Q , but the party denied her a ticket platform to campaign for re @-@ election in 2008 . She was later invited by the senior members of the Pakistan Peoples Party and successfully campaigned for her constituency for a second time . The PPP secured a plurality of the votes and formed a left @-@ wing alliance with the Awami National Party , MQM and PML @-@ Q. 
 = = = Minister of State for Economic Affairs = = = 
 Khar came to prominence during the Shaukat Aziz government and was appointed Minister of State for Economic Affairs in 2004 , a post she retained until 2007 . In 2008 , after successfully defending her constituency , she was appointed Minister of State for Finance and Economic Affairs in the cabinet of Yousaf Raza Gillani . She worked on the financial budget and economic policies in the absence of the then Finance Minister and on 13 June 2009 she successfully presented the 2010 federal budget in the Parliament and has the distinction of being the first woman politician to present the Pakistani budget in the National Assembly . 
 = = = Foreign minister = = = 
 Khar was appointed as Minister of State for Foreign Affairs — the deputy head of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs — on 11 February 2011 , as part of Gillani 's cabinet reshuffle . After Shah Mehmood Qureshi 's resignation as Foreign Minister , she became acting Minister of Foreign Affairs on 13 February 2011 . She was formally appointed as Foreign Minister on 18 July and was sworn in on 19 July , becoming the youngest and first female Minister of Foreign Affairs . President Asif Ali Zardari , who succeeded Pervez Musharraf in 2008 , said the appointment was " a demonstration of the government 's commitment to bring women into the mainstream of national life " . She was appointed foreign minister during a difficult time in Pakistan : when the country 's armed forces were confronting extreme elements in Western Pakistan and anti @-@ American emotions ran high over the Raymond Davis incident . 
 Shortly after her appointment , she visited India and held peace talks with her Indian counterpart , S. M. Krishna . Relations between the two countries had been suspended following the 2008 Mumbai attacks , resuming in February 2011 . The Indian media reported extensively on her fashion and appearance — the Birkin bag , the sunglasses , the Jimmy Choo stilettos and the pearl necklaces , for example . She held talks with leaders of the <unk> Conference before meeting Indian government representatives , a decision which was criticised by the Bharatiya Janata Party ( BJP ) , India 's main opposition party , which said it was a breach of protocol and demanded an inquiry into the matter . In August 2011 she visited China and held talks with Yang <unk> , the Chinese Foreign Minister . Hindustan Times reported that , in contrast to her reception in India , she was largely ignored by Chinese media . 
 The NATO strike which killed 24 Pakistani troops was one of the most notable incidents during her tenure and Foreign Minister Khar vigorously stated that the government of Pakistan and defense committees had approved a measure — similar to a parliamentary resolution put forward after bin Laden 's May 2011 death — that formally bars NATO and ISAF forces from using Pakistan 's supply routes . On 6 June 2012 , Pakistan renewed its call for a U.S. apology over the killing of 24 soldiers in U.S. warplane attacks at the Salala <unk> , as Khar argued that " higher principles should take precedence over politically popular considerations " . Khar challenged the U.S. to " live up to its democratic ideals by respecting the will of Pakistan ’ s elected legislature " , Foreign Policy magazine said in a Doha @-@ <unk> report on its interview with the top Pakistani diplomat . On 15 December 2011 , when the United States suspended financial aid to Pakistan , Khar warned her counterpart Hillary Clinton that the United States will be responsible for defeat in the war on terror as Pakistan could not fight the war alone . 
 On 21 January 2012 , Khar secretly left for Moscow with an agenda of strengthening bilateral relations . Khar and her foreign service officers made tremendous efforts to reach out to countries such as Russia in the wake of strained ties with the United States . On this trip she extended an invitation to the Russian leadership to visit Pakistan and to reaffirm cooperation and bilateral commitment and support to promote stability and peace in Afghanistan for " Afghan @-@ led and Afghan @-@ owned " efforts for national reconciliation in the country . On 12 August 2012 , while speaking at the 16th Summit of the Non @-@ Aligned Movement in Tehran , Khar maintained that " growing confrontation over Iran ’ s nuclear program was threatening further instability in the broader region , and a peaceful resolution of this issue is still possible on the basis of reciprocal confidence @-@ building measures and security assurances against external threat . " 
 During her short visit to Bangladesh on 9 November 2012 , Khar was approached by the Foreign Minister of Bangladesh <unk> Moni to settle pending post @-@ independence issues , emphasizing especially an unconditional apology from Pakistan for the genocide it had carried out during the Liberation War of 1971 . Khar reiterated that Pakistan had regretted its 1971 actions on different occasions since 1974 and called for the two countries to move ahead together . She urged Moni and the Prime Minister of Bangladesh , Sheikh Hasina , to bury the past . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Khar is married to Feroze Gulzar and has two daughters , <unk> and Dina . 
 = Dime Store ( Portland , Oregon ) = 
 The Dime Store was a short @-@ lived restaurant in Portland , Oregon , in the United States . It was established by Dayna McErlean , with additional conceptual development from Jeremy Larter . The restaurant opened in 2014 , replacing Leo 's Non @-@ Smoking Coffee Shop , a diner which had operated for thirty years . The Dime Store 's menu included diner classics such as burgers and milkshakes , along with all @-@ day breakfast and weekend brunch specials . Despite receiving a positive critical reception , the restaurant closed in November 2015 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Dime Store was a restaurant housed in the first floor corner of the Medical Dental Building ( 837 Southwest 11th Avenue ) in downtown Portland . Its menu was created by Claire Miller and included American diner classics such as burgers , ice cream floats , milkshakes , sundaes , and other desserts , as well as upscale diner food and healthy food options with a farmers ' market influence . 
 The all @-@ day breakfast menu included buttermilk biscuits and gravy , Water Avenue coffee , fried egg sandwiches , pancakes , and scrambled egg specials . The lunch menu included sandwiches ( BLT , club , falafel , grilled cheese , meatloaf ) , salads , and soups . The Dime Store 's weekend brunch menu featured Eggs Benedict , French @-@ style omelettes , and the " Boss @-@ Lady 's Breakfast " , which included braised greens , fried egg , and sausage . Brunch cocktails included Bloody Marys , mimosas , and Salty Dogs . Its beer , cocktail , and wine selection was curated by Nick <unk> . One milkshake special featured Salt & Straw , a Portland @-@ based artisanal ice cream company . 
 The restaurant featured a horseshoe @-@ shaped kiosk @-@ style counter displaying coffee , pastries , sandwiches , and a variety of 25 periodicals supplied by The City Reader , a Modern Newsstand on Southeast Division . It was described as a " shinier " version of the coffee shop which had occupied the same space for thirty years prior , with grey and red linoleum flooring and teal pleather or vinyl seating . 
 = = History = = 
 The restaurant replaced Leo 's Non @-@ Smoking Coffee Shop , which was owned by Peter and Jane Chan for thirty years . When Leo 's closed in February 2014 , rumors had already circulated about restaurateur and developer Dayna McErlean 's plans to open a more upscale diner . The Dime Store 's concept was created by McErlean and Jeremy Larter , and was inspired by the soda shops they both experienced growing up on the East Coast . Prior to the restaurant 's opening , plans were to serve breakfast and lunch during mid @-@ week hours , with the potential to later add happy hour and family @-@ friendly dinner options , as well as outdoor seating . 
 The Dime Store opened in the early summer of 2014 ( June – July ) , with a grand opening on June 16 . It began operating with a limited menu during the hours of 7am to 3pm ; hours were later extended to 6pm . The restaurant 's weekend brunch launched in July , offering a larger menu from 9am to 3pm . 
 The restaurant closed in November 2015 . The owners posted online , " It was a hard decision but sadly we have decided to close our doors . Thanks to everyone that 's supported us and have dined with us . We will miss you all and happy holidays ! " Willamette Week 's Martin <unk> attributed the diner 's closure to its location and lack of nearby foot traffic . Oregon Liquor Control Commission documentation from March 2016 shows an application for a tradename update to The Daily Feast . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Fodor 's called The Dime Store " bright and hip " , offering " office workers and hotel guests a much @-@ appreciated source of seasonally driven , well @-@ prepared comfort fare " . <unk> wrote a positive review of the restaurant in August 2014 , in which he paid tribute to Leo 's and described his two $ 1 extras ( an egg on his BLT and maple syrup for his pancakes ) as " the best two dollars [ he ] spent all week " . That same month , Thrillist contributor Drew Tyson included the diner in his list of the " 11 Best New Restaurants in Portland " , writing : 
 Billing itself as a " finer diner " , this old @-@ school space feels a bit like the diner in Twin Peaks . There 's a magazine and candy counter in one corner that no one seems to touch ; just quick enough service that once you start questioning whether or not you 'll get another cup of coffee , one arrives ; plus a menu full of classics . All @-@ in @-@ all it 's one of the only places you can go in Downtown and feel like you 're transported somewhere else entirely . 
 The Portland Mercury 's Andrea <unk> wrote : 
 Dime Store is its own thing , a great place to grab lemony eggs <unk> and a Water Avenue coffee on a Sunday without a massive line . Sure , there 's vintage milk bottles as water pitchers , " Hound Dog " blasting from the speakers , and a big @-@ old 1950s vibe going on — but you 're not going to feel like some <unk> in a retro @-@ themed chain here ... There 's no life @-@ changing or avant @-@ garde cooking happening at Dime Store . You won 't see coffee mayo and duck bologna like Vitaly Paley 's crew puts out at Penny Diner . You won 't find the greasy hash browns available at the actual old @-@ school diners . But that 's kind of the point . Dime Store is a sweet slice of nostalgia with just the right nod to current dining realities . 
 In 2015 , The Oregonian included the diner 's " Dime Burger " as one of five " burger classics " in its list of the city 's " 100 best Cheap Eats " . The newspaper later included The Dime Store in its list of the " top 10 Portland restaurant closings of 2015 " . 
 = Simon Bolivar Buckner = 
 Simon Bolivar Buckner ( April 1 , 1823 – January 8 , 1914 ) was an American soldier and politician who fought in the United States Army in the Mexican – American War and in the Confederate States Army during the American Civil War . He later served as the 30th Governor of Kentucky . 
 After graduating from the United States Military Academy at West Point , Buckner became an instructor there . He took a hiatus from teaching to serve in the Mexican – American War , participating in many of the major battles of that conflict . He resigned from the army in 1855 to manage his father @-@ in @-@ law 's real estate in Chicago , Illinois . He returned to his native state of Kentucky in 1857 and was appointed adjutant general by Governor Beriah Magoffin in 1861 . In this position , he tried to enforce Kentucky 's neutrality policy in the early days of the Civil War . When the state 's neutrality was breached , Buckner accepted a commission in the Confederate Army after declining a similar commission to the Union Army . In 1862 , he accepted Ulysses S. Grant 's demand for an " unconditional surrender " at the Battle of Fort Donelson . He was the first Confederate general to surrender an army in the war . He spent five months as a prisoner of war . After his release , Buckner participated in Braxton Bragg 's failed invasion of Kentucky and near the end of the war became chief of staff to Edmund Kirby Smith in the Trans @-@ Mississippi Department . 
 In the years following the war , Buckner became active in politics . He was elected governor of Kentucky in 1887 . It was his second campaign for that office . His term was plagued by violent feuds in the eastern part of the state , including the Hatfield – McCoy feud and the Rowan County War . His administration was rocked by scandal when state treasurer James " Honest Dick " Tate absconded with $ 250 @,@ 000 from the state 's treasury . As governor , Buckner became known for vetoing special interest legislation . In the 1888 legislative session alone , he issued more vetoes than the previous ten governors combined . In 1895 , he made an unsuccessful bid for a seat in the U.S. Senate . The following year , he joined the National Democratic Party , or " Gold Democrats " , who favored a gold standard policy over the Free Silver position of the mainline Democrats . He was the Gold Democrats ' candidate for Vice President of the United States in the 1896 election , but polled just over one percent of the vote on a ticket with John M. Palmer . He never again sought public office and died January 8 , 1914 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Simon B. Buckner ( Sr. ) , was born at Glen Lily , his family 's estate near Munfordville , Kentucky . He was the third child and second son of Aylett <unk> and Elizabeth Ann ( Morehead ) Buckner . Named after the " South American soldier and statesman , Simón Bolívar , then at the height of his power " , Buckner did not begin school until age nine , when he enrolled at a private school in Munfordville . His closest friend in Munfordville was Thomas J. Wood , who would become a Union Army general opposing Buckner at the Battle of Perryville and the Battle of Chickamauga during the Civil War . Buckner 's father was an iron worker , but found that Hart County did not have sufficient timber to fire his iron furnace . Consequently , in 1838 , he moved the family to southern Muhlenberg County where he organized an iron @-@ making corporation . Buckner attended school in Greenville , and later at Christian County Seminary in Hopkinsville . 
 On July 1 , 1840 , Buckner enrolled at the United States Military Academy . In 1844 he graduated eleventh in his class of 25 and was commissioned a brevet second lieutenant in the 2nd U.S. Infantry Regiment . He was assigned to garrison duty at Sackett 's Harbor on Lake Ontario until August 28 , 1845 , when he returned to the Academy to serve as an assistant professor of geography , history , and ethics . 
 = = Service in the Mexican – American War = = 
 In May 1846 , Buckner resigned his teaching position to fight in the Mexican – American War , enlisting with the 6th U.S. Infantry Regiment . His early duties included recruiting soldiers and bringing them to the Texas border . In November 1846 , he was ordered to join his company in the field ; he met them en route between Monclova and <unk> . The company joined John E. Wool at Saltillo . In January 1847 , Buckner was ordered to Vera Cruz with William J. Worth 's division . While Maj. Gen. Winfield Scott besieged Vera Cruz , Buckner 's unit engaged a few thousand Mexican cavalry at a nearby town called <unk> . 
 On August 8 , 1847 , Buckner was appointed quartermaster of the 6th Infantry . Shortly thereafter , he participated in battles at San Antonio and Churubusco , being slightly wounded in the latter battle . He was appointed a brevet first lieutenant for gallantry at Churubusco and Contreras , but declined the honor in part because reports of his participation at Contreras were in error — he had been fighting in San Antonio at the time . Later , he was offered and accepted the same rank solely based on his conduct at Churubusco . 
 Buckner was again cited for gallant conduct at the Battle of Molino del Rey , and was appointed a brevet captain . He participated in the Battle of Chapultepec , the Battle of Belen Gate , and the storming of Mexico City . At the conclusion of the war , American soldiers served as an army of occupation , which left them time for leisure activities . Buckner joined the Aztec Club , and in April 1848 was a part of the successful expedition of Popocatépetl , a volcano southeast of Mexico City . Buckner was accorded the honor of lowering the American flag over Mexico City for the last time during the occupation . 
 = = Interbellum = = 
 After the war , Buckner accepted an invitation to return to West Point to teach infantry tactics . Just over a year later , he resigned the post in protest over the academy 's compulsory chapel attendance policy . Following his resignation , he was assigned to a recruiting post at Fort Columbus . 
 Buckner married Mary Jane Kingsbury on May 2 , 1850 , at her aunt 's home in Old Lyme , Connecticut . Shortly after their wedding , he was assigned to Fort Snelling and later to Fort Atkinson on the Arkansas River in present @-@ day Kansas . On December 31 , 1851 , he was promoted to first lieutenant , and on November 3 , 1852 , he was elevated to captain of the commissary department of the 6th U.S. Infantry in New York City . Previously , he had attained only a brevet to these ranks . Buckner gained such a reputation for fair dealings with the Indians , that the Oglala Lakota tribe called him Young Chief , and their leader , Yellow Bear , refused to treat with anyone but Buckner . 
 Before leaving the Army , Buckner helped an old friend from West Point and the Mexican – American War , Captain Ulysses S. Grant , by covering his expenses at a New York hotel until money arrived from Ohio to pay for his passage home . On March 26 , 1855 , Buckner resigned from the Army to work with his father @-@ in @-@ law , who had extensive real estate holdings in Chicago , Illinois . When his father @-@ in @-@ law died in 1856 , Buckner inherited his property and moved to Chicago to manage it . 
 Still interested in military affairs , Buckner joined the Illinois State Militia of Cook County as a major . On April 3 , 1857 , he was appointed adjutant general of Illinois by Governor William Henry Bissell . He resigned the post in October of the same year . Following the Mountain Meadows massacre , a regiment of Illinois volunteers organized for potential service in a campaign against the Mormons . Buckner was offered command of the unit and a promotion to the rank of colonel . He accepted the position , but predicted that the unit would not see action . His prediction proved correct , as negotiations between the federal government and Mormon leaders eased tensions between the two . 
 In late 1857 , Buckner and his family returned to his native state and settled in Louisville . Buckner 's daughter , Lily , was born there on March 7 , 1858 . Later that year , a Louisville militia known as the Citizens ' Guard was formed , and Buckner was made its captain . He served in this capacity until 1860 , when the Guard was incorporated into the Kentucky State Guard 's Second Regiment . He was appointed inspector general of Kentucky in 1860 . 
 = = Civil War = = 
 In 1861 Kentucky governor Beriah Magoffin appointed Buckner adjutant general , promoted him to major general , and charged him with revising the state 's militia laws . The state was torn between Union and Confederacy , with the legislature supporting the former and the governor the latter . This led the state to declare itself officially neutral . Buckner assembled 61 companies to defend Kentucky 's neutrality . 
 The state board that controlled the militia considered it to be pro @-@ secessionist and ordered it to store its arms . On July 20 , 1861 , Buckner resigned from the state militia , declaring that he could no longer perform his duties due to the board 's actions . That August he was twice offered a commission as a brigadier general in the Union Army — the first from general in chief Winfield Scott , and the second from Secretary of War Simon Cameron following the personal order of President Abraham Lincoln — but he declined . After Confederate Maj. Gen. Leonidas Polk occupied Columbus , Kentucky , violating the state 's neutrality , Buckner accepted a commission as a brigadier general in the Confederate States Army on September 14 , 1861 , and was followed by many of the men he formerly commanded in the state militia . When his Confederate commission was approved , Union officials in Louisville indicted him for treason and seized his property . ( Concerned that a similar action might be taken against his wife 's property in Chicago , he had previously deeded it to his brother @-@ in @-@ law . ) He became a division commander in the Army of Central Kentucky under Brig. Gen. William J. Hardee and was stationed in Bowling Green , Kentucky . 
 = = = Fort Donelson = = = 
 After Union Brig. Gen. Ulysses S. Grant captured Fort Henry on the Tennessee River in February 1862 , he turned his sights on nearby Fort Donelson on the Cumberland . Western Theater commander Gen. Albert Sidney Johnston sent Buckner to be one of four brigadier generals defending the fort . In overall command was the influential politician and military novice John B. Floyd ; Buckner 's peers were Gideon J. Pillow and Bushrod Johnson . 
 Buckner 's division defended the right flank of the Confederate line of entrenchments that surrounded the fort and the small town of Dover , Tennessee . On February 14 , the Confederate generals decided they could not hold the fort and planned a breakout , hoping to join with Johnston 's army , now in Nashville . At dawn the following morning , Pillow launched a strong assault against the right flank of Grant 's army , pushing it back 1 to 2 miles ( 2 to 3 km ) . Buckner , not confident of his army 's chances and not on good terms with Pillow , held back his supporting attack for over two hours , which gave Grant 's men time to bring up reinforcements and reform their line . Buckner 's delay did not prevent the Confederate attack from opening a corridor for an escape from the besieged fort . However , Floyd and Pillow combined to undo the day 's work by ordering the troops back to their trench positions . 
 Late that night the generals held a council of war in which Floyd and Pillow expressed satisfaction with the events of the day , but Buckner convinced them that they had little realistic chance to hold the fort or escape from Grant 's army , which was receiving steady reinforcements . General Floyd , concerned he would be tried for treason if captured by the North , sought Buckner 's assurance that he would be given time to escape with some of his Virginia regiments before the army surrendered . Buckner agreed and Floyd offered to turn over command to his subordinate , Pillow . Pillow immediately declined and passed command to Buckner , who agreed to stay behind and surrender . Both Generals Floyd and Pillow left to leave General Buckner to surrender to the Union Forces . Pillow and Floyd were able to escape , as did cavalry commander Col. Nathan Bedford Forrest . 
 That morning , Buckner sent a messenger to the Union Army requesting an armistice and a meeting of commissioners to work out surrender terms . He may have been hoping Grant would offer generous terms , remembering the assistance he gave Grant when he was destitute , but Grant 's reply was curt , with the famous quotation , " No terms except unconditional and immediate surrender can be accepted . I propose to move immediately upon your works . " To this , Buckner responded : 
 SIR : — The distribution of the forces under my command , incident to an unexpected change of commanders , and the overwhelming force under your command , compel me , notwithstanding the brilliant success of the Confederate arms yesterday , to accept the ungenerous and <unk> terms which you propose . 
 The asperity of these notes was only superficial ; Buckner greeted his old friend warmly when Grant arrived to accept the surrender . They joked about their time in Mexico and the incompetence of General Pillow [ 35 ] . Grant offered to loan Buckner money to see him through his impending imprisonment , but Buckner declined . As an additional note Buckner paid for then Captain Grant 's lodging in New York City after the Mexican War when Grant was destitute . Also Buckner acted as a pall bearer and paid for Grant 's funeral and provided Grant 's widow a financial monthly payment so she could live out her years . The surrender was a humiliation for Buckner personally , but also a strategic defeat for the Confederacy , which lost more than 12 @,@ 000 men and much equipment , as well as control of the Cumberland River , which led to the evacuation of Nashville . 
 = = = Invasion of Kentucky = = = 
 While Buckner was a Union prisoner of war at Fort Warren in Boston , Kentucky Senator Garrett Davis unsuccessfully sought to have him tried for treason . On August 15 , 1862 , after five months of writing poetry in solitary confinement , Buckner was exchanged for Union Brig. Gen. George A. McCall . The following day he was promoted to major general and ordered to Chattanooga , Tennessee , to join Gen. Braxton Bragg 's Army of Mississippi . 
 Days after Buckner joined Bragg , both Bragg and Maj. Gen. Edmund Kirby Smith began an invasion of Kentucky . As Bragg pushed north , his first encounter was in Buckner 's home town of Munfordville . The small town was important for Union forces to hold if they wanted to maintain communication with Louisville while pressing southward to Bowling Green and Nashville . A small force under the command of Col. John T. Wilder guarded the town . Though vastly outnumbered , Wilder refused requests to surrender on September 12 and September 14 . By September 17 , however , Wilder recognized his difficult position and asked Bragg for proof of the superior numbers he claimed . In an unusual move , Wilder agreed to be blindfolded and brought to Buckner . When he arrived , he told Buckner that he ( Wilder ) was not a military man and had come to ask him what he should do . <unk> , Buckner showed Wilder the strength and position of the Confederate forces , which outnumbered Wilder 's men almost 5 @-@ to @-@ 1 . Seeing the hopeless situation he was in , Wilder informed Buckner that he wanted to surrender . Any other course , he later explained , would be " no less than willful murder . " 
 Bragg 's men continued northward to Bardstown where they rested and sought supplies and recruits . Meanwhile , Maj. Gen. Don Carlos Buell 's Army of the Ohio , the main Union force in the state , was pressing toward Louisville . Bragg left his army and met Kirby Smith in Frankfort , where he was able to attend the inauguration of Confederate Governor Richard Hawes on October 4 . Buckner , although protesting this distraction from the military mission , attended as well and gave stirring speeches to the local crowds about the Confederacy 's commitment to the state of Kentucky . The inauguration ceremony was disrupted by the sound of cannon fire from an approaching Union division and the inaugural ball scheduled for that evening was canceled . 
 Based on intelligence acquired by a spy in Buell 's army , Buckner advised Bragg that Buell was still ten miles from Louisville in the town of Mackville . He urged Bragg to engage Buell there before he reached Louisville , but Bragg declined . Buckner then asked Leonidas Polk to request that Bragg concentrate his forces and attack the Union army at Perryville , but again , Bragg refused . Finally , on October 8 , 1862 , Bragg 's army — not yet concentrated with Kirby Smith 's — engaged Maj. Gen. Alexander McCook 's corps of Buell 's army and began the Battle of Perryville . Buckner 's division fought under General Hardee during this battle , achieving a significant breakthrough in the Confederate center , and reports from Hardee , Polk , and Bragg all praised Buckner 's efforts . His gallantry was for naught , however , as Perryville ended in a tactical draw that was costly for both sides , causing Bragg to withdraw and abandon his invasion of Kentucky . Buckner joined many of his fellow generals in publicly denouncing Bragg 's performance during the campaign . 
 = = = Later Civil War service = = = 
 Following the Battle of Perryville , Buckner was reassigned to command the District of the Gulf , fortifying the defenses of Mobile , Alabama . He remained there until late April 1863 , when he was ordered to take command of the Army of East Tennessee . He arrived in Knoxville on May 11 , 1863 , and assumed command the following day . Shortly thereafter , his department was converted into a district of the Department of Tennessee under Gen. Bragg and was designated the Third Corps of the Army of Tennessee . 
 In late August , Union Maj. Gen. Ambrose Burnside approached Buckner 's position at Knoxville . Buckner called for reinforcements from Bragg at Chattanooga , but Bragg was being threatened by forces under Maj. Gen. William Rosecrans and could not spare any of his men . Bragg ordered Buckner to fall back to the Hiwassee River . From there , Buckner 's unit traveled to Bragg 's supply base at Ringgold , Georgia , then on to Lafayette and Chickamauga . Bragg was also forced from Chattanooga and joined Buckner at Chickamauga . On September 19 and 20 , the Confederate forces attacked and emerged victorious at the Battle of Chickamauga . Buckner 's Corps fought on the Confederate left both days , the second under the " wing " command of Lt. Gen. James Longstreet , participating in the great breakthrough of the Union line . 
 After Chickamauga , Rosecrans and his Army of the Cumberland retreated to fortified Chattanooga . Bragg held an ineffective siege against Chattanooga , but refused to take any further action as the Union forces there were reinforced by Ulysses S. Grant and reopened a tenuous supply line . Many of Bragg 's subordinates , including Buckner , advocated that Bragg be relieved of command . Thomas L. Connelly , historian of the Army of Tennessee , believes that Buckner was the author of the anti @-@ Bragg letter sent by the generals to President Jefferson Davis . Bragg retaliated by reducing Buckner to division command and abolishing the Department of East Tennessee . 
 Buckner was given a medical leave of absence following Chickamauga , returning to Virginia , where he engaged in routine work while recovering his strength . His division was sent without him to support Longstreet in the Knoxville Campaign , while the remainder of Bragg 's army was defeated in the Chattanooga Campaign . Buckner served on the court martial of Maj. Gen. Lafayette McLaws after that subordinate of Longstreet 's was charged with poor performance at Knoxville . Buckner was briefly given command of Maj. Gen. John Bell Hood 's division in February 1864 , and on March 8 , he was given command of the reestablished Department of East Tennessee . The department was a shell of its former self — less than one @-@ third its original size , badly equipped , and in no position to mount an offensive . Buckner was virtually useless to the Confederacy here , and on April 28 , he was ordered to join Edmund Kirby Smith in the Trans @-@ Mississippi Department of the Confederacy . 
 Buckner had difficulty traveling to the West , and it was early summer before he arrived . He assumed command of the District of West Louisiana on August 4 . Shortly after Buckner arrived at Smith 's headquarters in Shreveport , Louisiana , Smith began requesting a promotion for him . The promotion to lieutenant general came on September 20 . Smith placed Buckner in charge of the critical but difficult task of selling the department 's cotton through enemy lines . 
 As news of Gen. Robert E. Lee 's surrender on April 9 , 1865 , reached the department , soldiers deserted the Confederacy in droves . On April 19 , Smith consolidated the District of Arkansas with the District of West Louisiana ; the combined district was put under Buckner 's command . On May 9 , Smith made Buckner his chief of staff . Rumors began to swirl in both Union and Confederate camps that Smith and Buckner would not surrender , but would fall back to Mexico with soldiers who remained loyal to the Confederacy . Though Smith did cross the Rio Grande , he learned on his arrival that Buckner had traveled to New Orleans on May 26 and arranged terms of surrender . Smith had instead instructed Buckner to move all the troops to Houston , Texas . 
 At Fort Donelson , Tennessee , Buckner had become the first Confederate general of the war to surrender an army ; at New Orleans , he became the last . The surrender became official when Smith endorsed it on June 2 , ( Only Brigadier General Stand Watie held out longer ; he surrendered the last Confederate land forces on June 23 , 1865 ) . 
 Conditions set forth in Buckner 's surrender were the following : 
 " All acts of hostility on the part of both armies are to cease from this date . " 
 The officers and men are to be " paroled until duly exchanged . " 
 All Confederate property was to be turned over to the Union . 
 All officers and men could return home . 
 " The surrender of property will not include the side arms or private horses or baggage of officers " and enlisted men . 
 " All ' self @-@ disposed persons ' who return to ' peaceful pursuits ' are assured that may resume their usual avocations . . . " . " 
 = = Postbellum life = = 
 The terms of Buckner 's parole in Shreveport , Louisiana , on June 9 , 1865 , prevented his return to Kentucky for three years . He remained in New Orleans , worked on the staff of the Daily Crescent newspaper , engaged in a business venture , and served of the board of directors of a fire insurance company , of which he became president in 1867 . His wife and daughter joined him in the winter months of 1866 and 1867 , but he sent them back to Kentucky in the summers because of the frequent outbreaks of cholera and yellow fever . 
 Buckner returned to Kentucky when he was eligible in 1868 and became editor of the Louisville Courier . Like most former Confederate officers , he petitioned the United States Congress for the restoration of his civil rights as stipulated by the 14th Amendment . He recovered most of his property through lawsuits and regained much of his wealth through shrewd business deals . 
 On January 5 , 1874 , after five years of suffering with tuberculosis , Buckner 's wife died . Now a widower , Buckner continued to live in Louisville until 1877 when he and his daughter Lily returned to the family estate , Glen Lily , in Munfordville . His sister , a recent widow , also returned to the estate in 1877 . For six years , these three inhabited and repaired the house and grounds which had been neglected during the war and its aftermath . On June 14 , 1883 , Lily Buckner married Morris B. Belknap of Louisville , and the couple made their residence in Louisville . On October 10 of the same year , Buckner 's sister died , and he was left alone . 
 On June 10 , 1885 , Buckner married Delia Claiborne of Richmond , Virginia . Buckner was 62 ; Claiborne was 28 . Their son , Simon Bolivar Buckner , Jr . , was born on July 18 , 1886 . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Buckner had a keen interest in politics and friends had been urging him to run for governor since 1867 , even while terms of his surrender confined him to Louisiana . Unwilling to violate these terms , he instructed a friend to withdraw his name from consideration if it was presented . In 1868 , he was a delegate to the Democratic National Convention that nominated Horatio Seymour for president . Though Buckner had favored George H. Pendleton , he loyally supported the party 's nominee throughout the campaign . 
 In 1883 , Buckner was a candidate for the Democratic gubernatorial nomination . Other prominent candidates included Congressman Thomas Laurens Jones , former congressman J. Proctor Knott , and Louisville mayor Charles Donald Jacob . Buckner consistently ran third in the first six ballots , but withdrew his name from consideration before the seventh ballot . The delegation from Owsley County switched their support to Knott , starting a wave of defections that resulted in Jones ' withdrawal and Knott 's unanimous nomination . Knott went on to win the general election and appointed Buckner to the board of trustees for the Kentucky Agricultural and Mechanical College ( later the University of Kentucky ) in 1884 . At that year 's state Democratic convention , he served on the committee on credentials . 
 = = = Governor of Kentucky = = = 
 Delegates to the 1887 state Democratic convention nominated Buckner unanimously for the office of governor . A week later , the Republicans chose William O. Bradley as their candidate . The Prohibition Party and the Union Labor Party also nominated candidates for governor . The official results of the election gave Buckner a plurality of 16 @,@ 797 over Bradley . 
 Buckner proposed a number of progressive ideas , most of which were rejected by the legislature . Among his successful proposals were the creation of a state board of tax equalization , creation of a parole system for convicts , and codification of school laws . His failed proposals included creation of a department of justice , greater local support for education and better protection for forests . 
 Much of Buckner 's time was spent trying to curb violence in the eastern part of the state . Shortly after his inauguration , the Rowan County War escalated to vigilantism , when residents of the county organized a posse and killed several of the leaders of the feud . Though this essentially ended the feud , the violence had been so bad that Buckner 's adjutant general recommended that the Kentucky General Assembly dissolve Rowan County , though this suggestion was not acted upon . In 1888 , a posse from Kentucky entered West Virginia and killed a leader of the Hatfield clan in the Hatfield @-@ McCoy feud . This caused a political conflict between Buckner and Governor Emanuel Willis Wilson of West Virginia , who complained that the raid was illegal . The matter was adjudicated in federal court , and Buckner was cleared of any connection to the raid . Later in Buckner 's term , feuds broke out in Harlan , Letcher , Perry , Knott , and Breathitt counties . 
 A major financial scandal erupted in 1888 when Buckner ordered a routine audit of the state 's finances which had been neglected for years . The audit showed that the state 's longtime treasurer , James " Honest Dick " Tate , had been mismanaging and embezzling the state 's money since 1872 . Faced with the prospect that his malfeasance would be discovered , Tate absconded with nearly $ 250 @,@ 000 of state funds . He was never found . The General Assembly immediately began impeachment hearings against Tate , convicted him in absentia , and removed him from office . State auditor Fayette Hewitt was censured for neglecting the duty of his office , but was not implicated in Tate 's theft or disappearance . 
 During the 1888 session , the General Assembly passed 1 @,@ 571 bills , exceeding the total passed by any other session in the state 's history . Only about 150 of these bills were of a general nature ; the rest were special interest bills passed for the private gain of legislators and those in their constituencies . Buckner vetoed 60 of these special interest bills , more than had been vetoed by the previous ten governors combined . Only one of these vetoes was overridden by the legislature . Ignoring Buckner 's clear intent to veto special interest bills , the 1890 legislature passed 300 more special interest bills than had its predecessor . Buckner vetoed 50 of these . His reputation for rejecting special interest bills led the Kelley Axe Factory , the largest axe factory in the country at the time , to present him with a ceremonial " Veto Hatchet " . 
 When a tax cut passed over Buckner 's veto in 1890 drained the state treasury , the governor loaned the state enough money to remain solvent until tax revenue came in . Later that year , he was chosen as a delegate to the state 's constitutional convention . In this capacity , he unsuccessfully sought to extend the governor 's appointment powers and levy taxes on churches , clubs , and schools that made a profit . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 After his term as governor , Buckner returned to Glen Lily . In 1895 , he was one of four candidates nominated for a seat in the U.S. Senate — the others being the incumbent , J. C. S. Blackburn ; outgoing governor John Y. Brown ; and congressman James B. McCreary . The Democratic party split over the issue of <unk> . Buckner advocated for a gold standard , but the majority of Kentuckians advocated " Free Silver " . Seeing that he would not be able to win the seat in light of this opposition , he withdrew from the race in July 1895 . In spite of his withdrawal , he still received 9 of the 134 votes cast in the General Assembly . 
 At the 1896 Democratic National Convention in Chicago , the Democrats nominated William Jennings Bryan for president and adopted a platform calling for the free coinage of silver . Gold standard Democrats opposed Bryan and the free silver platform . They formed a new party — the National Democratic Party , or Gold Democrats — which Buckner joined . At the new party 's state convention in Louisville , Buckner 's name was proposed as a candidate for vice president . He was given the nomination without opposition at the party 's national convention in Indianapolis . Former Union general John Palmer was chosen as the party 's nominee for president . 
 Palmer and Buckner both had developed reputations as independent executives while serving as governors of their respective states . Because they had served on opposite sides during the Civil War , their presence on the same ticket emphasized national unity . The ticket was endorsed by several major newspapers including the Chicago Chronicle , Louisville Courier @-@ Journal , Detroit Free Press , Richmond Times , and New Orleans Picayune . Despite these advantages , the ticket was hurt by the candidates ' ages , Palmer being 79 and Buckner 73 . Further , some supporters feared that voting for the National Democrat ticket would be a wasted vote and might even throw the election to Bryan . Ultimately , Palmer and Buckner received just over one percent of the vote in the election . 
 Following this defeat , Buckner retired to Glen Lily but remained active in politics . Though he always claimed membership in the Democratic party , he opposed the machine politics of William Goebel , his party 's gubernatorial nominee in 1899 . In 1903 , he supported his son @-@ in @-@ law , Morris Belknap , for governor against Goebel 's lieutenant governor , J. C. W. Beckham . When the Democrats again nominated William Jennings Bryan in the 1908 presidential election , Buckner openly supported Bryan 's opponent , Republican William Howard Taft . 
 At 80 years of age , Buckner memorized five of Shakespeare 's plays because cataracts threatened to blind him , but an operation saved his sight . On a visit to the White House in 1904 , Buckner asked President Theodore Roosevelt to appoint his only son as a cadet at West Point , and Roosevelt quickly agreed . His son would later serve in the U.S. Army and be killed at the Battle of Okinawa , making him the highest @-@ ranking American to have been killed by enemy fire during World War II . 
 Following the deaths of Stephen D. Lee and Alexander P. Stewart in 1908 , Buckner became the last surviving Confederate soldier with the rank of lieutenant general . The following year , he visited his son , who was stationed in Texas , and toured old Mexican – American War battlefields where he had served . In 1912 , his health began to fail . He died on January 8 , 1914 , after a week @-@ long bout with uremic poisoning . He was buried in Frankfort Cemetery in Frankfort , Kentucky . 
 = Bernard Levin = 
 Henry Bernard Levin CBE ( 19 August 1928 – 7 August 2004 ) was an English journalist , author and broadcaster , described by The Times as " the most famous journalist of his day " . The son of a poor Jewish family in London , he won a scholarship to the independent school Christ 's Hospital and went on to the London School of Economics , graduating in 1952 . After a short spell in a lowly job at the BBC selecting press cuttings for use in programmes , he secured a post as a junior member of the editorial staff of a weekly periodical , Truth , in 1953 . 
 Levin reviewed television for The Manchester Guardian and wrote a weekly political column in The Spectator noted for its irreverence and influence on modern parliamentary sketches . During the 1960s he wrote five columns a week for The Daily Mail on any subject that he chose . After a disagreement with the proprietor of the paper over attempted censorship of his column in 1970 , Levin moved to The Times where , with one break of just over a year in 1981 – 82 , he remained as resident columnist until his retirement , covering a wide range of topics , both serious and comic . 
 Levin became a well @-@ known broadcaster , first on the weekly satirical television show That Was The Week That Was in the early 1960s , then as a panellist on a musical quiz , Face the Music , and finally in three series of travel programmes in the 1980s . He began to write books in the 1970s , publishing 17 between 1970 and 1998 . From the early 1990s , Levin developed Alzheimer 's disease , which eventually forced him to give up his regular column in 1997 , and to stop writing altogether not long afterwards . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Levin was born in London , the second child and only son of Philip Levin , a tailor of Jewish Bessarabian descent , and his wife , Rose , née <unk> . Philip Levin abandoned the family and moved to South Africa when Levin was three . The two children were brought up with the help of their maternal grandparents , who had emigrated from Lithuania at the turn of the 20th century . Levin wrote of his childhood , " My home was not a religious one ; my grandfather read the scriptures to himself silently and struggled through a little English ; my grandmother , who could read no language at all , lit a candle on the appropriate days , as did my mother , though for her it was not really a religious sign . My uncles were quite secular ... and had hardly anything to do with the religion of their father and grandfathers " . In The Guardian after Levin 's death , Quentin Crewe wrote , " His illiterate grandparents ' stories about life in Russia must have instilled in him the passionate belief in the freedom of the individual that lasted his whole life . In return , as he grew older , he used to read to them . Bernard could not read Hebrew , but he could get by in Yiddish " . 
 Rose Levin was a capable cook , and , though the household was not well off , Levin was well fed and acquired an interest in food that in adult life became one of the regular themes of his journalism . The cuisine was traditional Jewish , with fried fish as one cornerstone of the repertoire , and chicken as another – boiled , roast , or in soup with <unk> ( noodles ) , <unk> or kneidlach . As an adult Levin retained his love of Jewish cookery along with his passion for French haute cuisine . 
 The Levin household was not especially musical , though it had a piano which Judith was taught to play ; Rose Levin bought her son a violin and paid for lessons , convinced that he was " destined to be the next Kreisler or Heifetz " . Levin persevered ineptly for two and a half years and then gave up with relief . The experience put him off music for some time , and it was only later that it became one of his passions , a frequent topic in his writing . 
 Levin was a bright child , and , encouraged by his mother , he worked hard enough to win a scholarship to the independent school Christ 's Hospital in the countryside near Horsham , West Sussex . His housemaster was D.S. ( " Boom " ) <unk> , the school 's head of Classics . <unk> was a strict , even bullying , teacher , and was feared rather than loved by his pupils , but Levin learned Classics well , and retained a lifelong love of Latin tags and quotations in his writing . He battled on many fronts at Christ 's Hospital : he was a Jew at a Church of England establishment ; he was from a poor family ; he was slight of stature ; he was utterly indifferent to sport ; he adopted a Marxist stance , hanging the Red Flag from a school window to celebrate the Labour victory in 1945 . In the local streets , the school 's conspicuous uniform , including a cloak and tight stockings , attracted unwanted attention . Levin 's biographer Bel Mooney writes of this period , " <unk> put iron in his soul " . Among the consolations of Christ 's Hospital was its thriving musical life . At concerts by the school orchestra ( whose members included Levin 's contemporary , Colin Davis ) , Levin listened seriously to music for the first time . The food at the school was no such consolation ; according to Levin it was so appalling that there must be something better to be found , and from his late teens he sought out the best restaurants he could afford . 
 Levin hoped to go to the University of Cambridge , but , as his obituarist in The Times wrote , he " was not considered Oxbridge material " . He was accepted by the London School of Economics ( LSE ) , where he studied from 1948 to 1952 . His talents were recognised and encouraged by LSE tutors including Karl Popper and Harold Laski ; Levin 's deep affection for both did not prevent his perfecting a comic impersonation of the latter . Levin became a skilled debater ; he wrote for the student newspaper The Beaver , on a range of subjects , not least opera , which became one of his lifelong passions . 
 Having graduated from the LSE in 1952 , Levin worked briefly as a tour guide , and then joined the BBC 's North American Service . His job was to read all the newspapers and weekly magazines , selecting articles that might be useful for broadcasting . 
 = = = Journalism = = = 
 In 1953 , Levin applied for a job on the weekly periodical Truth . The paper had recently been taken over by the liberal publisher Ronald Staples who together with his new editor Vincent Evans was determined to cleanse it of its previous right @-@ wing racist reputation . Levin 's noticeably Jewish surname , together with such skills as he had acquired in shorthand and typing , gained him immediate acceptance . He was offered the post of " general editorial dogsbody , which was exactly what I had been looking for " . After a year , Evans left and was succeeded by his deputy , George Scott ; Levin was promoted in Scott 's place . He wrote for the paper under a variety of pseudonyms , including " A.E. <unk> " . 
 While still at Truth , Levin was invited to write a column in The Manchester Guardian about ITV , Britain 's first commercial television channel , launched in 1955 . Mooney describes his television reviews as " notably punchy " and The Times wrote , " Levin took out his shotgun and let loose with both barrels " . Levin gave the opening programmes a kindly review , but by the fourth day of commercial television he was beginning to baulk : " There has been nothing to get our teeth into apart from three different brands of cake @-@ mix and a patent doughnut " . Thereafter , he did not spare the network : " cliché succeeded to cliché " ; " a mentally defective aborigine who was deaf in both ears would have little difficulty in leaving ' Double Your Money ' £ 32 richer than when he entered " ; and after the network 's first hundred days he attributed its viewing figures to the " number of people who are sufficiently stupid to derive pleasure from such programmes " . 
 = = = The Spectator = = = 
 In 1956 , Levin found himself in irreconcilable disagreement with Truth 's support of the Anglo @-@ French military action in the Suez Crisis . The proprietor and editor of the long @-@ established weekly The Spectator , Ian Gilmour , invited Levin to join his staff . Levin left Truth and became the political correspondent of The Spectator . He declared that he was no expert in politics , but Gilmour advised him , " review it as you would review television " . Levin wrote his column under the pseudonym " Taper " , from the name of a corrupt political insider in Disraeli 's 1844 novel Coningsby . He followed Gilmour 's advice , becoming , as The Guardian 's Simon Hoggart said , " the father of the modern parliamentary sketch " : 
 Until then sketch writers were basically on the side of the MPs . Their job was to convey to voters the majesty of our legislators ' oratory , to remind us of the surpassing importance of their deliberations . A predecessor of mine published his collected works as The Glory of Parliament . Levin had truck with none of that nonsense . As he said later , he treated the old place as if it were a theatre . ' I was watching a farce , from the front row of the stalls , with a glass of champagne in my <unk> 
 Levin made no pretence of even @-@ handedness . There were politicians he liked and politicians he did not like . For those in the latter category , " Taper 's lacerations wounded " . He invented unflattering nicknames ; he wrote later , " I did not ( though I wish I had ) think of calling Sir Hartley Shawcross Sir Shortly <unk> , but I did call Sir Reginald Manningham @-@ Buller Sir Reginald Bullying @-@ Manner " . When the latter was elevated to the peerage as Lord Dilhorne , Levin renamed him Lord <unk> . 
 Taper was not Levin 's only work for The Spectator . He wrote on a wide range of subjects , from a campaign for the release of three Arabs imprisoned by the British authorities , to supporting publication of the banned novel Lady Chatterley 's Lover , and denunciation of the retired Lord Chief Justice , Lord Goddard . The last led to a secret meeting of more than 20 senior judges to see whether Levin could be prosecuted for criminal libel ; there was no prosecution , and his accusations about Goddard 's vindictiveness , deceit and bias have relatively recently been claimed to have been justified . In 1959 , Gilmour , while remaining as proprietor , stepped down as editor and was succeeded by his deputy , Brian Inglis ; Levin took over from Inglis as assistant editor . Later in that year , after the general election victory of another of his bêtes noires , Harold Macmillan , Levin gave up the Taper column , professing himself to be in despair . 
 Concurrently with his work at The Spectator , Levin was the drama critic of The Daily Express from 1959 , offending many in theatrical circles by his outspoken verdicts . He modelled his reviewing style on that of Bernard Shaw 's musical reviews of the late 19th century . He gave a fellow @-@ critic an edition of Shaw 's collected criticism , writing inside the cover , " ' In the hope that when you come across the phrases I have already stolen you will keep quiet about it " . 
 Gilmour discouraged any hopes Levin might have had of succeeding Inglis as editor and in 1962 , Levin left both The Spectator and The Daily Express , becoming drama critic of The Daily Mail . He remained there for eight years , and for the last five of them also wrote five columns a week on any subject of his choice . 
 = = = Television and The Pendulum Years = = = 
 Although by the early 1960s Levin was becoming a well @-@ known name , his was not yet a well @-@ known face . Meeting him in London the publisher Rupert Hart @-@ Davis did not immediately recognise him : " He looks about sixteen , and at first I thought he was someone ’ s little boy brought along to see the fun – very Jewish , with wavy <unk> hair , very intelligent and agreeable to talk to " . In 1963 Levin was invited to appear regularly on BBC television 's new weekly late @-@ night satirical revue , That Was The Week That Was , where he delivered monologues to camera about his pet hates and conducted interviews , appearing as " a tiny figure taking on assorted noisy giants in debate " . The programme , which had a short but much @-@ discussed run , was transmitted live ; this added to its edginess and impact , but also made it prone to disruption . Levin was twice assaulted on air , once by the husband of an actress whose show Levin had reviewed severely , and once by a woman astrologer who squirted him with water . 
 In 1966 BBC television screened a new musical quiz , Face the Music presented by Joseph Cooper . It ran intermittently until 1984 . Levin was a frequent panel member along with , among others , Robin Ray , Joyce Grenfell , David Attenborough and Richard Baker . 
 Levin published his first book in 1970 . Called The Pendulum Years , its subtitle , Britain and the Sixties , summed up its subject . In 22 self @-@ contained chapters , Levin considered various aspects of British life during the decade . Among his topics were prominent people including Harold Macmillan and Harold Wilson – dubbed the Walrus and the Carpenter by Levin – and institutions such as the monarchy , the churches and the British Empire in its last days . Among the individual events examined in the book were the 1968 student riots and the prosecution for obscenity of the publishers of Lady Chatterley 's Lover . 
 Levin 's interest in indexes developed from his work on The Pendulum Years . He compiled his own index for the book , " and swore a mighty oath , when I had finished the task , that I would rather die , and in a particularly unpleasant manner , than do it again " . He contrived to include in his index an obscene joke at the expense of the hapless prosecutor in the Chatterley trial , but found the difficulty of indexing so great that he became a champion of the Society of <unk> . He wrote several articles on the subject , and when reviewing books made a point of praising good indexes and condemning bad ones . 
 = = = The Times = = = 
 In June 1970 , during the general election campaign , Levin fell out with the proprietors of The Daily Mail , Lord Rothermere and his son Vere Harmsworth . Levin 's contract guaranteed him absolute freedom to write whatever he chose , but Harmsworth , an unswerving Conservative , attempted to censor Levin 's support for the other major party , Labour . Levin resigned , and immediately received offers from The Guardian and The Times to join them as a columnist . He found both tempting , and at one point " even had a wild notion of suggesting that I should write for both simultaneously " . In the end , he chose The Times , giving as his reason that though the liberal Guardian was more in line with his own politics than the conservative Times , " I wrote more comfortably against the grain of the paper I worked for rather than with it " . His obituarist in The Times adds that the decision may also have been swayed by the better remuneration offered by the paper . 
 Among the perquisites of the Times appointment were a company car and a large and splendid office at the paper 's building in Printing House Square , London . Levin accepted neither ; he could not drive and he hated to be isolated . He commandeered a desk in the anteroom to the editor 's office , a location that kept him closely in touch with the daily affairs of the paper . It also gave him ready access to the editor , William Rees Mogg , with whom he developed a good friendship . Levin 's brief was to write two columns a week ( later three ) on any subject that he wished . His range was prodigious ; he published nine volumes of his selected journalism of which the first , Taking Sides , covered subjects as diverse as the death watch beetle , Field Marshal Montgomery , Wagner , homophobia , censorship , Eldridge Cleaver , <unk> , theatrical nudity , and the North Thames Gas Board . 
 Within weeks of joining The Times Levin provoked a lawsuit and a strident controversy . The first was in March 1971 , in an article titled " Profit and dishonour in Fleet Street " , accusing Rothermere of underhand conduct and personal avarice during the merger of The Daily Mail and The Daily Sketch . The libel action brought by Rothermere was settled out of court , at substantial cost to the proprietor of The Times , Lord Thomson . Two months later , controversy followed Levin 's renewed condemnation of Lord Goddard immediately after the latter 's death in May 1971 . The legal profession closed ranks and defended Goddard 's reputation against Levin 's attacks . Among those denouncing Levin were Lords Denning , Devlin , Hodson , Parker , Shawcross and Stow Hill . After Levin 's death The Times published an article opining that information made public since 1971 " strongly supported " his criticisms of Goddard . At the time , the lawyers took revenge on Levin by ensuring that his candidacy for membership of the Garrick , a London club much favoured by lawyers and journalists , was blackballed . 
 At The Daily Mail , Levin had generally been restricted to 600 words for his articles . At The Times he had more licence to spread himself . He appeared in The Guinness Book of Records for the longest sentence ever to appear in a newspaper – 1 @,@ 667 words . He was proud of this , and affected to be outraged when " some bugger in India wrote a sentence very considerably longer " . He maintained that he could construct impromptu a sentence of up to 40 subordinate clauses " and many a native of these islands , speaking English as to the manner born , has followed me trustingly into the labyrinth only to perish miserably trying to find the way out " . 
 Sometimes Levin wrote about frivolous , even farcical matters , such as a series of mock @-@ indignant articles about the sex @-@ lives of mosquitoes . At other times he wrote about matters of grave moral importance , unfailingly denouncing authoritarian regimes whether of the left or the right . He observed , " I am barred by the governments concerned from entering the Soviet Union and the lands of her empire on the one hand and South Africa on the other . These decrees constitute a pair of campaign medals that I wear with considerable pleasure and I have a profound suspicion of those who rebuke me for partisanship while wearing only one " . He wrote regularly about the arts . Music was a recurrent theme ; he was notorious for his addiction to Wagner , and other favourite composers included Schubert and Mozart . He wrote about performers he admired , including Otto Klemperer , Alfred Brendel , and Kiri Te Kanawa . He turned less regularly to the visual arts , but when he did his views were clear @-@ cut and <unk> expressed . He wrote of a Pre @-@ Raphaelite exhibition in 1984 , " Never , in all my life , not even at the exclusively Millais exhibition in 1967 , have I seen so much sickening rubbish in one place at one time " . His knowledge and love of literature were reflected in many of his writings ; among his best @-@ known pieces is a long paragraph about the influence of Shakespeare on everyday discourse . It begins : 
 If you cannot understand my argument , and declare ' It 's Greek to me ' , you are quoting Shakespeare ; if you claim to be more sinned against than sinning , you are quoting Shakespeare ; if you recall your salad days , you are quoting Shakespeare ; if you act more in sorrow than in anger , if your wish is father to the thought , if your lost property has vanished into thin air , you are quoting Shakespeare " . 
 = = = Arianna Stassinopoulos ( Huffington ) = = = 
 In 1971 , Levin appeared in an edition of Face the Music along with a new panellist , Arianna Stassinopoulos ( later known as Arianna Huffington ) . He was 42 ; she was 21 . A relationship developed , of which she wrote after his death : " He wasn 't just the big love of my life , he was a mentor as a writer and a role model as a thinker " . 
 Although Levin had rejected Judaism when a youth , he <unk> after spirituality . Such religious sympathies as he had , he said , were " with <unk> faiths , like Buddhism , on the one hand , and with a straightforward message of salvation , like Christianity , on the other " . With the help of Stassinopoulos he continued to search after spiritual truth . She later wrote , " He tried therapy , he tried Insight , a self @-@ awareness seminar that I had helped to bring to London , he tried a stint in an ashram in India . Lesser souls would have avoided the ridicule that was heaped on him for his spiritual ' search ' by simply keeping it to himself . But he didn 't , because anything he was touched by he had to write about " . In 1980 he wrote extensive accounts in his column about his visit to the Indian commune of the meditation teacher Osho . 
 Levin was commissioned by the BBC to visit musical festivals around the world , broadcasting a series of talks about them . Together with Stassinopoulos , he visited festivals in Britain , Ireland , continental Europe and Australia . He later wrote a book , Conducted Tour ( 1982 ) on the same subject . By the time it was published he and Stassinopoulos were no longer together . At the age of 30 , she remained deeply in love with him but longed to have children ; Levin never wanted to marry or be a father . She concluded that she must break away , and moved to New York in 1980 . 
 = = = 1980s = = = 
 In 1981 Levin took a sabbatical from The Times after Rupert Murdoch bought the paper and Harold Evans succeeded Rees @-@ Mogg as editor . Evans and Levin were friends , but Levin had publicly stated his preference that Charles Douglas @-@ Home should be appointed . Within a year Evans and Murdoch fell out and Evans left in 1982 ; Douglas @-@ Home became editor , and coaxed Levin back , to write two columns a week . On returning to the paper in October 1982 , he began his column with the words , " And another thing " . This mirrored his opening gambit when publication of The Times resumed in 1979 after a printers ' strike lasting nearly a year : his first column then had begun with the word " Moreover " . By the 1980s Levin was sufficiently well known to be the subject of satire himself . The satirical ITV show Spitting Image caricatured him in high @-@ flown discussion with another well @-@ known intellectual in a sketch entitled " Bernard Levin and Jonathan Miller Talk Bollocks " . By now , Levin 's political views were moving to the right , and he was no longer writing so much against the grain of his newspaper . He had come to admire Margaret Thatcher , though not the rest of her party : " But there is one , and only one , political position that , through all the years and all my changing views and feelings , has never altered , never come into question , never seemed too simple for a complex world . It is my profound and unwavering contempt for the Conservative Party " . 
 Levin never published an autobiography , but his book <unk> , published in 1983 , consists of chapters on his principal pleasures : books , pictures , cities , walking , Shakespeare , music , food and drink , and spiritual mystery . The book is dedicated " To Arianna , with much more than enthusiasm " – they remained loving friends for the rest of his life . It contains a sentence that far outdoes his earlier 1 @,@ 667 word effort in The Times , starting on page 212 and ending four pages later ; it lists the restaurants most esteemed by Levin in Europe , Asia and America . 
 In the 1980s , Levin made three television series for Channel 4 . The first , Hannibal 's Footsteps , screened in 1985 , showed Levin walking the presumed route taken by Hannibal when he invaded Italy in 218 BC .. The programme followed Levin 's 320 @-@ mile journey from Aigues @-@ Mortes to the crossing into Italy in the <unk> valley . He remained true to his declared intention of eschewing all forms of vehicular transport , and walked all the way , with the exception of his crossing the Rhone , rowing himself in a small boat . He followed this with To the End of the Rhine in 1987 , following the Rhine from its two sources , the <unk> and the <unk> , in Switzerland , to its estuary at Rotterdam , 1 @,@ 233 km ( 766 mi ) to the north . In between he joined the Swiss citizen army on manoeuvres , visited Liechtenstein bankers , zig @-@ zagged the Swiss – German border at Lake Constance , attended the <unk> at <unk> and the opera at Bregenz , took the waters at Baden @-@ Baden , visited the manufacturers of eau de Cologne , and paid tribute to Erasmus at Basle . The last of the three series was in 1989 , A Walk up Fifth Avenue in New York , from Washington Square to the Harlem River . In this series he encountered extremes of wealth and poverty , and met a wide variety of people , some famous ( such as Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis and Donald Trump ) and some not ( including a sword @-@ swallowing <unk> , and a bag lady in Central Park ) . He wrote books based on each of the three series , published in 1985 , 1987 and 1989 respectively . 
 = = = Last years = = = 
 Levin began to have difficulty with his balance as early as 1988 , although Alzheimer 's disease was not diagnosed until the early 1990s . From September 1995 his Times column appeared once weekly instead of twice , and in January 1997 the editor , Peter Stothard , concluded , despite a great admiration for Levin , that the weekly column should cease . Levin retired , though he continued to write for the paper occasionally over the next year . 
 In his last decade , Levin 's partner was the journalist Liz Anderson , who took care of him during the long degenerative phase of his illness . He died in Westminster , London , aged 75 . He is buried in Brompton Cemetery , London . A memorial service was held at the church of St Martin @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Fields at which Sir David Frost delivering the eulogy described Levin as " a faithful crusader for tolerance and against injustice who had declared , ' The pen is mightier than the sword – and much easier to write with ' " . 
 = = Honours and commemorations = = 
 Levin was appointed CBE for services to journalism in 1990 . The Society of <unk> has instituted an award in Levin 's name ; it is given to " a journalist and author whose writings show untiring and eloquent support for <unk> and indexing " . He was president of the English Association , 1984 – 85 , and vice @-@ president 1985 – 88 . He was an honorary fellow of the LSE from 1977 , and a member of the Order of Polonia Restituta , conferred by the Polish Government @-@ in @-@ Exile in 1976 . In its obituary tribute to him , The Times described Levin as " the most famous journalist of his day " . 
 = Taxonomy of lemurs = 
 The taxonomic history of lemurs dates back to 1758 when Carl Linnaeus first classified them , and the taxonomy remains controversial today , with approximately 70 to 100 species and subspecies recognized , depending on how the term " species " is defined . Having undergone their own independent evolution on Madagascar , lemurs have diversified to fill many niches normally filled by other types of mammals . They include the smallest primates in the world , and once included some of the largest . Since the arrival of humans approximately 2 @,@ 000 years ago , lemurs have become restricted to 10 % of the island , or approximately 60 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 23 @,@ 000 sq mi ) , and many face extinction . Concerns over lemur conservation have affected lemur taxonomy , since distinct species receive increased conservation attention compared to subspecies . 
 The relationship between the aye @-@ aye and the rest of the lemurs has had the greatest impact on lemur taxonomy at the family rank and above . Genetic analysis of this relationship has also clarified lemur phylogeny and supports the hypothesis that lemurs rafted to Madagascar . Despite general agreement on phylogeny , the taxonomy is still under debate . At the genus level , the taxonomy has been relatively stable since 1931 , but a number of additional genera have been recognized since then . 
 Since the 1990s , there has been a steep increase in the number of recognized lemur species and subspecies through the discovery of new species , the elevation of existing subspecies to full species status , and the recognition of new species among previously known populations that were not even distinct subspecies . Currently living lemur species are divided into five families and 15 genera . If the extinct subfossil lemurs are included , three families , eight genera , and 17 species would be added to the count . The recent rise in species numbers is due to both improved genetic analysis and a push in conservation to encourage the protection of isolated and distinct lemur populations . Not everyone in the scientific community supports these taxonomic changes , with some preferring instead an estimate of 50 living species . 
 = = Background = = 
 Since their arrival on Madagascar , a biogeographically isolated island with a unique mammalian fauna , lemurs have diversified both in behavior and morphology . Their diversity rivals that of the monkeys and apes found throughout the rest of the world , especially when the recently extinct subfossil lemurs are considered . Ranging in size from the 30 g ( 1 @.@ 1 oz ) Madame Berthe 's mouse lemur , probably the world 's smallest primate , to the extinct 160 – 200 kg ( 350 – 440 lb ) Archaeoindris fontoynonti , the largest known prosimian , lemurs evolved diverse forms of locomotion , varying levels of social complexity , and unique adaptations to the local climate . They went on to fill many niches normally occupied by monkeys , squirrels , woodpeckers , and large grazing ungulates . In addition to the incredible diversity between lemur families , there has also been great diversification among closely related lemurs . 
 The arrival of humans on the island 1 @,@ 500 to 2 @,@ 000 years ago has taken a significant toll , not only on the size of lemur populations , but also on their diversity . Due to habitat destruction and hunting , at least 17 species and 8 genera have gone extinct and many others have become threatened . Historically , lemurs ranged across the entire island inhabiting a wide variety of habitats , including dry deciduous forests , lowland forests , spiny thickets , subhumid forests , montane forest , and mangrove . Today , their collective range is restricted to 10 % of the island , or approximately 60 @,@ 000 km2 ( 23 @,@ 000 sq mi ) . Most of the remaining forests and lemurs are found along the periphery of the island . The center of the island , the Hauts @-@ Plateaux , was converted by early settlers to rice paddies and grassland through slash @-@ and @-@ burn agriculture , known locally as tavy . As erosion depleted the soil , the cyclical forest regrowth and burning ended as the forest gradually failed to return . In 2008 , 41 % of all lemur taxa were threatened with extinction while 42 % were classified on the IUCN Red List as " Data Deficient " . 
 = = Overview of taxonomic and phylogenetic classification = = 
 In the first volume of the 10th edition of Systema Naturae ( 1758 ) , Carl Linnaeus , the founder of modern binomial nomenclature , created the genus Lemur to include three species : Lemur tardigradus ( the red slender loris , now known as Loris tardigradus ) , Lemur catta ( the ring @-@ tailed lemur ) , and Lemur volans ( the Philippine colugo , now known as Cynocephalus volans ) . Although the term " lemur " was at first intended for lorises , it was soon applied to the endemic Malagasy primates , which have been known as " lemurs " ever since . The name derives from the Latin term lemures , which refers to the " spirits of the dead " from Roman mythology . According to Linnaeus ' own explanation , the name was selected because of the nocturnal activity and slow movements of the slender loris . Being familiar with the works of Virgil and Ovid and seeing an analogy that fit with his naming scheme , Linnaeus adapted the term " lemur " for these nocturnal primates . However , it has been commonly and falsely assumed that Linnaeus was referring to the ghost @-@ like appearance , reflective eyes , and ghostly cries of lemurs . It has also been speculated that Linnaeus may also have known that the some Malagasy people have held legends that lemurs are the souls of their ancestors , but this is unlikely given that the name was selected for slender lorises from India . 
 Since the first taxonomic classification of lemurs , many changes have been made to lemur taxonomy . Within the primate order , treeshrews ( order <unk> ) were considered basal , prosimian primates — close relatives of lemurs — until the 1980s . <unk> , also incorrectly referred to as " flying lemurs " , were once considered lemur @-@ like primates , but were reclassified as close relatives of bats , and more recently as close relatives of primates within their own order , <unk> . Primates , together with their closest relatives , the treeshrews , colugos , and long @-@ extinct plesiadapiforms , form the taxonomically unranked Euarchonta clade within the Euarchontoglires . <unk> , some of which were originally placed in the genus Lemur by Carl Linnaeus , have since been moved into either their own infraorder ( Lorisiformes ) or their own superfamily ( Lorisoidea ) within Lemuriformes . 
 For the Malagasy primate fauna , taxonomic nomenclature proliferated during the 1800s , with the aid of museum systematists , such as Albert Günther and John Edward Gray , as well as naturalists and explorers , such as Alfred Grandidier . This nomenclature was not sorted out until decades later , when Ernst Schwarz standardized it in 1931 . It was not until the 1990s that this nomenclature started to see a new wave of taxonomic change . 
 = = <unk> classification = = 
 Although Carl Linnaeus originally grouped the first " lemurs " he classified under the order Primates , lemurs and other non @-@ human primates were later separated from humans by being placed in the order Quadrumana by Johann Friedrich Blumenbach in 1775 . ( He also placed humans in the order <unk> . ) This view was upheld by other famous naturalists and zoologists of the time , including Étienne Geoffroy Saint @-@ Hilaire ( who first placed lemurs in Strepsirrhini in 1812 ) , Georges Cuvier , and ( initially ) John Edward Gray . By 1862 , William Henry Flower , a comparative anatomist , was arguing against moving strepsirrhines out of Quadrumana into Insectivora ( a now @-@ abandoned biological grouping ) , claiming that their brain had features transitional between other primates and " inferior " mammals . In 1863 , Thomas Henry Huxley restored the order Primates to include humans , other apes , monkeys , lemurs , and even colugos . However , opposition continued with many specialists arguing that lemurs ( or " Half @-@ apes " ) should be placed in their own order . In 1873 , English comparative anatomist St. George Jackson Mivart countered these arguments and proceeded to define the primates by a list of anatomical features . 
 Since the 19th century , the classification of lemurs above the genus level has seen many changes . Early taxonomists proposed a variety of classifications for lemurs , but generally separated indriids from other lemurs and placed the aye @-@ aye in a major group of its own ; some classified the dwarf and mouse lemurs with the galagos . In 1915 , William King Gregory published a classification that remained generally accepted over the next decades . He placed all the lemurs together in a " series " Lemuriformes and recognized three families : Daubentoniidae , Indriidae , and Lemuridae ( including the current Cheirogaleidae and Lepilemuridae ) . George Gaylord Simpson 's influential 1945 classification of mammals placed the treeshrews and the fossil <unk> ( both now classified outside Primates ) inside Lemuriformes and classified the fossil families <unk> and Adapidae in a superfamily Lemuroidea with most of the lemurs . 
 Although treeshrews , <unk> , and the like are now no longer considered to be closely related to lemurs , disagreements persist over the classification of lemurs and related groups , resulting in competing arrangements of the infraorders and superfamilies within Strepsirrhini . In one taxonomy , infraorder Lemuriformes contains all living strepsirrhines in two superfamilies , Lemuroidea for all lemurs and Lorisoidea for the lorisoids ( lorisids and galagos ) . Alternatively , the lorisoids are sometimes placed in their own infraorder , Lorisiformes , separate from the lemurs . Yet another classification published by Colin Groves placed the aye @-@ aye in its own infraorder , Chiromyiformes , while the rest of the lemurs were placed in Lemuriformes and the lorisoids in Lorisiformes . 
 The classification of several lemur taxa has elicited particular debate . Most significantly , the placement of the aye @-@ aye has been controversial since its introduction to Western science in 1782 , and it has been a topic of debate until very recently . Arguing against Darwin 's theory of natural selection , Richard Owen claimed in 1863 that the aye @-@ aye 's distinct characteristics , including its ever @-@ growing incisors and unique , highly flexible middle finger , are so perfectly adapted for their uses in extractive foraging that they could not have evolved gradually through natural selection . More recently , the aye @-@ aye 's placement has posed problems for the rafting hypothesis for the primate colonization of Madagascar . If this species does not form a monophyletic group with the rest of the lemurs , then multiple colonization events would have had to occur to explain the occurrence of lemurs on Madagascar . 
 Until Owen published a definitive anatomical study in 1866 , early naturalists were uncertain whether the aye @-@ aye ( genus Daubentonia ) was a primate , rodent , or marsupial . In the late eighteenth century , for example , the aye @-@ aye was classified under the squirrel genus Sciurus . By emphasizing its primate features , such as its postorbital bar , stereoscopic vision , and opposable hallux , over its rodent @-@ like teeth , Owen demonstrated its affinity with other primates . In 1996 , <unk> @-@ Simons demonstrated that the shape and arrangement of the aye @-@ aye 's diminutive deciduous incisors indicate that this genus has a shared ancestry with the toothcombed primates . However , the placement of the aye @-@ aye within the primates remained problematic until very recently . The karyotype of the aye @-@ aye is noticeably different from that of its closest relatives , the lorises and the rest of the lemurs , with a diploid chromosome count of 2n = <unk> : <unk> Based on its anatomy , researchers have found support for classifying the genus Daubentonia as a specialized indriid , a sister group to all strepsirrhines , and an indeterminate taxon within the primates . In 1931 , Schwarz labeled the aye @-@ aye as an offshoot of Indriidae , claiming that all lemurs were monophyletic , whereas Reginald Innes Pocock had previously placed the aye @-@ aye outside of the lemurs . In that same year , Anthony and <unk> classified the aye @-@ aye under infraorder Chiromyiformes , a sister group to the other strepsirrhines . Colin Groves upheld this classification in 2005 because he was not entirely convinced the aye @-@ aye formed a clade with the rest of the Malagasy lemurs , despite molecular tests that had shown Daubentoniidae was basal to all Lemuroidea . 
 Another interpretation of the aye @-@ aye 's origins has once again called into question the single origins of the lemurs . The aye @-@ aye and a fossil strepsirrhine primate from Africa , Plesiopithecus , share similarities in the shape of the skull and the morphology of the lower jaw , which suggest that the latter could be an early relative of the aye @-@ aye . However , the placement of an aye @-@ aye ancestor in Africa would require multiple colonizations of Madagascar by strepsirrhine primates . Molecular tests may offer support , since they show that the aye @-@ aye was the first to diverge in the lemur clade and that the other lemur families did not diverge until much later . 
 Often classified with the galagos by early students , the cheirogaleids ( dwarf and mouse lemurs ) were placed with the other lemurs from Gregory 's 1915 classification until the early 1970s , when several anthropologists proposed that they were more closely related to lorisoids , based on morphological data . However , relevant genetic studies unanimously place cheirogaleids within the <unk> clade and Groves himself , who had promoted the cheirogaleid @-@ lorisoid relationship in a 1974 paper , by 2001 regarded the idea as refuted . 
 Classifications in the first half of the 20th century divided lemurs into three families : Daubentoniidae , Indriidae , and Lemuridae , with the latter including the current Cheirogaleidae and Lepilemuridae . Because of concerns that Lemuridae might not be monophyletic , the family was later split ; in 1982 Tattersall separated the Cheirogaleidae for the dwarf lemurs , mouse lemurs and relatives , and the Lepilemuridae for the sportive lemurs and bamboo lemurs ( including the greater bamboo lemur ) . This classification is still used , except that the bamboo lemurs were moved back to Lemuridae . 
 From the 1970s to the 1990s , there have been suggestions that the ruffed lemurs might be related to indriids or a sister group to Lemuridae and Indriidae and that the bamboo lemurs are related to the sportive lemurs , but neither view is supported by molecular phylogeny . The sportive lemurs and the extinct koala lemurs ( Megaladapidae ) both lack upper incisors in the permanent dentition , and in 1981 , Groves placed both together in the family Megaladapidae , which he renamed Lepilemuridae in 2005 because that older name takes precedence . Genetic research does not support a close relationship between the sportive and koala lemurs and instead places the koala lemurs as a sister group to Lemuridae ; therefore , the two are now placed in separate families ( Lepilemuridae for the sportive lemurs and Megaladapidae for the koala lemurs ) . The sloth lemurs ( Palaeopropithecidae ) and monkey lemurs ( Archaeolemuridae ) were classified as subfamilies within Indriidae as late as 1982 , but are now recognized as separate families . 
 The relationships among the families of lemurs have been problematic and have yet to be definitively resolved . Two competing phylogenies exist based on genetic and molecular data . One approach ( Horvath et al . ) looks at a larger number of genes , but among fewer species . This results in Lemuridae being a sister group to Lepilemuridae , Cheirogaleidae , and Indriidae . The other approach ( Orlando et al . ) looks at fewer genes , but more lemur species . Using this analysis , Lepilemuridae becomes the sister group to Lemuridae , Cheirogaleidae , and Indriidae . Both phylogenies agree that the Malagasy primates are monophyletic and that Daubentoniidae ( the aye @-@ aye ) is basal to the <unk> clade , having split off significantly earlier than the other families . However , two problems create complications for both approaches . First , the four most closely related living lemur families diverged within a narrow window of approximately 10 million years , making it much harder to distinguish the splits with molecular evidence . In addition , these families diverged from their last common ancestor approximately 42 mya ; such distant splits create a lot of noise for molecular techniques . 
 = = Genus @-@ level classification = = 
 Early distribution of lemur species among genera differed in a number of ways from current taxonomy . For example , the fork @-@ marked lemurs were initially placed in Lemur and then in Microcebus with the mouse lemurs before being placed in their own genus Phaner , and Charles Immanuel Forsyth Major split the Cheirogaleus medius species group of the dwarf lemurs into a separate genus <unk> , but this was not accepted . Genus @-@ level taxonomy was largely stabilized by Schwarz in 1931 , but a number of later changes have become accepted : 
 The ring @-@ tailed lemur , ruffed lemurs , and brown lemurs were once grouped together in the genus Lemur due to a host of morphological similarities . For instance , the skeletons of the ring @-@ tailed lemur and the brown lemurs are nearly indistinguishable . However , ruffed lemurs were reassigned to the genus Varecia in 1962 , and due to similarities between the ring @-@ tailed lemur and the bamboo lemurs , particularly in regards to molecular evidence and scent gland similarities , the brown lemurs were moved to the genus Eulemur in 1988 . The genus Lemur is now monotypic , containing only the ring @-@ tailed lemur . 
 In 2001 , Colin Groves concluded that despite similarities , the greater bamboo lemur was sufficiently distinct from the bamboo lemurs of the genus Hapalemur to merit its own monotypic genus , Prolemur , in contrast to Schwarz 's 1931 disagreement with Pocock 's decision to separate Prolemur from Hapalemur . 
 Originally placed in the genus Microcebus ( mouse lemurs ) , the giant mouse lemur was moved to its own genus , Mirza , in 1985 due to its larger size , morphological differences , dental characteristics , and behavior . 
 The hairy @-@ eared dwarf lemur was first placed in the genus Cheirogaleus ( dwarf lemurs ) in 1875 and was later found to have closer affinities with Microcebus . However , its dentition and cranium structure were held sufficiently distinct to merit elevation to its own genus , Allocebus . 
 In 1948 , paleontologist Charles Lamberton proposed a new sub @-@ genus for the giant ruffed lemurs , Pachylemur , which had previously been placed in the genus Lemur . Since the 1960s , it has been considered its own separate genus , although the two extinct species of giant ruffed lemur have sometimes been grouped under Varecia with their closest relatives . 
 A new genus of sloth lemur , Babakotia was named in 1990 . 
 = = Species @-@ level classification = = 
 There is widespread disagreement on aspects of species @-@ level lemur taxonomy , particularly concerning the recent increase in the number of recognized species . According to Russell Mittermeier , the president of Conservation International ( CI ) , taxonomist Colin Groves , and others , there are currently 101 recognized species or subspecies of extant lemur , divided into five families and 15 genera . Conversely , other experts in the field label this as a possible example of taxonomic inflation , and prefer instead an estimate of at least 50 species . All sides generally agree that the recently extinct subfossil lemurs should be classified in three families , eight genera , and 17 species . 
 Over the past two decades , the number of recognized lemur species has more than tripled according to some experts . In 1994 , 32 distinct species were named in the first edition of Conservation International 's field guide , Lemurs of Madagascar , and 68 were described in the 2nd edition , published in 2006 . In December 2008 , Russell Mittermeier , Colin Groves , and other experts co @-@ wrote an article in the International Journal of Primatology classifying 99 species and subspecies . In late 2010 , the 3rd edition of Lemurs of Madagascar listed 101 taxa . The number of lemur species is likely to continue growing in the coming years , as field studies , cytogenetic and molecular genetic research continues , particularly on cryptic species , such as mouse lemurs , which cannot be distinguished visually . 
 This threefold increase in less than two decades has not had universal support among taxonomists and lemur researchers . In many cases , classifications ultimately depends upon which species concept is used . Due to the critical condition that most Malagasy primate populations are in , taxonomists and conservationists sometimes favor splitting them into separate species to develop an effective strategy for the conservation of the full range of lemur diversity . Implicitly , this means that full species status will help grant genetically distinct populations added environmental protection . 
 The first large wave of new lemur species descriptions came in 2000 , when Colin Groves split two species of dwarf lemur ( Cheirogaleus ) into seven species while Rodin Rasoloarison and colleagues recognized seven species of mouse lemur in western Madagascar . Then in 2001 , Colin Groves elevated the red ruffed lemur ( Varecia rubra ) , five subspecies of brown lemur ( Eulemur albifrons , E. <unk> , E. collaris , E. rufus and E. <unk> ) , and four subspecies of sifaka ( Propithecus coquereli , P. <unk> , P. edwardsi , and P. <unk> ) to full species status . Additional elevations of all remaining subspecies within the Eulemur and Propithecus genera were made in the years that followed . These and subsequent changes in taxonomy were largely due to a shift to the phylogenetic species concept , and are not universally endorsed . 
 By far the most explosive growth in species numbers ( in absolute terms ) has been in the genera Microcebus and Lepilemur . In 2006 , 15 new species of Lepilemur were described , with three new species reported in February , one in June , and 11 in September . Since then , three additional species have been described , one of which turned out to be identical to a previously described species . Genetic and morphological differences seem to suggest that they are cryptic species , but there is still debate whether these merit full species status or should be regarded as subspecies of previously identified , " core " species . 
 Both brown lemurs and mouse lemurs were initially divided into a small number of species , either with no distinguishable subspecies ( in the case of mouse lemurs ) or with several distinguishable subspecies ( in the case of brown lemurs ) . With molecular research suggesting a more distant split in both genera , these subspecies or undistinguished populations have been promoted to species status . 
 In the case of mouse lemurs , the rise in species numbers has been only slightly less sudden and dramatic . Classified as one species by Ernst Schwarz in 1931 ( excluding one , Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur , that is no longer classified in Microcebus ) , the genus was revised to contain two species , the gray mouse lemur ( Microcebus murinus ) and the brown mouse lemur ( M. rufus ) , after an extensive field study in 1972 showed both living in sympatry in southeastern Madagascar . At the time , the gray mouse lemur was known in the drier parts of the north , west , and south , while the brown mouse lemur inhabited the humid rainforest regions of the east . However , we now know the species diversity and distribution to be significantly more complex . Revisions throughout the 1990s and 2000s identified numerous new species through genetic testing using mitochondrial DNA , demonstrating that the genus is represented by a multitude of cryptic species . Many , but not all of these defined species have been supported by nuclear DNA tests . 
 However , there are still concerns that species are being identified prematurely . Ian Tattersall , an anthropologist who recognized 42 species of lemur in 1982 , has expressed concern that the geographically organized variety in lemur populations is being recognized with full species status while the number of subspecies in lemur genera has virtually disappeared . He has argued that taxonomists are confusing differentiation and speciation , two processes that are often unrelated , while denying the role of microevolution in evolutionary processes . Still other researchers who emphasize the framework of the " general lineage concept of species " contend that lineage divergence or differentiation demarcates the beginning of a new species . 
 New species have been identified due to differences in morphology , karyotypes , cytochrome b sequences , and other genetic tests , as well as several combinations of these . When nuclear DNA ( nDNA ) was tested in conjunction with mitochondrial DNA ( mtDNA ) in mouse lemurs , a few species , such as Claire 's mouse lemur ( Microcebus <unk> ) were demonstrated to be indistinguishable from other closely related species . In such cases , nDNA did not vary , but the mtDNA that had been used to define it as a species was still distinct . Differences in results between nDNA , which is inherited from both parents , and mtDNA , which is inherited from the mother , was attributed to female philopatry , where females remain within or close to the home range into which they were born while males disperse . Since the isolated population known as Claire 's mouse lemur has distinct mtDNA , but not nDNA , it is likely to contain a population descended from a related group of females , but which still disperses and interbreeds with nearby populations . 
 Traditionally , karyology has been considered when determining species status . For example , in 2006 , three new species of sportive lemur were named based partly on karyotypes . From the lemurs studied so far , the diploid number of chromosomes varies between 2n = 20 and 2n = 66 . In the case of the brown lemurs , the diploid number ranges from 2n = 44 to 2n = 60 while the individual chromosome sizes vary considerably , despite strong similarities in morphology . 
 Sometimes distinctions are made due to very slight differences in pelage coloration . For instance , three distinctly colored types of mouse lemur were discovered in a multi @-@ year study in Beza Mahafaly Reserve in southern Madagascar , but rather than being separate species , DNA tests revealed that they all belonged to a single species , the reddish @-@ gray mouse lemur ( Microcebus griseorufus ) . For this reason , further research is needed to confirm or deny the recent species splits . Only through detailed studies of morphology , ecology , behavior , and genetics can the true number of lemur species be determined . 
 = Ferb Fletcher = 
 <unk> " Ferb " Fletcher is a British character on the animated television series Phineas and Ferb . The character , voiced by British actor Thomas Sangster , was created by Phineas and Ferb co @-@ founders Dan Povenmire and Jeff " Swampy " Marsh and first appeared in the show 's pilot episode , " Rollercoaster . " 
 Ferb and his stepbrother Phineas Flynn spend their days during summer vacation from school striving to have fun . They are featured in the majority of episodes as the A @-@ Plot constructing large scale inventions or taking part in other outlandish activities . Ferb , an engineering genius , allows Phineas to do most of the talking for the pair and is " more of a man of action . " When Ferb does speak , it is almost always a single sentence . In a conversation in the future time of " Phineas and Ferb 's Quantum Boogaloo " , it is revealed that he was at Camp David ( hinting that he might be the current President of the United States , although his British background would presumably rule that out ) . 
 Ferb was named after a set @-@ builder named Frank , whose wife nicknamed him " Ferb " . Frank , a friend of both Povenmire and Marsh , owns several tools and was considered a fitting choice for Ferb 's namesake . In " <unk> <unk> " Ferb explains that his name is short for something , but he didn 't get to say it . On Twitter , Povenmire announced that Ferb was actually short for " <unk> " . He cares for Vanessa Doofenshmirtz ( daughter of Dr. Heinz Doofenshmirtz ) and saves her in the same episode when she gets tangled up and a lawn mower almost gets her , but he is able to save her with a giant tool which appears to be an exaggerated version of a Swiss Army Knife . In " Summer Belongs To You " Vanessa asks Candace what Ferb is short for ; Candace realizes she doesn 't know herself what it is short for . In the fourth season episode " Act Your Age " , his teenage self appears to be in a relationship with Vanessa . Ferb 's design is based around a rectangle and also shaped like an " F " and is inspired by the style of late animator Tex Avery . As a character , Ferb has been critically well received and appears in several pieces of Phineas and Ferb merchandise , including toys , t @-@ shirts , and a video game . 
 = = Role in Phineas and Ferb = = 
 Ferb comes from a blended family , a premise the creators considered underused in children 's programming and which reflected Marsh 's own upbringing . Ferb 's birth mother is never revealed , but the series shows that both Ferb and his father Lawrence hail from the United Kingdom . Lawrence married Ferb 's stepmother Linda after meeting her at a 1990s concert by the ( fictitious ) band Love Händel . Marsh considers explaining the family background " not important to the kids ' lives . They are a great blended family and that 's all we need to know . " Ferb and his family live in the fictional town of Danville , in a large , suburban neighborhood . Throughout their summer vacation , Ferb and Phineas conceive outrageous schemes to defeat boredom while sitting lazily beneath a tree in their backyard . Phineas mainly conceives each project while Ferb spearheads its construction . Their activities are usually beyond the capability of a typical child and have included toy design ( in " Toy to the World " ) ; treasure @-@ hunting ( in " The Ballad of <unk> " ) ; engineering ( in " It 's About Time ! " ) ; and restaurant management ( in " Chez Platypus " ) . Ferb 's stepsister , Candace , is always trying to get the two in trouble with their mother for their schemes , but is never able to . Ferb hardly ever speaks but he is shown to talk at random times with a British accent . Ferb had a long speech in the episode " The Lizard Whisperer " . 
 = = Character = = 
 = = = Creation and conception = = = 
 Ferb was created by Phineas and Ferb co @-@ creators Dan Povenmire and Jeff " Swampy " Marsh , who originally met as layout artists on the Fox Network animated series The Simpsons . Phineas and Ferb was inspired by their boyhood memories of summer vacation ; Povenmire and Marsh both felt the theme of school in television had fallen to redundancy and wanted to create a series that took place solely in the summertime . 
 Ferb 's name was derived from that of a mutual friend of Povenmire and Marsh named Frank , who " owns more tools than anyone [ they ] know . " Frank was a set @-@ builder who had worked building and designing sets for shows such as Star Trek : Deep Space Nine . Frank 's wife disliked Frank 's name and gave him the unusual nickname " Ferb " . 
 = = = Design and voice = = = 
 Ferb was given a simplistic structure so that young audiences would be able to draw him easily . As with the other characters of Phineas and Ferb , Ferb 's design is constructed of geometric shapes in homage to animator Tex Avery . Ferb 's head is based on a rectangle with a wider top than bottom . A square is used for his nose , and an egg @-@ shaped oval is used for his eyes . The eye furthest from the screen is always drawn larger than the other . Povenmire uses a nine @-@ step process to draw Ferb , starting with his head and ending with touch ups . 
 Ferb was originally going to be voiced by actor Mitchel Musso . However , when Phineas and Ferb was picked up as a full series , Povenmire and Marsh chose to make Ferb British and cast Thomas Sangster as his voice . However , they enjoyed Musso to a level that they recast him as the voice of the character Jeremy Johnson ; although Musso no longer voices a title character , his new role allows him more lines . Sangster himself is a British actor and was among several cast members hired that hailed from England . Marsh himself had lived in the country for seven years and developed a fondness for the culture and people . 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 Ferb was devised as a character devoid of ill will . Marsh explained , " It was important to us that [ Phineas and Ferb ] never did anything with any animosity . They never tried to get their sister in trouble or outsmart their mother and get away with it . " Instead , he and his brother create things for the sheer enjoyment of it or to help out others ( " and for the ladies " ) ; for example , Ferb and Phineas carve Candace 's face into Mount Rushmore for her birthday , set up a roller derby for a rematch race with his Grandmother Betty Jo 's old rival , create a haunted house for their friend Isabella to cure her hiccups and make a super @-@ computer to find out what to do for their mom after being so kind to them . 
 Povenmire and Marsh intended for Ferb 's drive to create be stem primarily from a desire to have fun , and in one episode , " Thaddeus and Thor " , Phineas openly confirms this as his and his brother 's only goal in their daily schemes – though Ferb adds that they also do it " for the ladies . " 
 In the original pitch to overseas The Walt Disney Company executives , Povenmire and Marsh constructed storyboards and recorded them with dialogue and sound @-@ effects . As a prototype , Ferb did not speak at all . However , after considering comedy 's " big duos " including Wallace and Gromit and Jay and Silent Bob , the creators chose to have Ferb speak at least once in most episodes ( but in " Summer Belongs To You " he spoke nine times and in " The Lizard Whisperer " gives an entire short speech that lasts about 45 seconds ) , but to have him remain silent and allow Phineas to speak for him the majority of the time . Although Ferb 's <unk> is generally not commented on in the series , Phineas mentions it while he and his brother were in England on the episode " A Hard Day 's Knight " : " I 'll be the top half since I tend to do more of the talking and you will be on the bottom part because of your long <unk> legs " . Despite being quiet , Ferb is a polyglot , being able to speak in human , animal , and alien tongues . 
 Ferb also seems to possess good insight , which is probably the main character trait , other than his silence , distinguishing his character from Phineas . Jean Yoo , an official press member for Disney Channel , notes that when Ferb does speak , " it always shows a greater understanding of the situation than his countenance would indicate . " Ferb also seems to prefer singing to talking . He usually says one sentence per episode , such as " Platypuses are the only mammals to lay eggs , " " Well , he [ Buford ] was all up in my face , " or " Candace , we [ Phineas and Ferb ] are just kids . " He also has a crush on Vanessa Doofenshmirtz . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reception for the character has been generally positive . Emily Ashby of Common Sense Media describes him as a " go @-@ to engineering guru " and considers him and Phineas to be " partner [ s ] in crime . " Susan Stewart , reviewing the show in the New York Times , notes that Phineas and Ferb " work on a heroic scale and are apparently not limited by the laws of nature . " Josh Jackson , editor of Paste magazine , listed Ferb 's " dry wit " as the third of five reasons as to why the series is the " Best Kids Show on TV , " writing that " Ferb gets about one line per episode , but it 's always a doozy . " 
 Ed <unk> , Richie Stanley , and Jason Hayes , author 's the book Lost and Found : The Younger <unk> and the Churches That Reach Them , wrote that Ferb and Phineas , along with the cast of High School Musical , are examples of creating a " whole new culture " in households . <unk> , Stanley , and Hayes continued to write that " [ O ] ur culture has connected with media that shows not only the Cinderella and Prince Charming life we all wish for , but also the life in which we all live with real trials , real joys , and real fears . " 
 " Backyard Beach , " a song Danny Jacob performs as Ferb in the episode " Lawn Gnome Beach Party of Terror , " became very popular among viewers and was voted as the second best song in the series by viewers in the special 2009 event , " Phineas and Ferb 's Musical Cliptastic Countdown " . The best , according to viewers , was " Gitchee Gitchee Goo " from " Flop Starz , " which Jacob performs in as Ferb . Ferb is also credited as the singer in the music video version of " My Ride from Outer Space " from the episode " The Chronicles of <unk> " ( actually performed again by Danny Jacob ) . 
 = = In other media = = 
 Besides the series Phineas and Ferb , Ferb has been featured in several other pieces of merchandise from the series . To date , he has appeared in all Phineas and Ferb novelizations , published by Disney Press . Ferb appears in the Nintendo DS video game based on the series , simply titled Phineas and Ferb . Dan Povenmire has said that he saw nothing of the game until its release date , on which he was given a copy for free . Phineas and Ferb made a cameo on " The Straight @-@ A Team " episode of MAD when they decided to beat the Straight A @-@ Team . They appear again in the sketch " <unk> and Ferb Tale " where they are spoofed alongside the film Dolphin Tale . Their design in MAD was unrealistic to their regular design . 
 Plush toys of the character , along with toys representing Phineas and Perry , have been manufactured . Ferb also appears on most of the Phineas and Ferb t @-@ shirts . Ferb is set to appear in the forthcoming comic book series based on the series , though details are unconfirmed . Costumed versions of Ferb and Phineas have appeared in Disneyland , for the pre @-@ taping of the annual Walt Disney World Christmas Day Parade . 
 = Wreck of the RMS Titanic = 
 The wreck of the RMS Titanic is located about 370 miles ( 600 km ) south @-@ southeast off the coast of Newfoundland , lying at a depth of about 12 @,@ 500 feet ( 3 @,@ 800 m ) . The liner sunk in 1912 on April 15 , when it hit an iceberg during her maiden voyage . 
 The wreck lies in two main pieces about a third of a mile ( 600 m ) apart . The bow is still largely recognizable , in spite of its deterioration and the damage it suffered hitting the sea floor , and has a great deal of preserved interiors . The stern is completely ruined due to the damage it suffered while sinking 12 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) and hitting the ocean floor , and is now just a heap of twisted metal , which may explain why it has barely been explored during expeditions to the Titanic wreck . A substantial section of the middle of the ship broke apart and is scattered in chunks across the sea bed . A debris field covering about 5 by 3 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km × 4 @.@ 8 km ) around the wreck contains hundreds of thousands of items spilled from ship as she sank , ranging from passengers ' personal effects to machinery , furniture , utensils and coal , as well as fragments of the ship herself . The bodies of the passengers and crew once also lay in the debris field , but have since been entirely consumed by sea creatures , leaving only their shoes lying together in the mud . 
 Until 1985 , the location and condition of the wreck were unknown . Numerous expeditions tried using sonar to map the sea bed in the hope of spotting the wreck , but failed due to a combination of bad weather , technological difficulties and poor strategy over a massive search area . The wreck was finally located , 13 @.@ 2 miles ( 21 @.@ 2 km ) from the inaccurate position transmitted by Titanic 's crew while the ship was sinking , by a joint French @-@ American expedition led by Jean @-@ Louis Michel of IFREMER and Robert Ballard of the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution . The key to its discovery was an innovative remotely controlled deep @-@ sea vehicle called Argo , which could be towed above the sea bed while its cameras transmitted pictures back to a mother ship . 
 Titanic 's wreck has been the focus of intense interest since its discovery and has been visited by numerous expeditions , including salvage operations which have controversially recovered thousands of items which have been conserved and put on public display . The wreckage is too fragile to be raised because its condition has deteriorated in the century it has spent on the seafloor , and the deterioration has increased since its discovery . Many species of marine animals have made Titanic their home , such as rattail fish , spider crabs and brittle <unk> . The Titanic also plays host to great communities of metal @-@ eating bacteria , which as they consume the ship have created rusticles covering most of the hull . The bacteria are slowly devouring Titanic and will gradually reduce her to a spot of rust on the ocean floor with only the remaining scraps of her hull intermingled with her more durable fittings , like the propellers , the <unk> and the <unk> , which can resist attack by microbes . 
 Over the years after her sinking , many impractical , expensive and often physically impossible schemes have been put forward to raise the wreck from its resting place . They have included ideas such as filling the wreck with ping @-@ pong balls , injecting it with 180 @,@ 000 tons of Vaseline , or using half a million tons of liquid nitrogen to turn it into a giant iceberg that would float back to the surface . 
 = = Salvaging Titanic = = 
 Almost immediately after Titanic sank on 15 April 1912 , proposals were advanced to salvage her from her resting place in the North Atlantic Ocean , despite her exact location and condition being unknown . The families of several wealthy victims of the disaster – the <unk> , Astors , and <unk> – formed a consortium and contracted the Merritt and Chapman Derrick and Wrecking Company to raise Titanic . The project was soon abandoned as impractical as the divers could not even reach a fraction of the necessary depth , where the pressure is over 6 @,@ 000 pounds per square inch ( 410 bar ) . The lack of submarine technology at the time as well as the outbreak of World War I also put off such a project . The company considered dropping dynamite on the wreck to dislodge bodies which would float to the surface , but finally gave up after oceanographers suggested that the extreme pressure would have compressed the bodies into gelatinous lumps . ( In fact , this was incorrect . Whale falls , a phenomenon not discovered until 1987 – coincidentally , by the same submersible used for the first manned expedition to Titanic the year before – demonstrate that water @-@ filled corpses , in this case cetaceans , can sink to the bottom essentially intact . The high pressure and cold temperature of the water would have prevented significant quantities of gas forming during decomposition , preventing the bodies of Titanic victims from rising back to the surface . ) 
 In later years , various proposals were put forward to salvage Titanic . However , all fell foul due to practical and technological difficulties , a lack of funding and , in many cases , a lack of understanding of the physical conditions at the wreck site . Charles Smith , an architect from Denver , proposed in March 1914 to attach electromagnets to a submarine which would be irresistibly drawn to the wreck 's steel hull . Having found its exact position , more electromagnets would be sent down from a fleet of barges which would winch Titanic to the surface . An estimated cost of $ 1 @.@ 5 million ( £ 35 @,@ 451 @,@ 827 today ) and its impracticality meant that the idea was not put into practice . Another proposal involved raising Titanic by means of attaching balloons to her hull using electromagnets . Once enough balloons had been attached , the ship would float gently to the surface . Again , the idea got no further than the drawing board . 
 = = = Salvage proposals in the 1960s and 1970s = = = 
 In the mid @-@ 1960s , a hosiery worker from Baldock named Douglas Woolley devised a plan to find Titanic using a <unk> ( like Trieste , used to reach the bottom of the Mariana Trench in 1960 ) and raise the wreck by inflating nylon balloons that would be attached to her hull . The declared objective was to " bring the wreck into Liverpool and convert it to a floating museum . " The Titanic Salvage Company was established to manage the scheme and a group of businessmen from West Berlin set up an entity called Titanic @-@ <unk> to support it financially . It fell apart when its proponents found they could not overcome the problem of how the balloons would be inflated in the first place . Calculations showed that it could take ten years to generate enough gas to overcome the water pressure . 
 A variety of audacious but equally impractical schemes were put forward during the 1970s . One proposal called for 180 @,@ 000 tons of molten wax ( or alternatively , Vaseline ) to be pumped into Titanic , lifting her to the surface . Another proposal involved filling Titanic with ping @-@ pong balls , but overlooked the fact that the balls would be crushed by the pressure long before reaching the depth of the wreck . A similar idea involving the use of Benthos glass spheres , which could survive the pressure , was scuppered when the cost of the number of spheres required was put at over $ 238 million . An unemployed haulage contractor from Walsall named Arthur Hickey proposed to turn Titanic into an iceberg , freezing the water around the wreck to encase it in a buoyant jacket of ice . This , being lighter than liquid water , would float to the surface and could be towed to shore . The BOC Group calculated that this would require half a million tons of liquid nitrogen to be pumped down to the sea bed . In his 1976 thriller Raise the Titanic ! , author Clive Cussler 's hero Dirk Pitt repairs the holes in Titanic 's hull , pumps it full of compressed air and succeeds in making it " leap out of the waves like a modern submarine blowing its ballast tanks " , a scene depicted on the posters of the subsequent film of the book . Although this was an " artistically stimulating " highlight of the film , made using a 55 ft ( 17 m ) model of Titanic , it would not have been physically possible . 
 Robert Ballard of the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution had long been interested in finding Titanic . Although early negotiations with possible backers were abandoned when it emerged that they wanted to turn the wreck into souvenir paperweights , more sympathetic backers joined Ballard to form a company named <unk> International Ltd as a vehicle for rediscovering and exploring Titanic . In October 1977 he made his first attempt to find the ship with the aid of the Alcoa corporation 's deep sea salvage vessel <unk> . This was essentially a <unk> with sonar equipment and cameras attached to the end of the drilling pipe . It could lift objects from the seabed using a remote @-@ controlled mechanical claw . The expedition ended in failure when the drilling pipe broke , sending 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 m ) of pipe and $ 600 @,@ 000 worth of electronics plunging to the sea bed . 
 In 1978 , The Walt Disney Company and National Geographic magazine considered mounting a joint expedition to find Titanic , using the aluminium submersible <unk> . Titanic would have been well within the submersible 's depth limits , but the plans were abandoned for financial reasons . 
 The following year , the British billionaire financier and tycoon Sir James Goldsmith set up Seawise & Titanic Salvage Ltd with the involvement of underwater diving and photographic experts . His aim was to use the publicity of finding Titanic to promote his newly established magazine , NOW ! . An expedition to the North Atlantic was scheduled for 1980 but was cancelled due to financial difficulties . A year later , NOW ! folded after 84 issues with Goldsmith incurring huge financial losses . 
 Fred Koehler , an electronics repairman from Coral Gables , Florida , sold his electronics shop to finance the completion of a two @-@ man deep @-@ sea submersible called Seacopter . He planned to dive to Titanic , enter the hull and retrieve a fabulous collection of diamonds rumored to be contained in the purser 's safe . However , he was unable to obtain financial backing for his planned expedition . Another proposal involved using a semi @-@ submersible platform mounted with cranes , resting on two watertight supertankers , that would winch the wreck off the seabed and carry it to shore . A proponent was quoted as saying , " It 's like the Great Wall of China – given enough time and money and people , you can do anything . " Time , money and people were not forthcoming and the proposal got no further than any of its predecessors . 
 = = = Jack Grimm 's expeditions , 1980 – 83 = = = 
 On 17 July 1980 , an expedition sponsored by Texan oilman Jack Grimm set off from Port Everglades , Florida , in the research vessel <unk> Fay . Grimm had previously sponsored expeditions to find Noah 's Ark , the Loch Ness Monster , Bigfoot , and the giant hole in the North Pole predicted by the pseudoscientific Hollow Earth hypothesis . To raise funds for his Titanic expedition , he obtained sponsorship from friends with whom he played poker , sold media rights through the William Morris Agency , commissioned a book , and obtained the services of Orson Welles to narrate a documentary . He acquired scientific support from Columbia University by donating $ 330 @,@ 000 to the Lamont – Doherty Geological Observatory for the purchase of a wide @-@ sweep sonar , in exchange for five years ' use of the equipment and the services of technicians to support it . Drs. William B. Ryan of Columbia University and Fred <unk> of Scripps Institution of Oceanography in California joined the expedition as consultants . They nearly stayed ashore when Grimm introduced them to a new consultant – a monkey called Titan , which was trained to point at a spot on the map to supposedly indicate where Titanic was . The scientists issued an ultimatum : " It 's either us or the monkey . " Grimm preferred the monkey , but was prevailed upon to leave it behind and bring the scientists instead . 
 The results were inconclusive , as three weeks of surveying in almost continuous bad weather during July and August 1980 failed to find Titanic . The problem was exacerbated by technological limitations ; the Sea MARC sonar used by the expedition had a relatively low resolution and was a new and untested piece of equipment . It was nearly lost only 36 hours after it was first deployed when the tail was ripped off during a sharp turn , destroying the magnetometer , which would have been vital for detecting Titanic 's hull . Nonetheless it managed to survey an area of some 500 square nautical miles and identified 14 possible targets . 
 Grimm mounted a second expedition in June 1981 aboard the research vessel Gyre , with <unk> and Ryan again joining the expedition . To increase their chances of finding the wreck , the team employed a much more capable sonar device , the Scripps Deep Tow . The weather was again very poor , but all 14 of the targets were successfully covered and found to be natural features . On the last day of the expedition , an object that looked like a propeller was found . Grimm announced on his return to Boston that Titanic had been found , but the scientists declined to endorse his identification . 
 In July 1983 , Grimm went back a third time with Ryan aboard the research vessel Robert D. Conrad to have another look at the " propeller " . This time nothing was found and very bad weather brought an early end to the expedition . It later turned out that Sea MARC had actually passed over Titanic but had failed to detect it , while Deep Tow passed within 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) of the wreck . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 D. Michael Harris and Jack Grimm had failed to find Titanic but their expeditions did succeed in producing fairly detailed mapping of the area in which the ship had sunk . It was clear that the position given in Titanic 's distress signals was inaccurate , which was a major expedition difficulty because it increased the search area 's already @-@ massive size . Despite the failure of his 1977 expedition , Robert Ballard had not given up hope and devised new technologies and a new search strategy to tackle the problem . The new technology was a system called Argo / Jason . This consisted of a remotely controlled deep @-@ sea vehicle called Argo , equipped with sonar and cameras and towed behind a ship , with a robot called Jason tethered to it that could roam the sea floor , take close @-@ up images and gather specimens . The images from the system would be transmitted back to a control room on the towing vessel where they could be assessed immediately . Although it was designed for scientific purposes , it also had important military applications and the United States Navy agreed to sponsor the system 's development , on condition that it was to be used to carry out a number of programmes – many still classified – for the Navy . 
 The Navy commissioned Ballard and his team to carry out a month @-@ long expedition every year for four years , to keep Argo / Jason in good working condition . It agreed to Ballard 's proposal to use some of the time to search for Titanic once the Navy 's objectives had been met ; the search would provide an ideal opportunity to test Argo / Jason . In 1984 the Navy sent Ballard and Argo to map the wrecks of the sunken nuclear submarines USS Thresher and USS Scorpion , lost in the North Atlantic at depths of up to 9 @,@ 800 feet ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) . The expedition found the submarines and made an important discovery . As Thresher and Scorpion sank , debris spilled out from them across a wide area of the seabed and was sorted by the currents , so that light debris drifted furthest away from the site of the sinking . This " debris field " was far larger than the wrecks themselves . By following the comet @-@ like trail of debris , the main pieces of wreckage could be found . 
 A second expedition to map the wreck of Scorpion was mounted in 1985 . Only twelve days of search time would be left at the end of the expedition to look for Titanic . As Harris / Grimm 's unsuccessful efforts had taken more than forty days , Ballard decided that extra help would be needed . He approached the French national oceanographic agency , IFREMER , with which Woods Hole had previously collaborated . The agency had recently developed a high @-@ resolution side @-@ scan sonar called SAR and agreed to send a research vessel , Le <unk> , to survey the sea bed in the area where Titanic was believed to lie . The idea was for the French to use the sonar to find likely targets , and then for the Americans to use Argo to check out the targets and hopefully confirm whether they were in fact the wreck . The French team spent five weeks , from 5 July to 12 August 1985 , " mowing the lawn " – sailing back and forth across the 150 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 390 km2 ) target area to scan the sea bed in a series of stripes . However , they found nothing , though it turned out that they had passed within a few hundred yards of Titanic in their first run . 
 Ballard realized that looking for the wreck itself using sonar was unlikely to be successful and adopted a different tactic , drawing on the experience of the surveys of Thresher and Scorpion ; he would look for the debris field instead , using Argo 's cameras rather than sonar . Whereas sonar could not distinguish man @-@ made debris on the sea bed from natural objects , cameras could . The debris field would also be a far bigger target , stretching a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) or longer , whereas Titanic itself was only 90 feet ( 27 m ) wide . The search required round @-@ the @-@ clock towing of Argo back and forth above the sea bed , with shifts of watchers aboard the research vessel Knorr looking at the camera pictures for any sign of debris . After a week of fruitless searching , at 12 @.@ 48 am on Sunday 1 September 1985 pieces of debris began to appear on Knorr 's screens . One of them was identified as a boiler , identical to those shown in pictures from 1911 . The following day , the main part of the wreck was found and Argo sent back the first pictures of Titanic since her sinking 73 years before . The discovery made headlines around the world . 
 = = = Subsequent expeditions = = = 
 = = = = 1986 – 1998 = = = = 
 Following his discovery of the wreck site , Ballard returned to Titanic in July 1986 aboard the research vessel RV Atlantis II . Now the deep @-@ diving submersible DSV Alvin could take people back to Titanic for the first time since her sinking , and the remotely operated vehicle ( ROV ) Jason Jr. would allow the explorers to investigate the interior of the wreck . Another system , <unk> , was used to carry out photo surveys of the debris field . Jason Jr. descended the ruined Grand Staircase as far as B Deck , and photographed remarkably well preserved interiors , including some chandeliers still hanging from the ceilings . 
 Between 25 July and 10 September 1987 , an expedition mounted by IFREMER and a consortium of American investors which included George Tulloch , G. Michael Harris , D. Michael Harris and Ralph White made 32 dives to Titanic using the submersible Nautile . Controversially , they salvaged and brought ashore more than 1 @,@ 800 objects . A joint Russian @-@ Canadian @-@ American expedition took place in 1991 using the research vessel Akademik Mstislav Keldysh and its two MIR submersibles . Sponsored by Stephen Low and IMAX , CBS , National Geographic and others , the expedition carried out extensive scientific research with a crew of 130 scientists and engineers . The <unk> carried out 17 dives , spending over 140 hours at the bottom , shooting 40 @,@ 000 feet ( 12 @,@ 000 m ) of IMAX film . This was used to create the 1995 documentary film <unk> , which was later released in the US on DVD in a re @-@ edited version narrated by Leonard Nimoy . 
 IFREMER and RMS Titanic Inc . , the successors to the sponsors of the 1987 expedition , returned to the wreck with Nautile and the ROV Robin in June 1993 . Over the course of fifteen days , Nautile made fifteen dives lasting between eight and twelve hours . Another 800 artefacts were recovered during the expedition including a two @-@ tonne piece of a reciprocating engine , a lifeboat davit and the steam whistle from the ship 's forward funnel . 
 In 1993 , 1994 , 1996 , 1998 and 2000 , RMS Titanic Inc. carried out an intensive series of dives that led to the recovery of over 4 @,@ 000 items in the first two expeditions alone . The 1996 expedition controversially attempted to raise a section of Titanic itself , a section of the outer hull that originally comprised part of the wall of two First Class cabins on C Deck , extending down to D Deck . It weighed 20 tons , measured 15 by 25 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m × 7 @.@ 6 m ) and had four portholes in it , three of which still had glass in them . The section had come loose either during the sinking or as a result of the impact with the sea bed . Its recovery using diesel @-@ filled floatation bags was turned into something of an entertainment event with two cruise ships accompanying the expedition to the wreck site . Passengers were offered the chance , at $ 5 @,@ 000 per person , to watch the recovery on television screens in their cabins while enjoying luxury accommodation , Las Vegas @-@ style shows and casino gambling aboard the ships . Various celebrities were recruited to enliven the proceedings , including Burt Reynolds , Debbie Reynolds and Buzz Aldrin , and " Grand Receptions " for VIPs were scheduled on @-@ shore where the hull section would be displayed . However , the lift ended disastrously when rough weather caused the ropes supporting the bags to snap . At the moment the ropes broke , the hull section had been lifted to within only 200 feet ( 61 m ) of the surface . It hurtled 12 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) back down , embedding itself upright on the sea floor . Although the attempt was strongly criticised by marine archaeologists , scientists and historians as a money @-@ making publicity stunt , a second , successful attempt to lift the fragment was carried out in 1998 . The so @-@ called " Big Piece " was conserved in a laboratory in Santa Fe for two years before being put on display at the Luxor Las Vegas hotel and casino . 
 In 1995 , Canadian director James Cameron chartered the Akademik Mstislav Keldysh and the <unk> to make 12 dives to Titanic . He used the resulting footage to considerable effect in his blockbuster 1997 film Titanic . The discovery of the wreck in 1985 and a National Geographic documentary of Ballard 's 1986 expedition had inspired Cameron to write a synopsis in 1987 of what eventually became the film Titanic : " Do story with bookends of present day scene of wreck using submersibles intercut with memories of a survivor and re @-@ created scenes of the night of the sinking . A crucible of human values under stress . " Cameron 's expedition did not salvage anything from the ship . 
 = = = = 2000 to present = = = = 
 The 2000 expedition by RMS Titanic Inc. carried out 28 dives during which over 800 artefacts were recovered , including the ship 's engine telegraphs , perfume vials and watertight door gears . In 2001 , an American couple – David Leibowitz and Kimberly Miller – caused controversy when they were married aboard a submersible that had set down on the bow of Titanic , in a deliberate echo of a famous scene from James Cameron 's 1997 film . The wedding was essentially a publicity stunt , sponsored by a British company called <unk> Explorer which had offered a free dive to Titanic that Leibowitz had won . He asked whether his fiancée could come too and was told that she could – but only if she agreed to get married during the trip . The same company also brought along Philip Littlejohn , the grandson of one of Titanic 's surviving crew members , who became the first relative of a Titanic passenger or crew member to visit the wreck . Cameron himself also returned to Titanic in 2001 to carry out filming for Walt Disney Pictures ' Ghosts of the Abyss , filmed in 3D . 
 In 2003 and 2004 , the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration carried out two expeditions to Titanic . The first , carried out between 22 June and 2 July 2003 , performed four dives in two days . Its key aims were to assess the current condition of the wreck site and carry out scientific observations to support ongoing research . The stern section , which had previously received relatively little attention from explorers , was specifically targeted for analysis . The microbial colonies aboard Titanic were also a key focus of investigation . The second expedition , from 27 May – 12 June 2004 , saw the return of Robert Ballard to Titanic nearly 20 years after he discovered it . The expedition spent 11 days on the wreck , carrying out high @-@ resolution mapping using video and stereoscopic still images . 
 2005 saw two expeditions to the Titanic . James Cameron returned for the third and last time to film Last Mysteries of the Titanic . Another expedition searched for previously unseen pieces of wreckage , and led to the documentary Titanic 's Final Moments : Missing Pieces . 
 RMS Titanic Inc. mounted further expeditions to Titanic in 2004 and 2010 , when the first comprehensive map of the entire debris field was produced . Two autonomous underwater vehicles – torpedo @-@ shaped robots – repeatedly ran backwards and forwards across the 3 by 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km × 8 @.@ 0 km ) debris field , taking sonar scans and over 130 @,@ 000 high @-@ resolution images . This enabled a detailed photomosaic of the debris field to be created for the first time , giving scientists a much clearer view of the dynamics of the ship 's sinking . The expedition encountered difficulties : several hurricanes passed over the wreck site , and the Remora ROV was caught in a piece of wreckage . This same year saw the discovery of the new bacteria living in the rusticles on the Titanic , <unk> <unk> . 
 Tourist and scientific visits to Titanic are still continuing ; by April 2012 , 100 years since the disaster and nearly 25 since the discovery of the wreck , around 140 people had visited . On 14 April 2012 ( the 100th anniversary of the ship 's sinking ) , the wreck of the Titanic became eligible for protection as a UNESCO World Heritage Site , and in the same month , Robert Ballard , the wreck 's discoverer , has announced of a plan to preserve the wreck of the Titanic by using deep @-@ sea robots to paint the wreck with anti @-@ fouling paint , to help keep the wreck in its current state for all time . The proposed plan that Ballard announced has been outlined in a documentary made to time with the Titanic 's 100th sinking anniversary called Save the Titanic With Bob Ballard where Ballard himself talks about how this proposed paint job on the wreck will work . Ballard says that he proposed to robotically clean and repaint the Titanic with a colour scheme mimicking rusticles because he saw " original anti @-@ fouling paint on the ship 's hull , which was still working even after 74 years on the seabed " when he visited the Titanic in 1986 . 
 = = Description of the wreck = = 
 The position of the wreck is a considerable distance from the location transmitted by the ship 's wireless operators before she went down . The initial location was given as 41 ° 44 ′ N 50 ° 24 ′ W , 20 @.@ 8 miles ( 33 @.@ 5 km ) from the wreck . A corrected location was later transmitted as 41 ° 46 ′ N 50 ° 14 ′ W , but this too was inaccurate , by 13 @.@ 2 miles ( 21 @.@ 2 km ) . Titanic is in two main pieces 370 miles ( 600 km ) south @-@ east of Mistaken Point , Newfoundland . The bow is located at 41 ° 43 ′ 57 ″ N 49 ° 56 ′ 49 ″ W and the stern is about 1 @,@ 970 feet ( 600 m ) to the south at 41 ° 43 ′ 35 ″ N 49 ° 56 ′ 54 ″ W. The boilers found by Argo , which mark the point at which the ship went down , are about 600 feet ( 180 m ) east of the stern at 41 ° 43 ′ 32 ″ N 49 ° 56 ′ 49 ″ W. 
 The two main parts of the wreck of Titanic present a striking contrast . Although fourteen survivors testified that the ship had broken apart as she sank , this testimony was discounted by the official inquiries , and it was supposed that the ship had sunk intact . It is now clear that the stresses on Titanic caused the ship to split apart between the second and third funnels at or just below the surface . 
 = = = Bow section = = = 
 The bow section , which measures about 470 feet ( 140 m ) long , is thought to have descended at an angle of about 45 ° . Its distance from the stern was caused by its planing forward horizontally by about 1 foot ( 0 @.@ 30 m ) for every 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) of its descent . During the descent to the sea bed , the funnels were swept away , taking with them the rigging and large lengths of cables . These dragged along the boat deck , tearing away many of the davits and much of the other deck equipment . The foremast was also torn down , falling onto the port bridge area . The ship 's wheelhouse was swept away , possibly after being hit by the falling foremast . 
 The bow hit the bottom at a speed of about 20 knots ( 23 mph ; 37 km / h ) , digging about 60 feet ( 18 m ) deep into the mud , up to the base of the anchors . The impact bent the hull in two places and caused it to buckle downwards by about 10 ° under the forward well deck cranes and by about 4 ° under the forward expansion joint . When the bow section hit the sea bed , the weakened decks at the rear , where the ship had broken apart , collapsed on top of each other . The forward hatch cover was also blown off and landed a couple of hundred feet in front of the bow , possibly due to the force of water being pushed out as the bow impacted the bottom . 
 The area around the bridge is particularly badly damaged ; as Robert Ballard has put it , it looks " as if it had been squashed by a giant 's fist " . Charles R. Pellegrino has proposed that this was the result of a " down @-@ blast " of water , caused by a slipstream that had followed the bow section as it fell towards the sea bed . According to Pellegrino 's hypothesis , when the bow came to an abrupt halt the inertia of the slipstream caused a rapidly moving column of water weighing thousands of tons to strike the top of the wreck , striking it near the bridge . The roof of the officers ' quarters and the sides of the gymnasium were pushed in , railings were blown outwards and vertical steel columns supporting the decks were bent into a C @-@ shape . Large parts of the bow 's interior were demolished by surges of water and violent eddies kicked up by the wreck 's sudden halt . The actual damage made by the iceberg is not visible at the bow as it is buried under mud . 
 = = = Stern section = = = 
 The stern section , which measures about 350 feet ( 110 m ) long , suffered catastrophic damage during the descent and in landing on the sea bed . It had not fully filled with water when it sank and the increasing water pressure caused trapped air pockets to implode , tearing apart the hull . Data from a sonar map made during a 2010 expedition showed that the stern section rotated like a helicopter blade as it sank . The rudder appears to have swung over to an angle of about 30 – 45 ° during the stern 's descent , causing the section to follow a tight spiral to the bottom . It probably struck rudder @-@ first , burying most of the rudder in the mud up to a depth of 50 feet ( 15 m ) . The decks pancaked on top of each other and the hull plating splayed out to the sides of the shattered section . The <unk> is so severe that the combined height of the decks , which are piled up on top of the reciprocating engines , is now generally not more than about 12 to 15 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 to 4 @.@ 6 m ) high . No individual deck is more than about 1 foot ( 30 cm ) high . 
 Large sections of the hull plating seem to have fallen off well before the wreck hit the bottom . One such section , thought to have been from the galleys , separated from the stern in one piece and landed nearby . The force of the water tore up the poop deck and folded it back on itself . The center propeller is totally buried , while the force of the impact caused the two wing propellers and shafts to be bent upwards by an angle of about 20 ° . 
 A large V @-@ shaped section of the ship just aft of midships , running from the keel upwards through Number 1 Boiler Room and upwards to cover the area under the third and fourth funnels , was believed to have disintegrated entirely when the ship broke up . This was one of the weakest parts of the ship as a result of the presence of two large open spaces – the forward end of the engine room and the aft First Class passenger staircase . The rest of this part of the ship are scattered across the seabed at distances of 130 to 260 feet ( 40 to 79 m ) from the main part of the stern . During the 2010 expedition to map the wreck site , a major chunk of the deck house ( the base of the third funnel ) along with pieces of the third funnel was found . This showed that instead of simply disintegrating into a mass of debris , large sections of the ship broke off in chunks and that the ship broke in half between the second and third funnels , not the third and fourth funnels . Five of the boilers from Number 1 Boiler Room came loose during its disintegration and landed in the debris field around the stern . Experts believe that this tight cluster of the boilers marks the hypocenter of where the ship broke up 12 @,@ 000 feet above . The rest of the boilers are still presumably located in the bow section . 
 = = = Debris fields = = = 
 As Titanic broke apart , many objects and pieces of hull were scattered across the sea bed . There are two debris fields in the vicinity of the wreck , each between 2 @,@ 000 – 2 @,@ 600 ft ( 610 – 729 m ) long , trailing in a south @-@ westerly direction from the bow and stern . They cover an area of about 2 square miles ( 5 @.@ 2 km2 ) . Most of the debris is concentrated near the stern section of Titanic . It consists of thousands of objects from the interior of the ship , ranging from tons of coal spilled from ruptured bunkers to suitcases , clothes , <unk> wine bottles ( many still intact despite the pressure ) , bathtubs , windows , <unk> , jugs , bowls , hand mirrors and numerous other personal effects . The debris field also includes numerous pieces of the ship itself , with the largest pieces of debris in the vicinity of the partially disintegrated stern section . 
 = = Condition and deterioration of the wreck = = 
 Prior to the discovery of Titanic 's wreck , in addition to the common assumption that she had sunk in one piece , it had been widely believed that conditions at 12 @,@ 000 feet down would preserve the ship virtually intact . The water is bitterly cold at only about 1 – 2 ° C ( 34 – 36 ° F ) , there is no light and the high pressure was thought to be likely to lower oxygen and salinity levels to the point that organisms would not be able to gain a foothold on the wreck . Titanic would effectively be in a deep freeze . The reality has turned out to be very different , and the ship has increasingly deteriorated since she sank in April 1912 . Her gradual decay is due to a number of different processes – physical , chemical and biological . She is situated on an undulating , gently sloping area of seabed in a small canyon swept by the Western Boundary Current . <unk> from the current flow constantly across the wreck , scouring the sea bed and keeping sediment from building up over the hull . The current is strong and often changeable , gradually opening up holes in the ship 's hull . Salt corrosion eats away at the hull and it is also affected by galvanic corrosion . 
 The most dramatic deterioration has been caused by biological factors . It used to be thought that the depths of the ocean were a lifeless desert , but research carried out since the mid @-@ 1980s has found that the ocean floor is teeming with life and may rival the tropical rainforests for biodiversity . During the 1991 IMAX expedition , scientists were surprised by the variety of organisms that they found in and around Titanic . A total of 28 species were observed , including anemones , crabs , shrimp , starfish and rattail fish up to a yard ( 1 m ) long . Much larger creatures have been glimpsed by explorers . Some of Titanic 's fauna has never been seen anywhere else ; James Cameron 's 2001 expedition discovered a previously unknown type of sea cucumber , lavender with a glowing row of phosphorescent " portholes " along its side . A newly discovered species of bacterium found on the ship has been named <unk> <unk> , which has been found to cause rapid decay of the wreck . Henrietta Mann , who discovered the bacteria , has estimated that the Titanic will completely collapse possibly as soon as 2025 . The Canadian geophysicist Steve Blasco has commented that the wreck " has become an oasis , a thriving ecosystem sitting in a vast desert . " 
 The soft organic material aboard and dispersed onto the seabed around the hull would have been the first to disappear , rapidly devoured by fish and crustaceans . Wood @-@ boring molluscs such as Teredo colonized the ship 's decks and interior in huge numbers , eating away the wooden decking and other wooden objects such as furniture , paneling , doors and staircase banisters . When their food ran out they died , leaving behind calcareous tubes . The question of the victims ' bodies is one that has often troubled explorers of the wreck site . When the debris field was surveyed in Robert Ballard 's 1986 expedition , pairs of shoes were observed lying next to each other on the sea bed . The flesh , bones , and clothes had long since been consumed but the tannin in the shoes ' leather had apparently resisted the bacteria , leaving the shoes as the only markers of where a body had once lain . Ballard has suggested that skeletons may remain deep within Titanic 's hull , such as in the engine rooms or third @-@ class cabins . This has been disputed by scientists , who have estimated that the bodies would have completely disappeared by the early 1940s at the latest . 
 In any event , the molluscs and scavengers did not consume everything organic . Some of the wooden objects on the ship and in the debris field have not been consumed , particularly those made of teak , a dense wood that seems to have resisted the borers . The First Class reception area off the ship 's Grand Staircase is still remarkably intact and furniture is still visible among the debris on the floor . Although most of the corridors have lost their walls , furniture is still in place in many cabins ; in one , a mattress is still on the bed , with an intact and undamaged dresser behind it . Robert Ballard has suggested that areas within the ship or buried under debris , where scavengers may not have been able to reach , may still contain human remains . According to Charles Pellegrino , who dived on Titanic in 2001 , a finger bone encircled by the partial remains of a wedding ring was found concreted to the bottom of a soup <unk> that was retrieved from the debris field . It was returned to the sea bed on the next dive . 
 The longest @-@ lasting inhabitants of Titanic are likely to be bacteria and archaea which have colonized the metal hull of the ship . They have produced " reddish @-@ brown stalactites of rust [ hanging ] down as much as several feet , looking like long needle @-@ like icicles " , as Robert Ballard has put it . The formations , which Ballard dubbed " rusticles " , are extremely fragile and disintegrate in a cloud of particles if touched . The bacteria consume the iron in the hull , oxidizing it and leaving rust particles behind as a waste product . To protect themselves from the seawater , they secrete an acidic viscous slime that flows where gravity takes it , carrying ferric oxides and hydroxides . These form the rusticles . When scientists were able to retrieve a <unk> , it was discovered that it was far more complex than had been imagined , with complex systems of roots infiltrating the metal , interior channels , bundles of fibers , pores and other structures . Charles Pellegrino comments that they seem more akin to " levels of tissue organization found in sponges or mosses and other members of the animal or plant kingdoms . " The bacteria are estimated to be consuming Titanic 's hull at the rate of 400 pounds ( 180 kg ) per day . Roy <unk> , a microbiologist , estimates that the bow alone now supports some 650 tons of rusticles and that they will have devoured fifty per cent of the hull within 200 years . 
 Since Titanic 's wreck was discovered in 1985 , radical changes have been observed in the marine ecosystem around the ship . The 1996 expedition recorded 75 per cent more brittle stars and sea cucumbers than Ballard 's 1985 expedition , while crinoids and sea squirts had taken root all over the sea bed . Red krill had appeared and an unknown organism had built numerous nests across the seabed from black pebbles . The amount of rusticles on the ship had increased greatly . Curiously , the same thing had happened over about the same timescale to the wreck of the German battleship Bismarck , sunk at a depth of 4 @,@ 791 metres ( 15 @,@ 719 ft ) on the other side of the Atlantic . The mud around the ship was found to contain hundreds of different species of animals . The sudden explosion of life around Titanic may be a result of an increased amount of nutrients falling from the surface , possibly a result of human overfishing eliminating fish that would otherwise have consumed the nutrients . 
 Many scientists , including Robert Ballard , are concerned that visits by tourists in submersibles and the recovery of artefacts are causing the wreck to decay faster . Underwater bacteria have been eating away at Titanic 's steel and transformed it into rust since the ship sank , but because of the extra damage caused by visitors , the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration estimates that " the hull and structure of the ship may collapse to the ocean floor within the next 50 years . " The promenade deck has deteriorated significantly in recent years , partly because of damage caused by submersibles landing on the ship . The mast has almost completely deteriorated and has been stripped of its bell and brass light . Other damage includes a gash on the bow section where block letters once spelled Titanic , part of the brass <unk> which once held the ship 's wooden wheel is now twisted and the crow 's nest has completely deteriorated . The Canadian director James Cameron is responsible for some of the more significant damage during his expedition to the ship in mid @-@ 1995 to acquire footage for his 1997 film Titanic . One of the MIR submersibles used on the expedition collided with the hull , damaging both and leaving fragments of the submersible 's propeller shroud scattered around the superstructure . Captain Smith 's quarters were heavily damaged by the collapse of the external bulkhead , which exposed the cabin 's interior . 
 = = Ownership = = 
 Titanic 's discovery in 1985 sparked a debate over the ownership of the wreck and the valuable items inside and on the sea bed around it . Ballard and his crew did not bring up any artifacts from the wreck , considering such an act to be tantamount to grave robbing . Ballard has since argued strongly " that it be left unmolested by treasure seekers " . As Ballard has put it , the development of deep @-@ sea submersibles has made " the great pyramids of the deep .... accessible to man . He can either plunder them like the grave robbers of Egypt or protect them for the countless generations which will follow ours . " However , within only two weeks of the discovery , a British insurance company claimed that it owned the wreck , and several more schemes to raise it were announced . A Belgian entrepreneur offered trips to Titanic for $ 25 @,@ 000 a head . 
 Spurred by Ballard 's appeals for the wreck to be left alone , North Carolina Congressman Walter B. Jones , Jr. introduced the RMS Titanic Maritime Memorial Act in the United States House of Representatives in 1986 . It called for strict scientific guidelines to be introduced to govern the exploration and salvage of Titanic and urged the United States Secretary of State to lobby Canada , the United Kingdom and France to pass similar legislation . It passed the House and Senate by an overwhelming majority and was signed into law by President Ronald Reagan on 21 October 1986 . However , the law has been ineffective as the wreck lies outside United States waters , and the Act was set aside by the United States District for the Eastern District of Virginia , Norfolk Division , in 1998 . Although negotiations among the four countries were carried out between 1997 and 2000 , the resulting " Agreement Concerning the Shipwrecked Vessel <unk> Titanic " has been ratified by only the US and the UK . 
 = = = Litigation and controversy = = = 
 Only a few days after Ballard 's discovery of the wreck , Jack Grimm – the author of the unsuccessful early 1980s attempts to find Titanic – claimed ownership of it on the grounds that he had allegedly been the first to find it . He announced that he intended to begin salvaging the wreck . He said that he " [ couldn 't ] see them just lie there and be absorbed by the ocean floor . What possible harm can [ salvage ] do to this mass of twisted steel ? " 
 Titanic Ventures Inc . , a Connecticut @-@ based consortium , co @-@ sponsored a survey and salvage operation in 1987 with the French oceanographic agency IFREMER . The expedition produced an outcry , not least because of the damage that it caused to the wreck . When the crow 's nest bell was pulled from the mast , the crow 's nest itself , where the lookouts first saw the iceberg , collapsed . A Titanic survivor , Eva Hart , was outspoken in her condemnation of what many saw as the looting of a mass grave : " To bring up those things from a mass sea grave just to make a few thousand pounds shows a dreadful insensitivity and greed . The grave should be left alone . They 're simply going to do it as fortune hunters , vultures , pirates ! " 
 Public misgivings were increased when , on 28 October 1987 , a glitzy television program titled Return to the Titanic Live was broadcast from the Cité des Sciences et de l <unk> in Paris with Telly Savalas hosting . In front of a live TV audience , a valise recovered from the sea bed was opened , revealing a number of personal items apparently belonging to Richard L. Beckwith of New York , who survived the sinking . A safe was also opened , revealing a few items of memorabilia and some soggy banknotes . The tone of the event has been described by one commentator as " unsympathetic , lack [ ing ] dignity and finesse , and [ with ] all the superficial qualities of a ' media event ' . " The TV critic of The New York Times , John Corry , called the event " a combination of the sacred and profane and sometimes the downright silly . " Paul Heyer comments that it was " presented as a kind of deep sea striptease " and that Savalas " seemed haggard , missed several cues and at one point almost tripped over a chair " . Controversy persisted after the broadcast when claims were made that the safe had been opened beforehand and that the show had effectively been a fraud . 
 In the meantime , Marex @-@ Titanic Inc. was formed in 1992 to launch an expedition to the Titanic . Marex @-@ Titanic 's CEO was James Kollar . The company was a subsidiary of Marex International , an international marine salvage firm located in Memphis , Tennessee . In 1992 Marex made a bid to seize control of the artefacts and the wreck itself by suing Titanic Ventures , arguing that the latter had abandoned its claim by not returning to the wreck since the 1987 expedition . It claimed a superior right of salvage based on a " pill bottle " and hull fragment that were said to have been retrieved by Marex . Marex simultaneously sent a vessel , the Sea Mussel , to carry out its own salvage operation . However , the Marex artefacts were alleged to have been illegally retrieved by the 1991 Russian @-@ American @-@ Canadian expedition and Marex was issued with a temporary injunction preventing it from carrying out its plans . In October 1992 the injunction was made permanent and the salvage claims of Titanic Ventures were upheld . The decision was later reversed by an appeals court but Marex 's claims were not renewed . Even so , Titanic Ventures ' control of the artefacts recovered in 1987 remained in question until 1993 when a French administrator in the Office of Maritime Affairs of the Ministry of Equipment , Transportation , and Tourism awarded the company title to the artefacts . 
 In May 1993 Titanic Ventures sold its interests in the salvage operations and artefacts to RMS Titanic Inc . , a subsidiary of Premier Exhibitions Inc. headed by George Tulloch and Arnie Geller . It had to go through a laborious legal process of having itself legally recognised as the sole and exclusive salvager of the wreck . Its claim was opposed for a while by the Liverpool and London Steamship Protection and Indemnity Association , Titanic 's former insurer , but was eventually settled . It was awarded ownership and salvaging rights by the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia on 7 June 1994 in a ruling that declared the company to be the " salvor in possession " of the wreck . 
 Litigation has continued over the artefacts in recent years . In a motion filed on 12 February 2004 , RMS Titanic Inc. requested that the United States district court enter an order awarding it " title to all the artifacts ( including portions of the hull ) which are the subject of this action pursuant to the Law of Finds " or , in the alternative , a salvage award in the amount of $ 225 million . RMS Titanic Inc. excluded from its motion any claim for an award of title to the objects recovered in 1987 , but it did request that the district court declare that , based on the French administrative action , " the artifacts raised during the 1987 expedition are independently owned by <unk> . " Following a hearing , the district court entered an order dated 2 July 2004 , in which it refused to grant comity or recognise the 1993 decision of the French administrator , and rejected RMS Titanic Inc . ' s claim that it should be awarded title to the items recovered since 1993 under the Maritime Law of Finds . 
 RMS Titanic Inc. appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit . In its decision of 31 January 2006 the court recognised " explicitly the appropriateness of applying maritime salvage law to historic wrecks such as that of Titanic " and denied the application of the Maritime Law of Finds . The court also ruled that the district court lacked jurisdiction over the " 1987 artifacts " , and therefore vacated that part of the court 's 2 July 2004 order . In other words , according to this decision , RMS Titanic Inc. has ownership title to the objects awarded in the French decision ( valued $ 16 @.@ 5 million earlier ) and continues to be salvor @-@ in @-@ possession of the Titanic wreck . The Court of Appeals remanded the case to the District Court to determine the salvage award ( $ 225 million requested by RMS Titanic Inc . ) . 
 On 24 March 2009 , it was revealed that the fate of 5 @,@ 900 artefacts retrieved from the wreck would rest with a U.S. District Judge 's decision . The ruling was later issued in two decisions on 12 August 2010 and 15 August 2011 . As announced in 2009 , the judge ruled that RMS Titanic Inc. owned the artefacts and her decision dealt with the status of the wreck as well as establishing a monitoring system to check future activity upon the wreck site . On 12 August 2010 , Judge Rebecca Beach Smith granted RMS Titanic , Inc. fair market value for the artefacts but deferred ruling on their ownership and the conditions for their preservation , possible disposition and exhibition until a further decision could be reached . On 15 August 2011 , Judge Smith granted title to thousands of artefacts from the Titanic , that RMS Titanic Inc. did not already own under a French court decision concerning the first group of salvaged artefacts , to RMS Titanic Inc. subject to a detailed list of conditions concerning preservation and disposition of the items . The artefacts can be sold only to a company that would abide by the lengthy list of conditions and restrictions . RMS Titanic Inc. can profit from the artefacts through exhibiting them . 
 RMS Titanic Inc. has also attempted to secure exclusive physical access to the wreck site . In 1996 , it obtained a court order finding that it had " the exclusive right to take any and all types of photographic images of the Titanic wreck and wreck site . " It obtained another order in 1998 against Deep Ocean Expeditions and Chris Haver , a British Virgin Islands corporation that aimed to run tourist trips to Titanic at a cost of $ 32 @,@ 000 per person ( it now charges $ 60 @,@ 000 ) . This was overturned in March 1999 by the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit , which ruled that the law of salvage did not extend to obtaining exclusive rights to view , visit and photograph a wreck . The court pointed out that Titanic is " located in a public place " in international waters , rather than in a private or controllable location to which access could be restricted by the owner . Granting such a right would also create a perverse incentive ; since the aim of salvage is to carry out a salvage operation , leaving property in place so that it could be photographed would run counter to this objective . 
 = = = Conservation issues = = = 
 RMS Titanic Inc. has attracted considerable controversy for its approach to Titanic . Two rival camps have formed following the wreck 's discovery : the " conservationists " , championed by RMS Titanic Inc . ' s George Tulloch ( who died in 2004 ) , and the " protectionists " , whose most prominent advocate is Robert Ballard . The first camp has argued that artefacts from around the wreck should be recovered and conserved , while the latter camp argues that the entire wreck site should have been left undisturbed as a mass grave . Both camps agree that the wreck itself should not be salvaged – though RMS Titanic Inc. did not stick to its proclaimed " hands @-@ off " policy when it managed to demolish Titanic 's crow 's nest in the course of retrieving the bell . Its predecessor Titanic Ventures agreed with IFREMER that it would not sell any of the artefacts but would put them on public display , for which it could charge an entry fee . 
 Tulloch 's approach has undoubtedly resulted in outcomes that would not have been possible otherwise . In 1991 , he presented Edith Brown <unk> , a 96 @-@ year @-@ old survivor of the disaster , with her father 's pocket watch which had been retrieved from the sea bed . She had last seen it on 15 April 1912 when he waved goodbye to his wife and daughter as they left aboard lifeboat 14 . They never saw him again and he presumably went down with the ship . The watch was loaned to <unk> " for life " ; when she died four years later it was reclaimed by RMS Titanic Inc . On another occasion , a steamer trunk spotted in the debris field was found to contain three musical instruments , a deck of playing cards , a diary belonging to one Howard Irwin , and a bundle of letters from his girlfriend Pearl Shuttle . It was first thought that Irwin , a musician and professional gambler , had boarded the ship under a false identity . There was no record of him being among the passengers , even though a ticket had been purchased for him . It turned out that he had stayed ashore but his trunk had been brought aboard the ship by his friend Henry <unk> , who was among the victims of the disaster . The fragile contents of the trunk were preserved due to the interior being starved of oxygen , which prevented bacteria from consuming the paper . Very few other shipwrecks have yielded readable paper . 
 On the other hand , the heavily commercialised approach of RMS Titanic Inc. has caused repeated controversy and many have argued that salvaging Titanic is an inherently disrespectful act . The wreck site has been called a " tomb and a reliquary " , a " gravestone for the 1 @,@ 500 people who died " and " hallowed ground " . Titanic historians John Eaton and Charles Haas argue that the salvagers are little more than " plunderers and armchair salvage experts " and others have characterised them as " grave robbers " . The Return to Titanic ... Live ! television show in 1987 was widely condemned as a " circus " , though the 1987 expedition 's scientific and financial leaders had no control over the show . In a particularly controversial episode , RMS Titanic Inc. sold some 80 @,@ 000 lumps of coal retrieved from the debris field in order to fund the rumoured $ 17 million cost of lifting the " Big Piece " of the ship 's hull . It attempted to get around the no @-@ sale agreement with IFREMER by charging the new owners a $ 25 " fee " to act as " conservators " , in order to claim that the coal lumps had not actually been sold . This attracted strong criticism from all sides . Nonetheless , in 1999 Tulloch was ousted by the company 's shareholders and was replaced by Arnie Geller , who promised a more aggressive approach to making a profit . The company declared that it had an " absolute right " to sell recovered gold , coins and currency . It was prevented from doing this by a court order in the United States and IFREMER withdrew its cooperation and its submersibles , threatening a lawsuit . 
 = = Exhibitions of Titanic artifacts = = 
 Objects from Titanic have been exhibited for many years , though only a few were retrieved before the discovery of the wreck in 1985 . The Maritime Museum of the Atlantic in Halifax , Nova Scotia has a collection of wooden fragments and an intact deckchair plucked from the sea by the Canadian search vessels that recovered the victims ' bodies . Various other museums , including the National Maritime Museum in Greenwich and the SeaCity Museum in Southampton , have objects donated by survivors and relatives of victims , including some items that were retrieved from the bodies of victims . More donated Titanic artefacts are to be found in the Merseyside Maritime Museum in Liverpool and the Titanic Historical Society 's museum in Indian Orchard , Springfield , Massachusetts . The latter 's collection includes items such as the life jacket of Madeleine Astor , the wife of millionaire Titanic victim John Jacob Astor IV , a rivet which was removed from the hull before Titanic went to sea , an ice warning which never reached the bridge , a restaurant menu and a sample square of carpet from a First Class stateroom . 
 RMS Titanic Inc. organises large @-@ scale exhibitions around the world of artefacts retrieved from the wreck site . After minor exhibitions were held in Paris and Scandinavia , the first major exhibition of recovered artefacts was held at the National Maritime Museum in 1994 – 95 . It was hugely popular , drawing an average of 21 @,@ 000 visitors a week during the year @-@ long exhibition . Since then , RMS Titanic Inc. has established a large @-@ scale permanent exhibition of Titanic artefacts at the Luxor hotel and casino in Las Vegas , Nevada . The 25 @,@ 000 square feet ( 2 @,@ 300 m2 ) exhibit is the home of the " Big Piece " of the hull retrieved in 1998 and features conserved items including luggage , Titanic 's whistles , floor tiles and an unopened bottle of champagne . The exhibit includes a full @-@ scale replica of the ship 's Grand Staircase and part of the Promenade Deck , and even a mock @-@ up of the iceberg . It also runs a travelling exhibition called Titanic : The Artifact Exhibition which has opened in various cities around the world and has been seen by over 20 million people . The exhibition typically runs for six to nine months featuring a combination of artefacts , reconstructions and displays of the ship , her passengers and crew and the disaster itself . In a similar fashion to the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington , D.C. , visitors are given a " boarding pass " in the name of an individual passenger at the start of the exhibition . They do not discover the fate of their assigned passenger until the end . 
 = Germany – Japan relations = 
 The Germany – Japan relations ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> ) and German : Deutsch @-@ <unk> <unk> ) were established in 1860 with the first ambassadorial visit to Japan from Prussia ( which predated the formation of the German Empire in 1866 / 1870 ) . Japan modernized rapidly after the Meiji Restoration of 1867 , often using German models through intense intellectual and cultural exchange . After 1900 Japan aligned itself with Britain , and Germany and Japan were enemies in World War I. Japan declared war on Germany in 1914 and seized key German possessions in China and the Pacific . 
 In the 1930s , both countries adopted aggressive militaristic attitudes toward their respective regions . This led to a rapprochement and , eventually , a political and military alliance that included Italy : the " Axis " . During the Second World War , however , the Axis was limited by the great distances between the Axis powers ; for the most part , Japan and Germany fought separate wars , and eventually surrendered separately . 
 After the Second World War , the economies of both nations experienced rapid recoveries ; bilateral relations , now focused on economic issues , were soon re @-@ established . Today , Japan and Germany are , respectively , the third and fourth largest economies in the world , and benefit greatly from many kinds of political , cultural , scientific and economic cooperation . 
 According to a late 2012 Bertelsmann Foundation Poll , the Germans view Japan overwhelmingly positively , and regard that nation as less a competitor and more a partner . The Japanese views of Germany are positive as well , with 97 % viewing Germany positively and only 3 % viewing Germany negatively . 
 = = Country comparison = = 
 = = History = = 
 = = = First contacts and end of Japanese isolation ( before 1871 ) = = = 
 Relations between Japan and Germany date from the Tokugawa shogunate ( 1603 – 1868 ) , when Germans in Dutch service arrived in Japan to work for the Dutch East India Company ( VOC ) . The first well @-@ documented cases are those of the physicians Engelbert <unk> ( 1651 – 1716 ) and Philipp Franz Balthasar von Siebold ( 1796 – 1866 ) in the 1820s and 1860s respectively . Both accompanied the director of the Dutch trading post at Dejima on the obligatory voyage to Edo to pay tribute to the Shogun . Siebold became the author of Nippon , Archiv zur Beschreibung von Japan ( Nippon , Archive For The Description of Japan ) , one of the most valuable sources of information on Japan well into the 20th century ; since 1979 his achievements have been recognised with an annual German award in his honour , the Philipp Franz von Siebold @-@ Preis , granted to Japanese scientists . Von Siebold 's second visit to Japan ( 1859 @-@ 1862 ) became a disaster because he tried to influence Dutch politics in Japan and tried to obtain a permanent post as a diplomat in that country . 
 In 1854 the United States pressured Japan into the Convention of Kanagawa , which ended Japan 's isolation , but was considered an " unequal treaty " by the Japanese public , since the US did not reciprocate most of Japan 's concessions with similar privileges . In many cases Japan was effectively forced into a system of extraterritoriality that provided for the subjugation of foreign residents to the laws of their own consular courts instead of the Japanese law system , open up ports for trade , and later even allow Christian missionaries to enter the country . Shortly after the end of Japan 's seclusion , in a period called " Bakumatsu " ( <unk> , " End of the Shogunate " ) , the first German traders arrived in Japan . In 1860 Count Friedrich Albrecht zu Eulenburg led the Eulenburg Expedition to Japan as ambassador from Prussia , a leading regional state in the German Confederation at that time . After four months of negotiations , another " unequal treaty " , officially dedicated to amity and commerce , was signed in January 1861 between Prussia and Japan . 
 Despite being considered one of the numerous unjust negotiations pressed on Japan during that time , the Eulenburg Expedition , and both the short- and long @-@ term consequences of the treaty of amity and commerce , are today honoured as the beginning of official Japanese @-@ German relations . To commemorate its 150th anniversary , events were held in both Germany and Japan from autumn 2010 through autumn 2011 hoping " to ' raise the treasures of [ their ] common past ' in order to build a bridge to the future . " 
 = = = = Japanese diplomatic mission in Prussia = = = = 
 In 1863 , three years after von Eulenburg 's visit in Tokyo , a <unk> legation arrived at the Prussian court of King Wilhelm I and was greeted with a grandiose ceremony in Berlin . After the treaty was signed , Max von Brandt became diplomatic representative in Japan – first representing Prussia , and after 1866 representing the North German Confederation , and by 1871 representing the newly established German Empire . 
 In 1868 the Tokugawa Shogunate was overthrown and the Empire of Japan under Emperor Meiji was established . With the return of power to the <unk> Dynasty , Japan demanded a revocation of the " unequal treaties " with the western powers and a civil war ensued . During the conflict , German weapons trader Henry Schnell counselled and supplied weapons to the Daimyo of Nagaoka , a land lord loyal to the Shogunate . One year later , the war ended with the defeat of the Tokugawa and the renegotiation of the " unequal treaties " . 
 = = = Modernization of Japan and educational exchange ( 1871 – 1885 ) = = = 
 With the start of the Meiji period ( 1868 – 1912 ) , many Germans came to work in Japan as advisors to the new government as so @-@ called " <unk> <unk> " ( <unk> , " hired foreigners " ) and contributed to the modernization of Japan , especially in the fields of medicine ( Leopold Mueller , 1824 – 1894 ; Julius <unk> , 1848 – 1905 ; Erwin <unk> , 1849 – 1913 ) , law ( K. F. Hermann Roesler , 1834 – 1894 ; Albert Mosse , 1846 – 1925 ) and military affairs ( K. W. Jacob Meckel , 1842 – 1906 ) . Meckel had been invited by Japan 's government in 1885 as an advisor to the Japanese general staff and as teacher at the Army War College . He spent three years in Japan , working with influential persons including Katsura Tarō and Kawakami <unk> , thereby decisively contributing to the modernization of the Imperial Japanese Army . Meckel left behind a loyal group of Japanese admirers , who , after his death , had a bronze statue of him erected in front of his former army college in Tokyo . Overall , the Imperial Japanese Army intensively oriented its organization along <unk> @-@ German lines when building a modern fighting force during the 1880s . The French model that had been followed by the late shogunate and the early Meiji government was gradually replaced by the Prussian model under the leadership of officers such as Katsura Taro and Nogi Maresuke . 
 In 1889 the ‘ Constitution of the Empire of Japan ’ was promulgated , greatly influenced by German legal scholars Rudolf von <unk> and Lorenz von Stein , whom the Meiji oligarch and future Prime Minister of Japan Itō Hirobumi ( 1841 – 1909 ) visited in Berlin and Vienna in 1882 . At the request of the German government , Albert Mosse also met with Hirobumi and his group of government officials and scholars and gave a series of lectures on constitutional law , which helped to convince Hirobumi that the Prussian @-@ style monarchical constitution was best @-@ suited for Japan . In 1886 Mosse was invited to Japan on a three @-@ year contract as " hired foreigner " to the Japanese government to assist Hirobumi and Inoue <unk> in drafting the Meiji Constitution . He later worked on other important legal drafts , international agreements , and contracts and served as a cabinet advisor in the Home Ministry , assisting Prime Minister Yamagata Aritomo in establishing the draft laws and systems for local government . Dozens of Japanese students and military officers also went to Germany in the late 19th century , to study the German military system and receive military training at German army educational facilities and within the ranks of the German , mostly the Prussian army . For example , later famous writer Mori <unk> ( Mori Ōgai ) , who originally was an army doctor , received tutoring in the German language between 1872 and 1874 , which was the primary language for medical education at the time . From 1884 to 1888 , Ōgai visited Germany and developed an interest in European literature producing the first translations of the works of Goethe , Schiller , and Gerhart Hauptmann . 
 = = = Cooling of relations and World War I ( 1885 – 1920 ) = = = 
 At the end of the 19th century , Japanese – German relations cooled due to Germany ’ s , and in general Europe 's , imperialist aspirations in East Asia . After the conclusion of the First Sino @-@ Japanese War in April 1895 , the Treaty of Shimonoseki was signed , which included several territorial cessions from China to Japan , most importantly Taiwan and the eastern portion of the bay of the Liaodong Peninsula including Port Arthur . However , Russia , France and Germany grew wary of an ever @-@ expanding Japanese sphere of influence and wanted to take advantage of China 's bad situation by expanding their own colonial possessions instead . The frictions culminated in the so @-@ called " Triple Intervention " on 23 April 1895 , when the three powers " urged " Japan to refrain from acquiring its awarded possessions on the Liaodong Peninsula . In the following years , Wilhelm II ’ s nebulous fears of a “ Yellow Peril ” – a united Asia under Japanese leadership , led to further Japanese – German estrangement . Wilhelm II also introduced a regulation to limit the number of members of the Japanese army to come to Germany to study the military system . 
 Another stress test for German – Japanese relations was the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 / 05 , during which Germany strongly supported Russia . This circumstance triggered the Japanese foreign ministry to proclaim that any ship delivering coal to Russian vessels within the war zone would be sunk . After the Russo @-@ Japanese War , Germany insisted on reciprocity in the exchange of military officers and students , and in the following years , several German military officers were sent to Japan to study the Japanese military , which , after its victory over the tsarist army became a promising organization to study . However , Japan 's growing power and influence also caused increased distrust on the German side . 
 The onset of the First World War in Europe eventually showed how far German – Japanese relations had truly deteriorated . On 7 August 1914 , only two days after Britain declared war on the German Empire , the Japanese government received an official request from the British government for assistance in destroying the German raiders of the Kaiserliche Marine in and around Chinese waters . Japan , eager to reduce the presence of European colonial powers in South @-@ East Asia , especially on China 's coast , sent Germany an ultimatum on 14 August 1914 , which was left unanswered . Japan then formally declared war on the German Empire on 23 August 1914 thereby entering the First World War as an ally of Britain , France and the Russian Empire to seize the German @-@ held Caroline , Marshall , and Mariana Islands in the Pacific . 
 The only major battle that took place between Japan and Germany was the siege of the German @-@ controlled Chinese port of Tsingtao in Kiautschou Bay . The German forces held out from August until November 1914 , under a total Japanese / British blockade , sustained artillery barrages and manpower odds of 6 : 1 – a fact that gave a morale boost during the siege as well as later in defeat . After Japanese troops stormed the city , the German dead were buried at Tsingtao and the remaining troops were transported to Japan where they were treated with respect at places like the Bandō Prisoner of War camp . In 1919 , when the German Empire formally signed the Treaty of Versailles , all prisoners of war were set free and returned to Europe . 
 Japan was a signatory of the Treaty of Versailles , which stipulated harsh repercussions for Germany . In the Pacific , Japan gained Germany 's islands north of the equator ( the Marshall Islands , the Carolines , the Marianas , the Palau Islands ) and Kiautschou / Tsingtao in China . Article 156 of the Treaty also transferred German concessions in Shandong to Japan rather than returning sovereign authority to China , an issue soon to be known as Shandong Problem . Chinese outrage over this provision led to demonstrations , and a cultural movement known as the May Fourth Movement influenced China not to sign the treaty . China declared the end of its war against Germany in September 1919 and signed a separate treaty with Germany in 1921 . This fact greatly contributed to Germany relying on China , and not Japan , as its strategic partner in East Asia for the coming years . 
 = = = Rapprochement , Axis and World War II ( 1920 – 1945 ) = = = 
 After Germany had to cede most of former German New Guinea and Kiautschou / Tsingtao to Japan and with an intensifying Sino @-@ German cooperation , relations between Berlin and Tokyo were nearly dead . Under the initiative of Wilhelm Solf , who served as German ambassador to Japan from 1920 to 1928 , cultural exchange was strengthened again , culminating in the re @-@ establishment of the " German @-@ Japanese Society " ( 1926 ) , the founding of the " Japanese @-@ German Cultural Society " ( 1927 ) , and of the " Japanese @-@ German Research Institute " ( 1934 ) . 
 A temporary strain was put on German @-@ Japanese rapprochement in June 1935 , when the Anglo @-@ German Naval Agreement was signed between the United Kingdom and Nazi Germany , one of many attempts by Adolf Hitler to improve relations between the two countries . After all , Hitler had already laid down his plans in Mein Kampf , in which he identified England as a promising partner , but also defined Japan as a target of " international Jewry " , and thus a possible ally : 
 It was not in the interests of Great Britain to have Germany annihilated , but primarily a Jewish interest . And to @-@ day the destruction of Japan would serve British political interests less than it would serve the far @-@ reaching intentions of those who are leading the movement that hopes to establish a Jewish world @-@ empire . 
 At the time , many Japanese politicians , including Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto ( who was an outspoken critic of an alliance with Nazi Germany ) , were shocked by the Anglo @-@ German Naval Agreement . Nevertheless , the leaders of the military clique then in control in Tokyo concluded that it was a ruse designed to buy the Nazis time to match the British navy . 
 = = = = Consolidation of cooperation = = = = 
 Tokyo 's military leaders proceeded to devise plans assuring the Empire 's supply with resources by eventually creating a " Greater East Asia Co @-@ Prosperity Sphere " . In general , further expansion was envisioned – either northwards , attacking the Soviet Union , a plan which was called Hokushin @-@ ron , or by seizing French , Dutch and / or British colonies to the south , a concept dubbed " Nanshin " . Hitler , on the other hand , never desisted from his plan to conquer new territories in Eastern Europe for Lebensraum ; thus , conflicts with Poland and later with the Soviet Union seemed inevitable . 
 The first legal consolidation of German @-@ Japanese mutual interests occurred in 1936 , when the two countries then signed the Anti @-@ Comintern Pact , which was directed against the Communist International ( Comintern ) in general and the Soviet Union in particular . After the signing , Nazi Germany 's government also included the Japanese people in their concept of " honorary Aryans " . <unk> , Prince Chichibu then attended the 1937 Nuremberg Rally in Germany and met Adolf Hitler , with whom he tried to boost personal relations . Fascist Italy , led by Benito Mussolini joined the pact the same year , initiating the formation of the so @-@ called Axis between Rome , Berlin and Tokyo . 
 Originally , Germany had a very close relationship with the Chinese nationalist government , even providing military aid and assistance to the Republic of China . Relations soured after the outbreak of the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War on 7 July 1937 , and when China shortly thereafter concluded the Sino @-@ Soviet Non @-@ Aggression Pact with the Soviet Union . Eventually Hitler concluded that Japan , not China , would be a more reliable geostrategic partner , notwithstanding the superior Sino @-@ German economic relationship and chose to end his alliance with the Chinese as the price of gaining an alignment with the more modern and powerful Japan . In a May 1938 address to the Reichstag , Hitler announced German recognition of Manchukuo , the Japanese @-@ occupied puppet state in Manchuria , and renounced the German claims to the former colonies in the Pacific held by Japan . Hitler ordered the end of arm shipments to China , as well as the recall of all German officers attached to the Chinese Army . Despite this move , however , Hitler retained his general perception of neither the Japanese nor the Chinese civilizations being inferior to the German one . In The Political Testament of Adolf Hitler , he wrote : 
 Pride in one 's own race – and that does not imply contempt for other races – is also a normal and healthy sentiment . I have never regarded the Chinese or the Japanese as being inferior to ourselves . They belong to ancient civilizations , and I admit freely that their past history is superior to our own . They have the right to be proud of their past , just as we have the right to be proud of the civilization to which we belong . Indeed , I believe the more steadfast the Chinese and the Japanese remain in their pride of race , the easier I shall find it to get on with them . 
 During the late 1930s , though motivated by political and propaganda reasons , several cultural exchanges between Japan and Germany took place . A focus was put on youth exchanges , and numerous mutual visits were conducted ; for instance , in late 1938 , the ship Gneisenau carried a delegation of 30 members of the Hitlerjugend to Tokyo for a study visit . 
 In 1938 , representative measures for embracing the German @-@ Japanese partnership were sought and the construction of a new Japanese embassy building in Berlin was started . After the preceding embassy had to give way to Hitler 's and Albert Speer 's plans of re @-@ modeling Berlin to the world capital city of Germania , a new and more pompous building was erected in a newly established diplomatic district next to the Tiergarten . It was conceived by Ludwig <unk> under the supervision of Speer and was placed opposite the Italian embassy , thereby bestowing an architectural emphasis on the Rome @-@ Berlin @-@ Tokyo axis . 
 Despite tentative plans for a joint German @-@ Japanese approach against the USSR were hinted on in the 1936 Anti @-@ Comintern Pact , the years 1938 and 1939 were already decisive for Japan 's decision to not expand northward ( i.e. , against the USSR ) but to the south . The Empire decisively lost two border fights against the Soviets , the Battles of Lake Khasan and Khalkin Gol , thereby convincing itself that the Imperial Japanese Army , lacking heavy tanks and the like , would be in no position to challenge the Red Army at that time . Nevertheless , Hitler 's anti @-@ Soviet sentiment soon led to further <unk> with Japan , since he still believed that Japan would join Germany in a future war against the Soviet Union , either actively by invading southeast Siberia , or passively by binding large parts of the Red Army , which was fearing an attack of Japan 's Kwantung Army in Manchukuo , numbering ca . 700 @,@ 000 men as of the late 1930s . 
 In contrast to his actual plans , Hitler 's concept of stalling – in combination with his frustration with a Japan embroiled in seemingly endless negotiations with the United States , and tending against a war with the USSR – led to a temporary cooperation with the Soviets in the Molotov – Ribbentrop Pact , which was signed in August 1939 . Neither Japan nor Italy had been informed beforehand of Germany 's pact with the Soviets , demonstrating the constant subliminal mistrust between Nazi Germany and its partners . After all , the pact not only stipulated the division of Poland between both signatories in a secret protocol , but also rendered the Anti @-@ Comintern Pact more or less irrelevant . In order to remove the strain that Hitler 's move had put on German – Japanese relations , the " Agreement for Cultural Cooperation between Japan and Germany " was signed in November 1939 , only a few weeks after Germany and the Soviet Union had concluded their invasion of Poland and Great Britain and France declared war on Nazi Germany . 
 Over the following year , Japan also proceeded with its expansion plans . The Invasion of French Indochina on 22 September 1940 ( which by then was controlled by the collaborating government of Vichy France ) , and Japan 's ongoing bloody conflict with China , put a severe strain on American @-@ Japanese relations . On 26 July 1940 , the United States had passed the Export Control Act , cutting oil , iron and steel exports to Japan . This containment policy was Washington 's warning to Japan that any further military expansion would result in further sanctions . However , such US moves were interpreted by Japan 's militaristic leaders as signals that they needed to take radical measures to improve the Empire 's situation , thereby driving Japan closer to Germany . 
 = = = = Formation of the Axis = = = = 
 With Nazi Germany not only having conquered most of continental Europe including France , but also maintaining the impression of a Britain facing imminent defeat , Tokyo interpreted the situation in Europe as proof of a fundamental and fatal weakness in western democracies . Japan 's leadership concluded that the current state of affairs had to be exploited and subsequently started to seek even closer cooperation with Berlin . Hitler , for his part , not only feared a lasting stalemate with Britain , but also had started planning an invasion of the Soviet Union . These circumstances , together with a shortage in raw materials and food , increased Berlin 's interest in a stronger alliance with Japan . German foreign minister Joachim von Ribbentrop was sent to negotiate a new treaty with Japan , whose relationships with Germany and Italy , the three soon to be called " Axis powers " , were cemented with the Tripartite Pact of 27 September 1940 . 
 The purpose of the Pact , directed against an unnamed power presumed to be the United States , was to deter that power from supporting Britain , thereby not only strengthening Germany 's and Italy 's cause in the North African Campaign and the Mediterranean theatre , but also weakening British colonies in South @-@ East Asia in advance of a Japanese invasion . The treaty stated that the three countries would respect each other 's " leadership " in their respective spheres of influence , and would assist each other if attacked by an outside party . However , already @-@ ongoing conflicts , as of the signing of the Pact , were explicitly excluded . With this defensive terminology , aggression on the part of a member state toward a non @-@ member state would result in no obligations under the Pact . These limitations can be interpreted as a symptom of the German @-@ Japanese relations of that time being driven by mutual self @-@ interest , underpinned by the shared militarist , expansionist and nationalistic ideologies of their respective governments . 
 Another decisive limitation in the German @-@ Japanese alliance were the fundamental differences between the two nation 's policies towards Jews . With Nazi Germany 's well @-@ known attitude being extreme Antisemitism , Japan refrained from adopting any similar posture . On 31 December 1940 , Japanese foreign minister Yōsuke Matsuoka , a strong proponent of the Tripartite Pact , told a group of Jewish businessmen : 
 I am the man responsible for the alliance with Hitler , but nowhere have I promised that we would carry out his anti @-@ Semitic policies in Japan . This is not simply my personal opinion , it is the opinion of Japan , and I have no compunction about announcing it to the world . 
 On a similar note , both countries would continue to conceal any war crimes committed by the other side for the remainder of the war . The Holocaust was systematically concealed by the leadership in Tokyo , just as Japanese war crimes , e.g. the situation in China , were kept secret from the German public . An example would be the atrocities committed by the Japanese Army in Nanking in 1937 , which were denounced by German industrialist John Rabe . Subsequently , the German leadership ordered Rabe back to Berlin , confiscating all his reports and prohibiting any further discussion of the topic . 
 After the signing of the Tripartite Pact , mutual visits of political and military nature increased . After German ace and parachute expert Ernst Udet visited Japan in 1939 to inspect the Japanese aerial forces , reporting to Hermann Göring that " Japanese flyers , though brave and willing , are no sky @-@ beaters " , General Tomoyuki Yamashita was given the job of reorganizing the Japanese Air Arm in late 1940 . For this purpose , Yamashita arrived in Berlin in January 1941 , staying almost six months . He inspected the broken Maginot Line and German fortifications on the French coast , watched German flyers in training , and even flew in a raid over Britain after decorating Hermann Göring , head of the German Luftwaffe , with the Japanese " Grand Cordon of the Rising Sun " . General Yamashita also met and talked with Hitler , on whom he commented , 
 I felt , that in the mind of Hitler there was much of spiritual matters , transcending material plans . When I met the Führer he said that since boyhood he had been attracted by Japan . He read carefully reports of Japan 's victory over Russia when he was only 17 years old and was impressed by Japan 's astonishing strength . 
 According to Yamashita , Hitler promised to remember Japan in his will , by instructing the Germans " to bind themselves eternally to the Japanese spirit . " In fact , General Yamashita was so excited that he said : " In a short time , something great will happen . You just watch and wait . " Returning home , the Japanese delegation was accompanied by more than 250 German technicians , engineers and instructors . Soon , Japan 's Air Force was among the most powerful in the world . 
 On 11 November 1940 , German – Japanese relations , as well as Japan 's plans to expand southwards into South @-@ East Asia , were decisively bolstered when the crew of the German auxiliary cruiser Atlantis boarded the British cargo ship SS Automedon . Fifteen bags of Top Secret mail for the British Far East Command were found , including naval intelligence reports containing the latest assessment of the Japanese Empire 's military strength in the Far East , along with details of Royal Air Force units , naval strength , and notes on Singapore 's defences . It painted a gloomy picture of British land and naval capabilities in the Far East , and declared that Britain was too weak to risk war with Japan . The mail reached the German embassy in Tokyo on 5 December , and was then hand @-@ carried to Berlin via the Trans @-@ Siberian railway . On the initiative of the German naval attaché Paul Wenneker , a copy was given to the Japanese ; it provided valuable intelligence prior to their commencing hostilities against the Western Powers . The captain of the Atlantis , Bernhard Rogge , was rewarded for this with an ornate katana Samurai sword ; the only other Germans so honored were Hermann Göring and Field Marshal Erwin Rommel . 
 After reading the captured documents , on 7 January 1941 Japanese Admiral Yamamoto wrote to the Naval Minister asking whether , if Japan knocked out America , the remaining British and Dutch forces would be suitably weakened for the Japanese to deliver a deathblow . Thereby , Nanshin @-@ ron , the concept of the Japanese Navy conducting a southern campaign quickly matured and gained further proponents . 
 = = = = Stalling coordination of joint war plans = = = = 
 Hitler on the other hand was concluding the preparations for " Operation Barbarossa " , the invasion of the Soviet Union . In order to directly or indirectly support his imminent eastward strike , the Führer had repeatedly suggested to Japan that it reconsider plans for an attack on the Soviet Far East throughout 1940 and 1941 . In February 1941 , as a result of Hitler 's insistence , General Oshima returned to Berlin as Ambassador . On 5 March 1941 , Wilhelm Keitel , chief of OKW issued " Basic Order Number 24 regarding Collaboration with Japan " : 
 1 . It must be the aim of the collaboration based on the Three Power Pact to induce Japan , as soon as possible , to take active measures in the Far East . Strong British forces will thereby be tied down , and the center of gravity of the interests of the United States of America will be diverted to the Pacific . The sooner she intervenes , the greater will be the prospects of success for Japan in view of the still undeveloped preparedness for war on the part of her adversaries . The Barbarossa operation will create particularly favorable political and military prerequisites for this . 
 2 . To prepare the way for the collaboration it is essential to strengthen the Japanese military potential with all means available . For this purpose the High Commands of the branches of the Armed Forces will comply in a comprehensive and generous manner with Japanese desires for information regarding German war and combat experience , and for assistance in military economics and in technical matters . Reciprocity is desirable , but this factor should not stand in the way of negotiations . Priority should naturally be given to those Japanese requests which would have the most immediate application in waging war . In special cases the Führer reserves the decisions for himself . 
 3 . The harmonizing of the operational plans of the two parties is the responsibility of the Naval High Command . This will be subject to the following guiding principles : 
 a . The common aim of the conduct of war is to be stressed as forcing England to the ground quickly and thereby keeping the United States out of the war . Beyond this Germany has no political , military , or economic interests in the Far East which would give occasion for any reservations with regard to Japanese intentions . 
 b . The great successes achieved by Germany in mercantile warfare make it appear particularly suitable to employ strong Japanese forces for the same purpose . In this connection every opportunity to support German mercantile warfare must be exploited . 
 c . The raw material situation of the pact powers demands that Japan should acquire possession of those territories which it needs for the continuation of the war , especially if the United States intervenes . Rubber shipments must be carried out even after the entry of Japan into the war , since they are of vital importance to Germany . 
 d . The seizure of Singapore as the key British position in the Far East would mean a decisive success for the entire conduct of war of the three powers . In addition , attacks on other systems of bases of British naval power – extending to those of American naval power only if the entry of the United States into the war cannot be prevented – will result in weakening the enemy 's system of power in that region and also , just like the attack on sea communications , in tying down substantial forces of all kinds ( e.g. Australia ) . A date for the beginning of operational discussions cannot yet be fixed . 
 4 . In the military commissions to be formed in accordance with the Tripartite Pact , only such questions are to be dealt with as equally concern the three participating powers . These will include primarily the problems of economic warfare . The working out of the details is the responsibility of the main commission <unk> the co @-@ operation of the Armed Forces High Command . 
 5 . The Japanese must not be given any intimation of the Barbarossa operations . 
 On 18 March 1941 , at a conference attended by Hitler , Alfred Jodl , Wilhelm Keitel and Erich Raeder , Admiral Raeder stated : 
 Japan must take steps to seize Singapore as soon as possible , since the opportunity will never again be as favorable ( tie @-@ up of the whole English Meet ; unpreparedness of U.S.A. for war against Japan ; inferiority of the United States Pacific Fleet in comparison with the Japanese ) . Japan is indeed making preparations for this action ; but according to all declarations made by Japanese officers , she will only carry it out if Germany proceeds to land in England . Germany must , therefore , concentrate all her efforts on spurring Japan to act immediately . If Japan has Singapore , all other East Asiatic questions regarding the U.S.A. and England are thereby solved ( Guam , Philippines , Borneo , Dutch East Indies ) . Japan wishes , if possible , to avoid war against the U.S.A. She can do so if she determinedly takes Singapore as soon as possible . 
 In talks involving Hitler , his foreign minister Joachim von Ribbentrop , his Japanese counterpart at that time , Yōsuke Matsuoka , as well as Berlin 's and Tokyo 's respective ambassadors , Eugen Ott and Hiroshi Ōshima , the German side then broadly hinted at , but never openly asked for , either invading the Soviet Union from the east or attacking Britain 's colonies in South @-@ East Asia , thereby <unk> and diverting the British Empire away from Europe and thus somewhat covering Germany 's back . Although Germany would have clearly favored Japan 's attacking the USSR , exchanges between the two allies were always kept overly formal and indirect , as shown in the following statement by Hitler to ambassador Ōshima ( 2 June 1941 ) : 
 It would , of course , be up to Japan to act as it saw fit , but Japan 's cooperation in the fight against the Soviet Union would be welcomed if the [ Japanese ] advance to the south should run into difficulty because of supply and equipment . 
 Matsuoka , Ōshima and parts of the Japanese Imperial Army were proponents of Hokushin @-@ ron , Japan 's go @-@ north strategy aiming for a coordinated attack with Germany against the USSR and seizing East Siberia . But the Japanese army @-@ dominated military leadership , namely persons like minister of war Hideki Tōjō , were constantly pressured by the Japanese Imperial Navy and , thus , a strong tendency towards " Nanshin " existed already in 1940 , meaning to go south and exploit the weakened European powers by occupying their resource @-@ rich colonies in South @-@ East Asia . In order to secure Japan 's back while expanding southwards and as a Soviet effort to demonstrate peaceful intentions toward Germany , the Soviet – Japanese Neutrality Pact was signed in Moscow on 13 April 1941 by Matsuoka on his return trip from a visit to Berlin . Hitler , who was not informed in advance by the Japanese and considering the pact a ruse to stall , misinterpreted the diplomatic situation and thought that his attack on the USSR would bring a tremendous relief for Japan in East Asia and thereby a much stronger threat to American activities through Japanese interventions . As a consequence , Nazi Germany pressed forward with Operation Barbarossa , its attack on the Soviet Union , which started two months later on 22 June without any specific warning to its Axis partners . 
 Joseph Stalin had little faith in Japan 's commitment to neutrality even before the German attack , but he felt that the pact was important for its political symbolism , to reinforce a public affection for Germany . From Japan 's point of view the attack on Russia very nearly ruptured the Tripartite Pact on which the Empire was depending for Germany 's aid in maintaining good relations with Moscow so as to preclude any threat from Siberia . Prime Minister Fumimaro Konoe felt betrayed because the Germans clearly trusted their Axis allies too little to warn them of Barbarossa , even though he had feared the worst since receiving an April report from Ōshima in Berlin that " Germany is confident she can defeat Russia and she is preparing to fight at any moment . " Foreign minister Matsuoka on the other hand vividly tried to convince the Emperor , the cabinet as well as the army staff of an immediate attack on the Soviet Union . However , his colleagues rejected any such proposal , even regarding him as " Hitler 's office boy " by now and pointed out to the fact that the Japanese army , with its light and medium tanks , had no intention of taking on Soviet tanks and aircraft until they could be certain that the Wehrmacht had smashed the Red Army to the brink of defeat . 
 Subsequently , Konoe removed Matsuoka from his cabinet and stepped up Japan 's negotiations with the US again , which still failed over the China and Indochina issues , however , and the American demand to Japan to withdraw from the Tripartite Pact in anticipation of any settlement . Without any perspective with respect to Washington , Matsuoka felt that his government had to reassure Germany of its loyalty to the pact . In Berlin , Ōshima was ordered to convey to the German foreign minister Ribbentrop that the " Japanese government have decided to secure ' points d 'appui ' in French Indochina to enable further to strengthen her pressure on Great Britain and the United States of America , " and to present this as a " valuable contribution to the common front " by promising that " We Japanese are not going to sit on the fence while you Germans fight the Russians . " 
 Over the first months , Germany 's advances in Soviet Russia were spectacular and Stalin 's need to transfer troops currently protecting South @-@ East Siberia from a potential Japanese attack to the future defense of Moscow grew . Japan 's Kwantung Army in Manchuria was constantly kept in manoeuvres and , in talks with German foreign minister Ribbentrop , ambassador Oshima in Berlin repeatedly hinted at an " imminent Japanese attack " against the USSR . In fact , however , the leadership in Tokyo at this time had in no way changed its mind and these actions were merely concerted to create the illusion of an eastern threat to the Soviet Union in an effort to bind its Siberian divisions . Unknown to Japan and Germany , however , Richard Sorge , a Soviet spy disguised as a German journalist working for Eugen Ott , the German ambassador in Tokyo , advised the Red Army on 14 September 1941 , that the Japanese were not going to attack the Soviet Union until : 
 Moscow was captured 
 the size of the Kwantung Army was three times that of the Soviet Union 's Far Eastern forces 
 a civil war had started in Siberia . 
 Toward the end of September 1941 , Sorge transmitted information that Japan would not initiate hostilities against the USSR in the East , thereby freeing Red Army divisions stationed in Siberia for the defence of Moscow . In October 1941 Sorge was unmasked and arrested by the Japanese . Apparently , he was entirely trusted by the German ambassador Eugen Ott , and was allowed access to top secret cables from Berlin in the embassy in Tokyo . Eventually , this involvement would lead to Heinrich Georg <unk> replacing Ott in January 1943 . Sorge on the other hand would be executed in November 1944 and elevated to a national hero in the Soviet Union . 
 = = = = Japan enters World War II = = = = 
 In September 1941 Japan began its southward expansion by expanding its military presence in Indochina ( " securing ' points d 'appui ' " ) and decisively increased the number of stationed personnel and planes . This provoked the United States , the United Kingdom , and other Western governments to freeze Japanese assets , while the US ( which supplied 80 percent of Japan 's oil ) responded by placing a complete oil embargo on the Japanese Empire . As a result , Japan was essentially forced to choose between abandoning its ambitions in South @-@ East Asia and its prosecution of the war against China , or seizing the natural resources it needed by force . The Japanese military did not consider the former an option as attacking Soviet Russia instead of expanding into South Asia had become a more and more unpopular choice since Japan 's humiliating defeat at the Battle of Khalkin Gol in 1939 and the final rejection of any near @-@ term action in Siberia shortly after Germany began its invasion of the USSR . Moreover , many officers considered America 's oil embargo an unspoken declaration of war . With the harsh oil sanctions imposed by the United States , the Japanese leadership was now even more determined to remain in China . Germany had refused to sell Japan the blueprints to make synthetic oil , so Japan 's only hope for oil was to invade the Dutch East Indies , which would result in war with the United States and Britain . To succeed the Japanese had to neutralize the powerful United States Pacific Fleet , so they could prevent it from interfering with future Japanese movements in South @-@ East Asia and negotiate peace terms from a strong hand . 
 On 25 November 1941 , Germany tried to further solidify the alliance against Soviet Russia by officially reviving the Anti @-@ Comintern Pact of 1936 , now joined by additional signatories , Hungary and Romania . However , with the Soviet troops around Moscow now being reinforced by East Siberian divisions , Germany 's offensive substantially slowed with the onset of the Russian winter in November and December 1941 . In the face of his failing Blitzkrieg tactics , Hitler 's confidence in a successful and swift conclusion of the war diminished , especially with a US @-@ supported Britain being a constant threat in the Reich 's western front . Furthermore , it was evident that the " neutrality " which the US had superficially maintained to that point would soon change to an open and unlimited support of Britain against Germany . Hitler thus welcomed Japan 's sudden entry into the war with its air raid on the American naval base at Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941 and its subsequent declaration of war on the United States and Britain , just as the German army suffered its first military defeat at the gates of Moscow . Upon learning of Japan 's successful attack , Hitler even became euphoric , stating : " With such a capable ally we cannot lose this war . " Preceding Japan 's attack were numerous communiqués between Berlin and Tokyo . The respective ambassadors Ott and Ōshima tried to draft an amendment to the Tripartite Pact , in which Germany , Japan and Italy should pledge each other 's allegiance in the case one signatory is attacked by – or attacks – the United States . Although the protocol was finished in time , it would not be formally signed by Germany until four days after the raid on Pearl Harbor . Also among the communiqués was another definitive Japanese rejection of any war plans against Russia : 
 In case Germany demands that we participate in the war against the Soviet Union , we will respond that we do not intend to join the war for the time being . If this should lead to a situation whereby Germany will delay her entry into the war against the United States , it cannot be helped . 
 Nevertheless , publicly the German leadership applauded their new ally and ambassador Ōshima became one of only eight recipients of the Grand Cross of the Order of the German Eagle in Gold , which was awarded by Hitler himself , who reportedly said : 
 You gave the right declaration of war . This method is the only proper one . Japan pursued it formerly and it corresponds with his own system , that is , to negotiate as long as possible . But if one sees that the other is interested only in putting one off , in shaming and humiliating one , and is not willing to come to an agreement , then one should strike as hard as possible , and not waste time declaring war . 
 Although the amendment to the Tripartite Pact was not yet in force , Hitler chose to declare war on the United States and ordered the Reichstag , along with Italy , to do so on 11 December 1941 , three days after the United States ' declaration of war on the Empire of Japan . His hopes that , despite the previous rejections , Japan would reciprocally attack the Soviet Union , were not realized , as Japan stuck to its Nanshin strategy of going south , not north , and would continue to maintain an uneasy peace with the Soviet Union . Nevertheless , Germany 's declaration of war further solidified German – Japanese relations and showed Germany 's solidarity with Japan , which was now encouraged to cooperate against the British . To some degree , Japan 's actions in South @-@ East Asia and the Pacific in the months after Pearl Harbor , including the sinking of the HMS Prince of Wales and the HMS Repulse , the occupation of the Crown Colonies of Singapore , Hong Kong , and British Burma , and the air raids on Australia , were a tremendous blow to the United Kingdom 's war effort and preoccupied the Allies , shifting British ( including Australian ) and American assets away from the Battle of the Atlantic and the North African Campaign against Germany to Asia and the Pacific against Japan . In this context , sizeable forces of the British Empire were withdrawn from North Africa to the Pacific theatre with their replacements being only relatively inexperienced and thinly spread divisions . Taking advantage of this situation , Erwin Rommel 's Afrika Korps successfully attacked only six weeks after Pearl Harbor , eventually pushing the allied lines as far east as El Alamein . 
 Until the attack on the Soviet Union , Germany and Japan were able to exchange materials and personnel using the Trans @-@ Siberian Railway . Afterwards , submarines had to be sent on so @-@ called " Yanagi " ( Willow ) – missions , since the American and British navies rendered the high seas too dangerous for Axis surface cargo ships . However , given the limited capacities of submarines , eyes were soon focused directly on the Mediterranean , the Middle East and British India , all vital to the British war effort . In the long run , Germany and Japan envisioned a partnered linkage running across the British @-@ held Indian subcontinent that would allow for the transfer of weaponry and resources as well as potential joint military operations . After all , the choice of potential trading partners was very limited during the war and Germany was anxious for rubber and precious metals , while the Japanese sought industrial products , technical equipment , and chemical goods . By August 1942 the German advances in North Africa rendered an offensive against Alexandria and the Suez Canal feasible , which , in turn , had the potential of enabling maritime trade between Europe and Japan through the Indian Ocean . On the other hand , in the face of its defeat at the Battle of Midway in June 1942 with the loss of four aircraft carriers , the Japanese Navy decided to pursue all possibilities of gaining additional resources to quickly rebuild its forces . As a consequence , Ambassador Ōshima in Berlin was ordered to submit an extensive " wish list " requesting the purchase of vast amounts of steel and aluminium to be shipped from Germany to Japan . German Foreign Minister Ribbentrop quickly dismissed Tokyo 's proposal , since those resources were vital for Germany 's own industry . However , in order to gain Japanese backing for a new German @-@ Japanese trade treaty , which should also secure the rights of German companies in South @-@ East Asia , he asked Hitler to at least partially agree upon the Japanese demands . It took another five months of arguing over the Reichsmark @-@ Yen @-@ exchange rate and additional talks with the third signatory , the Italian government , until the " Treaty on Economic Cooperation " was signed on 20 January 1943 . 
 Despite this treaty , the envisioned German @-@ Japanese economic relations were never able to grow beyond mostly propagandistic status . The British kept control of the Suez Canal and submarines with very small cargo capability remained the main method of contact . With the loss of North Africa and the heavy defeat at Stalingrad , Germany was in a defensive posture by early 1943 , and never regained the initiative . 
 Japan was being <unk> in carriers and was unable to launch any offensives after its defeat at Midway in June 1942 . It was overextended and could not even feed its garrisons on islands across the Pacific . Tokyo 's plan of conquering the Solomons at Australia 's doorstep turned into a continuous retreat for the Japanese of which the defeat on Guadalcanal in early 1943 marked the beginning . Japan 's invasion of India had been halted at Imphal and Kohima , rendering impossible any joint operations against India . 
 With submarines remaining practically the only link between Nazi @-@ controlled Europe and Japan , trade was soon focused on strategic goods such as technical plans and weapon templates . Only 20 – 40 % of goods managed to reach either destination and merely 96 persons travelled by submarine from Europe to Japan and 89 vice versa during the war as only six submarines succeeded in their attempts of the trans @-@ oceanic voyage : I @-@ 30 ( April 1942 ) , I @-@ 8 ( June 1943 ) , I @-@ 34 ( October 1943 ) , I @-@ 29 ( December 1943 ) , I @-@ 52 ( March 1944 ) , and the German submarine U @-@ 511 ( August 1943 ) . Before I @-@ 29 embarked on her voyage to German @-@ occupied France in December 1943 , she had rendezvoused with the German submarine U @-@ 180 during an earlier mission to the Indian Ocean . During this meeting on 28 April 1943 , Indian freedom fighter Subhas Chandra Bose transferred to I @-@ 29 , thereby becoming the only civilian exchange between two submarines of two different navies in World War II . U @-@ 234 on the other hand is one of the most popular examples of an aborted Yanagi mission in May 1945 . Amongst others , her cargo included examples of the newest electric torpedoes , one crated Me 262 jet aircraft , a Henschel Hs 293 glide bomb , and 560 kg of uranium oxide . Whether the uranium was weapons @-@ grade material has not yet been clarified , however . 
 On rare occasions , German surface ships were able to reach Japan as well . These included auxiliary cruisers Michel and Thor , which were brought to Yokohama after the Kriegsmarine chiefs realized in the late 1942 that it would not practical for them to return to Germany @-@ controlled European ports . German supply ships ( Uckermark ) and foreign ships captured by German merchant raiders would come to Japanese ports as well . 
 In the face of their failing war plans , Japanese and German representatives more and more began to deceive each other at tactical briefings by exaggerating minor victories and <unk> losses . In several talks in spring and summer 1943 between Generaloberst Alfred Jodl and the Japanese naval attaché in Berlin , Vice Admiral <unk> Nomura , Jodl downplayed the afore described defeats of the German Army , e.g. by claiming the Soviet offensive would soon run out of steam and that " anywhere the Wehrmacht can be sent on land , it is sure of its <unk> , but where it has to be taken over sea , it becomes somewhat more difficult . " Japan , on the other hand , not only evaded any disclosure of its true strategic position in the Pacific , but also declined any interference in American shipments being unloaded at Vladivostok and large amounts of men and material being transported from East Siberia to the German front in the west . Being forced to watch the continued reinforcement of Soviet troops from the east without any Japanese intervention was a thorn in Hitler 's flesh , especially considering Japan 's apparent ignorance with respect to the recent Casablanca Conference at which the Allies declared only to accept the unconditional surrenders of the Axis nations . During a private briefing on 5 March 1943 , Hitler remarked : 
 They lie right to your face and in the end all their depictions are calculated on something which turns out to be a deceit afterwards ! 
 As the war progressed and Germany began to retreat further , Japanese ambassador Ōshima never wavered in his confidence that Germany would emerge victorious . However , in March 1945 he reported to Tokyo on the " danger of Berlin becoming a battlefield " and revealing a fear " that the abandonment of Berlin may take place another month " . On 13 April , he met with Ribbentrop — for the last time , it turned out — and vowed to stand with the leaders of the Third Reich in their hour of crisis but had to leave Berlin at once by Hitler 's direct order . On 7 and 8 May 1945 , as the German government surrendered to the Allied powers , Ōshima and his staff were taken into custody and brought to the United States . Now fighting an even more hopeless war , the Japanese government immediately denounced the German surrender as an act of treason and interned the few German individuals as well as confiscated all German property ( such as submarines ) in Japanese territory at the time . Four months later , on 2 September , Japan had to sign its own surrender documents . 
 = = = = Alleged German @-@ Japanese long @-@ term conspiracy = = = = 
 After the Second World War was officially concluded with the capitulation of the Empire of Japan , plans for trying the major German and Japanese war criminals were quickly implemented in 1946 . While Japanese officials had to face the Tokyo Trials , major German war crimes were dealt with at the Nuremberg Trials . Here it was the goal of the Allied prosecutors to portray the limited cooperation between the Third Reich and Imperial Japan as a long @-@ planned conspiracy to divide the world among the two Axis @-@ partners and thereby delivering just another demonstration of the common viciousness expressed by alleged joint long @-@ term war plans . 
 The Nazi plans of aggression called for use of Asiatic allies and they found among the Japanese men of kindred mind and purpose . They were brothers , under the skin . 
 According to modern historic research , however , such a conspiracy did not exist and is considered Allied propaganda . Although there was a limited and cautious military cooperation between Japan and Germany during the Second World War , no documents corroborating any long @-@ term planning or real coordination of military operations of both powers exist . 
 = = = Post @-@ WWII developments = = = 
 = = = = Rebuilding relations and new common interests = = = = 
 After their defeat in World War II , both Japan and Germany were occupied . Japan regained its sovereignty with the Treaty of San Francisco in 1952 and joined the United Nations in 1956 . Germany was split into two states . It was agreed in 1951 to take up diplomatic relations between Japan and the Federal Republic of ( West Germany ) again . The bilateral diplomatic ties between West Germany and Japan were fully restored in 1955 ; between East Germany and Japan in 1973 , the year both German states became UN @-@ members . 
 Beginning in the 1950s , Japanese companies sought to acquire needed raw materials like steel and chemical products in the German Ruhr region , with a small Japanese business community in Düsseldorf . In 1974 , West Germany and Japan signed an intergovernmental agreement on cooperation in science and technology , re @-@ intensifying joint scientific endeavours and technological exchange . The accord resulted in numerous projects , generally focused on marine research and geosciences , life sciences and environmental research . Additionally , youth exchange programs were launched , including a " Youth Summit " held annually since 1974 . 
 German @-@ Japanese political dealings were enlarged with both countries taking part in the creation of the so @-@ called Group of Six , or simply " G6 " , together with the US , the UK , France and Italy in 1975 as a response to the 1973 oil crisis . The G6 was soon expanded by Canada and later Russia , with <unk> , <unk> , and later <unk> , summits being held annually since then . 
 Over the following years , institutions , such as in 1985 the " Japanese – German Center " ( <unk> ) in Berlin and in 1988 the " German Institute for Japanese Studies " ( <unk> ) in Tokyo , were founded to further contribute to the academic and scientific exchange between Japan and Germany . 
 Around the mid @-@ 1980s , German and Japanese representatives decided to rebuild the old Japanese embassy in Berlin from 1938 . Its remains had remained unused after the building was largely destroyed during World War II . In addition to the original complex , several changes and additions were made until 2000 , like moving the main entrance to the Hiroshima Street , which was named in honour of the Japanese city , and the creation of a traditional Japanese Garden . 
 Post @-@ war relations between Japan and both Germanies , as well as with unified Germany since 1990 , have generally focused on economic and business questions . Germany , dedicated to free trade , continues to be Japan ’ s largest trading partner within Europe . This general posture is also reflected in the so @-@ called " 7 pillars of cooperation " agreed on by Foreign Minister of Japan Yōhei Kōno and Foreign Minister of Germany Joschka Fischer on 30 October 2000 : 
 Pillar 1 : Contribution for peace and stability of the international community 
 Pillar 2 : Consolidation of economic and trade relationships , under benefit of globalization impulses . 
 Pillar 3 : Contribution for a solution of global problems and social duties and responsibilities . 
 Pillar 4 : Contribution for the stability in the regions ( Korean Peninsula , People 's Republic of China , former Yugoslavia , Russia , South Asia , new independent states , Middle East and Gulf region , Middle and South America , East Timor , Africa ) 
 Pillar 5 : Further constitution of faithful political relations between Japan and Germany 
 Pillar 6 : Promotion of economic relations 
 Pillar 7 : Promotion of mutual understanding and the cultural relations 
 In 2000 , bilateral cultural exchange culminated in the " Japan in Germany " year , which was then followed by the " Germany in Japan " year in 2005 / 2006 . Also in 2005 , the annual German Film Festival in Tokyo was brought into being . 
 In 2004 , German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder and Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi agreed upon cooperations in the assistance for reconstruction of Iraq and Afghanistan , the promotion of economic exchange activities , youth and sports exchanges as well as exchanges and cooperation in science , technology and academic fields . 
 = = = = Current relations = = = = 
 In the late 1990s and early 2000s , Germany and Japan , being the United Nations ' second and third largest funders respectively , demanded a reform of the United Nations Security Council and an increase of the number of its permanent members . For this purpose both nations organized themselves together with Brazil and India to form the so @-@ called " G4 nations " . On 21 September 2004 , the G4 issued a joint statement mutually backing each other 's claim to permanent seats , together with two African countries . This proposal has found opposition in a group of countries called Uniting for Consensus . In January 2006 , Japan announced that it would not support putting the G4 resolution back on the table and was working on a resolution of its own . 
 Certain inefficiencies with respect to the bilateral cooperation between Germany and Japan were also reflected in 2005 , when former Japanese Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa wrote in a commemoration to the 20th anniversary of the Japanese @-@ German Center in Berlin that 
 the German @-@ Japanese relations are generally good and there are no particular bilateral problems . This results in a certain indifference , which may be considered a problem by now . 
 Nevertheless , as of 2008 , Japan still was Germany 's second largest trading partner in Asia after China . In 2006 , German imports from Japan totaled € 15 @.@ 6 billion and German exports to Japan € 14 @.@ 2 billion ( 15 @.@ 4 % and 9 % more than the previous year , respectively ) . In 2008 , however , Japanese exports and imports to and from the European Union fell by 7 @.@ 8 and 4 @.@ 8 % after growing by 5 @.@ 8 % in 2007 due to the global financial crisis . Bilateral trade between Germany and Japan also shrank in 2008 , with imports from Japan having dropped by 6 @.@ 6 % and German exports to Japan having declined by 5 @.@ 5 % . Despite Japan having remained Germany 's principal trading partner in Asia after China in 2008 , measured in terms of total German foreign trade , Japan ’ s share of both exports and imports is relatively low and falls well short of the potential between the world ’ s third- and fifth @-@ largest economies . 
 Unaffected by any stagnating German @-@ Japanese trade relations , the Japanese community in Düsseldorf , home to Europe 's largest Japantown , is growing again after a decline in the 1980s and 1990s . In 2008 , over 8000 Japanese lived in the Düsseldorf area , which features a Japanese school , two kindergartens , three libraries and numerous Japanese clubs . Moreover , over 200 Japanese companies are active in that region , creating over 20 @,@ 000 jobs . The Japanese community is widely considered a great asset for Düsseldorf . 
 On 14 and 15 January 2010 , German foreign minister Guido Westerwelle conducted his personal inaugural visit to Japan , focusing the talks with his Japanese counterpart , Katsuya Okada , on both nation 's bilateral relations and global issues . Westerwelle emphasized , that 
 We want to make our joint contribution towards ensuring that this decade is a decade of disarmament – not a decade of armament 
 and both ministers instructed their Ministries to draw up disarmament initiatives and strategies which Berlin and Tokyo can present to the international community together . Especially with regard to Iran 's nuclear program , it was also stressed that Japan and Germany , both technically capable of and yet refraining from possessing any ABC weapons , should assume a leading role in realizing a world free of nuclear weapons and that international sanctions are considered to be an appropriate instrument of pressure . Furthermore , Westerwelle and Okada agreed to enhance cooperation in Afghanistan and to step up the stagnating bilateral trade between both countries . The visit was concluded in talks with Japan 's Prime Minister Yukio Hatoyama , before which the German foreign minister visited the famous Meiji Shrine in the heart of Tokyo . 
 On Friday 11 March 2011 , the Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami , the most powerful known earthquake to hit Japan at the time , and one of the five most powerful recorded earthquakes of which Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan said , " In the 65 years after the end of World War II , this is the toughest and the most difficult crisis for Japan . " hit Honshu . The earthquake and the resulting tsunami not only devastated wide coastal areas in Miyagi Prefecture but also caused the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster triggering a widespread permanent evacuation surrounding the Fukushima I Nuclear Power Plant . German chancellor Angela Merkel immediately expressed her deepest sympathy to all those affected and promised Japan any assistance it would call for . As a consequence rescue specialists from the <unk> <unk> as well as a scout team of <unk> Germany ( International Search and Rescue ) were sent to Japan , however parts of the German personnel had to be recalled due to radiation danger near the damaged power plant . Furthermore , the German Aerospace Center provided <unk> @-@ <unk> and <unk> @-@ satellite imagery of the affected area . In the days after the disaster , numerous flowers , candles and paper cranes were placed in front of the Japanese embassy in Berlin by <unk> , including leading German politicians . Though never materialised , additional proposals for aid included sending special units of the German Bundeswehr to Japan , as the German Armed Forces ' decontamination equipment belongs to the most sophisticated in the world . 
 On 2 April 2011 , German Foreign Minister Westerwelle visited Tokyo on an Asia voyage , again offering Japan " all help , where it is needed " to recover from the tsunami and subsequent nuclear disaster of the previous month . Westerwelle also emphasised the importance of making progress with a free trade agreement between Japan and the European Union in order to accelerate the recovery of the Japanese economy . Together with his German counterpart , Japanese foreign minister Takeaki Matsumoto also addressed potential new fields of cooperation between Tokyo and Berlin with respect to a reform of the United Nations Security Council . 
 = = = English = = = 
 Akira , Kudo . ( 1998 ) Japanese @-@ German Business Relations : Co @-@ operation and Rivalry in the Interwar Period ( Nissan Institute / Routledge Japanese Studies ) ( 1998 ) 
 Baskett , Michael ( 2009 ) . " All Beautiful Fascists ? : Axis Film Culture in Imperial Japan " in The Culture of Japanese Fascism , ed . Alan <unk> . Durham : Duke University Press. pp. 212 – 234 . ISBN <unk> 
 Martin , Bernd ( 2005 ) . Japan and Germany in the Modern World . Berghahn Books . 
 Hübner , Stefan ( 2012 ) , " National Socialist Foreign Policy and Press Instructions , 1933 @-@ 1939 : Aims and Ways of Coverage Manipulation based on the Example of East Asia , " International History Review 34 # 2 pp 271 – 291 @.@ online 
 <unk> , Saori N. , Hanns <unk> and Takashi Inoguchi , eds . Global Governance : Germany and Japan in the International System ( 2004 ) 
 <unk> , Ernst L. ( 1958 ) Germany and Japan – A Study in Totalitarian Diplomacy 1933 – 1941 . The Hague : Martinus <unk> . 
 Spang , Christian W. and Rolf @-@ Harald <unk> ( eds . ) . ( 2006 ) Japanese – German Relations , 1895 – 1945 . War , Diplomacy and Public Opinion ( ISBN 0 @-@ 415 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 ) . London : Routledge. excerpt and text search 
 Warner , Geoffrey . " From Pearl Harbour to Stalingrad : Germany and its Allies in 1942 , " International Affairs , April 1978 , Vol . 54 Issue 2 , pp 282 – 92 
 Weinberg , Gerhard L. A World at Arms ( 2nd ed 2013 ) global history of WW2 by leading expert on German diplomacy excerpt and text search 
 = = = Other languages = = = 
 Hübner , Stefan ( 2009 ) Hitler und <unk> , 1904 bis 1933 . Die Entwicklung von Hitlers <unk> und <unk> vom <unk> @-@ <unk> Krieg bis zur " Machtergreifung " [ Hitler and East Asia , 1904 to 1933 . The Development of Hitler ’ s Image of Japan and China from the Russo @-@ Japanese War to the " Coming to Power " ] , in <unk> @-@ <unk> 9 / 2009 , 22 – 41 @.@ https : / / <unk> / <unk> / <unk> / <unk> / <unk> / at _ download / file 
 Ishii , Shiro et al . ( ed . ) : Fast wie mein eigen Vaterland : Briefe aus Japan 1886 – 1889 . [ Almost as my own Motherland : Letters from Japan ] . München : Iudicium 1995 . 
 Kreiner , Josef ( ed . ) . ( 1984 ) Deutschland – Japan . Historische Kontakte [ Germany – Japan . Historical Contacts ] . Bonn : Bouvier . 
 Kreiner , Josef ( ed . ) . ( 1986 ) Japan und die <unk> im <unk> Weltkrieg und in den <unk> Jahren [ Japan and the Central Powers in World War I and the 1920s ] . Bonn : Bouvier . 
 Kreiner , Josef and Regine Mathias ( ed . ) . ( 1990 ) Deutschland – Japan in der <unk> [ Germany – Japan in the inter @-@ war period ] . Bonn : Bouvier . 
 <unk> , Peter und <unk> , Sven : <unk> Impressionen eines <unk> <unk> . Karl von <unk> im Japan der Meiji @-@ Zeit / <unk> － <unk> ( A German Diplomat in Meiji Japan : Karl von <unk> . German / Japanese ) . München : Iudicium , 2007 . 
 Martin , Bernd and Gerhard Krebs ( eds . ) . ( 1994 ) <unk> und Fall der <unk> Berlin – Tôkyô [ Construction and Fall of the Berlin – Tôkyô Axis ] . Munich : Iudicium . 
 Martin , Bernd . ( 2001 ) Deutschland und Japan im <unk> Weltkrieg 1940 – 1945 , Vom Angriff auf Pearl Harbor bis zu deutschen <unk> . <unk> <unk> <unk> & Co . KG , Hamburg . 
 = Annexation of Crimea by the Russian Empire = 
 The territory of Crimea , previously controlled by the Crimean Khanate , was annexed by the Russian Empire on 19 April [ O.S. 8 April ] 1783 . The period before the annexation was marked by Russian interference in Crimean affairs , a series of revolts by Crimean Tatars , and Ottoman ambivalence . The annexation began many years of Russian rule in Crimea , which ended with the transfer of the territory to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic in 1954 . Russia annexed Crimea for a second time in March 2014 . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Independent Crimea ( 1774 – 76 ) = = = 
 Before Russia defeated the Ottoman Empire in the Russo @-@ Turkish War of 1768 – 74 , the Khanate , populated largely by Crimean Tatars , had been part of the Ottoman Empire . In the Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca , which was the result of that war , the Ottoman Empire was forced to cede sovereignty over the Khanate , and allow it to become an independent state under Russian influence . Tatars in Crimea had no desire for independence , and held a strong emotional attachment to the Ottoman Empire . Within two months of the signing of the treaty , the government of the Khanate sent envoys to the Ottomans , asking them to " destroy the conditions of independence " . The envoys said that as Russian troops remained stationed in Crimea at Yeni @-@ Kale and Kerch , the Khanate could not be considered independent . Nevertheless , the Ottomans ignored this request , not wishing to violate the agreement with Russia . In the disorder that followed the Turkish defeat , Tatar leader Devlet Giray refused to accept the treaty at the time of its signing . Having been fighting Russians in the Kuban during the war , he crossed the Kerch Strait to Crimea and seized the city of Kaffa ( modern Feodosia ) . Devlet subsequently seized the Crimean throne , usurping Sahib Giray . Despite his actions against the Russians , Russian Empress Catherine the Great recognised Devlet as Khan . 
 At the same time , however , she was grooming her favourite Şahin Giray , who resided at her court , for the role . As time went on , the rule of Devlet became increasingly untenable . In July of 1775 , he sent a group of envoys to Constantinople to negotiate a reentry of the Crimean Khanate into the Ottoman Empire . This action was in direct defiance of the Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca , which he asked the Ottomans to scrap . Famed diplomat Ahmed <unk> Efendi , who had helped draft the treaty , refused to provide any assistance to the Khanate , not wanting to start another disastrous war with Russia . Empress Catherine gave an order to invade Crimea in November 1776 . Her forces quickly gained control of Perekop , at the entrance to the peninsula . In January 1777 , Russian @-@ supported Şahin Giray crossed into Crimea over the Kerch Strait , much as Devlet had done . Devlet , aware of his impending defeat , abdicated and fled to Constantinople . Şahin was installed as a puppet Khan , infuriating the Muslim population of the peninsula . When he heard this news , Ottoman Sultan Abdul Hamid I noted " Şahin Giray is a tool . The aim of the Russians is to take Crimea . " Şahin , a member of the ruling House of Giray , attempted a series of reforms to " modernise " the Khanate . These included attempts to centralise power in the hands of the Khan , establishing " autocratic " rule , much as in Russia . Previously , power had been distributed between the leaders of different clans , called beys . He attempted to institute state taxation , a conscripted and centralised army , and to replace the traditional religion @-@ based Ottoman legal system with civil law . These reforms , aimed at disrupting the old Ottoman order , were despised by the Crimean populace . 
 = = = Crimean revolts ( 1777 – 82 ) = = = 
 At the behest of Empress Catherine , Şahin allowed Russians to settle in the peninsula , further infuriating Crimeans . A group of these settlers had been sent to Yeni @-@ Kale , which remained under Russian control following the installation of Şahin as Khan . Local residents banded together to prevent the Russian settlement , rebelling against Şahin . He sent the new conscript army he had created to quash the rebellion , only to see his forces defect to the rebels . Revolt spread across the peninsula , and rebel forces advanced on Şahin 's palace in <unk> . Amidst this rebellion , exiled Crimeans in Constantinople pressed the Ottoman government to act . Bowing to pressure , the government sent a fleet to Crimea , ostensibly to preserve the Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca . Russia , however , was quicker to act . Russian forces arrived at Yeni @-@ Kale in February 1778 , crushing the revolt before the Ottoman fleet arrived . When the fleet arrived in March , it found that there were no rebels left to support . It fought a brief skirmish with the Russian navy off <unk> ( modern Sevastopol ) , but was forced to flee . Şahin was reinstated as Khan . Minor skirmishes between the Ottoman and Russian navies continued until October 1778 , when the Ottoman fleet returned defeated to Constantinople . 
 Over the following years , Şahin continued to try and reform the Khanate . Support for his reform programme remained low , and it was seriously undermined by the decision of Empress Catherine to resettle the Crimean Pontic Greeks on the northern shores of the Azov Sea , outside the Khanate . That community , which was Christian , were an essential part of the Crimean merchant class , and had most readily supported Şahin 's reforms . This resettlement caused significant damage to the Crimean economy , and further weakened the position of the Khan . Recognising defeat in Crimea , the Ottoman Empire signed the Convention of <unk> Kavak in early 1779 . In the agreement , the Ottomans recognised Şahin as Khan of Crimea , promised no further intervention in Crimea , and conceded that Crimea was under Russian influence . Crimeans could no longer expect support from the Ottomans . Şahin 's reforms proceeded , gradually removing Tatars from positions of political influence . For a brief period , Crimea remained peaceful . 
 A new rebellion , sparked by the continuing marginalisation of Tatars within the Khanate government , started in 1781 . Various clan leaders and their forces came together in the Taman , across the Kerch Strait from Crimea . In April of 1782 , a large portion of Şahin 's army defected to the rebels , and joined them in the Taman . Communication between rebel leaders , including two of Şahin 's brothers , and the Crimean administrative elite was ongoing . Religious ( ulama ) and legal ( <unk> ) officials , important parts of the old Ottoman order , openly declared their antipathy for Şahin . Rebel forces attacked Kaffa on 14 May [ O.S. 3 May ] 1782 . Şahin 's forces were swiftly defeated , and he was forced to escape to Russian @-@ controlled Kerch . Rebel leaders elected Şahin 's brother <unk> Giray as Khan , and sent a message to the Ottoman government seeking recognition . It was not long , however , before Empress Catherine dispatched Prince Grigory Potemkin to restore Şahin to power . No significant opposition was fielded against the invading Russians , and many rebels fled back across the Kerch Strait . As such , the Khan was restored to his position in October 1782 . By this time , however , he had lost the favour of both Crimeans and Empress Catherine . In a letter to a Russian advisor to Şahin , Catherine wrote " He must stop this shocking and cruel treatment and not give them [ Crimeans ] just cause for a new revolt " . As Russian troops entered the peninsula , work on the establishment of a Black Sea port for use by the Empire began . The city of <unk> was chosen as the site of the port , which would go on to house the newly created Black Sea Fleet . Uncertainty about the sustainability of the restoration of Şahin Giray , however , led to an increase of support for annexing Crimea , spearheaded by Prince Potemkin . 
 = = Annexation ( 1783 ) = = 
 In March 1783 , Prince Potemkin made a rhetorical push to encourage Empress Catherine to annex Crimea . Having just returned from Crimea , he told her that many Crimeans would " happily " submit to Russian rule . Encouraged by this news , Empress Catherine issued a formal proclamation of annexation on 19 April [ O.S. 8 April ] 1783 . Tatars did not resist the annexation . After years of turmoil , the Crimeans lacked the resources and the will to continue fighting . Many fled the peninsula , leaving for Anatolia . Count Alexander Bezborodko , then a close advisor to the Empress , wrote in his diary that Russia was " forced " to annex Crimea : 
 The Porte has not kept good faith from the very beginning . Their primary goal has been to deprive the Crimeans of independence . They banished the legal khan and replaced him with the thief Devlet Giray . They consistently refused to evacuate the Taman . They made numerous perfidious attempts to introduce rebellion in the Crimea against the legitimate Khan Şahin Giray . All of these efforts did not bring us to declare war … The Porte never ceased to drink in each drop of revolt among the Tatars … Our only wish has been to bring peace to Crimea … and we were finally forced by the Turks to annex the area . 
 This view was far from reality . Crimean " independence " had been a puppet regime , and the Ottomans had played little role in the Crimean revolts . Crimea was incorporated into the Empire as <unk> Governorate . Later that year , the Ottoman Empire signed an agreement with Russia that recognised the loss of Crimea and other territories that had been held by the Khanate . The agreement , signed on 28 December 1783 , was negotiated by Russian diplomat Yakov Bulgakov . 
 = Parasakthi ( film ) = 
 Parasakthi ( English : The Goddess ) is a 1952 Indian Tamil @-@ language drama film directed by R. Krishnan and S. Panju . The film stars Sivaji Ganesan in his acting debut , along with S. V. Sahasranamam , S. S. Rajendran , Sriranjani Jr . , and Pandari Bai . It was jointly produced by National Pictures and AVM Productions and is based on a stage drama of the same name , written by Pavalar Balasundaram . The film narrates the misfortunes that befall the members of a Tamil family during World War II , and how the members face their individual fate and reunite at the end . 
 The screenplay and dialogues for Parasakthi were written by Karunanidhi , who would later become the Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu . The film 's soundtrack was composed by R. <unk> . Parasakthi was released on 17 October 1952 , during the festive occasion of Diwali , and faced controversies because of its portrayal of Brahmins and Hindu customs and practices in poor light . The <unk> society including the then ruling State government even demanded the film to be banned . 
 Despite these protests , the film was critically acclaimed , with praise directed towards its dialogues and the actors ' performances in particular . The film also become a commercial success , and had a theatrical run of over 175 days . Parasakthi also acquired cult status in Tamil cinema and became a trendsetter for dialogues and acting for later Tamil films . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Chandrasekaran , Gnanasekaran and Gunasekaran are three Indian immigrant brothers from Madurai , Tamil Nadu living in Rangoon , Burma with Chandrasekaran 's wife Saraswati . Their younger sister Kalyani was raised in their home town by their father Manickampillai . In 1942 , during World War II , the three brothers and Saraswati plan to visit Madurai to attend the impending wedding of Kalyani to a writer named Thangappan . Due to war conditions and bombardment of Burmese ports by Japan , the shipping company offers only one ticket and Gunasekaran , the youngest brother , takes it and leaves for Tamil Nadu . The ship fails to reach on time due to the dangers of the war , and Kalyani 's marriage takes place without any of her brothers present . 
 Kalyani becomes pregnant . But on the day she delivers her child , Thangappan dies in an accident and Manickampillai dies of shock , leaving Kalyani and her child destitute . Her house gets auctioned off , and she makes her living by selling food on the streets . Gunasekaran , after being stranded at sea for several months , finally arrives in Tamil Nadu at Madras . However , while watching a dance performance , he is robbed of all his belongings after being intoxicated . Impoverished , he becomes enraged at the status of the once glorious Tamil Nadu , and fakes insanity by indulging in numerous tricks to make a living . Gunasekaran finally comes across his destitute sister at Madurai , having learned of their father 's death and her poverty . He continues to play insane and does not reveal his true identity to her due to his poverty , but hovers around her . Kalyani is irritated by the stranger 's behaviour , unaware that he is her brother . 
 Kalyani is nearly molested by a vagabond named Venu , but is saved by Gunasekaran . She later leaves Madurai and arrives at Tiruchi , where she obtains work as a maid of <unk> Narayana Pillai , who also tries to molest her . She is , however , saved by his wife , and leaves the job . While searching for his sister , Gunasekaran reaches Tiruchi and comes across Vimala , a wealthy woman , to whom he explains the miserable status of him and his sister in the society . After resting in her house for a while , he silently leaves to continue searching for Kalyani . 
 As Japanese shelling intensifies in Burma , Chandrasekaran and Gnanasekaran decide to return to India . Chandrasekaran , accompanied by Saraswati , reaches Tiruchi safely and becomes a judge , but Gnanasekaran is lost in the journey and loses a leg in the shelling before arriving in India . He begs for a living , forms an association for beggars and tries to reform them . Kalyani reaches Chandrasekaran 's palatial house seeking food , but Chandrasekaran throws her out without recognising her . She later arrives at a temple seeking help , but the pujari ( priest ) also tries to molest her . Frustrated with life and unable to feed her child , Kalyani throws it into a river and attempts suicide , but is soon arrested for killing the child and brought for trial . 
 At the court , Kalyani defends her act of infanticide with the judge being Chandrasekaran , who after hearing her tragic story realises she is his sister , and faints . Gunasekaran is also brought to the court for having attacked the priest who tried to molest his sister . During his trial , Gunasekaran explains the misfortunes which have befallen him and his family , and justifies his actions . Gunasekaran 's valiant defence in the court awakens everyone on the evils of the society . As the trial proceeds , Vimala arrives and produces Kalyani 's child , which was revealed to have safely fallen in her boat instead of the river . Kalyani and Gunasekaran are pardoned and acquitted by the court , and are finally reunited with Chandrasekaran . Gnanasekaran , while collecting donations for his association of beggars , also joins them unexpectedly . With Vimala and Gunasekaran deciding to get married , the family subsequently inaugurates a welfare home for orphans . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Male cast 
 Sivaji Ganesan as Gunasekaran 
 S. V. Sahasranamam as Chandrasekaran 
 S. S. Rajendran as Gnanasekaran 
 Duraiswamy as Manickampillai 
 T. K. Ramachandran as Venu 
 K. M. <unk> as Vellai Swamy 
 Venkatraman as Thangappan 
 V. K. Ramasamy as Narayana Pillai 
 K. P. <unk> as the pujari ( priest ) 
 M. N. Krishnan as <unk> 
 Sakthivel as a servant 
 D. V. <unk> as Thambi Durai 
 V. K. Karthikeyan as the Tamil <unk> 
 Kannadasan as a judge ( uncredited ) 
 Female cast 
 Sriranjani Jr. as Kalyani 
 Pandari Bai as Vimala 
 Susheela as Saraswati 
 Kannamma as Jolly 
 <unk> as the fruit seller 
 T. P. Muthulakshmi as Kantha 
 A. S. Jaya as Parvati 
 = = Production = = 
 Parasakthi was a popular Tamil play written by Pavalar Balasundaram , a Tamil scholar . Around the same time , En Thangai ( My Sister ) , written by T. S. Natarajan , became popular . Sivaji Ganesan , at that time a struggling stage actor , acted in En Thangai as " a brother sacrificing his love for the sake of his sightless kid sister . " The pre @-@ production crew at Central Studio , Coimbatore , initially planned to merge these two plays to make a film . However , Natarajan , the author of En Thangai disagreed to the idea , and indeed sold the rights of the play to another producer . 
 The shooting of the film En Thangai began with Tiruchi <unk> , then a popular playback artist , playing the lead role of the sacrificing brother . However , he was eventually replaced by actor M. G. Ramachandran . Meanwhile , film distributor P. A. Perumal of National Pictures , with the patronage of A. V. Meiyappan of AVM Productions , bought the film rights of Parasakthi . Karunanidhi , who would later become the Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu , was signed to write the script . Ganesan , the stage actor of En Thangai was chosen to play the hero , making his cinematic acting debut . It was Perumal who , in 1950 , gave Ganesan a flight ticket to Madras for the screen test for Parasakthi . Ganesan had simultaneously shot for the film <unk> , which was supposed to be his actual film to release first , but released much later . He had earlier dubbed for Telugu actor Mukkamala in the 1951 Tamil film <unk> . 
 Parasakthi , which was jointly produced by National Pictures and AVM Productions , did not begin well for Ganesan . When shooting began and 2000 feet of the film was shot , Meiyappan was dissatisfied with Ganesan 's " thin " physique , and wanted him replaced with actor K. R. Ramaswamy . Perumal refused , and Ganesan was retained . Meiyappan was also satisfied with the final results of the film . The initial scenes of Ganesan which he earlier disliked were reshot . Ganesan was paid a monthly salary of ₹ 250 ( valued at about US $ 52 @.@ 5 in 1952 ) for acting in the film . S. S. Rajendran , who was another successful stage artist , also debuted in Parasakthi after the advice of political leader C. N. Annadurai . According to film historian Film News Anandan , Parasakthi was one of the few films at that time to be " completely driven " by stage artists . 
 <unk> was initially cast as the female lead , but opted out due to her pregnancy , and was eventually replaced by Telugu actress Sriranjani , Jr . Pandari Bai was also added to the film , after Meiyappan was impressed with her performance in Raja Vikrama ( 1950 ) . Poet Kannadasan declined to work as one of the film 's lyricists , and instead acted in a minor role as a court judge , as he was " determined to take part in the Parasakthi movie " . The cinematography was handled by S. Maruti Rao , while the songs were choreographed by <unk> . The film 's climax song " <unk> <unk> <unk> " featured stock footage of the political leaders C. Rajagopalachari , Periyar E. V. Ramasamy , <unk> , Annadurai , and Karunanidhi . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Panju stated that Parasakthi was designed to " create havoc . Of course , it did . We were challenging the social law itself , the basic Constitution itself " . The title song of the film was composed by Bharathidasan , keeping with the demand of the DMK party seeking a sovereign Dravidian nation . The poem glorifies the utopian nature of the Dravidian nation and ends with a long monologue that grieves the present India 's reality . When the female lead Kalyani becomes pregnant , she and her husband Thangappan decide to name the child " <unk> " if it is a boy , and " Nagammai " if it is a girl . The names are references to A. T. <unk> , a prominent and respected leader of the Justice Party and Nagammai , a leading activist in the Self @-@ Respect Movement and the wife of Periyar E. V. Ramasamy . According to film historian Selvaraj Velayutham , Parasakthi was basically oriented to social reform . United News of India ( UNI ) , The Times of India and K. S. Sivakumaran of the Sri Lankan newspaper Daily News have referred to the film as a satire , with UNI describing it as a " sociological satire " . 
 The film deploys Kalyani 's vulnerability as a widow in a hostile society , with consequent threats to her chastity , especially during the court trial scenes . The name Kalyani was chosen by the script writer to emphasise the contradiction between the meaning of her name indicating auspiciousness and her contrasting penury . The theme is expressed through Gunasekaran 's arguments in the court : " [ My ] sister 's name is Kalyani . An auspicious name [ indeed ] . But there is no ' <unk> ' around [ her ] neck " . Also , Vimala , who becomes Gunasekaran 's bride , compares herself to Kannagi , a popular symbol of chastity in Tamil culture . Ganesan , who enacted the role of Gunasekaran in Parasakthi , was a DMK activist in real life in 1952 and helped in propagating the theme of Dravida Nadu . The film attempted to bring to light the alleged fraud in the name of religion and presented agnostic views , displaying a powerful critique of the Congress rule in the Madras Presidency . 
 = = Music = = 
 The music of Parasakthi was composed by R. <unk> . The lyrics were written by Bharathidasan , T. N. Ramaiah Nadu , <unk> , Karunanidhi , and <unk> Narayana Kavi . The background score was composed by the Chennai @-@ based Saraswathi Stores Orchestra . Relatively higher importance was given to the film 's dialogues over its music , so the dialogues were sold separately on audio cassettes . Some of the numbers from Parasakthi were based on songs from Hindi films ; one was a rehash from the Urdu film Akeli ( 1952 ) . The number " O <unk> <unk> " inspired " Itai <unk> " from Periyar ( 2007 ) . The 2010 film <unk> <unk> borrows its title from the song of the same name . Annadurai is referenced in the number " Kaa Kaa Kaa " , in the line " <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> " ( " Crow elder , you are singing so melodiously with your beautiful mouth " ) . Credit for that song 's writer is disputed , with film music historian <unk> attributing it to <unk> Narayana Kavi , while Sachi Sri Kantha believes <unk> wrote the song . " <unk> " is based on the Urdu song " <unk> , <unk> Koi <unk> " from the Pakistani film <unk> ( 1952 ) . An album containing remixed versions of the songs of Parasakthi was released in on 3 June 2009 , to commemorate Karunanidhi 's 86th birthday . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Parasakthi was released on 17 October 1952 , on Diwali day . It was regarded as a " propaganda vehicle for a new political party " and marked the start of cinema 's " starring role in Tamil politics " . Ganesan 's performance in the film 's court scene was also very well received by audience , and was considered to have propelled him to stardom . The film became an instant commercial success , running for over 175 days in several theatres , and was one of the first films to be screened at the Madurai @-@ based Thangam theatre , which was noted as Asia 's largest theatre at the time . Parasakthi 's Telugu @-@ dubbed version of the same name was released in 1957 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 P. <unk> Mudaliar of Sunday Observer wrote , " The story is simple but it has been made powerful by Mr. Karunanidhi by his beautiful dialogues . Mr. Shivaji Ganesan , who plays the main role dominates from the beginning to the end " and concluded , " If an Academy award were to be given to any picture , I have little doubt that this picture would be entitled on its merits to such an award . " Dinamani Kadir , a Tamil weekly owned by Indian Express Limited ( then known as The Indian Express Group ) , carried an unusually long review of Parasakthi running into three closely printed pages . The review was given a cynical title , " <unk> <unk> " ( " The Abode of <unk> " ) and it began with a small box @-@ item which read , " Parasakthi : This goddess is abused in a Tamil film with her name " . The reviewer opined , " The main aim of the film is to attach gods . Along with that , the government and society are overtly and covertly attacked . The embittered and agitated reviewer further claimed , " He [ the hero of the film ] , acting as a mad man , threatens and beats the people on the street and grabs whatever they have and eats it . Then he goes to give repeatedly all those economics lectures , rationalist lectures and anti @-@ god lectures . When we see the hero doing all that , it seems as if he is portraying the lives of those who are trying to force such ideas in the ... film . " For the reviewer , thus , the DMK men were living on others ' sweat and preaching unacceptable <unk> ideas . 
 Film historian Randor Guy said , " 1952 ... an eventful year for Tamil cinema , the beginning of a new period " and added that " The film that ushered in that new era was Parasakthi written for the screen by another fast @-@ rising star Mu . Karunanidhi " , while concluding that the film would be " Remembered for the dialogue and the stunning performance of the new hero . " In an interview with Shobha Warrier of Rediff.com , Tamil film historian S. Theodore Baskaran said , " Sivaji 's best and most memorable films are his early ones " and mentioned that Ganesan was " very lucky to get a role in Parasakthi " , which he praised for the " flowery dialogues " . Film historian S. Muthiah said that Parasakthi " showed Karunanidhi as the master of meaningful screen dialogue that carried forceful messages to the masses " . The Sunday Indian called it " a classic DMK film scripted by M Karunanidhi " . In a 2007 interview with S. R. Ashok Kumar of The Hindu , director Balu Mahendra said , " ' Parasakthi 's ' heavy dialogue ( written in chaste Tamil by the current Chief Minister M. Karunanidhi ) coupled with a stunning performance by newcomer , Sivaji Ganesan , make it a favourite . " Film News Anandan called it " one of the most elaborately plotted melodramas in the Indian cinema " . 
 = = = Controversies = = = 
 Post release , Parasakthi was marred by numerous controversies , and was defined as " one of the most controversial films in the history of Tamil cinema " by Theodore Baskaran . It was accused of trying to portray Brahmins in poor light . Abuse of Hindu customs and religious practices evoked strong protests from the Hindu orthodoxy . Scenes like a priest attempting to rape a woman in a temple were found to be very provocative . The social elite and members of the then ruling Congress party demanded the film to be banned . The @-@ then Chief Minister of Madras , C. Rajagopalachari was unhappy with the extremely provocative nature of the film , but allowed it to be screened . One of the reasons stated by them was the dialogue spoken by Ganesan 's character , " Just because you came around chanting names and offered flowers to the stone , would it become a god ? " , which was accused of " mocking the audiences . " His reference to Goddess Parasakthi as a stone created a stir , and the word " stone " was eventually censored from the soundtrack . However , the given message was still " clear and the impact viral . " The State Government requested the Union Government to reconsider the film certification , but they declined , due to a previous examination by a Madras intelligence officer , who stated : 
 The dialogues for the film have been specially written in a forceful manner by Sri M Karunanidhi , the well known leader of the Dravidian Progression Federation ... The film graphically describes the sufferings and hardships that a young widow with her babe in arms has to face due to poverty and how cruelly society treats her , or <unk> her . The substance of the story by itself is not objectionable . The plot is interesting and the story has a powerful moral appeal , namely that there will be ups and downs in a man 's life and that chastity is the most precious jewel of womanhood . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Parasakthi acquired cult status and changed the character of Tamil cinema . Dialogue writing was given more importance than ever before . Speeches of the film replaced traditional music of artists like M. S. Subbulakshmi , K. B. Sundarambal and others at festivities . The film also had its share in giving the DMK the necessary stimulus to overthrow the Congress party in Tamil Nadu . The dialogues became so popular that " roadside entertainers used to recite long passages from the film in market area of Madras and collect money from bystanders " , and memorising the film 's dialogues became a " must for aspirant political orators " . They were even released separately on <unk> records . K. Hariharan , the director of L. V. Prasad Film Academy in Chennai , included the film in his 2013 list , " Movies that stirred , moved & shook us " . 
 In celebration of the film 's 50th year , Ganesan 's autobiography , entitled <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " My Autobiography " ) was released on 1 October 2002 in Tamil , exactly a year after the actor 's death in 2001 . The English version , titled Autobiography of an Actor : Sivaji Ganesan , October 1928 @-@ July 2001 , was released exactly five years later in 2007 . To commemorate 50 years since the release of Parasakthi , a memorial was inaugurated in AVM Studios on 17 October 2002 by Kamal Haasan in the presence of Ganesan 's sons Prabhu and Ramkumar . The memorial stands at the same place where Ganesan first faced the camera . A slab of black granite , the memorial has on its top a brass medallion that bears a close @-@ up of Ganesan uttering his popular opening line " Success " . At its bottom is a rectangular plaque that gives details about the memorial 's inauguration . At the base of the rectangular plaque are two other plaques resembling the pages of an open book and contains the names of the technical crew and all those involved in the making of the film . The visage of Ganesan wearing a hat was designed by Thotta Tharani . The 2003 film Success starring Ganesan 's grandson Dushyant was named after Ganesan 's popular line , but opened to negative reception . 
 Parasakthi is included with other Ganesan films in 8th Ulaga Adhisayam Sivaji , a compilation DVD featuring Ganesan 's " iconic performances in the form of scenes , songs and stunts " which was released in May 2012 . During the film 's diamond jubilee year celebrations in January 2013 , K. Chandrasekaran , the president of Nadigar <unk> Sivaji Social Welfare Association said , " Six decades down the line Parasakthi is remembered because it is not just a film , but an epic " . On the centenary of Indian cinema in April 2013 , Forbes India included Ganesan 's performance in the film in its list , " 25 Greatest Acting Performances of Indian Cinema " . Actor Sivakumar stated , " You can ’ t reproduce movies like Parasakthi , Pasamalar , Devadas , Veerapandiya Kattabomman or Ratha Kanneer [ ... ] By remaking such films , you are lowering yourself , while it enhances the original artists ’ image . " The Times of India included Parasakthi in its list , " Top 5 Sivaji Ganesan films on his birthday " . 
 Vivek parodied the film 's climax in <unk> Amman ( 2000 ) . A film called <unk> Parasakthi directed by A. <unk> was released in 1985 . This film is not related to Parasakthi . Karthi 's performance in his debut film <unk> Veeran ( 2007 ) was compared by critics with Parasakthi . Malathi Rangarajan , in her review of Citizen ( 2001 ) at The Hindu , mentioned that the court scene during the climax was reminiscent of Parasakthi 's climax . In Sivaji ( 2007 ) , the eponymous character ( Rajinikanth ) who shares his first name with Sivaji Ganesan , utters the dialogue , " Parasakthi hero da " ( " The hero of Parasakthi , man " ) when referring to himself . 
 Film Heritage Foundation announced in March 2015 that they would be restoring Parasakthi along with a few other Indian films from 1931 to 1965 as a part of their restoration projects carried out in India and abroad in accordance to international parameters . The foundation , however , stated that they would not <unk> any of the films as they " believe in the original repair as the way the master or the creator had seen it . " In July 2016 , Ganesan 's other grandson Vikram Prabhu launched a production house named " First Artist " with a still of Ganesan from Parasakthi as part of its logo . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Conan ( 2007 video game ) = 
 Conan is a 2007 action @-@ adventure video game that puts players in control of the titular hero , Conan the Barbarian , from Robert E. Howard 's fantasy literature . The game was published by THQ for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 game consoles . Its developer , Nihilistic Software , was inspired by the God of War and Ninja Gaiden video games to create an experience featuring gore and nudity . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Players control Conan the Barbarian from a third @-@ person perspective while attempting to advance through the series of levels that subdivide the game . 
 Conan can fight with sword and shield , two @-@ handed weapons , or a weapon in each hand . Starting with several basic attacks , the barbarian gains experience points by killing enemies . By exchanging these points for additional attacks , players improve the hero 's fighting abilities . Magic powers complement Conan 's arsenal , including the abilities to turn enemies into stone and conjure firestorms . The game also features context @-@ sensitive action sequences in which players press a sequence of buttons displayed on the screen to complete actions such as killing powerful enemies and interacting with the environment . 
 The gameplay is the same for each level : Conan moves from area to area , fighting groups of enemies until he reaches the end . At the end of certain levels , the barbarian has to fight a more powerful opponent called a boss . Defeating a boss involves a two @-@ stage process : Conan has to inflict heavy damage on the creature and thus trigger an interactive button @-@ pressing sequence that players have to complete to kill the boss . Several cycles of this process are required to defeat most bosses . Besides combat , button @-@ pressing sequences are also used to interact with the environment , such as knocking down obstacles to create passageways , or as parts of platforming sequences in which Conan climbs walls and jumps from ledge to ledge . Players can save their progress by using special stones that are placed throughout the game . 
 Conan starts each level with his default one @-@ handed sword , and can pick up shields and other weapons to switch between three styles of attack : fighting with a one @-@ handed weapon , a two @-@ handed weapon , or a weapon in each hand . Each style features several attacks with names like " Cimmerian Charge " and " Black River Rage " . The barbarian can change or stop his attacks at any time , creating many options in combat . When Conan lands a sequence of successive hits on his enemies , he activates his Song of Death , which increases the damage of his attacks for a short time . For defense , Conan can roll under enemy attacks or block them . If the player presses the block button just when an enemy is about to hit the barbarian , an image of a controller button appears on the screen . Pressing the button shown will make Conan execute a gory counterattack , which instantly kills the enemy . Other methods to kill enemies include grabbing and throwing them against other objects , such as spikes and other enemies , or over cliffs . 
 In addition to physical assaults , Conan can use magic powers to damage enemies . Gaining these powers in later stages of the game , the barbarian can turn opponents into stone , call down fire from the heavens , and summon flocks of ravens to do his bidding . These magical attacks can quickly end fights , but their use is limited by the number of magic points Conan has . When an enemy is killed , colored runes — each one conferring its own special advantage — are released and gathered by the barbarian . Red runes act as experience points , which are exchanged for advanced attacks . Green and blue runes restore Conan 's health and magic points , respectively . The barbarian can also obtain runes by breaking containers and freeing maidens from captivity . 
 = = Plot and setting = = 
 In Conan , the hero is on a quest to recover his lost armor and defeat an evil wizard . The game takes place in the world of Hyboria , a creation of Robert E. Howard for his stories about Conan the Barbarian . Conan 's developer , Nihilistic Software , chose several Hyborian locations , such as Kush , <unk> , and the <unk> Isles , to establish a link to the literary world . Hyboria was designed to be a fantasy version of Earth around 10 @,@ 000 BC , and its civilizations were based on those from the Stone to Iron Ages . Nihilistic portrayed the plains of Kush , a fictional Africa , as savannahs with villages of straw huts . <unk> was illustrated as a land filled with structures resembling Egyptian tombs and the <unk> Isles as lushly <unk> islands . 
