 Louis Stanislas was an intelligent boy , excelling in classics . His education was of the same quality and consistency as that of his older brother , Louis Auguste , despite the fact that Louis Auguste was heir and Louis Stanislas was not . Louis Stanislas ' education was quite religious in nature ; several of his teachers were men of the cloth . La <unk> drilled into young Louis Stanislas and his brothers the way he thought princes should " know how to withdraw themselves , to like to work , " and " to know how to reason correctly " . 
 In April 1771 , Louis Stanislas ' education was formally concluded and his own independent household was established , which astounded contemporaries with its extravagance : in 1773 , the number of servants reached 390 . In the same month his household was founded , Louis was granted several titles by his grandfather , Louis XV : Duke of Anjou , Count of Maine , Count of Perche , and Count of <unk> . During this period of his life he was often known by the title Count of Provence . 
 On 17 December 1773 , he was ordained as a Grand Master of the Order of St. Lazarus . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 On 14 May 1771 , Louis Stanislas married Princess Maria Giuseppina of Savoy . Marie Joséphine ( as she was known in France ) was a daughter of Victor Amadeus , Duke of Savoy ( later King Victor Amadeus III of Sardinia ) , and his wife Maria Antonia <unk> of Spain . 
 A luxurious ball followed the wedding on 20 May . Louis Stanislas was repulsed by his wife , who was considered ugly , tedious , and ignorant of the customs of the court of Versailles . The marriage remained unconsummated for years . Biographers disagree about the reason . The most common theories propose Louis Stanislas ' alleged impotence ( according to biographer Antonia Fraser ) or his unwillingness to sleep with his wife due to her poor personal hygiene . She never brushed her teeth , plucked her eyebrows , or used any perfumes . At the time of his marriage , Louis Stanislas was obese and <unk> instead of walked . He never exercised and continued to eat enormous amounts of food . 
 Despite the fact that Louis Stanislas was not infatuated with his wife , he boasted that the two enjoyed vigorous conjugal relations – but such declarations were held in low esteem by courtiers at Versailles . He also proclaimed his wife to be pregnant merely to spite Louis Auguste and his wife Marie Antoinette , who had not yet consummated their marriage . The Dauphin and Louis Stanislas did not enjoy a harmonious relationship and often quarrelled , as did their wives . Louis Stanislas did impregnate his wife in 1774 , having conquered his aversion . However , the pregnancy ended in a miscarriage . A second pregnancy in 1781 also miscarried , and the marriage remained childless . 
 = = At his brother 's court = = 
 On 27 April 1774 , Louis XV fell ill after contracting smallpox and died the following 10 May . The Dauphin , Louis Auguste , succeeded his grandfather as King Louis XVI . As eldest brother of the king , Louis Stanislas received the title Monsieur . Louis Stanislas longed for political influence . He attempted to gain admittance to the king 's council in 1774 , but failed . Louis Stanislas was left in a political limbo that he called " a gap of 12 years in my political life " . Louis XVI granted Louis Stanislas revenues from the Duchy of Alençon in December 1774 . The duchy was given to enhance Louis Stanislas ' prestige , however , the appanage generated only 300 @,@ 000 livres per annum , an amount much lower than it had been at its peak in the fourteenth century . 
 Louis Stanislas travelled more through France than other members of the royal family , who rarely left the Île @-@ de @-@ France . In 1774 , he accompanied his sister Clotilde to Chambéry on the journey to meet her bridegroom Charles Emmanuel , Prince of Piedmont , heir to the throne of Sardinia . In 1775 , he visited Lyon and also his spinster aunts Adélaïde and Victoire while they were taking the waters at Vichy . The four provincial tours that Louis Stanislas took before the year 1791 amounted to a total of three months . 
 On 5 May 1778 , Dr. <unk> , Marie Antoinette 's private physician , confirmed her pregnancy . On 19 December 1778 , the Queen gave birth to a daughter , who was named Marie @-@ Thérèse Charlotte de France and given the honorific title Madame Royale . The birth of a girl came as a relief to the Count of Provence , who kept his position as heir to Louis XVI , since Salic Law excluded women from acceding to the throne of France . However , Louis Stanislas did not remain heir to the throne much longer . On 22 October 1781 , Marie Antoinette gave birth to the Dauphin Louis Joseph . Louis Stanislas and his brother , the Count of Artois , served as godfathers by proxy for Joseph II , Holy Roman Emperor , the queen 's brother . When Marie Antoinette gave birth to her second son , Louis Charles , in March 1785 , Louis Stanislas slid further down the line of succession . 
 In 1780 , Anne <unk> de Caumont , Countess of Balbi , entered the service of Marie Joséphine . Louis Stanislas soon fell in love with his wife 's new lady @-@ in @-@ waiting and installed her as his mistress , which resulted in the couple 's already small affection for each other cooling entirely . Louis Stanislas commissioned a pavilion for his mistress on a parcel that became known as the Parc Balbi at Versailles . 
 Louis Stanislas lived a quiet and sedentary lifestyle at this point , not having a great deal to do since his self @-@ proclaimed political exclusion in 1774 . He kept himself occupied with his vast library of over 11 @,@ 000 books at Balbi 's pavilion , reading for several hours each morning . In the early 1780s , he also incurred huge debts totalling 10 million livres , which his brother Louis XVI paid . 
 An Assembly of Notables ( the members consisted of magistrates , mayors , nobles and clergy ) was convened in February 1787 to ratify the financial reforms sought by the Controller @-@ General of Finance Charles Alexandre de Calonne . This provided the Count of Provence , who abhorred the radical reforms proposed by Calonne , the opportunity he had long been waiting for to establish himself in politics . The reforms proposed a new property tax , and new elected provincial assemblies that would have a say in local taxation . Calonne 's proposition was rejected outright by the notables , and , as a result , Louis XVI dismissed him . The Archbishop of Toulouse , Étienne Charles de <unk> de Brienne , acquired Calonne 's ministry . Brienne attempted to salvage Calonne 's reforms , but ultimately failed to convince the notables to approve them . A frustrated Louis XVI dissolved the assembly . 
 Brienne 's reforms were then submitted to the Parlement of Paris in the hopes that they would be approved . ( A parlement was responsible for ratifying the king 's edicts . Each province had its own parlement , but the Parlement of Paris was the most significant of all . ) The Parlement of Paris refused to accept Brienne 's proposals and pronounced that any new taxation would have to be approved by an Estates @-@ General ( the nominal parliament of France ) . Louis XVI and Brienne took a hostile stance against this rejection , and Louis XVI had to implement a " bed of justice " ( Lit de justice ) , which automatically registered an edict in the Parlement of Paris , to ratify the desired reforms . On 8 May , two of the leading members of the Parlement of Paris were arrested . There was rioting in Brittany , Provence , Burgundy and Béarn in reaction to their arrest . This unrest was engineered by local magistrates and nobles , who enticed the people to revolt against the Lit de Justice , which was quite unfavourable to the nobles and magistrates . The clergy also joined the provincial cause , and condemned Brienne 's tax reforms . Brienne conceded defeat in July and agreed to calling the Estates @-@ General to meet in 1789 . He resigned from his post in August and was replaced by the Swiss magnate Jacques Necker . 
 In November 1788 , a second Assembly of Notables was convened by Jacques Necker , to consider the makeup of the next Estates @-@ General . The Parlement de Paris recommended that the Estates should be the same as they were at the last assembly , in 1614 ( this would mean that the clergy and nobility would have more representation than the Third Estate ) . The notables rejected the " dual representation " proposal . Louis Stanislas was the only notable to vote to increase the size of the Third Estate . Necker disregarded the notables ' judgment , and convinced Louis XVI to grant the extra representation – Louis duly obliged on 27 December . 
 = = = The outbreak of the French Revolution = = = 
 The Estates @-@ General were convened in May 1789 to ratify financial reforms . The Count of Provence favoured a stalwart position against the Third Estate and its demands for tax reform . On 17 June , the Third Estate declared itself a National Assembly , an Assembly not of the Estates , but of the people . 
 Provence urged the king to act strongly against the declaration , while the king 's popular minister Jacques Necker intended to compromise with the new assembly . Louis XVI was characteristically indecisive . On 9 July , the assembly declared itself a National Constituent Assembly that would give France a Constitution . On 11 July , Louis XVI dismissed Necker , which led to widespread rioting across Paris . On 12 July , the sabre charge of the cavalry regiment of Charles @-@ Eugène de Lorraine , prince de <unk> , on a crowd gathered at the Tuileries gardens , sparked the Storming of the Bastille two days later . 
 On 16 July , the Count of Artois left France with his wife and children , along with many other courtiers . Artois and his family took up residence in Turin , the capital city of his father @-@ in @-@ law 's Kingdom of Sardinia , with the family of the Princes of Condé . 
 The Count of Provence decided to remain at Versailles . When the royal family plotted to abscond from Versailles to Metz , Provence advised the king not to leave , a suggestion he accepted . 
 The royal family was forced to leave the palace at Versailles on the day after The Women 's March on Versailles , 5 October 1789 . They were re @-@ located to Paris . There , the Count of Provence and his wife lodged in the Luxembourg Palace , while the rest of the royal family stayed in the Tuileries Palace . In March 1791 , the National Assembly created a law outlining the regency of Louis Charles in case his father died while he was still too young to reign . This law awarded the regency to Louis Charles ' nearest male relative in France ( at that time the Count of Provence ) , and after him , the Duke of Orléans ( bypassing the Count of Artois ) . If Orléans were unavailable , the regency would be submitted to election . 
 The Count of Provence and his wife fled to the Austrian Netherlands in conjunction with the royal family 's failed Flight to Varennes in June 1791 . 
 = = Exile = = 
 = = = The early years = = = 
 When the Count of Provence arrived in the Low Countries , he proclaimed himself de facto regent of France . He exploited a document that he and Louis XVI had written before the latter 's failed escape to Varennes . The document gave him the regency in the event of his brother 's death or inability to perform his role as king . He would join the other princes @-@ in @-@ exile at Coblenz soon after his escape . It was there that he , the Count of Artois , and the Condés proclaimed that their objective was to invade France . Louis XVI was greatly annoyed by his brothers ' behaviour . Provence sent emissaries to various European courts asking for financial aid , soldiers , and munition . Artois secured a castle for the court in exile in the Electorate of Treves , where their maternal uncle , Clemens Wenceslaus of Saxony , was the Archbishop @-@ Elector . The activities of the émigrés bore fruit when the rulers of Prussia and the Holy Roman Empire gathered at Dresden . They released the Declaration of Pillnitz in August 1791 , which urged Europe to intervene in France if Louis XVI or his family were threatened . Provence 's endorsement of the declaration was not well received in France , either by the ordinary citizens or Louis XVI himself . 
 In January 1792 , the Legislative Assembly declared that all of the émigrés were traitors to France . Their property and titles were confiscated . The monarchy of France was abolished by the National Convention on 21 September 1792 . 
 Louis XVI was executed in January 1793 . This left his young son , Louis Charles , as the titular King . The princes @-@ in @-@ exile proclaimed Louis Charles " Louis XVII of France " . The Count of Provence now unilaterally declared himself regent for his nephew , who was too young to be head of the House of Bourbon . 
 Louis Charles died in June 1795 . His only surviving sibling was his sister Marie @-@ Thérèse , who was not considered a candidate for the throne because of France 's traditional adherence to Salic Law . Thus on 16 June , the princes @-@ in @-@ exile declared the Count of Provence " King Louis XVIII " . The new king accepted their declaration soon after . Louis XVIII busied himself drafting a manifesto in response to Louis XVII 's death . The manifesto , known as " The Declaration of Verona , " was Louis XVIII 's attempt to introduce the French people to his politics . The Declaration of Verona beckoned France back into the arms of the monarchy , " which for fourteen centuries was the glory of France " . 
 Louis XVIII negotiated Marie @-@ Thérèse 's release from her Paris prison in 1795 . He desperately wanted her to marry her first cousin , Louis @-@ Antoine , Duke of Angoulême , the son of the Count of Artois . Louis XVIII deceived his niece by telling her that her parents ' last wishes were for her to marry Louis Antoine , and she duly agreed to her uncle @-@ king 's wishes . 
 Louis XVIII was forced to abandon Verona when Napoleon Bonaparte invaded the Republic of Venice in 1796 . 
 = = = 1796 – 1807 = = = 
 Louis XVIII had been vying for the custody of his niece Marie @-@ Thérèse since her release from the Temple Tower in December 1795 . He succeeded when Francis II , Holy Roman Emperor , agreed to relinquish his custody of her in 1796 . She had been staying in Vienna with her Habsburg relatives since January 1796 . Louis XVIII moved to <unk> in the Duchy of Brunswick after his departure from Verona . He lived in a modest two @-@ bedroom apartment over a shop . Louis XVIII was forced to leave <unk> when King Frederick William II of Prussia died . In light of this , Marie @-@ Thérèse decided to wait a while longer before reuniting with her uncle . 
 In 1798 , Tsar Paul I of Russia offered Louis the use of Jelgava Palace in Courland ( now Latvia ) . Paul I also guaranteed Louis 's safety and bestowed upon him a generous pension , however , the tsar later disregarded this allowance . Marie @-@ Thérèse finally joined Louis XVIII at Jelgava in 1799 . In the winter of 1798 – 1799 , Louis XVIII wrote a biography of Marie Antoinette titled Réflexions Historiques sur Marie Antoinette . He attempted to recreate the court life of Versailles at Jelgava , where many old courtiers lived , re @-@ establishing all the court ceremonies , including the lever and coucher ( ceremonies that accompanied waking and bedding , respectively ) . 
 Marie @-@ Thérèse married her cousin Louis Antoine on 9 June 1799 at Jelgava Palace . Louis XVIII ordered his wife to attend the marriage ceremony in Courland without her long @-@ time friend ( and rumoured lover ) Marguerite de <unk> . Queen Marie Joséphine lived apart from her husband in Schleswig Holstein . Louis XVIII was trying desperately to display to the world a united family front . The queen refused to leave her friend behind with unpleasant consequences that rivalled the wedding in notoriety . Louis XVIII knew that his nephew Louis Antoine was not compatible with Marie @-@ Thérèse . Despite this , he still pressed for the marriage , which proved to be quite unhappy and produced no children . 
 Louis XVIII attempted to strike up a correspondence with Napoleon Bonaparte ( now First Consul of France ) in 1800 . Louis XVIII urged Bonaparte to restore the Bourbons to their throne , but the future emperor was immune to Louis 's requests and continued to consolidate his position as ruler of France . 
 Louis XVIII encouraged his niece to write her memoirs , as he wished them to be used as Bourbon propaganda . In 1796 and 1803 , Louis also used the diaries of Louis XVI 's final attendants in the same way . In January 1801 , Tsar Paul told Louis XVIII that he could no longer live in Russia . The court at Jelgava was so low on funds that it had to auction some of its possessions to afford the journey out of Russia . Marie @-@ Thérèse even sold a diamond necklace that the Emperor Paul had given her as a wedding gift . 
 Marie @-@ Thérèse persuaded Queen Louise of Prussia to give her family refuge in Prussian territory . Louise consented , but the Bourbons were forced to assume pseudonyms . With Louis XVIII using the title Comte d 'Isle ( named after his estate in Languedoc ) and at times Comte de Lille , he and his family assumed residence in Warsaw , then part of the province of South Prussia , in the Łazienki Palace from 1801 to 1804 , after an arduous voyage from Jelgava . According to <unk> <unk> , a contemporary living there at the time , the Prussian local authorities , wishing to honour the arrivals , had music played , but , wishing to give them a national and patriotic character , chose the La Marseillaise , the hymn of the First French Republic with unflattering allusions to both Louis XVI and Louis XVIII . They later apologised for their mistake . , 
 It was very soon after their arrival that they learned of the death of Paul I. Louis hoped that Paul 's successor , Alexander I , would repudiate his father 's banishment of the Bourbons ( which he later did ) . Louis XVIII then intended to set off to the Kingdom of Naples . The Count of Artois asked Louis to send his son , Louis Antoine , and daughter @-@ in @-@ law , Marie @-@ Thérèse , to him in Edinburgh , but they did not at this time . Artois had an allowance from King George III of Great Britain and sent some money to Louis . Louis XVIII 's court in exile was being spied on by French police . The court @-@ in @-@ exile was being financed mainly by interest owed from Francis II on valuables his aunt , Marie Antoinette , had removed from France and had to cut its expenses significantly . 
 In 1803 , Napoleon tried to force Louis XVIII to renounce his right to the throne of France , but Louis refused . In May 1804 , Napoleon Bonaparte declared himself Emperor of the French . Louis XVIII and his nephew departed for Sweden in July for a Bourbon family conference , where Louis XVIII , the comte d 'Artois , and the duc d 'Angoulême issued a statement condemning Napoleon 's decision to declare himself emperor . The King of Prussia issued a proclamation saying that Louis XVIII would have to leave Prussian territory , which meant leaving Warsaw . Alexander I of Russia invited Louis XVIII to resume residence in Jelgava . Louis XVIII had to live under less generous conditions than those enjoyed under Paul I , and he intended to embark for England as soon as possible . 
 As time went on , Louis XVIII realised that France would never accept an attempt to return to the Ancien Régime . Accordingly , he created another policy in 1805 with a view toward reclaiming his throne : a declaration that was far more liberal than his former ones . It repudiated his Declaration of Verona , promised to abolish conscription , retain Napoleon I 's administrative and judicial system , reduce taxes , eliminate political prisons , and guarantee amnesty to everyone who did not oppose a Bourbon Restoration . The opinions expressed in the declaration were largely those of the Count of Avaray , Louis 's closest associate in exile . 
 Louis XVIII was forced once again to leave Jelgava when Alexander of Russia informed him that his safety could not be guaranteed on continental Europe . In July 1807 , Louis boarded a Swedish frigate to Stockholm , bringing with him only the Duke of Angoulême . Louis did not stay in Sweden for long ; he arrived in Great Yarmouth , Norfolk , England , in November 1807 . He took up residence in <unk> Hall , leased to him by the Marquess of Buckingham . 
 = = = England = = = 
 Louis brought his wife and queen , Marie Joséphine , from mainland Europe in 1808 . Louis 's stay at <unk> Hall did not last long ; he soon moved to Hartwell House in Buckinghamshire , where over one hundred courtiers were housed . The King paid £ 500 in rent each year to the proprietor , Sir George Lee . The Prince of Wales ( the future George IV of Great Britain ) was very charitable to the exiled Bourbons . As Prince Regent , he granted them permanent right of asylum and extremely generous allowances . 
 The Count of Artois did not join the court @-@ in @-@ exile in Hartwell , preferring to continue his frivolous life in London . Louis 's friend the Count of Avaray left Hartwell for Madeira in 1809 , and died there in 1811 . Louis replaced Avaray with the Comte de Blacas as his principal political advisor . Queen Marie Joséphine died on 13 November 1810 . That same winter , Louis suffered a particularly severe case of gout , which was a recurring problem for him at Hartwell , and he had to be put in a wheelchair . 
 Napoleon I embarked on an invasion of Russia in 1812 . This war would prove to be the turning point in his fortunes , as the expedition failed miserably and Napoleon was forced to retreat with an army in tatters . 
 In 1813 , Louis XVIII issued another declaration while at Hartwell . " The Declaration of Hartwell " was even more liberal than his " Declaration of 1805 " , asserting that all those who served Napoleon or the Republic would not suffer repercussions for their acts , and that the original owners of the Biens nationaux ( lands confiscated from the nobles and clergy during the Revolution ) were to be compensated for their losses . 
 Allied troops entered Paris on 31 March 1814 . Louis , however , was unable to walk , and so sent the Count of Artois to France in January 1814 . Louis XVIII issued letters patent appointing Artois Lieutenant General of the Kingdom in the event of the Bourbons being restored . Napoleon I abdicated on 11 April , five days after his Senate had invited the Bourbons to re @-@ assume the throne of France . 
 = = Bourbon Restoration = = 
 = = = Restoration I = = = 
 The Count of Artois ruled as Lieutenant @-@ General of the kingdom until his brother 's arrival in Paris on 3 May . Upon his return , the king displayed himself to his subjects by creating a procession through the city . He took up residence in the Tuileries Palace the same day . His niece , the Duchess of Angoulême , fainted at the sight of the Tuileries , where she had lived during the time of the French Revolution . 
 Napoleon 's senate called Louis XVIII to the throne on the condition that he would accept a constitution that entailed recognition of the Republic and the Empire , a bicameral parliament elected every year , and the tri @-@ colour flag of the aforementioned regimes . Louis XVIII opposed the senate 's constitution and stated that he was " disbanding the current senate in all the crimes of Bonaparte , and appealing to the French people " . The senatorial constitution was burned in a theatre in royalist Bordeaux , and the Municipal Council of Lyon voted for a speech that defamed the senate . 
 The Great Powers occupying Paris demanded that Louis XVIII implement a constitution . Louis responded with the Charter of 1814 , which included many progressive provisions : freedom of religion , a legislature composed of the Chamber of Deputies and the Chamber of Peers , a press that would enjoy a degree of freedom , and a provision that the Biens nationaux would remain in the hands of their current owners . The constitution had 76 articles . Taxation was to be voted on by the chambers . Catholicism was to be the official religion of France . To be eligible for membership in the Chamber of Deputies , one had to pay over 1 @,@ 000 francs per year in tax , and be over the age of forty . The king would appoint peers to the Chamber of Peers on a hereditary basis , or for life at his discretion . Deputies would be elected every five years , with one fifth of them up for election each year . There were 90 @,@ 000 citizens eligible to vote . 
 Louis XVIII signed the Treaty of Paris on 30 May 1814 . The treaty gave France her 1792 borders , which extended east of the Rhine . She had to pay no war indemnity , and the occupying armies of the Sixth Coalition withdrew instantly from French soil . These generous terms would be reversed in the next Treaty of Paris after the Hundred Days ( Napoleon 's return to France in 1815 ) . 
 It did not take Louis XVIII long to go back on one of his many promises . He and his Controller @-@ General of Finance Baron Louis were determined not to let the exchequer fall into deficit ( there was a 75 million franc debt inherited from Napoleon I ) , and took fiscal measures to ensure this . Louis XVIII assured the French that the unpopular taxes on tobacco , wine and salt would be abolished when he was restored , but he failed to do so , which led to rioting in Bordeaux . Expenditures on the army was slashed in the 1815 budget – in 1814 , the military had accounted for 55 % of government spending . 
 Louis XVIII admitted the Count of Artois and his nephews the Dukes of Angoulême and Berry into the king 's council in May 1814 , upon its establishment . The council was informally headed by Prince Talleyrand . Louis XVIII took a large interest in the goings @-@ on of the Congress of Vienna ( set up to redraw the map of Europe after Napoleon 's demise ) . Talleyrand represented France at the proceedings . Louis was horrified by Prussia 's intention to annex the Kingdom of Saxony , to which he was attached because his mother was born a Saxon princess , and he was also concerned that Prussia would dominate Germany . He also wished the Duchy of Parma to be restored to the <unk> Bourbons , and not to Empress Marie Louise of France , as was being suggested by the Allies . Louis also protested the Allies ' inaction in Naples , where he wanted the Napoleonic usurper Joachim Murat removed in favour of the Neapolitan Bourbons . 
 On behalf of the Allies , Austria agreed to send a force to the Kingdom of Naples to depose Murat in February 1815 , when it became apparent that Murat corresponded with Napoleon I , which was explicitly forbidden by a recent treaty . Murat never actually wrote to Napoleon , but Louis , intent on restoring the Neapolitan Bourbons at any cost , forged the correspondence , and subsidised the Austrian expedition with 25 million francs . 
 Louis XVIII succeeded in getting the Neapolitan Bourbons restored immediately . Parma was bestowed upon Empress Marie Louise for life , and the <unk> Bourbons were given the Duchy of Lucca until the death of Marie Louise . 
 = = = Hundred Days = = = 
 On 26 February 1815 , Napoleon Bonaparte escaped his island prison of Elba and embarked for France . He arrived with about 1 @,@ 000 troops near Cannes on 1 March . Louis XVIII was not particularly worried by Bonaparte 's excursion , as such small numbers of troops could be easily overcome . There was , however , a major underlying problem for the Bourbons : Louis XVIII had failed to purge the military of its Bonapartist troops . This led to mass desertions from the Bourbon armies to Bonaparte 's . Furthermore , Louis XVIII could not join the campaign against Napoleon in the south of France because he was suffering from another case of gout . Minister of War Marshall Soult dispatched Louis Philippe , Duke of Orléans ( later King Louis Philippe I ) , the Count of Artois , and Marshall MacDonald to apprehend Napoleon . 
 Louis XVIII 's underestimation of Bonaparte proved disastrous . On 19 March , the army stationed outside Paris defected to Bonaparte , leaving the city vulnerable to attack . That same day , Louis XVIII quit the capital with a small escort at midnight . Louis decided to go first to Lille , and then crossed the border into the United Kingdom of the Netherlands , staying in Ghent . Other leaders , most prominently Alexander I of Russia , debated whether in the case of a second victory over the French Empire , the Duke of Orléans should be proclaimed king instead of Louis XVIII . 
 However , Napoleon did not rule France again for very long , suffering a decisive defeat at the hands of the armies of the Duke of Wellington and Field Marshal Blücher at the Battle of Waterloo on 18 June . The Allies came to the consensus that Louis XVIII should be restored to the throne of France . 
 = = = 1815 – 1824 = = = 
 Louis XVIII returned to France promptly after Napoleon 's defeat to ensure his second restoration " in baggage train of the enemy " , i.e. with Wellington 's troops . The Duke of Wellington used King Louis 's person to open up the route to Paris , as some fortresses refused to surrender to the Allies , but agreed to do so for their king . King Louis arrived at Cambrai on 26 June , where he released a proclamation stating that those who served the Emperor in the Hundred Days would not be persecuted , except for the " instigators " . It was also acknowledged that Louis XVIII 's government might have made mistakes during the First Restoration . On 29 June , a deputation of five from the Chamber of Deputies and the Chamber of Peers approached Wellington about putting a foreign prince on the throne of France . Wellington rejected their pleas outright , declaring that " [ Louis XVIII is ] the best way to preserve the integrity of France " . Wellington ordered the deputies to espouse King Louis 's cause . Louis XVIII entered Paris on 8 July to a boisterous reception : the Tuileries Palace gardens were thronged with bystanders , and , according to the Duke of Wellington , the acclamation of the crowds there were so loud that evening that he could not converse with the king . 
 Louis XVIII 's role in politics from the Hundred Days onward was voluntarily diminished ; he resigned most of his duties to his council . He and his ministry embarked on a series of reforms through the summer of 1815 . The king 's council , an informal group of ministers that advised Louis XVIII , was dissolved and replaced by a tighter knit privy council , the " Ministère de Roi " . Artois , Berry and Angoulême were purged from the new " <unk> " , and Talleyrand was appointed as the first Président du Conseil , i.e. Prime Minister of France . On 14 July , the ministry dissolved the units of the army deemed " rebellious " . Hereditary peerage was re @-@ established to Louis 's behest by the ministry . 
 In August , elections for the Chamber of Deputies returned unfavourable results for Talleyrand . The ministry wished for moderate deputies , but the electorate voted almost exclusively for ultra @-@ royalists , resulting in the so @-@ called Chambre <unk> . The Duchess of Angoulême and the Count of Artois pressured King Louis for the dismissal of his obsolete ministry . Talleyrand tendered his resignation on 20 September . Louis XVIII chose the Duke of Richelieu to be his new Prime Minister . Richelieu was chosen because he was accepted by Louis 's family and the reactionary Chamber of Deputies . 
 Anti @-@ Napoleonic sentiment was high in Southern France , and this was prominently displayed in the White Terror , which saw the purge of all important Napoleonic officials from government and the execution of others . The people of France committed barbarous acts against some of these officials . Guillaume Marie Anne Brune ( a Napoleonic marshal ) was savagely assassinated , and his remains thrown into the Rhône River . Louis XVIII deplored such illegal acts , but vehemently supported the prosecution of those marshals that helped Napoleon in the Hundred Days . Louis XVIII 's government executed Napoleon 's Marshal Ney in December 1815 for treason . His confidants Charles François , Marquis de <unk> , and the Duke de La Chatre advised him to inflict firm punishments on the “ traitors ” . 
 The king was reluctant to shed blood , and this greatly irritated the ultra @-@ reactionary Chamber of Deputies , who felt that Louis XVIII was not executing enough . The government issued a proclamation of amnesty to the “ traitors ” in January 1816 , but the trials that had already begun were finished in due course . That same declaration also banned any member of the House of Bonaparte from owning property in , or entering , France . It is estimated that between 50 @,@ 000 – 80 @,@ 000 officials were purged from the government during what was known as the Second White Terror . 
 In November 1815 , Louis XVIII 's government had to sign another Treaty of Paris that formally ended Napoleon 's Hundred Days . The previous treaty had been quite favourable to France , but this one took a hard line . France 's borders were retracted to their extent at 1790 . France had to pay for an army to occupy her , for at least five years , at a cost of 150 million francs per year . France also had to pay a war indemnity of 700 million francs to the allies . 
 In 1818 , the Chambers passed a military law that increased the size of the army by over 100 @,@ 000 . In October of the same year , Louis XVIII 's foreign minister , the Duke of Richelieu , succeeded in convincing the powers to withdraw their armies early in exchange for a sum of over 200 million francs . 
 Louis XVIII chose many centrist cabinets , as he wanted to appease the populace , much to the dismay of his brother , the ultra @-@ royalist Count of Artois . Louis always dreaded the day he would die , believing that his brother , and heir , Artois , would abandon the centrist government for an ultra @-@ royalist autocracy , which would not bring favourable results . 
 King Louis disliked the First Prince of the Blood Louis @-@ Philippe d 'Orléans , and took every opportunity to snub him , denying him the title of " Royal Highness " , partly out of resentment for the Duke 's father 's role in voting for Louis XVI 's execution . Louis XVIII 's nephew , the Duke of Berry , was assassinated at the Paris Opera on 14 February 1820 . The royal family was grief @-@ stricken and Louis XVIII broke an ancient tradition to attend his nephew 's funeral , as previous kings of France could not have any association with death . The death of the Duke of Berry meant that the House of Orléans was more likely to succeed to the throne . 
 Berry was the only member of the family thought to be able to beget children . His wife gave birth to a posthumous son in September , Henry , Duke of Bordeaux , nicknamed Dieudonné ( God @-@ given ) by the Bourbons because he was thought to have secured the future of the dynasty . However the Bourbon succession was still in doubt . The Chamber of Deputies proposed amending Salic law to allow the Duchess of Angoulême to accede to the throne . On 12 June 1820 , the Chambers ratified legislation that increased the number of deputies from 258 to 430 . The extra deputies were to be elected by the wealthiest quarter of the population in each département . These individuals now effectively had two votes . Around the same time as the “ law of the two votes ” , Louis XVIII began to receive visits every Wednesday from a lady named Zoé Talon , and ordered that nobody should disturb him while he was with her . It was rumoured that he inhaled snuff from her breasts , which earned her the nickname of <unk> ( <unk> ) . In 1823 , France embarked on a military intervention in Spain , where a revolt had occurred against the King Ferdinand VII . France succeeded in crushing the rebellion , an effort headed by the Duke of Angoulême . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Louis XVIII 's health began to fail in the spring of 1824 . He was suffering from obesity , gout and gangrene , both dry and wet , in his legs and spine . Louis died on 16 September 1824 surrounded by the extended royal family and some government officials . He was succeeded by his youngest brother , the Count of Artois , as Charles X. 
 Louis XVIII was the last French monarch , and the only one after 1774 , to die while still ruling . He was interred at the Basilica of St Denis , the necropolis of French kings . 
 = = Ancestors = = 
 = = In fiction = = 
 Louis XVIII has a cameo rôle in the novella Le Bal de Sceaux by Honoré de Balzac . 
 Louis XVIII appears briefly in the novel The Count of Monte Cristo , by Alexandre Dumas . 
 The young Count of Provence was portrayed by Sebastian <unk> in a few brief scenes in the 2006 motion picture Marie Antoinette , a biographical film written and directed by Sofia Coppola , based on the book , Marie Antoinette : The Journey by Lady Antonia Fraser . This movie makes a great error by naming him as the father of Louis XIX , who was in fact the son of Louis XVIII 's brother Charles X. 
 In the 1970 film Waterloo , Louis XVIII was portrayed by Orson Welles . 
 He appears briefly as well in the novel " Les Misérables " , by Victor Hugo . In Book the Third , Hugo writes that Louis XVIII enjoys running fast in his carriage as he is unable to walk . 
 = Versus ( EP ) = 
 Versus is the first extended play by American singer Usher . It was released on July 20 , 2010 on LaFace Records and Jive Records in conjunction with the deluxe edition of his sixth studio album Raymond v. Raymond . Several producers contributed to the production of the EP , including Polow da Don , Jim Jonsin , Rico Love , <unk> Boy , Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis , and Max Martin . Versus is marked as " the last chapter of Raymond v. Raymond " , and follows the theme of Usher exploring around the subjects of being newly single and a father . 
 Preceding the EP 's release was the lead single " DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love " , which achieved international success . The song peaked at number four on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 , and peaked inside the top @-@ ten in several other countries singles charts . " Hot Tottie " and " Lay You Down " were released as the second and third singles , respectively , with the former becoming a US top @-@ thirty hit . To promote the album , Usher appeared in several award and television shows , including Good Morning America , The Ellen DeGeneres Show and Jimmy Kimmel Live ! . 
 Versus debuted at number four on the US Billboard 200 chart , selling 46 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . It became Usher 's sixth top @-@ ten album in the United States , and has since , sold 302 @,@ 000 copies in the country . Despite some criticism towards its pop @-@ oriented material , the EP received generally positive reviews from most music critics . It earned Usher several nominations , including a Billboard Music Award , an International Dance Music Award and a NRJ Music Award . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 2009 , in an interview with People Magazine , Usher , whose private life has been highly documented after filing for divorce from wife Tameka Foster , told that his sixth studio album will be , " racy , risky and edgy , and sometimes about personal experiences . " In March , 2010 , he released the album under the title Raymond v. Raymond . Upon its release , Raymond v. Raymond received generally mixed reviews from music critics , who were ambivalent towards its songwriting and themes . However , the album was a commercial success and peaked at number one on the US Billboard 200 chart , with sales of 329 @,@ 000 for its first week ; it became Usher 's third consecutive US number one album . 
 On July 8 , 2010 , Versus was announced as a follow @-@ up to Raymond v. Raymond , and is Usher 's first extended play . Described during a press release as " the last chapter of Raymond v. Raymond " , he stated that the EP will explore the subjects of being newly single and a father . It would include Raymond v. Raymond single " There Goes My Baby " , as well as 8 new tracks . Several producers from the latter album contributed to the production of the EP , including Polow da Don , Jim Jonsin , Rico Love , <unk> Boy , Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis , Tha <unk> and Max Martin . Versus ' track listing and album cover was revealed on July 21 , 2010 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The EP incorporates the genres R & B , pop , dance @-@ pop and hip @-@ hop . Its lead single , " DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love " is a Europop track , with electronic and dance @-@ pop influence . About.com 's Mark Nero summed up its lyrics , to simply be " going clubbing on a Friday night " . " Hot Tottie " is an R & B song that incorporates hip @-@ hop , which is over strobing , electronic beats with Usher 's vocals auto @-@ tuned in parts ; the song contains a verse from rapper Jay @-@ Z , whose appearance was lauded by critics . " There Goes My Baby " is a down @-@ tempo R & B ballad , with elements of neo soul ; the song primarily uses Usher 's falsetto range . Both " Lay You Down " and " Lingerie " contain influences from pop artists , with the former channelling Prince whilst the latter , Michael Jackson . In an interview with music video website Vevo , Usher explained that " Lay You Down " is a " classic R & B baby maker " . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love " , featuring Pitbull , produced by Max Martin is the first single off the EP . It was released to iTunes on July 13 , 2010 and officially sent to radio on July 20 , 2010 . The song received generally positive reviews from critics , who complemented its production but were ambivalent towards its lack of originality ; the song was largely compared to " OMG " due to its club nature . Since its release , it has gained international success , peaking in the top three in Canada , Japan , Australia , France , and Hungary and in the top ten in several other countries . The song became Usher 's sixteenth Billboard Hot 100 top @-@ ten hit , peaking at number @-@ four on the chart , and number two on the US Pop Songs Chart . As of February 2011 , the song has sold over 3 million digital units , making it the second single to exceed the sales figure for both Usher and featured artist Pitbull . 
 " Hot Tottie " , featuring Jay @-@ Z , produced by Polow Da Don and written by Usher , Shawn Carter , and Ester Dean , is the second single . It was released for urban radio on August 9 , 2010 . Ciara was originally reported to be on the song , but did not appear on the final track . The song received very positive reviews from critics , who praised rapper Jay @-@ Z 's verse and Usher 's vocals . It peaked at number nine on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , and number 21 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart . Internationally , " Hot Tottie " peaked at number sixty @-@ two on the Canadian Hot 100 . Although it was not released officially as a single in the UK , the song reached number 104 on the UK Singles Chart and number twenty @-@ seven on the UK R & B Chart due to sales after the release of Versus only . " Lay You Down " , produced by Rico Love and Dwayne Nesmith , is the third single and was sent to urban radio on September 28 , 2010 . It maintained a peak of number fifty @-@ six on the R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , due to only being released to radio . Sara Anderson of AOL wrote that the song opens " with improvisational , high @-@ pitched ' <unk> ' and base @-@ driven synth beats [ ... ] . " 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 The EP was released on August 24 , 2010 in the United States . The set was preceded by the lead single " DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love " for mainstream audiences , and " Hot Tottie " for urban audiences . Versus ' tracks are included on the deluxe edition of Raymond v. Raymond ; the album was released in the United States conjointly with Versus , and released in the United Kingdom on September 20 , 2010 . The international version of Versus was not released as an EP , but instead as a full album in select countries . It includes the original tracks from the EP , as well as singles from Raymond v. Raymond , including " More " , " OMG " , " Lil Freak " , " Hey Daddy ( Daddy 's Home ) " and " Papers " . 
 Usher performed the lead single " DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love " in several shows , the first being Good Morning America ; he performed it alongside " OMG " . He performed both songs again during the 2010 MTV Music Video Awards . Jayson Rodriguez of MTV lauded the performance , writing that " Usher plays to win , and after his stirring performance it 's clear that the crown still rests securely on his head " . A few days later , Usher performed the song — whilst also interviewed — on The Ellen DeGeneres Show . On September 17 , 2010 , he performed the song alongside " There Goes My Baby " on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! . Usher performed " DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love " in the season five finale of America 's Got Talent , and in the seventh season of The X Factor . Usher performed " Hot Tottie " on an untelevised portion of his appearance on The Early Show on September 3 , 2010 , and performed it on his OMG Tour , alongside " DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love " . 
 = = = Tour = = = 
 In the summer of 2010 , Usher competed in a dance battle against fellow R & B artist Chris Brown at the Reggae <unk> . The battle sparked an Internet rumor of the two possibly going on tour . This was further pushed by producer Jermaine Dupri alluding that the two artist may be unaware of this upcoming tour . The singers later took to Twitter to ask who the fans would like to see them perform with . On September 8 , 2010 , the singer announced his touring trek ( and revealed it was solo ) for North America . Due to demand , many additional stops in Europe and Australasia were added . It is Usher 's first arena tour since his 2004 effort , The Truth Tour . The then announced OMG Tour commenced on November 10 , 2010 and concluded on June 1 , 2011 with Usher performing in a total of 92 shows . In its conclusion , the tour placed seventh on Billboard 's annual " Top 25 Tours " , earning nearly $ 75 million . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Versus received generally positive reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 65 , based on 6 reviews . Mikael Wood of Entertainment Weekly gave it an " A – " and said that " ' Love ' Em All ' describes an egalitarian sexual appetite , while ' Lingerie ' offers prime faux @-@ Prince boudoir funk . The Max Martin @-@ produced ' DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love ' shows ' OMG ' didn 't satisfy Usher 's dance @-@ pop Jones , but he 's hardly gone soft : ' Hot Tottie , ' with Jay @-@ Z , is nasty in all the right ways . " Sarah Rodman of The Boston Globe complimented its " compact running time " and stated " Instead of ho @-@ hum filler , ' Versus ' offers the strongest arrows in Usher ’ s quiver " . About.com 's Mark Edward Nero gave the EP three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of five stars and wrote that Usher has " regained his mojo " , while recommending it to fans of his music : " nine songs - seven of them new - clocking in at 38 minutes is a good deal for this solid package of music . " Steve Jones of USA Today gave Versus three out of four stars and called it " an abbreviated batch of fresh songs that can stand alone or as part of a deluxe original " . Billboard 's Gail Mitchell commended the album 's guest artists and wrote that it " alternately bumps and throbs as a reinvigorated Usher further paves his comeback path " 
 Jeff Weiss of the Los Angeles Times gave the EP two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of four stars and found " Hot Tottie " to be " intoxicating as its namesake " , but disapproved of some of the generic points and pop efforts . The Washington Post 's Sean Fennessey criticized its pop @-@ oriented tracks , stating " Usher works best in emotional hailstorms , not candy rain " , and viewed that it " finds him in Peter Pan mode , digging for remnants of a younger self that never existed " . Andy Kellman of Allmusic gave it two out of five stars and said that it " mostly resembles a batch of leftovers from his weakest album , even though it functioned as a momentum maintainer " . Kellman dismissed its productions as " innocuous Euro @-@ pop " and " merely passable contemporary R & B " . In a one @-@ star review , Slant Magazine 's Erich Henderson panned Versus as a " wretched collection of failed club @-@ sex jams " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The EP 's lead single " DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love " earned Usher several award nominations , including a Billboard Music Award , an International Dance Music Award and a NRJ Music Award . " There Goes My Baby " also earned Usher nominations , for a Billboard Music Award and a Soul Train Music Award ; the song won its nomination at the 53rd Grammy Awards in 2011 , for Best Male R & B Vocal Performance . As an act , Usher received numerous accolades , such as being ranked as the third most successful Billboard Hot 100 artist of 2010 , and the top R & B / Hip Hop Artist of that year . He was ranked as the sixth top overall artist of 2010 , from the success of both Raymond v. Raymond and Versus . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 The EP debuted at number four on the US Billboard 200 chart , with first @-@ week sales of 46 @,@ 000 copies , becoming Usher 's sixth top @-@ ten album . In its second week of release it sold 22 @,@ 450 copies , and dropped to number thirteen on the Billboard 200 . It then sold over 17 @,@ 000 copies in its third week of release , and fell two positions to number fifteen . In its fourth week of release the album dropped one position , and sold 18 @,@ 000 copies surpassing 100 @,@ 000 sales in total . In its fifth week of release , the EP sold 13 @,@ 000 copies , and fell to number twenty @-@ five on the charts . To date , Versus has sold 302 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . The EP obtained moderate to high charting success outside of the US ; it debuted and peaked at number twelve in Canada . In Belgium ( Flanders ) the EP peaked at number twenty @-@ seven , and remained on the chart for the longest compared to other countries it charted in , staying for twenty @-@ eight weeks . Versus achieved similar success in France , Netherlands and Germany , peaking in the top @-@ 40 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Sample credits 
 " Get in My Car " samples Leon Russell and Marc Benno 's song " Mr. Henri the Clown " . 
 " Lil Freak " samples Stevie Wonder 's 1973 " Living for the City " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits for Versus adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = New York State Route 92 = 
 New York State Route 92 ( NY 92 ) is a state highway located in central New York in the United States . The western terminus of the route is at an intersection with U.S. Route 11 ( US 11 , named State Street ) in downtown Syracuse . Its eastern terminus is at a junction with US 20 west of the village of Cazenovia . NY 92 is known as East Genesee Street through Syracuse and DeWitt ; from DeWitt to Cazenovia , its name varies by location . It heads generally eastward through Syracuse to DeWitt , where it crosses Interstate 481 ( I @-@ 481 ) while concurrent with NY 5 . At the east end of the overlap , it splits off follows a more southeasterly routing through the village of Manlius to Cazenovia . 
 NY 92 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York ; however , it originally began in Fayetteville . At the time , the portion of Genesee Street in eastern Syracuse was part of NY 5 . NY 92 was extended westward into Syracuse in the 1930s after NY 5 was realigned to follow Erie Boulevard instead . NY 92 was concurrent with parts of NY 20N from the 1930s to c . 1962 and with the easternmost section of NY 20SY from the 1950s to c . 1962 . When NY 20SY was removed c . 1962 , NY 92 was rerouted to bypass Fayetteville on NY 20SY 's former routing southwest of the village . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Syracuse = = = 
 NY 92 begins as a city @-@ maintained highway at an intersection with US 11 ( State Street ) in downtown Syracuse . The route heads eastward on East Genesee Street , passing under I @-@ 81 before splitting into a one @-@ way couplet at Almond Street . For the next two blocks , the eastbound and westbound lanes of NY 92 are separated by a small park situated within the block formed by Almond Street , Forman Avenue , and both directions of Genesee Street . The couplet ends just east of Forman Avenue , at which point NY 92 continues on as a highway four lanes wide but with one through traffic lane and one lane reserved for parking in each direction . 
 At Lexington Avenue , NY 92 begins to turn to the southeast as it heads through more residential areas of the city . At East Avenue , a local street just west of Nottingham Senior High School , the parking lanes become open to through traffic , effectively widening the road to two lanes in each direction . The route passes north of the school and St. Mary 's Cemetery and south of LeMoyne College before exiting the city limits . At this point , maintenance of the route shifts from Syracuse to the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) . Now in DeWitt , NY 92 continues past several blocks lined with homes to an intersection with Erie Boulevard , a six @-@ lane divided highway that carries NY 5 through eastern Syracuse . The boulevard ends here , however , and NY 5 turns to join NY 92 eastward along Genesee Street . 
 = = = East of Syracuse = = = 
 Not far to the east of this junction , NY 5 and NY 92 meet I @-@ 481 by way of a cloverleaf interchange . East of the interchange , Genesee Street widens to six lanes ( three in each direction ) as it heads along a commercial strip anchored by a large plaza featuring a Wegmans Food Markets store . NY 5 and NY 92 split at the east end of the strip in the hamlet of Lyndon . While NY 5 continues east along Genesee Street to Fayetteville , NY 92 heads southeast along the two @-@ lane Highbridge Road and bypasses Fayetteville to the southwest . 
 The route continues into the town of Manlius , where it crosses over Limestone Creek at the hamlet of High Bridge . Past this point , the amount of development along the highway increases as it approaches an intersection with NY 257 just inside of the Manlius village limits . Here , NY 92 becomes four lanes wide once again as it heads along the mostly commercial Fayette Street toward the village center . In the heart of Manlius , NY 92 overlaps with NY 173 for about 750 feet ( 230 m ) past another commercial strip along Seneca Street before resuming its southeasterly progression at Washington Street . It becomes Cazenovia Road upon exiting the village . 
 Outside of the village of Manlius , the amount of development along the route decreases as the homes lining the route become more spaced out . NY 92 follows Limestone Creek southeastward through the towns of Manlius and Pompey to the Madison County line , where the creek turns south to run through Pompey Hollow , an area of flatlands situated on the Onondaga County side of the line . The highway continues on into Madison County , where it becomes known as Syracuse Road as it heads through the town of Cazenovia . Most of NY 92 in Madison County passes through rural , undeveloped areas ; however , the section just north of its intersection with US 20 runs along Cazenovia Lake and serves several lakeside homes . NY 92 ends upon intersecting US 20 at the southwestern tip of the lake just west of the village of Cazenovia . 
 = = History = = 
 NY 92 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York to a northwest – southeast roadway connecting Fayetteville to Cazenovia . At Fayetteville , NY 92 ended at NY 5 , which continued west into downtown Syracuse on Genesee Street . NY 5 was realigned c . 1934 to follow Erie Boulevard through eastern Syracuse . NY 5 's former routing along Genesee Street between Columbus Avenue and Erie Boulevard became a westward extension of NY 92 , which overlapped NY 5 from Fayetteville to DeWitt . At Columbus Avenue , NY 92 turned north and followed that street to Erie Boulevard , where it ended at NY 5 . NY 92 was extended west along Genesee Street to its current terminus at US 11 in April 1935 . 
 The segment of NY 92 between Manlius and Cazenovia gained another designation in 1937 when it became part of NY 20N , a northerly alternate route of US 20 that was concurrent with other state routes for its entire length . In the early 1950s , the portions of NY 92 west of DeWitt and from Manlius to Cazenovia also became part of NY 20SY , another alternate route of US 20 that veered even farther north than NY 20N in order to serve downtown Syracuse . NY 20SY was realigned slightly between 1952 and 1954 to follow NY 5 through eastern Syracuse instead . 
 While most of NY 20SY overlapped other state routes , there were two sections where NY 20SY was the sole designation assigned to the highway it ran along . One of the two segments was near Fayetteville , where NY 20SY left NY 5 and NY 92 west of the village and bypassed Fayetteville to the southwest on Highbridge Road before rejoining NY 92 just north of Manlius . The NY 20N and NY 20SY designations were removed c . 1962 , at which time NY 92 was realigned to bypass Fayetteville by way of NY 20SY 's former routing southwest of the village . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Mitică = 
 Mitică ( Romanian pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) is a fictional character who appears in several sketch stories by Romanian writer Ion Luca Caragiale . The character 's name is a common hypocoristic form of Dumitru or Dimitrie ( Romanian for Demetrius ) . He is one of the best @-@ known figures in Caragiale 's 1901 collection Momente şi <unk> , as well as in Romanian humor at large . Mitică is a male resident of Bucharest whose background and status are not always clear , generally seen as an allegory of the average <unk> or through extension , inhabitants of Romania 's southern regions — Wallachia and Muntenia . According to accounts , he was based on a resident of Sinaia , whom Caragiale had befriended . 
 Caragiale used Mitică as a stock character to feature in satirical contexts ; the biographical insights he provided are short and often contradict each other . Among Mitică 's traits are his tendency to generate sarcastic comebacks and sententious catchphrases , a Francized speech , as well as inclinations to waste time and easily find his way out of problematic situations . His existence is connected to events in the history of Bucharest which he occasionally references in his jokes . Like Lache and Mache , who are present in Caragiale 's fiction , the character is usually portrayed as a civil servant who has a hard time making ends meet , but who is well liked by his peers . 
 On account of his caricature @-@ like nature , Mitică survived in common reference beyond Caragiale 's age . The character was portrayed by several actors , and most notably by Ştefan Iordache in the film De ce trag clopotele , Mitică ? . In contemporary Romanian , his name was turned into a common noun , and often pluralized under the form mitici . During and after the 1990s , the terms surfaced in polemics surrounding Romania 's centralism and the alternative projects for Transylvania 's regional autonomy . In this context , it was used in reference to administrators from Bucharest or the Old Kingdom . In parallel , the term was adapted into a stereotype of modern Bucharesters and inhabitants of other regions over the Southern Carpathians , who are often portrayed as belonging to the Balkans , as opposed to the Central European traditions of Transylvania . Under these definitions , Mitică and mitici were notably present in essays authored by the Transylvanian activist Sabin Gherman . 
 = = Eponymous sketch = = 
 Ion Luca Caragiale first introduced Mitică to his readers in an eponymous sketch of 1900 , where he evidenced the character 's universal traits and indicates that the first name is enough to define the character . The opening passage notably draws a parallel between Bucharest and Paris ( at a time when the Romanian capital was colloquially known as " little Paris " or " Paris of the East " ) , and mentions Gambrinus , a pub owned and managed by the writer himself : 
 " Of course we all ought to know [ Mitică ] : we bump into him so very often — in shops , in the trolley , in the tram car , on a bicycle , in the train wagon , at the restaurant , at Gambrinus — in short , everywhere . 
 Mitică is the <unk> par excellence . And given that Bucharest is a little Paris , Mitică himself is , obviously , a little Parisian . 
 He is neither young nor old , neither handsome nor ugly , he is so so ; he is a lad whose features are all balanced ; but that which sets him apart , that which makes him have a marked character is his original and inventive spirit . " 
 With sarcasm , Caragiale proceeds to indicate that the character 's main trait is his inventive use of Romanian and his tendency to coin terms and make jokes , with which " First and foremost , our little Parisian astounds the provincials " . The remainder of the sketch lists Mitică 's remarks , part of which are platitudes or clichés . Some of them are isolated observations , which the author defines as " sentimental , lyrical , and melancholic " : " The most beautiful girl can only offer what she has to offer " , " Life is a dream , death is an awakening " , and " Every rose has its thorn " . 
 Most of Mitică 's lines are comebacks in dialogue , and Caragiale notes that his character takes pride in " being unrivaled " when it comes to these . The writer implicates himself in the story , portraying himself as his character 's good friend and a main target for such remarks — for instance , he recounts that , soon after New Years ' Eve 1900 , Mitică pretended not to have recognized him because " it 's been a century since we last saw each other ! " He writes how , when he was ordering a <unk> in the presence of Mitică , the latter jokingly asked the bartender not to comply , " for [ Caragiale ] is likely to drink it " . 
 The character 's lines offer glimpses into his financial and social status . Thus , he claims that he does not carry change because the metal might attract lightning , refuses to listen to his friends ' confessions because they did not pay the revenue stamp for complaints , and , when told that cabs are available , he sarcastically tells the drivers that they may go home . In one instance , he publicizes his goal to run in elections , but explains that he is going to contest a non @-@ existing seat — at a time when the Romanian Kingdom made use of the census suffrage and had established electoral colleges to stand for the three wealth @-@ based categories , he claims his intention to enlist in the fourth college , for the sparsely @-@ populated area of <unk> @-@ Noi . The sketch shows him to be married and to resent his mother @-@ in @-@ law , but to be courting a young female telegraph @-@ operator . 
 In this context , Mitică is shown to have developed a series of jargon @-@ like expressions . When recounting this to his friends that a clerk has been fired from office , refers to this " a promotion " , elaborating that the new office involves " chasing flies out of [ the park in ] <unk> " . Caragiale provides some of his character 's one @-@ liner jokes , which include references to garlic as " Serbian vanilla " , and to Romanian leu banknotes as " Trajan 's pictures " ( alluding to their design , which , at the time , featured a portrait of the Roman Emperor ) . His absurd requests include asking a shopkeeper to sell him " a few centimeters " of yogurt , and telling friends to drink their beer " before it cools itself " or to " climb on top of a sheet of paper " in order to reach for clothes placed higher on a stand . Several of his puns refer to the switch from horse @-@ drawn trams to trolley poles , for instance showing him blaming unexpected stops on horses not having been properly fed . 
 = = Other texts = = 
 Mitică was again present in Caragiale 's Tot Mitică ( " Mitică Still " ) , a sketch which only comprises sections of dialog . It begins with an exchange of lines between an unnamed character and Mitică , which was to become one of the best known puns in this sequence . When asked the general interest question De ce <unk> clopotele , Mitică ? ( " What are they sounding the [ church ] bells for , Mitică ? " , which , in the Romanian original , may be interpreted as " What are they pulling the bells by ? " ) , the protagonist answers De <unk> , <unk> ( " By the string , my dear " ) . 
 Tot Mitică offers other glimpses into the character 's financial problems , showing him complaining that he has been " pulling the devil 's tail " — using a traditional proverb to indicate that he has had a hard time getting by . To this , he adds that the devil would be suing him for injuries . He claims that he is going to spend his vacation in the mountains , and elaborates that he is talking about the pawnbroking institution known as <unk> de <unk> ( from the French for " Mountain of Piety " ; see Mont de <unk> ) . Mitică enters a restaurant to order only things which he knows are free ( " a toothpick , a match , a glass of water and a newspaper " ) . In other such sequences of events , he is shown eating in a pub as a means to " defend himself from death " , and borrowing money which he promises not to return . 
 When , in order to converse with a friend in a different compartment , he is traveling second class on a first class train ticket , Mitică asks the conductor to pay him the difference . He is shown anxiously walking about in the Bucharest Tribunal hall , and asking to see a lawyer for his defense , jokingly claims that he wants to be defended " from flies " . When invited for a walk in the <unk> Park , which was heavily forested at the time , he pretends to have understood this as an invitation to chop trees , and stresses that he buys his firewood . 
 Mitică still frequents the beer garden , and one of the dialogs mentions that he spends entire nights there . He is shown to be flirting with women , including the telephone operator , and boasts that several ladies visit him in his home . 
 The sketch includes several references to well @-@ known characters of the day , including the Conservative Party leader Petre P. Carp , the archaeologist Grigore Tocilescu , the Royal administrator Ioan <unk> , the actor Ion Niculescu ( as Iancu Niculescu ) , as well as the dentist <unk> . The character reveals his tendencies toward political satire , with a one @-@ liner introduced by Caragiale 's definition of " Mitică as a chauvinist " — Mitică is shown announcing that the only song he wants to have played at his funeral is the nationalist tune <unk> @-@ te , române ! ( which translates as " Awaken Thee , Romanian ! " ) . 
 In addition to the main sketch and Tot Mitică , Caragiale introduced a character of this name in a longer piece , titled 1 <unk> ( " The 1st of April " ) , which centers on an April Fool gone wrong . Late in the evening , this Mitică decides to hide in <unk> while his lover Cleopatra pretends to court their common friend Mişu <unk> — with simulated indignation , he takes Mişu by surprise as Cleopatra embraces him . Mitică dies hours after Mişu , who reacts out of instinct to his threatening voice , hits him over the forehead with a cane . Another Mitică — " Mr. Mitică the haberdasher " , whose family name is probably Georgescu — is present in the 1900 sketch La <unk> ( " At the Fair in Obor " ) , where he is shown accompanied by his family and ridiculing his mother @-@ in @-@ law in public . In another such piece , titled <unk> ... ( " The Initiative ... " ) , Caragiale recounts another dialog with " my buddy Mitică " , who is shown to be unnerved that the Romanian state " is indifferent " to the fact that infants , his daughter included , do not have wet nurses assigned to them , and that breastfeeding has to rely on the private sector . Another or the same Mitică makes a brief appearance in <unk> ( " An Inspection " ) , where he is one of the clerks investigating the bizarre suicide of the civil servant <unk> . 
 A Mitică is present in the piece called <unk> ! ... — the title comes from a face ţal ( " to make ţal " ) , an antiquated expression which , as Caragiale explains in the beginning of his story , means " to make a payment " ( from the German <unk> ) . The writer illustrates this concept by invoking a meeting between him , Mitică , and Mitică 's wife Graziella . Caragiale recounts how his friend served him and others a copious dinner in his house , and then made them sit through Graziella 's reading of her own lengthy essay on women as portrayed in Romanian folklore . To this goal , Caragiale explains , Mitică discreetly claimed that it was ţal and added , using a quasi @-@ official parlance , that " all bills are to be paid " . The piece ends with Caragiale exiting Mitică 's house in haste and : as the latter shouts " to be seeing each other " , he exclaims " to be left alone , Mitică " . 
 = = Background themes and sources of inspiration = = 
 Despite Mitică 's association with Bucharest and his usual most common career as a state employee , several commentators have recounted that he may have been based on Gheorghe Matheescu , an entrepreneur from the town of Sinaia ( located on the <unk> Valley , in northern Muntenia ) . Matheescu took pride in this supposed connection , and , around 1939 , argued in its favor in front of literary historian Şerban Cioculescu . Cioculescu recorded the rumor , and indicated that it was backed by information received from Caragiale 's daughter , Ecaterina <unk> . Her father reportedly enjoyed Matheescu 's company , and , in 1901 , even authored short advertisements for his store . 
 Mitică and Lache and Mache have often been seen as three manifestations of a main type in Caragiale 's work — the petty clerk who spends his time off in lively company . Literary historian Garabet Ibrăileanu , an adherent to the left @-@ wing trend known as Poporanism , was among the first to stress that Mitică 's name , like those of Lache and Mache , was actually supposed to enhance his everyday nature , while arguing that the character stood for the first generation of commoners with access to education . Ibrăileanu , who criticized Caragiale for his satirical overview of the social process , believed that the clerks in his work are unnecessarily cynical , and stressed that <unk> was the only one of his works were " one sees at least one glitter of kindness in the souls of the mitici " . 
 Literary historian George Călinescu saw Mitică as a main representative of Balkan subjects in Ion Luca Caragiale 's prose , and listed among the character 's other traits his pessimism in respect to historical developments , as well as his interest in rallying people off the street and imposing his ideas on them . He defined the latter aspect as " southern " , and noted that , like other heroes of Caragiale 's sketches , Mitică is " at the antipode of Romanticism " , and inhabits a place where " Gothic meditation does not flourish " . In his history of the Junimea literary society , Z. Ornea argued that there was a link between Mitică 's personality and Caragiale 's strong rejection of nationalism : 
 " Caragiale 's mitici are jovial , good @-@ natured characters , easy @-@ going in their thought and behavior . <unk> does not suit them and fanatical <unk> are unimaginable in this context . An ecstatically nationalist Mitică is a contradiction in terms , since his formula in life is accommodation , adaption to the situations . " 
 The character and his counterparts have been understood as purveyors and exponents of <unk> , a concept treasured by Caragiale . The word , meaning " trifle " or " nonsense " , refers to pretentious and often ridiculous expectations of people caricatured in his work , but is uttered by such characters in reference to each other ( as their tendency to dismiss events they are confronted with , no matter how important they may be ) . <unk> was notably present in Caragiale 's own satirical magazine , <unk> Român ( which he issued at intervals in the 1890s and after 1900 ) . Two mentions of , respectively , <unk> and the magazine itself are made in Tot Mitică ( in reference to Petre P. Carp and to a woman courted by Mitică 's friend <unk> ) . 
 Mitică 's voluble nature has itself been considered to have negative implications . An assessment of this was offered by Călinescu , who rejected the popular take on the character as boorish : 
 " Mitică is a <unk> , a scoundrel , an intriguer , in general on account of his garrulous nature , and a generous and confusing <unk> , agreeing to render services without having the strength to complete them , which in turn permits him to ask services from anyone else [ ... ] . He is easy @-@ going , with a horror for suffering and is most of all a well @-@ mannered man . The impression that Caragiale 's heroes are vulgar is false and mostly arises from the fact that , wishing to seem distinguished , they have not yet cultivated their speech and gestures . " 
 Caragiale created Mitică at a time when the Romanian culture as developed in the Old Kingdom was the recipient of French influence , and the Romanian language was open to <unk> . The character himself partakes in the process , and is shown to have adopted several of the manners and pastimes associated with the French Third Republic . 
 = = Modern uses and influence = = 
 = = = Cultural and political symbol = = = 
 The literary critic Paul Zarifopol , who was Ion Luca Caragiale 's good friend , made several references to Mitică as a prototype of ignorance . He thus used the character to define the most ignorant of journalists and newspaper readers , and , in his lengthy essay titled Din <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " From the Register of Gentle Ideas " ) , argued that Mitică 's traits survived in the manners and morals of state employees and journalists after Caragiale 's death , throughout World War I and after the creation of Greater Romania . 
 Political interpretations of Mitică 's status were present at an earlier stage : in his influential essay <unk> ( " Neo @-@ Serfdom " ) , the Marxist thinker Constantin <unk> @-@ Gherea , himself a friend of Caragiale , used <unk> ... ' s protagonist to illustrate the interventionist policies of the National Liberal cabinets . He contended that the two terms of his comparison shared " a mania for [ state ] intervention " , and argued that the National Liberals had a tendency to <unk> the economy . 
 Commentators such as Constantin Amăriuţei have proposed that there is an intrinsic connection between Mitică and Gore Pirgu , one of the protagonists in the novel Craii de Curtea @-@ Veche , authored by Ion Luca Caragiale 's son and rival , the Symbolist Mateiu Caragiale . Pirgu , who enjoys a successful career during the interwar despite having a shady past and coarse manners , has been defined by Amăriuţei as " the eternal and real Mitică of the Romanian world " . 
 Constantin Amăriuţei was noted for defining Mitică 's character ( <unk> ) through <unk> terms borrowed from the German philosopher Martin Heidegger . He thus argued that , for all their mundane motivations , the character and his peers illustrated a search present with all individuals , identifiable with Heidegger 's concepts of Being @-@ in @-@ the @-@ World and Being @-@ toward @-@ death ( see Heideggerian terminology ) . 
 In 2000 , several essays by literary historian <unk> <unk> were published posthumously , under the title Mitică şi Hyperion ( " Mitică and Hyperion " ) . This name drew a direct comparison between the voluble Mitică and an equally famous character in Romanian literature , the aloof , rational , and god @-@ like protagonist of Mihai Eminescu 's poem Luceafărul ( " The Morning Star " ) . <unk> attempted to synthesize the two conflicting natures in the Romanian identity , and viewed the two as terms in " an oxymoron " standing at the center of Romanian culture . 
 In his essay on the history of drunkenness in Romanian culture , Mircea <unk> defined Mitică as : 
 " The Bucharest wise guy , a haughty rascal , a swindler doubled by a thief and a boor giving himself airs , deplorable , awkward and discredited from the get @-@ go , in reality an aborted « <unk> » , an aborted « wanton » . " 
 Literary critic Ioana <unk> agreed that there was a link between Mitică and other characters in Caragiale 's sketches ; she subsequently argued that formed an integral part of the writer 's caricature of Romania in its entirety , and that the measure to which they reflected reality is impossible to detect . In her 2007 volume of essays , titled În Ţara <unk> . De <unk> ori Caragiale ( " In the Land of the <unk> . Seven Times Caragiale " ) , she stressed that the character was both more human and more artificial than his usual interpretations in 20th century commentary . 
 A particular definition of Mitică and mitici was adopted by many inhabitants of Transylvania , who used the terms in reference to either Bucharest @-@ based politicians or inhabitants of the city at large , and contrasted them with their counterparts to the northwest . The character has thus evolved to include a stereotypical view of contemporary Bucharesters or Wallachians , one which depicts them as <unk> , arrogant , aggressive and cunning . In other contexts , the mitici may be seen as not having an adequate familiarity with the culture of Transylvania , and are associated with the Balkans ( whereas Transylvania is identified with Central Europe ) . 
 In September 1998 , the Transylvanian journalist and essayist Sabin Gherman issued a pamphlet titled M @-@ am <unk> de România ( " I 've Grown Tired of Romania " ) , which was at the center of a scandal over its radical tone and demands for regional autonomy in Transylvania . In its first lines , the message drew a parallel between Mitică and " politicians in power " , identifying centralism and the politics of Romania with , among other things , disorganization and statism . Gherman went on to contrast " the seriousness , the elegance , the discipline " which he attributed to Transylvania with the invasion of " <unk> , ordinary <unk> , the civilization of pumpkin seeds " . The latter sentence comprised a reference to the habit of consuming seeds as snacks , in which he saw evidence of rudimentary behavior : 
 " Here [ that is , outside Transylvania ] , one doesn 't have rights , but <unk> . Here they eat pumpkin seeds , they use « there is many » in their speech , and , in general , people get born , multiply themselves and die . " 
 = = = Portrayals and tributes = = = 
 One of the best @-@ known references to the character is the 1981 film De ce trag clopotele , Mitică ? ( translated as " Why Are the Bells Ringing , Mitică ? " ) , directed by Lucian Pintilie . Titled after the opening dialog in Tot Mitică , the film was actually structured around Caragiale 's play D @-@ ale <unk> , and included portions from several other writings — including 1 <unk> . Mitică , who makes a brief appearance before dying at the hands of Mişu <unk> , is portrayed by Ştefan Iordache . De ce trag clopotele , Mitică ? was noted for its subtle undertones , through which it expressed criticism of the Romanian communist regime ( at a time when the country was led by Nicolae Ceauşescu ) . 
 In 2003 , the Luceafărul Theater in Iaşi hosted a dramatized version of Momente şi <unk> . Titled În <unk> lui Mitică ( " In Mitică 's World " ) , it was directed by Constantin <unk> and starred <unk> <unk> . 
 The national television channel TVR 2 produces a weekly show titled D 'ale lu ' Mitică ( roughly : " Mitică 's Stuff " ) , whose title is inspired by Caragiale 's hero . Hosted by the actor Mitică Popescu , the show groups reportage pieces from the Romanian countryside , recording unusual events which , the editors believe , serve to illustrate the problems faced by small communities in the post @-@ 1989 transition period . 
 = From Russia with Love ( film ) = 
 From Russia with Love is a 1963 British @-@ American spy thriller film , directed by Terence Young , produced by Albert R. Broccoli and Harry Saltzman , and written by Richard Maibaum , based on Ian Fleming 's 1957 novel of the same name . It is the second film in the James Bond film series , as well as Sean Connery 's second role as MI6 agent James Bond . In the film , Bond is sent to assist in the defection of Soviet consulate clerk Tatiana Romanova in Turkey , where SPECTRE plans to avenge Bond 's killing of Dr. No . 
 Following the success of Dr. No , United Artists greenlit a sequel and doubled the budget available for the producers . In addition to filming on location in Turkey , the action scenes were shot at Pinewood Studios , Buckinghamshire and in Scotland . Production ran over budget and schedule , and was rushed to finish by its scheduled October 1963 release date . 
 From Russia with Love was a critical and commercial success , taking over $ 78 million in worldwide box office receipts over its $ 2 million budget , more than its predecessor Dr. No , becoming a blockbuster in 1960s cinema . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Seeking to exact revenge on James Bond ( 007 ) for killing SPECTRE 's agent , Dr. No , the organisation 's expert planner , Kronsteen , devises a plan to manipulate him into stealing a Lektor cryptographic device from the Soviets . SPECTRE 's leader , Number 1 , puts Rosa Klebb , an ex @-@ SMERSH operative and the organisation 's Number 3 , in charge of the mission . Klebb recruits Donald " Red " Grant , ordering him to protect Bond until he acquires the Lektor , before killing him for it and bringing the device back to SPECTRE so they can sell it back to the Soviets . To further assist the scheme , Klebb recruits Tatiana Romanova , a cipher clerk at the Soviet consulate in Istanbul , whom she fools into thinking that she is still working for SMERSH . In London , M informs Bond that Romanova has contacted their " Station ' T ' " in Turkey , offering to defect with a Lektor , which both MI6 and the CIA have been after for years . However , Romanova 's message states that she will only defect if brought back by Bond , whose photo she had supposedly found in a Soviet intelligence file . Prior to his departure , Bond is supplied with a attaché case containing a concealed knife , concealed gold sovereigns , and a special tear gas booby trap connected to the lock mechanism , along with an Armalite AR @-@ 7 rifle . 
 After travelling to Istanbul , Bond heads into the city to meet with station head Ali Kerim Bey , tailed by Bulgarians working for the Russians . They are in turn tailed by Grant , who kills one of them after Bond is taken back to his hotel , stealing their car and dumping it outside the Soviet consulate to implicate Kerim Bey . After Karim Bey luckily escapes a limpet mine attempt on his life , he assists Bond the following day to spy on the Soviet consulate . Upon learning that a rival agent , Krilencu , has recently returned and suspecting he was behind the attack on his life , Kerim Bey declares it unwise to stay in the city and takes Bond with him to a rural gypsy settlement . However , Krilencu learns of this and promptly attacks with his men . While Kerim Bey is wounded in the attack , Bond narrowly avoids being killed by being secretly saved by Grant . The following night , Bond and Kerim Bey track down Krilencu to his hideout and kill him with Bond 's rifle . 
 Upon returning to his hotel suite that night , Bond finds Romanova waiting for him in his bed and sleeps with her ; neither are aware of SPECTRE filming them . The next day , Romanova heads off for a pre @-@ arranged rendezvous at Hagia Sophia to drop off the floor plans for the consulate , with Grant ensuring Bond receives the plans by killing the other Bulgarian tail who attempts to intercept the drop . Using the plans , Bond and Kerim Bey successfully steal the Lektor and , together with Romanova , escape with the device onto the Orient Express . On the train , Kerim Bey quickly notices a Soviet security officer named Benz tailing them , prompting him and Bond to subdue him . When Bond leaves Benz and Kerim Bey alone together , Grant kills them , and makes it appear as though they killed each other , preventing Bond from leaving the train with Romanova to rendezvous with one of Kerim 's men . At the next station , Bond passes on word of Kerim Bey 's death , and requests for an agent from Station Y to meet him at Zagreb . However , when the train arrives at the station , Grant intercepts Nash , sent from Station Y , killing him before posing as him . After drugging Romanova at dinner , Grant overcomes Bond , before taunting him about SPECTRE 's involvement in the theft . After disclosing that Romanova was unaware of what was truly going on , believing she was working for Russia , Grant reveals to Bond his plans to leave behind the film SPECTRE took of him and Romanova in the hotel , along with a forged blackmail letter , to make it appear that their deaths were the result of a murder @-@ suicide . Bond quickly convinces him to accept a bribe of gold sovereigns in exchange for a final cigarette , tricking Grant into setting off the booby trap in his attaché case . In the ensuing struggle , Bond narrowly gains the upper hand , stabbing Grant with the case 's concealed knife before strangling him with his own garrotte . At dawn , Romanova , having recovered , leaves the train with Bond , whereupon they hijack Grant 's getaway truck and drive to a dock , taking a moored boat Grant planned to use . 
 Upon hearing the news of Grant 's death , Number 1 summons Kronsteen and Klebb to remind them that SPECTRE does not tolerate failure , before having Kronsteen executed . Klebb , given one final chance to complete the mission , is instructed to get back the Lektor before Bond returns to Britain . Klebb sends a SPECTRE agent named Morzeny , to intercept Bond with a squadron of SPECTRE 's boats . However , Bond escapes by releasing his boat 's gasoline drums and detonating them with a signal flare which engulfs his pursuer 's boats in flames . Eventually , he and Romanova reach Venice and check into a hotel . While discussing his mission 's success , Klebb , disguised as a maid , attempts to steal the Lektor . Struggling with Bond , she tries to kill him with a gun and then a poisoned toe @-@ spike concealed in her shoe , until Romanova shoots her . In the final scene , Bond throws the bedroom film of himself and Romanova into the water as they motorboat down the canal . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Sean Connery as James Bond : Secret Intelligence Service Agent 007 . 
 Daniela Bianchi as Tatiana Romanova ( voiced by Barbara Jefford ) : Soviet Embassy clerk and Bond 's love interest . Fleming based Romanova on Christine Granville . 
 Pedro Armendáriz as Ali Kerim Bey : British Intelligence station chief in Istanbul . 
 Lotte Lenya as Rosa Klebb : A former SMERSH colonel , now chief operations officer for SPECTRE . 
 Robert Shaw as Donald " Red " Grant : Cunning SPECTRE assassin and one of the principal Bond enemies . 
 Bernard Lee as M : Chief of British Intelligence . 
 Walter Gotell as Morzeny : SPECTRE thug who trains personnel on SPECTRE Island . 
 Vladek Sheybal as Kronsteen : Chess grandmaster , and chief planning officer for SPECTRE . 
 " ? " ( anonymous credit for Anthony Dawson ( body ) and Eric Pohlmann ( voice ) ) as " Number 1 " ( Ernst Stavro Blofeld ) : Chief of SPECTRE and Bond 's nemesis . 
 Lois Maxwell as Miss Moneypenny : M 's secretary . 
 Desmond Llewelyn as Major Boothroyd : Head of " Q " Section ( British Intelligence gadgetry department ) . 
 Eunice Gayson as Sylvia Trench : Bond 's semi @-@ regular girlfriend . 
 Francis de Wolff as <unk> : Chief of a Gypsy tribe used for dirty work by Kerim Bey . 
 George Pastell as the Orient Express train conductor . 
 Fred Haggerty as Krilencu : A Bulgarian assassin who works as a killer for the Soviets in the Balkans . 
 <unk> Gur and Martine Beswick as Vida and Zora , respectively : Two jealous Gypsy girls who are disputing the same man . 
 Nadja Regin as Kerim Bey 's lonely girlfriend . 
 = = Production = = 
 Following the financial success of Dr. No , United Artists greenlit a second James Bond film . The studio doubled the budget offered to Eon Productions with $ 2 million , and also approved a bonus for Sean Connery , who would receive $ 100 @,@ 000 along with his $ 54 @,@ 000 salary . As President John F. Kennedy had named Fleming 's novel From Russia with Love among his ten favourite books of all time in Life magazine , producers Broccoli and Saltzman chose this as the follow @-@ up to Bond 's cinematic debut in Dr. No . From Russia with Love was the last film President Kennedy saw at the White House on 20 November 1963 before going to Dallas . Most of the crew from the first film returned , with major exceptions being production designer Ken Adam , who went to work on Dr. Strangelove and was replaced by Dr. No 's art director Syd Cain ; title designer Maurice Binder was replaced by Robert Brownjohn , and stunt coordinator Bob Simmons was unavailable and was replaced by Peter Perkins though Simmons performed stunts in the film . John Barry replaced Monty Norman as composer of the soundtrack . 
 The film introduced several conventions which would become essential elements of the series : a pre @-@ title sequence , the Blofeld character ( referred in the film only as " Number 1 " ) , a secret @-@ weapon gadget for Bond , a helicopter sequence ( repeated in every subsequent Bond film except The Man with the Golden Gun ) , a postscript action scene after the main climax , a theme song with lyrics , and the line " James Bond will return / be back " in the credits . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Ian Fleming 's novel was a Cold War thriller but the producers replaced the Soviet undercover agency SMERSH with the crime syndicate SPECTRE so as to avoid controversial political overtones . The SPECTRE training grounds were inspired by the film Spartacus . The original screenwriter was Len Deighton , who accompanied Harry Saltzman , Syd Cain , and Terence Young to Istanbul but he was replaced because of a lack of progress . Thus , two of Dr. No 's writers , Johanna Harwood and Richard Maibaum , returned for the second film in the series Some sources state Harwood with being credited for " adaptation " mostly for her suggestions which were carried over into Maibaum 's script . Harwood stated in an interview in a Cinema Retro that she had been a screenwriter of several of Harry Saltzman 's projects , and her screenplay for From Russia with Love had followed Fleming 's novel closely , but she left the series due to what she called Terence Young 's constant rewriting of her screenplay with ideas that were not in the original Fleming work . Maibaum kept on making rewrites as filming progressed . Red Grant was added to the Istanbul scenes just prior to the film crew 's trip to Turkey — a change that brought more focus to the SPECTRE plot , as Grant started saving Bond 's life there ( a late change during shooting involved Grant killing the bespectacled spy at Hagia Sophia instead of Bond , who ends up just finding the man dead ) . For the last quarter of the movie , Maibaum added two chase scenes , with a helicopter and speedboats , and changed the location of Bond and Klebb 's battle from Paris to Venice . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Although uncredited , the actor who played Number 1 was Anthony Dawson , who had played Professor Dent in the previous Bond film , Dr. No . In the end credits , Blofeld is credited with a question mark . Blofeld 's lines were redubbed by Viennese actor Eric Pohlmann in the final cut . Peter Burton was unavailable to return as Major Boothroyd , so Desmond Llewelyn , a Welsh actor who was a fan of the Bond comic strip published in the Daily Express , accepted the part . However , screen credit for Llewelyn was omitted at the opening of the film and is reserved for the exit credits , where he is credited simply as " Boothroyd " . Llewelyn 's character is not referred to by this name in dialogue , but M does introduce him as being from Q Branch . Llewelyn remained as the character , better known as Q , in all but one of the series ' films until his death in 1999 . 
 Several actresses were considered for the role of Tatiana , including Italians Sylva <unk> and Virna Lisi , Danish actress Annette Vadim , and English @-@ born Tania Mallet . 1960 Miss Universe runner @-@ up Daniela Bianchi was ultimately cast , supposedly Sean Connery 's choice . Bianchi started taking English classes for the role , but the producers ultimately chose to have her lines redubbed by British stage actress Barbara Jefford in the final cut . The scene in which Bond finds Tatiana in his hotel bed was used for Bianchi 's screen test , with Dawson standing in , this time , as Bond . The scene later became the traditional screen test scene for prospective James Bond actors and Bond Girls . 
 Greek actress Katina <unk> was originally considered for the role of Rosa Klebb , but was unavailable . Terence Young cast Austrian singer Lotte Lenya after hearing one of her musical recordings . Young wanted Kronsteen 's portrayer to be " an actor with a remarkable face " , so the minor character would be well remembered by audiences . This led to the casting of Vladek Sheybal , whom Young also considered convincing as an intellectual . Several women were tested for the roles of Vida and Zora , the two fighting Gypsy girls , and after <unk> Gur and Martine Beswick were cast , they spent six weeks practising their fight choreography with stunt work arranger Peter Perkins . 
 Mexican actor Pedro Armendáriz was recommended to Young by director John Ford to play Kerim Bey . After experiencing increasing discomfort on location in Istanbul , Armendáriz was diagnosed with inoperable cancer . Filming in Istanbul was terminated , the production moved to Britain , and Armendáriz 's scenes were brought forward so that he could complete his scenes without delay . Though visibly in pain , he continued working as long as possible . When he could no longer work , he returned home and took his own life . Remaining shots after Armendáriz left London had a stunt double and Terence Young himself as stand @-@ ins . 
 Englishman Joe Robinson was a strong contender for the role of Red Grant but it was given to Robert Shaw . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Most of the film was set in Istanbul , Turkey . Locations included the Basilica Cistern , Hagia Sophia and the Sirkeci railway station which also was used for the Belgrade and Zagreb railway stations . The MI6 office in London , SPECTRE Island , the Venice hotel and the interior scenes of the Orient Express were filmed at Pinewood Studios with some footage of the train . In the film , the train journey was set in Eastern Europe . The journey and the truck ride were shot in Argyll , Scotland and Switzerland . The end scenes for the film were shot in Venice . However , to qualify for the British film funding of the time , at least 70 percent of the film had to have been filmed in Great Britain or the Commonwealth . The Gypsy camp was also to be filmed in an actual camp in Topkapi , but was actually shot in a replica of it in Pinewood . The scene with rats ( after the theft of the Lektor ) was shot in Spain , as Britain did not allow filming with wild rats , and filming white rats painted in cocoa did not work . Principal photography began on 1 April 1963 , and wrapped on 23 August . 
 Director Terence Young 's eye for realism was evident throughout production . For the opening chess match , Kronsteen wins the game with a re @-@ enactment of Boris Spassky 's victory over David Bronstein in 1960 . Production Designer Syd Cain built up the " chess pawn " motif in his $ 150 @,@ 000 set for the brief sequence . A noteworthy gadget featured was the attaché case ( briefcase ) issued by Q Branch . It had a tear gas bomb that detonated if the case was improperly opened , a folding AR @-@ 7 sniper rifle with twenty rounds of ammunition , a throwing knife , and 50 gold sovereigns . A boxer at Cambridge , Young choreographed the fight between Grant and Bond along with stunt co @-@ ordinator Peter Perkins . The scene took three weeks to film and was violent enough to worry some on the production . Yet Robert Shaw and Connery did most of the stunts themselves . 
 After the unexpected loss of Armendáriz , production proceeded , experiencing complications from uncredited rewrites by Berkely Mather during filming . Editor Peter Hunt set about editing the film while key elements were still to be filmed , helping to restructure the opening scenes . Hunt and Young conceived of moving the Red Grant training sequence to the beginning of the film ( prior to the main title ) , a signature feature that has been an enduring hallmark of every Bond film since . The briefing with Blofeld was rewritten , and back projection was used to re @-@ film Lotte Lenya 's lines . 
 Behind schedule and over @-@ budget , the production crew struggled to complete production in time for the already @-@ announced premiere date that October . On 6 July 1963 , while scouting locations in Argyll , Scotland for that day 's filming of the climactic boat chase , Terence Young 's helicopter crashed into the water with art director Michael White and a cameraman aboard . The craft sank into 40 – 50 feet ( 12 – 15 m ) of water , but all escaped with minor injuries . Despite the calamity , Young was behind the camera for the full day 's work . A few days later , Bianchi 's driver fell asleep during the commute to a 6 am shoot and crashed the car . The actress 's face was bruised and Bianchi 's scenes had to be delayed for two weeks while the facial contusions healed . 
 The helicopter and boat chase scenes were not in the original novel but were added to create an action climax . The former was inspired by the crop @-@ dusting scene in Hitchcock 's North by Northwest and the latter by a previous Young / Broccoli / Maibaum collaboration , The Red Beret . These two scenes would initially be shot in Istanbul but were moved to Scotland . The speed @-@ boats could not run fast enough due to the many waves in the sea , and a rented boat filled with cameras ended up sinking in the Bosphorus . A helicopter was also hard to obtain , and the special effects crew were nearly arrested trying to get one at a local air base . The helicopter chase was filmed with a radio controlled miniature helicopter . The sounds of the boat chase were replaced in post @-@ production since the boats were not loud enough , and the explosion , shot in Pinewood , got out of control , burning Walter Gotell 's eyelids and seriously injuring three stuntmen . 
 Photographer David Hurn was commissioned by the producers of the James Bond films to shoot a series of stills with Sean Connery and the actresses of the film . When the theatrical property Walther PPK pistol did not arrive , Hurn volunteered the use of his own Walther LP @-@ 53 air pistol . Though the photographs of the " James Bond is Back " posters of the US release airbrushed out the long barrel of the pistol , film poster artist Renato <unk> used the long @-@ barrelled pistol for his drawings of Connery on the British posters . 
 For the opening credits , Maurice Binder had disagreements with the producers and did not want to return . Designer Robert Brownjohn stepped into his place , and projected the credits on female dancers , inspired by constructivist artist László Moholy @-@ Nagy projecting light onto clouds in the 1920s . Brownjohn 's work started the tradition of scantily clad women in the Bond films ' title sequences . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 From Russia with Love is the first Bond film in the series with John Barry as the primary soundtrack composer . The theme song was composed by Lionel Bart of Oliver ! fame and sung by Matt Monro , although the title credit music is a lively instrumental version of the tune beginning with Barry 's brief James Bond is Back then segueing into Monty Norman 's " James Bond Theme " . Monro 's vocal version is later played during the film ( as source music on a radio ) and properly over the film 's end titles . Barry travelled with the crew to Turkey to try getting influences of the local music , but ended up using almost nothing , just local instruments such as finger cymbals to give an exotic feeling , since he thought the Turkish music had a comedic tone that did not fit in the " dramatic feeling " of the James Bond movies . 
 In this film , Barry introduced the percussive theme " 007 " — action music that came to be considered the " secondary James Bond theme " . He composed it to have a lighter , enthusiastic and more adventurous theme to relax the audience . The arrangement appears twice on the soundtrack album ; the second version , entitled " 007 Takes the Lektor " , is the one used during the gunfight at the Gypsy camp and also during Bond 's theft of the Lektor decoding machine . The completed film features a holdover from the Monty Norman @-@ supervised Dr. No music ; the post @-@ rocket @-@ launch music from Dr. No is played in From Russia with Love during the helicopter and speedboat attacks . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 From Russia with Love premiered on 10 October 1963 at the Odeon Leicester Square in London . Ian Fleming , Sean Connery and Walter Gotell attended the premiere . The following year , it was released in 16 countries worldwide , with the United States premiere on 8 April 1964 , at New York 's Astor Theatre . Upon its first release , From Russia with Love doubled Dr. No 's gross by earning $ 12 @.@ 5 million ( $ 95 million in 2016 dollars ) at the worldwide box office . After reissue it grossed $ 78 million , of which $ 24 million was from North America . It was the most popular movie at the British box office in 1963 . 
 The film 's cinematographer Ted Moore won the BAFTA award and the British Society of Cinematographers award for Best Cinematography . At the 1965 Laurel Awards , Lotte Lenya stood third for Best Female Supporting Performance , and the film secured second place in the Action @-@ Drama category . The film was also nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song for " From Russia with Love " . 
 = = = Contemporary reviews = = = 
 In comparing the film to its predecessor , Dr. No , Richard Roud , writing in The Guardian , said that From Russia with Love " didn 't seem quite so lively , quite so fresh , or quite so rhythmically fast @-@ moving . " He went on to say that " ... the film is highly immoral in every imaginable way ; it is neither uplifting , instructive nor life @-@ enhancing . Neither is it great film @-@ making . But it sure is fun . " Writing in The Observer , Penelope Gilliatt noted that " The way the credits are done has the same self @-@ mocking flamboyance as everything else in the picture . " Gilliatt went on to say that the film manages " to keep up its own cracking pace , nearly all the way . The set @-@ pieces are a stunning box of tricks " . The critic for The Times wrote of Bond that he is " the secret ideal of the congenital square , conventional in every particular ... except in morality , where he has the courage — and the physical equipment — to do without thinking what most of us feel we might be doing ... " The critic thought that overall , " the nonsense is all very amiable and tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek and will no doubt make a fortune for its <unk> " . 
 Bosley Crowther of The New York Times said : " Don 't miss it ! This is to say , don 't miss it if you can still get the least bit of fun out of lurid adventure fiction and pseudo @-@ realistic fantasy . For this mad <unk> of a desperate adventure of Bond with sinister characters in Istanbul and on the Orient Express is fictional exaggeration on a grand scale and in a dashing style , thoroughly illogical and improbable , but with tongue blithely wedged in cheek . " 
 Time magazine called the film " fast , smart , shrewdly directed and capably performed " and commented extensively on the film 's humour , saying " Director Young is a master of the form he ridicules , and in almost every episode he hands the audience shocks as well as <unk> . But the <unk> are more memorable . They result from slight but sly infractions of the thriller formula . A Russian agent , for instance , does not simply escape through a window ; no , he escapes through a window in a brick wall painted with a colossal poster portrait of Anita Ekberg , and as he crawls out of the window , he seems to be crawling out of Anita 's mouth . Or again , Bond does not simply train a telescope on the Russian consulate and hope he can read somebody 's lips ; no , he makes his way laboriously into a gallery beneath the joint , runs a submarine periscope up through the walls , and there , at close range , inspects two important Soviet secrets : the heroine 's legs . " 
 = = = Reflective reviews = = = 
 From Russia with Love received generally positive reviews from critics ; Rotten Tomatoes sampled 49 reviewers and judged 96 % of the reviews to be positive . Many online sites also commonly state From Russia with Love as the best Bond film of all time . 
 In his 1986 book , Danny Peary described From Russia with Love as " an excellent , surprisingly tough and gritty James Bond film " which is " refreshingly free of the gimmickry that would characterise the later Bond films , and Connery and Bianchi play real people . We worry about them and hope their relationship will work out ... Shaw and Lotte Lenya are splendid villains . Both have exciting , well @-@ choreographed fights with Connery . Actors play it straight , with excellent results . " 
 Film critic James Berardinelli cited this as his favourite Bond film , writing " Only From Russia with Love avoids slipping into the comic book realm of Goldfinger and its successors while giving us a sampling of the familiar Bond formula ( action , gadgets , women , cars , etc . ) . From Russia with Love is effectively paced and plotted , features a gallery of detestable rogues ( including the ultimate Bond villain , Blofeld ) , and offers countless thrills " . 
 In June 2001 Neil Smith of BBC Films called it " a film that only gets better with age " . In 2004 , Total Film magazine named it the ninth @-@ greatest British film of all time , making it the only James Bond film to appear on the list . In 2006 , Jay <unk> of Filmcritic praised the film 's " impressive staging of action scenes " , while IGN listed it as second @-@ best Bond film ever , behind only Goldfinger . That same year , Entertainment Weekly put the film at ninth among Bond films , criticising the slow pace . When the " James Bond Ultimate Collector 's Set " was released in November 2007 by MGM , Norman Wilner of MSN chose From Russia with Love as the best Bond film . Conversely , in his book about the Bond phenomenon , The Man With the Golden Touch , British author Sinclair McKay states " I know it is heresy to say so , and that some enthusiasts regard From Russia With Love as the Holy Grail of Bond , but let 's be searingly honest – some of it is <unk> dull . " In 2014 Time Out polled several film critics , directors , actors and stunt actors to list their top action films ; From Russia With Love was listed at 69 . 
 The British Film Institute 's <unk> guide called the film " one of the series ' high points " and said it " had advantages not enjoyed by many later Bond films , notably an intelligent script that retained the substance of Ian Fleming 's novel while toning down the overt Cold War politics ( the Cuban Missile Crisis had only occurred the previous year ) . " In 2008 , Michael G. Wilson , the current co @-@ producer of the series , stated " We always start out trying to make another From Russia with Love and end up with another Thunderball . " Sean Connery , Michael G. Wilson , Barbara Broccoli , Timothy Dalton and Daniel Craig also consider this their favourite Bond film . Albert Broccoli listed it with Goldfinger and The Spy Who Loved Me as one of his top three favourites , explaining that he felt " it was with this film that the Bond style and formula were perfected " . 
 = = Video game adaptation = = 
 In 2005 , the From Russia with Love video game was developed by Electronic Arts and released on 1 November 2005 in North America . It follows the storyline of the book and film , albeit adding in new scenes , making it more action @-@ oriented . One of the most significant changes to the story is the replacement of the organisation SPECTRE to <unk> because the name SPECTRE constituted a long @-@ running legal dispute over the film rights to Thunderball between United Artists / MGM and writer Kevin McClory . Most of the cast from the film returned in likeness . Connery not only allowed his 1960s likeness as Bond to be used , but the actor , in his 70s , also recorded the character 's dialogue , marking a return to the role 22 years after he last played Bond in Never Say Never Again . Featuring a third @-@ person multiplayer deathmatch mode , the game depicts several elements of later Bond films such as the Aston Martin DB5 from Goldfinger ( 1964 ) and the <unk> from Thunderball ( 1965 ) . 
 The game was penned by Bruce Feirstein who previously worked on the film scripts for GoldenEye , Tomorrow Never Dies , The World Is Not Enough , and the 2004 video game , Everything or Nothing . Its soundtrack was composed by Christopher Lennertz and Vic Flick . 
 = Louvre Abu Dhabi = 
 The Louvre Abu Dhabi is a planned museum , to be located in Abu Dhabi , UAE . On Tuesday 7 March 2007 , the Louvre in Paris announced that a new Louvre museum would be completed by 2012 in Abu Dhabi , with a revised estimate in early 2013 for a completion date of 2015 . These both fell short of the current projection of an opening in late 2016 . This is part of a thirty @-@ year agreement between the city of Abu Dhabi and the French government . The museum is to be located on the Saadiyat Island Cultural District , and will be approximately 24 @,@ 000 square metres ( 260 @,@ 000 sq ft ) in size . The final cost of the construction is expected to be between € 83 million and € 108 million . In addition , US $ 525 million was paid by Abu Dhabi to be associated with the Louvre name , and an additional $ 747 million will be paid in exchange for art loans , special exhibitions and management advice . 
 Artwork from around the world will be showcased at the museum , with particular focus placed upon bridging the gap between Eastern and Western art . However , the construction of the museum has caused much controversy in the art world , as many objections have been raised as to the motives of the Louvre in this deal . 
 = = History = = 
 The establishment of this museum was approved by the French Parliament on 9 October 2007 . The architect for the building will be Jean Nouvel and the engineers are Buro Happold . Jean Nouvel also designed the Institut du Monde <unk> in Paris . 
 The museum will be part of a US $ 27 billion tourist and cultural development for Saadiyat Island , a complex which is planned to include three other museums , including a Guggenheim Museum and the Zayed National Museum . According to the government sponsored website UAE Interact : " The French Museums Agency will operate in collaboration with the Tourism Development and Investment Company ( TDIC ) , which is behind the transformation of Saadiyat Island . It will be chaired by French financier and member of the country 's Académie des Beaux @-@ Arts , Marc <unk> de <unk> , publisher of the periodical Revue des Deux Mondes . " Bruno <unk> , the former Executive Director of Centre Georges Pompidou , will take the position of Executive Director . " 
 By choosing the Louvre , the emirate of Abu Dhabi not only sealed a partnership with the world ’ s most visited and well @-@ known museum , but selected one which , from its very inception , had a vocation to reach out to the world , to the essence of mankind , through the contemplation of works of art . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Location = = = 
 Saadiyat Island 's Cultural District plans to house the largest single cluster of world @-@ class cultural assets . In addition to the Louvre Abu Dhabi these are intended to include : Zayed National Museum , to be designed by United Kingdom @-@ based architectural company Foster and Partners under the direction of Lord Norman Foster ; the Guggenheim Abu Dhabi contemporary arts museum - the world 's largest Guggenheim and the only museum to be located in the Middle East ; a performing arts centre designed by Zaha Hadid ; a maritime museum with concept design by Tadao Ando and a number of arts pavilions . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 The museum will be designed as a " seemingly floating dome structure " ; its web @-@ patterned dome allowing the sun to filter through . The overall effect is meant to represent " rays of sunlight passing through date palm fronds in an oasis . " The total area of the museum will be approximately 24 @,@ 000 square metres ( 260 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . The permanent collection will occupy 6 @,@ 000 square metres ( 65 @,@ 000 sq ft ) , and the temporary exhibitions will take place over 2 @,@ 000 square metres ( 22 @,@ 000 sq ft ) , 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Construction works at Louvre Abu Dhabi officially started on 26 May 2009 . Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan , the Crown Prince of Abu Dhabi and the President of France , Nicolas Sarkozy inaugurated an exhibition titled , Talking Art : Louvre Abu Dhabi at the Gallery One of the Emirates Palace Hotel which includes 19 works of art bought over the last 18 months for the Louvre Abu Dhabi , as well as loans from the French national museums to mark the beginning of the construction work . Piling works In Louvre were to be completed by August 2010 , with the piling and enabling works package awarded to the German specialized company ( Bauer International <unk> ) . The total of <unk> piles consisted of RC Piles and H @-@ Piles and was completed on 3 August 2010 . 
 On 29 October 2011 , Tourism Development & Investment Company ( TDIC . ) , the project manager owned by the government of Abu Dhabi , announced it would delay establishing the museum . The company gave no new date . According to the UAE newspapers Gulf News and The National , the delay could be explained by a review of the emirate 's economic strategy . 
 In January 2012 it was confirmed that the Louvre Abu Dhabi 's new opening date would be 2015 . 
 Construction on the main phase of the museum began in early 2013 by a consortium headed by <unk> , <unk> San José and <unk> Abu Dhabi . This stage includes waterproofing and the two basement levels , along with four concrete pillars that will support the 7 @,@ 000 tonne dome . 
 Work on the construction of the gallery spaces and initial preparation for the dome began in the fourth quarter of 2013 . On 5 December 2013 , the first element of the museum 's canopy was lifted into place . 
 On 17 March 2014 TDIC announced the completion of the first permanent gallery structure to mark the first anniversary of the start of construction . At this time , it was claimed that a total of ten million man hours had been worked and 120 @,@ 538 cubic meters of concrete used . 
 On 22 September , the final super @-@ sized element in the canopy was fitted in place , marking a significant milestone in the museum 's construction phase . In October , The Tourism & Development Investment Company announced that the Louvre Abu Dhabi was more than 50 per cent complete . 
 = = = Brand and visual identity = = = 
 The logo and typeface for the Louvre Abu Dhabi was designed by Studio Philippe <unk> , and is implemented in both Roman and Arabic script . <unk> typeface was extended to create <unk> LT to accommodate use across different languages . 
 Lebanese typographer , <unk> Sarkis created the Arabic typeface , designed to reflect both the architecture of the building and the heat of the region . 
 The logo is completed by a broken line of shapes that reflect the shapes of the individual letters in the wordmark . <unk> says the inspiration for both typeface and logo was the museum ’ s architectural elegance and lightness . 
 = = Collection = = 
 Questions have been raised as to the nature of the artworks to be displayed at the museum . However , according to the National : " the type and nature of the exhibits planned for the Louvre Abu Dhabi have been affected to no extent by the fact the new museum would be in a Muslim country , said Mr. Loyrette . " 
 Subjects and themes have been freely discussed with our partners in Abu Dhabi and no request to avoid such subjects has been made . The exhibition policy will be set up regarding excellence and high @-@ standard quality . As a new museum we hope the Louvre Abu Dhabi will be part of the international community . 
 It has been noted that the museum will showcase work from multiple French museums , including the Louvre , the Centre Georges Pompidou , the Musée d 'Orsay and Palace of Versailles . However , Donnedieu de Vabres , the French Culture Minister , stated at the announcement that the Paris Louvre " would not sell any of its 35 @,@ 000 @-@ piece collection currently on display " . 
 It will not be dedicated to occidental art but will show all kinds of artistic creations . It will set up a dialogue between west and east , between north and south . As such , art from the Middle East will be shown within the Louvre Abu Dhabi . 
 In 2012 , the Louvre Abu Dhabi started collecting photography , making its first acquisitions in the field , including works by Joseph @-@ Philibert <unk> de <unk> , Roger Fenton and George Wilson Bridges . The museum also acquired a sculpture of a Bactrian princess dating from the third millennium BC , a pavement and fountain set from the early Ottoman period , as well as the paintings Breton Boys Wrestling ( 1888 ) by Paul Gauguin and The <unk> Reader ( 1928 ) by René Magritte . 
 Further details of the museum 's collection on opening were revealed in October 2014 , with a number of important works to be loaned under the agreement with Agence France @-@ <unk> and the Musée du Louvre , including Leonardo Da Vinci 's La Belle <unk> and works by Henri Matisse , a self @-@ portrait by Vincent Van Gogh , Jacques @-@ Louis David 's Napoleon Crossing the Alps and Claude Monet 's Gare Saint @-@ Lazare , . 
 = = Exhibitions = = 
 The Louvre Abu Dhabi first started sharing its collection with the public through an exhibition entitled " Talking Art : Louvre Abu Dhabi , " which opened in May 2009 . The exhibition presented the first 19 acquisitions for the institution , including a Mamluk holy Koran from the 14th century , a 5th @-@ century <unk> from <unk> , a Virgin and Child by Bellini , and Mondrian ’ s Composition with blue , red , yellow and black from 1922 . 
 A second exhibition , Birth of a Museum , opened at the exhibition space <unk> Al Saadiyat in May 2013 , ending in August that year . The first large @-@ scale preview of the collection , it featured 130 works acquired by the government of Abu Dhabi for the permanent collection . They included a never @-@ before seen work by Picasso , a Bronze Age terracotta statue from Cyprus , along with artifacts from Greece , Turkey , Japan and Syria . 
 In May 2014 , the Birth of a Museum exhibition , featuring works shown in Abu Dhabi and a number of new acquisitions opened at the Louvre in Paris . A number of new works were presented , including <unk> <unk> by the Japanese artist Kazuo <unk> and painted in 1960 . 
 = = Other programmes = = 
 The Louvre Abu Dhabi has also been working with the Paris Sorbonne University Abu Dhabi to set up a master ’ s program for museum professionals to train them and help them respond to local needs . 
 = = Management = = 
 = = = Contract = = = 
 Louvre Abu Dhabi is an entirely separate museum from the Louvre in Paris , although the two are linked by a thirty @-@ year branding and training agreement and the Paris Louvre is one of the 12 shareholders in Agence France @-@ <unk> . The thirty @-@ year agreement , signed by French Culture Minister Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres and Sheik Sultan bin Tahnoon Al Nahyan , will prompt the construction of a Louvre museum on Saadiyat Island , near central Abu Dhabi , in exchange for US $ 1 @.@ 3 billion . The contract prohibits the creation of any similar operation with the name of the Louvre in any of the other emirates of the UAE , Saudi Arabia , Kuwait , Oman , Bahrain , Qatar , Egypt , Jordan , Syria , Lebanon , Iran , or Iraq . French President Jacques Chirac praised the museum deal with Abu Dhabi , saying it reflects " a certain idea of the world " in which each party to the accord , " proud of its roots and of its identity , is conscious of the equal dignity of all cultures . " 
 = = = Cost = = = 
 US $ 525 million was paid by Abu Dhabi to be associated with the Louvre name , and an additional $ 747 million in exchange for art loans , special exhibitions and management advice . <unk> is leading a consortium that is building the museum under a $ 653 million contract awarded early in 2013 . 
 = = = Cost estimates = = = 
 US $ 525 million was paid by the city of Abu Dhabi for the use of the Louvre brand name , with US $ 195 million payable within a month . In addition to this , US $ 247 million will be paid for the loan of artworks from the Louvre over a ten @-@ year period , with a total of between two hundred and three hundred artworks expected . The Parisian Louvre will also be providing management advice to its Middle Eastern counterpart , at a cost of US $ 214 @.@ 5 million . An additional US $ 253 @.@ 5 million will be paid for various special exhibitions . A total of four exhibitions will be hosted per year over a period of fifteen years . The city of Abu Dhabi will also make a direct donation of US $ 32 @.@ 5 million to the Louvre to refurbish a wing of the Pavillon de Flore for the display of international art . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 The deal has sparked much controversy in both artistic and academic circles . According to <unk> Farhat , " the controversy that has surfaced in France is led by art historian Didier <unk> , one of the most outspoken critics of the French – Emirati deal . " A petition against the deal , signed by 4 @,@ 650 museum experts , archaeologists and art historians , has insisted that " museums are not for sale . " The Louvre has been accused of behaving " like a corporation with a clearly @-@ defined strategy : profit maximization . " In the words of Didier <unk> : 
 We have lost a battle , but the combat continues . 
 = = = Human rights abuse controversies = = = 
 In April 2011 , over 120 international artists urged a boycott of both the Louvre and Guggenheim museums over concerns regarding the abuse and exploitation of construction workers employed to develop the complex . In December 2013 , The Guardian reported that conditions for the workers at the construction sites amount to modern @-@ day slavery . 
 = = = Response = = = 
 According to the New York Times , " Henri Loyrette , the president and director of the Louvre , has responded to growing criticism of the museum ’ s new policy of establishing footholds abroad , arguing that the Louvre cannot ignore the ' internationalization ' of museums . " He had the following to say in the museum 's defence : 
 It 's a fair fee for the concession of the name . This tutelary role deserves reward . It 's normal . 
 We 're not selling the French legacy and heritage . We want this culture to radiate to parts of the world that value it . We 're proud that Abu Dhabi wants to bring the Louvre here . We 're not here to transform culture into a consumer product . 
 Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan , UAE President and Ruler of Abu Dhabi said : 
 This is a major achievement in Abu Dhabi 's vision to become a world @-@ class destination bridging global cultures . This accord further strengthens international dialogue , which will embrace all cultures . This initiative is a unique milestone in international cooperation and bilateral relations and a tribute to the longstanding and friendly ties our two nations have enjoyed . It also creates an enriching environment to be treasured by and to educate generations to come . 
 = Wreck @-@ It Ralph = 
 Wreck @-@ It Ralph is a 2012 American 3D computer @-@ animated fantasy @-@ comedy film produced by Walt Disney Animation Studios and released by Walt Disney Pictures . It is the 52nd animated feature in the Walt Disney Animated Classics series . The film was directed by Rich Moore , who has directed episodes of The Simpsons and Futurama , and the screenplay was written by Phil Johnston and Jennifer Lee from a story by Moore , Johnston and Jim Reardon . John Lasseter served as the executive producer . The film features the voices of John C. Reilly , Sarah Silverman , Jack McBrayer , and Jane Lynch . The film tells the story of the eponymous arcade game villain who rebels against his role and dreams of becoming a hero . He travels between games in the arcade , and ultimately must eliminate a dire threat that could affect the entire arcade , and one that Ralph himself inadvertently started . 
 Wreck @-@ It Ralph premiered at the El Capitan Theatre on October 29 , 2012 , and went into general release on November 2 . The film has earned $ 471 million in worldwide box office revenue , $ 189 million of which was earned in the United States and Canada ; it was met with critical and commercial success , winning the Annie Award for Best Animated Feature and receiving nominations for the Golden Globe Award for Best Animated Feature Film and the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature . The film was released on Blu @-@ ray and DVD on March 5 , 2013 . 
 A sequel titled Wreck @-@ It Ralph 2 is scheduled for release on March 9 , 2018 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 When Litwak 's Family Fun Center & Arcade closes at night , the various video @-@ game characters leave their normal in @-@ game roles and are free to travel to other games . Within the game Fix @-@ It Felix , Jr . , the characters celebrate its titular hero but ostracize the game 's villain character , Wreck @-@ It Ralph . At a support group for video @-@ game antagonists , Ralph reveals his desire to stop being the bad guy . Back home , Ralph finds the other characters celebrating their game 's 30th anniversary without inviting him . Felix reluctantly invites Ralph to join them , but the others isolate him . They tell him that if he won a medal , just as Felix does in their game , they would respect him . 
 At Tapper 's , Ralph learns he can win a medal in the first @-@ person shooter Hero 's Duty . Ralph enters the game and encounters Sergeant Calhoun , its leader . Between game sessions , Ralph climbs the game 's central beacon and collects the medal , accidentally hatching a Cy @-@ Bug , one of the game 's enemies . It clings to Ralph as he stumbles into an escape pod that launches him out of the game . Meanwhile , with Ralph missing , a girl reports to arcade @-@ owner Litwak that Fix @-@ It Felix , Jr. is malfunctioning . Since broken games get unplugged , leaving their characters homeless , Felix searches for Ralph . 
 Ralph crash @-@ lands in Sugar Rush , a kart @-@ racing game . As he searches for his medal , he meets Vanellope von Schweetz , a glitchy character who takes the medal and uses it to buy entry into a race . King Candy and the other racers refuse to let Vanellope participate , claiming she is not really part of the game . Ralph helps Vanellope build a kart . They are found and chased by King Candy , and he chased them into Vanellope 's home in Diet Cola Mountain , an unfinished racing course , he discovers she has no idea how to drive , so he teaches her , and she learns quickly . 
 Back in Hero 's Duty , Felix meets Calhoun , who warns that the Cy @-@ Bugs can take over any game they enter . As the pair searches for Ralph and the Cy @-@ Bug in Sugar Rush , they separate when Felix , enamored with Calhoun , inadvertently reminds her of her fiancé , who had been killed by a Cy @-@ Bug in her backstory . Calhoun finds hundreds of Cy @-@ Bug eggs underground , and Felix becomes imprisoned in King Candy 's castle during his search for Ralph . 
 Desperate , King Candy hacks the game 's code to retrieve Ralph 's medal and offers it to Ralph , explaining that letting Vanellope race would be disastrous for both her and the game . Fearing for Vanellope 's safety , Ralph wrecks the kart and returns to his own game , but finds that everyone has evacuated , expecting the game to be unplugged in the morning . Discovering Vanellope 's image on the Sugar Rush cabinet , Ralph realizes she is an intended part of the game , not a glitch . 
 Ralph returns to Sugar Rush , finds Felix and Vanellope , and asks Felix to fix the wrecked kart . As the race proceeds , the hatched Cy @-@ Bugs attack and Felix , Calhoun , and Ralph battle them . When Vanellope catches up to King Candy , her glitching reveals that he is actually Turbo , a rogue character from an old game , Turbo Time , who sabotaged a newer game out of jealousy , causing both to be unplugged . Vanellope escapes from Turbo , who is consumed by a Cy @-@ Bug . The group flees the doomed game , but Vanellope finds she cannot pass through the exit . Calhoun says the game cannot be saved without a beacon to attract and kill the Cy @-@ Bugs . 
 Ralph heads to Diet Cola Mountain , where he plans on collapsing its Mentos stalactites into the cola at the bottom , causing a blinding eruption that would attract the bugs . Before he can finish , Turbo , merged with the Cy @-@ Bug that had consumed him , attacks and carries Ralph away . Ralph breaks free and dives toward the mountain , intending to sacrifice himself to start the eruption on impact . Vanellope in turn uses her glitching abilities to save Ralph . The eruption starts and draws the Cy @-@ Bugs and Turbo to their destruction . Vanellope crosses the finish line , restoring her memory and status as Princess Vanellope , the game 's ruler and lead character , while keeping her advantageous glitching ability . Felix and Ralph return to their game in time for Litwak to see it still works , sparing it from being unplugged . Calhoun and Felix marry , and the characters of Fix @-@ It Felix , Jr. gain a new respect for Ralph . 
 = = Voice cast = = 
 John C. Reilly as Wreck @-@ It Ralph , a large hillbilly brute who is the villain of the game Fix @-@ It Felix , Jr . 
 Sarah Silverman as Vanellope von Schweetz , a racer / glitch in Sugar Rush . 
 Jack McBrayer as Fix @-@ It Felix , Jr . , a repairman who is the hero of Fix @-@ It Felix , Jr . 
 Jane Lynch as Sergeant <unk> Jean Calhoun , the lead character of Hero 's Duty . 
 Alan Tudyk as King Candy , the ruler of Sugar Rush . He is secretly Turbo , the vengeful star racer of <unk> . King Candy / Turbo 's vocal stylings are based on comedian Ed Wynn , and his physical mannerisms are modeled from Wynn 's Mad Hatter character in Alice in Wonderland . 
 Mindy Kaling as <unk> <unk> , a racer in Sugar Rush . 
 Joe Lo Truglio as Markowski , a soldier from Hero 's Duty that Ralph meets in Tapper . 
 Ed O 'Neill as Mr. Stan Litwak , owner of Litwak 's Family Fun Center & Arcade . 
 Dennis Haysbert as General Hologram , a holographic general in Hero 's Duty . 
 Adam Carolla as <unk> , a Long John who is a member of the Sugar Rush police department . 
 Horatio Sanz as Duncan , a doughnut who is a member of the Sugar Rush police department . 
 Rich Moore as Sour Bill , King Candy 's sour ball henchman . 
 The cast also includes the Fix @-@ It Felix , Jr . <unk> , Edie McClurg as Mary , Raymond S. Persi as Mayor Gene , Jess Harnell as Don , Rachael Harris as Deanna , and Skylar Astin as Roy ; Katie Lowes as <unk> , Jamie Elman as <unk> <unk> , Josie Trinidad as <unk> Bing @-@ Bing , and <unk> Walk as <unk> <unk> , racers in Sugar Rush ; Phil Johnston as Surge Protector , Game Central Station security ; Stefanie Scott as Moppet Girl , a young arcade @-@ game player ; John DiMaggio as Beard Papa , the security guard at the Sugar Rush candy @-@ kart factory ; Raymond Persi as a Zombie , Brian <unk> as a Cyborg ( based on Kano from Mortal Kombat ) and Martin Jarvis as <unk> , a devil @-@ like villain , who attends the Bad @-@ Anon support group ; Tucker Gilmore as the Sugar Rush Announcer ; Brandon Scott as Kohut , a soldier in Hero 's Duty ; and Tim Mertens as Dr. Brad Scott , a scientist and Sgt. Calhoun 's deceased fiancé in Hero 's Duty ( voiced by Nick Grimshaw in the UK version but not in the UK home release ) . 
 The film features several cameos from real @-@ world video game characters including : Root Beer Tapper ( Maurice LaMarche ) , the bartender from Tapper ; Sonic the Hedgehog ( Roger Craig Smith ) ; Ryu ( Kyle Hebert ) , Ken Masters ( Reuben Langdon ) , M. Bison ( Gerald C. Rivers ) , and Zangief ( Rich Moore ) from Street Fighter II ; Clyde ( Kevin <unk> ) from Pac @-@ Man ; and Yuni Verse ( Jamie <unk> Roberts ) from Dance Dance Revolution . 
 A character modeled after dubstep musician Skrillex makes an appearance in Fix @-@ It Felix , Jr. as the DJ at the anniversary party of the game . 
 = = Video game cameos and references = = 
 In addition to the spoken roles , Wreck @-@ It Ralph contains a number of other video game references , including characters and visual gags . The video game villains at the support meeting , in addition to those mentioned above , include : Bowser from the Mario franchise , Doctor Eggman from Sonic the Hedgehog , and Neff from Altered Beast . Additionally , the game cabinet of the Fix It Felix , Jr. arcade game is stylized to strongly resemble the cabinet of the original Nintendo Donkey Kong arcade game , with Ralph and Felix taking similar poses as Donkey Kong and Mario , respectively . The Hero 's Duty game is a reference to the hugely successful first @-@ person shooter games Halo and Call of Duty . Characters from Q * bert , including Q * bert , Coily , Slick , Sam , and Ugg , are shown as " homeless " characters and later taken in by Ralph and Felix into their game ( Q * bert also speaks to Felix at one point using the signature synthesized gibberish and word @-@ balloon symbols from his game , called Q * bert @-@ ese ) . Scenes in Game Central Station and Tapper 's bar include Chun @-@ Li , Cammy and Blanka from Street Fighter , Pac @-@ Man , Blinky , Pinky , and <unk> from Pac @-@ Man , the Paperboy from Paperboy , the two paddles and the ball from Pong , Dig Dug , a <unk> , and a <unk> from Dig Dug , The <unk> from <unk> , Frogger from Frogger , and Peter Pepper from <unk> . Additionally , Lara Croft and Mario are referenced , but not seen . 
 Additional references are based on sight gags . The residents of <unk> and the bartender from Tapper are animated using a jerky motion that spoofs the limited animation cycles of the sprites of many eight- and sixteen @-@ bit arcade games . King Candy uses the Konami Code on an NES controller to access the programming of Sugar Rush . Throughout Game Central Station is graffiti that includes " Aerith lives " ( referencing the character of Aerith Gainsborough from Final Fantasy VII ) , " All your base are belong to us " ( an Engrish phrase popularized from the game Zero Wing ) , " Sheng Long Was Here " ( referencing an April Fool 's joke around a made @-@ up character Sheng Long from Street Fighter ) , and " Jenkins " ( a nod to the popular Leeroy Jenkins meme from World of Warcraft ) . There is also a reference to the Metal Gear series when Ralph is searching for a medal in Tapper 's Lost and found , finding first a Super Mushroom from the Mario franchise , and then Metal Gear 's " <unk> point " ( with the corresponding sound effect from the game ) . Mr. Litwak wears a black and white striped referee 's shirt , a nod to the iconic outfit of Twin Galaxies founder Walter Day . One of the songs in the credits is an original work from Buckner and Garcia , previously famous for writing video game @-@ themed songs in the 1980s . The Walt Disney Animation Studios opening logo is animated in an 8 @-@ bit pixelated fashion , whereas the Walt Disney Pictures closing production logo appears in a glitched state , a reference to the kill screen from many early arcade games such as Pac @-@ Man . 
 = = Production = = 
 The concept of Wreck @-@ It Ralph was first developed at Disney in the late 1980s , under the working title High Score . Since then , it was redeveloped and reconsidered several times : In the late 1990s , it took on the working title Joe Jump , then in the mid @-@ 2000s as Reboot Ralph . 
 John Lasseter , the head of Walt Disney Animation Studios and executive producer of the film , describes Wreck @-@ It Ralph as " an 8 @-@ bit video @-@ game bad guy who travels the length of the arcade to prove that he 's a good guy . " In a manner similar to Who Framed Roger Rabbit and the Toy Story films , Wreck @-@ It Ralph featured cameo appearances by a number of licensed video @-@ game characters . For example , one scene from the film shows Ralph attending a support group for the arcade 's various villain characters , including Clyde from Pac @-@ Man , Doctor Eggman from Sonic the Hedgehog , and Bowser from Super Mario Bros. Rich Moore , the film 's director , had determined that for a film about a video @-@ game world to feel authentic , " it had to have real characters from real games in it . " Moore aimed to add licensed characters in a similar manner as cultural references in Looney Tunes shorts , but considered " having the right balance so a portion of the audience didn 't feel they were being neglected or talked down to . " However , Moore avoided creating the movie around existing characters , feeling that " there 's so much mythology and baggage attached to pre @-@ existing titles that I feel someone would be disappointed , " and considered this to be a reason why movies based on video game franchises typically fail . Instead , for Ralph , the development of new characters representative of the 8 @-@ bit video game was " almost like virgin snow , " giving them the freedom to take these characters in new directions . 
 Before production , the existing characters were added to the story either in places they would make sense to appear , or as cameos from a list of characters suggested by the film 's creative team , without consideration if they would legally be able to use the characters . The company then sought out the copyright holders ' permissions to use the characters , as well as working with these companies to assure their characters were being represented authentically . In the case of Nintendo , the writers had early on envisioned the Bad @-@ anon meeting with Bowser as a major character within the scene ; according to Moore , Nintendo was very positive towards this use , stating in Moore 's own words , " If there is a group that is dedicated to helping the bad guy characters in video games then Bowser must be in that group ! " Nintendo had asked that the producers try to devise a scene that would be similarly appropriate for Mario for his inclusion in the film . Despite knowing they would be able to use the character , the producers could not find an appropriate scene that would let Mario be a significant character without taking away the spotlight from the main story , and opted to not include the character . Moore debunked a rumor that Mario and his brother character Luigi were not included due to Nintendo requesting too high a licensing fee , stating that the rumor grew out of a joke John C. Reilly made at Comic @-@ Con. Dr. Wily from Mega Man was going to appear , but was cut from the final version of the film . Overall , there are about 188 individual character models in the movie as a result of these cameo inclusions . 
 An earlier draft of the screenplay had Ralph and Vanellope spending time going around the game world to collect the pieces for her kart for Sugar Rush , and at times included Felix traveling with the pair . During these scenes , Ralph would have lied to Felix regarding his budding relationship with Calhoun , leading eventually to Ralph becoming depressed and abandoning his quest to get his medal back . At this point , a fourth game world , Extreme Easy Living 2 , would have been introduced and was considered a " hedonistic place " between the social nature of The Sims and the open @-@ world objective @-@ less aspects of Grand Theft Auto , according to Moore . Ralph would go there to , wallowing in his depression , and would find happiness by gaining " Like It " buttons for doing acceptable actions in the party @-@ like nature of the place . Moore stated that while it was difficult to consider dropping this new game world , they found that its introduction in the second half of the film would be too difficult a concept for the viewer to grasp . They further had trouble working out how a social game would be part of an arcade , and though they considered having the game be running on Litwak 's laptop , they ultimately realized that justifying the concept would be too convoluted . Line art sketches and voice over readings of the scene were included on the home media release of the film . 
 The film introduced Disney 's new bidirectional reflectance distribution functions , with more realistic reflections on surfaces , and new virtual cinematography Camera Capture system , which makes it possible to go through scenes in real @-@ time . To research the Sugar Rush segment of the film , the visual development group traveled to trade fair ISM Cologne , a See 's Candy factory , and other manufacturing facilities . The group also brought in food photographers , to demonstrate techniques to make food appear appealing . Special effects , including from " smoke or dust , " looks distinct in each of the segments . 
 = = Release = = 
 The film was originally scheduled for a release on March 22 , 2013 , but it was later changed to November 2 , 2012 due to it being ahead of schedule . The theatrical release was accompanied by Disney 's animated short film , Paperman . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 The first trailer for Wreck @-@ It Ralph was released on June 6 , 2012 , debuting with Madagascar 3 : Europe 's Most Wanted and Rock of Ages . This also coincided with the 2012 Electronic Entertainment Expo , for which Disney constructed a mock aged arcade cabinet for the fictional Fix @-@ It Felix , Jr. game on display on the show floor . Disney also released a browser @-@ based Flash @-@ based version of the Fix @-@ It Felix , Jr. game as well as iOS , Android and Windows Phone versions , with online Unity @-@ based versions of Sugar Rush and Hero 's Duty . A second trailer for the film was released on Sep 12 , 2012 , coinciding with Finding Nemo 3D and Frankenweenie . 
 To promote the home media release of Wreck @-@ It Ralph , director Rich Moore produced a short film titled <unk> Hulse : Where Potential Lives . Set within the movie 's universe , the mockumentary film was designed as a parody of The King of Kong . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Wreck @-@ It Ralph was released on Blu @-@ ray Disc ( 2D and 3D ) and DVD in North America on March 5 , 2013 from Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment . The film was made available for digital download in selected regions on Feb 12 , 2013 . Wreck @-@ It Ralph debuted at # 1 in Blu @-@ ray and DVD sales in the United States . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Wreck @-@ It Ralph grossed $ 189 @.@ 4 million in North America and $ 281 @.@ 8 million in other countries , for a worldwide total of $ 471 @.@ 2 million . It was the 14th @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of 2012 , and the fourth @-@ highest @-@ grossing 2012 animated film . 
 In North America , the film debuted with $ 13 @.@ 5 million , an above @-@ average opening @-@ day gross for an animated film released in November . During its opening weekend , the film topped the box office with $ 49 million , making it the largest opening for a Walt Disney Animation Studios film at the time . 
 Outside North America , Wreck @-@ It Ralph earned $ 12 million on its opening weekend from six markets . Among all markets , its three largest openings were recorded in the UK , Ireland and Malta ( $ 7 @.@ 15 million ) , Brazil ( $ 5 @.@ 32 million with weekday previews ) , and Russia and the CIS ( $ 5 @.@ 27 million ) . In total grosses , the three largest markets were the UK , Ireland and Malta ( $ 36 @.@ 2 million ) , Japan ( $ 29 @.@ 6 million ) , and Australia ( $ 24 @.@ 0 million ) . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The review @-@ aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes reports that 87 % of critics have given the film a positive review , based on 171 reviews with an average score of 7 @.@ 5 / 10 . The site 's consensus reads : " Equally entertaining for both kids and parents old enough to catch the references , Wreck @-@ It Ralph is a clever , colorful adventure built on familiar themes and joyful nostalgia . " At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating from mainstream critics , calculated a score of 72 out of 100 , based on 36 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . The film earned an " A " from audiences polled by CinemaScore . 
 Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave the film 3 out of 4 stars and wrote , " More than in most animated films , the art design and color palette of Wreck @-@ It Ralph permit unlimited sets , costumes and rules , giving the movie tireless originality and different behavior in every different cyber world . " A.O. Scott of The New York Times wrote , " The movie invites a measure of cynicism – which it proceeds to obliterate with a 93 @-@ minute blast of color , noise , ingenuity and fun . " Peter Debruge of Variety stated , " With plenty to appeal to boys and girls , old and young , Walt Disney Animation Studios has a high @-@ scoring hit on its hands in this brilliantly conceived , gorgeously executed toon , earning bonus points for backing nostalgia with genuine emotion . " Betsy Sharkey of the Los Angeles Times said , " The movie 's subversive sensibility and old @-@ school / new @-@ school feel are a total kick , " while Justin Lowe of The Hollywood Reporter wrote , " With a mix of retro eye @-@ candy for grown @-@ ups and a thrilling , approachable storyline for the tykes , the film casts a wide and beguiling net . " Conversely , Christopher Orr of The Atlantic found it " overplotted and underdeveloped . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The film 's score was composed by Henry Jackman . The soundtrack also features original songs by Owl City , AKB48 , Skrillex , and Buckner & Garcia . Early in the development process , Robert Lopez and Kristen Anderson @-@ Lopez wrote an original song for the film ; it was later cut out . 
 All music composed by Henry Jackman ( except 1 – 6 ) . 
 = = Video games = = 
 In addition to the Flash version of the Fix @-@ It Felix , Jr. game , Disney released a tie @-@ in side @-@ scrolling platform game called Wreck @-@ It Ralph for the Wii , Nintendo 3DS , and Nintendo DS , to mostly negative reviews . The arcade style side @-@ scrolling game was produced in collaboration between Disney Interactive and Activision and serves as a " story extension " to the film . Taking place following the events of the film , players may play as Wreck @-@ It Ralph or Fix @-@ It Felix , causing or repairing damage , respectively , following another Cy @-@ Bug incident . Game levels are based on the locations in the film like the Fix @-@ It Felix , Jr . , Hero 's Duty , and Sugar Rush games as well as Game Central Station . It was released in conjunction with the film 's release , in November 2012 . 
 In October 2012 , Disney released fully playable browser @-@ based versions of the Hero 's Duty and Sugar Rush games on the new official film site . A mobile game titled Wreck @-@ it Ralph was released in November 2012 for iOS and Android systems , with a Windows Phone 8 version following almost a year later . Initially , the game consisted of three mini @-@ games , Fix @-@ it Felix Jr . , Hero 's Duty and Sweet Climber , which were later joined by Turbo Time and Hero 's Duty : Flight Command . The game was retired on August 29 , 2014 . 
 Ralph also appears in Sega 's Sonic & All @-@ Stars Racing Transformed as a playable guest character . Ralph and Vanellope appear as playable characters in Disney Infinity as well ( voiced by Brian T. Delaney and Silverman , respectively ) ; the Disney Store released their individual figures on January 7 , 2014 . A combo " toy box pack " of the two figures with Sugar Rush customization discs was released April 1 , 2014 from the Disney Store . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 In an interview on October 25 , 2012 , director Rich Moore said that he and Disney have ideas about a sequel that would bring the characters up to date and explore online gaming and console gaming . Moore stated that many of the crew and voice cast are open to the sequel , believing that they have " barely scratched the surface " of the video game world they envisioned . He also stated that he plans to include Mario and Tron in the sequel . In a 2014 interview , the film 's composer Henry Jackman said that a story for the sequel is being written . In July 2015 , John C. Reilly said he had signed on to reprise his role of Ralph in a projected sequel . 
 On March 24 , 2016 , Rich Moore stated that a sequel is still being planned . Moore also hopes to specifically include an appearance from Mario , citing a " good relationship with Nintendo " . On June 30 , 2016 , Walt Disney Animation Studios announced that a sequel would be released on March 9 , 2018 , with Reilly , Moore and writer Phil Johnston attached , and that it would focus on " Ralph leaving the arcade and wrecking the Internet " . Official concept art was also released . 
 = Hurricane Sandra ( 2015 ) = 
 Hurricane Sandra in 2015 was the latest @-@ forming major hurricane in the Northeastern Pacific basin on record . Originating from a tropical wave , Sandra was first classified as a tropical depression on November 23 well south of Mexico . Environmental conditions , including high sea surface temperatures and low wind shear , were highly conducive to intensification and the storm quickly organized . A small central dense overcast developed atop the storm and Sandra reached hurricane status early on November 25 after the consolidation of an eye . The hurricane achieved its peak as a Category 4 on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale with winds of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) and a pressure of 934 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 58 inHg ) early on November 26 . This made Sandra the strongest November hurricane on record in the Northeastern Pacific . Thereafter , increasing shear degraded the hurricane 's structure and weakening ensued . Rapid weakening took place on November 27 and Sandra 's circulation became devoid of convection as it diminished to a tropical storm that evening . The cyclone degenerated into a remnant low soon thereafter and ultimately dissipated just off the coast of Sinaloa , Mexico , on November 29 . 
 As the precursor to Sandra traversed Central America , it produced unseasonably heavy rainfall that triggered flooding and landslides . Four people died in various incidents related to the system : three in El Salvador and one in Honduras . Initially expecting a landfalling storm , officials in Northwestern Mexico prepared equipment for power outages , closed schools , and evacuated 180 residents . Sandra 's effects largely consisted of light to moderate rainfall ; some traffic accidents and landslides resulted from this , though the overall impacts were limited . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On November 6 , 2015 , a tropical wave emerged off the west coast of Africa over the Atlantic Ocean . Only sporadic convection — shower and thunderstorm activity — accompanied the system as it traveled west for the next ten days . As it reached the southwestern Caribbean Sea on November 17 , westerly winds associated with the Intertropical Convergence Zone spurred the development of an area of low pressure and extensive convection . Forecasters at the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) noted potential for the system to develop into a tropical cyclone ; however , persistent wind shear inhibited this system from consolidating before it reached Central America . The system emerged over the Pacific Ocean near Nicaragua on November 21 ; once back over water , convection blossomed near the low 's center . Convection remained largely disorganized over the following two days as the system progressed westward in response to a subtropical ridge to the north . 
 A Tehuantepec gap wind event in conjunction with horizontal wind shear spurred development of a vortex within the disturbance and a well @-@ defined low formed by 12 : 00 UTC on November 23 . Six hours later the low acquired sufficient convective organization , including elongated banding features ot the north , to be classified Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ Two @-@ E. At this time , the depression was situated 435 mi ( 705 km ) south @-@ southwest of Acapulco , Mexico . Aided by high sea surface temperatures of 86 ° F ( 30 ° C ) , ample ocean heat content and low wind shear , the small system quickly intensified into a tropical storm — at which time the NHC assigned it the name Sandra — and developed a central dense overcast . A prominent banding feature with cloud tops below − 112 ° F ( − 80 ° C ) and frequent lightning formed north of the circulation on November 24 . By 18 : 00 UTC , a 23 to 29 mi ( 37 to 47 km ) wide eye became apparent , signaling the onset of rapid intensification . 
 Throughout November 25 , Sandra dramatically strengthened as deep convection blossomed around a tightening and clearing eye . The system achieved hurricane status by 06 : 00 UTC and major hurricane status — Category 3 or higher on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale — by 00 : 00 UTC on November 26 . Prominent outflow became established atop the cyclone and further aided the intensification . Throughout the strengthening phase , a mid- to upper @-@ level trough near the west coast of North America created a weakness in the subtropical ridge , prompting Sandra to turn north around the western edge of the high . Sandra reached its peak intensity as a high @-@ end Category 4 hurricane around 06 : 00 UTC on November 26 with maximum sustained winds of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 934 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 58 inHg ) . By this time , the hurricane 's eye shrunk to less than 6 mi ( 10 km ) in diameter . Within hours , however , increasing wind shear began to impact the circulation and caused convection to become asymmetric . Concurrently , the system started a turn northeast toward mainland Mexico as it rounded the ridge . 
 Steadily increasing wind shear gradually unraveled Sandra during the latter part of November 26 and into November 27 . The storm 's outflow , though prominent to the north , became restricted on the southern side . Sandra briefly regained organization around 00 : 00 UTC on November 27 , with its eye becoming redefined ; however , persistent shear prevailed and the system weakened below major hurricane status by 06 : 00 UTC . The hurricane rapidly deteriorated throughout November 27 as convection became displaced to the northeast of the circulation . The low @-@ level circulation soon decoupled from the mid- to upper @-@ level circulations and Sandra degraded to a tropical storm by 00 : 00 UTC on November 28 . The convectively devoid low @-@ level circulation abruptly turned northwest in response to a shallow ridge . Failing to redevelop convection atop its center , Sandra degenerated into a remnant low by 06 : 00 UTC . Sustained winds dropped below gale @-@ force by 18 : 00 UTC . Intense thunderstorm activity did blossom to the northeast of the center late on November 28 , prompting the storm to resume a northeasterly course . The cyclone eventually succumbed to strong shear and opened up into a trough roughly 60 mi ( 95 km ) southwest of Culiacán , Mexico , late on November 29 . 
 = = = Records = = = 
 Reaching tropical storm status on November 24 , Sandra was the fourth @-@ latest forming tropical storm in the Northeastern Pacific basin since reliable records began . Upon becoming a hurricane at 06 : 00 UTC on November 25 , Sandra was the second @-@ latest such storm on record in the Northeastern Pacific ; only Hurricane Winnie of 1983 — the only December hurricane on record in the basin — formed later . This also marked the record @-@ tying 16th hurricane to form in the Pacific north of the equator and east of the International Dateline ; this record is shared with 1990 , 1992 , and 2014 . When it further became a major hurricane at 00 : 00 UTC on November 26 , Sandra was the latest @-@ forming such storm in the Northeastern Pacific basin on record . It surpassed the previous record set by Hurricane Kenneth in 2011 by nearly four days . Sandra was also the ninth major hurricane in the Northeastern Pacific proper and the eleventh east of the dateline , both setting a record for the most in a single season . Sandra 's peak intensity with winds of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) and pressure of 934 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 58 inHg ) ranked it as the strongest November hurricane on record in the Northeastern Pacific , surpassing Hurricane Kenneth 's 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) and 940 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 76 inHg ) . On a global scale , Sandra was the 30th major hurricane and " record @-@ shattering " 25th Category 4 or 5 storm of 2015 ; the previous records were 23 and 18 , respectively , occurring in both 1997 and 2004 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 The precursor to Sandra produced unseasonably heavy rains across parts of Central America , leading to flooding . In Nicaragua , flooding affected 55 homes and destroyed 1 , primarily in Managua . A total of 56 families required evacuation . Local officials blamed the flooding on trash @-@ clogged drains . Five people were injured in the Nueva Segovia Department when an ambulance crashed on a foggy , rain @-@ slicked road . A landslide in <unk> , Honduras , destroyed a home killing a 25 @-@ day @-@ old baby and injuring four others . In Nueva Esparta , El Salvador , two people drowned after being swept away by the swollen El <unk> River . Flooding in <unk> killed one person and inundated homes in <unk> , prompting the evacuation of 14 families . 
 Moisture from Sandra streamed northward into the Southern Plains and Lower Mississippi River Valley and contributed to widespread rainfall and flooding . Heavy rains affected portions of Texas , Oklahoma , Arkansas , Mississippi , and Tennessee . The Dallas – Fort Worth metroplex received 3 @.@ 45 in ( 88 mm ) of rain on November 27 , their wettest November day on record ; this total contributed to breaking the city 's wettest @-@ year on record . 
 = = = Mexico = = = 
 On November 26 , the Government of Mexico issued a tropical storm watch for Baja California Sur between Todos los Santos and Los <unk> ; this was discontinued less than 24 hours later . The State Council of Civil Protection of Baja California Sur opened four shelters in both Cabo San Lucas and San José del Cabo ; school officials cancelled classes for November 27 . In La Paz , the Federal Electricity Commission deployed 96 trucks to handle potential power outages . On November 27 , a tropical storm warning was raised for mainland Mexico between Altata and San Blas as well as the Islas Marías ; the warning was discontinued the following day as Sandra rapidly dissipated . Alerts were raised across portions of Sinaloa and Nayarit in advance of the hurricane . The port of Mazatlán suspended operations on November 28 and public shelters were opened in the city . Water pumps , generators , and relief crews were mobilized at the port . About 180 people from the small community of Boca <unk> , Nayarit , evacuated inland . The storm also prompted delay of the annual <unk> Pacífico . 
 On November 27 , Sandra produced wind gusts up to 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) on Socorro Island as the storm moved 115 mi ( 185 km ) southeast of the island . Effects from Sandra were minor and limited due to its dissipation offshore ; rainfall was limited to 1 to 3 in ( 25 to 76 mm ) in most areas and largely considered beneficial . In contrast to predictions of 3 @.@ 0 to 5 @.@ 9 in ( 75 to 150 mm ) of rain across Baja California Sur , only 0 @.@ 71 in ( 18 mm ) fell in San José del Cabo while other areas of the Los Cabos Municipality received a trace to no accumulation . Wet roads in Cabo San Lucas resulted in two accidents that left three people injured . In Chihuahua , minor landslides damaged roads . 
 = Lesser Antillean macaw = 
 The Lesser Antillean macaw or Guadeloupe macaw ( Ara guadeloupensis ) is a hypothetical extinct species of macaw that is thought to have been endemic to the Lesser Antillean island region of Guadeloupe . In spite of the absence of conserved specimens , many details about the Lesser Antillean macaw are known from several contemporary accounts , and the bird is the subject of some illustrations . Austin Hobart Clark described the species on the basis of these accounts in 1905 . Due to the lack of physical remains , and the possibility that sightings were of macaws from the South American mainland , doubts have been raised about the existence of this species . A phalanx bone from the island of Marie @-@ Galante confirmed the existence of a similar @-@ sized macaw inhabiting the region prior to the arrival of humans , and was correlated with the Lesser Antillean macaw in 2015 . Later that year , historical sources distinguishing between the red macaws of Guadeloupe and the scarlet macaw ( A. macao ) of the mainland were identified , further supporting its validity . 
 According to contemporary descriptions , the body of the Lesser Antillean macaw was red and the wings were red , blue and yellow . The tail feathers were between 38 and 51 cm ( 15 and 20 in ) long . Apart from the smaller size and the all @-@ red coloration of the tail feathers , it resembled the scarlet macaw and may therefore have been a close relative of that species . The bird ate fruit – including the poisonous manchineel , was monogamous , nested in trees and laid two eggs once or twice a year . Early writers described it as being abundant in Guadeloupe , but it was becoming rare by 1760 , and only survived in uninhabited areas . Disease and hunting by humans are thought to have eradicated it shortly afterwards . The Lesser Antillean macaw is one of 13 extinct macaw species that have been proposed to have lived in the Caribbean islands . Many of these species are now considered dubious because only three are known from physical remains , and there are no extant endemic macaws on the islands today . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The Lesser Antillean macaw is well @-@ documented compared to most other extinct Caribbean macaws , since it was mentioned and described by several contemporary writers . Parrots thought to be the Lesser Antillean macaw were first mentioned by the Spanish historian Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo y Valdés in 1553 , referring to a 1496 account by the Spanish bibliographer Ferdinand Columbus , who mentioned chicken @-@ sized parrots — which the Island Caribs called " Guacamayas " — in Guadeloupe . In 1774 , the French naturalist Comte de Buffon stated that the Italian explorer Christopher Columbus had found macaws in Guadeloupe . The French botanist Jean @-@ Baptiste Du Tertre gave the first detailed descriptions in 1654 and 1676 , and illustrated the bird and other animals found in Guadeloupe . The French clergyman Jean @-@ Baptiste Labat also described the bird in 1742 . Writers such as George Edwards and John Latham also mentioned the presence of red and blue macaws on the islands off America . 
 The American zoologist Austin Hobart Clark gave the Lesser Antillean macaw its scientific name , Ara guadeloupensis , in 1905 , based on the contemporary accounts , and he also cited a 1765 color plate as possibly depicting this species . He wrote that it was different in several ways from the superficially similar scarlet macaw ( A. macao ) , as well as the green @-@ winged macaw ( A. <unk> ) and the Cuban macaw ( A. tricolor ) . Clark suggested the species might have existed on the islands of Dominica and Martinique , based on accounts of red macaws there , as well as on Guadeloupe . In his 1907 book Extinct Birds , the British zoologist Walter Rothschild instead claimed each island had its own species , and that the Lesser Antillean macaw was confined to Guadeloupe . In 1967 , the American ornithologist James Greenway wrote that the macaws reported from Guadeloupe could have been imported to the region from elsewhere by the native population , but this is difficult to prove . Greenway also suggested that the scarlet macaw and the Cuban macaw formed a superspecies with the Lesser Antillean macaw and other hypothetical extinct species suggested for Jamaica and Hispaniola . According to the English paleontologist Julian Hume , the similarity between the Lesser Antillean macaw and the scarlet macaw indicates that they were close relatives , and that the Guadeloupe species may have descended from the mainland macaw . 
 A small parrot ulna found on the Folle Anse archaeological site on Marie @-@ Galante , an island in the Guadeloupe region , was assigned to the Lesser Antillean macaw by the ornithologists Matthew Williams and David Steadman in 2001 . In 2008 , the ornithologists Storrs Olson and Edgar Maíz López cast doubt upon this identification , and proposed that the bone instead belonged to the extant imperial amazon ( Amazona imperialis ) . The size and robustness of the bone was similar to ulnae of the imperial amazon , and though it was worn , the authors identified what appeared to be a notch , which is also present on ulnae of the genus Amazona , but not in the genus Ara . Subfossil remains from the island of Montserrat have also been suggested to belong to the Lesser Antillean macaw . The species was recognized by Birdlife International and the IUCN Red List until 2013 , but was not considered valid thereafter . 
 In 2015 , a terminal phalanx bone ( ungual claw bone ) attributable to the genus Ara from south @-@ western Marie @-@ Galante was described by ecologists Monica Gala and Arnaud Lenoble . It was discovered in the Blanchard Cave during excavations in 2013 @-@ 2014 , in a fossil @-@ bearing deposit dating to the late Pleistocene epoch . The deposit was radiocarbon dated to about 10 @,@ 690 years ago ; the earliest evidence of human settlement in the area has been dated to 5 @,@ 300 years ago . This confirmed that the Guadeloupe region once had an endemic macaw which could not have been brought there by humans . All other macaw bones from the Lesser Antillean islands have been recovered from archaeological sites , and could therefore have been the remains of birds brought there by Amerindians . The size of the phalanx bone matched what was described for the Lesser Antillean macaw by contemporary writers , and the authors therefore correlated the two . They conceded that this connection could only be tentative , as there were no remains of the Lesser Antillean macaw to compare with . 
 Later in 2015 , Lenoble reviewed overlooked historical Spanish and French sources , finding references to mainly red macaws consistent with the Lesser Antillean macaw . The writings of the French missionary Raymond Breton ( on Guadeloupe from 1635 to 1654 ) were especially illuminating , as they showed that both he and the native Island Caribs clearly distinguished between the red macaws of Guadeloupe and the scarlet macaws from the mainland , which supports the idea that the Lesser Antillean macaw represents an independent species . As the Lesser Antillean Carib language had different words reserved for men and women , Breton gave the name of the bird as Kínoulou ( <unk> ) and Caarou ( ♀ ) . Lenoble furthermore concluded that the supposed violet macaw ( named Anodorhynchus purpurascens based on accounts of blue parrots from Guadeloupe ) was based on misidentified references to the also @-@ extinct Guadeloupe amazon ( Amazona violacea ) , and therefore never existed . 
 As many as 13 now @-@ extinct species of macaw have variously been suggested to have lived on the Caribbean islands , but many of these were based on old descriptions or drawings and only represent hypothetical species . In addition to the Lesser Antillean macaw , only two endemic Caribbean macaw species are known from physical remains ; the Cuban macaw is known from 19 museum skins and subfossils , and the Saint Croix macaw ( A. autochthones ) is known only from subfossils . Macaws are known to have been transported between the Caribbean islands and from mainland South America to the Caribbean both in historic times by Europeans and native peoples , and in prehistoric times by Paleoamericans . Parrots were important in the culture of native Caribbeans , and were among the gifts offered to Christopher Columbus when he reached the Bahamas in 1492 . Historical records of macaws on these islands , therefore , may not have represented distinct , endemic species ; it is also possible that these macaws were escaped or feral birds that had been transported to the islands from elsewhere . All the endemic Caribbean macaws were likely driven to extinction by humans in historic and prehistoric times . The identity and distribution of indigenous macaws in the Caribbean is only likely to be further resolved through paleontological discoveries and examination of contemporary reports and artwork . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Lesser Antillean macaw was described as having similar coloration to the scarlet macaw , but with shorter tail feathers between 38 and 51 cm ( 15 and 20 in ) long . In contrast , the tail feathers of the scarlet macaw are 61 cm ( 2 ft ) long and have blue tips , and the outer feathers are almost entirely blue . In spite of the tail feathers being shorter , it is not certain whether the Lesser Antillean macaw was smaller than the scarlet macaw overall , as the relative proportions of body parts vary between macaw species . The tail feathers were longer than those of the Cuban macaw , which were 30 cm ( 12 in ) long . The morphology of the fossil phalanx bone from Marie @-@ Galante was most similar to the second or third ungual of the scarlet macaw , though the bone is slightly smaller at 15 @.@ 3 mm ( 0 @.@ 60 in ) compared to 15 – 17 mm ( 0 @.@ 59 – 0 @.@ 67 in ) . 
 Du Tertre described the Lesser Antillean macaw as follows in 1654 : 
 The Macaw is the largest of all the parrot tribe ; for although the parrots of Guadeloupe are larger than all other parrots , both of the islands and of the main land , the Macaws are a third larger than they ... The head , neck , underparts , and back are flame color . The wings are a mixture of yellow , azure , and scarlet . The tail is wholly red , and a foot and a half long . 
 Though Clark converted Du Tertre 's tail measurement to 18 in ( 45 @.@ 7 cm ) , Lenoble pointed out that a 17th @-@ century French foot unit was slightly larger than the English equivalent , and the measurement should rather be converted to 19 @.@ 3 in ( 49 cm ) , indicating a smaller size difference between the Lesser Antillean macaw and the scarlet macaw . 
 In 1742 , Labat described the macaw in much the same way as Du Tertre , while adding several details : 
 It is the size of a full grown fowl . The feathers of the head , neck , back and underparts are flame color ; the wings are of a mixture of blue , yellow and red ; the tail , which is from fifteen to twenty inches in length is wholly red . The head and the beak are very large , and it walks gravely ; it talks very well , if it is taught when young ; its voice is strong and distinct ; it is amiable and kind , and allows itself to be caressed ... 
 Both authors wrote that the macaws were the largest parrots of Guadeloupe , and stressed that the parrots of each Caribbean island were distinct , and could be differentiated both based on their morphology and their vocalizations . According to Hume , this means that the birds described could not simply have been escaped South American macaws . Furthermore , the docile and amiable nature described by Du Tertre and Labat does not match the behavior of South American macaws . 
 Breton 's mid @-@ 1600s accounts of the macaw confirmed it as distinct from mainland scarlet macaws : 
 Macaws are larger than parrots , with a very beautiful red plumage mixed with purple in the tail and wings ... Macaws found on islands are called Kínoulou , f . Caarou . <unk> is found on the continent , and is redder and more elegant than the island variety . 
 Apart from Du Tertre 's crude 1667 drawing and Labat 's 1722 derivative , a few contemporary paintings depict red macaws that may be the Lesser Antillean macaw . A color plate accompanying a 1765 volume of Buffon 's encyclopaedia Histoire Naturelle ( no . 12 in Planches <unk> , entitled L 'Ara Rouge ) shows a red macaw with entirely red tail feathers and more red on the tertial and scapular feathers of the wing than are present on the scarlet macaw . Copies of the plate differ in the nuances used , but are identical in pattern . The painting suggests that a specimen may have been present in Europe at the time . The Swedish zoologist Carl Linnaeus cited the plate in his 1766 description of the scarlet macaw , but his description does not match the bird shown . A 1626 painting by the Dutch artist Roelant Savery , which also includes a dodo , shows a red macaw that agrees with the descriptions of the Lesser Antillean macaw . A second macaw in the painting may be the hypothetical extinct Martinique macaw ( A. martinicus ) , but though many parrots were imported into Europe at the time from all over the world , it is impossible to determine the accuracy of such paintings today . 
 = = Behavior and ecology = = 
 Du Tertre gave a detailed account of the behavior of the Lesser Antillean macaw in 1654 : 
 This bird lives on berries , and on the fruit of certain trees , but principally on the apples of the <unk> ( ! ) , which is a powerful and caustic poison to other animals . It is the prettiest sight in the world to see ten or a dozen Macaws in a green tree . Their voice is loud and piercing , and they always cry when flying . If one imitates their cry , they stop short . They have a grave and dignified demeanor , and so far from being alarmed by many shots fired under a tree where they are perched , they gaze at their companions who fall dead to the ground without being disturbed at all , so that one may fire five or six times into the same tree without their appearing to be frightened . 
 In a 1667 work , Du Tertre gave a similar account , and added that the macaw only ate the poisonous manchineel ( Hippomane mancinella ) fruits in times of necessity . He also described the monogamous reproductive behavior of the bird : 
 The male and the female are inseparable companions and it is rare that one is seen singly . When they wish to breed ( which they do once or twice a year ) they make a hole with their beaks in the stump of a large tree , and construct a nest with feathers from their own bodies . They lay two eggs , the size of those of a partridge ( Perdix cinerea ) . The others of the parrot kind make their nests in the same way , but lay green eggs ... The Macaws are much larger than the large parrots of Guadeloupe or Grenada , and live longer than a man ; but they are almost all subject to a falling sickness . 
 The twice @-@ yearly breeding mentioned by Du Tertre may have actually been staggered breeding , which is practiced by some tropical birds . 
 Though Clark suggested that the Lesser Antillean macaw also occurred on Dominica and Martinique , there is no evidence for this . Instead , it probably existed on other islands close to Guadeloupe . The fossil phalanx bone from Marie @-@ Galante was deposited in a time when that island and the rest of the Guadeloupe archipelago were closer together than they are today due to lower sea @-@ levels . The areas were separated by three channels , the largest of which was 6 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 7 miles ) wide . This would not have been a hindrance to flying animals , and the macaws of the Guadeloupe islands would probably have been a single population during the Pleistocene . 
 = = Extinction = = 
 In 1534 , German historian Johann <unk> wrote that the forests of Guadeloupe were full of red macaws , which were apparently as abundant as grasshoppers , and the native people of the region cooked its flesh together with that of humans and of other birds . In 1654 , Du Tertre stated that the flesh was tough to eat , and that some considered it unpalatable and even poisonous . He wrote that he and the other inhabitants often consumed it , and that he experienced no ill @-@ effects from it . He also stated that the native people wore the feathers decoratively on their heads and as moustaches through the septum of the nose . He described how it was hunted by the native population : 
 The natives make use of a stratagem to take them alive ; they watch for a chance to find them on the ground , eating the fruit which has fallen from the trees , when they approach quietly under cover of the trees , then all at once run forward , clapping their hands and filling the air with cries capable not only of astounding the birds , but of terrifying the boldest . Then the poor birds , surprised and distracted , as if struck with thunderbolt , lose the use of their wings , and , making a virtue of necessity , throw themselves on their backs and assume the defensive with the weapons nature has given them – their beaks and claws – with which they defend themselves so bravely that not one of the natives dares to put his hand on them . One of the natives brings a big stick which he lays across the belly of the bird , who seizes it with beak and claws ; but while he is occupied in biting it , the native ties him so adroitly to the stick that he can do with him anything he wishes ... 
 Since Du Tertre wrote that the macaws were prone to sickness , an outbreak of a disease , along with hunting , may have contributed to its demise . In 1760 , the French zoologist Mathurin Jacques Brisson quoted a letter by French writer M. de la Borde , which stated that macaws had become very rare in the Antillean islands because they were hunted for food . By then they could only be found in areas not frequented by humans , and were probably extinct soon afterwards . Parrots are often among the first species to be exterminated from a given locality , especially islands . 
 = A.A.R.M. = 
 " A.A.R.M. " is the collective name for the twenty @-@ second and twenty @-@ third episodes of the ninth season of the American comedy television series The Office , as well as the 198th and 199th episode overall . It was also the series ' penultimate entry , airing a week before the series finale . It originally aired on NBC on May 9 , 2013 . This episode guest stars Nora Kirkpatrick , Aaron Rodgers , Clay Aiken , Mark McGrath , Santigold , Jessica St. Clair , and Rachel Crow . 
 The series — presented as if it were a real documentary — depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In the episode , Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) convinces Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) that he needs to choose someone to act as an Assistant to the Assistant to the Regional Manager ( A.A.R.M. ) ; the two subsequently hold tryouts for the position . Angela Lipton ( Angela Kinsey ) is forced to bring her son , Phillip , to work , and Dwight thinks that he may be his son . Pam Halpert 's ( Jenna Fischer ) final fears about her husband 's love are settled . Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) attempts to get on " The Next Great A Cappella Sensation " , but is not able to audition . Finally , all the members of the office gather at Poor Richard 's Pub and watch the airing of the official in @-@ series documentary . 
 " A.A.R.M. " features a dramatic scene in which Jim presents a DVD of the highlights of his relationship with Pam , topped with him finally presenting her with a card he wrote in the second season episode " Christmas Party " . The idea to have Jim finally give Pam his card had been considered in the writers ' room for some time , but only during " A.A.R.M. " did the writers feel it was the right time . In addition , the episode contained several scenes that were purposely staged to be reminiscent of past episodes of the series , with scenes mimicking unique shots in both the third season installment " Gay Witch Hunt " and the sixth season episode " The Delivery " . 
 The episode was also viewed by 4 @.@ 56 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 3 / 6 percent rating among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 , ranking third in its timeslot , making it the highest @-@ rated episode of the season since the earlier entry " The Boat " . " A.A.R.M. " received largely positive reviews from critics . The interaction between Jim , Pam , and Dwight received particular praise ; many were particularly pleased with the call @-@ back to " Christmas Party " . Andy 's subplot , however , was highly panned . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) convinces regional manager Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) that he needs to choose someone to act as an Assistant to the Assistant to the Regional Manager ( A.A.R.M. ) . Jim designs several Dwight @-@ oriented challenges as tryouts for the position , and it is inevitably found that Dwight is the most qualified . Angela Lipton ( Angela Kinsey ) is forced to bring her child , Phillip , to work , after her daycare turns her child away . Dwight , upon overhearing that Phillip has been eating the type of paper which he himself regards as the most flavorful , begins to think that Angela 's son is actually his . To test this theory , Dwight offers the child either a check for one million dollars or a beet ; Phillip picks the beet . Dwight tells Angela that he will marry her if the child is his , but she denies that this is not the case . Dwight then confers with Jim , asking whether he should propose to Angel or his girlfriend Esther , who he thinks is the more logical choice . Jim tells Dwight that he needs to put aside logic and follow his instincts . Dwight makes up his mind and proposes to Angela , who says yes . Angela finally reveals to Dwight that Phillip is indeed his son , explaining that she lied about his parentage in order to test Dwight 's feelings for her . 
 Meanwhile , Darryl Philbin ( Craig Robinson ) returns to Scranton , after quietly quitting a week ago to work full @-@ time at Athlead , the sports marketing company that Jim founded . When the others spot him , they are upset that he left without saying goodbye and demand to spend some time with him in one way or another before he leaves for good . The office ultimately decides on one final dance together . 
 When Darryl runs into Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) , he tells her about the company 's success and how Jim is missing out by staying in Scranton . Pam begins to worry that she is making Jim do something that he does not want to do . She confronts her husband and admits that she thinks she might not be good enough for him . He asks the in @-@ series documentary crew 's help ; the crew makes a DVD of the highlights that they have collected of Jim and Pam 's relationship . The final scene that they use is from the second season Christmas episode " Christmas Party " in which Jim gives Pam a teapot as a gift , but takes back his accompanying note to her . After Pam watches the DVD , Jim presents her with the actual , unopened note . She reads it to herself , and , realizing that Jim does truly love her , the two happily embrace . 
 Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) , who had been fired in the previous episode , auditions for The Next Great A Cappella Sensation . However , before he is able to try out , the judges close the auditions , sending home the remaining applicants , who have been standing in line for hours . Refusing to accept this , he bolts past security and argues with the judges to let him audition . When they refuse , he throws a crying tantrum . Later , he journeys to Poor Richard 's Pub , where he meets his former office workers . All together , the office watches the official airing of the documentary on PBS 's Scranton affiliate station , WVIA @-@ TV . 
 = = Production = = 
 " A.A.R.M. " was written by executive producer Brent Forrester , marking his eleventh writing credit for the series , his first since the earlier season episode , " Work Bus " . It was directed by regular Office editor David Rogers , marking his ninth directing credit , and first since the earlier season episode " Junior Salesman " . The episode was originally supposed to air as a half @-@ hour episode , but NBC later announced it would be expanded to fill an hour time slot . Unlike the previous episodes that were expanded , like " Moving On " and " Livin ' the Dream " , " A.A.R.M. " counts as two produced episodes . 
 This episode guest stars Aaron Rodgers , Clay Aiken , Mark McGrath , Santigold , and Jessica St. Clair . In order to get them , the show reached out to " a small group of celebrities that [ the producers ] thought would be good " . Both Aiken and Santigold accepted . Baumgartner then asked Rodgers , who was a friend , and he accepted . McGrath later became available , and he was chosen as well . Angela 's son , Phillip , was played by twins Vince and Evan Edwards . The child that filmed the scene in which Phillip picked the beet was only supposed to point to the beet . In the end , the child said " beet ! " , which Rogers called " amazing " . The voice of the documentarian that responds to Jim is that of episode director David Rogers . Rogers also voiced the same character in the season opener " New Guys " . Originally , showrunner and series creator Greg Daniels had re @-@ recorded the line in " New Guys " , but ended up liking Roger 's voice better . He asked him to reprise the role in " A.A.R.M. " to preserve continuity . 
 Jules <unk> designed the portraits of Dwight and Mose , as well as Dwight 's propaganda picture . He had previously created Pam 's watercolor of Dunder Mifflin that hung on the walls . All of the dances moves were choreographed by Mary Ann Kellogg , who had choreographed many of the series ' dance @-@ heavy episodes . The obstacle course in the warehouse was crafted by Rogers and Forrester , with input from the show 's art department . Wilson also helped , since he eventually was the one who ran through it ; it was his idea to have the course terminate on a raised palette of boxes . Originally , the course was supposed to be in the park lot , but Rogers moved it , feeling that the warehouse was " more organic " and that the heat would have been detrimental to the finished product . The idea to have Jim finally give Pam his card had been considered in the writers ' room for some time , but only during " A.A.R.M. " did the writers feel it was the right time . The card and envelope was the same one used for " Christmas Party " almost seven years prior . In fact , the card contained a genuine message that <unk> wrote for Fischer . Rogers admitted that the Pam and Jim video was inspired by a number of fan videos that exist on the internet . The reason that " Open Your Eyes " by Snow Patrol plays over the video is that Claire Scanlon , the series editor , felt that it was similar in style to " Sing " by Travis , which played in the second season episode " The Client " . 
 The episode contained several scenes that were reminiscent of past episodes of the series . The shot in which Jim and Dwight survey the office was filmed to be similar to a scene that featured Dwight and Michael in the third season installment " Gay Witch Hunt " . In addition , Dwight pulling Angela over was filmed in a way that recalled the sixth season episode " The Delivery " . Although The scene wherein Jim gives advice to Dwight was shot in a similar manner to Jim 's farewell to Michael in the seventh season episode " Goodbye , Michael " , it was not intentionally supposed to look like it , according to Rogers . In addition , the obstacle course was not a direct reference to the second season episode " Office Olympics " , although Rogers understood that there were similarities . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Jim references both Michael J. Fox and the 1985 film Back to the Future during his " nonsense " conference room meeting . Dwight realizes that Phillip is his son after the child looks at a small @-@ scale replica of the Battlestar Galactica , fictional ship from the science fiction series of the same name , in the same way that Dwight does . Dwight 's test to see if Phillip is his son has been compared to a similar scene in the 1997 film <unk> , in which Tibetan monks practice a similar ritual . To win over Kevin , Angela and Oscar pretend that baby Phillip presented him with an iTunes gift card . Darryl and the rest of the office dance to the song " Boogie Wonderland " by Earth , Wind , and Fire . The show Andy auditions for The Next Great A Cappella Sensation , is a parody of popular singing shows like American Idol , The Voice , and The Sing @-@ Off . The fictional show is hosted by Mark McGrath , the lead singer from the rock band Sugar Ray . The judges for the show include Aaron Rodgers , Clay Aiken , and Santigold . Rodgers is an American football quarterback for the Green Bay Packers , Aiken is a singer who gained prominence following the second season of American Idol in 2003 , and Santigold is an American singer , songwriter , and producer . Andy sings both the Cornell University alma mater ( " Far Above Cayuga 's Waters " ) , as well as " You 're Never Fully Dressed Without a Smile " from the musical Annie . The woman auditioning that he interrupts is Rachel Crow , who achieved fame after competing in season one of The X @-@ Factor . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " A.A.R.M. " originally aired on May 9 , 2013 on NBC . In its original American broadcast , " A.A.R.M. " was viewed by an estimated 4 @.@ 56 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 3 rating / 6 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 3 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 6 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This marked a significant increase , of almost one million viewers , in the ratings from the previous episode , " Livin ' the Dream " . It was also the most @-@ watched episode of The Office since the earlier ninth season episode " The Boat " , which had aired on November 8 , 2012 and was watched by 4 @.@ 83 million viewers . The episode ranked third in its half @-@ hour timeslot , being beaten by an episode of the ABC drama Grey 's Anatomy which received a 3 @.@ 1 / 9 rating and an entry of the CBS series Person of Interest which scored a 2 @.@ 4 / 7 rating . The Office was also the highest @-@ rated NBC series of the night . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Alan Sepinwall of HitFix gave the episode a positive review , and wrote that " as a quasi @-@ finale , ' A.A.R.M. ' was surprisingly [ … ] terrific in most areas . " He particularly enjoyed the interaction between Jim and Dwight , calling it " so much fun " ; he argued that the show would have probably fared better following Steve Carell 's departure had the power dynamic and relationship between Jim and Dwight that was explored in " A.A.R.M. " been established earlier in the eighth season . He concluded that " The best parts of ' A.A.R.M. ' felt like a fitting close to the non @-@ documentary @-@ viewing portion of the series . " M. Giant of Television Without Pity was pleased with the episode , and awarded it an " A " grade , the first for the series since " Goodbye , Michael " almost two seasons ago . Jenna Mullins of E ! Online wrote that the episode " was full of emotional moments that seemed like love letters to the fans who have watched the show since the pilot . " Mullins also praised the scenes between Jim and Pam , noting that " we collapsed in tears because the couple we 've been rooting for [ … ] can still find ways to make us cry . " 
 Nick Campbell of TV.com felt that the episode was " a decent if uneven penultimate episode that gave us one last look at this quirky group of people in their office environment " . He was largely happy with the return of the fun @-@ loving version of Jim , noting that " Pam mentioned that she loves ' Goofy Jim ' and I , [ sic ] have to admit , I love Goofy Jim myself " . Campbell felt that the episode dabbled in fan service , but that it was expected and needed for the show to have a successful ending . Roth Cornet of IGN awarded the episode an 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 , denoting a " great " episode . She wrote that " The interplay between Jim , Dwight , and Pam has been the core of the series since Michael Scott 's departure , and it was good to see the trio front and center once again as The Office comes to a close . " Furthermore , Cornet was happy with Dwight 's proposal and the dance party that signaled Darryl 's leaving , calling the latter " a slice of bliss " . 
 Erik Adams of The A.V. Club gave the episode a " B + " . He said that " what benefits ' <unk> ' most [ … ] is a back @-@ to @-@ basics Jim @-@ and @-@ Dwight storyline " that illustrated the growth that the characters have experienced in the last nine years . He wrote that there were many tender moments in the episode , such as Dwight and Jim 's confrontation , Pam and Jim 's reaffirmation of love , and Dwight 's proposal to Angela . He concluded that " It ’ s that blend of new beginnings and closing circles that makes ' <unk> ' an effective second @-@ to @-@ last chapter of The Office " . Dan Forcella of TV Fanatic awarded the episode four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , and wrote that the episode " didn 't disappoint " . He called " the scene in which Pam was watching the docu @-@ created montage just as Jim was giving Dwight love advice " the " most emotionally rewarding moment on The Office since Michael Scott 's goodbye . " 
 Many critics were extremely pleased with the call back to the teapot and Jim 's note from " Christmas Party " . Adams felt that the scene , before the reveal of the note , was properly executed , and that the note made it even better . Sepinwall called it " a fabulous payoff for longtime fans " . Cornet called the sequence " effective " . Rick Porter of Zap2it wrote that it was a " nice move " on the part of the writers for " not letting us know what Jim wrote on the card from ' Christmas Party ' [ because ] it has to be pretty epic . " 
 Conversely , most critics gave Andy 's plot a negative review . Sepinwall called the entire plot " <unk> " . Campbell referred to it as " a mediocre story that stood in stark contrast to the emotional timbre of the rest of the episode " . Cornet called the scenes " just as disconnected from the core of the show as that character has for some time now . " Porter wrote that " the show never quite got a handle on what to do with the character this season " , and his subplot in " A.A.R.M. " was the culmination of this issue . 
 = Battle of San Patricio = 
 The Battle of San Patricio was fought on February 27 , 1836 between Mexican troops and rebellious immigrants to the Mexican province of Texas , known as Texians . The battle marked the start of the Goliad Campaign , the Mexican offensive to retake the Texas Gulf Coast . It took place in and around San Patricio . 
 By the end of 1835 , all Mexican troops had been driven from Texas . Frank W. Johnson , the commander of the volunteer army in Texas , and James Grant gathered volunteers for a planned invasion of the Mexican port town of Matamoros . After spending several weeks gathering horses for the Matamoros Expedition , in late February Johnson and about 40 men led the herd to San Patricio . Johnson assigned some of his troops to a ranch 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) outside town to guard the horses , while the rest of his men garrisoned in three different locations in town . 
 Unbeknownst to the Texians , on February 18 , Mexican General José de Urrea led a large contingent of troops from Matamoros into Texas . Their goal was to neutralize the Texian soldiers gathered along the coast . Urrea 's men easily followed the trail left by Johnson 's herd of horses . Mexican soldiers surprised the sleeping Texians in San Patricio in the early hours of February 27 . After a fifteen @-@ minute battle , all but six Texians had been killed or imprisoned . One Mexican soldier was killed and four injured . 
 = = Background = = 
 Under President Antonio López de Santa Anna , the Mexican government began to shift away from a federalist model to a more centralized government . His increasingly dictatorial policies , including the revocation of the Constitution of 1824 in early 1835 , incited federalists throughout the nation to revolt . The Mexican army quickly put down revolts in the Mexican interior , including a brutal suppression of militias in Oaxaca and Zacatecas . Unrest continued in the Mexican state Coahuila y Tejas . The area that bordered the United States , known as Texas , was populated primarily by English @-@ speaking settlers , known as Texians . In October , the Texians took up arms in what became known as the Texas Revolution . The following month , Texians declared themselves part of a state independent from Coahuila and created a provisional state government based on the principles of the Constitution of 1824 . By the end of the year , all Mexican troops had been expelled from Texas . 
 Leading federalists in Mexico advocated a plan to attack centralist troops in Matamoros . Members of the General Council , the interim Texas governing body , were enamored with the idea of a Matamoros Expedition . They hoped it would inspire other federalist states to revolt and keep the bored Texian troops from deserting the army . Most importantly , it would move the war zone outside Texas . The Council officially approved the plan on December 25 , and on December 30 Frank W. Johnson , the commander of the volunteer army , and his aide James Grant took the bulk of the army and almost all of the supplies to Goliad to prepare for the expedition . 
 Determined to quash the rebellion , Santa Anna began assembling a large force to restore order ; by the end of 1835 his army numbered 6 @,@ 019 soldiers . In late December , at his behest , the Mexican Congress passed the Tornel Decree , declaring that any foreigners fighting against Mexican troops " will be deemed pirates and dealt with as such , being citizens of no nation presently at war with the Republic and fighting under no recognized flag " . In the early nineteenth century , captured pirates were executed immediately . The resolution thus gave the Mexican Army permission to take no prisoners in the war against the Texians . Santa Anna personally led the bulk of his troops inland to San Antonio de Béxar and ordered General José de Urrea to lead 550 troops along the Atascocita Road toward Goliad . Urrea 's efforts to quell the rebellion along the Texas Gulf Coast have become known as the Goliad Campaign . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 The Texas provisional government had named Sam Houston the commander of a new regular army in Texas , but without authority over the volunteers who reported to Johnson . The provisional governor , Henry Smith , opposed the Matamoros Expedition and ordered Houston to find a way to disband it . In a rousing speech to the volunteers , Houston dissuaded the bulk of the men from continuing their mission . Many left the army . Others joined the troops stationed under Houston 's second @-@ in @-@ command , James Fannin , at Presidio La Bahia in Goliad . By the end of January 1836 , only 70 men remained with Johnson and Grant . Most of these volunteers were Americans or Europeans who had arrived in Texas after the Texas Revolution had commenced . 
 Urrea reached Matamoros on January 31 . A committed federalist himself , he soon convinced other federalists in the area that the Texians ' ultimate goal was secession and their attempt to spark a federalist revolt in Matamoros was just a method of diverting attention from themselves . Urrea 's force crossed into Texas on February 18 . 
 Meanwhile , Mexican double agents continued to assure Johnson and Grant that they would be able to take Matamoros easily . Despite hearing rumors that the Mexican army was approaching , Grant and Johnson chose to take their men south of the Nueces River , into territory belonging to the state of Tamaulipas , to search for horses to buy , steal , or otherwise gather . About February 21 , Johnson and part of the group began herding about 100 horses back into Texas . The rest of the men remained with Grant , ostensibly to look for more horses . In actuality , he was attempting to rendezvous with his allies near Matamoros to determine whether federalists were still willing to rise up against the Mexican army . 
 Johnson 's men arrived on February 24 in San Patricio , an Irish settlement about 100 miles ( 160 km ) north of Matamoros . Many of the San Patricio residents were centralists , loyal to the Mexican government . Johnson sent twelve men to guard the horses at the ranch of Julian de la Garza , approximately 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) outside the town , while the rest garrisoned in San Patricio . The weather was frigid , and the men 's clothes were threadbare . Confident that Grant would alert him if Mexican troops were in the area , Johnson chose not to appoint sentries , instead allowing all of the men to take shelter . 
 The Mexican troops easily followed the trail left by Johnson 's herd . On February 25 , Urrea led 100 dragoons and 100 infantry to corner the Texians . By 10 p.m. , scouts reported that Texian troops were established in San Patricio . The Mexican soldiers continued marching through the cold night ; six of the troops died of exposure . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Urrea instructed three officers to go to San Patricio dressed as civilians and warn the centralists that the Mexican army was approaching . In an effort to reduce casualties and property damage , centralists were asked to declare their loyalties by leaving lanterns burning in their windows . Locals also gave the officers precise information on which buildings housed Texian soldiers . Urrea sent 30 men under Captain Rafael <unk> to de la Garza 's ranch to surprise the Texians camped there . At 3 : 30 a.m. on February 26 , the remaining Mexican soldiers entered San Patricio . 
 One group of Texians surrendered immediately when they awoke to find themselves surrounded by Mexican troops . When another party of Texians was asked to surrender , they instead opened fire , killing a Mexican officer and wounding two other soldiers . Determined to prevent more casualties , Mexican dragoons prepared to set the house on fire to force the Texians out . At this point , several Texians called that they were surrendering . As they left the house , they were shot or lanced . 
 By chance , Johnson and three of his men , Lieutenant Daniel Toler and Sergeants Love and Miller , were still awake and discussing tactics . Mexican troops had been told that the house where Johnson was quartered was one of their targets , yet a lamp burned in the window , signalling that this was the home of a loyalist . Out of an abundance of caution , a group of troops knocked on the door . Before the Texians could open the door , they heard the gunfire from the town square . Toler looked out a window and saw uniformed troops on the porch . Without opening the door , he told the soldiers , in Spanish , that there were no troops there , but he would open the door momentarily . The fighting moved into the street , and soldiers who had been guarding the back door of the house rushed around to the front . Johnson , Toler , Love , and Miller dashed out the back door and escaped . 
 At the de la Garza ranch , the Texians had been taking turns standing sentry . In the cold , all of the sentries had fallen asleep . <unk> 's soldiers opened fire on the sleeping men , injuring two Texians . In the subsequent fight , four Texians died , eight men ( three Americans and five Tejanos , Mexican @-@ born citizens ) were taken prisoner , and several escaped . 
 The fighting ended within fifteen minutes . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Six Texians escaped , including Johnson , Toler , Miller , Love , and John F. Beck . They made their way on foot to Refugio , where they sent a messenger to Fannin at Goliad , 75 miles ( 121 km ) north , to let him know that Urrea 's army was close . The survivors reached Goliad on February 29 . After filling out an official report on the battle , Johnson , Toler , and Love left the army and went to San Felipe . The remaining survivors joined Fannin 's troops and were later killed in the Goliad Massacre . 
 Eleven Texians were killed outright , five suffered mortal wounds , and 21 others were taken prisoner . Six local men were also arrested for aiding the rebellion . Some historians report that most were executed immediately in the town square . According to reports by Johnson and another Texian , Urrea questioned several of the prisoners , and there were reports that the men were tortured . Within 72 hours all of the prisoners were dead . One Mexican soldier was killed and four were wounded . 
 Urrea 's official records state that the battle was fought at Fort Lipantitlán , on the other side of the Nueces River . Texian accounts are consistent that the fighting occurred in town and at the de la Garza ranch . While Urrea waited for reinforcements before beginning his march towards Goliad , his advance party searched for Grant and the remaining Texians . After learning of Grant 's whereabouts from local spies , on March 2 Mexican dragoons ambushed the Texians at Agua Dulce Creek . 
 = M @-@ 102 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 102 is a state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan that runs along the northern boundary of Detroit following 8 Mile Road . The highway follows the Michigan Baseline , a part of the land survey of the state , and the roadway is also called Base Line Road in places . As a county road or city street , 8 Mile Road extends both east and west of the M @-@ 102 designation , which leaves 8 Mile on the eastern end to follow Vernier Road . The western terminus of M @-@ 102 is at the junction of 8 Mile Road and M @-@ 5 ( Grand River Avenue ) and the opposite end is at Vernier Road and Interstate 94 ( I @-@ 94 ) . The 8 Mile Road name extends west to Pontiac Trail near South Lyon with a discontinuous segment located west of US Highway 23 ( US 23 ) . The eastern end of 8 Mile Road is in Grosse Pointe Woods near I @-@ 94 . 
 The highway was first designated in the late 1920s , connecting US Highway 10 ( US 10 , Woodward Avenue , now M @-@ 1 ) with US 25 ( Gratiot Avenue , now M @-@ 3 ) . Extensions to the highway designation moved the termini in the 1930s and 1940s east to M @-@ 29 ( Jefferson Avenue ) and US 16 ( Grand River Avenue , now M @-@ 5 ) . A change in the 1960s added a section of north – south roadway to the eastern end of M @-@ 102 ; that change was reversed within about a year . A western extension along Grand River Avenue in 1977 was reversed in 1994 , and M @-@ 102 has remained the same since . 
 8 Mile Road has carried major cultural significance ; since the mid @-@ 20th century , as the city demographics have changed , it has served as a physical and cultural dividing line between the wealthier , predominantly white northern suburbs of Detroit and the poorer , predominantly black city . The racial patterns have changed , as more middle @-@ class African Americans have also moved north of 8 Mile , but the socioeconomic divide between the city and suburbs remains . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Starting at an intersection with Hamburg Road along the Livingston – Washtenaw county line , 8 Mile Road runs eastward to an interchange with US 23 near Whitmore Lake . There is a gap before 8 Mile Road resumes at Pontiac Trail along the Oakland – Washtenaw county line . Near the suburb of Northville , the road curves northward into Oakland County , and Base Line Road follows the county line for about one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) . The road meets I @-@ 96 / I @-@ 275 at that freeway 's exit 167 along the border between Livonia and Farmington Hills . As its name implies , 8 Mile Road runs east – west eight miles ( 13 km ) north of the origin of the Mile Road System at Michigan and Woodward avenues . 
 M @-@ 102 starts at the intersection between M @-@ 5 ( Grand River Avenue ) and 8 Mile Road and runs eastward along 8 Mile Road . The highway widens out into a boulevard setup with each direction divided by a central median . Motorists that want to make a left turn along 8 Mile Road have to perform a Michigan left to do so . Starting at the Inkster Road intersection , M @-@ 102 forms the boundary between Redford to the south and Southfield to the north . East of Five Points Road , the 8 Mile follows the northern city limits of Detroit . On either side of 8 Mile Road , the area is filled with residential neighborhoods of the two cities with commercial businesses immediately adjacent to the highway . About two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) east of its starting point , M @-@ 102 intersects US 24 ( Telegraph Road ) at a cloverleaf interchange near Frisbee @-@ Pembroke Park and Plum Hollow Country Club . Along the length of the eight @-@ lane highway , there are large power line towers in the median . 
 Continuing east , M @-@ 102 intersects M @-@ 39 ( Southfield Freeway ) and M @-@ 10 ( Lodge Freeway ) south of the Southfield campus of Oakland Community College and the Northland Center Mall . As the highway approaches M @-@ 1 ( Woodward Avenue ) , there are a pair of service drives that split from the main roadway in each direction to provide access through the interchange with M @-@ 1 . The main lanes of M @-@ 102 pass under M @-@ 1 and its ramp connections before the service drives merge back in on the other side . This interchange is located adjacent to the Michigan State Fairgrounds , former site of the now @-@ defunct Michigan State Fair , and Woodlawn Cemetery . East of the fairgrounds , the highway crosses a line of the Canadian National Railway that also carries Amtrak passenger traffic ; the line is south of a rail terminal in Ferndale . Further east , M @-@ 102 meets I @-@ 75 before intersecting Dequindre Road . Dequindre is the boundary between Oakland and Macomb counties . 
 Now following the Wayne – Macomb county line , M @-@ 102 separates Warren from Detroit . The highway also runs parallel to , and about a half mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) north of Outer Drive , the original beltway highway proposed in 1918 to encircle Detroit . The road passes the Mound Road Engine facility , a former Chrysler plant next to the Mound Road intersection . East of the plant , the highway crosses a branch line of the Conrail Shared Assets Operations on the east side of the plant complex before intersecting M @-@ 53 ( Van Dyke Road ) . Further east , 8 Mile Road passes north of the Bel Air Center Shopping Center before crossing another Canadian National Railway line next to the intersection with M @-@ 97 ( Groesbeck Highway ) . 
 On the far east side of Detroit , M @-@ 102 separates the city from the suburb of Eastpointe once near the intersection with M @-@ 3 ( Gratiot Avenue ) . Near Kelly Road and the Eastland Center , the highway turns southeasterly along Vernier Road to enter Harper Woods in Wayne County ; 8 Mile Road continues due eastward along the county line in this suburb as a four @-@ lane undivided urban arterial street . The eastern terminus of M @-@ 102 is at the interchange between Vernier Road and I @-@ 94 about 1 @,@ 700 feet ( 520 m ) south of 8 Mile Road near the boundary with Grosse Pointe Woods . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 102 was first designated along 8 Mile Road from US 10 ( Woodward Avenue , now M @-@ 1 ) to US 25 ( Gratiot Avenue , now M @-@ 3 ) in late 1928 or early 1929 . In 1939 , the eastern terminus was moved as M @-@ 102 was extended along 8 Mile and Vernier Roads to end in Grosse Pointe Shores at M @-@ 29 ( Jefferson Avenue ) . The highway was extended in the early 1940s from Woodward westward to US 16 ( Grand River Avenue , now M @-@ 5 ) . 
 During 1963 , the M @-@ 102 designation was extended northerly along Jefferson Avenue through St. Clair Shores , replacing the M @-@ 29 designation to the Shook Road interchange at the northern end of the then @-@ existing I @-@ 94 freeway . That extension was reversed the next year , and M @-@ 102 was scaled back to end at US 25 ( Gratiot Avenue ) ; the rest of 8 Mile and Vernier roads plus the Jefferson Avenue segment are added to M @-@ 29 instead . M @-@ 102 was re @-@ extended along 8 Mile and Vernier roads to the I @-@ 94 interchange in Harper Woods in 1970 replacing M @-@ 29 ; the remainder of that other highway along Vernier Road and Jefferson Avenue to Shook Road that was once part of M @-@ 102 was transferred to local control . 
 When I @-@ 96 was completed in 1977 , several highway designations were shifted in the Metro Detroit area . The Business Spur I @-@ 96 designation that had replaced US 16 was removed from Grand River Avenue . That roadway was signed as M @-@ 5 southward between 8 Mile Road and its present eastern terminus at I @-@ 96 while the remainder of Grand River Avenue and the stub freeway formerly part of I @-@ 96 that continued out to I @-@ 275 became part of M @-@ 102 . This extension to M @-@ 102 was reversed in October 1994 when M @-@ 5 was extended northwesterly along Grand River Avenue , the freeway and up the Haggerty Connector north of I @-@ 96 in Novi , replacing part of M @-@ 102 in the process . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 = = = Racial and economic divide = = = 
 The road has long served as a de facto cultural dividing line between the predominantly poor black city and its wealthier , predominantly white northern suburbs . The perception of 8 Mile as the chief dividing line between racial groups and classes persists , in part because the suburban counties of Oakland and Macomb remain , on the whole , significantly whiter and more prosperous than the city of Detroit . However , in recent years increasing numbers of whites have moved into Detroit , especially around the downtown area , and other neighborhoods in the region have become more ethnically diverse as well . 
 According to the 2000 U.S. Census , the median family income for the city of Detroit , whose population was 81 @.@ 55 % African @-@ American , was $ 33 @,@ 853 , and 26 @.@ 1 % of the population lived below the poverty line . By contrast , the median family income for Oakland County , whose population was 82 @.@ 75 % white , was $ 75 @,@ 540 , and only 5 @.@ 5 % of residents lived below the poverty line . These results were compiled into an Index of <unk> of 85 @.@ 9 by researchers with Brown University and Florida State University , the highest score for a metropolitan area in the United States . After the 2010 Census , the index was computed as 79 @.@ 6 , which was a " substantial decline " in the words of the study 's authors . 
 = = = In surveying = = = 
 8 Mile Road is also known as Base Line Road , for it was used to set the baseline for the Public Land Survey System in Michigan . The system helped bring order to county boundaries , which had often been set in other states by geographic markers such as rivers , hills , and trees , and were therefore rather irregular . Today , the baseline forms the northern or southern boundary of many southern Michigan counties . 
 = = = In media = = = 
 Tupac Shakur , Tim Roth , and Thandie Newton form the fictitious musical act Eight Mile Road in the 1997 film Gridlock 'd , which is set in Detroit . The movie 8 Mile , starring Detroit @-@ area hip hop artist Eminem , as well as his songs " Lose Yourself " and " 8 Mile " , both take their names and cultural subject matter from the roadway . 
 In addition to these film references , there are a number of songs that refer to 8 Mile Road , some of which include : 
 Eminem – " Encore / Curtains Down " 
 Eminem – " Marshall Mathers " 
 Eminem – " Yellow Brick Road " 
 Eminem – " Mockingbird " 
 Obie Trice – " 8 Mile " 
 Danny Brown – " 8 Mile " 
 Eminem – " No Love " 
 The roadway is also shown on <unk> 's program Hardcore Pawn , a show about a pawn shop located on 8 Mile Road . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Coimbatore = 
 Coimbatore , also known as Kovai [ <unk> ] , is a major city in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu . Located on the banks of the Noyyal River surrounded by the Western Ghats , it is the second largest city in the state after Chennai and the sixteenth largest urban agglomeration in India . It is administered by the Coimbatore Municipal Corporation and is the administrative capital of Coimbatore district . It is one of the fastest growing tier @-@ II cities in India and a major hub for textiles , industries , commerce , education , information technology , healthcare and manufacturing in Tamil Nadu . It is often referred to as the " Manchester of South India " due to its cotton production and textile industries . Coimbatore is also referred to as the " Pump City " and it supplies nearly half of India 's requirements of motors and pumps . The city is one of the largest exporters of jewellery , wet grinders , poultry and auto components with " Coimbatore Wet Grinder " and " Kovai Cora Cotton " recognised as Geographical Indications by the Government of India . 
 Coimbatore was part of Kongu Nadu during the Sangam period between c . 1st and the 4th centuries CE and was ruled by the Cheras as it served as the eastern entrance to the Palakkad Gap , the principal trade route between the west coast and Tamil Nadu . Coimbatore was located along the ancient Roman trade route that extended from Muziris to Arikamedu in South India . The medieval Cholas conquered the Kongu Nadu in the 10th century CE . The region was ruled by Vijayanagara Empire in the 15th century followed by the Nayaks who introduced the <unk> system under which Kongu nadu region was divided into 24 <unk> . In the later part of the 18th century , the Coimbatore region came under the Kingdom of Mysore and following the defeat of Tipu Sultan in the Anglo @-@ Mysore Wars , the British East India Company annexed Coimbatore to the Madras Presidency in 1799 . The Coimbatore region played a prominent role in the Second Poligar War ( 1801 ) when it was the area of operations of <unk> Chinnamalai . 
 In 1804 , Coimbatore was established as the capital of the newly formed Coimbatore district and in 1866 it was accorded municipality status with Robert Stanes as its Chairman . The city experienced a textile boom in the early 19th century due to the decline of the cotton industry in Mumbai . Post independence , Coimbatore has seen rapid growth due to industrialisation . Coimbatore was ranked the best emerging city in India by India Today in the 2014 annual Indian city survey . The city was ranked fourth among Indian cities in investment climate by Confederation of Indian Industry and 17th among the top global outsourcing cities by <unk> . Coimbatore has been selected as one of the hundred Indian cities to be developed as a smart city under Prime Minister Narendra Modi 's flagship Smart Cities Mission . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 There are multiple theories regarding the origin of the name . According to one theory , " Coimbatore " is a derivation of <unk> ( literally ' new town of <unk> ' ) , after chieftain <unk> or <unk> , evolved into <unk> and later anglicised as Coimbatore . <unk> , the goddess worshiped by <unk> evolved into <unk> and later <unk> . Another theory states that the name could have been derived from <unk> . 
 = = History = = 
 The region around Coimbatore was ruled by the Cheras during Sangam period between c . 1st and the 4th centuries CE and it served as the eastern entrance to the Palakkad Gap , the principal trade route between the west coast and Tamil Nadu . The Kosar tribe mentioned in the second century CE Tamil epic <unk> and other poems in Sangam literature is associated with the Coimbatore region . The region was located along an ancient Roman trade route that extended from Muziris to Arikamedu . The medieval Cholas conquered the Kongu Nadu in the 10th century CE . A Chola highway called <unk> <unk> ran through the region . Much of Tamil Nadu came under the rule of the Vijayanagara Empire by the 15th century . In the 1550s , Madurai Nayaks , who were the military governors of the Vijaynagara Empire , took control of the region . After the Vijayanagara Empire fell in the 17th century , the Madurai Nayaks established their state as an independent kingdom . They introduced the <unk> system under which Kongu Nadu region was divided into 24 <unk> . 
 In the latter part of the 18th century , the region came under the Kingdom of Mysore , following a series of wars with the Madurai Nayak dynasty . After the defeat of Tipu Sultan in the Anglo @-@ Mysore Wars , the British East India Company annexed Coimbatore to the Madras Presidency in 1799 . The Coimbatore region played a prominent role in the Second Poligar War ( 1801 ) , when it was the area of operations of <unk> Chinnamalai . In 1804 , Coimbatore was established as the capital of the newly formed Coimbatore district and in 1866 it was accorded municipality status . Sir Robert Stanes became the first Chairman of the Coimbatore City Council . The region was hard hit during the Great Famine of 1876 – 78 resulting in nearly 200 @,@ 000 famine related fatalities . The first three decades of the 20th century saw nearly 20 @,@ 000 plague @-@ related deaths and acute water shortage . 
 The decline of the cotton industry in Mumbai fuelled an economical boom in Coimbatore in the 1920s and 1930s . The region played a significant role in the Indian independence movement with Mahatma Gandhi visiting the city thrice . Coimbatore was the base of operations for political figures such as S. P. <unk> Naidu , R. K. <unk> Chetty , C.S. <unk> and C. Subramaniam during the freedom movement . Post independence , Coimbatore has seen rapid growth due to industrialisation and in 1981 , Coimbatore was constituted as a Municipal corporation . On February 14 , 1998 , the radical Islamist group Al Ummah bombed 11 places across the city killing 58 people and injuring more than 200 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Coimbatore lies at 11 ° 1 ′ 6 ″ N 76 ° 58 ′ 21 ″ E in south India at 411 metres ( 1349 ft ) above sea level on the banks of the Noyyal River , in southwestern Tamil Nadu . It covers an area of 642 @.@ 12 km2 ( 247 @.@ 92 sq mi ) . It is surrounded by the Western Ghats mountain range to the West and the North , with reserve forests of the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve on the northern side . The Noyyal River forms the southern boundary of the city , which has an extensive tank system fed by the river and rainwater . The eight major tanks and wetland areas of Coimbatore are namely , Singanallur , <unk> , Ukkadam <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . Multiple streams drain the waste water from the city . 
 The city is divided into two distinctive geographic regions : the dry eastern side which includes majority of the urban area of the city and the western region which borders the Nilgiris , Anaimalai and Munnar ranges . Palghat Gap , a mountain pass which connects the neighbouring state of Kerala to Tamil Nadu , lies to the west of the city . Because of its location in the biodiversity hotspot of the Western Ghats , it is rich in fauna and flora . The Coimbatore urban wetlands harbours around 116 species of birds , of which 66 are resident , 17 are migratory and 33 are local migrants . The spot @-@ billed pelican , painted stork , <unk> stork , ibis , spot @-@ billed duck , teal and black @-@ winged stilt visit the Coimbatore wetlands on their migration . Apart from the species common to the plains , various threatened and endangered species such as Indian elephants , wild boars , leopards , Bengal tigers , gaurs , Nilgiri tahr , sloth bear and black @-@ headed oriole are found in the region . 
 The northern part of the city has a rich tropical evergreen forest with commercially significant trees such as teak , sandalwood , rosewood and bamboo . The soil is predominantly black , which is suitable for cotton cultivation , but some red loamy soil is also found . According to the Bureau of Indian Standards , Coimbatore falls under the Class III / IV Seismic Zone , having experienced an earthquake of magnitude 6 @.@ 0 on the Richter scale on February 8 , 1900 . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Coimbatore has a pleasant climate due to the presence of forests to the north and the cool winds blowing through the Palghat gap in the Western Ghats . Under the Köppen climate classification , the city has a tropical wet and dry climate , with the wet season lasting from October to December due to the northeast monsoon . The mean maximum temperature ranges from 35 @.@ 9 ° C ( 97 ° F ) to 29 @.@ 2 ° C ( 85 ° F ) and the mean minimum temperature ranges from 24 @.@ 5 ° C ( 76 ° F ) to 19 @.@ 8 ° C ( 68 ° F ) . The highest temperature ever recorded is 40 @.@ 4 ° C ( 105 ° F ) on May 5 , 1983 while the lowest is 11 @.@ 7 ° C ( 53 ° F ) on January 8 , 1912 . 
 Due to the south west monsoon winds passing through the Palghat gap , elevated regions of the city receive rainfall in the months from June to August . After a warm and humid September , the north east monsoon starts from October lasting till early November . The average annual rainfall is around 700 mm ( 27 @.@ 6 in ) with the northeast and the southwest monsoons contributing to 47 % and 28 % respectively to the total rainfall . This periodic rainfall does not satisfy the water requirements of the city throughout the year and water supply schemes like <unk> and <unk> help to sustain the needs of the city during the non @-@ monsoon months . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 Coimbatore has a population of 1 @,@ 601 @,@ 438 . As per the 2011 census based on pre @-@ expansion city limits , Coimbatore had a population of 1 @,@ 050 @,@ 721 with a sex ratio of 997 females for every 1 @,@ 000 males , much above the national average of 929 . It is the second largest city in the state after capital Chennai and the sixteenth largest urban agglomeration in India . A total of 102 @,@ 069 were under the age of six , comprising 52 @,@ 275 males and 49 @,@ 794 <unk> average literacy of the city was 82 @.@ 43 % , compared to the national average of 72 @.@ 99 % . There were a total of 425 @,@ 115 workers , comprising 1 @,@ 539 cultivators , 2 @,@ 908 main agricultural labourers , 11 @,@ 789 in house hold industries , 385 @,@ 802 other workers , 23 @,@ 077 marginal workers , 531 marginal cultivators , 500 marginal agricultural labourers , 1 @,@ 169 marginal workers in household industries and 20 @,@ 877 other marginal workers . 
 As per the 2001 census , Coimbatore had a population of 930 @,@ 882 within the municipal corporation limits . The population of the urban agglomeration as per 2011 census is 2 @,@ 136 @,@ 916 with males constituting 50 @.@ 08 % of the population and females 49 @.@ 92 % . Coimbatore has an average literacy rate of 89 @.@ 23 % , higher than the national average of 74 @.@ 04 % . Male literacy is 93 @.@ 17 % and female literacy is 85 @.@ 3 % with 8 @.@ 9 % of the population under six years of age . The sex ratio was 964 females per 1000 males . In 2005 , the crime rate in the city was 265 @.@ 9 per 100 @,@ 000 people , accounting for 1 @.@ 2 % of all crimes reported in major cities in India . It ranked 21st among 35 major cities in India in the incidence of crimes . In 2011 , the population density in the city was 10 @,@ 052 per km2 ( 26 @,@ 035 per mi2 ) . Around 8 % of the city 's population lives in slums . 
 = = Administration and politics = = 
 Coimbatore is a Municipal corporation administered by the Coimbatore Municipal Corporation and is the administrative headquarters of Coimbatore district . Coimbatore was established as the capital of Coimbatore district in 1804 and in 1866 it was accorded municipality status . In 1981 , Coimbatore was elevated as a municipal corporation . The city is divided into five administrative zones – East , West , North , South and Central , each further subdivided into 20 wards . Each ward is represented by a councillor who is elected by direct election and the Mayor of Coimbatore is elected by Councillors . The executive wing of the corporation is headed by a Corporation Commissioner and maintains basic services like water supply , sewage and roads . The district itself is administered by the District collector and the district court in Coimbatore is the highest court of appeal in the district . The Coimbatore City Police is headed by a Commissioner and there are 18 police stations in the city . 
 A large part of the Coimbatore urban agglomeration falls outside the Municipal corporation limits . These suburbs are governed by local bodies called Village Panchayats and Town Panchayats . Besides the Coimbatore Municipal Corporation , the Coimbatore UA comprises the town panchayats of <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Perur , Madukkarai , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , census towns of <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Sulur , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and municipalities of <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . These local bodies are in turn split into wards each electing a councillor through direct election . The head of the local body known as president is elected by the councillors from among their number . 
 Coimbatore elects ten members to the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly and one member to the Indian Parliament . The five legislative assembly constituencies in the city are Coimbatore North , Coimbatore South , <unk> , Singanallur and Sulur which form a part of the Coimbatore Parliamentary Constituency . Part of the urban agglomeration comes under the Nilgiris and Pollachi constituencies . In the Indian general election held in 2014 , AIADMK candidate A. P. Nagarajan defeated C. P. Radhakrishnan of the BJP in the Coimbatore Lok Sabha constituency . In the last legislative assembly election held in 2011 , the AIADMK led front won in all five assembly constituencies . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Coimbatore is amongst the fastest growing tier @-@ II cities in India and a major hub for textiles , industries , commerce , education , information technology , healthcare and manufacturing in Tamil Nadu . Coimbatore houses more than 25 @,@ 000 small , medium and large industries with the city 's primary industries being engineering and textiles . Coimbatore is called the " Manchester of South India " due to its extensive textile industry , fed by the surrounding cotton fields . <unk> Park was the first special economic zone ( SEZ ) set up in 2006 . In 2010 , Coimbatore ranked 15th in the list of most competitive ( by business environment ) Indian cities . Coimbatore also has a 160 @,@ 000 square feet ( 15 @,@ 000 m2 ) trade fair ground , built in 1999 and is owned by CODISSIA . It is also the country 's largest pillar @-@ free hall , according to the Limca Book of Records . 
 Coimbatore region experienced a textile boom in the 1920s and 1930s . Though , Robert Stanes had established Coimbatore 's first textile mills as early as the late 19th century , it was during this period that Coimbatore emerged as a prominent industrial centre . Coimbatore is home to more than 17 % of the fibre textile mills in India . Coimbatore has trade associations such as CODISSIA , <unk> and <unk> representing the industries in the city . Coimbatore houses a number of textile mills and is the base of textile research institutes like the Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel International School of Textiles & Management , Central Institute for Cotton Research ( <unk> ) and the South India Textile Research Institute ( <unk> ) . Kovai Cora Cotton saree is a recognised Geographical Indication . 
 Coimbatore is the second largest producer of software in the state , next only to capital Chennai . <unk> park and other Information technology parks in the city has aided in the growth of IT and Business process outsourcing industries in the city . It is ranked at 17th among the top global outsourcing cities by <unk> . Coimbatore is the second largest hub in India for Cognizant Technology Solutions employing 5000 people . Software exports stood at ₹ 7 @.@ 1 billion ( US $ 110 million ) for the financial year 2009 – 10 up 90 % from the previous year . Coimbatore has a large and diversified manufacturing sector facilitated by the presence of research institutes like Tamil Nadu Agricultural University , <unk> and large number of engineering colleges producing about 50 @,@ 000 engineers annually . 
 Coimbatore is a major centre for the manufacture of automotive components in India with car manufacturers Maruti <unk> and Tata Motors sourcing up to 30 % , of their automotive components from the city . G.D. Naidu developed India 's first indigenous motor in 1937 . India 's first indigenously developed diesel engine for cars was manufactured in the city in 1972 . The city is also a major centre for small auto component makers catering to the automobile industry , from personal to commercial and farm vehicles . The city contributes to about 75 % of the 1 lakh total monthly output of wet grinders in India . The industry employs 70 @,@ 000 people and had a yearly turnover of ₹ 2 @,@ 800 crore ( US $ 420 million ) in 2015 . The term " Coimbatore Wet Grinder " has been given a Geographical indication . 
 Coimbatore is also referred to as " the Pump City " as it supplies nearly 50 % of India 's requirements of motors and pumps . The city is one of the largest exporters of jewellery renowned for diamond cutting , cast and machine made jewellery . There are about 3 @,@ 000 jewellery manufacturers employing over 40 @,@ 000 goldsmiths . 
 Coimbatore has a large number of poultry farms and is a major producer of chicken eggs . The city contributes to nearly 95 % of processed chicken meat exports . Coimbatore has some of the country 's oldest flour mills and these mills which cater to all the southern states , have a combined grinding capacity of more than 50 @,@ 000 MT per month . The hospitality industry has seen a growth in the 21st century with new upscale hotels being set up . Coimbatore is the largest non @-@ metro city for e @-@ commerce in South India . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Coimbatore and its people have a reputation for entrepreneurship . Though it is generally considered a traditional city , Coimbatore is diverse and cosmopolitan . The World Classical Tamil Conference 2010 was held in Coimbatore . The heavy industrialisation of the city has also resulted in the growth of trade unions . 
 = = = Language = = = 
 Tamil is the official language and Kongu Tamil ( also called <unk> or <unk> ) , a dialect , is predominantly spoken . Coimbatore also has a significant number of Kannadigas , Telugus , <unk> and North Indians , mainly Gujaratis . As per the 2001 census , the number of speakers by native language are as follows : Tamil ( 707 @,@ 263 ) followed by Telugu ( 125 @,@ 616 ) , Malayalam ( 46 @,@ 645 ) and Kannada ( 30 @,@ 195 ) . During the 1970s the city witnessed a population explosion as a result of migration fuelled by increased economic growth and job opportunities . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 The city 's population is predominantly Hindu with minor Muslim and Christian population . Jains , Sikhs and Buddhists are also present in small numbers . According to the religious census of 2011 , Coimbatore has 83 @.@ 31 % Hindus , 8 @.@ 63 % Muslims , 7 @.@ 53 % Christians , 0 @.@ 28 % Jains , 0 @.@ 05 % Sikhs , 0 @.@ 02 % Buddhists and 0 @.@ 01 % Others . 0 @.@ 17 % of the respondents did not state their religion . 
 The Mariamman festivals at the city 's numerous Amman temples are major events in summer . Major Hindu temples in the city include the Perur <unk> Temple , Naga Sai Mandir , <unk> Temple , <unk> Mariamman Temple , <unk> Vinayagar Temple , <unk> Ranganathaswamy Temple , <unk> Murugan Temple , Loga <unk> <unk> Temple , <unk> <unk> <unk> Temple and <unk> Yogic Temple . The mosques on <unk> Street and Big Bazaar Street date back to 18th century CE . Christian missions date back to the 17th century when permission was granted by the Nayak rulers to set up churches in the region . Sikh <unk> and Jain temples are also present in Coimbatore . 
 = = = Cuisine = = = 
 Coimbatore cuisine is predominantly south Indian with rice as its base . Most local restaurants still retain their rural flavor , with many restaurants serving food over a banana leaf . Eating on a banana leaf is an old custom and imparts a unique flavor to the food and is considered healthy . North Indian , Chinese and continental cuisines are also available . <unk> , dosa , <unk> and appam are popular dishes . Coimbatore has an active street food culture and various cuisine options for dining . <unk> <unk> <unk> , made from a mixture of dal and rice is a recipe that existed from fourth century CE and unique to the area . <unk> is a popular dish prepared by simmering deep fried mushrooms ( usually chopped mushroom ) in a spicy broth , until it reaches a porridge like consistency and served sprinkled with chopped onions and coriander leaves . 
 = = = Arts = = = 
 <unk> Vincent , who had built the first cinema of south India in Coimbatore , introduced the concept of Tent Cinema in which a tent was erected on an open land to screen the films . Central Studios was set up in 1935 while S. M. <unk> Naidu established <unk> Studios in 1945 . The city conducts its own music festival every year . Art , dance and music concerts are held annually during the months of September and December ( Tamil calendar month – <unk> ) . Coimbatore also houses a number of museums and art galleries like G.D. Naidu Museum & Industrial Exhibition , H A Gass Forest Museum , Government Museum , <unk> Gandhi Gallery and Kasthuri Srinivasan Art Gallery and Textile Museum . 
 = = Transport = = 
 = = = Air = = = 
 The city is served by the Coimbatore International Airport at Peelamedu 15 km ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) from the city centre . The airport commenced operations in 1940 as a civil aerodrome with Indian Airlines operating Fokker F27 , Douglas DC @-@ 3 and later Hawker Siddeley HS 748 aircraft . The then Prime Minister of India Manmohan Singh declared the government 's intention to upgrade the Coimbatore Airport to International status in a meeting with senior ministers on 6 June 2012 and it was granted the status of international airport by the Union Cabinet on 2 October 2012 . The airport is operated by Airports Authority of India and caters to domestic flights to major Indian cities and international flights to Sharjah and Singapore . As of 2014 @-@ 15 , the airport was the 15th largest airport in India in terms of total aircraft movement , 18th largest in terms of passengers handled and 13th largest in terms of cargo handled . It has a single runway , which is 9 @,@ 760 feet ( 2 @,@ 970 m ) in length and is capable of handling large aircraft . Air Carnival , a proposed airline is expected to commence operations in 2016 with the airport as its hub . 
 Sulur Air Force Station , located at <unk> is an air base operated by the Indian Air Force and accommodates Antonov An @-@ 32 heavy air lifter aircraft , Mil Mi @-@ 8 transport helicopters and the HAL Dhruv helicopters of the Sarang helicopter display team . The first squadron of ingeniously built HAL Tejas will be inducted at Sulur AFS and Sukhoi Su @-@ 30MKI aircraft will be stationed at the base by 2016 . 
 = = = Rail = = = 
 Train service in Coimbatore started in 1861 , upon the construction of the Podanur – Madras line connecting Kerala and the west coast with the rest of India . Coimbatore lies on the Coimbatore - Shoranur Broad gauge railway line and the city falls under the Salem Division of the Southern Railway zone of Indian Railways . The major railway station is the Coimbatore Junction which is the second @-@ largest income generating station in the Southern Railway zone after Chennai Central and is amongst the top hundred booking stations of Indian Railways . Other major railway stations catering to the city include Coimbatore North Junction , Podanur Junction and minor stations at Peelamedu , Singanallur , <unk> Junction , <unk> , Madukkarai , <unk> and Sulur . 
 = = = = Monorail = = = = 
 In 2012 , Coimbatore Municipal Corporation proposed three monorail routes . The first circular route will connect Gandhipuram with Ganapathy , Sivananda Colony , Sai Baba colony , RS Puram , Townhall and City Railway Station . The second circular route will connect Podanur with Trichy Road , <unk> , Redfields , Race Course , City Railway Station and Ukkadam . A linear line was proposed from <unk> to <unk> via airport , CODISSIA , PSG Tech , Lakshmi Mills , Gandhipuram , Coimbatore North Junction and Cowley Brown Road . <unk> and <unk> were included in the linear line as part of the phase extension . 
 = = = Road = = = 
 There are six major arterial roads in the city : Avinashi road , Trichy road , <unk> road , Mettupalayam road , Palakkad road and Pollachi road . Coimbatore bypass is a series of bypasses connecting the various National Highways and State Highways passing through and originating from Coimbatore . The first section of the bypass , a 28 @-@ kilometre ( 17 mi ) stretch from <unk> to Madukkarai on National Highway 544 opened for traffic in 2000 . It was the first road privatisation project to be implemented on a build – operate – transfer model in South India . In 2008 , the State Highways department came up with a proposal to create a Ring road to help de @-@ congest the main arterial roads and the 12 km road would extend from Peelamedu to Mettupalayam road . In 2011 , the Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu announced the construction of two new flyovers at Ukkadam and <unk> to help de @-@ congest the Palakkad Road . In 2012 , the Government of Tamil Nadu decided in favour of an eastern road that connected Mettupalayam Road with Avinashi Road and the existing bypass . The city municipal corporation is undertaking the construction of six rail @-@ over @-@ bridges in the city . There are five National Highways passing through the city : 
 Apart from State and National Highways , the city corporation maintains a 635 @.@ 32 kilometres ( 394 @.@ 77 miles ) long road network . Town buses started operating in 1921 and serve most parts of the city , as well as other towns and villages in the district . The number of inter @-@ city routes operated by Coimbatore division is 119 with a fleet of more than 500 buses . It also operates town buses on 257 intra @-@ city routes . The intra @-@ city buses operate from major bus stations in Gandhipuram , Singanallur and Ukkadam to other parts across the city . Inter @-@ city and intra @-@ city buses that connect Coimbatore operate from different bus stands : 
 Coimbatore <unk> is a proposed bus rapid transit project under the <unk> scheme of the Government of India . It is planned along a 27 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 17 @.@ 1 mi ) stretch connecting Avinashi road and Mettupalayam road . The city is also served by auto rickshaws and radio taxi services . Coimbatore has four Regional Transport Offices viz . TN 37 ( South ) , TN 38 ( North ) , TN 66 ( Central ) , TN 99 ( West ) . 
 = = Education = = 
 Coimbatore is a major educational hub . The first college of Coimbatore , Government Arts College , was opened in 1875 . The first engineering college in the city , the Arthur Hope College of Technology ( now known as the Government College of Technology , Coimbatore ) , was started by G.D. Naidu in 1945 followed later by private engineering colleges PSG College of Technology and Coimbatore Institute of Technology in the 1950s . The Air Force Administrative College , established in 1949 , is the oldest training institute of the Indian Air Force . Coimbatore Medical College was opened in 1966 and the Government law college started functioning from 1978 . The agricultural school established in 1868 was converted into a full @-@ fledged agricultural university Tamil Nadu Agricultural University in 1971 and the <unk> Ali Centre for Ornithology and Natural History was opened in 1990 . 
 As of 2010 , the district is home to 7 universities , 78 engineering colleges , 3 medical colleges , 2 dental colleges , 35 polytechnics and 150 arts and science colleges . The city houses three government run universities Tamil Nadu Agricultural University , <unk> University , Anna University Coimbatore and four private universities . The city houses Government research institutes including the Central Institute for Cotton Research , Sugarcane Breeding Research Institute , Institute of Forest Genetics and Tree Breeding ( <unk> ) , Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education and Tamil Nadu Institute of Urban Studies . In 2008 , Government of India announced a plan to establish a world class university in the region . 
 Three types of schools operate in Coimbatore : government run schools , schools funded by the government but run by private trusts ( aided schools ) and schools funded completely by private trusts . Schools may follow Tamil Nadu Anglo Indian School Board , Tamil Nadu State Board , Matriculation or CBSE syllabus . The city falls under the purview of Coimbatore Education District . In 2013 , 45 @,@ 863 students appeared for <unk> examinations and the pass percentage was 94 @.@ 12 % . 
 = = Utility services = = 
 = = = Media = = = 
 Four major English newspapers The Hindu , The Times of India , Deccan Chronicle and The New Indian Express bring out editions from the city . Business Line , a business newspaper also brings out a Coimbatore edition . Tamil newspapers which have Coimbatore editions include Dinamalar , Dina Thanthi , Dinamani , Dinakaran , Tamil Murasu and Maalai Malar ( both evening newspapers ) . Two Malayalam newspapers – Malayala Manorama and Mathrubhumi also have considerable circulation in the city . Lotus News is headquartered in Coimbatore . 
 A Medium wave radio station is operated by All India Radio , with programs in Tamil , English and Hindi . Five FM radio stations operate from Coimbatore – Rainbow FM , Suryan FM , Radio Mirchi , Radio City and Hello FM . All these private radio stations air exclusively Tamil based programs , including film music . Television relay started in 1985 from Delhi Doordarshan and in 1986 , after inception of the repeater tower at Kodaikanal , telecast from Madras commenced . In 2005 , Doordarshan opened its studio in Coimbatore . Television services are accessible through DTH or digital cable . 
 = = = Telecommunication = = = 
 Coimbatore has a well @-@ connected communications infrastructure . Till the 1990s the state owned Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited ( BSNL ) was the only telecommunication service provider in the city . In the 1990s , private telecom companies too started offering their services . As of 2010 , BSNL , Reliance Communications , Bharti Airtel and Tata <unk> offer broadband service and fixed line services . MTS offers mobile broadband services . Cellular telephony was first introduced in 1997 and mobile telephone services available . Coimbatore is the headquarters of the Tamil Nadu circle of cellular service providers . 
 = = = Healthcare = = = 
 As of 2010 , the size of the health care industry in Coimbatore is estimated at ₹ 1 @,@ 500 crore ( US $ 220 million ) . There are around 750 hospitals in the city with an in @-@ patient capacity of 5 @,@ 000 beds . The first health care centre in the city was started in 1909 . In 1969 , it was upgraded to Coimbatore Medical College Hospital , a government run tertiary care hospital with 1020 beds and provides free health care . The city corporation maintains 16 dispensaries and 2 maternity homes . People from nearby districts and the state of Kerala visit Coimbatore for medical tourism due to the availability of hospitals and healthcare facilities . 
 = = Sports and recreation = = 
 Coimbatore is often referred to as the " India 's motorsports hub " and the " Backyard of Indian Motorsports " . <unk> designed and built entry level race cars and the Kari Motor Speedway , a Formula 3 Category circuit is named after him . Tyre manufacturer MRF assembles Formula Ford cars in Coimbatore in association with former F3 Champion J. Anand and racing company Super Speeds designs Formula cars . Rallying is another major event with rallies conducted in closed roads around Coimbatore . Narain Karthikeyan , India 's first Formula One driver hails from the city and other motorsport drivers from Coimbatore include J. Anand and V. R. Naren Kumar . 
 Nehru Stadium , built originally for football also hosts athletic meets . The stadium has been renovated with Korean grass for the field and a synthetic track around it for athletics . Apart from the stadium , other sporting venues include the Coimbatore Golf Course , a 18 @-@ hole golf course and Coimbatore Cosmopolitan Club , which is more than 100 years old . Coimbatore Flying Club is located in the Coimbatore airport premises . The city hosts its own annual marathon called Coimbatore Marathon as an event to raise cancer awareness . Retired tennis player <unk> Vaidyanathan , who became the first Indian woman in the modern era to feature and win a round at a main draw Grand Slam in 1998 Australian Open hails from Coimbatore . Coimbatore District Chess Association ( <unk> ) , established in 1940 is the oldest chess association in the country . 
 = = = Recreation = = = 
 There are several amusement parks around the city , namely : Black Thunder water theme park near Mettupalayam , Kovai <unk> amusement park at Perur and Maharaja Theme Park at <unk> . Since the 1980s , the city has had a few small shopping complexes and major shopping malls include <unk> Mall and Fun Republic Mall . The city also has a number of parks including the VOC park , the Tamil Nadu Agricultural University park , Race Course Children 's park and Bharathi park in <unk> Colony . Coimbatore Zoo houses a number of animals and birds and is located near VOC park . The grounds are used for conducting fairs and events including the annual Independence day and Republic day celebrations . Singanallur Lake is a popular tourist place and bird watcher destination . Popular cinemas include KG Cinemas , The Cinema and Cinépolis . 
 = = Environmental issues = = 
 Air pollution , lack of proper waste management infrastructure and degradation of water bodies are the major environmental issues in Coimbatore . There is a sewage treatment plant at Ukkadam with the capacity to process 70 million litres of sewage water per day . Garbage is collected by the corporation and sewage is pumped into the water tanks and the Noyyal river through streams . This along with garbage dumping and encroachments has led to degradation of the water bodies and depletion in the groundwater table . The tanks are renovated by the city 's environmental groups with their own fund @-@ raising and the corporation . The corporation is responsible and involved in clearing encroachment of the tanks . <unk> , an environmental organisation founded by the city 's industrial houses , undertakes de @-@ silting of tanks and cleaning of the Noyyal river . Environment Conservation Group based out of the city is also involved in conservation of trees and wetlands , monitoring wildlife crime and conducting awareness sessions for students . 
 = = International relations = = 
 Coimbatore has sister city relationship with Toledo , Ohio . The relation has enabled exchange in the fields of arts and education between the cities . A twin city pact with the German city of Esslingen was signed in July 2016 with the relation enabling the cities to collaborate on areas of mutual interest , health , education , culture and social development . 
 Alliance Française de Madras , a Franco @-@ Indian non @-@ profit association promoting the growth of French in India has a centre at PSG Institute of Management in Coimbatore . 
 = Ioan Gyuri Pascu = 
 Ioan Gyuri Pascu ( Romanian pronunciation : [ <unk> ̯ an <unk> <unk> ] ; also credited as Ioan <unk> Pascu , Gyuri Pascu and <unk> Pascu ; born August 31 , 1961 ) is a Romanian pop music singer , producer , actor and comedian , also known for his participation in the comedy troupe Divertis and for his activity in Romanian cinema and television . Moving between rock music , rhythm and blues , reggae and jazz , the multi @-@ instrumentalist Pascu founded a number of bands and registered success particularly during the early 1990s , when he was the lead singer of a group known as The Blue Workers . Pascu was the manager of several alternative music acts with his label Tempo Music , and remains an outspoken critic of Romanian commercial radio . 
 Noted for his impressions and musical acts within Divertis ' political satire shows , Pascu is also a successful actor , appearing in film productions such as Lucian Pintilie 's An Unforgettable Summer and Cristian Mungiu 's Occident , and portraying known characters in Romanian theater in various stage adaptations . He has had collaboration with several main television stations , including TVR 1 , Antena 1 and Pro TV . He has contributions as a printed media journalist , with sports columns , and is also a writer of Christian literature . He received an offer from Walt Disney Pictures , and he provides the voice of King Louie in 2006 for the Romanian version of the film , The Jungle Book . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Pascu is a native of Agnita ( at the time part of Braşov Region , now in Sibiu County ) , where he graduated from primary school . He was born to an ethnic Romanian father and a half @-@ Hungarian mother ; on his mother 's side , he is also the descendant of Poles and Slovaks . His mother was a Roman Catholic and his father , like Gyuri , was a Romanian Orthodox . His name reflects his complex heritage : Ioan was chosen as his Romanian name ; his second name was the Hungarian <unk> , but it was recorded as <unk> in his birth certificate and personal documents ever since — as Pascu later indicated , this was because neither his father nor the notary were familiar with Hungarian phonology . Pascu , who is fluent in the Hungarian language , prefers the hypocoristic Gyuri . 
 Pascu began to study piano when he was nine years old , and sang soprano in his school choir , entertaining his friends with impressions of well @-@ known pop singers . During fifth grade , he started playing handball with an amateur team , discarding piano lessons and contemplating a career in acting . He also taught himself guitar . 
 At age fourteen , Pascu 's voice changed . He was still a soprano in the choir , but had to use his head voice . As a high school student , Pascu had to enlist in the Union of Communist Youth ( UTC ) , the Romanian communist regime compulsory youth organization . In 1976 , he enrolled at the Agnita High School , which later became the Agro @-@ Industrial High School . The same year , he gave up handball and began a more formal study of guitar music , using the Maria <unk> textbook as his guide . He debuted as an amateur actor in 1977 , with a school theater performance at the Agnita House of Culture . 
 Pascu was also interested in the <unk> Flacăra concerts , an outlet for American folk @-@ inspired and folk rock , tolerated under communism . He became familiar with Western music acts such as Olivia Newton @-@ John and Queen , and active in the UTC 's cultural brigade , wrote and performed his first folk @-@ rock numbers . 
 = = = <unk> Negri and Fundal = = = 
 In May 1978 , Pascu attended an International Workers ' Day celebration in Mediaş , where he befriended brothers <unk> and Horia Moldovan , who were in the same band as pop singer Elena <unk> . According to Pascu 's official site , they played Western rock hits for him , including Deep Purple 's " Child in Time " and Uriah Heep 's " July Morning " . Between 1978 and 1980 , Pascu sang with the Moldovans ' band <unk> Negri , and was invited to perform with them at wedding parties and similar festivities . With the money he earned , he purchased his first acoustic guitar directly from the factory in <unk> , and taught himself to play drums . He composed one of his first published songs , " <unk> " ( " Melancholy " ) , in 1979 . 
 In 1980 , Pascu applied for Târgu Mureş ' Szentgyörgyi István Drama School , but failed the entry exam . He worked in a state @-@ owned factory as a lathe operator , and for several months in 1980 , was conscripted into the Romanian Land Forces , where he met other amateur musicians who were undergoing military training . Together they founded the rock band Fundal , with Pascu as lead singer and drummer . They performed in the nationwide <unk> României festival . 
 In 1982 , their military term over , Pascu and Fundal returned to Mediaş , where Pascu was discovered by Romanian Radio 's Radio <unk> station . He was invited to perform at the station 's youth concerts , where he met and befriended Teo Peter , bass player for Compact , and music promoter Andrei <unk> . During 1982 , Pascu also played <unk> Flacăra concerts , and was billed for the UTC 's Scînteia <unk> shows . He later described his mentoring by rock singers Cristi <unk> , Liviu <unk> , Adi <unk> and <unk> <unk> as his " third real school " . In 1980 , Pascu also discovered and became influenced by reggae music . He was introduced to the reggae style by The Police and its reggae fusion sessions , then became a fan of reggae numbers played by African diaspora students in Romanian universities . Twenty years later , Pascu told reporters : " Between 1980 and 1985 , I was mad about Bob Marley . " 
 = = = University years and Divertis debut = = = 
 In 1984 , Pascu moved to Cluj @-@ Napoca , and was admitted into the Cluj University Faculty of Letters , studying Romanian and Spanish . He had applied for the similar faculty at the University of Bucharest twice , but failed the entry exam . Soon after admission , he joined the university 's theatrical company Ars <unk> şi <unk> , mentored by literary critic Ion Vartic . He performed radio comedy and parody theater during this time , and was involved in Vartic 's <unk> literary club . Pascu continued his interest in sports , particularly soccer , and was a noted fan of the college soccer team FC Universitatea Cluj . 
 In 1986 , while Ars <unk> was touring Bucharest with an adaptation of Ion Luca Caragiale 's plays , Pascu met and befriended members of the comedic ensemble and student group Divertis , which performed subtle political satire against Nicolae Ceauşescu 's communist rule . Pascu had been a Divertis fan since 1982 and recalled , " I met with the Divertis boys after a show . They liked me [ and ] asked me to join the group " . His first performance with Divertis took place in 1987 , at <unk> <unk> resort in <unk> County . Pascu resumed his musical career , and also in 1987 , was invited by <unk> to sing at a summer festival in Deva . 
 In 1988 @-@ 1989 , upon graduation , Pascu taught Romanian language and literature at a primary school in <unk> , <unk> County , but gave up to pursue his singing career . Late in 1989 , he was in <unk> , where he met Mircea Baniciu , former member of Romania 's leading rock band <unk> Phoenix . He was a guest in Baniciu 's home just as the anti @-@ communist Revolution erupted in Timişoara . He rejoined Divertis in Iaşi , but their scheduled show there was broken up by the communist authorities . 
 With the end of communism , Pascu diversified his career as an entertainer . After performing a solo music recital in February 1990 , he renewed his contract with Divertis , and toured the country with them . Later that year , Divertis performed for the first time in a series of comedy shows airing on Romanian Television channels . The group worked with filmmaker and Traffic Police officer Virgil <unk> , adding comedy bits to his serialized road safety campaign , <unk> <unk> ( " Roadside Reflections " ) . From December 1990 to 1992 , Pascu was employed as a program editor by the same station . 
 In 1992 , with Mircea Rusu , Pascu released the extended play recording Ar <unk> fi ( " It Could Be " ) . In partnership with his girlfriend Daniela Marin , he founded Tempo Music , which claimed to be Romania 's first independent music label . Pascu also founded his own band , The Blue Workers . 
 = = = First musical and comedic hits = = = 
 Pascu recalled that during the 1990s , Divertis had to perform dozens of consecutive encores while on tour , which interfered with the group 's regular Twin Peaks viewing parties . According to <unk> newspaper , Pascu 's activity with Divertis turned him into " one of the most popular figures in homegrown comedy " . In his 2006 interview with <unk> Veche , Divertis founder Toni Grecu recalled that Pascu was notable as the only group member not born in the historical region of Moldavia . 
 In 1993 , Pascu experienced his first significant success in music with the album Mixed Grill and the single " Ţara <unk> şi <unk> se <unk> " ( " The Country Is Burning and Old Women Are <unk> Their Hair " , referencing a Romanian proverb ) . A poll conducted by the journal <unk> <unk> nominated the track as the best song of 1993 , and the nationwide station Radio Contact awarded Pascu its " Composer of the Year " title . Mixed Grill marked Pascu 's brief experimentation with a fusion of rock and reggae . Hits such as " <unk> " and " Mi @-@ am <unk> <unk> " ( " I Got Me a <unk> " ) led some to consider him one of the pioneers of Romanian reggae , years ahead of acts like El Negro and Pacha Man . The mix of genres became characteristic of Pascu 's work in music : " When I was writing records , I figured that , should someone , say , be playing my record at a party , they would have several kinds to choose from , and they would not grow bored . But it 's not because of that , I think that 's how inspiration visits me , that this is how I write . I won 't stick to any one musical genre . " In addition to the piano , guitar and drums , Pascu also began playing the harmonica . 
 Soon after marrying Daniela Marin in August 1993 , Pascu was invited by director Lucian Pintilie to star in his film An Unforgettable Summer , alongside Kristin Scott Thomas , Claudiu Bleonţ and Marcel <unk> . Pascu , who referred to filming on location as his mock @-@ honeymoon , received good reviews for his performance . 
 Over the following years , Pascu and The Blue Workers released two EPs , the rhythm and blues record Maşina cu jazzolină ( " The <unk> Engine " ) and Caseta pentru <unk> , <unk> şi <unk> ( " The Cassette for the Mind , Heart and Mouth " ) . Pascu also appeared on a number of comedy recordings released by Divertis , earning Pascu the reputation of a protest song writer . He was inspired by Romanian politics and the social debates of the 1990s to write hits like " <unk> românesc " ( " The Romanian Carrot " ) and " <unk> " ( " The Plumber " ) . Pascu acknowledged his political streak , recognized what he considered the necessary link between social phenomena and a songwriter 's cultural perspective , and argued that songs should always tell a story . One of the parody songs included on Maşina cu jazzolină , titled " Africa , Africa " , drew special interest in cultural circles with its satirical undertones . The lyrics suggested that modern Romania was no better than the average African nation . According to historian Sorin <unk> , " Africa , Africa " showed " the Romanians ' tendency to relate to extra @-@ European realities " , a trend he observed during Ceauşescu 's final decade , and then throughout the early post @-@ revolutionary period . 
 In 1995 , after a series of festivals where he sang together with The Blue Workers , Pascu had a solo recital at Braşov 's Golden Stag Festival , and was awarded the Best Album trophy by the music magazine <unk> <unk> , for Maşina cu jazzolină . He was also the opening act for Western rock groups touring Romania : the British bands Jethro Tull , Beats International and Asia , and Germany 's Scorpions . As a television actor , Pascu was also taking part in the development of Romania 's advertising industry . He is chiefly remembered in pop culture as the spokesman for Connex , one of the first mobile phone operators in Romania , with the catchphrase Alo , Maria ? ( " Hello , Maria ? " ) . 
 In February 1997 , Pascu released the album <unk> <unk> ( " Innocent Thoughts " ) . According to his website , it can be considered as Pascu 's " first less commercial record . " Pascu 's daughter , Ana <unk> , was born later in the same month . 
 After 1997 , Pascu prioritized his activity as a music promoter and producer . Between 1998 and 2000 , he and his wife helped launch successful pop and alternative rock acts such as Vama Veche , <unk> Pogany and Dinu <unk> . After releasing the song collection <unk> lui Gyuri ( " Gyuri 's Stories " ) in 1999 , he gave up music , stating that he had become disenchanted with newer pop trends , but returned in 2000 with a limited @-@ release record titled <unk> ( <unk> de <unk> ) , " Leave It ( Home Music ) " . As stated on his website , the record registered success with " his closest fans " and with members of the Romanian @-@ American community . 
 = = = From Occident to Felix şi Otilea = = = 
 Also in 2000 , Pascu began working with filmmaker Cristian Mungiu . He wrote the soundtrack to Mungiu 's short film Zapping and appeared with Mircea Diaconu in Mungiu 's medium @-@ length film <unk> <unk> . They collaborated in Occident , which featured music composed by Pascu and his supporting role as " <unk> " , opposite Alexandru Papadopol ( " Luci " ) . This contribution earned Pascu critical accolades . Film critic Alex . Leo Şerban referred to Pascu 's " memorable " performance as Papadopol 's " cynical , good for all neighbor " , and cultural journalist Eugenia Vodă suggested that the " authentic by definition " Pascu added " diaphanous touches " to Mungiu 's black comedy . 
 Two years after Occident 's premiere , Pascu released the album <unk> de a visa ( " The Left to Dream " ) , which was less of a commercial success and as Pascu noted , was inconsistent with the editorial policies of commercial radio . According to his website , it was not promoted by the mainstream radio stations , and sold most of its copies during live performances . In a 2009 interview , Pascu argued , " Every time I had songs to pitch , [ the stations ] would say : ' they 're good , but they don 't fit in with our policies . ' [ ... ] If commercial radio stations were to count , I haven 't had put out a record since 1993 . " He also thanked the file sharing community for circulating copies of his music , even though he lost some royalties . Pascu voiced his opposition to the singing competitions phenomenon , stating that as a one @-@ time member of the Mamaia Festival jury , he had a " bittersweet " experience of Romanian pop politics . 
 Pascu toured the country to mark the celebration of his 20th year in music , mostly performing in provincial clubs . He continued to give occasional concerts ( including as an opening act for Italian singer Albano <unk> in Arad ) , and starting in 2003 , hosted the musical talk show Taverna on the national television channel , TVR 1 . With Divertis , Pascu became a co @-@ host of a regular comedy program on Antena 1 , which filmed on location in the United States . He had a recurring sketch on the show titled Felix şi Otilea ( " Felix and Otilea " ) , opposite female pop singers Monica Anghel and Jojo , and comedians Cătălin <unk> and Daniel <unk> . He was a voice actor on <unk> Planet , a cartoon show produced by Divertis for Antena 1 . For these contributions , Pascu was designated " the best comedian of 2003 " in a TVR 1 poll . 
 He released the solo albums O <unk> ( " A Star " ) and <unk> de @-@ a <unk> ( " Pretending to Play " ) , both in 2004 . In July 2005 , he was invited to sing Brazil 's National Anthem at an exhibition soccer match between the 1994 World Cup @-@ winning Brazilian squad and the Romanian team . The same year , he released a greatest hits record , titled 12 ani , 12 <unk> ( " 12 Years , 12 Ballads " ) . Pascu reunited with The Blue Workers for a 2005 nationwide tour and a 2006 performance at the Children 's Palace in Bucharest . They appeared at <unk> festival in <unk> , which celebrated ethnic minorities and the practice of toleration . 
 Pascu parted with Divertis in 2007 . At the time , he indicated that he could no longer handle their tight schedule . The break was not total , though , since Pascu continued to appear on <unk> Planet . In a 2007 interview , reflecting on that show 's impact , he stated , " I 'm not much of a fan of political humor . I simply like the impromptu kind of humor [ ... ] . If [ the joke ] happens to be political , it is because that is what we have to do in this series . " In 2012 , he asserted that his break with political humor was definitive , and against the consensus in Divertis — in 2007 , Pascu noted there was already a disagreement between him and Toni Grecu . Shortly after his departure , a conflict between Grecu and the other Divertis actors broke Divertis into competing halves . 
 Pascu released the album La <unk> <unk> ( " Halfway through Life " ) at Cluj @-@ Napoca recital , in November 2007 . He resumed his stage career during this time as well . In spring 2007 , he starred as <unk> <unk> in an adaption of Caragiale 's O noapte <unk> , commemorating the 130th anniversary of the play 's first public performance . Pascu appeared in Marius Barna 's documentary film Utopia <unk> ( " Forced Utopia " ) , which investigated ordinary life in Communist Romania , with singer Dan <unk> , literary critic Ion Bogdan <unk> , actor @-@ politician Mircea Diaconu , and historian Marius <unk> . 
 = = = Writing debut and Pro TV projects = = = 
 At the age of forty , Pascu began publishing Christian literature , specializing in essays about mysticism . When asked about his beliefs , he declared himself inspired by the Orthodox priest <unk> Boca and Bulgarian @-@ born New Age mystic <unk> <unk> <unk> . In 2007 , he said , " We must understand that our destiny , our earthly road , is that of rebuilding the connection with Divinity , with God . " Although an Orthodox , Pascu went on pilgrimage to the Roman Catholic Sanctuary of Our Lady of Lourdes . 
 Pascu was also asked to appear in a Hungarian @-@ produced film , in the role of a Romanian Police officer , and starred in a stage production of Eugène Ionesco 's Le <unk> . He had cameos in television commercials and wrote sports columns in periodicals , including the leisure magazine Time Out Bucharest . In the 2008 @-@ 2009 season , he played Chief Inspector Fane <unk> in Vine <unk> ! , a comedy series produced by Pro TV and based on Spain 's Los Hombres de Paco . Television critic Cezar Paul @-@ <unk> called it a " catastrophic " failure . 
 In April 2009 , Pascu provided the comedic <unk> at <unk> Awards Gala , but his performance received mixed reviews . Three months later , he was the opening act for American folk artist Suzanne Vega at her Bucharest show . Pascu noted that he had honored the invitation only after consulting with his daughter , a Vega fan , and that he adapted his electric guitar songs to the " unplugged " setting , playing the mandolin . 
 In autumn , he reunited with most of his Divertis colleagues after they moved from Antena 1 to Pro TV . He appeared in a Metropolis Theater production of The Lower Depths by Maxim Gorky , with veteran Ştefan <unk> in the lead role . The play opened to good reviews , and Pascu 's presence , along with that of other comedic actors ( Alexandru <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) , was considered an unusual directorial touch to Gorky 's tragedy . Pascu and his Blue Workers performed at the Sibiu Jazz Festival . Late in 2009 , Pascu and his wife agreed to a divorce . 
 In April 2010 , Pascu sparked criticism in the media when he agreed to perform at a Timişoara rally of Gregorian <unk> 's Yoga movement ( MISA ) . <unk> 's legal troubles and allegations regarding MISA 's sexual policies were the center of public debates ; when contacted by reporters , Pascu stressed that it was a regular gig and stated , " Those people have never harmed me and I have no reason to be avoiding their company . " Pascu 's activities for that year included other live concerts , including one held during the <unk> event of June . In November , he was a guest at the Mircea Baniciu tribute concert , entertaining the public with musical impressions of folk singers Nicu <unk> and Victor <unk> , and performing <unk> <unk> classics . Pascu also purchased his own drinking establishment and live music venue , a Bucharest tavern he named Gyuri 's Pub , which hosted performances by the Moldovan folk singer Radu <unk> . A collaborator of Pascu on solo music projects during spring 2010 , <unk> sang and played the guitar while riding a horse . 
 = = = 2010 stroke and Divertis split = = = 
 In late 2010 , it was reported that Pascu had suffered a stroke and was recovering at the University Hospital of Bucharest . Romania 's media speculated that the stroke was caused by the stress of his divorce , although Pascu had stated that the separation was amiable . His career was jeopardized by the stroke , so Pascu decided to quit drinking alcohol . Pascu resumed artistic life , studying for the part of <unk> in Victor Ion Popa 's comedy Take , <unk> and <unk> . The production went on a tour of Romanian theaters in the early months of 2011 . 
 Pascu returned to Land of Jokes , the comedic series produced by one half of Divertis for Pro TV , where he played the lead character <unk> ( a spoof on Highlander : The Series ) . His return highlighted the conflict between Toni Grecu , who was producing a political comedy show for the same station , and the less politicized Land of Jokes . In June 2011 , Pascu and the other Land of Jokes comedians announced that their split with Divertis was final , and that their contract with Pro TV had reached an end . In an interview with Adevărul daily , the freelance comedians announced that they were considering other offers ; Pascu criticized Pro TV 's focus on producing talent shows . Pascu later acknowledged that he strongly disliked Pro TV features such as Romania 's Got Talent , even though his daughter <unk> appeared on it as part of a gospel music ensemble . 
 The new comedy troupe took the name <unk> , since " the Land of Jokes brand was left with Pro TV " , and in August 2011 , signed with TVR 1 . Media analyst Iulian <unk> stated about the move , " The [ <unk> ] program managed a fifth place in ratings . It is the beginning of the end for one of the most upright and best loved brands in Romanian television . " 
 In October 2011 , Pascu returned to Cluj @-@ Napoca as a celebrity host for the inauguration of Cluj Arena , home ground of the soccer club Universitatea . He traveled to Seattle and performed at a fund @-@ raiser for a new Romanian Orthodox cultural center in America . In early 2012 , he centered his musical activity on Suceava County , working with local singer @-@ songwriter Lian <unk> . Their collaboration resulted in the ballad album Tropa , Tropa ... € <unk> ! , released on January 20 at Câmpulung <unk> , where Pascu and The Blue Workers performed a concert . Pascu appeared with his Occident colleague Mircea Diaconu on the short film Loto , playing the role of a car salesman . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Ar <unk> fi ( EP , 1992 ) 
 Mixed Grill ( studio album , 1993 ) 
 Maşina cu jazzolină ( studio album , 1994 ) 
 <unk> pentru <unk> , <unk> şi <unk> ( studio album , 1996 ) 
 <unk> <unk> ( studio album , 1997 ) 
 <unk> ( <unk> de <unk> ) ( studio album , 2000 ) 
 <unk> de a visa ( studio album , 2002 ) 
 <unk> o <unk> ( studio album , 2003 ) 
 <unk> de @-@ a <unk> ( studio album , 2004 ) 
 12 ani , 12 <unk> ( greatest hits album , 2005 ) 
 La <unk> <unk> ( studio album , 2007 ) 
 Tropa , Tropa ... € <unk> ! ( with Lian <unk> ; studio album , 2012 ) 
 = Open House ( Breaking Bad ) = 
 " Open House " is the third episode of the fourth season of the American television drama series Breaking Bad , and the 36th overall episode of the series . It originally aired on AMC in the United States on July 31 , 2011 . In the episode , Walter and Skyler advance their plans to buy a car wash as a front organization , while Jesse holds increasingly darker parties to distract from his guilt for having killed Gale . Meanwhile , Marie starts stealing to cope with the difficult recovery of her husband Hank , who is asked to offer his advice regarding Gale 's murder investigation . 
 The episode was written by Sam Catlin and directed by filmmaker David Slade , marking his first time directing for television . It featured guest appearances by Nigel Gibbs and stand @-@ up comedian Bill Burr , the latter of whom specifically sought to appear on the show . The footage shown from the first @-@ person perspective of Gus ' camera is actual footage from the real camera . Marie 's return to the kleptomania she demonstrated in the first season was conceived early during brainstorming sessions for the third season . 
 Breaking Bad music supervisor Thomas Golubić sought to select music for Jesse 's party sequences appropriate for the dark tone of the scenes , including the song " If I Had a Heart " by Swedish musician Fever Ray . " Open House " was viewed by an estimated 1 @.@ 714 million viewers and received a 0 @.@ 7 Nielsen rating among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . The episode received generally positive reviews . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode begins as Walt furiously notices a motion @-@ detecting surveillance camera that has been installed in the lab . Later that day , Skyler convinces Walt in a meeting with Saul to buy the car wash by mentioning how the owner insulted his manhood . She devises a plan to trick the owner into selling by having a con artist ( supplied by Saul ) pretend to be a water @-@ tester who is shutting down the business out of concerns over contaminants . The owner promptly sells to her , agreeing to an even lower price than her original offer . Jesse is still feeling numb from recent events , attempting to clear his head with nostalgic go @-@ kart trips . He continues to open his house up for all @-@ night drug @-@ fueled orgies , deliberately throwing piles of money in the midst of the chaos . Angry and frustrated by Hank 's continuous cold shoulder , Marie resumes her kleptomania ; she starts stealing objects from real @-@ estate open houses , where she also makes up elaborate stories about who she is , but is eventually caught by a real @-@ estate agent . A livid Hank pulls strings with a senior police officer to get her out of being charged . The same officer drops by the Schrader residence to seek Hank 's help by giving him Gale 's lab notes to look at . Hank initially shoves away the notebook , but begins to read it later that night . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Open House " was written by Sam Catlin and directed by David Slade , marking his first time directing for television . Slade was a fan of Breaking Bad and sought to direct an episode of the show . Filmed in February 2011 , the episode was edited by Skip MacDonald , one of a handful of editors who have regularly worked on the series . Nigel Gibbs reprised his role as detective Tim Roberts , whom he portrayed in the second season episode " Grilled " . Stand @-@ up comedian Bill Burr made a guest appearance as the man who poses as an environmental inspector for Skyler . Burr was cast after he expressed interest in appearing on the show to Breaking Bad extras casting directors Sharon <unk> and Sherry Thomas . Series creator Vince Gilligan said , " We just waste so much time here in the writer 's room by getting on YouTube and watching some of his routines . " Stand @-@ up comedian Lavell Crawford reprised his recurring role as Huell , Saul 's bodyguard , and Jennifer Hasty also made a guest appearance as Stephanie Doswell , the realtor who exposes Marie 's thefts . 
 Although credited Giancarlo Esposito does not appear . 
 The concept of Gus installing a surveillance camera into the meth lab stemmed from the idea of Walter and Gus employing what Gilligan called " brinkmanship and gamesmanship " against each other after their falling out at the end of the third season . Gilligan commented : " What 's one way Gus can amp up the story there ? How can he mess with Walt 's head a little bit ? " The footage shown from the first @-@ person perspective of the camera is actual footage from the real camera , including the numbers shown at the top and bottom of the screen . This is why that shot is shown in <unk> and in lower quality than the rest of the episode , which was shot in 35 mm film . The episode features a subplot with Marie engaging in acts of kleptomania , which had been a major part of her character during the first season . Catlin said it was conceived early on that Marie would act this way while brainstorming the ideas for Marie coping with Hank 's difficult recovery . Gilligan described Marie 's acts of stealing as a respite for her : " She 's looking for another life , but she 's not actively ready to leave her husband or anything like that . ... We liked the quirkiness of it . " Betsy Brandt said " Open House " was her favorite episode of the season to shoot . 
 The idea of Jesse riding go @-@ karts by himself to relax was inspired by Aaron Paul and other crew members who often went kart racing between filming of Breaking Bad episodes in Albuquerque , New Mexico . During one of the party scenes at Jesse 's house , Jesse keeps throwing crumpled dollar bills at the mouth of a sleeping man wearing a dress shirt and tie with no pants until he finally gets one inside his mouth . Catlin thought of the idea , and it was property master Trina <unk> actually throwing the bills off @-@ screen ; she got one into the actor 's mouth on her second try . The scenes in Jesse 's house were shot on a set in a sound stage built by production designer Mark Freeborn and construction coordinator William Gilpin . Although scenes in Jesse 's house are occasionally filmed in an actual house , these particular scenes could not be shot there because the party was so messy . 
 The party scenes sought to illustrate Jesse 's internal guilt and self @-@ hatred for having murdered Gale Boetticher in the third season finale , " Full Measure " . Bryan Cranston praised these scenes , saying , " I thought it was a great way to show a person going through a private hell . That everybody suffers , deals with their own personal loss in many different ways . " Although the previous episode , " Thirty @-@ Eight Snub " , also featured similar party scenes , the party was much darker and more decrepit in " Open House " , and Breaking Bad music supervisor Thomas Golubic tried to select music appropriate for that darker tone . Originally he tried using variations of punk rock , hip hop and dubstep , but felt it was inappropriate and wanted something that " deeper into Jesse 's headspace " . He chose the song " If I Had a Heart " by Swedish musician Fever Ray which was used during a sequence of scenes before and during Jesse 's party . Golubic said he liked the " muted loud sort of feel " of the song , which he felt matched Jesse 's frame of mind and the " full , heavy darkness " of the party . It was chosen by a vote among the writers among four possible songs . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Open House " aired on Sunday , July 31 , 2011 on AMC . The episode was viewed by an estimated 1 @.@ 714 million viewers and received a 0 @.@ 7 Nielsen rating among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 0 @.@ 7 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . The episode was the 22nd highest rated program on the day it aired . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received positive reviews . Alan Sepinwall of HitFix said he was particularly interested in the Marie and Jesse characters this episode , and called it a credit to the show 's evolution that the supporting cast subplots can be so interesting without Walt . He also praised David Slade 's direction , particularly during the <unk> in Jesse 's scenes . Seth Amitin of IGN called it a " great episode " and an improvement over the previous two , " Box Cutter " and " Thirty @-@ Eight Snub " . He praised the way Skyler 's character proved herself to both Walter and Saul , and praised Betsy Brandt 's performance , claiming her subplot provided much @-@ needed comic relief and reminded him of the works of David Sedaris . Entertainment Weekly writer Melissa Maerz praised the development of Skyler 's character and said the episode touched upon a common theme in Breaking Bad about masculinity . With Skyler asserting herself in Walter 's work , and Hank taking out his insecurities about being disabled on Marie , Maerz said the script raises the question , " What does it mean to be a strong man ? " Los Angeles Times writer Todd VanDerWerff called it " one of the best episodes this show has ever done " , despite diverting the attention from Walter to the support cast members . VanDerWerff said the episode well demonstrated how Walter 's actions affected others around him and said Marie 's character was more interesting than in the past . 
 Matt Richenthal of TV Fanatic complimented the performances by Betsy Brandt and Aaron Paul , and said of the latter , " Seriously , does any actor on TV convey more by saying less than Aaron Paul ? " He also compared Skyler 's increasingly calculated approach to Walter 's drug dealing to Gus ' personality . New York magazine writer Logan Hill praised Brandt 's performance and said it was interesting to see an episode so focused on Skyler and Marie on a show usually dominated by the male characters . However , he said Skyler 's transformation from concerned wife to competent criminal partner felt too sudden . Not all reviews were positive . Slate writers June Thomas and Jessica Grose both enjoyed Marie in " Open House " , but both felt the scenes at Jesse 's house were too over @-@ the @-@ top and that Skyler 's concerns about Walter 's safety seemed out of character . 
 = German destroyer Z10 Hans Lody = 
 Z10 Hans Lody was a Type 1934A @-@ class destroyer built for Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine in the mid @-@ 1930s . At the beginning of World War II on 1 September 1939 , the ship was initially deployed to blockade the Polish coast , but she was quickly transferred to the North Sea to lay defensive minefields . In late 1939 the ship laid multiple offensive minefields off the English coast that claimed nine merchant ships and she crippled a British a destroyer during one of these missions . 
 Hans Lody was under repair for most of the Norwegian Campaign and was transferred to France in late 1940 where she participated in several engagements with British ships , crippling another destroyer . The ship returned to Germany in late 1940 for a refit and was transferred to Norway in June 1941 as part of the preparations for Operation Barbarossa , the German invasion of the Soviet Union . Hans Lody spent some time at the beginning of the campaign conducting anti @-@ shipping patrols in Soviet waters , but these were generally fruitless . She escorted a number of German convoys in the Arctic later in the year before returning to Germany in September for machinery repairs . 
 The ship returned to Norway in mid @-@ 1942 , but was badly damaged when she ran aground in July and did not return until April 1943 . Hans Lody participated in the German attack ( Operation Zitronella ) on the Norwegian island of Spitzbergen , well north of the Arctic Circle and then spent the next six months on convoy duties in southern Norway . The ship began a lengthy refit in April 1944 and was not operational for the next year . She spent April 1945 escorting convoys in Danish waters before making one voyage to rescue refugees in East Prussia in May . Hans Lody was assigned to the Royal Navy after the war and used as a training ship and then a barracks ship before being broken up for scrap in 1949 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Z10 Hans Lody had an overall length of 119 meters ( 390 ft 5 in ) and was 114 meters ( 374 ft 0 in ) long at the waterline . The ship had a beam of 11 @.@ 30 meters ( 37 ft 1 in ) , and a maximum draft of 4 @.@ 23 meters ( 13 ft 11 in ) . She displaced 2 @,@ 171 long tons ( 2 @,@ 206 t ) at standard load and 3 @,@ 110 long tons ( 3 @,@ 160 t ) at deep load . The two Wagner geared steam turbine sets , each driving one propeller shaft , were designed to produce 70 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 51 @,@ 000 kW ; 69 @,@ 000 shp ) using steam provided by six high @-@ pressure Wagner boilers . The ship had a designed speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) and she reached a maximum speed of 37 @.@ 8 knots from 65 @,@ 000 shp ( 48 @,@ 000 kW ) during her sea trials . Hans Lody carried a maximum of 752 metric tons ( 740 long tons ) of fuel oil which was intended to give a range of 4 @,@ 400 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 100 km ; 5 @,@ 100 mi ) at a speed of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) , but the ship proved top @-@ heavy in service and 30 % of the fuel had to be retained as ballast low in the ship . The effective range proved to be only 1 @,@ 530 nmi ( 2 @,@ 830 km ; 1 @,@ 760 mi ) at 19 knots . The crew numbered 10 officers and 315 enlisted men , plus an additional four officers and 19 enlisted men if serving as a flotilla flagship . 
 The ship carried five 12 @.@ 7 @-@ centimeter ( 5 in ) SK C / 34 guns in single mounts with gun shields , two each superimposed , fore and aft . The fifth gun was carried on top of the aft superstructure . Her anti @-@ aircraft armament consisted of four 3 @.@ 7 @-@ centimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) SK C / 30 guns in two twin mounts abreast the rear funnel and six 2 @-@ centimeter ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) C / 30 guns in single mounts . Hans Lody carried eight above @-@ water 53 @.@ 3 @-@ centimeter ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes in two power @-@ operated mounts . A pair of reload torpedoes were provided for each mount . Four depth charge throwers were mounted on the sides of the rear deckhouse and they were supplemented by six racks for individual depth charges on the sides of the stern . Enough depth charges were carried for either two or four patterns of 16 charges each . Mine rails could be fitted on the rear deck that had a maximum capacity of 60 mines . A system of passive hydrophones designated as ' GHG ' ( Gruppenhorchgerät ) was fitted to detect submarines and the S @-@ Gerät active sonar system was scheduled to be installed during February 1940 . 
 During the war the ship 's light anti @-@ aircraft armament was augmented several times . In 1941 , improved 2 cm C / 38 guns replaced the original C / 30 guns and three additional guns were added . The two guns on the aft shelter deck were replaced at some point by a single 2 cm quadruple Flakvierling mount , probably in 1942 . During her 1944 – 45 refit , Hans Lody received the " Barbara " anti @-@ aircraft refit in which all of her existing 3 @.@ 7 cm and most of her 2 cm guns were replaced . She retained her Flakvierling mount and the remainder of her anti @-@ aircraft armament now consisted of seven twin 3 @.@ 7 cm SK M / 42 mounts and three twin 2 cm mounts . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Z10 Hans Lody , named after naval reservist Carl Hans Lody who was executed by the British as a spy during World War I , was ordered on 4 August 1934 and laid down at Germaniawerft , Kiel on 1 April 1935 as yard number <unk> . She was launched on 14 May 1936 and completed on 13 September 1938 . The destroyer was assigned to the 8th Destroyer Division ( 8 . Zerstörerdivision ) upon completion and participated in the homecoming celebrations for the Condor Legion on 30 May 1939 under her first commander , Lieutenant Commander ( Korvettenkapitän ) Karl @-@ <unk> von Puttkamer . 
 When World War II began in September 1939 , Hans Lody was initially deployed in the Baltic to operate against the Polish Navy and to enforce a blockade of Poland , but she was soon transferred to the German Bight where she joined her sisters in laying defensive minefields . While loading mines on 4 September , one exploded aboard Hans Lody , killing two crewmen and wounded six others , and slightly damaging the ship 's stern . The ship later patrolled the Skagerrak to inspect neutral shipping for contraband goods , losing one man overboard and three injured during a storm at the end of October . On the night of 18 / 19 November , Commander ( Fregattenkapitän ) Erich Bey , in his flagship Z15 Erich Steinbrinck , led Z16 Friedrich Eckoldt and Hans Lody , in laying a minefield off the Humber Estuary that claimed another seven ships of 38 @,@ 710 Gross Register Tons ( GRT ) , including the Polish ocean liner M / S Piłsudski of 14 @,@ 294 GRT . 
 Bey , now using Hans Lody as his flagship , left port on the morning of 6 December with Z12 Erich Giese and Z11 Bernd von Arnim to lay a minefield off Cromer . The latter ship had severe boiler problems and was ordered to return to port in the late afternoon while the other two continued their mission . They spotted several darkened ships as they approached their destination , including the destroyers HMS Juno and HMS Jersey , but were not spotted in return . As the two German destroyers withdrew after having laid their mines , they spotted the two British destroyers again at a range of 8 @,@ 000 meters ( 8 @,@ 700 yd ) and closed to attack . When the range dropped to 4 @,@ 600 meters ( 5 @,@ 000 yd ) , Lody fired three torpedoes at Juno , the leading British ship , while Giese fired four at Jersey . None of Lody 's torpedoes struck their target , but one of Giese 's hit Jersey abreast her aft torpedo mount . The torpedo detonated in an oil fuel tank and started a major fire . Neither British ship spotted the German destroyers and they continued on while Juno turned about to help her sister . Two British ships totalling 5 @,@ 286 GRT were sunk by this minefield . Hans Lody began a refit at Wesermünde on 9 December that was not finished until 22 May 1940 . 
 In June Hans Lody was tasked to escort the battleships Scharnhorst and Gneisenau , as well as the heavy cruiser Admiral Hipper , in Operation Juno , a planned attack on Harstad , Norway , to relieve pressure on the German garrison at Narvik . The ships sortied on 8 June and sank the troop transport Orama , the oil tanker Oil Pioneer and the minesweeping trawler Juniper en route , Hans Lody delivering the coup de grâce on the first two of these . The German commander , Admiral Wilhelm Marschall , then ordered the Admiral Hipper and all four destroyers to Trondheim because of the heavy weather , where they arrived in the morning of 9 June . The two battleships continued the sortie and sank the aircraft carrier Glorious and her two escorting destroyers , although Scharnhorst was badly damaged by a torpedo from the destroyer Acasta in the engagement . The battleship was escorted home by Hans Lody and her sisters Steinbrinck and Z7 Hermann Schoemann for repairs . The destroyer was lightly damaged during an air raid on 13 June , but was back in service a week later . She returned to Norway in time to screen the crippled Gneisenau as she returned to Kiel on 25 July , suffering a minor collision with the battleship en route . 
 Hans Lody transferred to France on 9 September in preparation for Operation Sealion , the planned invasion of Great Britain . Now based at Brest , the ship helped to lay a minefield in Falmouth Bay during the night of 28 / 29 September . Five ships totalling only 2 @,@ 026 GRT were sunk by this minefield . During a Royal Air Force air raid on Brest on 10 October , Hans Lody was slightly damaged by bomb splinters and strafing , losing two crewmen killed and seven wounded during the attack . Bey led Hans Lody and four other destroyers during a sortie for the Southwest Approaches on 17 October and were intercepted by a British force of two light cruisers and five destroyers . The British opened fire at extreme range and were forced to disengage in the face of long @-@ range torpedo volleys and attacks by Luftwaffe bombers without having hit any of the German ships . On the night of 24 – 25 November , Hans Lody and the destroyers Z4 Richard Beitzen and Z20 Karl Galster sortied from Brest , bound for the Land 's End area . En route they encountered some fishing ships south @-@ west of Wolf Rock and engaged them with gunfire with little effect . The German ships then spotted a small convoy and sank one of the three merchantmen and damaged another . The flash from the guns alerted the five destroyers of the British 5th Destroyer Flotilla , but they could not intercept the German destroyers before dawn . Three nights later the German ship sortied again for the same area . They encountered two tugboats and a barge , but only sank one of the former and the barge , totaling 424 GRT . This time the 5th Destroyer Flotilla was able to intercept around 06 : 30 on 29 November . The Germans opened fire first , each destroyer firing four torpedoes , of which only two from Hans Lody hit their target , HMS Javelin . The torpedoes hit at each end of the ship and blew off her bow and stern , but the British were able to tow her home . Hans Lody was hit by two 2 @-@ pounder ( 40 mm ) shells during the engagement , but suffered no casualties . The ship returned home on 5 December for a refit in Wesermünde that lasted until April 1941 . 
 = = = 1941 – 42 = = = 
 She was one of the escorts for the battleship Bismarck and the heavy cruiser Prinz Eugen from Cape Arkona to Trondheim on 19 – 22 May as they sortied into the North Atlantic . The following month , Hans Lody escorted the heavy cruiser Lützow from Kiel to Norway as the latter ship attempted to break through the British blockade . Several Bristol Beaufort aircraft spotted Lützow and her escorts en route and one managed to surprise the ships and torpedo the cruiser early on the morning of 13 June , forcing her to return to Germany for repairs . She was then sent to Kirkenes , Norway in July 1941 . Now a part of the 6th Destroyer Flotilla ( 6 . Zerstörer @-@ Flottille ) , she participated in a sortie on 12 – 13 July that sank two small Soviet ships at the cost of expending 80 % of their ammunition . Her participation in another sortie on 22 July had to be cancelled due to condenser problems . When the British aircraft carriers Victorious and Furious attacked Petsamo and Kirkenes on 29 July , the destroyers were far to the east and could not catch the British ships before they left the area . The German destroyers sortied into the Kola Inlet on 9 August where they sank one small Soviet patrol vessel . The flotilla was now assigned to escort convoys between <unk> and Kirkenes ; during one of these missions , the submarine Trident sank two troop @-@ carrying freighters , Bahia Laura and Donau II despite the destroyers . Hans Lody depth @-@ charged Trident without significant effect and rescued 38 survivors from the two ships . The ship departed for Germany for repairs to her boilers on 27 September . 
 After repairs were completed , she screened the heavy cruiser Lützow during her voyage to Trondheim 15 – 20 May 1942 and laid a minefield in the Skaggerak en route . Hans Lody was damaged when a valve was left open and flooded the starboard engine room in early June and required two weeks to be repaired . She was one of four destroyers assigned to escort the battleship Tirpitz during Operation Rösselsprung ( Knight 's Move ) , an attack on the Russia @-@ bound Convoy PQ 17 . The ships sailed from Trondheim on 2 July for the first stage of the operation , although three of the destroyers , including Hans Lody , assigned to Tirpitz 's escort ran aground in the dark and heavy fog and were forced to return to port for repairs . After temporary repairs , she was towed back to Kiel for permanent repairs on 25 July . Three days later the ships were attacked without effect by three Beaufort torpedo bombers . Korvettenkapitän Karl @-@ Adolf Zenker assumed command in August . The dockyard estimated the time to repair Hans Lody at six months or more and the Kriegsmarine gave serious consideration to decommissioning her as uneconomical to repair , but was persuaded to repair her anyway . 
 = = = 1943 – 49 = = = 
