 During sea trials on 15 February 1943 , a fire broke out in an engine room ; repairs were not completed until 22 April and the ship then returned to Norway . In September the ship participated in Operation Zitronella , ferrying troops of the 349th Grenadier Regiment ( Grenadier @-@ Regiment ) of the 230th Infantry Division to destroy Norwegian facilities on the island of Spitzbergen , together with Tirpitz and the battleship Scharnhorst , escorted by eight other destroyers . While successful , the operation was primarily intended to boost the morale of the ships stationed in the Arctic when fuel shortages limited their activities and the Allies reestablished the bases five weeks later . Hans Lody and her sisters then spent the next six months in southern Norway laying minefields at the entrance to the Skaggerak and escorting convoys to and from Norway . She was ordered to Kiel at the end of April 1944 for a lengthy refit that lasted until February 1945 . After working up , the ship was assigned convoy escort duties in the Skaggerak on 5 April . A month later , Hans Lody departed Copenhagen to load refugees at the Hela Peninsula in East Prussia ; she had about 1 @,@ 500 aboard when she returned on 7 May . The ship sailed to Kiel the next day and was decommissioned on 9 May . 
 The Royal Navy assumed control of her the following day and sailed her to Wilhelmshaven where she waited while the Allies decided on the disposition of the captured ships . She was allocated to Britain at the end of 1945 and arrived at Portsmouth on 7 January 1946 where she was allocated the pennant number of <unk> , later <unk> . The ship was initially used to familiarize the British on her high @-@ pressure boilers until October when she was used as accommodation ship in Southampton . Hans Lody was arrived at Sunderland under tow on 17 July 1949 to be broken up . 
 = Antankarana = 
 The Antankarana ( or Antakarana ) is an ethnic group of Madagascar that inhabits the northern tip of Madagascar around Antsiranana . Their name means " the people of the <unk> , " the limestone rock formations that distinguish their traditional territory . The <unk> of the Antankarana may be visited at the Ankarana Reserve . There are over 50 @,@ 000 Antakarana in Madagascar as of 2013 . 
 The Antankarana split off from the Sakalava in the early 17th century following a succession dispute . The group settled at the northern end of the island where they established sovereignty over and integrated the existing communities . During periods of conflict with Sakalava in the 17th century and the Kingdom of Imerina in the 19th century , the community periodically sought refuge in the natural stone shelters and caves of the modern Ankarana Reserve , eventually taking their name from the locale and holding it as sacred . In the early 19th century an Antankarana king signed a treaty with French envoys in Reunion that mobilized French troops to expel the Merina from Antankarana territory in exchange for French control over several small islands off Madagascar 's west coast . They also aided the French in staging attacks on the Merina monarchy that resulted in the 1896 French colonization of Madagascar . The Antankarana are one of the few communities that continues to honor a single king and reaffirm his sacred ancestral role through traditional ceremonies that date back centuries . 
 Culturally the Antankarana have many similarities with the neighboring Sakalava . They practice tromba ( ancestral spirit possession ) and believe in nature spirits . They adhere to a wide range of fady ( ancestral taboos ) , particularly including several that serve to protect wildlife and wilderness areas . The traditional economy of the Antankarana revolved around fishing and livestock , although more recently they have adopted farming ; many are salary earners working in civil administration , teaching , trade and other areas . 
 = = History = = 
 The Antankarana were originally a branch of the Sakalava royal line called the Zafin 'i'fotsy ( children of silver ) . This group split off from the Sakalava in the 16th century following a dispute with the Zafin <unk> ( children of gold ) that ended with the latter 's exclusive right to the kingship . Having been refused the right to the throne , the Zafin 'i'fotsy left the Sakalava homeland on the southwestern coast to settle just north of the boundaries of Sakalava control . The first Antankarana king , <unk> ( 1614 – 39 ) , claimed a large part of the island 's north as his territory , which he split into five provinces each ruled by one of his sons . This territory was rapidly reduced from the south by Zafin <unk> prince <unk> , who led violent campaigns into bordering Antankarana territory to expand the frontiers of what was to become the Sakalava Kingdom of Iboina at the end of the 17th century . Many Zafin 'i'fotsy nobles were killed or quickly surrendered to the advancing Sakalava armies , but oral history celebrates several who resisted , including <unk> , a descendent of <unk> . His son Andriantsirotso ( 1692 – 1710 ) founded the Antankarana kingdom , leading the Zafin 'i'fotsy further north into the area now protected as Ankarana Reserve and declaring his sovereignty over the north . He was accepted as king both by his own people and by the communities already living in the north , who united together under the name Antankarana ( people of the Ankarana rocks ) . The Sakalava warred with the nascent Antankarana kingdom in its continued effort to claim sovereignty over the territory , but the Antankarana hid themselves in natural shelters formed by the rocks and caves of Ankarana . Eventually they were forced to take refuge at Maroantsetra , a town ruled by a relative named <unk> ; Andriantsirotso was able to repel the Sakalava three years later with the support of <unk> 's soldiers . Throughout this period Andriantsirotso established the foundations for the kingdom by organizing military cooperation among clans , establishing an administration , developing economic regulations and introducing customs that reinforced a hierarchical social order . According to oral history , at the point when Andriantsirotso was preparing to return to his own capital , a mysterious eight @-@ year @-@ old girl named <unk> arrived in Maroantsetra . She revealed herself to be a sorceress and instructed Andriantsirotso on the rituals to perform en route to ensure his safe return and the establishment of a strong kingdom , including the continuing practice of tying a mat to two <unk> trees planted outside the king 's house to indicate a royal residence and symbolize the indivisibility of the kingdom . 
 From its founding , the Antankarana Kingdom was ruled by an unbroken series of nobles of Andriantsirotso 's line . He was succeeded by Lamboeny ( 1710 – 1790 ) , then <unk> ( 1790 – 1802 ) , <unk> ( 1802 – 1809 ) and Tsialana I ( 1809 – 1822 ) . The Kingdom of Imerina rapidly expanded over the first several decades of the 19th century , launching regular military campaigns to bring coastal communities under Merina control . As the Merina neared the Antankarana homeland they established posts along major trade routes where taxes were charged to Antankarana and other merchants , establishing economic control over the territory ; this was soon followed by the installation of Merina administrators to govern the territory . Tsialana I was forced to become a vassal of the Merina sovereign . From 1835 to 1837 , his son and successor , King Tsimiaro I ( 1822 – 1882 ) , made repeated attempts to expel the Merina from his territory , but was unsuccessful . The Merina backlash forced Tsimiaro to lead his people to refuge among the rocks of Ankarana in 1838 or 1837 , where they lived for over a year . During this time the king was betrayed by one of his own people and the group was surrounded by Merina soldiers . According to oral history , the king prayed for God 's help and swore that if they survived , the Antankarana would convert to Islam . Although many of his party were gunned down , the king and most of his subjects escaped to the island of Nosy Mitsio , where they converted ; many others were drowned in the attempt to cross . The site of the crossing is most commonly believed to be the village of <unk> <unk> , which retains a sacred character and has become a site of pilgrimage and ritual commemoration of the exodus . 
 In 1838 @-@ 9 an agreement was signed between the Sakalava king and <unk> Said , King of Zanzibar , to give Said control over the Sakalava and Antankarana kingdoms ; this agreement never came to the attention of Tsimiaro and resulted in no changes in governance on the ground . While in exile on Nosy Mitsio , Tsimiaro traveled to Ile Bourbon to conclude a treaty with the French on 5 April 1841 that guaranteed French protection for the Antankarana in exchange for rights to the islands of Nosy Mitsio , Nosy Faly , Nosy Be and Nosy Komba . The French intercession eventually repelled the Merina , allowing the king to reestablish the capital at Ambatoharaña , but more than 40 years passed before the entire Antankarana had permanently returned to the mainland . Upon his death , Tsimiaro was buried at his request in the Ankarana cave where he had taken refuge from the Merina . Other nobles are mainly entombed in the Islamic cemetery near Ambatoharaña . When the French agreed to recognize Malagasy sovereignty in 1862 , they retained their claimed right to the Antankarana and Sakalava protectorates they had established . Tsimiaro was succeeded by his son , Tsialana II , ( 1883 – 1924 ) who was born on Nosy Mitsio in 1843 . He collaborated with the French actively during their first expedition against the Merina ( 1883 – 85 ) , and again during the successful expedition of 1895 that ended in French colonization of the island and the dismantling of the Merina monarchy . His son <unk> would go on to fight on the side of the French during World War I. Tsialana II was succeeded by Lamboeny II ( 1925 – 1938 ) , Tsialana III ( 1948 – 1959 ) and Tsimiharo II ( 1959 – 1982 ) . 
 After Madagascar regained independence from France in 1960 its various administrations interfered little with the reign of Tsimiharo II or his successor Tsimiharo III ( 1983 – 2004 ) . This changed after the election of Albert Zafy ( 1991 – 96 ) , an Antankarana noble from the village of Ambilobe . Zafy sought to reduce the powers of King Tsimiharo III , who responded by " declaring war " against the new president . This standoff came to an end with the election of Zafy 's successor , Didier Ratsiraka , who returned to a policy of non @-@ interference in local governance traditions . Tsimiharo III was deposed in 2004 following allegations of corruption , and Lamboeny III was selected to succeed him . 
 = = Identity = = 
 There are 50 @,@ 000 Antakarana in Madagascar as of 2013 . They live in the northernmost part of the island , and claim Malagasy and Arab ancestry . They are an offshoot of the Sakalava people . Their territory begins at the northern tip of the island at Antsiranana and extends down the west coast , including the island of Nosy Mitsio . It is bounded to the east by the <unk> River and extends south to the village of <unk> . 
 = = Society = = 
 Although subject to all national laws and government , the Antakarana are also united in their recognition of the authority of a king ( <unk> ) who is the living descendent of a line of Antankarana royalty going back nearly four centuries . The authority of this king is reaffirmed every five years at the village of Ambatoharaña in a ritual mast @-@ raising ceremony called the <unk> . Although some accounts date the ritual back to the origins of Antankarana kingship , the specific features of the ceremony as practiced today are rooted in historical events of the 19th century . The ceremony includes a pilgrimage to Nosy Mitsio to commemorate the flight of Antankarana refugees to the island in the 1830s to escape the advancing armies of the Kingdom of Imerina and to visit the tombs of ancestors who died there ; until recently , it has sometimes also included raising both French and Antankarana banners to honor the 1841 treaty signed with the French . The king is selected by a council of elder members of the royal family in the ruling line . He is responsible for reciting <unk> ( ancestral invocations ) at ceremonies where the ancestors ' blessings are requested . Another important social role is that of the <unk> . The Antankarana community selects a single noble woman to hold this position , which has similar authority and importance to that of the king . She is not his wife ; rather , she has a separate leadership role to fulfill . The Antankarana are recognized among Malagasy as one of the few remaining ethnic groups in Madagascar that continues to reassert the ancestral authority of their king through continued practice of traditional kingship rituals . 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Antankarana homes are typically raised on stilts above ground level . Young men seeking to start a family typically leave their father 's house and build their own from wood and thatch gathered locally . After marrying a young woman will leave her family 's home to move into her husband 's house , where she manages the household and assists in planting and harvesting rice . The husband is responsible for earning money for basic necessities and farming the family 's land . A young couple typically receives furniture and other essentials as wedding gifts from friends , family and community members . Divorce and remarriage are common in Antankarana society . 
 = = = Class affiliation = = = 
 Like elsewhere in Madagascar , Antankarana society was traditionally divided into three classes : nobles , commoners and slaves . Slavery was abolished under the French colonial administration but families often retain their historic affiliations . In traditional communities , descendants of nobles live on the northern side of the village and non @-@ nobles live in the southern part . The areas may be divided by a central clearing where the town hall is often situated ; if the village also has a <unk> ( house reserved for royalty ) , it would traditionally be located here . Intermarriage across classes is common among the Antankarana , and most can claim a family relation to a member of the noble class . Historically , commoners were further sub @-@ divided into caste @-@ like groups called <unk> ( " types of people " ) based on their form of livelihood . 
 = = = Religious affiliation = = = 
 The majority of Antankarana identify to varying degrees as Muslim . Once a year at the village of Ambatoharaña , Muslims from across the northern and western parts of Madagascar congregate to visit the tombs of Muslim kings buried here . The form of Islam practiced by the Antankarana is highly syncretic and blends traditional ancestor worship and local customs and beliefs with major holidays and cultural elements borrowed from Arab Muslim culture . The number of Antankarana who practice a standard , orthodox form of Islam is negligible . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Antankarana culture shares many common points with that of their Sakalava neighbors . Their rituals are similar and honor many of the same ancestors , and members of both groups adhere to many of the same fady , making it difficult at times to distinguish the two groups from one another . Relations between the two are amicable . In a custom unique to the Antankarana , called the <unk> , two trees growing before the house of a noble family are tied together to symbolize the unity of the <unk> and the merger of past with present and the dead with the living . The Antankarana , like many other coastal groups , practice tromba ( spirit possession ) as a means to commune with ancestors . The royal ancestral spirits that possess tromba mediums are almost always of Sakalava ancestry . It is widely believed that the spirits of the dead often inhabit crocodiles , and it is often fady among the Antankarana to kill these animals . The Antankarana also believe in <unk> , a kind of nature spirit . 
 Rice is the foundation of every meal , and is often eaten with fish broth , greens , beans or squash . Manioc and green bananas are staples most commonly eaten when other more preferable foods are too expensive or out of season . The Antankarana were historically herders and although they are now generally agriculturalists , cattle are kept for milk . They are also viewed as a form of wealth ; the number of cattle one gives away indicates generosity , and the number sacrificed to the ancestors is a measure of loyalty . The sacrifice of zebu is a typical element of many major rituals and celebrations ranging from Muslim holidays to life events like marriage , death and birth . 
 The traditional martial art of Madagascar , <unk> , and large dance parties ( <unk> ) are very popular among the Antankarana youth , who often are drawn more to western culture than ancestral practices and beliefs . 
 Clothing was historically made from woven raffia . The fibers would be combed into strands that were knotted together to form cords , which were then woven into panels . These panels were stitched together to create prayer rugs and clothing . Women and men historically wore long raffia smocks . 
 = = = Fady = = = 
 Numerous fady protect wilderness areas , particularly including the Ankarana massif . Excessive cutting of mangrove trees for wood or the setting of bush fires are both prohibited , as is the use of nets with holes less than 15 millimeters to prevent catching immature fish . Certain species are protected through fady that forbid hunting them , including sharks , rays and crocodiles . Many fady also exist to regulate relations between the sexes . For instance , it is taboo for a girl to wash her own brother 's clothing . Conservative communities adhere to a fady against medical injections , surgery or modern medicines due to their association with their historic enemies the Merina , who were the first to use them widely ; instead , tromba ceremonies and traditional herbal remedies are commonly used for healing . These taboos are most strongly applied in the center of Antankarana territory around the village of Ambatoharaña and less so in the villages at the periphery of the region . 
 = = = Funeral rites = = = 
 Funerals among the Antankarana are often celebratory events . Among villagers living near the sea , it is not uncommon for the remains of a loved one to be placed in a coffin which the family carries running into the sea . 
 = = = Dance and music = = = 
 At royal ceremonies a traditional dance called the <unk> is often performed . 
 = = Language = = 
 The Antankarana speak a dialect of the Malagasy language , which is a branch of the Malayo @-@ Polynesian language group derived from the Barito languages , spoken in southern Borneo . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The Antankarana were historically fishermen and pastoralist zebu herders , although in recent years most have become agriculturalists . Sea fishing is carried out in two @-@ man canoes made from a single hollowed out log . Antankarana fishermen used these canoes to hunt whales , turtles and fish . They also used nets to hunt in rivers , where they could catch eels , fish , crayfish and other food sources . Salt production was historically a major economic activity . Historically the Antankarana engaged in trading with European seafarers , exchanging tortoiseshell for guns . Today , while the majority of Antankarana continue to work in these traditional sectors – especially the highly lucrative shrimp fishing business or the growing of sugarcane – many are wage laborers . More highly educated community members , particularly among the noble class , work in salaried positions as government officials , teachers and a variety of other trades and professions . The <unk> national sugar company factories are located in Antankarana territory and employ many migrants , but relatively few Antankarana as their standard of living on average is high enough to be able to pursue better opportunities . 
 The most significant urban area in the Antankarana homeland is Antsiranana ( formerly Diego @-@ Suarez ) . Ambilobe , where the current king <unk> is the nearest major urban area to the traditional seat of royal Antankarana power at Ambatoharaña . 
 = Italian cruiser Marsala = 
 Marsala was a protected cruiser built by the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) in the 1910s . She was the second and final member of the Nino Bixio class , which were built as scouts for the main Italian fleet . She was equipped with a main battery of six 120 @-@ millimeter ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) guns and had a top speed in excess of 26 knots ( 48 km / h ; 30 mph ) , but her engines proved to be troublesome in service . Marsala spent World War I based at Brindisi ; she was involved in the Battle of the Otranto Straits in May 1917 , where she briefly engaged Austro @-@ Hungarian cruisers . Marsala 's career was cut short in November 1927 when she was stricken from the naval register and sold for scrap , the result of her unreliable engines and drastic cuts to the naval budget . 
 = = Design = = 
 Marsala was 140 @.@ 3 meters ( 460 ft ) long at the waterline , with a beam of 13 m ( 43 ft ) and a draft of 4 @.@ 1 m ( 13 ft ) . She displaced up to 4 @,@ 141 metric tons ( 4 @,@ 076 long tons ; 4 @,@ 565 short tons ) at full load . Her crew consisted 13 officers and 283 enlisted men . The ship 's propulsion system consisted of three steam turbines , each driving a screw propeller . Steam was provided by fourteen mixed coal and oil firing Blechynden boilers . The engines were rated at 23 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 17 @,@ 000 kW ) for a top speed of 27 @.@ 66 knots ( 51 @.@ 23 km / h ; 31 @.@ 83 mph ) . She had a range of 1 @,@ 400 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 600 km ; 1 @,@ 600 mi ) at a cruising speed of 13 knots ( 24 km / h ; 15 mph ) . 
 Marsala was armed with a main battery of six 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) L / 50 guns mounted singly . She was also equipped with six 76 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) L / 50 guns and two 450 mm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes . The ship was only lightly armored , with a 38 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) thick deck , and 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick plating on her main conning tower . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Marsala 's keel was laid down at the Castellammare shipyard on 15 February 1911 , the same day as Nino Bixio . Work on Marsala proceeded slower than on her sister , and she was launched on 24 March 1912 , where she was named for the city where Giuseppe Garibaldi launched the Expedition of the Thousand in 1860 . After completing fitting @-@ out work , the ship was commissioned into the Italian fleet on 4 August 1914 . Italy declared neutrality at the start of World War I in August 1914 , but by May 1915 , the Triple Entente had convinced the Italians to enter the war against the Central Powers . Admiral Paolo Thaon di Revel , the Italian naval chief of staff , believed that Austro @-@ Hungarian submarines could operate too effectively in the narrow waters of the Adriatic , which could also be easily seeded with minefields . The threat from these underwater weapons was too serious for him to use the fleet in an active way . Instead , Revel decided to implement a blockade at the relatively safer southern end of the Adriatic with the main fleet , while smaller vessels , such as the MAS boats , conducted raids on Austro @-@ Hungarian ships and installations . 
 Marsala , Nino Bixio , and the cruiser Quarto were based at Brindisi during the war , where they could patrol the path from the narrow Adriatic to the Mediterranean . By May 1917 , the reconnaissance forces at Brindisi had come under the command of Rear Admiral Alfredo Acton . On the night of 14 – 15 May , the Austro @-@ Hungarian cruisers Helgoland , Novara , and Saida and several destroyers raided the Otranto Barrage — a patrol line of drifters intended to block Austro @-@ Hungarian and German U @-@ boats . Marsala was the only Italian cruiser with steam up in her boilers when word of the Austro @-@ Hungarian attack reached Brindisi . The British cruisers HMS Dartmouth and Bristol departed first , along with five Italian destroyers . Marsala , the flotilla leader <unk> , and three destroyers followed thereafter . Marsala briefly engaged the fleeing Austro @-@ Hungarians in the Battle of the Otranto Straits , before Acton broke off the pursuit and ordered a return to port . 
 Following the end of the war in November 1918 , the Regia Marina demobilized ; severely reduced naval budgets — the result of a weakened Italian economy in the early 1920s — led to further draw @-@ downs . Marsala 's engines were plagued with problems throughout her career , which made the ship an obvious target in the effort to trim the Regia Marina 's budget . She was stricken from the naval register on 27 November 1927 and subsequently broken up for scrap . 
 = Apollo 's Chariot = 
 Apollo 's Chariot is steel roller coaster at the Busch Gardens Williamsburg theme park in James City County , Virginia , United States . The ride was the first Hyper Coaster designed by Swiss firm Bolliger & Mabillard . It officially opened to the public on March 30 , 1999 . 
 The 4 @,@ 882 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 1 @,@ 488 m ) ride is characterised by eight air @-@ time hills , with heights ranging between 49 and 131 feet ( 15 and 40 m ) . Riders ascend 170 feet ( 52 m ) on the chain lift hill before dropping 210 feet ( 64 m ) at an angle of 65 ° . Apollo 's Chariot is generally well received with it consistently rating highly in industry rankings . 
 = = History = = 
 Apollo 's Chariot was announced on September 5 , 1998 , as the tallest and fastest roller coaster at Busch Gardens Williamsburg . On January 23 , 1999 , the ride was nearing completion with approximately 20 pieces of track left to be installed . Apollo 's Chariot opened as the first Hyper Coaster from Swiss manufacturer , Bolliger & Mabillard . 
 Busch Gardens held Apollo 's Chariot 's opening ceremony on March 30 , 1999 . Italian fashion model Fabio Lanzoni was brought in to promote the new roller coaster . During the ride 's inaugural run , a 10 @-@ pound goose struck him in the face leaving his nose covered with blood . He was treated at a nearby hospital for minor cuts . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The 4 @,@ 882 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 1 @,@ 488 m ) Apollo 's Chariot is a Bolliger & Mabillard Hyper Coaster . The park 's existing terrain is utilised to allow a 170 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 52 m ) lift hill to be translated into a first drop stretching 210 feet ( 64 m ) . With a top speed of 73 miles per hour ( 117 km / h ) , the ride features eight air @-@ time hills . Riders of Apollo 's Chariot experience up to 4 @.@ 1 times the force of gravity on the 2 @-@ minute , 15 @-@ second ride . Apollo 's Chariot operates with three trains with nine cars per train . Riders are arranged four across in a single row for a total of 36 riders per train . This configuration of trains allows for a theoretical capacity of 1 @,@ 750 riders per hour . Riders are restrained by a lapbar and the seats are elevated so riders ’ feet don 't touch the ground . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 After departing from the station , the train begins to climb the 170 @-@ foot ( 52 m ) chain lift hill . When the train reaches the top , it drops down a few feet in a pre @-@ drop . The pre @-@ drop serves to reduce the stress and pull of the chain . After the pre @-@ drop , the train goes down a 210 feet ( 64 m ) drop toward a water @-@ filled ravine at a 65 degree angle and reaching a top speed of 73 miles per hour ( 117 km / h ) . At the end of the ravine , the train enters a second airtime hill with a 131 @-@ foot ( 40 m ) drop . A short narrow above ground tunnel is at the bottom of the second drop . After the tunnel , the train descends a 144 @-@ foot ( 44 m ) drop , which banks to the left as it descends . The train then goes through an upward helix . Coming out of the helix , the train drops 102 feet ( 31 m ) then turns right and rises up into the mid @-@ course brake run . The train drops 48 feet ( 15 m ) out of the brake run followed by another drop at 87 feet ( 27 m ) toward the ravine . The train then banks right , makes a 38 @-@ foot ( 12 m ) dip , turns left and goes through a small 16 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) dip . The train then makes one last 49 @-@ foot ( 15 m ) airtime drop before climbing up and into the final brake run . There is approximately 26 seconds of airtime during the 2 minute and 15 second ride . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In the ride 's debut year , Busch Gardens Williamsburg had lower attendance levels than they were expecting . This was attributed to prolonged periods of inclement weather . As a result of this , the park planned to re @-@ launch Apollo 's Chariot in 2000 in an attempt to drive attendance . 
 In Amusement Today 's annual Golden Ticket Awards , Apollo 's Chariot has consistently ranked highly . In its debut year , it ranked position 20 . In the 13 years since , the coaster has consistently ranked higher , peaking at # 4 in 2005 , 2007 , 2008 and 2012 . 
 In Mitch Hawker 's worldwide Best Roller Coaster Poll , Apollo 's Chariot entered at position 6 in 1999 , before dropping to a low of 32 in 2012 . The ride 's ranking in subsequent polls is shown in the table below . 
 = The Boat Race 1939 = 
 The 91st Boat Race took place on 1 April 1939 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . In a race umpired by the former Oxford rower William Rathbone , Cambridge won by four lengths in a time of 19 minutes 3 seconds . The victory took the overall record in the event to 48 – 42 in Cambridge 's favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1938 race by two lengths , with Cambridge leading overall with 47 victories to Oxford 's 42 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Cambridge were coached by H. E. Boardman , J. N. Duckworth ( three @-@ time Blue between 1934 and 1936 ) and Derek Mays @-@ Smith . Oxford 's coaches were John Cherry ( who rowed for the Dark Blues in the 1936 , 1937 and 1938 races ) , Guy Oliver Nickalls ( who had rowed three times between 1921 and 1923 ) and J. H. Philips . The race was umpired by the former Oxford rower and coach William Rathbone who had represented the Dark Blues in the 1926 and 1927 races and coached them in the 1936 and 1937 races . 
 During the build @-@ up to the race at Putney , Oxford 's stroke R. M. A. Bourne suffered a serious hand injury ; he was temporarily replaced by J. R. Bingham , but Bourne failed to regain his form after returning and so was dropped in favour of his stand @-@ in . Oxford were described by the rowing correspondent for The Manchester Guardian as having " a powerful , orthodox crew without a weak man in the boat " while he suggested that " Cambridge are not orthodox , and they have not quite the same uniformity of style " . The rowing correspondent for the The Times agreed , stating that " since 1936 Cambridge rowing has certainly deteriorated , and they have produced this year as heterogeneous a crew as has ever been seen in the race . " The Dark Blues were considered by most to be favourites to win the race . Both crews raced in boats built by George Sims Boatbuilding Company of Hammersmith . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 12 st 12 @.@ 5 lb ( 81 @.@ 7 kg ) , 2 @.@ 5 pounds ( 1 @.@ 1 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . The Cambridge crew saw three former Blues return , including Alan Burrough who was making his third consecutive appearance . Oxford 's crew included four rowers with Boat Race experience , including their number four , R. R. Stewart who was also taking part in his third consecutive race . Three of the individuals participating in the race were registered as non @-@ British : Oxford 's H. P. V. Massey was Canadian , while Cambridge 's crew included American number five H. Parker and Australian number six J. Turnbull . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Oxford . Umpire Rathbone started the race at 11 : 01 a.m. after Oxford had kept Cambridge waiting at the stakeboat for five minutes . Oxford made the quicker start and were a quarter of a length ahead within fifteen seconds . However , Cambridge 's longer strokes saw them soon pick up pace and within a minute they were a third of a length ahead of the Dark Blues . Out @-@ rating their opponents by four strokes per minute , Cambridge were half a length ahead by Craven Steps and two lengths up by the Mile Post . Despite their lead , the Light Blues were " rather ragged and badly together " while Oxford " were rowing perfectly steadily . " The Dark Blue cox Massey steered across to the Surrey station in an attempt to gain more advantage from the tide , but Cambridge began to pull away again at Harrods Furniture Depository and led by two and a half lengths as they passed below Hammersmith Bridge . 
 The Light Blues reduced their stroke rate but continued to extend their lead , passing Chiswick Steps with a 12 @-@ second advantage which they were held to until they passed below Barnes Bridge . C. B. Sanford , the Cambridge stroke , called for a push and increased the rate by four strokes a minute to pull even further ahead , even though Oxford had made a push of their own . Cambridge won by four lengths in a time of 19 minutes 3 seconds . It was their first victory since the 1936 race , and the fastest winning time and largest winning margin since the 1934 race . The victory took the overall record in the event to 47 – 42 in Cambridge 's favour . The rowing correspondent of The Manchester Guardian was critical of Oxford 's failure to respond to Cambridge 's early pressure : " it was incumbent on them to fight like tigers , they settled down to a dignified and , as it were , middle @-@ aged stride " . The Observer 's rowing correspondent agreed : " It could hardly be described as a ' race ' for Oxford made no effort to ' race ' and the further they went the more they fell behind . " 
 = Jennifer 's Body = 
 Jennifer 's Body is a 2009 supernatural horror black comedy film written by Diablo Cody and directed by Karyn Kusama . The film stars Megan Fox , Amanda Seyfried , Johnny Simmons , and Adam Brody . Fox portrays a demonically possessed high school cheerleader who kills her male classmates , with her best friend striving to stop her . The film premiered at the 2009 Toronto International Film Festival and was released in the United States and Canada on September 18 , 2009 . The title is a reference to the song of the same name by alternative rock band Hole on their album Live Through This . As a tie @-@ in to the film , Boom ! Studios produced a Jennifer 's Body graphic novel , released in August 2009 . 
 Working with Cody again following their collaborative efforts on the film Juno , Jason Reitman stated he and his producers " want to make unusual films " . Cody said she wanted the film to speak to female empowerment and explore the complex relationships between best friends . 
 The film had a lackluster performance at the North American box office , making $ 2 @.@ 8 million its opening day and $ 6 @.@ 8 million its opening weekend , and received mixed reviews from critics ; whereas negative reviews criticized the narrative and , specifically , the horror / comic premise for " fail [ ing ] to be either funny or scary enough to satisfy " , positive reviews praised the film for its dialogue , performances , and emotional resonance . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Anita " Needy " Lesnicki , once an insecure and bookish teenager living near Devil 's Kettle , Minnesota , is now a violent mental inmate who narrates the story as a flashback while in solitary confinement . She has been friends with a selfish and popular cheerleader , Jennifer Check , since childhood , despite having little in common . One night , Jennifer takes Needy to a local dive bar to attend a concert by indie rock band Low Shoulder . A suspicious fire engulfs the bar , killing several people , and Jennifer , who is in shock , agrees to leave with the band despite Needy 's protests . Later that evening , Jennifer , covered in blood , appears in Needy 's kitchen and proceeds to eat food from the refrigerator . Unable to digest the matter , she vomits a trail of black , spiny fluid and then leaves in a hurry as Needy calls after her . 
 The next morning at school , Jennifer appears fine and shrugs off Needy 's concerns . While the whole town is devastated by the deaths caused by the fire , Jennifer seduces the school 's football captain in the woods and then kills him ; his disemboweled corpse is later found . Meanwhile , the members of Low Shoulder gain popularity due to their rumored heroism during the fire and offer to make a charity appearance at the school 's spring formal . 
 A month later , Jennifer is beginning to look pale , and accepts a date with school goth / emo Colin , whom she brutally kills that night . While Needy and her boyfriend , Chip , have sex , Needy senses something dreadful has happened . She leaves in a panic and almost runs over Jennifer , drenched in blood . At home , she finds Jennifer in her bedroom . Jennifer kisses her , initiating a brief makeout session , and soon explains what happened after the fire : Low Shoulder took her into the woods and offered her as a virgin sacrifice to Satan in exchange for fame and fortune . Although the sacrifice and greedy exchange were a success , Jennifer was not a virgin , and when lead singer Nikolai murdered her , the ritual backfired and a demonic spirit took over her body . Unbeknownst to Needy , Jennifer also encountered Indian exchange student Ahmet after the fire and , upon hearing that no one knew he had survived , took him into the woods and ate him , rendering him her first victim . Jennifer states that she can withstand virtually any injury without pain and is rather difficult to kill . 
 At school the following day , the town is stunned by Colin 's death . Needy goes to the school library 's occult section and surmises that Jennifer is a succubus ; she is weakest when she is hungry , and must feed on flesh in order to sustain her life and appearance . Needy tells Chip about her discoveries and warns him not to attend the school dance . He does not believe her and she subsequently breaks up with him in order to protect him . Chip still goes to the dance , hoping to meet with Needy , but is instead intercepted by Jennifer , who seduces him and takes him to an abandoned pool house . Needy arrives there and finds Jennifer feeding on Chip . Needy tries to drown Jennifer but Jennifer , hovering in the air , attacks her . She is then stabbed by a fatally injured Chip with a pool skimmer . Jennifer escapes while Needy watches her boyfriend die . 
 Needy decides she must kill Jennifer for the common good . She goes to Jennifer 's home and sees her , already recovered , picking out her next victims in her yearbook . Crashing through the window , Needy engages in a fight with Jennifer wielding a box cutter . <unk> with a stab to the heart , Needy finally destroys the demon and kills her . Jennifer 's mother enters and finds Needy with the box cutter on top of her daughter 's body . Soon after , Needy is brought to an asylum . Since she was bitten non @-@ fatally by Jennifer , she has obtained some of Jennifer 's supernatural powers , such as the ability to hover in the air . Set upon revenge for what was done to herself , Jennifer , and Chip , she escapes the mental facility and hitchhikes a ride to the hotel where Low Shoulder are staying ; there , she slaughters the members , whose killings are later discovered by local authorities . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Megan Fox as Jennifer Check : 
 Fox was in negotiations to star as Jennifer Check since the film was announced in 2007 , and was officially cast in October 2007 . Fox said the reason she agreed to the role was her love for the script . " I think what I loved about the movie is it 's so unapologetic and how completely inappropriate it is at all times , " she said . " That was my favorite part about the script and about the character . It 's fun to be able to say the shit that she got to say and get away with it and how people find it charming . " Asked how acting in a film like this is different from acting in Transformers , Fox said " there 's [ no ] distractions , like there 's no robots to distract you from whatever performance I do give . So , if it 's terrible , you 're gonna fucking know that it 's really terrible " . She said despite this aspect of the business being intimidating , she enjoyed portraying the character . " I wasn 't really sure what I was doing , " said Fox . " I was just trying to have fun with it and I felt like I was able to make fun of my own image as to how some people might perceive Megan Fox to be . I was just sort of flying freely and I hope some of it works . " To prepare for her role as a living @-@ dead teenager , Fox dropped to a near frail 97 pounds and stayed out of the sun to keep her skin pale . In balancing out the film 's horror with humor , she said she relied heavily on Diablo Cody 's script and Karyn Kusama 's direction to pull it off , stating , " I have a very specific sense of humor , things that I think are funny aren 't going to fly with middle America . It 's going to eliminate some of the audience , so you need someone there to tell you you can 't do that . " 
 Amanda Seyfried as Anita " Needy " Lesnicki : 
 In February 2008 , Seyfried was cast as Anita " Needy " Lesnicki , the " plain Jane " best friend to Fox 's character with whom she shares a somewhat lesbian infatuation . Seyfried said it was a relief to play the nerdy character opposite Fox . " Being a lead ( like Megan ) , you have that weird pressure of feeling like you have to look attractive , " she stated . " In this movie , I didn 't worry about any of that [ shit ] . I don 't want to play the one that everybody is supposed to want to have sex with . " 
 Johnny Simmons as Chip Dove 
 J. K. Simmons as Mr. Wroblewski 
 Amy Sedaris as Toni Lesnicki 
 Adam Brody as Nikolai : 
 <unk> reported that the filmmakers were looking at actual rock band members Pete Wentz of Fall Out Boy and Joel Madden of Good Charlotte to portray male lead Nikolai Wolf . Chad Michael Murray was also considered for the role . In March 2008 , Johnny Simmons was reportedly cast as Nikolai . However , Brody was officially cast in the role of Nikolai , while Simmons was then given the role of Chip Dove . Brody said he did not do his own vocals , adding , " My singing voice is still going through puberty . They gave me a singing lesson or two , and it 's not the worst thing in the world , but it 's not anything anyone would choose to hear . " 
 Kyle Gallner as Colin Gray 
 Cynthia Stevenson as Mrs. Dove 
 Chris Pratt as Officer Roman Duda 
 Carrie <unk> as Mrs. Check 
 Juan <unk> as Dirk 
 Juno Ruddell as Officer <unk> 
 Valerie Tian as <unk> 
 Aman Johal as Ahmet from India 
 Josh Emerson as Jonas <unk> 
 Lance Henriksen as the driver near the end of film 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Jennifer 's Body is the follow @-@ up to writer and producer Diablo Cody 's and Jason Reitman 's collaboration efforts on Juno . In October 2007 , Fox Atomic pre @-@ emptively purchased the rights to Cody 's script with Megan Fox to star . Peter Rice , who at the time oversaw Fox Searchlight and Fox Atomic , brought in the project as Fox Searchlight had previously distributed Cody 's film Juno . Mason Novick and Reitman 's producing partner Dan <unk> signed as producers in November 2007 with plans to produce the film under Hard C , which is housed at Fox Searchlight . Reitman commented , " We want to make unusual films , and anything that turns a genre on its ear interests Dan and I. " Karyn Kusama was announced as director in January 2008 . Kusama said she signed on to the project because of the script . " I was blessed to read this script at a moment where the producers were meeting with directors and it just knocked me out . It was just so original , so imaginative " , she stated . " That 's what it is about this script and the world is that it feels like a fairy tale gone psycho and I think that 's what most fairy tales actually started as . " Additionally , Cody , Reitman and Kusama knew the film would be R rated because of the language . 
 In February 2008 , a cease and desist was given to a writer at <unk> after they posted an advance script review for the film . The Latino Review also posted an advance review . At the time <unk> received their cease and desist order , questions were raised why Latino Review 's largely positive script review was allowed to stay posted while <unk> was being forced by Fox Searchlight to remove their mainly negative coverage . Although Latino Review was later asked to remove their review , numerous other websites and blogs published their own critiques of the script . 
 Cody stated that when writing the script , she was " simultaneously trying to pay tribute to some of the conventions that we 've already seen in horror , yet , at the same time , kind of turn them on their ear " . One of her influences from the 1980s horror genre was the film The Lost Boys . She wanted to " honor that , and at the same time , [ she ] had never really seen this particular subgenre done with girls and [ she ] tried to do a little of both " . Despite this , she said she had noticed that " the last survivor standing in the typical horror film is a woman " and that because of this she feels " horror has always had kind of a feminist angle to it in a weird way and , at the same time , it 's kind of delightfully exploitative " . Jennifer 's Body could play on both of these aspects . 
 Cody said she wanted the film to speak to female empowerment and explore the complex relationships between best friends . " ( Director ) Karyn Kusama and I are both outspoken feminists " , she said . " We wanted to subvert the classic horror model of women being terrorized . I want to write roles that service women . I want to tell stories from a female perspective . I want to create good parts for actresses where they 're not just accessories to men . " Addressing " the male @-@ dominated " horror genre , Cody said " a key reason for writing the film was to bring to the screen a new way of expressing the intensity of female bonds " and that the adolescent female friendships she experienced were unparalleled in their intensity . She wanted to show the " almost horrific " aspect of such devotion and its relation to parasitism . 
 The producers decided to have the film open with the statement " Hell is a teenage girl " to reflect the " horrors " of puberty and that " the hellish emotions felt during high school often reappear as teenage girls mature into young women " . Cody stated : 
 There 's the scene where Jennifer 's sitting alone smearing makeup on her face . I always thought that was such a sad image . She 's so vulnerable . I don 't know any woman who hasn 't had a moment sitting in front of the mirror and thinking , ' Help me , I want to be somebody else . ' What makes it extra affecting is that [ Megan Fox ] is stunning . 
 Cody crafted the story to follow a night that ends in a tragic fire , after which Jennifer is kidnapped and set up as a sacrifice which goes awry . Jennifer , now possessed by a demon and subsequently altered into a succubus , sets out on a bloody rampage in which she devours boys , and it is up to Needy to stop her . In sort of a reversal aspect of how puberty changes a girl 's life , Jennifer must consume the blood of others once a month or she becomes weak and plain @-@ looking . " It 's a meek shall inherit the Earth sort of thing . I think it 's always really satisfying and cathartic to see a character that was previously bullied become super human " , said Cody . Cody said the script is not a reflection of any part of her own life , but that she is more like character Needy . " I would say I was more of a Needy than a Jennifer . I was never an Alpha female , and I 've never gotten off with bullying other people " , she said . " If I had to choose , I was definitely the one being shoved , not the one shoving . " 
 The nickname " Needy " was given to Seyfried 's character to underline the essentially condescending dynamic in Jennifer and Needy 's high school relationship , as Needy often admires Jennifer and feels she needs her . Cody said " Jennifer is a product of a culture that pressures girls to be skinny , beautiful and just like movie stars " and that she " hopes the film inspires girls to take life into their own hands and do with it , what they want " . " If I had gone to this movie as a teenage girl , I would 've come out of it feeling totally inspired " , she stated . " I would 've wanted to write , I would 've wanted to create and I would 've felt like I watched something that was speaking to me . " 
 Assigned to direct the film , Kusama said , " I think also a lot of horror is about <unk> – whether it 's Carrie or Rosemary 's Baby . " She said she feels " like there 's a lot of fear of the female or kind of celebration of it in some weird way and something about this movie managed to take the fear and the sense that it 's the female that ultimately survives and sort of marry that in a really interesting way " . 
 Addressing her decision to have Jennifer and Needy be romantically intimate at one point during the film , which takes place in the form of a long and passionate kissing scene , Cody said she did not write the scene to score publicity . Speaking of the scene 's media hype , she said that " if the two protagonists of the film were a guy and a girl and in a particularly tense moment , they shared a kiss , no one would say it was gratuitous " but " the fact that they 're women means it 's some kind of stunt " . The scene was " intended to be something profound and meaningful " to her and Kusama . She further stated : 
 Obviously we knew people were going to totally sensationalize it . They 're beautiful girls , the scene is hot — I 'm not afraid to say that . There is a sexual energy between the girls which is kind of authentic , because I know when I was a teen @-@ aged girl , the friendships that I had with other girls were almost romantic , they were so intense . I wanted to sleep at my friend 's house every night , I wanted to wear her clothes , we would talk on the phone until our ears ached . I wanted to capture that heightened feeling you get as an adolescent that you don 't really feel as a grownup . ( laughs ) You like [ your ] friends when you 're a grownup , but you don 't need to sleep in the same bed with them and talk to them on the phone until 5 a.m. every night . 
 Though the film is part comedy , Cody initially intended for it to be a " very dark , very brooding " traditional slasher film . Close to " a third of the way into the process " she felt that she was incapable of doing so because " the humor just kept sneaking in " . She stated , " I have a macabre sense of humor . A lot of the things in the movie that are horrifying are funny to me . " Feeling that " comedy films and horror films are kind of similar " due to being films where you can significantly gauge intense reactions from the audience , Cody stated , " They 're laughing , they 're screaming , it 's not a passive experience . So , I actually think comedy and horror are kind of similar in that way . " 
 = = = Design and effects = = = 
 Handling the film 's special effects were KNB EFX GROUP and the Moving Picture Company ( MPC ) . For Jennifer 's demonic form , the creators used different techniques . " I actually wasn 't in [ the makeup chair ] that much because they created an entire head . They did a live cast of me from the shoulders up . They created me and then put the teeth in " , stated Fox . " To save my face , they had a photo double that would come in and do most of the crazy monster makeup - they would do that on her . So it would go from me , then in post @-@ production it would somehow go to her and the fake head . They would mix them all together . " 
 For the " vomit scene " where Jennifer has just arrived at Needy 's house after being murdered and inhabited by a demon , Fox said the liquid she was given to spit out " was actually ... chocolate syrup initially " . " We did a few takes where I would just do this scream and sort of puke Hershey 's chocolate syrup . Scratch the Hershey 's because I don 't want to endorse that or anything " , she stated . " And then , special effects did a rig that clamps onto my ear and you revisit it in the pool scene ... " Fox said it " clips on . It goes around the back of my ear and then I bite down on it on the side of my face , like this , and it projectiles . It 's a tube ... " 
 Directing the scene , Kusama said it had a classic feel . Fox agreed , " Yeah , and it projects whatever that material was . I 'm not sure . It was pretty intense . I think it was worse for [ Seyfried ] because she 's the one that got puked on . I was the one doing the puking . " 
 For more practical special effects on the set as opposed to CG , Kusama said it " was a choice that we all sort of made organically " . She said they appreciate " those kind of effects in older movies and [ questions ] sometimes how much more effective it is to use a ton of CG " and that they " always started with a practical effect and then moved forward from there to lay a groundwork of something that 's actually physically , materially there " . They found this to be more enjoyable . 
 Erik Nordby of KNB ( known for his work on The Haunting in Connecticut , which also features co @-@ star Kyle Gallner ) stated , " We immediately went into pitch mode in January and spent a solid two weeks trying to not only bid the script but also collect as much reference material and stuff for the first client get together . " He said the director and producers wanted an " old @-@ school , hands @-@ off , lo @-@ fi approach to the visual effects " so that the horror elements would not overpower the storyline . Based on the script , MPC similarly came to the same conclusion and " provided a clear direction " for Nordby and his team . " At that point when we met with them , they had already met with KNB , who had already done up a stylized still of what , at the time , they were calling ' Evil Jennifer , ' " he said . " There was a lot of info yet to come , but based on the script , Jennifer goes from very beautiful Megan Fox to a very ghoulish , succubus creature whose jaw <unk> half @-@ way down her face . " Nordby said the look was eventually toned down at the wishes of MPC . From there , KNB " produced some tests , grabbing a bunch of stills from [ Fox ] and [ did their ] work to indicate how that balance could exist between special effects and visual effects and still maintain a level of subtlety " and that " [ MPC ] responded really well " . 
 The teams wanted to " maintain some sort of the Megan Fox allure " but said that it was " incredibly difficult because as soon as [ they ] warped her face in any direction , the shine kind of came off it " . To combat this , they ended up focusing on anything below her nose , where they had the freedom to make things " as horrific as [ they ] needed to " and then above her nose , " [ they ] could manipulate it somewhat with warps and color correction in her eye sockets . So even at her worst , she had some of that sexiness throughout " . 
 Nordby said most of the attention was devoted to Jennifer 's face and that " very quickly in combination " with special effects and makeup , MPC thought up a five @-@ station system for what Jennifer goes through . Nordby stated : 
 Stage one is beautiful Jennifer and then two and three were strictly makeup where her eyes become more recessed and she would start to look plain like the rest of us . And stage four was some custom dentures that KNB made for her , and then visual effects in stage four was mainly facial warping and <unk> her eyes some more and having a pinning effect to her irises and a variety of other musculature deforms , just bringing her cheek bones down more . And stage five was the full on , as crazy as it gets , which you don 't really see until near the end . 
 During testing , Nordby and the special effects teams realized that getting Fox in and out of the appliance used to create Jennifer 's murderous jaw would be too time @-@ consuming . To remedy this , they hired a photo double . " [ E ] very day ( for about 10 days ) she would sit in a chair with this full appliance on her and we would shoot this jaw , and then all [ Fox ] would have to do is the dentures " , stated Nordby . He said that " when it came time to shoot any of these jaw moments , [ Fox ] would act out in rehearsal how she was going to attack her victim and [ they would ] fine tune that blocking so it was relatively locked " . The camera accompanied them in the same way , as " it would roll and she would put her dentures in , and they would really distort her face " in a way that would produce a satisfying and nice side effect . Additionally , the team would have Fox wear contact lenses and go through exactly the same motions as normal Jennifer . " But then I would shoot all the key poses that existed in whatever moves the digital double was doing , so that we had as much of that appliance in that lighting condition that we could get " , said Nordby . " KNB also created a hairless but high detailed head of the stage five Jennifer that had an articulating jaw . " 
 Nordby spent a significant amount of time shooting " the articulating jaw " scene because they had " ultimate control over how the light was hitting the head " . He said , " This so @-@ called jaw shot became a pivotal point , because for four months of the post , the filmmakers thought the film was getting too scary so MPC pulled back on the jaw and then they thought it wasn 't scary enough . " Because of this , " they pushed back and this jaw went back and forth quite a bit to help navigate where they wanted the tone on any given day " . These different poses helped the two teams perfect the jaw scenes . " From a marketing point of view , from all the test screenings they did " , said Norby , " there was a lot of work figuring out how to make this a scary film as well as a funny film . " Since the team was on a small budget , they " relied more on skilled artists to think through shots rather than a brute force approach " . 
 MPC additionally worked on the disappearing waterfall that serves as Jennifer 's grave when she is killed at the beginning of the film . They transformed the mysterious waterfall into a whirlpool . " We came up with an approach that we thought would work because we had a lot of confidence in our water sims " , stated Nordby . " The waterfall appears both as a day and night shot , so we had to integrate with the water . And the night shots play a pivotal role in the film , and we do a huge crane over . " They could not lock it to a pan or to a tilt and filming the shots was difficult due to the actual base of the waterfall being out of reach . Nordby said , " I eventually lowered down a shot — a ton of reference of the area because I knew we 'd have to do some digi @-@ matte work to recreate the basin that the whirlpool ends up in . " They soon realized that there was an insufficient amount of churning and foam to read as real as the location . The CG Supervisor , Pete Dionne , presented a different idea . " He grabbed chunks of that river and <unk> it so that it had a nice stretch of birds ' eye point of view of the water that existed on the location in the lighting situation we were trying to match " , stated Nordby . " And then he projected that onto a whirlpool of animated sprites and had similar enough texture to the actual water that existed there , but pulled control into lighting it and could add depth mainly to the center of it . " Dealing with " very shallow " water , the team had to take extra care when filming the scenes . 
 During the film 's fire scene , Cody appears as a character in the barroom . " To me , I am afraid of fire and fire <unk> and all that stuff which is why I don 't know why I asked to be in the bar scene because I 've never exploded before " , she said . She had asked to be set on fire . " That was me trying to conquer a fear . By the way , they would not allow me to do a full burn for insurance purposes , even though I argued that Burt Reynolds had done it once " , stated Cody . " But apparently he got really hurt , so they would not let me . To me , there 's nothing more horrifying than being stuck in a claustrophobic space as it is burning down so , to me , it was more like tapping into a personal fear . That 's not tough . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 In late 2007 , Fox Atomic had plans to film Jennifer 's Body before a possible writer 's strike . When the Writers Guild of America strike began , shooting was then moved to March 7 , 2008 , in Burnaby , British Columbia , specifically at Robert Burnaby Park near Cariboo Hill Secondary School . Some of the scenes , particularly those situated in a school setting , were filmed in local Vancouver @-@ area schools such as Vancouver Technical Secondary School , Langley Secondary School and University Hill Secondary School . 
 Fox said that while filming her highly anticipated kissing scene with Seyfried that Seyfried was " extremely uncomfortable " but that she herself was not . " I feel much safer with girls , so I felt more comfortable kissing [ Seyfried ] than kissing any of the other people that I had to kiss " , she said . Seyfried 's uneasiness in the scene caused " giggling fits " between takes . Seyfried said that neither of them wanted to do the kiss because they felt it was just for promotional purposes . She agreed with Fox that she was uneasy about acting out the scene . " It was my first time doing a real kissing scene with a woman " , she stated . " It is just weird . It is a woman . With a woman 's smell — soft and <unk> — and maybe the pheromones are different . Something about it felt uncomfortable for me . " 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Music was incorporated as an essential part of the film ; there are " very specific bands " placed in band posters in some parts , such as in the selection of the band poster on the walls of the bar . Kusama said " [ t ] he music was a huge component of the movie " and this is first evident with " the songs that we see and hear performed , but then , just the vibe of the movie actually " . She said , " As the movie progresses , it becomes a pretty clearly music @-@ oriented movie . It 's sort of a youth movie . Some of those bands were totally made up and some of them are not . " 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The film received mixed reviews from critics . Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes reports 42 % of critics gave the film positive write @-@ ups based on 172 reviews , with a rating average of 5 @.@ 1 / 10 . The site 's consensus of opinion is that " Jennifer 's Body features occasionally clever dialogue but the horror / comic premise fails to be either funny or scary enough to satisfy " . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the film holds a mixed / average score of 47 based on 29 reviews . Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film a C- grade on a scale of A to F. 
 Film critic Roger Ebert enjoyed the film , dubbing it a " Twilight for boys " and saying " as a movie about a flesh @-@ eating cheerleader , it 's better than it has to be " . Ebert said that within Cody there is " the soul of an artist , and her screenplay brings to this material a certain edge , a kind of gleeful relish , that 's uncompromising . This isn 't your assembly @-@ line teen horror thriller " . Additionally , he complimented Fox as " [ coming ] through " in her portrayal and " play [ ing ] the role straight " . He gave the film three out of four stars . Rick Groen of The Globe and Mail gave the film three out of four stars . Peter Travers of Rolling Stone stated it is " Hot ! Hot ! Hot ! " and that " Director Karyn Kusama is torn between duty to female empowerment and slasher convention " . He credited Fox 's portrayal as showing " a comic flair " that Transformers " never investigated " . Tom Charity of CNN said " [ the ] last time a horror flick tried for a distinctly female point of view the result was Twilight , which was more of a wan gothic romance than a chiller " and " Fox makes a convincing vixen , callously picking up victims whenever her luster begins to fade . It 's not hard to imagine she can have anyone who takes her fancy " . Charity credited the dialogue as " bitingly smart , funny teen @-@ speak ... along with sharp pop culture references " . 
 Mary Pols of Time magazine called the film entertaining and reasoned " [ t ] here is a lot of intelligent camp here , and some sharply observed characterizations " and Cody and Kusama 's " depiction of the ways in which women like Needy are willing to compromise themselves to indulge an ultimately less secure friend is spot @-@ on " . Dana Stevens of Slate praised the film for being " luscious and powerful , sexy and scary , maddening at times , but impossible to stop watching " and a " wicked black comedy with unexpected emotional resonance , one of the most purely pleasurable movies of the year so far " . Elle 's Karen Durbin said the film not only puts " a fresh spin on female @-@ centric pop genres but also own [ s ] them outright " and is " rich with first @-@ rate performances " . 
 The Miami Herald 's Rene Rodriguez likened the film 's " [ effective exploitation ] of the genre as a metaphor for adolescent angst , female sexuality and the strange , sometimes corrosive bonds between girls who claim to be best friends " to Brian De Palma 's 1976 film Carrie . She applauded the film for being fearless when delving into the subject of teen sex and for reversing the tradition / idea that only " bad girls have sex when they 're 16 [ and the ] good ones — those who , like Needy , do their homework and are responsible — never slide past first base " . Nick Pinkerton of Sci Fi Weekly called Fox and Seyfried 's lesbian kissing scene " the best close @-@ up girl @-@ girl <unk> " since Cruel Intentions , and A. O. Scott of The New York Times concluded " the movie deserves — and is likely to win — a devoted cult following , despite its flaws " and " [ these flaws ] are mitigated by a sensibility that mixes playful pop @-@ culture ingenuity with a healthy shot of feminist anger " . 
 Giving a partially negative review of the film was Joshua Rothkopf of Time Out New York , who said the " movie has a centerfold sheen to it — and some <unk> soft @-@ core flirtation to match — as its plot dives deeply into Twilight @-@ esque heavy @-@ melo meltdown in the last act " and that " Cody throws one too many losses at Needy ; the screenwriter loses her satiric way about halfway through . But for a while , this has real fangs " . Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post said , " There 's a certain kooky , kinky fun to be had with Jennifer 's Body " but that " [ a ] <unk> , this is the stuff of lurid adolescent distraction , not great cinema " and " is strictly a niche item but provides a goofy , campy bookend to Drag Me to Hell on the B @-@ movie shelf . Watch it , forget it , move on " . San Francisco Chronicle 's Peter Hartlaub stated , " Enjoy the film for its witty dialogue and fun performances , but know that there isn 't a single good scare . An episode of Murder , She Wrote has more thrills . " Hartlaub felt the film is not bad , is " almost always pleasing " and that Fox " proves that she has some [ acting ] range " but " the chances that it will be somebody else 's pop culture reference 27 years from now are slim to none " . Joe Neumaier of New York Daily News said , " Fox merely needs to look either vacant or evil , which the Transformers boy @-@ toy does <unk> well " but " [ w ] <unk> and story are still the lifeblood of a movie , and Jennifer 's Body is filled like a Twinkie with half @-@ fleshed @-@ out ideas " . Disagreeing with Fox 's performance , Chicago Tribune 's Michael Phillips called Fox " a pretty bad actress " who " doesn 't seem to get Cody 's sense of humor . At all " . He reasoned the " movie 's partially redeemed by Seyfried , who makes her character more than a repository for audience sympathy " and " her make @-@ out scene with Fox is handled with more suspense and care than anything else in the movie " . 
 Michael Sragow of Baltimore Sun described the only " perfect aspect " of Jennifer 's Body as being its title . " No one is going to like this movie for its brain " , he said . Claudia Puig of USA Today stated of the film , " Jennifer 's Body is not as hot as you hope it would be " . Where others praised the film 's dialogue , MSNBC 's Alonso Duralde called the writing lazy and " [ w ] <unk> still , all of Cody 's trademark pop @-@ culture – infused dialogue stands out as artificial and precious " . Jennifer 's Body , he said , wants " so badly " to be a Heathers @-@ esque dark comedy , " but its shortcomings makes you appreciate why that earlier film was so great " . Ty Burr of The Boston Globe also said the film wants to be like Heathers , and reminded him " a lot " of Heathers but the only scene in the film that " actually feels dangerous " is when the possessed Jennifer initiates a long and passionate kiss with Needy , which the film " very , very nervously backs away from " and that " Jennifer 's Body falls into the dispiriting category of dumb movies made by smart people , in this case a <unk> clever writer and a talented director who think a few wisecracks are enough to subvert the teen horror genre " . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Though the film was expected to pull in a significant number of the late teenage / young adult audience , particularly males aged 17 and older , while Cody hoped for a large female turnout , it earned a " disappointing " $ 2 @.@ 8 million on its opening Friday and $ 6 @.@ 8 million its opening weekend at the North American box office ; the film placed # 5 , while 3D animated film Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs placed # 1 with $ 30 @.@ 1 million . Produced for $ 16 million , Jennifer 's Body did manage to attract the sizable female audience Cody wanted ; 51 % were female , with 70 % of patrons under age 25 . The film had been expected to benefit somewhat from its heavily marketed lesbian kissing scene between Fox and Seyfried , which , in addition to Fox being in the film , was thought to entice and successfully attract male viewers . Critic Jim Vejvoda at IGN stated that such a scene is not as shocking as it was in past decades and cannot be expected to significantly pull in an audience . The film grossed $ 16 @,@ 204 @,@ 793 domestically and $ 15 @,@ 351 @,@ 268 in international sales , for a worldwide total of $ 31 @,@ 556 @,@ 061 . 
 Box @-@ office analysts and critics debated the film 's underperformance . Analyst Jeff Bock , of Exhibitor Relations , reasoned the film underperformed at the box office due to two reasons ; the first , he said , is the genre . Bock stated that Americans get horror and comedy , but with the idea " of those two things together in one place , people suddenly get very dumb " . " The horror @-@ comedy genre is the toughest sell in Hollywood " , he said . He noted films Tremors , Slither , Shaun of the Dead , Eight Legged Freaks and The Evil Dead series , and said that while many of those are considered critical and business successes , " none of them have brought in the <unk> that a simple horror or comedy can . " In addition , he labeled the Scream franchise as more " straight @-@ up horror " than comedy and stated Zombieland 's box office performance would determine the horror @-@ comedy genre 's current viability . 
 Despite other R @-@ rated horror films having centered around teenagers , some such as Scream having been successful , Bock said the second reason Jennifer 's Body under @-@ performed at the box office is the R @-@ rating , which he described as a " killer " for the film . He said the film is set in high school and " sounds like the perfect package for teens " but that " the R rating banned many teens from the theaters " and the studio was left with " an R @-@ rated film marketed to whom , exactly ? " Nicole Sperling of Entertainment Weekly felt that it was a slow and disappointing weekend for the box office in general ; 3D animated film Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs was steep competition , and with low box office performances by the Matt Damon film The Informant ! and Jennifer Aniston film Love Happens , she concluded that this may support " the current hypothesis floating around Hollywood , that movie stars no longer matter " and that it takes more than a name to open a film . S.T. VanAirsdale of Movieline echoed Sperling 's sentiment about the weekend , as " some of the <unk> high @-@ profile openings in recent memory " . He concluded five reasons for Jennifer 's Body 's underperformance at the box office . The first , he said , is the distributor . " 20th Century Fox 's genre wing , Fox Atomic , had Jennifer 's Body in the can by the time the mother ship shut it down last spring " , he said . " Instead of offloading the film to Fox Searchlight , which nimbly maneuvered Diablo Cody 's previous brainchild Juno to awards @-@ season <unk> in 2007 , a decision was somehow reached to fill a gap in Big Fox 's early fall slate with a gory " and " post @-@ feminist horror romp starring Megan Fox and Amanda Seyfried " . VanAirsdale classified this as a " [ b ] ig mistake " and that " [ y ] ou 'd have to go back to The Devil Wears Prada to find an example of a Fox release that worked without a genuine male lead ; you ’ d probably have to go back to Aliens to find a genre example of such that they pulled off successfully . " He named the second reason as the marketing , stating that the film was not well @-@ marketed ( whether by billboards , transit posters , lobby <unk> , or other promotional venues ) , even in New York . 
 VanAirsdale cited the release date and screening as the third and fourth reasons ; he said there was confusion about what day the film was going to debut in theaters , and that Toronto is " a nation removed from the audience where the film 's actual momentum had been accruing for at least a month " and that " this rarely works for early fall releases ; not because news doesn ’ t travel , obviously , but because it peels away a layer of accessibility that accompanies New York and L.A. bows . " The final reason , he attributed to the critics , believing that the fusion of horror and teen comedy confused some of them . He mentioned Ty Burr 's review in particular , and stated that the film could perhaps have used more horror and been funnier , but that the film is " ultimately a movie about two teenage girls ' misadventures in victimization " and that " [ t ] he jokes are virtually incidental to the friction imposed on women who happen to be two sides of the same coin . Who 's the monster , and who made the monster ? Sorry if you wanted Heathers with demons , fellas . Equipment 's cheap these days ; perhaps make your own ? " 
 Hollywood.com box @-@ office analyst and President Paul Dergarabedian said " the poor numbers don 't mean Fox can 't open a movie . " " It may be a matter of just choosing the right projects for her " , he told the Associated Press . " She 's trying to find a world beyond Transformers , and she will . She 's young and has a lot of promise . " 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The film was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on December 29 , 2009 in the United States and Canada . In Australia , the DVD and Blu @-@ ray was released on May 18 , 2010 . The film opened at # 11 at the DVD sales chart , making $ 1 @.@ 6 million in the first week off 104 @,@ 000 DVD units . There is a rated and an unrated version , with the unrated version running about five minutes longer than the theatrical version . The UK Blu @-@ ray lacks most of the extras found on the locked US release . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The film 's soundtrack was released by Fueled by Ramen on August 25 , 2009 , and featured previously released music by various indie rock and alternative rock bands such as White Lies , Florence + The Machine , <unk> Pickups and Black Kids . It also features pop punk band All Time Low and electropop singer Little Boots . In addition , the album features new songs from pop rock artists such as Cobra Starship and Panic ! at the Disco and Paramore 's lead singer Hayley Williams . The first single from the soundtrack is " New Perspective " by Panic ! at the Disco . 
 The album received a 3 out of 5 review from Allmusic , who described the album as having " a slightly different spin , mixing indie with the more expected punk , emo , and metal " . Mike Diver at the BBC wrote an unfavorable review of the album , stating that " This assortment of acts says nothing of its parent film , beyond the occasional reference to school days and nods to something nasty coming this way " . 
 The ending sequence of the film itself features a song , " Violet " , from the album Live Through This by Hole . This same album also features a song entitled " Jennifer 's Body . " In total , the film features 22 songs , most of which are included on the soundtrack . 
 = = Graphic novel = = 
 As a tie @-@ in to the film , Boom ! Studios produced a Jennifer 's Body graphic novel . The novel expands on the film 's universe and Jennifer 's murders of the boys . It was written by Black Metal 's Rick Spears , with the first nine pages illustrated by Jim <unk> ( Clerks ) . Two covers , in Fox 's likeness , were designed ; one for the direct market by Eric Jones ( available only in comic specialty stores ) , and the other by Frank Cho for the mass market focusing more on " hellish Jennifer stories " with art by <unk> , Hack / Slash 's Tim Seely , DMZ 's Nikki Cook , and <unk> 's Ming Doyle . The novel was released in August 2009 . 
 The novel features less of Jennifer than the film , but does capture her " going in for the kill " several times . It focuses heavily on following her soon @-@ to @-@ be victims and provides information on their personalities not elaborated on in the film so that readers can better conclude whether the boys deserved to be murdered . The novel consists of four chapters , with a prologue and an epilogue , with art provided for each by different artists . Each one follows a different boy and what is happening in his life just before Jennifer kills him . 
 On creating the story , Spears stated , " The best part for me as a writer was to show some events from the movie from a different point of view , sort of like Rashomon for you Kurosawa fans . And with comics we can get into the character 's heads in a way that works well in comics and novels more so than in film . " He stated , " ... I was using the medium to change what we really know about these characters and twist around what we see in the movies . All the academics aside , it 's also very funny and gore splattered . " 
 Spears stated that while writing the stories , the film was still being made and he had not seen any of it at the time . He mainly learned about the characters through the script . " I got to read the screenplay . It was kinda crazy writing characters that were being changed on set and in the editing process . I had to bob and weave to keep up but that was all part of the fun " , he said . 
 = Halo : Reach = 
 Halo : Reach is a first @-@ person shooter video game developed by Bungie and published by Microsoft Game Studios for the Xbox 360 home video game console . The sixth installment in the Halo series , Reach was released worldwide in September 2010 . The game takes place in the year 2552 , where humanity is locked in a war with the alien Covenant . Players control Noble Six , a member of an elite supersoldier squad , when the human world known as Reach falls under Covenant attack . 
 After releasing Halo 3 in 2007 , Bungie split into teams to develop two different games — what would become Halo 3 : ODST and Reach . The developers decided to create a prequel to the original Halo game trilogy , freeing themselves from the obligation of addressing old story threads . As the game would take place on a human world doomed to be destroyed , they focused on making the environment a character unto itself . Longtime Halo composers Martin O 'Donnell and Michael Salvatori returned to compose Reach 's music , aiming for a more somber sound to match the story . 
 Reach was announced at the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2009 in Los Angeles , California , and the first in @-@ engine trailer was shown at the 2009 Spike Video Game Awards . Players who purchased ODST were eligible to participate in a Reach multiplayer beta in May 2010 ; the beta allowed Bungie to gain player feedback for fixing bugs and making gameplay tweaks before shipping the final version . Microsoft gave Reach its biggest game marketing budget yet and created award @-@ winning live @-@ action commercials , action figures , and interactive media to promote the game . 
 The game grossed US $ 200 million on its launch day , setting a new record for the franchise . Reach sold well in most territories , moving more than three million units its first month in North America . Critical reception was positive ; reviewers from publications such as GamePro , IGN , and Official Xbox Magazine called it the best Halo title yet . Critics generally praised the game 's graphics and sound , but the plot and characters were less positively received . Reach was Bungie 's final Halo game ; subsequent games have been overseen by Microsoft subsidiary 343 Industries . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Halo : Reach is a first @-@ person shooter in which players predominantly experience gameplay from a first @-@ person perspective ; the game perspective switches to third @-@ person when using certain weapons and vehicles . Gameplay is more similar to Halo : Combat Evolved than later games in the series . The player 's head @-@ up display displays and tracks a player 's current weapons , abilities , and health ; it also contains a compass and a " motion tracker " that registers moving allies , enemies , and vehicles in a certain radius of the player . The HUD changes when the player pilots aircraft and spacecraft . 
 In the game 's campaign , which can be played alone or cooperatively , players assume the role of Noble Six , a supersoldier engaged in combat with an alien collective known as the Covenant . The Covenant come in eight distinct varieties with different ranks and classes for each type ; for example , Elites are the leaders of a group , while Grunts are less intelligent and only dangerous in large groups . The player is equipped with a recharging energy shield that absorbs damage from weapons , fire and impacts . When the energy shield is depleted , the player loses health . When the player 's health reaches zero , the character dies and the game reloads from a saved checkpoint . Health is replenished using health packs scattered throughout Reach 's levels . The campaign 's encounters with enemies are typically large , open spaces with weapons caches , cover from enemy fire and strategic vantage points . New to the Halo series are dogfight sequences set in space . 
 Reach features updated versions of old weapons , plus new weapons fulfilling various combat roles . In Halo 3 , players can carry single @-@ use equipment power @-@ ups that offer temporary offensive or defensive advantages . This system of single @-@ use equipment is replaced in Reach by reusable and persistent armor abilities that remain with a character until they are replaced . The abilities are a jetpack ; active camouflage ; sprint ; hologram , which creates a facsimile of the player running towards a target point ; drop shield , which creates a bubble that heals those inside and protects them from a limited amount of damage ; and armor lock , which immobilizes the player but grants invincibility for a brief period of time . When playing as Covenant Elites , players also have access to an evade armor ability . 
 = = = Multiplayer = = = 
 Reach supports player @-@ versus @-@ player multiplayer through splitscreen on a single Xbox 360 , local networks ( System Link ) , and the Xbox Live service . The game includes standard multiplayer modes such as " slayer " and capture the flag , as well as gametypes new to the franchise . In " headhunter " , players drop skulls upon death , which other players can pick up and deposit at special zones for points . When players die , all their accumulated skulls are dropped . " Stockpile " has teams race to collect neutral flags , holding them at capture points every minute for points . " Generator defense " pits three human supersoldiers , or Spartans , against three Covenant soldiers called Elites . The Elites ' objective is to destroy three generators , while the Spartans defend the installation . After every round the players switch roles . " Invasion " is a six versus six mode with three squads of two on each team . The gametype matches Spartans against Elites ; Elites vie for control of territories to disable a shield guarding a navigation core . Once the shield is disabled , they must transfer the core to a dropship ; the Spartans must prevent this . As the game progresses , new vehicles and areas of the map become open . 
 Alongside other multiplayer options is " firefight " , where players take on increasingly difficult waves of foes in a game of survival . Players can customize the firefight options , including the number and types of enemies . Firefight versus allows a player @-@ controlled Elite team to try to stop a Spartan team from scoring points . Game modes like generator defense are also playable in firefight . 
 Also included with Reach is " Forge " , a level editor . Players can edit the default multiplayer maps and a large empty map known as " Forge World " , adding or modifying spawn points , weapons and items . Objects may be phased into other objects , and can also be snapped to specific orientations . Other included features are the " theater " , where players can watch saved films of their games and take screenshots and video clips for posterity , and the file share , where players can upload their screenshots , films , custom maps , and gametypes for public viewing . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Reach takes place in a futuristic science fiction setting ; the year is 2552 , shortly before the events of the video game Halo : Combat Evolved , and during the events of the novel Halo : The Fall of Reach . Humans , under the auspices of the United Nations Space Command ( UNSC ) , have been waging a long war against a collective of alien races known as the Covenant . By the events of Reach , almost all of humanity 's interstellar colonies have fallen . Reach itself is an Earthlike colony that serves as the UNSC 's main military hub . The colony is home to over 700 million civilians in addition to the military presence . 
 The game follows the actions of " Noble Team " , a UNSC special operations unit composed of elite supersoldiers known as Spartans . Players assume the role of a new addition to the team identified by the call sign Noble Six . Noble Team 's leader is Carter @-@ A259 , a no @-@ nonsense soldier . His second @-@ in @-@ command , Kat @-@ <unk> , has a bionic arm ; together , Carter and Kat are the only remaining original members of Noble Team . The other current members include heavy weapons specialist Jorge @-@ 052 , assault specialist Emile @-@ <unk> , and marksman Jun @-@ <unk> . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The game opens with the planet Reach in ruins , then flashes back to before the devastating invasion by the Covenant . Noble Team , dispatched to investigate why a communications relay has gone offline , discovers Covenant forces on Reach . Soon after , the team defends " Sword Base " , an Office of Naval Intelligence ( ONI ) installation , from a Covenant vessel . The team meets Catherine Halsey , a scientist and the mastermind behind the Spartan program and their MJOLNIR powered armor . Halsey informs Noble Team that the Covenant forces at the relay were searching for important information . 
 Jun and Six are dispatched on a covert mission to assess the Covenant 's strength and discover an invasion force gathering on the planet . The following morning , Noble Team assists UNSC forces in assaulting a Covenant ground base . When a massive Covenant super @-@ carrier joins the fight , Jorge and Six take part in a plan to destroy the super @-@ carrier using a makeshift bomb . The Spartans use starfighters to infiltrate a smaller Covenant corvette , prepare the bomb and set the corvette on a docking course with the carrier , but the bomb 's timer is damaged . Left with no choice , Jorge stays behind and sacrifices himself to destroy the super @-@ carrier . Moments later , huge numbers of Covenant ships arrive at Reach and begin a full @-@ scale invasion . 
 Six returns to the surface and travels to the city of New Alexandria . The Spartan aids the local military in fighting the Covenant and evacuating the city , reuniting with Noble Team along the way . They retreat to an underground bunker when the Covenant begin to bombard the city with plasma , but Kat is killed by a Covenant sniper before they reach it . Recalled to Sword Base , Noble Team is guided underground to an ancient artifact that Halsey believes is key to winning the war against the Covenant . Six , Carter and Emile are entrusted with transporting the artificial intelligence Cortana , and the information she carries concerning the artifact , to the UNSC ship Pillar of Autumn . Jun leaves the team to escort Halsey to another base . 
 En route to the Autumn 's dry dock , Carter is critically wounded . He rams his ship into a Covenant mobile assault platform , allowing Six and Emile to safely reach the shipyard . Emile uses a mass driver emplacement to defend the Autumn while Six fights through Covenant ground forces to get Cortana to the Autumn 's captain , Jacob Keyes . When Emile is slain by Elites , Six remains behind to control the gun , ensuring the Autumn 's escape . The Autumn flees from Reach and discovers a Halo ringworld , leading directly to the events of Halo : Combat Evolved . 
 The post @-@ credits scene puts the player in control of Six 's last stand against overwhelming Covenant forces . After sustaining heavy damage , Six drops his or her shattered helmet and is overwhelmed and killed . Decades later , Six 's helmet remains on the grassy plains of a now @-@ restored Reach . A narration by Halsey eulogizes Noble Team , who ultimately enabled humanity 's victory over the Covenant . 
 = = Development = = 
 Halo : Reach was announced on June 1 , 2009 , accompanied by a trailer at the Microsoft Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) press conference . A press release announced that an invitation to the open multiplayer beta of the game would appear in 2010 . Reach is Bungie 's last game development for the Halo series . Responsibility for developing future Halo games fell to Microsoft subsidiary 343 Industries . 
 A trailer released March 3 , 2010 , showcased the game 's multiplayer . Bungie revealed parts of the game 's campaign and Firefight at E3 2010 . The game reached the " zero bug release " milestone on June 23 , signifying a shift from content creation to troubleshooting ; buggy artificial intelligence or other elements would be removed rather than fixed at this point because of time constraints . Bungie released the complete list of achievements for the game on July 30 , including their titles , symbols , and requirements , and completed Reach between the end of July and beginning of August 2010 . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 After Halo 3 , development studio Bungie created an internal team to work on Peter Jackson 's planned Halo game , Halo Chronicles . Chronicles was eventually canceled and the team began working on a standalone expansion project — Halo 3 : ODST — while another team , led by creative director Marcus Lehto and design lead Christian Allen , worked on Reach . The team considered many different concepts and approaches to the game ; among the rejected ideas was a sequel to Halo 3 . The team eventually settled on a prequel to the first Halo game in brainstorming sessions . It would take place on the planet Reach , during a pivotal time in the war . " Reach , as a fictional planet , was just a great candidate [ to ] play around with . It 's such a rich world , with such a great fiction surrounding it , " said Lehto . " We were like : ' Okay , that 's it . We 've just got a lot of things we can do there so we can build an immense story with it . ' " No longer burdened with continuing the story threads of the Halo trilogy , Bungie used Reach to introduce new characters and settings . As Reach ends with the destruction of the titular planet , Bungie wanted to be sure players still felt a sense of accomplishment and success . " It is a challenge overall to ensure the player feels they 're doing the right thing all the way to the end , " said Lehto . 
 Lehto recalled that making a character @-@ driven story was a great challenge — players would come to know more about them as they progressed through the campaign , but the Spartan characters also had to behave intelligently . " The Halo games consistently featured protagonists that were silent during gameplay sequences . Community manager Brian Jarrard pushed for allowing players to choose a female Noble Six and have the cinematics and dialogue change accordingly . The post @-@ credit game sequence was the subject of intense discussion ; some at Bungie wanted to remove it . Executive producer Joe Tung noted , " the ' survive ' component ... felt great to us . We definitely talked about different versions of how that was happening and different versions of ending [ the game ] cinematically , but I think the way that it ultimately ended up is just a really well @-@ paced , significant and emotionally impactful ending . " 
 The developers originally intended to port existing Halo 3 assets to Reach and update them . For Halo 3 , Bungie had been forced to shrink parts of the game to fit the game engine 's constraints , but wanted to make Reach look better than its predecessors . " The more we started looking into this , the more we found that realistically we could rebuild each asset from scratch with a huge increase in quality without significantly investing more time , " said Bungie 3D artist Scott Shepherd . Texture resolution and polygon counts for models increased ; the Reach assault rifle is constructed of more polygons than an entire Marine character from Halo 3 . The prequel concept also gave the art team an opportunity to redesign key enemies , weapons , and elements of the series . Artists found inspiration in the original concept art for Halo : Combat Evolved ; the shape for the redesigned Covenant Grunts came from a sketch that concept artist Shi Kai Wang created ten years earlier . 
 The developers redesigned the game engine , the software that handles rendering and much of gameplay . Bungie hired an expert in motion capture to develop more realistic character animations . Building a motion capture studio in @-@ house saved Bungie time as motion capture data could be applied to the game models the same day it was shot . The developers sought to increase replay value by focusing on improving artificial intelligence . Rather than scripting enemy encounters , they focused on a more open world or sandbox approach to battles . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 Composing team Martin O 'Donnell and Michael Salvatori scored Reach . O 'Donnell wrote " somber , more visceral " music since the plot is character @-@ driven and focuses on a planet that is already known — in the Halo fictional universe — to have fallen . The first music he wrote for Reach was played for the game 's world premiere , and he used it as a starting piece to develop further themes . O 'Donnell began work on Reach while ODST , for which he also wrote the music , was still in production , but did not begin composing until August 2009 . Past Halo collaborators Salvatori , C. Paul Johnson , and Stan LePard assisted O 'Donnell . With Reach , he did not give them strictly divided responsibilities . " I decided this time to come up with some themes , tempos , keys , and other basic starting points for musical ideas , " explained O 'Donnell . " I shared these with all the other composers and just asked them to take off if they felt inspired by any of that material . " The works @-@ in @-@ progress they came up with were either retouched by O 'Donnell or sent back to be finished by their composer . 
 In previous Halo games , sections of music overlap and change depending on player action . Reach 's system of interactive audio was much more complex , featuring the ability to combine up to seven layers of instrumentation compared to Combat Evolved 's two . Developers also expanded the sound effect system . Every interacting object in Reach produces two sounds for respective objects ; for example , a Warthog vehicle that hits an armored Covenant soldier produces a crunching metal noise based on the two colliding elements . The interaction between objects and terrain was demonstrated in an in @-@ game environment that O 'Donnell called " the <unk> room " after the bands of alternating colors on the objects and environment . 
 = = = Multiplayer beta = = = 
 Reach 's multiplayer beta was open to owners of Halo 3 : ODST . More than three million copies of ODST were sold by November 2009 . Bungie estimated between two and three million players for the upcoming Reach beta , compared to the 800 @,@ 000 that participated in Halo 3 's trial . Development schedules forced Bungie to release a six @-@ week @-@ old beta , fraught with bugs and issues already addressed in newer builds . Though concerned that these issues might tarnish the game 's image , Jarrard noted that they had little choice but to ship it as it was and communicate with players concerning the fixes . 
 More than 2 @.@ 7 million players participated in the beta , which lasted from May 3 to 20 . The game was rolled out from an internal group of Bungie and Microsoft employees , with the total number of players in the thousands . When the beta went public , more than a million played the first day , causing back @-@ end servers to struggle to handle the traffic . While the engineering team had overestimated server load , bugs in server clusters caused game uploads to become backed up , slowing matchmaking until the underlying issues could be fixed . Jarrard noted that the 16 million total hours of play time and large @-@ scale rollout of the beta was vital to seeing how Reach would perform . 
 Bungie used the beta to fix mistakes , glitches , and balance issues within gameplay elements . " We needed our fans to provide feedback , " said Lehto , adding that having a large audience to " hammer " on the game allowed them to gather useful feedback to mold the finished product . The game automatically collected statistics such as upload and matchmaking speeds , as well as game preferences ; sorting out what Jarrard called " the more subjective anecdotal feedback " from emails , notes , and forums proved more difficult . The Reach beta generated over 360 @,@ 000 forum posts on Bungie 's community forums . Bungie created official threads for groups of issues to manage the high volume of feedback ; " We tried to give people a little bit more of a direct avenue to give that feedback and to make our lives easier . It was definitely a lot to assess and digest , " said Jarrard . Certain feedback from the players did not correlate with the statistical data obtained from the matches during the beta . Chris Carney , lead designer for the multiplayer mode , recalled vocal dissatisfaction with the pistol early in the beta ; by the end of the beta , the weapon was responsible for most of the kills coming from newly included weapons in the game . Bungie deployed special test matches to eliminate lurking variables , balance gameplay , and make other informed changes . 
 = = Release = = 
 Reach was released in three editions on September 14 , 2010 . The standard edition consisted of the game and its manual . The limited edition featured an artifact bag with story information , different packaging , and an exclusive set of in @-@ game Elite armor . The " legendary edition " contained all the materials from the limited edition , a different packaging , two hours of developer commentary on the game 's cutscenes , an in @-@ game Spartan armor effect , and a 10 @-@ pound ( 4 @.@ 5 kg ) statue created by McFarlane Toys . North American players who purchased a first run copy of the game ( in @-@ store near launch day or pre @-@ ordered ) received an in @-@ game Spartan " recon " helmet customization ; players in other regions could earn it only by pre @-@ ordering . Reach also came bundled with a limited edition Xbox 360 Slim that sports Halo @-@ themed sounds and finish and two controllers . 
 Bungie released a demo on May 24 , 2010 , featuring a single player level from the game 's story mode , a multiplayer competitive map , and a cooperative firefight mission . Microsoft later listed Reach as an Xbox Live Marketplace download on August 12 , 2010 , at a price of <unk> Microsoft Points ( ~ US $ 1250 ) . A spokesperson confirmed the download was for media review purposes , and that there were no plans to distribute the game to the public through Games on Demand . Four days later , hackers managed to access , download , and distribute the game online ; Microsoft stated they were actively investigating the matter . Halo 2 , Halo 3 , and ODST were similarly leaked ahead of their planned release . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 According to Jarrard , the team decided to have much more " grandiose " marketing for Reach than that of ODST . Microsoft gave Reach its largest game marketing budget at the time , surpassing the scale and $ 6 @.@ 5 million cost of Halo 3 's award @-@ winning marketing . Marketers focused their efforts on connecting with consumers via universal themes , rather than outdoing Halo 3 's push . Interpublic Group of Companies ' <unk> handled strategy and video development for the marketing push , while <unk> developed interactive components . The agencies were involved with Halo 3 's marketing . The advertisers ' brief was simple : " Remember Reach . Focus on the heroes , not the victims . Expand our audience beyond Halo fanboys . " 
 The advertising campaign commenced in April 2010 with the live @-@ action short " Birth of a Spartan " . A series of online videos highlighting a day in the life of average Reach citizens before the Covenant invade , began on August 23 , followed by TV spots on August 29 . The series concluded in late August with another short , " Deliver Hope " . As part of the promotions , Microsoft created an interactive light sculpture ; users logged onto a website where they could direct a KUKA industrial robot to plot <unk> of light ; over 54 @,@ 000 points created a monument to Noble Team that faded unless more points were plotted . Reach 's marketing won several industry distinctions , among them thirteen medals from the MI6 Game Marketing Conference Awards . 
 Several lines of tie @-@ in merchandise were launched . McFarlane , who had produced toys for Halo 3 , created a line of five @-@ inch action figures , while Square Enix 's Play Arts toy label created additional figures . 
 Reach was released Tuesday , September 14 in 25 countries . Tens of thousands of stores signed up for midnight launch events ; sponsored events took place in London , Oslo , Stockholm , and New York . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Reach made $ 200 million in first @-@ day sales , a record for the franchise . Its strong sales suggested to analysts that core titles in the holiday season could reverse sluggish video game sales in 2010 . In its first sixteen days the game sold $ 350 million worth of merchandise . Reach premiered at the top of Xbox 360 and multi @-@ platform charts in most territories . Figures from the NPD Group estimated that Reach sold 3 @.@ 3 million units in North America , making it the third game for its console generation ( Xbox 360 , PS3 , Wii ) to sell more than three million units during the first month of its release ( alongside Halo 3 and Modern Warfare 2 ) . Halo : Reach became the third bestselling game of 2010 in North America , behind Call of Duty : Black Ops and Madden NFL 11 . It sold 4 @.@ 7 million units by September 2011 . 
 In the United Kingdom , Reach 's opening week was the fifth @-@ best launch in the territory , beating Halo 3 's debut by 20 @,@ 000 units and ODST 's by 200 @,@ 000 units . In its second week on the UK charts Reach was the second bestselling title , displaced by the racing game F1 2010 . Reach continued to hold the top place in North America . In Japan , the game debuted at first place with 44 @,@ 413 units , but fared poorly in the long @-@ term ( as have other Halo games ) . This showing was above ODST 's sales of 29 @,@ 734 in the comparable timeframe , but below Halo 3 's 61 @,@ 143 . Reach dropped out of the top 20 best selling titles entirely its second week . 
 = = = Downloadable content = = = 
 Reach supports additional downloadable content ( DLC ) . Bungie released the game 's first DLC , dubbed the " Noble Map Pack " , on November 30 , 2010 ; this map pack contains three maps , unique in that they are not based on Reach campaign levels . Microsoft partnered with Certain Affinity , which had worked on Halo 2 maps , to produce the second , " Defiant Map Pack " , made available for download on March 15 , 2011 . 
 A " title update " was released by 343 Industries for Reach that modified game mechanics such as bullet spread and melee damage . The update also contained playlists for Halo : Combat Evolved Anniversary . Purchasers of anniversary edition received a voucher to download the game 's seven multiplayer maps directly into Reach , the map pack was also made available to purchase via the Xbox Live Marketplace . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Halo : Reach received critical acclaim upon its release . On review @-@ aggregating web sites GameRankings and Metacritic , it holds averages of 91 @.@ 79 % and 91 / 100 , respectively . Critics such as 1UP.com 's Thierry Nguyen , the staff of Edge , GamePro 's Matt Cabral , and others considered Reach the best Halo title yet . Reviewers noted there were few major changes to the Halo formula ; IGN 's Erik Brudvig wrote that Reach was not " another rehash " , though franchise veterans would feel immediately at home with the game . 
 Nguyen , Tom Hoggins of The Daily Telegraph , and others wrote that Reach took the best elements from previous games and combined them in Bungie 's final entry . Hoggins noted that this approach made Reach " a blistering , breathless crescendo to a decade 's worth of work " , but also that it was unlikely to convert non @-@ Halo fans . The Daily Mirror 's Kevin Lynch praised Bungie for introducing new gameplay mechanics like jetpacks without ruining the title 's learning curve or game balance . 
 Brudvig praised the campaign for avoiding the " repetitive landscapes and circuitous , difficult to follow plots " of past Halo titles . GameSpot 's Chris Watters and others felt the artificial intelligence of friendly non @-@ player characters was less advanced than that of enemies , especially while driving . Steve Boxer wrote for The Guardian that Reach 's story made previous entries feel " amateurish " ; Nguyen felt that whereas previous Halo titles had become mired in inconsistencies and Star Trek @-@ like technobabble , Reach told a broader and more accessible story . Despite this , he contended , the game suffered from archetypal characters with which players spent little time : " I almost forgot that Noble Four ( Emile ) even existed for a big chunk of the campaign , as I rarely saw him . " Wired 's Gus Mastrapa unfavorably compared Noble Team to the marines of Aliens , writing that most of the characters were unmemorable and one @-@ dimensional . Nguyen also faulted the game for occasional lapses in exposition , but summed these up as " minor quibbles " compared to the improvements . In contrast , GamesRadar 's Charlie <unk> opined that Reach 's campaign was better than ODST 's , but lacked the " franchise @-@ changing potential " it promised . Lynch judged that while Bungie still had not learned to create a perfect story , " [ Reach ] does expertly set up bombastic scene after scene " . 
 Ben Kuchera of Ars Technica enjoyed the multiplayer component of Reach for its scope — " no matter how you play , you will find something to like . " Reviewers lauded the many customization options available to players : Watters and Kuchera praised the concept of psych profiles to hone more agreeable teammate selections , but questioned its effectiveness ; G4 considered Reach 's Forge World more expansive and impressive than Halo 3 's Forge offerings ; and Lynch wrote that the sheer quantity of multiplayer options would give the game a long life cycle for players . 
 Critics considered the audio @-@ visual components a marked advance over Halo 3 and ODST 's . The New Zealand Herald 's Troy <unk> @-@ Forbes wrote that with the improved graphics and animation , " [ Reach ] looks just like a big @-@ budget Hollywood project . " Official Xbox Magazine acknowledged better graphics in other games , but praised Reach for " eye @-@ catching beauty and breathless scope " , noting that the inclusion of wildlife and civilians heightened the impression of a planet under siege . Martin Robinson of IGN UK appreciated O 'Donnell 's moody score and the redone sound effects , writing that the new weapons " feel like they 're about to tear your hands off " . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 = Keep It Together ( Madonna song ) = 
 " Keep It Together " is a song by American singer Madonna from her fourth studio album Like a Prayer ( 1989 ) . It was released on January 30 , 1990 by Sire Records as the sixth and final single from the album in the United States , Canada and Japan . Written and produced by Madonna and Stephen Bray , the main inspiration behind " Keep It Together " was Madonna 's relationship with her family — whom she dearly missed after her divorce from actor Sean Penn . The song was dedicated to American funk and soul band Sly and the Family Stone . The lyrics deal with the realization of how important Madonna 's family has been to her life . A pop and funk song consisting of an upbeat rhythm and groove , " Keep It Together " features percussion , banjo and a conga . 
 In the United Kingdom and some other countries , " Dear Jessie " ( 1989 ) served as the final single from the album and " Keep It Together " was not released as a separate single at all . Receiving mixed reviews from critics , " Keep It Together " was compared to the work of Sister Sledge , especially their song " We Are Family " . The song was a commercial success , reaching a peak of number eight on the Billboard Hot 100 and Canadian charts , while topping the dance chart in the United States . In Australia it reached the top of the charts as a double A @-@ side single with " Vogue " . " Keep It Together " has been performed as the closing song of the 1990 Blond Ambition World Tour . The performances were inspired by the 1971 science fiction film , A Clockwork Orange , and during the introduction , Madonna sang a verse from " Family Affair " by Sly and the Family Stone . 
 = = Background = = 
 When Madonna started work on her fourth studio album , Like a Prayer , she was already in an emotional state of mind , following her divorce with then @-@ husband Sean Penn , her thirtieth birthday , and unfavorable reviews for her acting endeavors . She had certain personal matters on her mind that she thought could be the musical direction of the album . But she understood that as she was growing up , so was her core audience . Feeling the need to try something different , Madonna wanted the sound of her new album to indicate what could be popular in music . However , being raised as a Catholic , Madonna felt guilty about the failure of her marriage . She said , " Because in Catholicism you are a born sinner and you are a sinner all your life . ... I could not escape my past , nor could I relax " . Saddened by what was happening with her , Madonna missed her family , her father and her siblings . She confessed to Becky Johnston for Interview magazine : 
 I didn 't feel close to anybody in my family when I was growing up . [ ... ] I didn 't feel close to my older brothers , they were just typical older brothers who tortured me all the time . And I didn 't feel close to my sisters . There was a lot of competition in our family , [ ... ] so , I worked really hard in school . I was a straight @-@ A student , and they all hated me for it because I did it more for the position I was going to have in my father 's eyes that for whatever I was going to learn by studying . Then when I got a little older — when I was in high school and started dancing really seriously — I 'd say I got closer to my brothers . My oldest brother opened my eyes to lots of things [ ... ] . 
 The song was released as the sixth and final single from the album on January 30 , 1990 , by Sire Records . In Australia , it was released as the B @-@ side of " Vogue " , while it was not released in the United Kingdom at all , where " Dear Jessie " served as the album 's final single . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Keep It Together " is a pop and funk song with an upbeat rhythm and groove . It was produced by Madonna and Bray , and features Paulinho da Costa on percussion , brass playing by David <unk> and Steven Madaio , Bill Bottrell as the audio engineer and guitars by Chester Kamen . Despite not on the album 's credits , Prince also played guitar on the song according to Madonna . 
 According to Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine , the song is influenced by the Sly and the Family Stone track " Family Affair " ( 1971 ) . It starts as the sound of slap bass plays along with sequenced synth bass , as Madonna sings the opening lines , " Keep , keep it together , keep people together forever and ever " . As the first verse starts , a guitar comes into play with Madonna 's voice being backed by percussion and banjo . After the second chorus comes near the end , Madonna utters the line " Brothers and sisters , They hold the key , To your heart and your soul , Don 't forget that your family is gold " , the percussion sound is thinned out and a mixture of the sound from a live drummer and conga comes into the picture . The song ends with the main groove sound gradually fading out . 
 According to Rikky Rooksby , author of The Complete Guide to the Music of Madonna , although " Keep It Together " sonically pays tribute to Sly and the Family Stone , the lyrics talk about the realization of how important Madonna 's family has been as a form of stability in her life , especially in the line " Brothers and sisters , They 've always been there for me , We have a connection , Home is where the heart should be " . The lyrics follow the course of Madonna 's rise from figuratively being a " hungry sibling " ( " I 'm gonna leave this place , So I can forget every single hungry face " ) to being a superstar ( " I hit the big time but I still get the blues , Everyone 's a stranger , City life can get to you " ) . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Keep It Together " received mixed reviews from critics . Mark C. Taylor , author of Nots : Religion and Postmodernism , felt that " Keep It Together " was a " striking instance of her repeated invocation of family values " . He believed that Madonna 's fascination for family was reflected in the song . Carol Benz , one of the authors of The Madonna Connection , believed that the song was successful in asserting the necessity of family ties . J. Randy Taraborrelli , author of Madonna : An Intimate Biography described the track as " an uptempo romp about the trials and tribulations , and the joys of having a family . " Martha Bayles , author of Hole In Our Soul , felt that " Keep It Together " failed to become an anthem for emotional commitment , because of the funk nature of the song . Madonna , Unauthorized 's writer Christopher Anderson proclaimed the track as a worthy number @-@ one single , and complimented the song 's theme of allegiance to one 's family , despite the turmoil and dissensions that occur . Lucy O 'Brien , author of Madonna : Like an Icon , described it as an " upbeat meditation on sibling power " and believed that the purpose behind the song was to present a homey image of brothers and sisters happy and together , and Madonna 's need to restore bonds and relationships that had become fraught or distant in her life then . Hadley Freeman from The Guardian described " Keep It Together " as " amazing , purely for being Madonna 's take on Sister Sledge 's ' We Are Family ' , a concept no one foresaw , and the fact that she later disowned various members of her family gives it , shall we say , an interesting tinge of irony . " 
 USA Today 's Edna Gunderson wrote that " Keep It Together " evoked an " R & B groove " that was successful in adding more variation to Like a Prayer . Conversely , Ian Blair of the Chicago Tribune thought that the different funk tempo of the song distracted from the emotional quotient of the album . Blair added that the song " hits a groove that is one of the funkiest things Madonna has ever done . " Scott <unk> from The Palm Beach Post listed the song as one of the album 's " downpour " moments . Writing for The Jerusalem Post , Andy Goldberg from the newspaper listed the song as one of the highlights of the album , and complimented the family oriented lyrics . Bruce Britt from Boca Raton News believed that " Keep It Together " was one of the songs from the album , that exemplified the personal approach to songwriting by Madonna . 
 Spin 's Joe Levy named the song the only " great " dance record on Like a Prayer , and also observed that " Keep It Together " was a " girly @-@ disco " song that drew influences from Sister Sledge 's " We Are Family " and Madonna 's own " Into the Groove " . Stephen Holden from The New York Times believed that the song brought the pop @-@ funk style and hippie happiness of Sly and the Family Stone . Journalist J. D. Considine , while reviewing Like a Prayer for Rolling Stone , felt that " Keep It Together " portrayed " an impressive invocation of the importance of family " . Considine was concerned that since the confessional nature of the songs on Like a Prayer evoked strong emotions from the listener , " Keep It Together " would probably seem almost trivial by comparison to them . Stephen Thomas Erlewine from Allmusic believed that the song constituted of deep funk music . Louis Virtel of The Backlot gave the song a positive review , calling it a " rollicking family reunion " that is the " sunny side of “ Oh Father ’ s ” grim familial reckoning . " Kenneth Partridge from Billboard described the song as a mid @-@ tempo synth @-@ funk tune with a " tense " groove , on which Madonna offers an olive branch to her estranged father and siblings . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " Keep It Together " debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 56 , on the issue dated February 3 , 1990 . The next week , " Keep It Together " jumped to number 41 , becoming one of the greatest gaining songs . It eventually peaked at number eight on the Hot 100 , on the issue dated March 31 , 1990 . During the next few weeks , the song fell quickly from its peak as Madonna 's next single , " Vogue " , began to get massive radio airplay . Its final appearance on the Hot 100 was at number 83 on the issue dated April 28 , 1990 . " Keep It Together " topped the Hot Dance Music / Club Play chart , and peaked at number 66 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . Three months since its release , it was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipment of 500 @,@ 000 copies of the single . In Canada , the song debuted at number 85 on the RPM Singles Chart on February 10 , 1990 , and after eight weeks , it peaked at number eight . " Keep It Together " was present on the chart for 15 weeks and placed at number 86 on the RPM Year @-@ end chart for 1990 . 
 In Australia , " Keep It Together " charted on the ARIA Singles Chart along with " Vogue " . It debuted on the chart at number 19 and reached the top the next week , remaining there for five consecutive weeks . The song was present for a total of 35 weeks on the chart and reached number three on the Australian Year @-@ end chart for 1990 . It was certified double @-@ platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipment of 140 @,@ 000 copies of the single . After its release in Japan , " Keep It Together " appeared for two weeks on the Oricon Singles Chart , and reached number five . The single was not released in the United Kingdom , where " Dear Jessie " was the final single from Like a Prayer instead . 
 = = Live performance = = 
 Madonna has performed the song only on her 1990 Blond Ambition World Tour , where it was the closing song of the set list . The staging of the performances was inspired by the 1971 science fiction film , A Clockwork Orange . The shows featured an introductory verse from " Family Affair " by Sly and the Family Stone . Madonna wore an all @-@ black ensemble involving a cage vest , the longline bra , skintight shorts , knee @-@ pads and a bowler hat . Her getup was a nod to actress Liza Minnelli in the film Cabaret . The performance started with her dancers appearing on the stage , with chairs on their back . Madonna appeared in their middle and started doing push @-@ ups on the stage . She started singing " Family Affair " , then mid @-@ way through the song , changed to " Keep It Together " . During the intermediate music , Madonna and her dancers performed an intricate choreography with the chairs . At the end , all the musicians , dancers and collaborators came to say good @-@ bye to Madonna . The singer was left alone on stage to finish with a powerful repeat of her line " Keep people together forever and ever " . 
 In an interview with Stephen Holden from The New York Times , Madonna explained the significance of the performance : " Finally , right when you think I 'll end [ the concert ] on a happy note , I come out with my family to do a Bob Fosse @-@ <unk> ' Clockwork Orange ' rendition of ' Keep It Together ' . It 's the show 's ultimate statement about the family , because we 're absolutely brutalizing with each other , while there 's also no mistaking that we love each other deeply . " Author Lynne Layton complimented the performance , saying that " as in her double attitude to materialism , femininity , and everything else , what marks the performance is not that Madonna is in control , but that she is open about the pros and cons of family life and obviously echoes the experience of many . " Her thoughts were shared by John <unk> from Newsday , who complimented the aerobics performed onstage by Madonna and her dancers . Conversely , author Allen Metz commented that although the performance was tightly choreographed , the overall feel was marred due to the song 's own " shortcomings " . Greg Kot from Chicago Tribune felt that the addition of lines from " Family Affair " underlined the " home @-@ is @-@ where @-@ the @-@ heart @-@ is " theme of " Keep It Together " . Louis Virtel from The Backlot praised the performance of the song , stating that it served as the " perfect concluding performance . " Two different performances were recorded and released on video : the Blond Ambition – Japan Tour 90 , filmed in Yokohama , Japan , on April 27 , 1990 , and the Blond Ambition World Tour Live , filmed in Nice , France , on August 5 , 1990 . It was also shown on the HBO special titled Madonna Live ! – Blond Ambition World Tour , and was added in her 1991 documentary , Truth or Dare . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Madonna – songwriter , producer , vocals 
 Stephen Bray – songwriter , producer 
 Paulinho da Costa – percussion 
 David <unk> – brass , strings 
 Steven Madaio – brass 
 Bill Bottrell – audio engineer , mixing 
 Chester Kamen – guitars 
 Credits and personnel adapted from Like a Prayer album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Give Me Your Eyes = 
 " Give Me Your Eyes " is a song by contemporary Christian musician Brandon Heath from his second album , What If We . It was released in July 2008 as the album 's lead single and quickly gained success . It sold nearly 6 @,@ 000 downloads in the first week , and became 2008 's highest @-@ debuting Christian track at the time . It soon placed at No. 1 on Christian radio charts , and held the position for multiple consecutive weeks . At the end of 2008 , it was the second most @-@ played song of the year on Christian contemporary hit radio . 
 The song is about wanting to see the world as God would , and having a desire to view people with more compassion . " Give Me Your Eyes " was written by Heath and songwriter Jason Ingram , and was generally well received by critics . The song received two GMA Dove Awards in April 2009 , including the Song of the Year title . It was also Grammy Award @-@ nominated in the Best Gospel Song category for 2009 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The song 's meaning originated with a discussion between Brandon Heath and friend and songwriter Jason Ingram . " We had a conversation over Chinese food that we wished we could have God ’ s perspective on things " , Heath said . " If we did have His perspective , we 'd wish we could have it for long periods of time , rather than just for a few seconds . That was the beginning . " He soon began to pen a song about the idea , co @-@ writing " Give Me Your Eyes " with Ingram . Prior to recording What If We , Heath had written 40 possible tracks for the album , and although the song was not his top favorite , he noted that " Give Me Your Eyes " was " one of the first that really stuck out . " 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 The song 's genre is represented by pop , and includes acoustic and mild hip hop influences . It is a mid @-@ tempo song based upon a strummed acoustic guitar , background piano , and occasional strings . The song 's continuous clap @-@ sounding beat was described as a " hip @-@ hop shuffle " , drawing comparisons to Christian musician Mat Kearney . 
 Lyrically , the song is about a desire to view people as God would , and was " inspired by people @-@ watching at an airport " . Heath has said , " [ it 's ] a song about my own convictions for wanting to see the world with compassionate eyes . " 
 = = Release = = 
 " Give Me Your Eyes " was digitally released as the lead single from What If We on July 23 , 2008 . Upon its release , the single was commercially successful and soon began to place on Christian radio charts . It made nearly 6 @,@ 000 downloads in the first week , which was the highest @-@ debuting Christian track of 2008 at the time . By the second week , another 6 @,@ 700 copies were sold . It placed at No. 1 on Billboard 's Hot Christian Songs chart beginning in September , and spent an end total of 14 consecutive weeks at the top by December . It also held the No. 1 position on the Radio & Records ( R & R ) Christian CHR chart for 13 consecutive weeks from the last week of August through the start of December . For the week of November 1 , 2008 , " Give Me Your Eyes " debuted on Billboard 's Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart at No. 22 , which is equivalent to placing at No. 122 on the Hot 100 . 
 By mid @-@ September , it had sold 70 @,@ 000 digital downloads . The song placed at No. 1 on the iTunes top Christian songs chart and held the position from July through February for seven consecutive months , receiving 100 @,@ 000 downloads on iTunes by late October . It ended 2008 as the second most @-@ played song on R & R 's Christian CHR format ; the song also placed at No. 9 for the year 's top @-@ played Christian AC songs . 
 = = Compilation = = 
 This song was also by the appearances by the compilation album WOW Hits 2009 and Now That 's What I Call Faith . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The song was generally received well by critics . The New York Times highlighted Heath 's Grammy Award @-@ nominated What If We album as one of the best Grammy nominees in Christian music that year , saying ; " Mr. Heath 's sense of wonder is firmly intact — ' Give Me Your Eyes , ' which is nominated for best gospel song , is a breezy statement of humble devotion . " The song was featured on USA Today 's top ten " pick of the week " playlist in the beginning of March 2009 ; the magazine 's editor and music critic Brian Mansfield said , " Grammy and Dove Award nominations are attracting a second look for Heath 's song about seeing life 's big picture . " Jesus Freak Hideout 's Matthew Watson said of Heath 's future music efforts : " it could be really outstanding if he sticks to more upbeat songs like ' Give Me Your Eyes ' . " 
 The song was Grammy Award @-@ nominated in the Best Gospel Song category for the 51st Grammy Awards of 2009 . It received two awards at the 40th GMA Dove Awards in April 2009 : Song of the Year and Pop / Contemporary Song of the Year . On January 30 , 2010 , the song won an Emmy for the Nashville Rescue Mission : Hunger to Hope public service announcement campaign from the <unk> Chapter of the National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences . 
 = = Music video = = 
 A music video for " Give Me Your Eyes " was filmed over the night of July 23 – 24 , 2008 at the Birmingham @-@ Shuttlesworth International Airport in Birmingham , Alabama after most flights had landed for the night . It was directed by the Erwin Brothers and premiered on the Gospel Music Channel on August 23 , 2008 . The video is mainly set in an airport as Brandon Heath walks among people , with interspersed shots of Heath sitting on steps and singing . The scenes of Heath sitting on stairs and in a chair were filmed in the older 1962 Birmingham Air Terminal which is adjacent to the current terminal and no longer used for passenger traffic . In the bridge of the song , a portion of the video is played backwards as he sings the lines " I want a second glance / So give me a second chance / To see the way You see the people all alone " . In the last chorus , a few of the previous scenes are replayed as Heath now helps with people 's individual situations . In one of the early shots , a woman steps in front of an approaching car ; it is replayed as Heath intervenes and stops her from being hit by the car . The video 's airport scene included about 100 extras . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Hammerton 's Ferry = 
 Hammerton 's Ferry is a pedestrian and cycle ferry service across the River Thames in the London Borough of Richmond upon Thames , London , England . The ferry links the northern bank near Marble Hill House in Twickenham with the southern bank near Ham House in Ham . It is one of only four remaining ferry routes in London not to be replaced by a bridge or tunnel . 
 = = Historical background = = 
 Although ferries ( and later bridges ) had crossed the river to the east at Richmond since 1459 and to the west at Eel Pie Island since at least 1652 the lands to the south of the river at this point had historically been privately held by the Tollemache family ( owners of Ham House ) and off limits to the public . Consequently , despite the distance from the nearest crossings there was little demand for cross @-@ river services at this location . Additionally , the Tollemache family had licensing rights for the Twickenham Ferry at Eel Pie Island ( sometimes known as Dysart 's ferry after the family ) , and consequently had little interest in promoting a competing service . The Twickenham Ferry is a setting for some action in Little <unk> by Charles Dickens . 
 = = Walter Hammerton = = 
 In 1901 Marble Hill House on the north bank of the Thames and the surrounding park were purchased for public use and in 1902 the footpath on the southern bank near Ham House became a public right of way by Act of Parliament resulting in increased passenger traffic in the area . In 1908 local resident Walter Hammerton began hiring out boats to leisure users from a boathouse opposite Marble Hill House , and in 1909 began to operate a regular ferry service across the river at this point using a 12 @-@ passenger clinker @-@ built skiff , charging 1d per journey . 
 = = = Legal challenge = = = 
 In 1913 William Champion , and Lord Dysart , operators of the nearby Twickenham Ferry , took legal action against Hammerton to remove his right to operate the ferry . Although Hammerton won the initial case , the judgement was reversed on appeal . Following considerable public interest in the case , a public subscription raised the funds for Hammerton to take the case to the House of Lords , who ruled in his favour on 23 July 1915 . 
 The legal case resulted in considerable publicity for Hammerton , culminating in the release of the song " The Ferry to Fairyland " celebrating the case . ( " Fairyland " , in this case , referring to Marble Hill House , recently purchased by the London County Council for public enjoyment . ) 
 In 1947 Hammerton retired after 38 years of operating the ferry , leaving the ferry and boathouse to Sandy Scott . 
 = = Current operation = = 
 The ferry is currently owned by Francis Spencer and operated by Stan Rust . The current ferry , Peace of Mind , was designed and built by <unk> Limited in South Wales in 1997 . Hammerton 's original skiff is now on display at the Museum in Docklands . 
 The ferry currently operates between a floating boathouse on the north bank of the Thames and a rudimentary jetty on the south bank . The boathouse is also in use as a private mooring for leisure craft . The ferry operates on all weekends , and weekdays between February and October . As well as the ferry service , rowboats , canoes and motorboats can also be hired from the boathouse . 
 In July 2007 the ferry briefly made headlines when owner Francis Spencer saved from drowning a woman found floating in the Thames . After the rescue , the woman left the scene and was never identified . 
 A local tradition holds that a tunnel connects Ham House and Marble Hill House , paralleling the route of the ferry . However , there is no evidence that this is the case . 
 The ferry marks the starting point of the Great River Race and is on the course of the Twickenham Regatta . As the ferry has right @-@ of @-@ way over rowed craft , the races have to be carefully timed to ensure that the ferry does not interfere with their running . 
 = = Image gallery = = 
 = Nominal impedance = 
 Nominal impedance in electrical engineering and audio engineering refers to the approximate designed impedance of an electrical circuit or device . The term is applied in a number of different fields , most often being encountered in respect of : 
 The nominal value of the characteristic impedance of a cable or other form of transmission line . 
 The nominal value of the input , output or image impedance of a port of a network , especially a network intended for use with a transmission line , such as filters , equalisers and amplifiers . 
 The nominal value of the input impedance of a radio frequency antenna 
 The actual impedance may vary quite considerably from the nominal figure with changes in frequency . In the case of cables and other transmission lines , there is also variation along the length of the cable , if it is not properly terminated . 
 It is usual practice to speak of nominal impedance as if it were a constant resistance , that is , it is invariant with frequency and has a zero reactive component , despite this often being far from the case . Depending on the field of application , nominal impedance is implicitly referring to a specific point on the frequency response of the circuit under consideration . This may be at low @-@ frequency , mid @-@ band or some other point and specific applications are discussed in the sections below . 
 In most applications , there are a number of values of nominal impedance that are recognised as being standard . The nominal impedance of a component or circuit is often assigned one of these standard values , regardless of whether the measured impedance exactly corresponds to it . The item is assigned the nearest standard value . 
 = = 600 Ω = = 
 Nominal impedance first started to be specified in the early days of telecommunications . At first amplifiers were not available and when they did become available they were expensive . It was consequently necessary to achieve maximum power transfer from the cable at the receiving end in order to maximise the lengths of cables that could be installed . It also became apparent that reflections on the transmission line would severely limit the bandwidth that could be used or the distance that it was practicable to transmit . Matching equipment impedance to the characteristic impedance of the cable reduces reflections ( and they are eliminated altogether if the match is perfect ) and power transfer is maximised . To this end , all cables and equipment started to be specified to a standard nominal impedance . The earliest , and still the most widespread , standard is 600 Ω , originally used for telephony . It has to be said that the choice of this figure had more to do with the way telephones were interfaced into the local exchange than any characteristic of the local telephone cable . Telephones ( old style analogue telephones ) connect to the exchange through twisted pair cabling . Each leg of the pair is connected to a relay coil which detect the signalling on the line ( dialling , handset off @-@ hook etc . ) . The other end of one coil is connected to a supply voltage and the second coil is connected to ground . A telephone exchange relay coil is around 300 Ω so the two of them together are terminating the line in 600 Ω . 
 The wiring to the subscriber in telephone networks is generally done in twisted pair cable . Its impedance at audio frequencies , and especially at the more restricted telephone band frequencies , is far from constant . It is possible to manufacture this kind of cable to have a 600 Ω characteristic impedance but it will only be this value at one specific frequency . This might be quoted as a nominal 600 Ω impedance at 800 Hz or 1 kHz . Below this frequency the characteristic impedance rapidly rises and becomes more and more dominated by the ohmic resistance of the cable as the frequency falls . At the bottom of the audio band the impedance can be several tens of <unk> . On the other hand , at high frequency in the MHz region , the characteristic impedance flattens out to something almost constant . The reason for this response is explained at primary line constants . 
 Local area networks ( LANs ) commonly use a similar kind of twisted pair cable , but screened and manufactured to tighter tolerances than is necessary for telephony . Even though it has a very similar impedance to telephone cable , the nominal impedance is rated at 100 Ω . This is because the LAN data is in a higher frequency band where the characteristic impedance is substantially flat and mostly resistive . 
 <unk> of line nominal impedance led to two @-@ port networks such as filters being designed to a matching nominal impedance . The nominal impedance of low @-@ pass symmetrical T- or Pi @-@ filter sections ( or more generally , image filter sections ) is defined as the limit of the filter image impedance as the frequency approaches zero and is given by , 
 <formula> 
 where L and C are as defined in constant k filter . As can be seen from the expression , this impedance is purely resistive . This filter transformed to a band @-@ pass filter will have an impedance equal to the nominal impedance at resonance rather than low frequency . This nominal impedance of filters will generally be the same as the nominal impedance of the circuit or cable that the filter is working into . 
 While 600 Ω is an almost universal standard in telephony for local presentation at customer 's premises from the exchange , for long distance transmission on trunk lines between exchanges other standard nominal impedances are used and are usually lower , such as 150 Ω . 
 = = 50 Ω and 75 Ω = = 
 In the field of radio frequency ( RF ) and microwave engineering , by far and away the most common transmission line standard is 50 Ω coaxial cable ( coax ) , which is an unbalanced line . 50 Ω first arose as a nominal impedance during world war two work on radar and is a compromise between two requirements . This standard was the work of the wartime US joint Army @-@ Navy RF Cable Coordinating Committee . The first requirement is for minimum loss . The loss of coaxial cable is given by , 
 <formula> <unk> / metre 
 where R is the loop resistance per metre and Z0 is the characteristic impedance . Making the diameter of the inner conductor larger will decrease R and decreasing R decreases the loss . On the other hand , Z0 depends on the ratio of the diameters of outer and inner conductors ( Dr ) and will decrease with increasing inner conductor diameter thus increasing the loss . There is a specific value of Dr for which the loss is a minimum and this turns out to be 3 @.@ 6 . For an air dielectric coax this corresponds to a characteristic impedance of 77 Ω . The coax produced during the war was rigid air @-@ insulated pipe , and this remained the case for some time afterwards . The second requirement is for maximum power handling and was an important requirement for radar . This is not the same condition as minimum loss because power handling is usually limited by the breakdown voltage of the dielectric . However , there is a similar compromise in terms of the ratio of conductor diameters . Making the inner conductor too large results in a thin insulator which breaks down at a lower voltage . On the other hand , making the inner conductor too small results in higher electric field strength near the inner conductor ( because the field lines are closer together on the smaller circumference ) and again reduces the breakdown voltage . The ideal ratio , Dr , for maximum power handling turns out to be 1 @.@ 65 and corresponds to a characteristic impedance of 30 Ω in air . The 50 Ω impedance is the geometric mean of these two figures ; 
 <formula> 
 and then rounding to a convenient whole number . 
 Wartime production of coax , and for a period afterwards , tended to use standard plumbing pipe sizes for the outer conductor and standard AWG sizes for the inner conductor . This resulted in coax that was nearly , but not quite , 50 Ω . Matching is a much more critical requirement at RF than it is at voice frequencies , so when cable started to become available that was truly 50 Ω a need arose for matching circuits to interface between the new cables and legacy equipment , such as the rather strange 51 @.@ 5 Ω to 50 Ω matching network . 
 While 30 Ω cable is highly desirable for its power handling capabilities , it has never been in commercial production because the large size of inner conductor makes it difficult to manufacture . This is not the case with 77 Ω cable . Cable with 75 Ω nominal impedance has been in use from an early period in telecommunications for its low loss characteristic . According to Stephen <unk> of Belden Wire & Cable 75 Ω was chosen as the nominal impedance rather than 77 Ω because it corresponded to a standard AWG wire size for the inner conductor . For coax video cables and interfaces 75 Ω is now the near universal standard nominal impedance . 
 = = Radio antennae = = 
 The widespread idea that 50 Ω and 75 Ω cable nominal impedances arose in connection with the input impedance of various antennae is a myth . It is true , however , that several common antennae are easily matched to cables with these nominal impedances . A quarter wavelength monopole in free space has an impedance of 36 @.@ 5 Ω , and a half wavelength dipole in free space has an impedance of 72 Ω . A half @-@ wavelength folded dipole , commonly seen on television antennae , on the other hand , has a 288 Ω impedance – four times that of a straight @-@ line dipole . The ½ λ dipole and the ½ λ folded dipole are commonly taken as having nominal impedances of 75 Ω and 300 Ω , respectively . 
 An installed antenna ’ s feed @-@ point impedance varies above and below the quoted value , depending on its installation height above the ground and the electrical properties of the surrounding earth . 
 = = Cable quality = = 
 One measure of cable manufacturing and installation quality is how closely the characteristic impedance adheres to the nominal impedance along its length . Impedance changes can be caused by variations in geometry along the cable length . In turn , these can be caused by a faulty manufacturing process or by faulty installation ( such as not observing limits on bend radii ) . Unfortunately , there is no easy , non @-@ destructive method of directly measuring impedance along a cable 's length . It can , however , be indicated indirectly by measuring reflections , that is , return loss . Return loss by itself does not reveal much , since the cable design will have some intrinsic return loss anyway due to not having a purely resistive characteristic impedance . The technique used is to carefully adjust the cable termination to obtain as close a match as possible and then to measure the variation of return loss with frequency . The minimum return loss so measured is called the structural return loss ( SRL ) . SRL is a measure of a cables ' adherence to its nominal impedance but it is not a direct correspondence , errors further from the generator have less effect on SRL than those close to it . The measurement must also be carried out at all in @-@ band frequencies to be significant . The reason for this is that equally spaced errors introduced by the manufacturing process will cancel and be invisible , or at least much reduced , at certain frequencies due to quarter wave impedance transformer action . 
 = = Audio systems = = 
 For the most part , audio systems both professional and domestic , have their components interconnected with low impedance outputs connected to high impedance inputs . These impedances are poorly defined and nominal impedances are not usually assigned for this kind of connection . The exact impedances make little difference to performance as long as the latter is many times larger than the former . This is a common interconnection scheme , not just for audio , but for electronic units in general which form part of a larger equipment or are only connected over a short distance . Where audio needs to be transmitted over large distances , which is often the case in broadcast engineering , considerations of matching and reflections dictate that a telecommunications standard is used , which would normally mean using 600 Ω nominal impedance ( although other standards are sometimes encountered , such as sending at 75 Ω and receiving at 600 Ω which has bandwidth advantages ) . The nominal impedance of the transmission line and of the amplifiers and equalisers in the transmission chain will all be the same value . 
 Nominal impedance is used , however , to characterise the transducers of an audio system , such as its microphones and loudspeakers . It is important that these are connected to a circuit capable of dealing with impedances in the appropriate range and assigning a nominal impedance is a convenient way of quickly determining likely incompatibilities . Loudspeakers and microphones are dealt with in separate sections below . 
 = = = Loudspeakers = = = 
 Loudspeaker impedances are kept relatively low compared with other audio components so that the required audio power can be transmitted without using inconveniently ( and dangerously ) high voltages . The most common nominal impedance for loudspeakers is 8 Ω . Also used are 4 Ω and 16 Ω . The once common 16 Ω is now mostly reserved for high frequency compression drivers since the high frequency end of the audio spectrum does not usually require so much power to reproduce . 
 The impedance of a loudspeaker is not constant across all frequencies . In a typical loudspeaker the impedance will rise with increasing frequency from its DC value , as shown in the diagram , until it reaches a point of its mechanical resonance . Following resonance , the impedance falls to a minimum and then begins to rise again . Speakers are usually designed to operate at frequencies above their resonance , and for this reason it is the usual practice to define nominal impedance at this minimum and then round to the nearest standard value . The ratio of the peak resonant frequency to the nominal impedance can be as much as 4 : 1 . It is , however , still perfectly possible for the low frequency impedance to actually be lower than the nominal impedance . A given audio amplifier may not be capable of driving this low frequency impedance even though it is capable of driving the nominal impedance , a problem that can be solved either with the use of crossover filters or underrating the amplifier supplied . 
 In the days of valves ( vacuum tubes ) , most loudspeakers had a nominal impedance of 16 Ω . Valve outputs require an output transformer to match the very high output impedance and voltage of the output valves to this lower impedance . These transformers were commonly tapped to allow matching of the output to a multiple loudspeaker setup . For example , two 16 Ω loudspeakers in parallel will give an impedance of 8 Ω . Since the advent of solid @-@ state amplifiers whose outputs require no transformer , the once @-@ common multiple @-@ impedance outputs have become rare , and lower impedance loudspeakers more common . The most common nominal impedance for a single loudspeaker is now 8 Ω . Most solid @-@ state amplifiers are designed to work with loudspeaker combinations of anything from 4 Ω to 8 Ω . 
 = = = Microphones = = = 
 There are a large number of different types of microphone and there are correspondingly large differences in impedance between them . They range from the very low impedance of ribbon microphones ( can be less than one ohm ) to the very large impedance of piezoelectric microphones which are measured in <unk> . The Electronic Industries Alliance ( EIA ) has defined a number of standard microphone nominal impedances to aid categorisation of microphones . 
 The International Electrotechnical Commission defines a similar set of nominal impedances , but also has a coarser classification of low ( less than 600 Ω ) , medium ( 600 Ω to 10 <unk> ) and high ( more than 10 <unk> ) impedances . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 <unk> inputs are usually high impedance so that they only minimally affect the circuit being measured when connected . However , the input impedance is made a specific nominal value , rather than arbitrarily high , because of the common use of X10 probes . A common value for oscilloscope nominal impedance is 1 <unk> resistance and 20 <unk> capacitance . With a known input impedance to the oscilloscope , the probe designer can ensure that the probe input impedance is exactly ten times this figure ( actually oscilloscope plus probe cable impedance ) . Since the impedance included the input capacitance and the probe is an impedance divider circuit , the result is that the waveform being measured is not distorted by the RC circuit formed by the probe resistance and the capacitance of the input ( or the cable capacitance which is generally higher ) . 
 = Geastrum pectinatum = 
 Geastrum pectinatum is an inedible species of mushroom belonging to the earthstar family of fungi . Although young specimens are spherical , fruit body development involves the outer layer of tissue splitting open like a star into 7 to 10 pointed rays that eventually bend back to point downward , revealing a small – 1 to 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 to 1 @.@ 0 in ) broad – spore sac . The spore sac is supported by a small radially wrinkled stalk . There is a distinct conical opening ( peristome ) at the top of the spore sac that is up to 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 3 in ) long . It is commonly known as the beaked earthstar or the beret earthstar , in reference to the shape of the spore sac and its prominent , protruding peristome . The mass of spores and surrounding cells within the sac , the gleba , is dark @-@ brown , and becomes powdery in mature specimens . Spores are spherical , measuring 4 to 6 micrometers in diameter , with warts on their surfaces . Although uncommon , Geastrum pectinatum has a cosmopolitan distribution , and has been collected in various locations in Europe , North and South America , Asia and Africa , where it grows on the ground in open woods . Like several other earthstars , crystals of calcium oxalate are found on G. pectinatum , and are thought to be involved in fruit body maturation . 
 = = Taxonomy , classification , and naming = = 
 Christian Hendrik Persoon published the first description of Geastrum pectinatum in 1801 . In 1860 , Miles Joseph Berkeley and Moses Ashley Curtis described the species Geastrum <unk> ( originally named Geaster <unk> ) , based on specimens sent to them by Charles Wright that he obtained from the Bonin Islands during the North Pacific Exploring and Surveying Expedition . Japanese mycologist Sanshi Imai considered this identical with G. pectinatum in a 1936 publication . In 1959 , mycologist J.T. Palmer reported comparing the original specimen collected by Persoon with fresh samples of what were then thought to be the distinct species G. <unk> and G. <unk> ( named by English naturalist Miles Joseph Berkeley in 1838 and 1848 , respectively ) and concluded the three specimens were synonymous ; the original Persoon specimen was then designated as the neotype . 
 In Ponce de Leon 's classification of Geastrum , he placed the species in the subgenus Geastrum , section Geastrum , as the type of the subsection <unk> , group <unk> . Other species in this group — characterized by a determinate peristome surrounded by a groove — are G. xerophilum , and G. <unk> . In Stanek 's ( 1958 ) infrageneric concept , G. pectinatum is placed in section <unk> ( encompassing species whereby the mycelial layer covers the entire endoperidium ) , in subsection <unk> , which includes species with plicate <unk> . 
 The specific epithet is derived from the Latin pectinatum , " like a comb " . Its common names include the " beaked earthstar " or the " beret earthstar " . Samuel Frederick Gray called it the " comblike shell @-@ puff " in his 1821 " A Natural Arrangement of British Plants " . 
 = = Description = = 
 Immature specimens – 1 to 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 to 0 @.@ 8 in ) diameter – are roughly spherical and begin their development submerged in the ground , but gradually push above ground during maturation . In this state the outer surface is covered with mycelia , which forms a soft , fluffy coat that holds soil and debris to the outer surface . The young fruit bodies often have a rounded knob or protuberance . Like other members of genus Geastrum , G. pectinatum has a fruit body wall that is multilayered . At maturity , the outer layer ( the exoperidium ) splits open from the top in a stellate ( star @-@ shaped ) manner into 7 – 9 rays that support the spore sac contained within the inner wall ( the endoperidium ) . The expanded specimens are up to 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) broad and 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) tall . The rays of the exoperidium bend back ( reflex ) , simultaneously elevating the spore sac above the ground in what is known as the fornicate condition ; this position exposes the spore sac to more air currents , aiding spore dispersal . The surface of the rays often crack to reveal lighter @-@ colored areas , especially along the edges . Together with a well @-@ developed layer of mycelium , the rays are typically bound to fragments of earth or forest duff . 
 The tough and membranous endoperidium comprising the spore sac , purple @-@ brown in color and 0 @.@ 5 to 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 to 0 @.@ 6 in ) tall by 1 to 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 to 1 @.@ 0 in ) wide , is supported by a small stalk — a pedicel — that is 3 – 4 mm long by 7 – 10 mm wide and which has a grooved ( sulcate ) apophysis , or swelling . This ring @-@ shaped swelling is made of remnants from a tissue called the pseudoparenchymatous layer . When fresh , the pseudoparenchymatous layer is whitish in color , thick and fleshy ; it dries to become brown to dark brown while shrinking and often splitting and peeling . The endoperidium may be pruinose — covered with fine , white , powder — although the presence of this characteristic has been noted as being somewhat variable . The spore sac is opened by a single apical pore atop a conical " beak " , or peristome . The peristome is pectinate — made of tissue that resembles the teeth of a comb ; the specific epithet is named after this characteristic . The peristome is 2 to 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 08 to 0 @.@ 20 in ) long , and comprises 20 – 32 distinct ridges . The mass of spores and surrounding cells within the sac , the gleba , is dark @-@ brown , and becomes powdery in mature specimens . Internally , the endoperidium contains a structure called the columella that is narrowly conical in shape , whitish or pale brown , and extends more than halfway into the gleba . G. pectinatum has no distinguishable odor or taste ; like other earthstar mushrooms , it is inedible , and of " no alimentary interest " . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The spores of G. pectinatum are brown and opaque . They have a roughly spherical shape and are ornamented with transparent ( hyaline ) , truncate warts ; the diameter is 4 – 4 @.@ 5 µm , or 5 @.@ 5 – 6 @.@ 5 if the lengths of the warts is included . Spore @-@ bearing cells , the basidia , are 2- or 4 @-@ spored , while cystidia ( specialized sterile cells that occur at the hymenial surface in some mushrooms ) are absent . The capillitia — a mass of thread @-@ like sterile fibers dispersed among the spores — are light brown and 3 – 7 µm in diameter . They are tapered , thick @-@ walled with a narrow interior , and either smooth or slightly encrusted . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Geastrum pectinatum has been mistaken for the morphologically similar but smaller species G. <unk> . The latter species lacks vertical striations on the basal portions of the endoperidium , and does not have a pseudoparenchymatous collar around the stem . Another similar species , G. <unk> , has a shorter stem and is missing the ridges at the base of the spore sac . Further , the color of its spore sac is usually brown , in contrast to the gray @-@ blue of G. pectinatum . G. xerophilum also has a dusting of white powder on the surface of the spore sac , but unlike G. pectinatum , consistently lacks a ring at the base of the pedicel ; furthermore , in contrast to G. pectinatum , the spores of G. xerophilum are yellow and contain oil drops that are readily observable with a microscope . G. striatum has smaller fruit bodies than G. pectinatum , and a distinct collar @-@ like apophysis . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 This species has been reported to grow solitary or in groups on sandy soil or rich composted soil in both mixed and coniferous forests , often beneath cedars . In Hawaii , it is usually found growing in duff under coastal Casuarina and groves of Cupressus . The species has been noted to occur in late summer and autumn ( in Britain and Europe ) , but the fruit bodies may dry and persist for some time . 
 Geastrum pectinatum has a cosmopolitan distribution . It has been reported from Australia , and New Zealand , Africa ( the Congo , South Africa ) Central America ( Costa Rica ) , Asia ( Northeastern China and Japan ) , and South America ( Brazil ) . In Europe , it has been reported from Belgium , Ireland , Germany , the Netherlands , Norway , and Sweden . In the Middle East , it has been recorded in Israel , and Turkey . In North America , it is known from the United States ( including Hawaii ) , Canada , and Mexico . It is in the Red Data Book ( documenting rare and endangered species ) of Latvia , and is considered a threatened species in Poland . North American sources gives its frequency of appearance as " rare " , but Stellan Sunhede , in his 1989 monograph on the Geastraceae , considers it one of the most common earthstar mushrooms of northern Europe . 
 = = Calcium oxalate crystals = = 
 Calcium oxalate is a common crystalline compound found in many fungi , including the earthstars . The presence of calcium oxalate crystals — apparent as a whitish powder on the surface of the spore sac — has been verified for G. pectinatum using scanning electron microscopy . The calcium oxalate crystals occur in the tetragonal form , known as <unk> . A study on the related species Geastrum saccatum has shown that these crystals are responsible for the characteristic opening ( dehiscence ) of the outer peridial layers . The formation of calcium oxalate crystals stretches the layers of the outer walls , pushing apart the inner and outer layers of the peridium . 
 = = = Cited literature = = = 
 Sunhede S. ( 1989 ) . Geastraceae ( <unk> ) : Morphology , Ecology , and Systematics with Special Emphasis on the North European Species . Synopsis Fungorum , 1 . Oslo , Norway : <unk> . ISBN 82 @-@ <unk> @-@ 05 @-@ 5 . 
 = Here with Me ( MercyMe song ) = 
 " Here with Me " is a song by Christian rock band , MercyMe . Written and composed by the band , as well as Peter <unk> , Dan Muckala and Brad Russell , " Here with Me " is a ballad with a musical vibe influenced by worship , pop and rock music ; the overall sound has been compared to that of alternative rock band , Coldplay . " Here with Me " lyrically discusses the omnipotence of God . 
 Released as the lead single from MercyMe 's 2004 album , Undone , " Here with Me " attained positive critical reception and peaked at No. 1 on multiple Christian radio chart formats ; it also peaked inside the top 40 on several mainstream radio formats . It ranked at No. 16 on the 2000s decade @-@ end Hot Christian Songs and Hot Christian AC charts . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 " Here with Me " was written and composed by MercyMe , Dan Muckala , Brad Russell , and Peter Kipley . It was recorded at several locations : Blueberry Hill , Sound Stage , Abbey Road Studios , The Indigo Room , <unk> , Luminous Sound , and The <unk> . Recording was handled by F. Reid Shippen , Mike O 'Connor , and Steve Bishir ; the strings on the song were arranged by Rob Mathes and recorded by Simon Rhodes at Abbey Road Studios . " Here with Me " was mixed by Shippen and produced by Kipley , while the mastering for the song was handled by Ted Jensen at Sterling Sound . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Here with Me " is a ballad with a length of four minutes and nine seconds . It is set in common time in the key of B major , with a moderate tempo of eighty @-@ four beats per minute and a vocal range spanning from B3 @-@ F ♯ 5 . Musically , " Here with Me " has been compared to the musical vibe of Coldplay and Robbie Williams . The song is piano @-@ driven , with influences from pop , rock , and worship . It features a musical crescendo that has been described as similar to " I Can Only Imagine " . The lyrical content of the song has been described as having a devotional bent , and conveys a theme of God 's omnipotence and holiness . " Here with Me " also attempts to comprehend the mystery of God 's love . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " Here with Me " received generally positive reviews from critics . Johnny <unk> of Allmusic commented that " the lush " Here With Me " might be a Robbie Williams pop gem were it not for its devotional bent " . David McCreary of CCM Magazine opined on his review of Undone that " One surefire hit is “ Here With Me , ” the album ’ s first single ... A captivating piano @-@ driven ballad , the song vividly conveys the wonder of God ’ s omnipresence and holiness and features a rousing crescendo rivaling that of “ Imagine " . Russ Breimeier of Christianity Today International commented that the song was " worshipful " , also opining that it " struggle [ s ] with comprehending the mystery and enormity of God 's love " . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 " Here with Me " debuted at No. 40 on the Hot Christian Songs chart for the week of April 3 , 2004 . The song advanced to No. 10 in its sixth chart week , and to No. 5 in its eight chart week , holding that spot for three consecutive weeks . In its sixteenth chart week , " Here with Me " advanced to its peak of No. 1 , holding that spot for eleven consecutive weeks . It dropped to No. 2 in its twenty @-@ seventh chart week , holding that spot for two weeks before returning to No. 1 for two more weeks . " Here with Me " dropped to No. 3 in its thirty @-@ first chart week , and spent a further eight weeks on the chart before dropping out . In all , " Here with Me " spent thirty @-@ nine weeks on the Hot Christian Songs chart , thirteen of them at No. 1 . On the Adult Contemporary chart , " Here with Me " debuted at No. 24 for the chart week of May 15 , 2004 . " Here with Me " advanced to No. 19 in its sixth chart week , holding that spot for three consecutive weeks . In its nineteenth chart week , it advanced to its peak of No. 12 , and spent a further seven weeks on the chart before dropping out . In all , " Here with Me " spent twenty @-@ six weeks on the Adult Contemporary chart . 
 On the Adult Top 40 chart , " Here with Me " debuted at No. 38 for the chart week of August 28 , 2004 . It spent an additional week on the chart before dropping out , after having spent two weeks on the chart . " Here with Me " also peaked at No. 1 on the Billboard Hot Christian AC chart ( spending ten weeks at No. 1 ) , the Radio & Records Christian AC chart ( spending seven weeks at No. 1 ) , and the Radio & Records Inspo chart ( spending five weeks at No. 1 ) , as well as peaking at No. 2 on the Radio & Records Christian CHR chart . " Here with Me " ranked at No. 4 on the 2004 year @-@ end Hot Christian Singles and Tracks Titles and Hot Christian Adult Contemporary Titles charts , as well as at No. 19 on the year @-@ end Adult Contemporary Singles and Tracks chart . Additionally , it ranked at No. 16 on both the 2000s decade @-@ end Hot Christian Songs and Hot Christian AC charts . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Direct grant grammar school = 
 A direct grant grammar school was a type of selective secondary school in England and Wales that existed between 1945 and 1976 . One quarter of the places in these schools were directly funded by central government , while the remainder attracted fees , some paid by the Local Education Authority and some by private pupils . On average , the schools received just over half of their income from the state . 
 The status was introduced by the Education Act 1944 as a modification of an existing direct grant scheme to privately endowed schools . There were 179 direct grant grammar schools , which , together with over 1 @,@ 200 grammar schools maintained by local authorities , formed the most academic tier of the Tripartite System . They varied greatly in size and composition , but , on average , achieved higher academic results than either maintained grammar schools or independent schools . 
 State secondary education was reorganised on comprehensive lines in the late 1960s and early 1970s . The direct grant was phased out from 1975 and the schools were required to choose between becoming maintained comprehensive schools or fully independent schools . Forty @-@ five schools , almost all Roman Catholic , joined the state system , while a few closed . The rest ( including all the secular schools ) became independent and mostly remain as highly selective independent schools . 
 = = Origins = = 
 In the 19th century , few boys and very few girls in England and Wales received secondary education , which was available only at private schools . During this time , secondary provision expanded and adjusted to growing demand . At the start of that century , some boarding schools like Eton College and Winchester College thrived educating the sons of the aristocracy , but most endowed grammar schools were in decline , their classical curricula seen as irrelevant to the industrial age . These schools were reformed under the Endowed Schools Act 1869 , which also led to many endowments being diverted to the creation of girls ' schools . In the meantime a range of other schools had appeared . After the Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829 and mid @-@ century Irish immigration , Catholic teaching orders from Ireland and mainland Europe began to establish their own grammar schools . New proprietary schools were established , initially as joint @-@ stock companies , converting to charities if they were successful . One of the largest such companies was the Girls ' Public Day School Company ( later Trust ) , set up to provide an affordable academic education for girls , which had established 32 schools by 1894 . 
 In the latter part of the century , many of the less wealthy schools received annual grants from the Department of Science and Art and from their county councils . The grant system was restructured when the Board of Education was created in 1901 to fund early secondary schools , and the Education Act 1902 gave counties and county boroughs responsibility for schools , designating them as local education authorities ( LEAs ) . Secondary schools controlled by voluntary bodies could receive a grant from either the Board of Education or their local authority , or both . In return they were required to meet the Board 's regulations , and were subject to the same system of inspections as state @-@ funded schools . Under the Education ( Administrative Provisions ) Act 1907 , secondary schools in receipt of grant were required to admit a specified proportion of their intake , usually 25 % , free of charge from state elementary schools . Suitable pupils were selected using a scholarship examination . 
 Circular 1381 , a directive issued by the Board of Education in 1926 , required that schools choose a single source of grant : they could receive a " direct grant " from central government , or be " grant @-@ aided " by their local authority . By 1932 there were 240 secondary schools receiving a direct grant , compared with 1138 aided by local authorities . Although this division was intended purely as an administrative convenience , local authorities gradually gained more influence over the schools they aided , in part because of the schools ' weak financial position during the Great Depression . 
 The Depression and the falling birth rate in the pre @-@ war years had also weakened independent schools and schools receiving the direct grant . At the same time , the state @-@ funded sector had grown to the point where universal secondary education seemed achievable , and changes in society had made the idea more popular . Proposals were made for a reorganisation of the maintained sector , including a new accommodation with the voluntary schools . In response , the Headmasters ' Conference persuaded the President of the Board of Education , R.A. Butler , to establish a commission under Lord Fleming in July 1942 " to consider means whereby the association between the Public Schools ... and the general education system of the country could be developed and extended " . 
 = = Direct grant scheme = = 
 The Education Act 1944 aimed to introduce a universal system of secondary education for England and Wales . Under the Tripartite System , there were to be three types of schools , with pupils sitting an eleven plus exam to determine which type of school they would be sent to . The most academic tier would be the grammar school , and the Act revised the terms of the direct grant to operate alongside LEA @-@ maintained grammar schools , many of which were former LEA @-@ aided schools . The latter schools , unable to cope with the costs of the reorganisation required by the 1944 Act , had been offered the status of voluntary controlled or voluntary aided schools , under which the state would pay all their running costs and all or most of their capital costs . They were thus fully integrated into the state system . 
 The new direct grant scheme was a modification of proposals in the Fleming Report of 1944 . A direct grant grammar school would provide 25 % of its places free of charge to children who had spent at least 2 years in maintained primary schools , and would reserve at least a further 25 % of places to be paid for by the LEA if required . The remaining ( " residuary " ) places would attract fees , but no child would be admitted unless they had achieved the required standard in the eleven plus . The schools would be inspected by Her Majesty 's Inspectors of Schools , would have one third of their governing bodies appointed by the LEA , and would require the approval of the Secretary of State to raise fees or carry out building work . 
 The scheme was attractive to most of the direct grant schools . Of the 231 secondary schools receiving direct grant in 1945 , 196 applied to join the new scheme , with the rest becoming independent schools . In addition 31 grant @-@ aided schools applied to join the scheme . Of these , 164 schools ( including four formerly grant @-@ aided schools ) were accepted as direct grant grammar schools . The list was re @-@ opened between 1957 and 1961 , when 44 applications were received , of which 15 were accepted . There were therefore 179 direct grant grammar schools , alongside over 1200 maintained grammar schools . 
 Beside the Direct Grant Scheme , the Act also made provision for LEAs to fund places at independent schools in areas where there was a shortage of appropriate places in maintained schools . For example , there might be a lack of selective places , or of selective places in Roman Catholic schools . In the late 1960s , 56 independent schools had over 25 % of their places funded by LEAs in this way , with seven of them over 75 % LEA @-@ funded . 
 = = Characteristics of the schools = = 
 In 1966 , when direct grant schools were at their height , they educated 3 @.@ 1 % of secondary pupils across England and Wales , while independent schools accounted for 7 @.@ 1 % . For A @-@ level students , these proportions rose to 6 @.@ 2 % and 14 @.@ 7 % respectively . Before <unk> School became coeducational in 1972 , all but 2 of the schools were single sex , with a slight majority of girls ' schools . There were 56 Roman Catholic schools , 14 Church of England and 6 Methodist . Many of the schools were in the north of England , with 46 in the historic county of Lancashire ( including Manchester ) and 18 in the West Riding of Yorkshire , while there were only 7 in inner London and 4 in Wales . In 1961 , an average of 59 % of pupils at direct grant grammar schools were state @-@ funded , but the proportion also varied greatly between schools . 
 Direct grant schools had similar teacher / pupil ratios to the maintained grammar schools , as their fees were regulated to match costs at the latter schools . The proportion of teachers with first and second class degrees was slightly lower than in their maintained counterparts . The principal difference from the maintained schools was greater freedom from LEA influence . 
 Although there was much variation , these schools as a group were middle @-@ class institutions , with many tending to move closer to the independent schools in social composition . On average , three @-@ quarters of pupils came from white @-@ collar homes , including 60 % with fathers in management or the professions , while only 7 % were children of semi @-@ skilled or unskilled workers . On average , the intake of the schools was also more academically selective than either maintained grammar schools or independent schools . Their results were correspondingly high , with 60 % of their pupils staying on to age 18 and 38 % going on to university , significantly greater proportions than either of the other groups of schools . 
 = = Types of schools = = 
 There was a great deal of variation between direct grant grammar schools . According to the Donnison Report ( discussed in the next section ) , the schools were of four types , though the boundaries between them were not always clear @-@ cut . 
 Donnison called the first group " regional schools " : large , highly academically selective day schools with large sixth forms , located near large cities , and mostly boys ' schools belonging to the Headmaster 's Conference . The archetype of the direct grant grammar school , was the largest , Manchester Grammar School , whose High Master from 1945 to 1962 , Eric James ( elevated to the peerage in 1959 ) , was an outspoken advocate of the " meritocracy " . In 1968 the school sent 77 % of its boys on to university , a rate surpassed only by the independent Winchester College . Close behind were such schools as Bradford Grammar School , Leeds Grammar School , Haberdashers ' Aske 's School and Latymer Upper School . A large girls ' school of similar academic attainment was North London Collegiate School , which had been founded in 1850 by Frances Buss . These schools achieved university admission rates that rivalled the older public schools , which in turn moved to raise their academic standards for admission , and to increase their focus of academic achievement . With their high profile , such schools formed the popular image of a direct grant grammar school , but they accounted for only about a quarter of them . 
 The second group consisted of 30 schools ( 23 for boys and 7 for girls ) with a significant proportion ( over 25 % ) of boarders . Boarders made up the majority of pupils at 15 schools ( all but one for boys ) , including five of the six Methodist schools . Boarding schools tended to be smaller and less academically selective than other direct grant schools , and to take a larger proportion of fee @-@ paying pupils . They also tended to be more socially selective , with nearly three quarters of their pupils having fathers in management or the professions . 
 The third group , Roman Catholic schools , made up nearly a third of the direct grant schools ( 19 for boys and 37 for girls ) . They were predominantly day schools , though 10 of them took a small proportion of boarders . Their fees were about 15 % lower than other direct grant grammars , and they tended to take a much higher proportion of LEA @-@ funded pupils . In 1968 , 40 of these schools took over 80 % of their pupils from their LEAs ; the average proportion was 86 % . They also tended to be more socially mixed , with 37 % of their pupils from managerial and professional homes and 16 % children of semi @-@ skilled or unskilled workers . These schools were thus similar to the LEA @-@ maintained Roman Catholic grammar schools , whom they outnumbered . Lacking endowments and having lower fee income , they were less financially secure than other direct grant grammars . 
 The fourth group were non @-@ denominational local grammar schools , often with an intake more able on average than in maintained grammar schools , but covering a broader range . These included the 23 schools of the Girls ' Public Day School Trust ( now the Girls ' Day School Trust ) . 
 = = Comprehensive reorganisation = = 
 During the post @-@ War period , many parts of the world moved from selective education to comprehensive schools catering for children of all abilities . Dissatisfaction with the Tripartite System grew during the 1950s , with concern over the harsh division of the school population at the age of 11 , and the loss to the economy of the " submerged three @-@ quarters " in secondary modern schools . Experiments with comprehensive schools spread from Anglesey to the Midlands and Yorkshire . 
 In 1964 , a Labour government was elected promising " to reorganise the State secondary schools on comprehensive lines " . In the following year , the Department of Education and Science distributed Circular 10 / 65 , requesting that Local Education Authorities prepare plans for such a reorganisation of their schools . The Circular also requested consultation between LEAs and direct grant schools on their participation in a comprehensive system . For this reason , direct grant schools were excluded from consideration by the Public Schools Commission set up in 1965 , even though 152 of them would otherwise have fallen within its remit . 
 There was little progress in the local negotiations proposed in the Circular . Two Catholic girls ' schools , St Anne 's Convent School , Southampton and St Anthony 's School , Sunderland , converted to a fully comprehensive intake , expanding to over 1000 pupils each . A few others proposed minor adjustments , but the vast majority were unchanged . In view of this lack of progress , the Public Schools Commission was asked on October 1967 to add direct grant schools to its investigation . The Commission , now chaired by David Donnison , issued its second report in 1970 , concluding that " Grammar schools of the traditional kind cannot be combined with a comprehensive system of education : we must choose what we want . Fee @-@ paying is not compatible with comprehensive education . " They recommended that the schools choose between becoming voluntary aided comprehensives and full independence , but the Conservatives came to power before any action had been taken . 
 Meanwhile , a trickle of schools had begun to leave the scheme , starting with Trinity School of John Whitgift , which became independent in 1968 , but still had half its places funded by the LEA . It was followed in 1970 by Oakham School , which became co @-@ educational in the following year , and Queen Victoria High School , which merged with The Cleveland School to form Teesside High School . A respite was provided in the early 1970s , when Margaret Thatcher , the Conservative Education Secretary , raised the level of grant , which had been lowered by the Labour government . 
 = = Abolition and legacy = = 
 Labour returned to power in 1974 and enacted the Direct Grant Grammar Schools ( Cessation of Grant ) Regulations 1975 , which required schools to choose whether to become LEA @-@ maintained comprehensive schools or independent schools without grant . 
 Of the 174 remaining direct grant grammar schools , 51 ( two Church of England and the rest Catholic ) applied to join the state sector , of which 46 were accepted . These schools had become dependent on state funding , and the move to comprehensive education was also supported by the Roman Catholic hierarchy , often over the objections of those connected with the schools . One school , St. Joseph 's College , Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent , was approved to join the state system , but became independent instead following a campaign by parents . Elsewhere the plans proceeded over local objections , with schools closing or becoming comprehensive schools or sixth form colleges , often by merging with other schools . Dr Williams ' School , a small school for girls in Dolgellau , northwest Wales , also closed at this time . 
 The remaining schools , including all of the large secular ones , became independent when their grant was phased out as the remaining state @-@ funded pupils left . This coincided with the mid @-@ 1970s recession , a difficult time for independent schools but doubly so for the former direct grant schools , which had just lost 25 – 50 % of their intake . Many local boys ' schools became coeducational to replace the lost places . An echo of the direct grant , the Assisted Places scheme was introduced by the Conservative government of Margaret Thatcher in 1981 , lasting until 1997 . Approximately two @-@ thirds of these places were held at former direct grant grammar schools . The independent sector soon recovered , and prospered without competition from state grammar schools . 
 From 1993 a small number of Roman Catholic former direct grant schools entered the state sector as grant @-@ maintained schools . A few secular schools have subsequently become academies . Those that remain independent are typically highly selective , and have strong academic reputations . In 2001 , they included 61 of the 100 highest performing independent day schools . No longer a bridge between state and private sectors , these schools have become part of a flourishing independent sector now sharply distinguished from the state system , a situation decried by the Sutton Trust as " educational apartheid " . 
 = Industrial music = 
 Industrial music is a genre of experimental / electronic music that draws on transgressive and provocative themes . The term was coined in the mid @-@ 1970s with the founding of Industrial Records by Genesis P @-@ Orridge of Throbbing Gristle and Monte Cazazza ; on Throbbing Gristle 's debut album The Second Annual Report , they coined the slogan " industrial music for industrial people " . In general , the style is harsh and challenging . AllMusic defines industrial as the " most abrasive and aggressive fusion of rock and electronic music " ; " initially a blend of avant @-@ garde electronics experiments ( tape music , musique concrète , white noise , synthesizers , sequencers , etc . ) and punk provocation " . 
 The first industrial artists experimented with noise and aesthetically controversial topics , musically and visually , such as fascism , serial killers and the occult . Their production was not limited to music , but included mail art , performance art , installation pieces and other art forms . Prominent industrial musicians include Throbbing Gristle , Monte Cazazza , SPK , Boyd Rice , Cabaret Voltaire , and Z 'EV . The precursors that influenced the development of the genre included acts such as electronic group Kraftwerk , experimental rock acts such as The Velvet Underground and Frank Zappa , psychedelic rock artists such as Jimi Hendrix , and composers such as John Cage . Musicians also cite writers such as William S. Burroughs , and philosophers such as Friedrich Nietzsche as influences . 
 While the term was self @-@ applied by a small coterie of groups and individuals associated with Industrial Records in the 1970s , it was broadened to include artists influenced by the original movement or using an " industrial " aesthetic . These artists expanded the genre by pushing it into noisier and more electronic directions . Over time , its influence spread into and blended with styles including ambient and rock , all of which now fall under the post @-@ industrial music label . Electro @-@ industrial music is a primary subgenre that developed in the 1980s . The two other most notable hybrid genres are industrial rock and industrial metal , which include bands such as Nine Inch Nails and Ministry , both of which released platinum @-@ selling albums in the 1990s . These three distinct genres are often referred to as simply industrial . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Precursors = = = 
 Industrial music drew from a broad range of predecessors . Alexei Monroe argues that Kraftwerk were particularly significant in the development of industrial music , as the " first successful artists to incorporate representations of industrial sounds into nonacademic electronic music . " Industrial music was created originally by using mechanical and electric machinery , and later advanced synthesizers , samplers and electronic percussion as the technology developed . Monroe also argues for Suicide as an influential contemporary of the industrial musicians . Groups cited as inspirational by the founders of industrial music include The Velvet Underground , Joy Division , and Martin Denny . Genesis P @-@ Orridge of Throbbing Gristle had a cassette library including recordings by the Master Musicians of <unk> , Kraftwerk , Charles Manson , and William S. Burroughs . P @-@ Orridge also credited 1960s rock such as The Doors , Pearls Before Swine , The Fugs , Captain Beefheart , and Frank Zappa in a 1979 interview . 
 Chris Carter also enjoyed and found inspiration in Pink Floyd and Tangerine Dream . Boyd Rice was influenced by the music of 60 's girl groups and tiki culture . Z 'EV cited Christopher Tree ( Spontaneous Sound ) , John Coltrane , Miles Davis , Tim Buckley , Jimi Hendrix , and Captain Beefheart , among others together with Tibetan , Balinese , Javanese , Indian , and African music as influential in his artistic life . Cabaret Voltaire cited Roxy Music as their initial forerunners , as well as Kraftwerk 's Trans @-@ Europe Express . Cabaret Voltaire also recorded pieces reminiscent of musique concrète and composers such as Morton Subotnick . Nurse with Wound cited a long list of obscure free improvisation and Krautrock as recommended listening . 23 Skidoo borrowed from Fela Kuti and Miles Davis 's On the Corner . Many industrial groups , including Einstürzende Neubauten , took inspiration from world music . 
 Many of the initial industrial musicians preferred to cite artists or thinkers , rather than musicians , as their inspiration . Simon Reynolds declares that " Being a Throbbing Gristle fan was like enrolling in a university course of cultural extremism . " John Cage was an initial inspiration for Throbbing Gristle . SPK appreciated Jean Dubuffet , Marcel Duchamp , Jean Baudrillard , Michel Foucault , Walter Benjamin , Marshall McLuhan , Friedrich Nietzsche , and Gilles Deleuze . Cabaret Voltaire took conceptual cues from Burroughs , J. G. Ballard , and Tristan Tzara . Whitehouse and Nurse with Wound dedicated some of their work to the Marquis de Sade ; the latter also took impetus from the Comte de <unk> . 
 Another influence on the industrial aesthetic was Lou Reed 's Metal Machine Music . Pitchfork Music cites this album as " inspiring , in part , much of the contemporary avant @-@ garde music scene — noise , in particular . " The album consists entirely of guitar feedback , anticipating industrial 's use of non @-@ musical sounds . 
 = = = Industrial records = = = 
 Industrial Music for Industrial People was originally coined by Monte Cazazza as the strapline for the record label Industrial Records , founded by British art @-@ provocateurs Throbbing Gristle . The first wave of this music appeared with Throbbing Gristle , from London ; Cabaret Voltaire , from Sheffield ; and Boyd Rice ( recording under the name NON ) , from the United States . Throbbing Gristle first performed in 1976 , and began as the musical offshoot of the Kingston upon Hull @-@ based COUM Transmissions . COUM was initially a psychedelic rock group , but began to describe their work as performance art in order to obtain grants from the Arts Council of Great Britain . COUM was composed of P @-@ Orridge and Cosey <unk> Tutti . Beginning in 1972 , COUM staged several performances inspired by Fluxus and Viennese <unk> . These included various acts of sexual and physical abjection . Peter Christopherson , an employee of commercial artists Hipgnosis , joined the group in 1974 , with Carter joining the following year . 
 The group renamed itself Throbbing Gristle in September 1975 , their name coming from a northern English slang word for an erection . The group 's first public performance , in October 1976 , was alongside an exhibit titled Prostitution , which included pornographic photos of Tutti as well as used tampons . Conservative politician Nicholas Fairbairn declared that " public money is being wasted here to destroy the morality of our society " and blasted the group as " wreckers of civilization . " The group ended in 1981 , with P @-@ Orridge declaring " the mission is terminated . " 
 = = = Expansion of the scene = = = 
 The bands Clock DVA , Nocturnal Emissions , Whitehouse , Nurse with Wound , and SPK soon followed . Whitehouse intended to play " the most brutal and extreme music of all time " , a style they eventually called power electronics . An early collaborator with Whitehouse , Steve Stapleton , formed Nurse with Wound , who experimented with noise sculpture and sound collage . Clock DVA described their goal as borrowing equally from surrealist <unk> and " nervous energy sort of funk stuff , body music that flinches you and makes you move . " 23 Skidoo , like Clock DVA , merged industrial music with African @-@ American dance music , but also performed a response to world music . Performing at the first WOMAD Festival in 1982 , the group likened themselves to Indonesian gamelan . Swedish act Leather Nun , were signed to Industrial Records in 1978 , being the first non @-@ TG / Cazazza act to have an IR @-@ release . Their singles eventually received significant airplay in the United States on college radio . 
 Across the Atlantic , similar experiments were taking place . In San Francisco , performance artist Monte Cazazza began recording noise music . Boyd Rice released several albums of noise , with guitar drones and tape loops creating a cacophony of repetitive sounds . In Boston Sleep Chamber and other artists from Inner @-@ X @-@ Musick began experimenting with a mixture of powerful noise and early forms of EBM . In Italy , work by Maurizio Bianchi at the beginning of the 1980s also shared this aesthetic . In Germany , Einstürzende Neubauten mixed metal percussion , guitars , and unconventional instruments ( such as <unk> and bones ) in stage performances that often damaged the venues in which they played . <unk> <unk> , inspired by Antonin Artaud and an enthusiasm for amphetamines , also originated an art movement called Die <unk> <unk> . <unk> is particularly well known for his hissing scream . 
 In January 1984 , Einstürzende Neubauten performed a Concerto for Voice and Machinery at the Institute of Contemporary Arts ( the same site as COUM 's Prostitution exhibition ) , drilling through the floor and eventually sparking a riot . This event received front page news coverage in England . Other groups who practiced a form of industrial " metal music " ( that is , produced by the sounds of metal crashing against metal ) include Test Dept , Laibach , and Die Krupps , as well as Z 'EV and SPK . Test Dept were largely inspired by Russian Futurism and toured to support the UK miners ' strike ( 1984 – 1985 ) . Skinny Puppy embraced a variety of industrial forefathers and created a lurching , <unk> whole from many pieces . Swans , from New York City , also practiced a metal music aesthetic , though reliant on standard rock instrumentation . Laibach , a Slovenian group who began while Yugoslavia remained a single state , were very controversial for their iconographic borrowings from Stalinist , Nazi , <unk> , Dada , and Russian Futurist imagery , conflating Yugoslav patriotism with its German authoritarian adversary . Slavoj Žižek has defended Laibach , arguing that they and their associated Neue <unk> Kunst art group practice an <unk> with the hidden perverse enjoyment undergirding authority that produces a subversive and liberatory effect . In simpler language , Laibach practiced a type of agitprop that was widely utilized by industrial and punk artists on both sides of the atlantic . 
 Following the breakup of Throbbing Gristle , P @-@ Orridge and Christopherson founded Psychic TV and signed to a major label . Their first album was much more accessible and melodic than the usual industrial style , and included hired work by trained musicians . Later work returned to the sound collage and noise elements of earlier industrial . They also borrowed from funk and disco . P @-@ Orridge also founded Thee Temple ov <unk> Youth , a quasi @-@ religious organization that produced video art . Psychic TV 's commercial aspirations were managed by Stevo of Some <unk> records , who released many of the later industrial musicians , including <unk> Neubauten , Test Dept , and Cabaret Voltaire . 
 Cabaret Voltaire had become friends with New Order , and began to practice a similar form of danceable electropop . Christopherson left Psychic TV in 1983 and formed Coil with John Balance . Coil made use of gongs and <unk> in an attempt to <unk> " Martian , " " homosexual energy " . David Tibet , a friend of Coil 's , formed Current 93 ; both groups were inspired by amphetamines and LSD . J. G. Thirlwell , a co @-@ producer with Coil , developed a version of black comedy in industrial music , borrowing from lounge as well as noise and film music . In the early 1980s , the Chicago @-@ based record label Wax Trax ! and Canada 's Nettwerk helped to expand the industrial music genre into the more accessible electro @-@ industrial and industrial rock genres . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The birth of industrial music was a response to " an age [ in which ] the access and control of information were becoming the primary tools of power . " At its birth , the genre of industrial music was different from any other music , and its use of technology and disturbing lyrics and themes to tear apart preconceptions about the necessary rules of musical form supports the suggestion that industrial music is modernist music . The artists themselves made these goals explicit , even drawing connections to social changes they wished to argue for through their music . 
 The Industrial Records website explains that the musicians wanted to re @-@ invent rock music , and that their uncensored records were about their relationship with the world . They go on to say that they wanted their music to be an awakening for listeners so that they would begin to think for themselves and question the world around them . Industrial Records intended the term industrial to evoke the idea of music created for a new generation , with previous music being more agricultural : P @-@ Orridge stated that " there 's an irony in the word ' industrial ' because there 's the music industry . And then there 's the joke we often used to make in interviews about churning out our records like motorcars — that sense of industrial . And ... up till then the music had been kind of based on the blues and slavery , and we thought it was time to update it to at least Victorian times — you know , the Industrial Revolution " . 
 Early industrial music often featured tape editing , stark percussion and loops distorted to the point where they had degraded to harsh noise , such as the work of early industrial group Cabaret Voltaire , which Journalist Simon Reynolds described as characterized by " hissing high hats and squelchy snares of rhythm @-@ generator . " Carter of Throbbing Gristle invented a device named the " Gristle @-@ <unk> " , played by Christopherson , which comprised a one @-@ octave keyboard and a number of cassette machines triggering various pre @-@ recorded sounds . 
 Traditional instruments were often played in nontraditional or highly modified ways . Reynolds described the Cabaret Voltaire members ' individual contributions as " [ Chris ] Watson 's smears of synth slime ; [ Stephen ] <unk> 's <unk> pulsing bass ; and [ Richard H. ] Kirk 's spikes of shattered @-@ glass guitar . " Watson custom @-@ built a fuzzbox for Kirk 's guitar , producing a unique timbre . Carter built speakers , effects units , and synthesizer modules , as well as modifying more conventional rock instrumentation , for Throbbing Gristle . Tutti played guitar with a slide in order to produce glissandi , or pounded the strings as if it were a percussion instrument . Throbbing Gristle also played at very high volume and produced ultra @-@ high and sub @-@ bass frequencies in an attempt to produce physical effects , naming this approach as " metabolic music . " 
 Vocals were sporadic , and were as likely to be bubblegum pop as they were to be abrasive polemics . Cabaret Voltaire 's Stephen <unk> 's vocals were electronically treated . 
 The purpose of industrial music initially was to serve as a commentary on modern society by eschewing what artists saw as trite connections to the past . Throbbing Gristle opposed the elements of traditional rock music remaining in the punk rock scene , declaring industrial to be " anti @-@ music . " Early industrial performances often involved taboo @-@ breaking , provocative elements , such as mutilation , sado @-@ masochistic elements and totalitarian imagery or symbolism , as well as forms of audience abuse , such as Throbbing Gristle 's aiming high powered lights at the audience . 
 Industrial groups typically focus on transgressive subject matter . In his introduction for the Industrial Culture Handbook ( 1983 ) , Jon Savage considered some hallmarks of industrial music to be organizational autonomy , shock tactics , and the use of synthesizers and " anti @-@ music . " Furthermore , an interest in the investigation of " cults , wars , psychological techniques of persuasion , unusual murders ( especially by children and psychopaths ) , forensic pathology , <unk> , concentration camp behavior , the history of uniforms and insignia " and Aleister Crowley 's magick was present in Throbbing Gristle 's work , as well as in other industrial pioneers . Burroughs 's recordings and writings were particularly influential on the scene , particularly his interest in the cut @-@ up technique and noise as a method of disrupting societal control . Many of the first industrial musicians were interested in , though not necessarily sympathetic with , fascism . Throbbing Gristle 's logo was based on the lightning symbol of the British Union of Fascists , while the Industrial Records logo was a photo of Auschwitz . 
 = = Post @-@ industrial = = 
 In the late 1980s , a number of additional styles developed from the already eclectic base of industrial music . These offshoots include fusions with noise music , ambient music , folk music , post @-@ punk and electronic dance music , as well as other mutations and developments . The scene has spread worldwide , and is particularly well represented in North America , Europe , and Japan . Post @-@ industrial subgenres include dark ambient , power electronics , Japanoise , <unk> , electro @-@ industrial , electronic body music , industrial hip hop , industrial rock , industrial metal , industrial pop , martial industrial , power noise , and witch house . 
 The best @-@ selling offshoots of industrial music have been industrial rock and metal ; Ministry and Nine Inch Nails both recorded platinum @-@ selling albums . Their success led to an increase in commercial success for some other industrial musicians ; for example , the Nine Inch Nails remix album Further Down the Spiral , which included contributions from Foetus and Coil , was certified gold in 1996 . The mid @-@ 1990s was a high point for industrial rock , when , in addition to bands that had been around since the 1980s , newer bands such as Gravity Kills , whose self @-@ titled debut sold almost half a million records , had some chart and radio success , and especially for industrial metal , with Marilyn Manson releasing multiple platinum selling albums . 
 = Interstate 96 = 
 Interstate 96 ( I @-@ 96 ) is an Interstate Highway that runs for approximately 192 miles ( 309 km ) entirely within the US state of Michigan . The western terminus is at an interchange with US Highway 31 ( US 31 ) and Business US 31 ( Bus . US 31 ) on the western boundary of Norton Shores southeast of Muskegon , and the eastern terminus is at I @-@ 75 near the Ambassador Bridge in Detroit . From Grand Rapids through Lansing to Detroit , the freeway parallels Grand River Avenue , never straying more than a few miles from the decommissioned US 16 . The Wayne County section of I @-@ 96 is named the Jeffries Freeway from its eastern terminus to the junction with I @-@ 275 and M @-@ 14 . Though maps still refer to the freeway as the Jeffries , the portion within the city of Detroit was renamed by the state legislature as the Rosa Parks Memorial Highway in December 2005 in honor of the late civil rights pioneer . There are four auxiliary Interstates as well as two current and four former business routes associated with I @-@ 96 . 
 Grand River Avenue originated as an Native American trail before Michigan statehood . It later was used as a wagon road across the state . The roadway was included in the State Trunkline Highway System in 1919 as M @-@ 16 and later the United States Numbered Highway System as US 16 . Construction of a freeway along the length of the corridor was proposed in the 1940s , and included as part of the Interstate Highway System in the mid @-@ 1950s . This construction was started in 1956 and initially completed across the state to Detroit in 1962 . The proposed route for the Jeffries Freeway in Detroit was moved in the 1960s ; it was built in the 1970s . I @-@ 96 was completed on November 21 , 1977 , in the Detroit area , closing the last gap along the route . Since then , additional interchanges and lanes have been added in places to accommodate traffic needs . 
 = = Route description = = 
 I @-@ 96 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) as a segment of the larger State Trunkline Highway System . In 2011 , the department 's traffic surveys showed that on average , 201 @,@ 200 vehicles used the highway daily between 6 and 7 Mile roads in Livonia . Near Norton Shores , 20 @,@ 638 vehicles did so each day between Airline and Fruitport roads . These are the highest and lowest counts along the highway , respectively . As an Interstate Highway , all of I @-@ 96 is included in the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . In addition , the highway in Detroit has been named by the Michigan Legislature the Rosa Parks Memorial Highway to honor the civil rights pioneer Rosa Parks . The segment from Livonia west to I @-@ 275 is the Jeffries Freeway , named for a former mayor of Detroit , Edward Jeffries . 
 = = = Muskegon to Grand Rapids = = = 
 I @-@ 96 begins at a three @-@ quarter cloverleaf interchange with US 31 northeast of the Muskegon County Airport in Norton Shores , near Muskegon . At the starting terminus , the highway has a grassy median and two lanes in each direction as it travels southeasterly through rural Muskegon County . The freeway is paralleled by Airline Highway in an area of with a mix of fields and residences as far as Fruitport . I @-@ 96 bypasses that village to the north and east before crossing into Ottawa County at Fruitport Road . After a distance of about five miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) in the county , the trunkline reaches Nunica . The highway crosses the <unk> Creek and turns eastward toward Coopersville . The freeway runs parallel to the Grand River , about 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) to the north . Near Ironwood Drive , I @-@ 96 turns southeasterly again and goes through Marne . 
 Beyond Marne , I @-@ 96 passes the western end of M @-@ 11 and crosses into Kent County , curving around a rest area for the eastbound lanes . The freeway runs eastward through a light industrial area of the suburb of Walker as it enters the Grand Rapids metropolitan area . At the interchange with Alpine Avenue , M @-@ 37 merges onto the freeway and the two run concurrently past the studios for <unk> @-@ TV with its iconic <unk> , a 16 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) sphere 100 feet ( 30 m ) above the ground that uses colored lights to display a weather forecast . Adjacent to the studios are the ramps from eastbound I @-@ 96 to southbound US 131 and from northbound US 131 to westbound I @-@ 96 . These ramps mark the northern end of I @-@ 296 , an unsigned auxiliary Interstate Highway designation applied to them and the US 131 freeway south to downtown Grand Rapids . I @-@ 96 turns northeasterly past a commercial area to a three @-@ quarter cloverleaf interchange that provides all of the other connections with US 131 next to a crossing of the Grand River . 
 East of the river , I @-@ 96 and M @-@ 37 pass through the northern suburb of Comstock Park , intersecting Connector M @-@ 44 ( CONN M @-@ 44 , Plainfield Avenue ) near Lamberton Lake . Past that interchange , the freeway angles southeasterly and then southward , bypassing Grand Rapids to the northeast . East of downtown , I @-@ 96 / M @-@ 37 meets I @-@ 196 ( Gerald R. Ford Freeway ) at a partial interchange ; traffic headed eastbound on I @-@ 196 must enter I @-@ 96 eastbound and only westbound I @-@ 96 traffic may enter I @-@ 196 . Immediately east of the interchange is another for M @-@ 44 ( East Beltline Avenue ) where M @-@ 37 separates from the freeway to turn southward . Through this series of interchanges , I @-@ 96 curves to the east and then turns back southward after passing through them . There are two more interchanges for M @-@ 21 ( Fulton Street ) and Cascade Road before I @-@ 96 meets the eastern end of M @-@ 11 at 28th Street . The next interchange for 36th Street provides access to the Gerald R. Ford International Airport . The freeway continues to the east of the airport and then intersects the eastern end of M @-@ 6 ( Paul B. Henry Freeway , South Beltline Freeway ) at an interchange over the confluence of the Thornapple and Grand rivers . 
 = = = Grand Rapids to Brighton = = = 
 The freeway exits the edges of the Grand Rapids urban area past the interchange with M @-@ 6 , turning due east and paralleling the northern edge of Cascade Road . I @-@ 96 curves to the south of Pratt Lake near the county line , crossing into Ionia County . Grand River Avenue is the frontage road as the freeway heads east through farm fields . South of Ionia , I @-@ 96 intersects M @-@ 66 . Near Portland , the trunkline turns to the southeast to cross the Grand River again . On the east side of town , the freeway crosses Grand River Avenue , its former business spur into town . I @-@ 96 continues southeasterly , crossing into Clinton County , and passes the community of Eagle . Entering the western reaches of the Lansing metropolitan area , I @-@ 96 merges with I @-@ 69 and turns southward at an interchange in the southwestern corner of the county ; this interchange also provides access to Business Loop I @-@ 96 ( BL I @-@ 96 , Grand River Avenue ) . 
 These two Interstates run southward together for about 6 @.@ 5 miles ( 10 @.@ 5 km ) on the west side of the metropolitan area , picking up a third lane in each direction . The exit numbers and mileposts along the concurrency reflect those of I @-@ 96 , which is considered the dominant designation of the pair . South of that interchange , the freeway crosses into Eaton County and over the Grand River . The trunkline passes near residential subdivisions , and next to the interchange for BL I @-@ 69 / M @-@ 43 ( Saginaw Highway ) , there is a large retail development . Further south , I @-@ 496 ( Olds Freeway ) branches off to run into downtown Lansing before the split between I @-@ 96 and I @-@ 69 . I @-@ 69 turns southward while I @-@ 96 turns southeasterly , dropping back to four lanes in total . After the Lansing Road interchange , the freeway crosses the Grand River one last time and runs due east to bypass Lansing . 
 I @-@ 96 crosses into Ingham County and continues along the southern edges of the Lansing metro area . It passes through areas with residential subdivisions and commercial developments , coming to a pair of interchanges including one for the eastern end of BL I @-@ 96 ( Cedar Street ) . Near the crossing of the Red Cedar River , I @-@ 96 goes through the interchange for I @-@ 496 / US 127 . East of that interchange , the freeway begins to exit the metro area as the landscape transitions back to farm fields . I @-@ 96 continues eastward , bypassing Williamston and Webberville to the south . Near the latter , the freeway turns more southeasterly and crosses into Livingston County . 
 In Livingston County , I @-@ 96 passes to the south of Fowlerville and Howell . Near the Livingston County Spencer J. Hardy Airport on the western edge of Howell , I @-@ 96 meets M @-@ 59 , which carries the Howell business loop easterly to Grand River Avenue . The freeway expands to six lanes and runs parallel to Grand River Avenue on the southern side of town . The business loop reconnects near Lake Chemung on the east side of town , and I @-@ 96 turns further to the southeast . On the northeast side of Brighton , I @-@ 96 crosses over Grand River Avenue and the landscape transitions to include residential subdivisions . I @-@ 96 crosses US 23 and enters the far northwestern edge of Metro Detroit . 
 = = = Metro Detroit = = = 
 I @-@ 96 passes through an area with several lakes as it crosses into Oakland County . This area includes the Island Lake State Recreation Area to the south and the Kensington Metropark to the north of the freeway in an area where it crosses the Huron River . The Interstate runs through Wixom into Novi , where it passes to the south of the Twelve Oaks Mall . Southeast of the mall , I @-@ 96 enters a complex interchange on the border between Novi and Farmington Hills that connects it to M @-@ 5 ( Haggerty Connector ) , I @-@ 275 and I @-@ 696 ( Reuther Freeway ) . The trunkline drops a lane in each direction as it enters the interchange and turns southward . The freeway then merges into I @-@ 275 and increases to four lanes in each direction running south in Farmington Hills . 
 According to the Federal Highway Administration , I @-@ 275 ends at the junction with I @-@ 96 and M @-@ 14 along the boundary between Livonia and Plymouth Township and not at the interchange in Novi and Farmington Hills . MDOT considers I @-@ 275 to extend northward concurrently with I @-@ 96 to the Novi and Farmington Hills , and maps from other providers follow MDOT 's lead and label the freeway north of M @-@ 14 as I @-@ 96 / I @-@ 275 . 
 I @-@ 96 / I @-@ 275 runs southward for about two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) before crossing into Wayne County at the interchange with 8 Mile Road near the Meadowbrook Country Club . The freeway curves to the east around Schoolcraft College ; then , south of 5 Mile Road , I @-@ 96 meets the interchange with M @-@ 14 and I @-@ 275 where it turns to the east along the Jeffries Freeway . To the north and south sides of I @-@ 96 are a pair of service drives named Schoolcraft Road which follow the 4 Mile location on the Mile Road System for Detroit . To the north of the Jeffries are residential neighborhoods and to the south are commercial or industrial areas . At Inkster Road , the freeway crosses into Redford Township where it intersects US 24 ( Telegraph Road ) near Eliza Howell Park . East of the park , I @-@ 96 enters Detroit . 
 Past the Outer Drive interchange , I @-@ 96 splits into a local @-@ express lanes configuration . There are two carriageways in each direction , and the central ones have three lanes that bypass almost all of the exits while the outer ones have two lanes that have access to each exit . The Jeffries turns southeasterly and separates from Schoolcraft Road shifting one @-@ half mile ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) to the south . The interchange with M @-@ 39 ( Southfield Freeway ) features slip ramps so that traffic can pass between the local and express lanes . Further east , I @-@ 96 turns northeasterly to cross Grand River Avenue at the southern end of M @-@ 5 . I @-@ 96 curves over to the interchange with M @-@ 8 ( Davison Avenue ) and the local @-@ express configuration ends as the freeway turns back to the south to cross over Grand River Avenue . 
 From the crossing south of Davison , I @-@ 96 runs parallel to Grand River Avenue southeasterly with eight lanes total . The two run together as far as the interchange with I @-@ 94 ( Edsel Ford Freeway ) near Bishop Park . I @-@ 96 turns more south @-@ southeasterly there through residential neighborhoods on Detroit 's southeastern side . I @-@ 96 terminates at an interchange that connects it to I @-@ 75 ( Fisher Freeway ) and to the Ambassador Bridge . 
 = = History = = 
 Interstate 96 was mostly constructed in sections that opened from 1957 to 1962 , but it was not completed in the Detroit area until 1977 . Even before the National Interstate and Defense Highways Act was signed in 1956 , the route was being planned as a replacement of the old US 16 , which was decommissioned in 1962 . 
 = = = Beginnings = = = 
 The Muskegon – Grand Rapids – Lansing – Detroit corridor was initially named the Grand River Road , an Indian trail that was designated as a military highway in 1825 . The roadway was included as a branch of " Division 2 " of the State Trunkline Highway System when that was created in May 1913 . When the system was signposted in 1919 , the highway was assigned the M @-@ 16 designation . Grand River Avenue was the first paved highway across the state when paving was completed in 1926 . The entire highway was designated as part of US 16 later that year . 
 East of Grand Rapids , the highway was a major artery of national importance , and was added to the proposed " Interregional Highway System " as part of a northern route between Chicago and Detroit by the 1940s . A branch from Grand Rapids to Muskegon was added later that decade , and in 1957 the Chicago – Detroit route was labeled as part of Interstate 94 , with Interstate 94N on the spur to Muskegon . Michigan , believing that this would " cause considerable confusion to the public " , requested a change in April 1958 , which would move I @-@ 94 to the shorter Kalamazoo route ( which was planned as I @-@ 92 ) , make the Muskegon – Detroit route I @-@ 96 , and assign I @-@ 67 to the connection from I @-@ 94 to I @-@ 96 at Grand Rapids , but this was initially rejected by the American Association of State Highway Officials ( AASHO ) . By mid @-@ 1959 , Michigan 's plan had been approved , with one change : I @-@ 96 would take the south leg from I @-@ 94 at Benton Harbor to Grand Rapids , and the north leg to Muskegon would be I @-@ 196 . 
 Construction of the Brighton – Farmington Expressway piece of the US 16 upgrade began in 1956 , and , when a four @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) piece opened on August 1 , 1957 , it was the first section of funded Interstate to open in Michigan . The entire 23 @-@ mile ( 37 km ) freeway from east of Brighton to a bypass of Farmington was completed in December of that year . By early 1959 , when signs for I @-@ 96 and I @-@ 196 were posted , 59 miles ( 95 km ) of the " Detroit – Muskegon Freeway " had been completed and marked as US 16 . With the opening of 51 miles ( 82 km ) from west of Lansing to east of Howell , the entire route , except in the Detroit area , opened for travel on December 12 , 1962 . US 16 was decommissioned in the state at that time ; the portions into Muskegon and Detroit , beyond the ends of the freeway , became separate related highways named Business Spur Interstate 196 ( BS I @-@ 196 ) for Muskegon and for Detroit . 
 In 1963 , the Michigan State Highway Department petitioned AASHO to again make the change it had requested back in 1958 , moving I @-@ 96 over I @-@ 196 to end at Muskegon and renumbering I @-@ 96 west of Grand Rapids to I @-@ 67 . The state cited problems with destination signing and numerous complaints from the public about confusion caused by the numbering . At their October 21 , 1963 meeting , AASHO approved the relocation of I @-@ 96 , but rejected I @-@ 67 , stating that the number should be kept for a more major route in case the system is expanded , and instead assigned I @-@ 196 to the not @-@ yet @-@ complete Benton Harbor – Grand Rapids highway . With the scheduled completion of the Lodge Freeway on October 29 , 1964 , a full freeway route was available from I @-@ 96 into downtown Detroit via I @-@ 696 and the Lodge , but it would be some time before I @-@ 96 was finished into the city . 
 = = = Construction of the Jeffries Freeway = = = 
 The Detroit Expressway and Transit System plan , prepared in 1945 for the city of Detroit , included a Grand River Expressway , which was to parallel Grand River Avenue into downtown and relieve congestion on that artery . A rail line would be built in the median of the freeway west of West Chicago Street , where streetcars would exit onto the existing surface tracks on Grand River Avenue into downtown . The plan called for a future conversion to rapid transit with a grade @-@ separated route to downtown . The Department of Street Railways determined in 1947 that the operation would cost $ 6 million per year ( equivalent to $ 193 million / yr in 2015 ) , and the planned transit line was dropped from the plans . By 1961 , the proposed highway was renamed the Jeffries Freeway , after Edward Jeffries , who served as Detroit mayor from 1940 to 1948 . 
 The first piece of the Jeffries Freeway connected the Fisher Freeway ( I @-@ 75 ) with the Ford Freeway ( I @-@ 94 ) in 1970 . It was extended northwest to Livernois Avenue ( exit <unk> ) in July 1971 , and then to Grand River Avenue at Schaefer Highway ( exit 185 ) in 1973 . In 1976 , the freeway was extended west to the Southfield Freeway ( exit 183 ) , and the entire I @-@ 275 concurrent section was opened . The final piece was completed on November 21 , 1977 , connecting the Detroit section to I @-@ 275 . The I @-@ 96 designation was assigned along the I @-@ 275 freeway south to the Jeffries Freeway , and eastward along the new freeway to the M @-@ 39 interchange ; the remaining stub of I @-@ 96 around Farmington was redesignated as an extension of M @-@ 102 ( now M @-@ 5 ) . 
 Originally , the route of Interstate 96 from the east end of the existing freeway in Farmington through Detroit , named the Jeffries Freeway ( commonly referred to as simply " the Jeffries " ) , was to closely parallel Grand River Avenue ( formerly US 16 ) . However , by 1963 , several freeway revolts were taking place in urban locations throughout the country , including Detroit . Several of Detroit 's planned freeways were modified , scaled back , or outright cancelled . To minimize the impact to existing communities and businesses , it was decided that the Jeffries Freeway would no longer utilize the Grand River Avenue corridor . Instead , the new I @-@ 96 freeway corridor would partially use right @-@ of @-@ way from the C & O Railroad through the city of Livonia ( ultimately being built over Schoolcraft Road ) , and utilize the planned I @-@ 275 freeway bypassing Detroit to the west to connect back to the existing freeway . 
 = = = Subsequent history = = = 
 Since the completion of I @-@ 96 in 1977 , several changes to the freeway have taken place . Beginning in 1984 , an extension of the US 27 freeway ( later to become I @-@ 69 ) bypassing Lansing opened ; US 27 was then cosigned with I @-@ 96 along the western side of Lansing . Three years later , the I @-@ 69 designation was applied to this new bypass , resulting in a triple concurrency ( I @-@ 96 / I @-@ 69 / US 27 ) that existed until 2002 , when US 27 was decommissioned in Michigan . 
 From 2003 to 2005 , the Beck Road interchange ( exit 160 ) in Novi was reconstructed as a single point urban interchange ( SPUI ) , the first in the metropolitan Detroit area and the first on I @-@ 96 . An interchange between 36th Street and I @-@ 96 was built starting in 2005 and was completed in 2006 . The project aimed to improve access to the Gerald R. Ford International Airport southeast of Grand Rapids . The reconstruction of the Wixom Road interchange near Novi as a SPUI was completed in late fall of 2008 . Another interchange at <unk> Road in Howell was approved for construction on July 19 , 2012 . This interchange was designed to bring improved access to the eastern Howell area , which prior to construction of the <unk> Road exit was only accessible from westbound I @-@ 96 . The project was completed on December 2 , 2013 . Also in 2013 , the two interchanges near Nunica serving M @-@ 104 and B @-@ 31 were reconstructed , with two ramps removed from the former and two added to the latter ; a new partial interchange was also built in preparation of M @-@ 231 , a future bypass of Grand Haven that is slated for completion in 2016 . 
 On April 5 , 2014 , MDOT closed I @-@ 96 between Newburgh Road and US 24 ( Telegraph Road ) . The project is to cost $ 148 million , and it will rebuild the seven miles ( 11 km ) , replace two bridges , and repair 32 other bridges . The department will also install new drainage and replace the signs along I @-@ 96 . The project was expected to be completed in October 2014 . Instead , it was finished ahead of schedule , and that segment of I @-@ 96 was opened on September 21 , 2014 . 
 Also in 2015 , work began on bypassing the 1960s interchange with US 23 near Brighton . A new set of through lanes will be built on I @-@ 96 between the current eastbound and westbound lanes with three new bridges over northbound and southbound US 23 , and over Old US 23 . The existing lanes of I @-@ 96 will be changed to be collector @-@ distributor lanes for ramp traffic . 
 = = = Gateway Project = = = 
 Beginning on February 25 , 2008 , MDOT and the Detroit International Bridge Company initiated the Ambassador Gateway Project at the eastern end of I @-@ 96 . The adjacent section of I @-@ 75 closed completely to traffic in both directions to start the complete reconstruction of the road to better connect I @-@ 75 and I @-@ 96 to the Ambassador Bridge , and the plans included the reconstruction of a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) of I @-@ 96 . That segment of I @-@ 96 closed on July 14 , 2008 , and it was scheduled to reopen a month early the following September . The overall project to realign ramps and connect the bridge to the freeways was mired in lawsuits between MDOT and the private company that owns the bridge . The company 's owner was jailed for contempt of court during court proceedings in early 2012 . MDOT was later ordered to assume responsibility for construction , and the department completed the project on September 21 , 2012 . 
 = = = Incidents = = = 
 On January 12 , 2005 , a large multiple @-@ vehicle collision consisting of over 200 motor vehicles occurred on both directions of I @-@ 96 near Williamston in Ingham County . Two people , Douglas James Baker ( age 15 ) and Jason Eldridge ( age 27 ) were killed in the incident . It was one of the largest collisions in US history and was blamed on heavy fog . 
 In October 2012 , reports of a sniper shooting cars along I @-@ 96 in four counties led to a federal investigation and a multi @-@ jurisdictional task force of 100 law enforcement officials . As of October 30 , 2012 , 25 shootings had been linked to one suspect . The Federal Bureau of Investigation , the Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco , Firearms and Explosives , and Crime Stoppers offered a $ 102 @,@ 000 reward for information leading to the arrest of the perpetrator . The suspect , <unk> Casteel of Wixom , was arrested on November 5 , 2012 , and ordered to stand trial in 2013 in Oakland County for 60 charges in one case , with a second trial on terrorism and murder charges to be brought by the Michigan Attorney General . On October 30 , 2013 , the suspect pleaded no contest , but mentally ill , in the Oakland County case , and he was sentenced to serve anywhere from six years and eight months to 10 years in prison on multiple assault charges ( as well as two concurrent years on weapons charges ) for that case on February 4 , 2014 . The trial for the Livingston County case began on January 14 , 2014 , and after being convicted on the terrorism charge , Casteel was sentenced to 16 to 40 years in state prison . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = = Related trunklines = = 
 = = = Auxiliary Interstates = = = 
 I @-@ 96 has four related , auxiliary Interstate highways that connect the main freeway to downtowns and other cities . I @-@ 196 is a relatively long freeway spur , beginning at I @-@ 96 east of downtown Grand Rapids and heading west through downtown to Holland , and then south to I @-@ 94 near Benton Harbor . The unsigned I @-@ 296 connects I @-@ 96 north of downtown Grand Rapids with I @-@ 196 in downtown , and is signed as US 131 . I @-@ 496 is a loop through downtown Lansing , which I @-@ 96 bypasses to the south , and I @-@ 696 is a northern bypass of Detroit , connecting I @-@ 96 in Novi with I @-@ 75 in Royal Oak and I @-@ 94 in St. Clair Shores . 
 = = = Business routes = = = 
 There have been six business routes of Interstate 96 ( I @-@ 96 ) in the US state of Michigan . There are two business loops designated Business Loop Interstate 96 ( BL I @-@ 96 ) : one through Lansing and one through Howell . Both follow the old route of US 16 , with appropriate connections to I @-@ 96 . There are three former business spurs that were designated Business Spur Interstate 96 ( BS I @-@ 96 ) . One connected to the carferry docks in Muskegon , running concurrently with part of Business US 31 ( Bus . US 31 ) along former US 16 , but it has been eliminated . The second spur ran into downtown Portland until it was decommissioned in 2007 . Two routes in the Detroit area — a loop through Farmington and a spur into Detroit — both using Grand River Avenue , and meeting at the temporary end of I @-@ 96 near Purdue Avenue , were eliminated when I @-@ 96 was moved to the completed Jeffries Freeway in 1977 . These Detroit @-@ area business routes are still state @-@ maintained as unsigned highways . 
 = Imelda ( film ) = 
 Imelda is a 2003 documentary film directed by Ramona S. Diaz about the life of Imelda Marcos , former First Lady of the Philippines . Beginning with her childhood , the film documents her marriage to future President of the Philippines Ferdinand Marcos , her rule under the dictatorship , her exile in Hawaii and her eventual return to the Philippines . 
 Reviews were largely favorable and it won the Excellence in Cinematography Award Documentary award at Sundance Film Festival in 2004 . Imelda outsold Spider @-@ Man 2 in the Philippines , but only took US $ 200 @,@ 992 at the US box office with an additional US $ 300 @,@ 000 worldwide . Reviews from critics are favorable with a 94 % fresh rating from Rotten Tomatoes and a 69 / 100 from Metacritic . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Diaz followed Imelda Marcos , the former First Lady of the Philippines , for a month and interviewed her daughter <unk> and her son Ferdinand , Jr . The film incorporates third party interviews and archive material ; it recounts Imelda 's life , including her marriage to her husband , Philippine president Ferdinand Marcos . Discussing the Marcos presidency , Imelda says that there were no human rights abuses in her country ; she says that her husband abolished Congress and declared martial law in 1972 to protect democracy . She says that she took 3 @,@ 000 pairs of shoes with her when she went into exile , and justifies her extravagant clothing by saying that it " inspired the poor to dress better " . She also says that she had enormous museums and theaters constructed to enrich the lives of Filipinos . 
 Imelda says in one vignette that she had met United States Army General Douglas MacArthur during his landing in Tacloban at the end of World War II , and that McArthur insisted that she should perform for the composer Irving Berlin , She sang " God Bless the Philippines " and when Berlin asked her why she sang the lyrics incorrectly she said , " what 's the difference between America and the Philippines ? " The assassination attempt on Imelda and the assassination of Benigno Aquino , Jr. are featured in the film . Footage from parties held by the Marcos couple , including one during which actor George Hamilton sang " I can 't give you anything but love , Imelda " , are also used in the film . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Imelda had its world premiere at the International Documentary Film Festival Amsterdam and its North American premiere in the documentary competition of the 2004 Sundance Film Festival , where it won the Excellence in Cinematography Award Documentary . The film was also screened at the Maryland Film Festival in Baltimore . 
 Critical reviews were mostly favorable . The film has a 94 % fresh rating from Rotten Tomatoes and a 69 / 100 from Metacritic . The website Film Threat commended the film 's treatment of the subject 's flaws because it " allows her to describe them herself " ; TV Guide called Imelda " an entertaining storyteller " . The New York Times said the film is " a devastating portrait " and equates the theme of Imelda with that of delusion and power . The San Francisco Chronicle said it was " spellbinding " . 
 Both the Chronicle and Variety consider the film balanced and even @-@ handed . Variety said that Imelda — who has been accustomed to public attention since her teenage years , was convinced that her charm and charisma would create a more favorable impression in the film than might otherwise be expected . It said that " her defenses of her husband and his regime are obviously filled with rationalizations and <unk> " . Other reviewers were more scathing , or note her distorted reality and the many contradictions with which she lives . 
 The film took US $ 200 @,@ 992 at the box office in the United States . In the Philippines , Imelda obtained a temporary injunction that prevented it being shown for a brief time . When the injunction was canceled and the film was released , it earned more than Spider @-@ Man 2 and was considered a smash hit . Outside the US , the film received box office revenue of US $ 300 @,@ 000 . 
 = Seaplane Squadron RAAF = 
 Seaplane Squadron was a flying unit of the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) between the wars . It operated Supermarine Southampton flying boats from January 1928 , as well as other types . Along with Fighter Squadron , Seaplane Squadron was a component of No. 1 Flying Training School , based at RAAF Point Cook , Victoria . Seaplane Squadron was responsible for coastal reconnaissance , training aircrew to operate seaplanes , and supporting the Royal Australian Navy . It also conducted survey flights over remote parts of Australia and mapped the Darwin – Sydney section of the Empire Air Mail Scheme route . Seaplane Squadron was disbanded in June 1939 . 
 = = History = = 
 Although the first entry in Seaplane Squadron records is dated 16 February 1934 , the official history of the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) between the wars refers to the unit as having been in operation when Australia acquired two Supermarine Southampton flying boats , which entered service in January 1928 . The Southamptons formed a coastal reconnaissance flight within Seaplane Squadron , which also operated other aircraft for seaplane training . Seaplane Squadron was one of two formations raised at RAAF Point Cook , Victoria , under the auspices of No. 1 Flying Training School ( No. 1 FTS ) , the other being Fighter Squadron , which operated Bristol Bulldogs . No. 1 FTS had been the first unit to be formed as part of the new Australian Air Force on 31 March 1921 ( the prefix " Royal " was added in August that year ) . 
 The Southamptons ( nicknamed " <unk> " ) were the biggest aircraft in the RAAF 's inventory at the time and a new seaplane hangar was specially constructed for them at Point Cook . On 22 June , one of the flying boats was overturned by strong wind on the Torrens River en route to meet the four Southamptons of the Royal Air Force 's Far East Flight near Adelaide . In their naval cooperation role , the Southamptons were required to locate and shadow " enemy " cruisers on exercises . They also trialled radio communications between aircraft and naval ships . 
 The Southamptons were used for parachute training with the " pull @-@ off " technique , which involved standing on a small platform near the outer wing struts , opening the parachute and being dragged from the aircraft by the wind . In the early 1930s , the flying boats took part in several forestry surveys in Tasmania . From June 1935 to February 1936 , a Southampton was employed to map the Darwin – Sydney section of the Empire Air Mail Scheme route ; its survey work ultimately took it to New Guinea and around the Australian continent . Seaplane Squadron undertook search @-@ and @-@ rescue work with both the Southamptons and Supermarine Seagulls ; the former were involved in the abortive search for the airliner Miss Hobart , a DH.86 that vanished in Bass Strait on 19 October 1934 . One of the Southamptons was taken out of service in 1937 ; the other continued flying until 1939 . 
 In October 1929 , Seaplane Squadron received a locally designed amphibian , the Wackett Widgeon II ; it crashed into the sea off Point Cook on 6 January 1930 , killing all three occupants . Another Wackett design , the Warrigal II landplane , was fitted with floats and assigned to Seaplane Squadron in September 1932 for trials and possible use as a trainer and patrol aircraft ; it was considered successful in the latter role but maintenance issues led to its disposal in July 1933 . The squadron also operated Moths . In May 1934 , one of these was flown to Darwin , Northern Territory , where it was fitted with floats and undertook reconnaissance and survey work in cooperation with HMAS <unk> , before being converted back to a landplane and returning to Point Cook in July . In December 1935 , a Gipsy Moth fitted with skis embarked for Antarctica aboard the RRS Discovery II to locate missing explorer Lincoln Ellsworth . Seaplane Squadron began operating Avro Ansons for navigation courses and cross @-@ country exercises in 1937 ; one exercise in November 1938 involved a round @-@ Australia flight . A new headquarters building for the squadron was constructed at Point Cook in the late 1930s , as part of general improvements to RAAF facilities owing to the threat of war in Europe . 
 Throughout their existence , Seaplane and Fighter Squadrons remained under the control of No. 1 FTS and were " really little more than flights " , in the words of the official history . The final entry in Seaplane Squadron records was made on 30 June 1939 . The unit became the nucleus for No. 10 ( Reconnaissance ) Squadron , formed at Point Cook the following day . 
 = George H. W. Bush = 
 George Herbert Walker Bush ( born June 12 , 1924 ) is an American politician who was the 41st President of the United States from 1989 to 1993 and the 43rd Vice President of the United States from 1981 to 1989 . A member of the U.S. Republican Party , he was previously a congressman , ambassador , and Director of Central Intelligence . He is the oldest living former President and Vice President . He is also the last living former President who is a veteran of World War II . Bush is often referred to as " George H. W. Bush " , " Bush 41 " , " Bush the Elder " , or " George Bush Sr. " to distinguish him from his eldest son , George W. Bush , who was the 43rd President of the United States . Prior to his son 's presidency , he was known simply as George Bush or President Bush . 
 Bush was born in Milton , Massachusetts , to Prescott Bush and Dorothy Walker Bush . Following the attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941 , Bush postponed college , enlisted in the U.S. Navy on his 18th birthday , and became the youngest aviator in the U.S. Navy at the time . He served until the end of the war , then attended Yale University . Graduating in 1948 , he moved his family to West Texas and entered the oil business , becoming a millionaire by the age of 40 . 
 He became involved in politics soon after founding his own oil company , serving as a member of the House of Representatives and Director of Central Intelligence , among other positions . He failed to win the Republican nomination for President in 1980 , but was chosen by party nominee Ronald Reagan to be his running mate , and the two were elected . During his tenure , Bush headed administration task forces on deregulation and fighting the " War on Drugs " . 
 In 1988 , Bush ran a successful campaign to succeed Reagan as President , defeating Democratic opponent Michael Dukakis . Foreign policy drove the Bush presidency : military operations were conducted in Panama and the Persian Gulf ; the Berlin Wall fell in 1989 , and the Soviet Union dissolved two years later . Domestically , Bush reneged on a 1988 campaign promise and , after a struggle with Congress , signed an increase in taxes that Congress had passed . In the wake of a weak recovery from an economic recession , along with continuing budget deficits and the controversy over his appointment of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court , he lost the 1992 presidential election to Democrat Bill Clinton . 
 Bush left office in 1993 . His presidential library was dedicated in 1997 , and he has been active — often alongside Bill Clinton — in various humanitarian activities . Besides being the 43rd president ( 2001 – 09 ) , his son George also served as the 46th Governor of Texas ( 1995 – 2000 ) and is one of only two presidents — the other being John Quincy Adams — to be the son of a former president . His second son , Jeb Bush , served as the 43rd Governor of Florida ( 1999 – 2007 ) and made an unsuccessful run for president in 2016 . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 George Herbert Walker Bush was born at 173 Adams Street in Milton , Massachusetts , on June 12 , 1924 to Prescott Sheldon Bush and Dorothy ( Walker ) Bush . The Bush family moved from Milton to Greenwich , Connecticut , shortly after his birth . 
 Bush began his formal education at the Greenwich Country Day School in Greenwich . Beginning in 1936 , he attended Phillips Academy in Andover , Massachusetts , where he held a number of leadership positions including president of the senior class , secretary of the student council , president of the community fund @-@ raising group , a member of the editorial board of the school newspaper , and captain of both the varsity baseball and soccer teams . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Following the attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941 , Bush decided to join the US . Navy , so after graduating from Phillips Academy in 1942 , he became a naval aviator at the age of 18 . After completing the 10 @-@ month course , he was commissioned as an ensign in the United States Naval Reserve at Naval Air Station Corpus Christi on June 9 , 1943 , just three days before his 19th birthday , which made him the youngest naval aviator to that date . 
 He was assigned to Torpedo Squadron ( VT @-@ 51 ) as the photographic officer in September 1943 . The following year , his squadron was based on the USS San Jacinto as a member of Air Group 51 , where his lanky physique earned him the nickname " Skin " . During this time , the task force was victorious in one of the largest air battles of World War II : the Battle of the Philippine Sea . 
 After Bush 's promotion to Lieutenant ( junior grade ) on August 1 , 1944 , the San Jacinto commenced operations against the Japanese in the Bonin Islands . Bush piloted one of four Grumman TBM Avenger aircraft from VT @-@ 51 that attacked the Japanese installations on Chichijima . His crew for the mission , which occurred on September 2 , 1944 , included Radioman Second Class John Delaney and Lieutenant Junior Grade William White . During their attack , the Avengers encountered intense anti @-@ aircraft fire ; Bush 's aircraft was hit by flak and his engine caught on fire . Despite his plane being on fire , Bush completed his attack and released bombs over his target , scoring several damaging hits . With his engine ablaze , Bush flew several miles from the island , where he and one other crew member on the TBM Avenger bailed out of the aircraft ; the other man 's parachute did not open . Bush waited for four hours in an inflated raft , while several fighters circled protectively overhead until he was rescued by the lifeguard submarine USS <unk> . For the next month he remained on the <unk> , and participated in the rescue of other pilots . Several of those shot down during the attack were executed and eaten by their captors . 
 Bush subsequently returned to San Jacinto in November 1944 and participated in operations in the Philippines until his squadron was replaced and sent home to the United States . Through 1944 , he flew 58 combat missions for which he received the Distinguished Flying Cross , three Air Medals , and the Presidential Unit Citation awarded to San Jacinto . 
 Because of his valuable combat experience , Bush was reassigned to Norfolk Navy Base and put in a training wing for new torpedo pilots . He was later assigned as a naval aviator in a new torpedo squadron , VT @-@ 153 , based at Naval Air Station Grosse Ile , Michigan . Upon the Japanese surrender in 1945 , Bush was honorably discharged in September of that year . 
 = = = Marriage and college years = = = 
 George Bush married Barbara Pierce on January 6 , 1945 , only weeks after his return from the Pacific . The couple 's first residence was a small rented apartment in Trenton , Michigan , near Bush 's Navy assignment at NAS Grosse Ile . Their marriage produced six children : George Walker Bush ( born 1946 ) , Pauline Robinson " Robin " Bush ( 1949 – 1953 , died of leukemia ) , John Ellis " Jeb " Bush ( born 1953 ) , Neil Mallon Pierce Bush ( born 1955 ) , Marvin Pierce Bush ( born 1956 ) , and Dorothy Bush Koch ( born 1959 ) . 
 Bush had been accepted to Yale University prior to his enlistment in the military , and took up the offer after his discharge and marriage . While at Yale , he was enrolled in an accelerated program that allowed him to graduate in two and a half years , rather than four . He was a member of the Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity and was elected its president . He also captained the Yale baseball team , and as a left @-@ handed first baseman , played in the first two College World Series . As the team captain , Bush met Babe Ruth before a game during his senior year . He was also , like his father , a member of the Yale cheerleading squad . Late in his junior year he was , like his father Prescott Bush ( 1917 ) , initiated into the Skull and Bones secret society . He graduated as a member of the Phi Beta Kappa from Yale in 1948 with a Bachelor of Arts degree in economics . 
 = = Business career = = 
 After graduating from Yale , Bush moved his young family to West Texas . His father 's business connections proved useful as he ventured into the oil business , starting as a sales clerk with Dresser Industries , a subsidiary of Brown Brothers Harriman ( where Prescott Bush had served on the board of directors for 22 years ) . While working for Dresser , Bush lived in various places with his family : Odessa , Texas ; Ventura , Bakersfield and Compton , California ; and Midland , Texas . ( According to eldest son George W. Bush , then age two , the family lived in one of the few duplexes in Odessa with an indoor bathroom , which they " shared with a couple of hookers " . ) Bush started the Bush @-@ <unk> Oil Development company in 1951 and in 1953 co @-@ founded the Zapata Petroleum Corporation , an oil company that drilled in the Permian Basin in Texas . In 1954 he was named president of the Zapata Offshore Company , a subsidiary which specialized in offshore drilling . 
 In 1959 , shortly after the subsidiary became independent , Bush moved the company and his family from Midland to Houston . He continued serving as president of the company until 1964 , and later chairman until 1966 , but his ambitions turned political . By that time , Bush had become a millionaire . According to Time.com , Bush had a net worth of $ 20 million in 2015 . 
 = = Political career , 1964 – 80 = = 
 = = = Congressional years , 1967 – 71 = = = 
 Bush served as Chairman of the Republican Party for Harris County , Texas in 1964 , but wanted to be more involved in policy making , so he set his sights high : he aimed for a U.S. Senate seat from Texas . After winning the Republican primary , Bush faced his opponent , incumbent Democrat Ralph W. Yarborough , who attacked Bush as a right @-@ wing extremist . Bush was a strong supporter of Republican Senator Barry Goldwater , who headed the Republican ticket as the presidential candidate . Like Goldwater , Bush strongly opposed civil rights legislation in the name of states rights . Yarborough , a leading Texas liberal , supported the civil rights legislation and was reelected by 56 % - 44 % . The Republican candidate for governor , Jack Crichton of Dallas , who often campaigned alongside Bush before the election , lost by a much wider margin to Governor John B. Connally Jr . Bush and the Harris County Republicans played a role in the development of the new Republican Party of the late 20th century . First , Bush worked to absorb the John Birch Society members , who were trying to take over the Republican Party . Second , during and after the Civil Rights Movement , Democrats in the South who were committed to segregation left their party , and although the " country club Republicans " had differing ideological beliefs , they found common ground in hoping to expel the Democrats from power . 
 Bush was elected in 1966 to a House of Representatives seat from the 7th District of Texas , defeating with 57 percent of the ballots cast the Democrat Frank Briscoe , the district attorney of Harris County known for his law and order credentials and a cousin of later Governor Dolph Briscoe . Bush was the first Republican to represent Houston in the U.S. House . Bush 's representative district included Tanglewood , the Houston neighborhood that was his residence ; his family had moved into Tanglewood in the 1960s . His voting record in the House was generally conservative : Bush voted for the Civil Rights Act of 1968 , although it was generally unpopular in his district . He supported the Nixon administration 's Vietnam policies , but broke with Republicans on the issue of birth control , which he supported . Despite being a first @-@ term congressman , Bush was appointed to the powerful House Ways and Means Committee , where he voted to abolish the military draft . He was elected to a second term in 1968 . 
 In 1970 Nixon convinced Bush to relinquish his House seat to run for the Senate against Ralph Yarborough , a fierce Nixon critic . In the Republican primary , Bush easily defeated conservative Robert J. Morris , by a margin of 87 @.@ 6 % to 12 @.@ 4 % . Nixon came to Texas to campaign in Longview for Bush and gubernatorial candidate Paul Eggers , a Dallas lawyer who was a close friend of U.S. Senator John G. Tower . Former Congressman Lloyd Bentsen , a more moderate Democrat and native of Mission in south Texas , defeated Yarborough in the Democratic primary . Yarborough endorsed Bentsen , who defeated Bush , 53 @.@ 4 to 46 @.@ 6 % . As Bush 's political career waned , he moved out of Houston and sold his first Tanglewood house , but for periods of time continued to reside in Tanglewood . 
 = = = Ambassador to the United Nations ( 1971 – 73 ) = = = 
 Following his 1970 loss , Bush was well known as a prominent Republican businessman from the " Sun Belt " , a group of states in the Southern part of the country . Nixon noticed and appreciated the sacrifice Bush had made of his Congressional position , so he appointed him Ambassador to the United Nations . He was confirmed unanimously by the Senate , and served for two years , beginning in 1971 . 
 = = = Chairman of the Republican National Committee ( 1973 – 74 ) = = = 
 Amidst the Watergate scandal , Nixon asked Bush to become chairman of the Republican National Committee in 1973 . Bush accepted , and held this position when the popularity of both Nixon and the Republican Party plummeted . He defended Nixon steadfastly , but later as Nixon 's complicity became clear , Bush focused more on defending the Republican Party , while still maintaining loyalty to Nixon . As chairman , Bush formally requested that Nixon eventually resign for the good of the Republican party . Nixon did this on August 9 , 1974 ; Bush noted in his diary that " There was an aura of sadness , like somebody died .... The [ resignation ] speech was vintage Nixon — a kick or two at the press — enormous strains . One couldn 't help but look at the family and the whole thing and think of his accomplishments and then think of the shame .... [ President Gerald Ford 's swearing @-@ in offered ] indeed a new spirit , a new lift . " 
 = = = Envoy to China , 1974 – 75 = = = 
 Gerald Ford , Nixon 's successor , appointed Bush to be Chief of the U.S. Liaison Office in the People 's Republic of China . Since the United States at the time maintained official relations with the Republic of China on Taiwan and not the People 's Republic of China , the Liaison Office did not have the official status of an embassy and Bush did not formally hold the position of " ambassador " , though he unofficially acted as one . The 14 months that he spent in China were largely seen as beneficial for <unk> relations . 
 After Ford 's accession to the presidency , Bush was under serious consideration for being nominated as Vice President . Ford eventually narrowed his list to Nelson Rockefeller and Bush . White House Chief of Staff Donald Rumsfeld reportedly preferred Rockefeller over Bush . Rockefeller was finally named and confirmed . 
 Bush was again passed over for the vice presidency by Ford when the president chose Bush 's future presidential rival , Senator Bob Dole , to replace Rockefeller on the 1976 presidential ticket . 
 = = = Director of Central Intelligence ( 1976 – 77 ) = = = 
 In 1976 Ford brought Bush back to Washington to become Director of Central Intelligence ( DCI ) , replacing William Colby . He served in this role for 357 days , from January 30 , 1976 , to January 20 , 1977 . The CIA had been rocked by a series of revelations , including those based on investigations by the Church Committee regarding illegal and unauthorized activities by the CIA , and Bush was credited with helping to restore the agency 's morale . In his capacity as DCI , Bush gave national security briefings to Jimmy Carter both as a Presidential candidate and as President @-@ elect , and discussed the possibility of remaining in that position in a Carter administration , but did not do so . He was succeeded by Deputy Director of Central Intelligence E. Henry <unk> , who served as acting Director of Central Intelligence until Stansfield Turner was confirmed . 
 = = = Other positions , 1977 – 80 = = = 
 After a Democratic administration took power in 1977 , Bush became chairman on the Executive Committee of the First International Bank in Houston . He later spent a year as a part @-@ time professor of Administrative Science at Rice University 's Jones School of Business beginning in 1978 , the year it opened ; Bush said of his time there , " I loved my brief time in the world of academia . " Between 1977 and 1979 , he was a director of the Council on Foreign Relations foreign policy organization . 
 = = 1980 presidential campaign = = 
 Bush had decided in the late 1970s that he was going to run for president in 1980 ; in 1979 , he attended 850 political events and traveled more than 250 @,@ 000 miles ( 400 @,@ 000 km ) to campaign for the nation 's highest office . In the contest for the Republican Party nomination , Bush stressed his wide range of government experience , while competing against rivals Senator Howard Baker of Tennessee , Senator Bob Dole of Kansas , Congressman John Anderson of Illinois ( who would later run as an independent ) , Congressman Phil Crane , also of Illinois , former Governor John Connally of Texas , former Minnesota Governor Harold Stassen , and the front @-@ runner Ronald Reagan , former actor , and Governor of California . 
 In the primary election , Bush focused almost entirely on the Iowa caucuses , while Reagan ran a more traditional campaign . Bush represented the centrist wing in the GOP , whereas Reagan represented conservatives . Bush famously labeled Reagan 's supply side @-@ influenced plans for massive tax cuts " voodoo economics " . His strategy proved useful , to some degree , as he won in Iowa with 31 @.@ 5 % to Reagan 's 29 @.@ 4 % . After the win , Bush stated that his campaign was full of momentum , or " Big Mo " . As a result of the loss , Reagan replaced his campaign manager , reorganized his staff , and concentrated on the New Hampshire primary . The two men agreed to a debate in the state , organized by the Nashua Telegraph , but paid for by the Reagan campaign . Reagan invited the other four candidates as well , but Bush refused to debate them , and eventually they left . The debate proved to be a pivotal moment in the campaign ; when the moderator , John Breen , ordered Reagan 's microphone turned off , his angry response , " I am paying for this microphone , " struck a chord with the public . Bush ended up losing New Hampshire 's primary with 23 % to Reagan 's 50 % . Bush lost most of the remaining primaries as well , and formally dropped out of the race in May of that year . 
 With his political future seeming dismal , Bush sold his house in Houston and bought his grandfather 's estate in Kennebunkport , Maine , known as " Walker 's Point " . At the Republican Convention , Reagan selected Bush as his Vice Presidential nominee , placing him on the winning Republican presidential ticket of 1980 . 
 = = Vice Presidency ( 1981 – 89 ) = = 
 = = = First term , 1981 – 85 = = = 
 As Vice President , Bush generally took on a low profile while recognizing the constitutional limits of the office ; he avoided decision @-@ making or criticizing Reagan in any way . As had become customary , he and his wife moved into the Vice President 's residence at Number One Observatory Circle , about two miles from the White House . After selling the house in the Tanglewood , the Bushes declared a room in The <unk> Hotel in Houston as their official voting address . The Bushes attended a large number of public and ceremonial events in their positions , including many state funerals , which became a common joke for comedians . Mrs. Bush found the funerals largely beneficial , saying , " George met with many current or future heads of state at the funerals he attended , enabling him to forge personal relationships that were important to President Reagan . " As the President of the Senate , Bush stayed in contact with members of Congress , and kept the president informed on occurrences on Capitol Hill . 
 On March 30 , 1981 , early into the administration , Reagan was shot and seriously wounded in Washington , D.C. Bush , second in command by the presidential line of succession , was in Fort Worth , Texas , and flew back to Washington immediately . Reagan 's cabinet convened in the White House Situation Room , where they discussed various issues , including the availability of the Nuclear Football . When Bush 's plane landed , his aides advised him to proceed directly to the White House by helicopter , as an image of the government still functioning despite the attack . Bush rejected the idea , responding , " Only the President lands on the South Lawn . " This made a positive impression on Reagan , who recovered and returned to work within two weeks . From then on , the two men would have regular Thursday lunches in the Oval Office . 
 In December 1983 Bush flew to El Salvador and warned that country 's military leaders to end their death squads and hold fully free elections or face the loss of U.S. aid . Bush 's aides feared for his safety and thought about calling the meeting off when they discovered apparent blood stains on the floor of the presidential palace of Álvaro Magaña . Bush was never told of the aides ' concerns and a tense meeting was held in which some of Magaña 's personnel brandished semiautomatic weapons and refused requests to take them outside . 
 Bush was assigned by Reagan to chair two special task forces , on deregulation and international drug smuggling . The deregulation task force reviewed hundreds of rules , making specific recommendations on which ones to amend or revise , in order to curb the size of the federal government . The drug smuggling task force coordinated federal efforts to reduce the quantity of drugs entering the United States . Both were popular issues with conservatives , and Bush , largely a moderate , began courting them through his work . 
 = = = Second term , 1985 – 89 = = = 
 Reagan and Bush ran for reelection in 1984 . The Democratic opponent , Walter Mondale , made history by choosing a woman as his running mate , New York Representative Geraldine Ferraro . She and Bush squared off in a single televised Vice Presidential debate . Serving as a contrast to the Ivy @-@ League educated Bush , Ferraro represented a " blue @-@ collar " district in Queens , New York ; this , coupled with her popularity among female journalists , left Bush at a disadvantage . The Reagan @-@ Bush ticket won in a landslide against the Mondale @-@ Ferraro ticket . Early into his second term as Vice President , Bush and his aides were planning a run for the presidency in 1988 . By the end of 1985 , a committee had been established and over two million dollars raised for Bush . 
 Bush became the first Vice President to serve as Acting President when , on July 13 , 1985 , Reagan underwent surgery to remove polyps from his colon , making Bush acting president for approximately eight hours . 
 The Reagan administration was shaken by a scandal in 1986 , when it was revealed that administration officials had secretly arranged weapon sales to Iran , and had used the proceeds to fund the anticommunist Contras in Nicaragua , a direct violation of the law . When the Iran @-@ Contra Affair , as it became known , broke to the media , Bush , like Reagan , stated that he had been " out of the loop " and unaware of the diversion of funds , although this was later questioned . His diaries from that time stated " I 'm one of the few people that know fully the details . " Ailes and others were concerned that Bush was seen as a " wimp " , an image put to rest by his evident fury in an interview with Dan Rather . 
 As Vice President , Bush officially opened the 1987 Pan American Games in Indianapolis . 
 In 1988 the USS Vincennes accidentally shot down Iran Air Flight 655 killing 290 passengers . Bush said that he would " never apologize for the United States of America . Ever . I don 't care what the facts are . " 
 = = = = 1988 presidential campaign = = = = 
 In the January 26 , 1987 , issue of Time magazine , in an article entitled " Where Is the Real George Bush ? " journalist Robert Ajemian reported that a friend of Bush 's had urged him to spend several days at Camp David thinking through his plans for his prospective presidency , to which Bush is said to have responded in exasperation , " Oh , the vision thing . " This oft @-@ cited quote became a shorthand for the charge that Bush failed to contemplate or articulate important policy positions in a compelling and coherent manner . The phrase has since become a metonym for any politician 's failure to incorporate a greater vision in a campaign , and has often been applied in the media to other politicians or public figures . 
 Bush had been planning a presidential run since as early as 1985 , and entered the Republican primary for President of the United States in October 1987 . His challengers for the Republican presidential nomination included U.S. Senator Bob Dole of Kansas , U.S. Representative Jack Kemp of New York , former Governor Pete DuPont of Delaware , and conservative Christian televangelist Pat Robertson . 
 Though considered the early frontrunner for the nomination , Bush came in third in the Iowa caucus , behind winner Dole and runner @-@ up Robertson . Much as Reagan did in 1980 , Bush reorganized his staff and concentrated on the New Hampshire primary . With Dole ahead in New Hampshire , Bush ran television commercials portraying the senator as a tax raiser ; he rebounded to win the state 's primary . Following the primary , Bush and Dole had a joint media appearance , when the interviewer asked Dole if he had anything to say to Bush , Dole said , in response to the ads , " yeah , stop lying about my record " in an angry tone . This is thought to have hurt Dole 's campaign to Bush 's benefit . Bush continued seeing victory , winning many Southern primaries as well . Once the multiple @-@ state primaries such as Super Tuesday began , Bush 's organizational strength and fundraising lead were impossible for the other candidates to match , and the nomination was his . 
 Leading up to the 1988 Republican National Convention , there was much speculation as to Bush 's choice of running mate . Bush chose little @-@ known U.S. Senator Dan Quayle of Indiana , favored by conservatives . Despite Reagan 's popularity , Bush trailed Democratic nominee Michael Dukakis , then Governor of Massachusetts , in most polls . 
 Bush , occasionally criticized for his lack of eloquence when compared to Reagan , delivered a well @-@ received speech at the 1988 Republican National Convention . Known as the " thousand points of light " speech , it described Bush 's vision of America : he endorsed the Pledge of Allegiance , prayer in schools , capital punishment , gun rights , and opposed abortion . The speech at the convention included Bush 's famous pledge : " Read my lips : no new taxes . " 
 The general election campaign between the two men was described in 2008 as one of the dirtiest in modern times . Bush blamed Dukakis for polluting the Boston Harbor as the Massachusetts governor . Bush also pointed out that Dukakis was opposed to a law that would require all students to say the Pledge of Allegiance , a topic well covered in Bush 's nomination acceptance speech . 
 Dukakis 's unconditional opposition to capital punishment led to a pointed question being asked during the presidential debates . Moderator Bernard Shaw asked Dukakis if Dukakis would hypothetically support the death penalty if his wife , Kitty , were raped and murdered . Dukakis 's response of no , as well as a provocative ad about convicted felon Willie Horton , contributed toward Bush 's characterization of Dukakis as " soft on crime " . 
 Bush defeated Dukakis and his running mate , Lloyd Bentsen , in the Electoral College , by 426 to 111 ( Bentsen received one vote from a faithless elector ) . In the nationwide popular vote , Bush took 53 @.@ 4 % of the ballots cast while Dukakis received 45 @.@ 6 % . Bush became the first serving Vice President to be elected President since Martin Van Buren in 1836 as well as the first person to succeed someone from his own party to the Presidency via election to the office in his own right since Herbert Hoover in 1929 . 
 = = Presidency ( 1989 – 93 ) = = 
 Bush was inaugurated on January 20 , 1989 , succeeding Ronald Reagan . He entered office at a period of change in the world ; the fall of the Berlin Wall and the collapse of Soviet Union came early in his presidency . He ordered military operations in Panama and the Persian Gulf , and , at one point , was recorded as having a record @-@ high approval rating of 89 % . 
 In his Inaugural Address , Bush said : 
 I come before you and assume the Presidency at a moment rich with promise . We live in a peaceful , prosperous time , but we can make it better . For a new breeze is blowing , and a world refreshed by freedom seems reborn ; for in man 's heart , if not in fact , the day of the dictator is over . The totalitarian era is passing , its old ideas blown away like leaves from an ancient , lifeless tree . A new breeze is blowing , and a nation refreshed by freedom stands ready to push on . There is new ground to be broken , and new action to be taken . 
 = = = Domestic policy = = = 
 = = = = Economy = = = = 
 Early in his term , Bush faced the problem of what to do with leftover deficits spawned by the Reagan years . At $ 220 billion in 1990 , the deficit had grown to three times its size since 1980 . Bush was dedicated to curbing the deficit , believing that America could not continue to be a leader in the world without doing so . He began an effort to persuade the Democratic controlled Congress to act on the budget ; with Republicans believing that the best way was to cut government spending , and Democrats convinced that the only way would be to raise taxes , Bush faced problems when it came to consensus building . 
 In the wake of a struggle with Congress , Bush was forced by the Democratic majority to raise tax revenues ; as a result , many Republicans felt betrayed because Bush had promised " no new taxes " in his 1988 campaign . Perceiving a means of revenge , Republican congressmen defeated Bush 's proposal which would enact spending cuts and tax increases that would reduce the deficit by $ 500 billion over five years . Scrambling , Bush accepted the Democrats ' demands for higher taxes and more spending , which alienated him from Republicans and gave way to a sharp decrease in popularity . Bush would later say that he wished he had never signed the bill . Near the end of the 101st Congress , the president and congressional members reached a compromise on a budget package that increased the marginal tax rate and phased out exemptions for high @-@ income taxpayers . Although he originally demanded a reduction in the capital gains tax , Bush relented on this issue as well . This agreement with the Democratic leadership in Congress proved to be a turning point in the Bush presidency ; his popularity among Republicans never fully recovered . 
 Coming at around the same time as the budget deal , America entered into a mild recession , lasting for six months . Many government programs , such as welfare , increased . As the unemployment rate edged upward in 1991 , Bush signed a bill providing additional benefits for unemployed workers . The year 1991 was marked by many corporate reorganizations , which laid off a substantial number of workers . Many now unemployed were Republicans and independents , who had believed that their jobs were secure . 
 By his second year in office , Bush was told by his economic advisors to stop dealing with the economy , as they believed that he had done everything necessary to ensure his reelection . By 1992 , interest and inflation rates were the lowest in years , but by midyear the unemployment rate reached 7 @.@ 8 % , the highest since 1984 . In September 1992 , the Census Bureau reported that 14 @.@ 2 % of all Americans lived in poverty . At a press conference in 1990 , Bush told reporters that he found foreign policy more enjoyable . 
 = = = = Major initiatives = = = = 
 During a speech to commemorate the 20th anniversary of the Apollo 11 moon landing , Bush announced a vision to complete Space Station Freedom , resume exploration of the Moon and begin exploration of Mars . Although a space station was eventually constructed – work on the International Space Station began in 1998 – other work has been confounded by NASA budgetary issues . In 1998 , Bush received the Rotary National Award for Space Achievement 's National Space Trophy for his pioneering leadership of the U.S. space program . 
 Bush signed a number of major laws in his presidency , including the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 ; this was one of the most pro @-@ civil rights bills in decades . He is also the only President to successfully veto a civil rights act , having vetoed the job @-@ discrimination protection Civil Rights Act of 1990 . Bush feared racial quotas would be imposed , but later approved watered @-@ down Civil Rights Act of 1991 . He worked to increase federal spending for education , childcare , and advanced technology research . He also signed the Radiation Exposure Compensation Act which provides monetary compensation of people who had contracted cancer and a number of other specified diseases as a direct result of their exposure to atmospheric nuclear testing undertaken by the United States during the Cold War , or their exposure to high levels of radon while doing uranium mining . In dealing with the environment , Bush reauthorized the Clean Air Act , requiring cleaner burning fuels . He quarreled with Congress over an eventually signed bill to aid police in capturing criminals , and signed into law a measure to improve the nation 's highway system . Bush signed the Immigration Act of 1990 , which led to a 40 percent increase in legal immigration to the United States . 
 Bush became a life member of the National Rifle Association early in 1988 and had campaigned as a " pro @-@ gun " candidate with the NRA 's endorsement . In March 1989 , he placed a temporary ban on the import of certain semiautomatic rifles . This action cost him endorsement from the NRA in 1992 . Bush publicly resigned his life membership in the organization after receiving a form letter from NRA depicting agents of the Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco , and Firearms as " jack @-@ booted thugs . " He called the NRA letter a " vicious slander on good people . " 
 = = = Points of Light = = = 
 President Bush devoted attention to voluntary service as a means of solving some of America 's most serious social problems . He often used the " thousand points of light " theme to describe the power of citizens to solve community problems . In his 1989 inaugural address , President Bush said , " I have spoken of a thousand points of light , of all the community organizations that are spread like stars throughout the Nation , doing good . " 
 Four years later , in his report to the nation on The Points of Light Movement , President Bush said , " Points of Light are the soul of America . They are ordinary people who reach beyond themselves to touch the lives of those in need , bringing hope and opportunity , care and friendship . By giving so generously of themselves , these remarkable individuals show us not only what is best in our heritage but what all of us are called to become . " 
 In 1990 , the Points of Light Foundation was created as a nonprofit organization in Washington to promote this spirit of volunteerism . In 2007 , the Points of Light Foundation merged with the Hands On Network with the goal of strengthening volunteerism , streamlining costs and services and deepening impact . Points of Light , the organization created through this merger , has approximately 250 affiliates in 22 countries and partnerships with thousands of nonprofits and companies dedicated to volunteer service around the world . In 2012 , Points of Light mobilized 4 million volunteers in 30 million hours of service worth $ 635 million . 
 On October 16 , 2009 , President Barack Obama held a Presidential Forum on Service hosted by former President George H. W. Bush and Points of Light at the George Bush Presidential Library Center on the campus of Texas A & M University . The event celebrated the contributions of more than 4 @,@ 500 Daily Point of Light award winners and honored President Bush 's legacy of service and civic engagement . 
 In 2011 , Points of Light paid tribute to President George H. W. Bush and volunteer service at Washington , D.C. ' s Kennedy Center . President Bush was joined by Presidents Jimmy Carter , Bill Clinton , and George W. Bush to highlight the role volunteer service plays in people 's lives . 
 = = = Daily Point of Light Award = = = 
 President Bush created the Daily Point of Light Award in 1989 to recognize ordinary Americans from all walks of life taking direct and consequential voluntary action in their communities to solve serious social problems . The President focused great attention on these individuals and organizations , both to honor them for their tremendous work and to call the nation to join them and multiply their efforts . By the end of his administration , President Bush had recognized 1 @,@ 020 Daily Points of Light representing all 50 states and addressing issues ranging from care for infants and teenagers with AIDS to adult illiteracy and from gang violence to job training for the homeless . The Daily Point of Light continues to be awarded by Points of Light and President Bush continues to sign all of the awards . 
 On July 15 , 2013 , President Barack Obama welcomed President Bush to the White House to celebrate the 5,000th Daily Point of Light Award . They bestowed the award on Floyd Hammer and Kathy Hamilton of Union , Iowa , for their work founding Outreach , a nonprofit that delivers free meals to hungry children in 15 countries . 
 = = = Judicial appointments = = = 
 = = = = Supreme Court = = = = 
 Bush appointed the following Justices to the Supreme Court of the United States : 
 David Souter – 1990 
 Clarence Thomas – 1991 
 = = = = Other courts = = = = 
 In addition to his two Supreme Court appointments , Bush appointed 42 judges to the United States Courts of Appeals , and 148 judges to the United States district courts . Among these appointments was Vaughn R. Walker , who would later be revealed to be the earliest known gay federal judge . Bush also experienced a number of judicial appointment controversies , as 11 nominees for 10 federal appellate judgeships were not processed by the Democratically @-@ controlled Senate Judiciary Committee . 
 = = = Foreign policy = = = 
 = = = = Panama = = = = 
 In the 1980s , Panamanian leader Manuel Noriega , a once <unk> leader who was later accused of spying for Fidel Castro and using Panama to traffic drugs into the United States , was one of the most recognizable names in America and was constantly in the press . The struggle to remove him from power began in the Reagan administration , when economic sanctions were imposed on the country ; this included prohibiting American companies and government from making payments to Panama and freezing $ 56 million in Panamanian funds in American banks . Reagan sent more than 2 @,@ 000 American troops to Panama as well . Unlike Reagan , Bush was able to remove Noriega from power , but his administration 's unsuccessful post @-@ invasion planning hindered the needs of Panama during the establishment of the young democratic government . 
 In May 1989 , Panama held democratic elections , in which Guillermo Endara was elected president ; the results were then annulled by Noriega 's government . In response , Bush sent 2 @,@ 000 more troops to the country , where they began conducting regular military exercises in Panamanian territory ( in violation of prior treaties ) . Bush then removed an embassy and ambassador from the country , and dispatched additional troops to Panama to prepare the way for an upcoming invasion . Noriega suppressed an October military coup attempt and massive protests in Panama against him , but after a U.S. serviceman was shot by Panamanian forces in December 1989 , Bush ordered 24 @,@ 000 troops into the country with an objective of removing Noriega from power ; " Operation Just Cause " was a large @-@ scale American military operation , and the first in more than 40 years that was not related to the Cold War . 
 The mission was controversial , but American forces achieved control of the country and Endara assumed the Presidency . Noriega surrendered to the United States and was convicted and imprisoned on racketeering and drug trafficking charges in April 1992 . President Bush and First Lady Barbara Bush visited Panama in June 1992 , to give support to the first post @-@ invasion Panamanian government . 
 = = = = Soviet Union = = = = 
 In 1989 , just after the fall of the Berlin Wall , Bush met with Soviet General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev in a conference on the Mediterranean island of Malta . The administration had been under intense pressure to meet with the Soviets , but not all initially found the Malta Summit to be a step in the right direction ; General Brent Scowcroft , among others , was apprehensive about the meeting , saying that it might be " premature " due to concerns where , according to Condoleezza Rice , " expectations [ would be ] set that something was going to happen , where the Soviets might grandstand and force [ the U.S. ] into agreements that would ultimately not be good for the United States . " But European leaders , including François Mitterrand and Margaret Thatcher , encouraged Bush to meet with Gorbachev , something that he did December 2 and 3 , 1989 . Though no agreements were signed , the meeting was viewed largely as being an important one ; when asked about nuclear war , Gorbachev responded , " I assured the President of the United States that the Soviet Union would never start a hot war against the United States of America . And we would like our relations to develop in such a way that they would open greater possibilities for cooperation .... This is just the beginning . We are just at the very beginning of our road , long road to a long @-@ lasting , peaceful period . " The meeting was received as a very important step to the end of the Cold War . 
 Another summit was held in July 1991 , where the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty ( START I ) was signed by Bush and Gorbachev in Moscow . The treaty took nine years in the making and was the first major arms agreement since the signing of the Intermediate <unk> Nuclear Forces Treaty by Reagan and Gorbachev in 1987 . The contentions in START would reduce the strategic nuclear weapons of the United States and the USSR by about 35 % over seven years , and the Soviet Union 's land @-@ based intercontinental ballistic missiles would be cut by 50 % . Bush described START as " a significant step forward in dispelling half a century of mistrust " . After the dissolution of the USSR in 1991 , President Bush and Gorbachev declared a <unk> strategic partnership , marking the end of the Cold War . 
 = = = = Gulf War = = = = 
 On August 2 , 1990 , Iraq , led by Saddam Hussein , invaded its oil @-@ rich neighbor to the south , Kuwait ; Bush condemned the invasion and began rallying opposition to Iraq in the US and among European , Asian , and Middle Eastern allies . Secretary of Defense Richard Bruce " Dick " Cheney traveled to Saudi Arabia to meet with King Fahd ; Fahd requested US military aid in the matter , fearing a possible invasion of his country as well . The request was met initially with Air Force fighter jets . Iraq made attempts to negotiate a deal that would allow the country to take control of half of Kuwait . Bush rejected this proposal and insisted on a complete withdrawal of Iraqi forces . The planning of a ground operation by US @-@ led coalition forces began forming in September 1990 , headed by General Norman Schwarzkopf . Bush spoke before a joint session of the U.S. Congress regarding the authorization of air and land attacks , laying out four immediate objectives : " Iraq must withdraw from Kuwait completely , immediately , and without condition . Kuwait 's legitimate government must be restored . The security and stability of the Persian Gulf must be assured . And American citizens abroad must be protected . " He then outlined a fifth , long @-@ term objective : " Out of these troubled times , our fifth objective – a new world order – can emerge : a new era – freer from the threat of terror , stronger in the pursuit of justice , and more secure in the quest for peace . An era in which the nations of the world , East and West , North and South , can prosper and live in harmony .... A world where the rule of law supplants the rule of the jungle . A world in which nations recognize the shared responsibility for freedom and justice . A world where the strong respect the rights of the weak . " With the United Nations Security Council opposed to Iraq 's violence , Congress authorized the use of Military force with a set goal of returning control of Kuwait to the Kuwaiti government , and protecting America 's interests abroad . 
 Early on the morning of January 17 , 1991 , allied forces launched the first attack , which included more than 4 @,@ 000 bombing runs by coalition aircraft . This pace would continue for the next four weeks , until a ground invasion was launched on February 24 , 1991 . Allied forces penetrated Iraqi lines and pushed toward Kuwait City while on the west side of the country , forces were intercepting the retreating Iraqi army . Bush made the decision to stop the offensive after a mere 100 hours . Critics labeled this decision premature , as hundreds of Iraqi forces were able to escape ; Bush responded by saying that he wanted to minimize U.S. casualties . Opponents further charged that Bush should have continued the attack , pushing Hussein 's army back to Baghdad , then removing him from power . Bush explained that he did not give the order to overthrow the Iraqi government because it would have " incurred incalculable human and political costs .... We would have been forced to occupy Baghdad and , in effect , rule Iraq . " 
 Bush 's approval ratings skyrocketed after the successful offensive . Additionally , President Bush and Secretary of State Baker felt the coalition victory had increased U.S. prestige abroad and believed there was a window of opportunity to use the political capital generated by the coalition victory to revitalize the Arab @-@ Israeli peace process . The administration immediately returned to Arab @-@ Israeli peacemaking following the end of the Gulf War ; this resulted in the Madrid Conference , later in 1991 . 
 = = = = Somali Civil War = = = = 
 Faced with a humanitarian disaster in Somalia , exacerbated by a complete breakdown in civil order , the United Nations had created the UNOSOM I mission in April 1992 to aid the situation through humanitarian efforts , though the mission failed . The Bush administration proposed American aid to the region by assisting in creating a secure environment for humanitarian efforts and UN Resolution 794 was unanimously adopted by the Security Council on December 3 , 1992 . A lame duck president , Bush launched Operation Restore Hope the following day under which the United States would assume command in accordance with Resolution 794 . Fighting would escalate and continue into the Clinton administration . 
 = = = NAFTA = = = 
 Bush 's administration , along with the Progressive Conservative Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney , spearheaded the negotiations of the North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA ) , which would eliminate the majority of tariffs on products traded among the United States , Canada , and Mexico , to encourage trade amongst the countries . The treaty also restricts patents , copyrights , and trademarks , and outlines the removal of investment restrictions among the three countries . 
 The agreement came under heavy scrutiny amongst mainly Democrats , who charged that NAFTA resulted in a loss of American jobs . NAFTA also contained no provisions for labor rights ; according to the Bush administration , the trade agreement would generate economic resources necessary to enable Mexico 's government to overcome problems of funding and enforcement of its labor laws . Bush needed a renewal of negotiating authority to move forward with the NAFTA trade talks . Such authority would enable the president to negotiate a trade accord that would be submitted to Congress for a vote , thereby avoiding a situation in which the president would be required to renegotiate with trading partners those parts of an agreement that Congress wished to change . While initial signing was possible during his term , negotiations made slow , but steady , progress . President Clinton would go on to make the passage of NAFTA a priority for his administration , despite its conservative and Republican roots — with the addition of two side agreements — to achieve its passage in 1993 . 
 The treaty has since been defended as well as criticized further . The American economy has grown 54 % since the adoption of NAFTA in 1993 , with 25 million new jobs created ; this was seen by some as evidence of NAFTA being beneficial to the United States . With talk in early 2008 regarding a possible American withdrawal from the treaty , Carlos M. Gutierrez , current United States Secretary of Commerce , writes , " Quitting NAFTA would send economic shock waves throughout the world , and the damage would start here at home . " But John J. Sweeney , President of the AFL @-@ CIO , wrote in The Boston Globe that " the U.S. trade deficit with Canada and Mexico ballooned to 12 times its pre @-@ NAFTA size , reaching $ 111 billion in 2004 . " 
 On January 8 , 1992 , Bush fainted after vomiting at a banquet hosted by the then Prime Minister of Japan , Kiichi Miyazawa . Bush was suffering from gastroenteritis . 
 = = = Pardons = = = 
 As other presidents have done , Bush issued a series of pardons during his last days in office . On December 24 , 1992 , he granted executive clemency to six former government employees implicated in the Iran @-@ Contra scandal of the late 1980s , most prominently former Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger . Bush described Weinberger , who was scheduled to stand trial on January 5 , 1993 , for criminal charges related to Iran @-@ Contra , as a " true American patriot " . 
 In addition to Weinberger , Bush pardoned Duane R. Clarridge , Clair E. George , Robert C. McFarlane , Elliott Abrams , and Alan G. Fiers Jr . , all of whom had been indicted and / or convicted of criminal charges by an Independent Counsel headed by Lawrence Walsh . 
 = = = Honorary degrees = = = 
 Texas A & M University 
 Sacred Heart University 
 Dartmouth College , awarded a Doctor of Laws 
 Harvard University awarded a Doctor of Laws degree on May 29 , 2014 . 
 = = = Awards and honors = = = 
 In 1990 Time magazine named him the Man of the Year . In 1991 the U.S. Navy Memorial Foundation awarded Bush its Lone Sailor award for his naval service and his subsequent government service . In 1993 , he was made an Honorary Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath by Queen Elizabeth II . 
 = = = 1992 presidential campaign = = = 
 Bush announced his reelection bid in early 1992 ; with a coalition victory in the Persian Gulf War and high approval ratings , reelection initially looked likely . As a result , many leading Democrats declined to seek their party 's presidential nomination . But an economic recession , and doubts of whether Bush ended the Gulf War properly , reduced his popularity . 
 Conservative political columnist Pat Buchanan challenged Bush for the Republican nomination , and shocked political pundits by finishing second , with 37 % of the vote , in the New Hampshire primary . Bush responded by adopting more conservative positions on issues , in an attempt to undermine Buchanan 's base . Once he had secured the nomination , Bush faced his challenger , Democrat and Governor of Arkansas William Jefferson " Bill " Clinton . Clinton attacked Bush as not doing enough to assist the working middle @-@ class and being " out of touch " with the common man , a notion reinforced by reporter Andrew Rosenthal 's false report that Bush was " astonished " to see a demonstration of a supermarket scanner . 
 In early 1992 , the race took an unexpected twist when Texas billionaire H. Ross Perot launched a third party bid , claiming that neither Republicans nor Democrats could eliminate the deficit and make government more efficient . His message appealed to voters across the political spectrum disappointed with both parties ' perceived fiscal irresponsibility . Perot later bowed out of the race for a short time , then reentered . 
 Clinton had originally been in the lead , until Perot reentered , tightening the race significantly . Nearing election day , polls suggested that the race was a dead @-@ heat , but Clinton pulled out on top , defeating Bush in a 43 % to 38 % popular vote margin . Perot won 19 % of the popular vote , one of the highest totals for a third party candidate in U.S. history , drawing equally from both major candidates , according to exit polls . Bush received 168 electoral votes to Clinton 's 370 . 
 Several factors were key in Bush 's defeat . The ailing economy which arose from recession may have been the main factor in Bush 's loss , as 7 in 10 voters said on election day that the economy was either " not so good " or " poor " . On the eve of the 1992 election , after unemployment reports of 7 @.@ 8 % appeared ( the highest since 1984 ) , Economic recession had contributed to a sharp decline in his approval rating – to just 37 % . 
 Conservative Republicans point to Bush 's 1990 agreement to raise taxes in contradiction of his famous " Read my lips : no new taxes " pledge . In doing so , Bush alienated many members of his conservative base , losing their support for his re @-@ election . According to one survey , of the voters who cited Bush 's broken " No New Taxes " pledge as " very important " , two thirds voted for Bill Clinton . Bush had raised taxes in an attempt to address an increasing budget deficit , which has largely been attributed to the Reagan tax cuts and military spending of the 1980s . The tax revenue increase had not hurt his approval ratings to the extent that it prevented it from reaching 89 % during the Gulf War , four months after the tax vote . By February 1991 his approval rating rose to its highest level — 89 % . 
 = = = Public image = = = 
 George Bush was widely seen as a " pragmatic caretaker " president who lacked a unified and compelling long @-@ term theme in his efforts . Indeed , Bush 's sound bite where he refers to the issue of overarching purpose as " the vision thing " has become a metonym applied to other political figures accused of similar difficulties . " He does not say why he wants to be there " , wrote columnist George Will , " so the public does not know why it should care if he gets his way " . 
 His Ivy League and prep school education led to warnings by advisors that his image was too " preppy " in 1980 , which resulted in deliberate efforts in his 1988 campaign to shed the image , including meeting voters at factories and shopping malls , abandoning set speeches . 
 His ability to gain broad international support for the Gulf War and the war 's result were seen as both a diplomatic and military triumph , rousing bipartisan approval , though his decision to withdraw without removing Saddam Hussein left mixed feelings , and attention returned to the domestic front and a souring economy . A New York Times article mistakenly depicted Bush as being surprised to see a supermarket barcode reader ; the report of his reaction exacerbated the notion that he was " out of touch " . Amid the early 1990s recession , his image shifted from " conquering hero " to " politician befuddled by economic matters " . 
 Although Bush became the first elected Republican president since Hoover in 1932 to lose a reelection bid ( facing a 34 % approval rating leading up to the 1992 election ) , the mood did not last . Despite his defeat , Bush climbed back from election day approval levels to leave office in 1993 with a 56 % job approval rating . By December 2008 , 60 % of Americans gave Bush 's presidency a positive rating . 
 = = Post @-@ presidency ( 1993 – present ) = = 
 Upon leaving office , Bush retired with his wife , Barbara , and temporarily moved into a friend 's house near the Tanglewood community of Houston as they prepared to build a permanent retirement house nearby . Ultimately they built their retirement house in the community of West Oaks , near Tanglewood . They had a presidential office within the Park Laureate Building on Memorial Drive . Mimi Swartz of National Geographic wrote that " The Bushes are too studiously sedate to live in River Oaks " . They spend the summer at Walker 's Point in Kennebunkport , Maine . On January 10 , 1999 , the Bushes became the longest @-@ married Presidential couple in history , outlasting John and Abigail Adams , who were married for 54 years and 3 days . At 70 years as of January 2015 , they still hold the record , by a year and a half , over Jimmy and Rosalynn Carter . Bush holds his own fishing tournament in Islamorada , an island in the Florida Keys . 
 In 1993 , Bush was awarded an honorary knighthood ( GCB ) by Queen Elizabeth II . He was the third American president to receive the honor , the others being Dwight D. Eisenhower and Ronald Reagan . 
 In 1993 , Bush visited Kuwait to commemorate the coalition 's victory over Iraq in the Gulf War , where he was targeted in an assassination plot . Kuwaiti authorities arrested 17 people allegedly involved in using a car bomb to kill Bush . Through interviews with the suspects and examinations of the bomb 's circuitry and wiring , the FBI established that the plot had been directed by the Iraqi Intelligence Service . A Kuwaiti court later convicted all but one of the defendants . Two months later , in retaliation , Clinton ordered the firing of 23 cruise missiles at Iraqi Intelligence Service headquarters in Baghdad . The day before the strike , U.S. Ambassador to the UN Madeleine Albright went before the Security Council to present evidence of the Iraqi plot . After the missiles were fired , Vice President Al Gore said the attack " was intended to be a proportionate response at the place where this plot " to assassinate Bush " was hatched and implemented " . 
 From 1993 to 1999 he served as the chairman to the board of trustees for Eisenhower Fellowships , and from 2007 to 2009 was chairman of the National Constitution Center . 
 In 1997 , the same year as the opening of his Presidential Library , the Houston international airport was renamed George Bush Intercontinental Airport . 
 President Bush is Honorary Chairman of Points of Light , an international nonprofit dedicated to engaging more people and resources in solving serious social problems through voluntary service . 
