 The final album Smith completed in his lifetime , Figure 8 , was released on April 18 , 2000 . It featured the return of Rothrock , Schnapf , Brion , and Waronker and was partially recorded at Abbey Road Studios in England , with an obvious Beatles influence in the songwriting and production . The album garnered very favorable reviews , peaking at number 99 on the Billboard 200 and 37 on the UK Album Charts . The album received praise for its power pop style and complex arrangements , described as creating a " sweeping kaleidoscope of layered instruments and sonic textures " . However , some reviewers felt that Smith 's trademark dark and melancholy songwriting had lost some of its subtlety , with one reviewer likening some of the lyrics to " the self @-@ pitying complaints of an adolescent venting in his diary " . 
 Album art and promotional pictures from the period showed Smith looking cleaned @-@ up and put @-@ together . An extensive tour in promotion of the record ensued , book @-@ ended by television appearances on Late Night with Conan O 'Brien and the Late Show with David Letterman . However , Smith 's condition began to deteriorate as he had become addicted to heroin either towards the end of or just after the Figure 8 tour . 
 = = = 2001 – 02 : Addiction and scrapped recordings = = = 
 Around the time he began recording his final album , Smith began to display signs of paranoia , often believing that a white van followed him wherever he went . He would have friends drop him off for recording sessions almost a mile away from the studio , and to reach the location , he would trudge through hundreds of yards of brush and cliffs . He started telling people that DreamWorks was out to get him : " Not long ago my house was broken into , and songs were stolen off my computer which have wound up in the hands of certain people who work at a certain label . I 've also been followed around for months at a time . I wouldn 't even want to necessarily say it 's the people from that label who are following me around , but it was probably them who broke into my house . " During this period , Smith hardly ate , subsisting primarily on ice cream . He would go without sleeping for several days and then sleep for an entire day . 
 A follow @-@ up to Smith 's 2000 album was originally planned to happen with Rob Schnapf , but their sessions were abandoned . Smith also began distancing himself from manager Margaret <unk> , who had handled him since the Roman Candle days . He finally began recording a new album with only himself and Jon Brion as producers sometime during 2001 . The pair had recorded a substantial amount of music for the album when Brion confronted Smith about his drug and alcohol abuse . Their friendship promptly ended , and Smith scrapped all of their work until that point . He later said " There was even a little more than half of a record done before this new one that I just scrapped because of a blown friendship with someone that made me so depressed I didn 't want to hear any of those songs . He was just helping me record the songs and stuff , and then the friendship kind of fell apart all of a sudden one day . It just made it kind of awkward being alone in the car listening to the songs . " 
 When Brion sent a bill for the abandoned sessions to DreamWorks , executives Lenny Waronker and Luke Wood scheduled a meeting with Smith to determine what went wrong with the sessions . The singer complained of intrusion upon his personal life from the label , as well as poor promotion for the Figure 8 album . The talks proved to be fruitless , and soon after , Smith sent a message to the executives , stating that if they did not release him from his contract , he would take his own life . In May 2001 , Smith set out to re @-@ record the album , mostly on his own , but with some help from David McConnell of <unk> . McConnell told Spin that , during this time , Smith would smoke over $ 1 @,@ 500 worth of heroin and crack per day , would often talk about suicide , and on numerous occasions tried to give himself an overdose . Steven Drozd of The Flaming Lips and Scott McPherson played a few drum tracks , Sam Coomes contributed some bass guitar and backing vocals , but almost every other instrument was recorded by Smith . 
 Smith 's song " Needle in the Hay " was included in Wes Anderson 's 2001 dark comedy film The Royal Tenenbaums during a suicide attempt scene . Smith was originally supposed to contribute a cover of The Beatles ' " Hey Jude " for the film , but when he failed to do so in time , Anderson had to use The Mutato Muzika Orchestra 's version of the track instead . Anderson would later say that Smith " was in a bad state " at the time . 
 Smith 's live performances during 2001 and 2002 were infrequent , typically in the Pacific Northwest or Los Angeles . A review of his December 20 , 2001 show at Portland 's Crystal Ballroom expressed concern over his appearance and performance : his hair was uncharacteristically greasy and long , his face was bearded and gaunt , and during his songs he exhibited alarming signs of " memory @-@ loss and <unk> " . At another performance in San Francisco that month , the audience began shouting out lyrics when Smith could not remember them . 
 In the first of only three concerts performed in 2002 , Smith co @-@ headlined Northwestern University 's A & O Ball with Wilco on May 2 in Chicago . He was onstage for nearly an hour but failed to complete half of the songs . He claimed that his poor performance was due to his left hand having fallen asleep and told the audience it felt " like having stuff on your hand and you can 't get it off " . Smith 's performance was reviewed as " undoubtedly one of the worst performances ever by a musician " and an " excruciating [ … ] nightmare " . A reporter for the online magazine Glorious Noise wrote , " It would not surprise me at all if Elliott Smith ends up dead within a year . " 
 On November 25 , 2002 , Smith was involved in a brawl with the Los Angeles Police Department at a concert where The Flaming Lips and Beck were performing . Smith later said he was defending a man he thought the police were harassing . Assuming that Smith was homeless , the officers allegedly beat and arrested him and Chiba . The two spent the night in jail . Smith 's hand and back were injured in the incident , causing him to cancel a number of shows . Wayne Coyne , lead singer of The Flaming Lips and a friend of Smith 's , stated concern over Smith 's appearance and actions , saying that he " saw a guy who had lost control of himself . He was needy , he was grumpy , he was everything you wouldn 't want in a person . It 's not like when you think of Keith Richards being pleasantly blissed out in the corner . " 
 = = = 2003 : Reemergence and From a Basement on the Hill = = = 
 Smith had attempted to go to rehab several times , but found that he was unable to relate to the popular treatments for addicts that used a Twelve @-@ Step Program basis for treatment . " I couldn 't do the first step [ … ] I couldn 't say what you were supposed to say and mean it . " In 2002 , Smith went to the <unk> Restoration Center in Beverly Hills to start a course of treatment for his drug addiction . In one of his final interviews , he spoke about the center , " What they do is an IV treatment where they put a needle in your arm , and you 're on a drip bag , but the only thing that 's in the drip bag is amino acids and saline solution . I was coming off of a lot of psych meds and other things . I was even on an antipsychotic , although I 'm not psychotic . " 
 Two sold @-@ out solo acoustic concerts at Hollywood 's Henry Fonda Theater , on January 31 and February 1 , 2003 , saw Smith attempting to reestablish his credibility as a live performer . Before the show , Smith scrawled " Kali – The Destroyer " ( the Hindu goddess associated with time and change ) in large block letters with permanent ink on his left arm , which was visible to the crowd during the performance . On several songs , he was backed by a stripped @-@ down drum kit played by Robin <unk> ( of the band 764 @-@ HERO ) , and on one track , members of opening band Rilo Kiley contributed backing vocals . Smith then played two more live shows in his adopted hometown : three months later at The Derby and once at the L.A. Weekly Music Awards in June . 
 After his 34th birthday on August 6 , 2003 , he gave up alcohol , caffeine , red meat , refined sugar and his longtime ( sometimes abused ) regimen of psychiatric medication . Director Mike Mills had been working with Smith during his final years and described Smith 's troubles and apparent recovery : " I gave the script to him , then he dropped off the face of the earth [ … ] he went through his whole crazy time , but by the time I was done with the film , he was making From a Basement on the Hill and I was shocked that he was actually making music . " 
 With things improving for Smith after several troubled years , he began experimenting with noise music and worked on his girlfriend Jennifer Chiba 's iMac with the intent of learning how to record with computers , noting that it was the only method with which he was still unfamiliar . Smith jokingly labeled his experimental way of recording " The California <unk> " ( a play on the Beach Boys ' " California Sound " ) . He said of the songs , " They 're kind of more noisy with the pitch all distorted . Some are more acoustic , but there aren 't too many like that . Lately I 've just been making up a lot of noise . " 
 He was also in the process of recording songs for the <unk> soundtrack , including Big Star 's " Thirteen " and Cat Stevens 's " Trouble " . In August 2003 , Suicide Squeeze Records put out a limited @-@ edition vinyl single for " Pretty ( Ugly Before ) " , a song that Smith had been playing since the Figure 8 tour . 
 Elliott 's final show was at Redfest at the University of Utah in Salt Lake City on September 19 , 2003 . The final song ever played by Elliott live , was Long , Long , Long by The Beatles . However , the last original song Smith played live was " Say Yes " . 
 = = Death = = 
 Smith died on October 21 , 2003 at the age of 34 years from two stab wounds to the chest . At the time of the stabbing , he was at his Lemoyne Street home in Echo Park , California , where he lived with his partner , Jennifer Chiba . According to Chiba , the two were arguing , and she locked herself in the bathroom to take a shower . Chiba heard him scream and upon opening the door saw Smith standing with a knife in his chest . She pulled the knife out , after which he collapsed and she called 9 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 . Smith died in the hospital with the time of death listed as 1 : 36 p.m. A possible suicide note , written on a Post @-@ it note , read : " I 'm so sorry — love , Elliott . God forgive me . " 
 The name " Elliott " is misspelled as " Elliot " in the coroner 's report ; however , a coroner informed the Smoking Gun website " that Smith 's first name was misspelled in the report " , not on the Post @-@ it note . While Smith 's death was originally reported as a suicide , the official autopsy report released in December 2003 left open the question of homicide . 
 According to Pitchfork Media , record producer Larry Crane reported on his Tape Op message board that he had planned to help Smith mix his album in mid @-@ November . Crane wrote , " I hadn 't talked to Elliott in over a year . His girlfriend , Jennifer , called me [ last week ] and asked if I 'd like to come to L.A. and help mix and finish [ Smith 's album ] . I said ' yes , of course ' , and chatted with Elliott for the first time in ages . It seems surreal that he would call me to finish an album and then a week later kill himself . I talked to Jennifer this morning , who was obviously shattered and in tears , and she said , ' I don 't understand , he was so healthy . ' " 
 The coroner reported that no traces of illegal substances or alcohol were found in Smith 's system at the time of his death but did find prescribed levels of antidepressant , anxiolytic , and ADHD medications , including <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and Amphetamine . There were no hesitation wounds , which are typical of suicide by self @-@ infliction . However , the authorities do not seem to be investigating the case further . 
 Smith 's body was cremated and a public burial site or memorial was never formally announced . 
 = = = Reaction = = = 
 Shortly after Smith 's death , a fan memorial was initiated outside Solutions Audio ( <unk> Sunset Boulevard , Los Angeles , California ) , the site at which the cover of the Figure 8 album was shot . Farewell messages to Smith were written on the wall , and flowers , photos , candles , and empty bottles of alcohol mentioned in Smith 's songs were left . Since then , the wall has been a regular target for graffiti but is regularly restored by fans . 
 Memorial concerts were held in several cities in the United States and the United Kingdom . A petition was soon put forth with intent to make part of the Silver Lake area a memorial park in Smith 's honor . It received over 10 @,@ 000 signatures , but no plans to establish the park have been announced . A memorial plaque located inside Smith 's former high school , Lincoln High , was hung in July 2006 . The plaque has the line " I 'm never gonna know you now , but I 'm gonna love you anyhow " from Smith 's song " Waltz # 2 ( XO ) " . 
 Since Smith 's death , many musical acts have paid him tribute . Songs in tribute to , or about , Smith have been released by Pearl Jam ( " Can 't Keep " on the Live at Benaroya Hall concert album ) ; Sparta ( " Bombs and Us " ) ; Third Eye Blind ( " There 's No Hurry to Eternity " , originally titled " Elliott Smith " , on the Live from Nowhere Near You , Volume Two : Pacific Northwest compilation ) ; Ben Folds ( " Late " on Songs for Silverman ) ; Brad Mehldau ( " Sky Turning Grey ( for Elliott Smith ) " on Highway Rider ) ; Rilo Kiley ( " It Just Is " , and " <unk> " from the album More Adventurous ) ; Rhett Miller ( " The Believer " on The Believer ) ; <unk> ( " Heaven Adores You " on Treble and Tremble ) ; Joan As Police Woman ( " We Don 't Own It " on Real Life ) ; and Pete Yorn ( " Bandstand in the Sky " on Nightcrawler , a song jointly dedicated to Jeff Buckley ) . Several tribute albums have also been released since his death , including Christopher O 'Riley 's Home to Oblivion : An Elliott Smith Tribute . 
 The band Grandaddy played the track " Oh Well , OK " in the encore of its reunion tour ( August to September 2012 ) . During the song , images of Smith and the Solutions Audio Memorial were displayed on a screen behind the band . Smith sang live with Jason Lytle and Grandaddy on a mesmerizing rendition of " He 's Simple , He 's Dumb , He 's the Pilot " at Benaroya Hall Seattle on June 18 , 2001 . 
 On July 30 , 2004 , Chiba filed a lawsuit against the Smith family for 15 % of his earnings ( over $ 1 million ) , claiming that she and Smith lived as " husband and wife " , that the singer pledged to take care of her financially for the rest of her life , and that she worked as his manager and agent from around 2000 until his death . A state labor commissioner ruled her claim as manager to be invalid , as she had worked as an " unlicensed talent agent " under California 's Talent Agencies Act . The case made it to the California appellate court in October 2007 , but was defeated 2 – 1 ; Chiba could potentially appeal the case to the Supreme Court of California . 
 In an October 2013 SPIN magazine article — a reflection at the ten @-@ year anniversary of Smith 's death — drummer McPherson stated that Smith was " a sick man without his medicine " during the last 31 days of his life , when he was not only sober , but had also given up red meat and sugar . In the same article , Chiba recalls thinking , " Okay , you 're asking a lot of yourself . You 're giving up a lot at once . " Chiba further explained that " anyone who understands drug abuse knows that you use drugs to hide from your past or sedate yourself from strong , overwhelming feelings . So when you 're newly clean and coming off the medications that have been masking all those feelings , that 's when you 're the most vulnerable . " Writing for SPIN , Liam Gowing also encountered a local musician who stated that Smith had said to him : " The people who try to intervene , they 're good people who genuinely care about you . But they don 't know what you 're going through . Do what you need to do . " According to the musician , Smith had adamantly dissuaded him from suicide . 
 = = Posthumous releases = = 
 From a Basement on the Hill , almost four years in production , was released on October 19 , 2004 , by ANTI- Records ( a part of Epitaph Records ) . With Smith 's family in control of his estate , they chose to bring in Rob Schnapf and Smith 's ex @-@ girlfriend Joanna Bolme to sort through the recordings and mix the album . Although Smith had voiced his desire for it to be a double album or a regular album with a bonus disc , it was not clear whether it would have been possible for him to release it that way had he completed it . As completed by Schnapf and Bolme , it was released as a 15 @-@ track single album . Many songs from the sessions ( later leaked onto the Internet ) were not included , such as " True Love " , " Everything 's OK " , " Stickman " , and " Suicide Machine " ( a reworking of the Figure 8 @-@ era unreleased instrumental " Tiny Time Machine " ) . There has been unconfirmed speculation that Smith 's family made the decision not to include some songs on the record due to their lyrical content , although songs such as " King 's Crossing " that deal with darker subjects did make the album . 
 Elliott Smith and the Big Nothing , a biography by Benjamin Nugent , was rushed to publication and hit stores shortly after From a Basement on the Hill , barely beyond the first anniversary of the musician 's death . Smith 's family , as well as Joanna Bolme , Jennifer Chiba , Neil Gust , Sam Coomes , and Janet Weiss , all declined to be interviewed . It contained interviews with Rob Schnapf , David McConnell , and Pete Krebs . The book received mixed reviews , with Publishers Weekly remarking that while " Nugent manages to patch together the major beats of Smith 's life , he can offer little meaningful insight . " 
 In 2005 , a tribute album , A Tribute to Elliott Smith , was released . It featured various bands performing tributes to Smith . 
 On May 8 , 2007 , a posthumous two @-@ disc compilation album entitled New Moon was released by Kill Rock Stars . The album contained 24 songs recorded by Smith between 1994 and 1997 during his tenure with the label , songs that were not included on albums , as well as a few early versions and previously released B @-@ sides . In the United States , the album debuted at number 24 on the Billboard 200 , selling about 24 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . The record received favorable reviews and was Metacritic 's 15th best @-@ reviewed album of 2007 . A portion of the proceeds from album sales were to go to Outside In , a social service agency for low @-@ income adults and homeless youth in Portland , Oregon . 
 On October 25 , 2007 , a book titled Elliott Smith was released by Autumn de Wilde , which consists of photographs , handwritten lyrics , and " revealing talks with Smith 's inner circle " . De Wilde was responsible for the Figure 8 sleeve art , making a landmark and de facto Smith memorial of the Solutions Audio mural . A five @-@ song CD featuring previously unreleased live recordings of Smith performing acoustically at Largo in Los Angeles was included in the release . 
 Following the singer 's death , the Smith estate licensed his songs for use in a number of film and television projects , such as One Tree Hill , The Girl Next Door , Georgia Rule , and Paranoid Park . 
 In a March 2009 interview , Larry Crane said that the estate of Elliott Smith was now " defunct " and all rights previously held by the singer are now in the control of " his parents " . Crane went on to say that his parents own the rights to Smith 's high school recordings , some of the Heatmiser material , all solo songs recorded until his 1998 record deal with DreamWorks Records , and From a Basement on the Hill . DreamWorks Records was acquired by Universal Music Group in 2003 , and Interscope Records currently " owns all studio and live recording from Jan 1998 to his passing , except for the songs on From a Basement on the Hill . " 
 In December 2009 , Kill Rock Stars announced that it had obtained the rights to re @-@ release Roman Candle and From a Basement on the Hill , originally released by Cavity Search and ANTI- , respectively . Roman Candle would be remastered by Larry Crane . Along with the press release , Kill Rock Stars posted a previously unreleased track of Smith 's , titled " Cecilia / Amanda " , as a free download . Roman Candle and From a Basement on the Hill were re @-@ released on April 6 , 2010 , in the US . 
 A greatest hits compilation titled An Introduction to ... Elliott Smith was released in November 2010 by Domino Records ( UK ) and Kill Rock Stars ( US ) . 
 In August 2013 , there was a memorial concert in Portland , Oregon and three other cities . Attending the Portland show were several musicians Smith had performed with , friends , and an appearance by film director Gus Van Sant . 
 In 2014 , director Paul Thomas Anderson posted a video of the pilot episode for a show called The Jon Brion Show , featuring an acoustic set by Smith including accompaniment by Brion and pianist Brad Mehldau . 
 On July 17 , 2015 , a documentary about Smith 's life titled Heaven Adores You saw a limited theatrical release . The documentary enlisted a number of close friends and family members , as well as hours of audio interviews throughout Smith 's short career . The film was directed by Nickolas Rossi and released through Eagle Rock Entertainment . Heaven Adores You received positive reviews from Consequence of Sound , The Guardian , and The Hollywood Reporter . 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 Smith respected and was inspired by many artists and styles , including Big Star , The Clash , The Who , Led Zeppelin , The Kinks , Pink Floyd , Rush , Elvis Costello , Oasis , Television , Motown and flamenco records , AC / DC , Hank Williams , and Scorpions , Smith claimed to listen exclusively to selected albums ( such as The Marble Index by Nico ) for months . Sean Croghan , a former roommate of Smith 's , said that the singer " listened almost exclusively to slow jams " in his senior year at college . Smith was also known to gain inspiration from novels , religion , and philosophy . He liked classic literature , especially Samuel Beckett , T. S. Eliot , and Fyodor Dostoyevsky ( and other Russian novelists ) . 
 Smith mentioned his admiration for Bob Dylan in several interviews , citing him as an early musical influence . He once commented : " My father taught me how to play ' Don 't Think Twice , It 's All Right ' . I love Dylan 's words , but even more than that , I love the fact that he loves words . " Smith covered Dylan 's " When I Paint My Masterpiece " several times in concert . Smith has also been compared to folk legend Nick Drake , due to his fingerpicking style and vocals . Darryl Cater of AllMusic called references to " the definitive folk loner " Drake " inevitable " , and Smith 's lyrics have been compared to those in Drake 's minimalist and haunting final album . 
 Smith was a dedicated fan of The Beatles ( as well as their solo projects ) , once noting that he had been listening to them frequently since he was about " four years old " and also claimed that hearing The White Album was his original inspiration to become a musician . In 1998 , Smith contributed a cover of the Beatles song " Because " to the closing credits and soundtrack of the film American Beauty . Although this was the only Beatles song that Smith ever officially released , he is known to have recorded at least two others ( " Revolution " and " I 'll Be Back " ) and played many songs by both the band and the members ' solo projects at live concerts . 
 Regarding his songwriting , Smith said : 
 The way I think about it is ... I don 't really think about it in terms of language , I think about it more like shapes . That 's an interesting thing to talk about but it 's difficult . I 'm really into chord changes . That was the thing that I liked when I was a kid . So , I 'm not like a ... I don 't make up " a riff " really . It 's usually like ... that sequence that has some implied melody in it or something like that . 
 Smith said that transitions were his favorite part of songs and that he preferred to write broader , more impressionistic music closer to pop rather than folk music . Smith compared his songs to stories or dreams , not purely confessional pieces that people could relate to . When asked about the dark nature of his songwriting and the cult following he was gaining , Smith said he felt it was merely a product of his writing songs that were strongly meaningful to him rather than anything contrived . Larry Crane , Smith 's posthumous archivist , has said that he was surprised at the amount of " recycling of musical ideas " that he has encountered while cataloging the singer 's private tapes : " I found songs recorded in high school reworked 15 years on . Lyrics became more important to him as he became older , and more time was spent working on them . " 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Roman Candle ( 1994 ) 
 Elliott Smith ( 1995 ) 
 Either / Or ( 1997 ) 
 XO ( 1998 ) 
 Figure 8 ( 2000 ) 
 Posthumous albums 
 From a Basement on the Hill ( 2004 ) 
 New Moon ( 2007 ) 
 Heaven Adores You ( 2016 ) 
 = Mari Lwyd = 
 The Mari Lwyd is a wassailing folk custom found in South Wales . The tradition entails the use of an eponymous hobby horse which is made from a horse 's skull mounted on a pole and carried by an individual hidden under a sackcloth . It represents a regional variation of a " hooded animal " tradition that appears in various forms throughout Britain . 
 The custom was first recorded in 1800 , with subsequent accounts of it being produced into the early twentieth century . According to these , the Mari Lwyd was a tradition performed at Christmas time by groups of men . They would form into teams to accompany the horse on its travels around the local area , and although the makeup of such groups varied , they typically included an individual to carry the horse , a leader , and individuals dressed as stock characters such as Punch and Judy . The team would carry the Mari Lwyd to local houses , where they would request entry through the medium of song . The householders would be expected to deny them entry , again through song , and the two sides would continue their responses to one another in this manner . If the householders eventually relented , then the team would be permitted entry and given food and drink . 
 Although the custom was given various names , it was best known as the Mari Lwyd ; the etymology of this term remains the subject of academic debate . The folklorist Iorwerth C. Peate believed that the term meant " Holy Mary " and thus was a reference to the Virgin Mary , while fellow folklorist E. C. Cawte thought it more likely that the term had originally meant " Grey Mare " , thus referring to the heads ' equine appearance . A number of earlier folklorists to examine the topic , such as Peate and Ellen Ettlinger , believed that the tradition had once been a pre @-@ Christian religious rite , although scholarly support for this interpretation has declined amid a lack of supporting evidence . 
 Although the tradition declined in the early to mid @-@ twentieth century , in part due to opposition from some local Christian clergy and changing social conditions , it was revived in new forms in the mid @-@ to @-@ latter part of the century . The tradition has also inspired various artistic depictions , appearing , for instance , in the work of the painter Clive Hicks @-@ Jenkins and the poet Vernon Watkins . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Mari Lwyd itself consists of a horse 's skull that is decorated with ribbons and affixed to a pole ; to the back of the skull is attached a white sheet , which drapes down to conceal both the pole and the individual carrying this device . On occasion , the horse 's head was represented not by a skull but was instead made from wood or even paper . In some instances , the horse 's jaw was able to open and close as a result of string or lever attached to it , and there are accounts of pieces of glass being affixed into the eye sockets of some examples , representing eyes . An observer of the tradition as it was performed at Llangynwyd during the nineteenth century noted that preparation for the activity was a communal event , with many locals involving themselves in the decorating of the Mari Lwyd . 
 The Mari Lwyd custom was performed during wither festivities , specifically around the dates of Christmas and New Year . However , the precise date on which the custom was performed varied between villages , and in a number of cases the custom was carried out for several consecutive nights . There is a unique example provided by an account from Gower in which the head was kept buried throughout the year , only being dug up for use during the Christmas period . 
 The custom used to begin at dusk and often lasted late into the night . The Mari Lwyd party consisted of four to seven men , who often had coloured ribbons and rosettes attached to their clothes and sometimes wore a broad sash around the waist . There was usually a smartly dressed " Leader " who carried a staff , stick , or whip , and sometimes other stock characters , such as the " Merryman " who played music , and Punch and Judy ( both played by men ) with blackened faces ; often brightly dressed , Punch carried a long metal poker and Judy had a <unk> . 
 The Mari Lwyd party would approach a house and sing a song in which they requested admittance . The inhabitants of the house would then offer excuses for why the team could not enter . The party would sing a second verse , and the debate between the two sides – known as the <unk> – would continue until the house 's inhabitants ran out of ideas , at which time they were obliged to allow the party entry and to provide them with ale and food . An account from Nantgarw described such a performance , in which the Punch and Judy characters would cause a noise , with Punch tapping the ground to the rhythm of the music and rapping on the door with a poker , while Judy brushed the ground , house walls , and windows with a broom . The householders had to make Punch promise that he would not touch their fireplace before he entered the building , otherwise it was the local custom that before he left he would rake out the fire with his poker . In the case from Llangynwyd , however , there was no interplay between the householders and troupe , but rather the latter were typically granted entry automatically after singing the first verse of their song . 
 Once inside , the entertainment continued with the Mari Lwyd running around neighing and snapping its jaws , creating havoc , frightening children ( and perhaps even adults ) while the Leader pretended to try to restrain it . The Merryman played music and entertained the householders . The folklorist Iorwerth C. Peate believed that in recorded examples from Glamorganshire it was apparent that the Mari Lwyd custom had become " indistinguishable " from the practice of wassailing , although added that there were still some examples of wassailing that did not involve the Mari Lwyd . He added that links between Mari Lwyd and wassailing were also apparent from recorded examples in other part of Wales , thus opining that Mari Lwyd represented a variant of the wider wassailing custom that was found throughout Britain . 
 The Mary Lwyd was part of a wider " hooded animal " tradition that the folklorist E. C. Cawte identified as existing in different forms in various parts of Britain . Features common to these customs were the use of a hobby horse , the performance at Christmas time , a song or spoken statement requesting payment , and the use of a team who included a man dressed in women 's clothing . A related example is the hoodening custom of East Kent in south @-@ eastern England . 
 = = Early development = = 
 = = = Etymology = = = 
 Most recorded sources term this particular custom Mari Lwyd . Jones considered this to be a translation of " Blessed Mary " , and thus a reference to the Virgin Mary , a key religious figure in Roman Catholicism . Although translating it slightly differently , as " Holy Mary " , Peate endorsed this viewpoint . Although some of his acquaintances later suggested that the use of Mari for Mary was unknown in Wales prior to the Protestant Reformation , he countered these criticisms with the observation that the term Mari was being used in reference to the Virgin in the mid @-@ 14th century Black Book of Carmarthen , thus attesting to its early usage in Welsh . He nevertheless accepted that during the medieval period the term might have been restricted largely to poets , given that there is no evidence of its usage among the common dialect in this period . 
 Given that llwyd is the usual word for " grey " in the Welsh language and that Welsh speakers would have been exposed to the English word " mare " , an alternative suggestion considered by Peate was that the term Mari Lwyd had originally meant " Grey Mare " . This etymological explanation would have parallels with the name of a similar hooded horse tradition found in Ireland and the Isle of Man , which is known in the former as the <unk> <unk> and in the latter as the <unk> Vane , in both cases meaning " White Mare " . Initially believing that " there is much to be said for this suggestion " , Peate later embraced it fully . Cawte similarly believed that that " Grey Mare " was the most likely original meaning of the term , noting that the Mari Lwyd appeared to represent a horse and that similar hobby horse customs in neighbouring England , such as the hoodening tradition of East Kent , also made reference to horses with their name . Peate suggested that even if the term Mari Lwyd had originally referred to a " Grey Mare " , it could still have come to be associated with the Virgin Mary in popular folk culture following the Reformation , thus explaining why the Virgin Mary is referred to in the lyrics of some surviving Welsh wassailing songs . 
 A further suggestion is that Mari Lwyd derives from the English term Merry <unk> , referring to a merry game . Peate opposed this idea , arguing that if the latter was converted into Welsh then the result would be <unk> @-@ <unk> or <unk> @-@ <unk> . Peate also dismissed the idea that had been suggested to him that the term Mari in this context had derived from Morris , a reference to Morris dancing . Another reason to doubt this idea is that there is no known historical link between the Mari Lwyd , which was found in South Wales , and the Morris dance , which was concentrated in the north of the country . 
 In other recorded instances , the Mary Lwyd custom is given different names , with it being recorded as Y <unk> ( " The Wassail " ) in parts of Carmarthenshire . In the first half of the 19th century it was recorded in Pembrokeshire under the name of Y March ( " The Horse " ) and Y <unk> @-@ <unk> ( " The Canvas Horse " ) . One account from West Glamorgan has the head termed the <unk> bee [ bi ? ] y llwyd , meaning the " Grey Magpie " , although this may be due to an error on the part of the recorder , who could have confused the horse 's head for the <unk> pica llwyd , an artificial bird in a tree that was carried by <unk> in the same area . 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 <unk> the custom to be " the survival of some ancient popular rite or ceremony " , in 1888 David Jones suggested that its origins were Christian , and that it had once been part of the festivities of the Feast of the Ass , a commemoration of the Biblical flight of the Virgin Mary and Saint Joseph into Egypt that was historically marked on 14 January . According to Jones ' idea , the Mari Lwyd itself represented the donkey on which Mary rode during the story . 
 Peate was of the opinion that the Mari Lwyd was " no doubt a survival of a pre @-@ Christian tradition " that had once been spread across Britain and other parts of Europe , and which – having survived the Christianisation of Britain – had been renamed Mari Lwyd in reference to the Virgin Mary during the Middle Ages . He expressed the view that the original custom had been " horrific in origin and intention " and that from an early date it had been connected to wassailing . Cawte concurred that it was " reasonable to accept " that the Mari Lwyd head had become attached to an independent wassailing tradition , but said that the connection to the Virgin Mary was unnecessary . Pearce also suggested the possibility that in parts of Glamorganshire and Monmouthshire the Mari Lwyd tradition came under the influence of Miracle plays , thus explaining why later recorded examples from those counties contained characters known as " the Sergeant " and the " Merryman " . 
 The folklorist Trefor M. Owen also suggested that the Mari Lwyd was a practice " which probably had a religious ( if pre @-@ Christian ) origin " , adding that by the time it had been recorded , it had become " emptied of its religious content " . Also embracing Peate 's suggestion of ancient origins , Ellen Ettlinger believed that the Mari Lwyd represented a " death horse " , as symbolised by the white cloth worn by its carrier , suggesting that it was originally employed in a pre @-@ Christian ritual to mark the festival of Samhain . The folklorist Christina Hole suggested that this " ancient character " was once " a bringer of fertility " . However , after 1970 the folkloric trend for interpreting such hobby horse traditions as pre @-@ Christian survivals had ended , as scholars came to express greater caution about proposing origins for such customs . 
 = = Regional coverage = = 
 In mapping the distribution of Mari Lwyd appearances , Cawte noted that it was principally a custom associated with Glamorganshire , with two @-@ thirds of instances falling within that county . The custom stretched east into the industrial valleys of Monmouthshire , with the most easterly account coming from Monmouth itself ; this account is also one of the earliest . A number of examples were also found in Carmarthenshire , with a single example found in both Brecknockshire and Cardiganshire . There is a single record of the custom being performed in North Wales , in an example from Wrexham , which Cawte believed was the result of a Glamorgan man bringing the custom with him as he moved north . Previously , Peate had cautioned that the comparative absence of recorded examples from Mid and North Wales was not proof that the Mari Lwyd custom had never been present in those areas . 
 Cawte opined that there was " no clear reason " for the distribution of the Mari Lwyd custom , which cut through various local cultural features . Those areas where it was found did not correlate with any distinction between English @-@ speaking and Welsh @-@ speaking areas in South Wales . He acknowledged however that there was a " reasonable correspondence " between the areas in which the Mari Lwyd was recorded and the areas which were used for mineral production in the 14th century . He therefore suggested the possibility that it might have been performed by coal and iron miners in western Glamorganshire , Carmarthenshire , and western Monmouthshire , and that from there it could have spread into those villages where goods were manufactured using those minerals . 
 = = Recorded appearances = = 
 = = = 18th and 19th centuries = = = 
 The earliest published account of the Mari Lwyd appeared in 1800 in J. Evans ' A Tour through Part of North Wales , in the year 1798 , and at Other Times . Although the book itself focused on North Wales , the chapter in which the passage was included discussed the language and customs of Wales more generally . In this section , Evans related that : 
 A man on new year 's day , dressing himself in blankets and other trappings , with a <unk> head like a horse , and a party attending him , knocking for admittance , this obtained , he runs about the room with an uncommon frightful noise , which the company quit in real or pretended fright ; they soon recover , and by reciting a verse of some <unk> , or , in default , paying a small gratuity , they gain admission . 
 Evans returned to the custom in his 1804 work Letters Written During a Tour Through South Wales , in the year 1803 , and at Other Times . Here he provided a clearer discussion than before , making it apparent that teams accompanying a man dressed as a horse or bull toured the local area from Christmas until after Twelfth Day , and that they were given food or money to leave the householders alone . 
 The Mari Lwyd next appeared in an 1819 account from West Glamorgan , where the Mari Lwyd itself was termed an <unk> Bee y llwyd ( roughly " Grey Magpie " ) and was accompanied by " three or four partners in the profits of the expedition , who are by turns horse , groom , or attendants " . 
 It has been suggested that the Welsh Methodist revival contributed to the decline of both the Mari Lwyd and a number of other Welsh folk customs . In 1802 , the harpist Edward Jones of Merioneth published a book in which he lamented the destructive impact that Christian preachers were having on Welsh folk customs , which they were criticising as sinful . In his view , " the consequence is , Wales , which was formerly one of the merriest and happiest countries in the World , is now becoming one of the dullest " . Reflecting such a view , in 1852 the Reverend William Roberts , a Baptist minister at Blaenau Gwent , condemned the Mari Lwyd and other related customs as " a mixture of old Pagan and Popish ceremonies ... I wish of this folly , and all similar follies , that they find no place anywhere apart from the museum of the historian and antiquary . " 
 Owen suggested that the custom 's decline was also a result of changing social conditions in South Wales . He argued that the Mari Lwyd wassailing custom " gave an approved means of entering the houses of neighbours in a culture in which there were few public assemblies – at least in the heart of winter – in which the convivial spirit of the season could be released " . Further , he suggested that the gifts of food , drink , and sometimes money " no doubt helped to further the feeling of community among country folk while at the same time manifesting it " . He argued that the changing social conditions altered the ways that people in southern Wales celebrated Christmas , hence contributing to the folk custom 's decline . 
 = = = 20th century revival = = = 
 In a 1935 article on the subject of the Mari Lwyd , Peate stated that the tradition " is still met with ; it is practised in the Cardiff district , Bridgend , Llangynwyd , Neath and other Glamorgan districts " . He highlighted an example from Christmas Eve 1934 , in which a Mari Lwyd was observed performing alongside at least twelve singers in a chemist 's shop in the Mumbles , Swansea . Ettlinger subsequently expressed the view that " Dr. Peate deserves the sincerest gratitude of all folk @-@ lore students for having so valiantly penetrated the mysteries surrounding the Mari Lwyd . " 
 The historian Ronald Hutton stated that the Mari Lwyd tradition appeared to have become defunct in the early 20th century . In the middle of that century it was revived in Llangynwyd . In 1967 , Lois Blake published a letter in the journal English Dance and Song in which she noted that the Mari Lwyd appeared each Christmas Eve at the Barley Mow Inn at Graig <unk> , near Cowbridge , where a man named John Williams had kept the custom alive for the past sixty years . Blake also explained that she believed that the custom was still performed at several villages in the Maesteg area of Glamorgan . During the 1970s , Hole commented that the tradition was still found in Glamorganshire and <unk> . 
 During the 1980s , further revived forms of the Mari Lwyd tradition emerged in Caerphilly , Llantrisant , and St Fagans , all of which are in the same borderland between Vale and mountains . Commenting on the example of Llantrisant , which was inaugurated in 1980 , Mick <unk> noted that the custom had " re @-@ established herself so strongly that there are complaints if she misses any of her regular calls " . He noted that in 1991 the Llantrisant Mari Lwyd was taken to Yn <unk> , a Pan @-@ Celtic festival on the Isle of Man , and that it had also been taken to the <unk> <unk> festival at Perranporth in Cornwall . Hutton believed that the custom re @-@ emerged in the borderlands between Vale and the mountains in part because people in Glamorgan sought to reaffirm their sense of cultural identity during the termination of their traditional industries , and partly because the Welsh Folk Museum was located in the area . More widely , he believed that the revival of the Mari Lwyd was in large part due to the " forces of local patriotism " , noting that a similar situation had resulted in the resurrection of the hoodening tradition in East Kent . 
 The town council of Aberystwyth organised " The World 's Largest Mari Lwyd " for the Millennium celebrations in 2000 . A mixture of the Mari Lwyd and Wassail customs occurs in the border town of Chepstow , South Wales , every January . A band of English <unk> meet with the local Welsh Border Morris Side , The <unk> , on the bridge in Chepstow . 
 = = In culture = = 
 The Mari Lwyd has prompted responses from the arts in Wales . The poet Vernon Watkins published his " Ballad of the Mari Lwyd " in 1941 . The Archbishop of Canterbury Rowan Williams has written that this , " one of the outstanding poems of the century , draws together the folk @-@ ritual of the New Year , the Christian Eucharist , the uneasy frontier between living and dead , so as to present a model of what poetry itself is — frontier work between death and life , old year and new , bread and body . " 
 The Mari Lwyd was utilised by the artist Clive Hicks @-@ Jenkins in a series of drawings from around 2000 that focused on a metamorphosing horse / man as a nightmarish harbinger of his father 's death . Catriona Urquhart wrote a sequence of poems titled The Mare 's Tale which were published alongside Hicks @-@ Jenkins ' images in 2001 . In her 1977 novel Silver on the Tree , the author Susan Cooper included an appearance from the Mari Lwyd . 
 = = Related Welsh customs = = 
 In 1919 , H. W. Evans recorded the existence of a similar custom which had existed in Solva , Pembrokeshire circa 1840 , during his mother 's childhood . He stated that this custom entailed the use of what he termed a " Mari Lwyd " , furthermore providing a drawing of it using his mother 's recollections as a basis , although was unaware of how this costume had been used . According to Evans ' description , this Mari Lwyd consisted of a sheet that had been sewn together along two adjacent sides to make a cone , which was then stuffed with hay and decorated with buttons for eyes and harvest gloves for ears , thus resembling an animal 's snout . An individual could conceal themselves under the sheet and use a hay fork inserted into the hay to hold it up . A similar custom appears in an account from 1897 , in which an entity known as the <unk> Llwyd ( " Grey <unk> " ) was described ; it involved an imitation horse 's head being made from canvas and stuffed with hay , being carried about using a hay fork on All Hallow 's Eve . 
 Cawte also noted the example of other Welsh folk customs featuring the head of a horse , however he opined that these " so not seem to be closely related to the mari <unk> " . A horse 's head was prepared in a manner akin to the Mari Lwyd for a spring festival known as the <unk> or <unk> , which took place in Pembrokeshire circa 1820 . As part of this festival , young men and women gathered at a mill for a night 's entertainment . In the late nineteenth century , a tradition was recorded in North Wales that was known as " giving a skull " , in which the skull of a horse or donkey was placed over the front door of a woman 's house on May Day as a sign of contempt . In parts of Wales a horse 's head – sometimes with horns attached – was featured as part of the charivari processions designed to shame those who were deemed to have behaved in an immoral manner . 
 = = = Audio recordings = = = 
 Recordings of the Mari Lwyd custom @-@ made during the 1940s and 1950s by Peter Kennedy and others . Available at the <unk> website here 
 " The Mari Lwyd " , by David Thomas , David Jenkins , and Thomas Jenkins , recorded by Peter Kennedy , on The Folk Songs of Britain , Vol . 9 Songs of Ceremony ( 1971 ) , Topic Records : <unk> 12 @-@ T @-@ 197 . 
 " The Mari Lwyd " , available on <unk> : Traditional Celtic Music of Wales ( 1998 ) by Carreg <unk> , Marquis Music : <unk> . 
 " The Mari Lwyd " , written by Hugh Lupton , sung by Chris Wood , on Ghosts ( 2005 ) by the English Acoustic Collective , <unk> Records : <unk> . 
 = Alatskivi Castle = 
 Alatskivi Castle ( Estonian : Alatskivi loss , German : Schloss <unk> ) is a Neo @-@ Gothic castle in Alatskivi , Estonia . Dating to the 17th century , it is situated in Alatskivi Parish , Tartu County . It was rebuilt in the late 19th century by Baron Arved von <unk> , modeled on the royal residence of Balmoral in Scotland . A renovation occurred between 2005 and 2011 . Five rooms on the first floor house the Eduard Tubin museum , which documents his accomplishments as a music composer and conductor . 
 Alatskivi Castle is surrounded by various ancillary buildings and a forested park of 130 hectares ( 320 acres ) area , the largest in Tartu County . The park contains many oaks , ashes , maples , alders and an approach road lined with linden trees . 
 = = Location = = 
 Alatskivi Castle is located 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) north of Tartu and 205 kilometres ( 127 mi ) from Tallinn . It is built on the high bank of Lake Alatskivi at the foot of the Alatskivi valley . An arched entrance leads to the castle along a road lined with linden trees . 
 = = History = = 
 The earliest mention of the manor was in 1601 . King Gustav Adolf II of Sweden gave it to his secretary , Johan Adler Salvius , in 1628 . In 1642 , its ownership passed on to Hans <unk> <unk> ( <unk> @-@ <unk> ) . In 1753 , it was purchased by the <unk> and inherited by the <unk> in 1870 . Baron Arved George de <unk> ( 1845 – 1909 ) rebuilt the castle between 1876 – 1885 according to his own designs , in the Scottish baronial style , designed as a smaller version of Queen Victoria 's Balmoral Castle in Scotland , which he had visited in 1875 . After nationalization occurred in 1919 , the castle complex was taken over by the government under the Ministry of Agriculture and became a school , cavalry barracks , state controlled farm land , council offices , cinema and library . It has been fully refurbished to its original form based on the original pictures of the aristocracy and their descendants who resided here . After the 2011 restoration , the castle was opened to the public with the Alatskivi Castle Foundation administrating the castle and the manor complex . 
 = = Features = = 
 The writer Ain <unk> refers to the manor house having been designed as a mock @-@ English castle . The castle is built to an asymmetrical plan , with single- and double @-@ storied wings , turrets and a slate roof . The building has both single- and double @-@ storied floors . It hosts seminars , training programmes and small conferences , and is fitted with three meeting rooms and dining facilities . 
 Completed in 2011 , the Eduard Tubin Museum is located in five rooms on the first floor of the castle . The main feature is devoted to the life and work of Eduard Tubin who was one of Estonia 's most esteemed composers . The initial exhibits are of members of the Tartu school who studied with Tubin , including Heino Eller , Eduard <unk> , Alfred <unk> , Olav Roots , and Karl Leichter . Tubin 's music scores , manuscripts , books , records , films and photos , musical instruments , records , books , and sketches of theatre costumes are all part of the display . The museum also houses a large @-@ scale model of the castle and plays the music of Tubin . 
 = = Manor Park = = 
 The 130 hectares ( 320 acres ) large Manor Park consists of oaks , ashes , maples , alders and an approach road lined with linden trees , some trees being grown on terraces . It is the largest in the Tartu County . A hiking track is laid through the park and the Alatskivi Nature Reserve . There are two artificial reservoirs along the Alatskivi River . There is a large boulder at the extreme end of the park in <unk> Forest where Apollo Belvedere 's statue existed in the past , although the statue has been moved to <unk> Park in Tallinn . The main castle is surrounded by many stone buildings . During the 19th century , the manor had 57 buildings , of which 41 remain . These are grouped in four areas connected by roads . The first contains the castle , coaching house and cheese cellar ; the second , the economic circle , contains the laundry , kitchen , stables and sheds ; the third or border circle , contains the barn , mills , church and cemetery ; the outer fourth circle contains the Apollo Belvedere statue and the final resting place of the Estonian folklore figure <unk> . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Brachytherapy = 
 Brachytherapy is a form of radiotherapy where a sealed radiation source is placed inside or next to the area requiring treatment . Brachytherapy is commonly used as an effective treatment for cervical , prostate , breast , and skin cancer and can also be used to treat tumours in many other body sites . Treatment results have demonstrated that the cancer cure rates of brachytherapy are either comparable to surgery and EBRT or are improved when used in combination with these techniques . Brachytherapy can be used alone or in combination with other therapies such as surgery , external beam radiotherapy ( EBRT ) and chemotherapy . 
 Brachytherapy contrasts with unsealed source radiotherapy in which a therapeutic radionuclide ( radioisotope ) is injected into the body to chemically localize to the tissue requiring destruction . It also contrasts to EBRT , in which high @-@ energy x @-@ rays ( or occasionally gamma @-@ rays from a radioisotope like cobalt @-@ 60 ) are directed at the tumour from outside the body . Brachytherapy instead involves the precise placement of short @-@ range radiation @-@ sources ( radioisotopes ) directly at the site of the cancerous tumour . These are enclosed in a protective capsule or wire , which allows the ionizing radiation to escape to treat and kill surrounding tissue but prevents the charge of radioisotope from moving or dissolving in body fluids . The capsule may be removed later , or ( with some radioisotopes ) it may be allowed to remain in place . A feature of brachytherapy is that the irradiation affects only a very localized area around the radiation sources . Exposure to radiation of healthy tissues farther away from the sources is therefore reduced . In addition , if the patient moves or if there is any movement of the tumour within the body during treatment , the radiation sources retain their correct position in relation to the tumour . These characteristics of brachytherapy provide advantages over EBRT - the tumour can be treated with very high doses of localised radiation whilst reducing the probability of unnecessary damage to surrounding healthy tissues . 
 A course of brachytherapy can be completed in less time than other radiotherapy techniques . This can help reduce the chance for surviving cancer cells to divide and grow in the intervals between each radiotherapy dose . Patients typically have to make fewer visits to the radiotherapy clinic compared with EBRT , and the treatment is often performed on an outpatient basis . This makes treatment accessible and convenient for many patients . These features of brachytherapy mean that most patients are able to tolerate the brachytherapy procedure very well . 
 The global market for brachytherapy reached US $ 680 million in 2013 , of which the High @-@ Dose Rate ( HDR ) and LDR segments accounted for 70 % . <unk> and electronic brachytherapy commanded the remaining 30 % . The brachytherapy market is expected to reach over US $ 2 @.@ 4 billion in 2030 , growing by 8 % annually , mainly driven by the <unk> market as well as electronic brachytherapy , which is gaining significant interest worldwide as a user @-@ friendly technology . The word is from the Greek word <unk> brachys , meaning " short @-@ distance " . 
 = = Medical uses = = 
 Brachytherapy is commonly used to treat cancers of the cervix , prostate , breast , and skin . 
 Brachytherapy can also be used in the treatment of tumours of the brain , eye , head and neck region ( lip , floor of mouth , tongue , nasopharynx and oropharynx ) , respiratory tract ( trachea and bronchi ) , digestive tract ( oesophagus , gall bladder , bile @-@ ducts , rectum , anus ) , urinary tract ( bladder , urethra , penis ) , female reproductive tract ( uterus , vagina , vulva ) , and soft tissues . 
 As the radiation sources can be precisely positioned at the tumour treatment site , brachytherapy enables a high dose of radiation to be applied to a small area . Furthermore , because the radiation sources are placed in or next to the target tumour , the sources maintain their position in relation to the tumour when the patient moves or if there is any movement of the tumour within the body . Therefore , the radiation sources remain accurately targeted . This enables clinicians to achieve a high level of dose conformity – i.e. ensuring the whole of the tumour receives an optimal level of radiation . It also reduces the risk of damage to healthy tissue , organs or structures around the tumour , thus enhancing the chance of cure and preservation of organ function . 
 The use of HDR brachytherapy enables overall treatment times to be reduced compared with EBRT . Patients receiving brachytherapy generally have to make fewer visits for radiotherapy compared with EBRT , and overall radiotherapy treatment plans can be completed in less time . Many brachytherapy procedures are performed on an outpatient basis . This convenience may be particularly relevant for patients who have to work , older patients , or patients who live some distance from treatment centres , to ensure that they have access to radiotherapy treatment and adhere to treatment plans . Shorter treatment times and outpatient procedures can also help improve the efficiency of radiotherapy clinics . 
 Brachytherapy can be used with the aim of curing the cancer in cases of small or locally advanced tumours , provided the cancer has not metastasized ( spread to other parts of the body ) . In appropriately selected cases , brachytherapy for primary tumours often represents a comparable approach to surgery , achieving the same probability of cure and with similar side effects . However , in locally advanced tumours , surgery may not routinely provide the best chance of cure and is often not technically feasible to perform . In these cases radiotherapy , including brachytherapy , offers the only chance of cure . In more advanced disease stages , brachytherapy can be used as palliative treatment for symptom relief from pain and bleeding . 
 In cases where the tumour is not easily accessible or is too large to ensure an optimal distribution of irradiation to the treatment area , brachytherapy can be combined with other treatments , such as EBRT and / or surgery . Combination therapy of brachytherapy exclusively with chemotherapy is rare . 
 = = = Cervical cancer = = = 
 Brachytherapy is commonly used in the treatment of early or locally confined cervical cancer and is a standard of care in many countries . Cervical cancer can be treated with either LDR , PDR or HDR brachytherapy . Used in combination with EBRT , brachytherapy can provide better outcomes than EBRT alone . The precision of brachytherapy enables a high dose of targeted radiation to be delivered to the cervix , while minimising radiation exposure to adjacent tissues and organs . 
 The chances of staying free of disease ( disease @-@ free survival ) and of staying alive ( overall survival ) are similar for LDR , PDR and HDR treatments . However , a key advantage of HDR treatment is that each dose can be delivered on an outpatient basis with a short administration time providing greater convenience for many patients . 
 = = = Prostate cancer = = = 
 Brachytherapy to treat prostate cancer can be given either as permanent LDR seed implantation or as temporary HDR brachytherapy . 
 Permanent seed implantation is suitable for patients with a localised tumour and good prognosis and has been shown to be a highly effective treatment to prevent the cancer from returning . The survival rate is similar to that found with EBRT or surgery ( radical prostatectomy ) , but with fewer side effects such as impotence and incontinence . The procedure can be completed quickly and patients are usually able to go home on the same day of treatment and return to normal activities after 1 to 2 days . Permanent seed implantation is often a less invasive treatment option compared to the surgical removal of the prostate . 
 Temporary HDR brachytherapy is a newer approach to treating prostate cancer , but is currently less common than seed implantation . It is predominately used as to provide an extra dose in addition to EBRT ( known as ‘ ” boost ” therapy ) as it offers an alternative method to deliver a high dose of radiation therapy that conforms to the shape of the tumour within the prostate , while sparing radiation exposure to surrounding tissues . HDR brachytherapy as a boost for prostate cancer also means that the EBRT course can be shorter than when EBRT is used alone . 
 = = = Breast cancer = = = 
 Radiation therapy is standard of care for women who have undergone lumpectomy or mastectomy surgery , and is an integral component of breast @-@ conserving therapy . Brachytherapy can be used after surgery , before chemotherapy or <unk> in the case of advanced disease . Brachytherapy to treat breast cancer is usually performed with HDR temporary brachytherapy . Post surgery , breast brachytherapy can be used as a “ boost ” following irradiation of the whole breast using EBRT . More recently , brachytherapy alone is applied in a technique called APBI ( accelerated partial breast irradiation ) , involving delivery of radiation to only the immediate region surrounding the original tumour . 
 The main benefit of breast brachytherapy compared to EBRT is that a high dose of radiation can be precisely applied to the tumour while sparing radiation to healthy breast tissues and underlying structures such as the ribs and lungs . APBI can typically be completed over the course of a week . The option of brachytherapy may be particularly important in ensuring that working women , the elderly or women without easy access to a treatment centre , are able to benefit from breast @-@ conserving therapy due to the short treatment course compared with EBRT ( which often requires more visits over the course of 1 – 2 months ) . Brachytherapy has demonstrated excellent local control of breast cancer at follow @-@ up of up to 6 years post treatment . A study is underway to compare patient outcomes of APBI in comparison to EBRT at up to 10 years after treatment . 
 There are two methods that can be used to deliver breast brachytherapy : 
 Interstitial breast brachytherapy using multiple catheters 
 <unk> breast brachytherapy using a balloon catheter 
 Interstitial breast brachytherapy involves the temporary placement of several flexible plastic catheters in the breast tissue . These are carefully positioned to allow optimal targeting of radiation to the treatment area while sparing the surrounding breast tissue . The catheters are connected to an afterloader , which delivers the planned radiation dose to the treatment area . Interstitial breast brachytherapy can be used as “ boost ” after EBRT , or as APBI . 
 <unk> breast brachytherapy ( also known as “ balloon brachytherapy ” ) involves the placement of a single catheter into the breast cavity left after the removal of the tumour ( lumpectomy ) . The catheter can be placed at the time of the lumpectomy or <unk> . Via the catheter , a balloon is then inflated in the cavity . The catheter is then connected to an afterloader , which delivers the radiation dose through the catheter and into the balloon . Currently , intracavitary breast brachytherapy is only routinely used for APBI . 
 There are also devices that combine the features of interstitial and intracavitary breast brachytherapy ( e.g. <unk> ) . These devices use multiple catheters but are inserted through a single @-@ entry point in the breast . Studies suggest the use of multiple catheters enables physicians to target the radiation more precisely . 
 = = = Skin cancer = = = 
 HDR brachytherapy for <unk> skin cancer , such as basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma , provides an alternative treatment option to surgery . This is especially relevant for cancers on the nose , ears , eyelids or lips , where surgery may cause disfigurement or require extensive reconstruction . Various applicators can be used to ensure close contact between the radiation source ( s ) and the skin , which conform to the curvature of the skin and help ensure precision delivery of the optimal irradiation dose . 
 Brachytherapy for skin cancer provides good cosmetic results and clinical efficacy ; studies with up to 5 years follow @-@ up have shown that brachytherapy is highly effective in terms local control , and is comparable to EBRT . Treatment times are typically short , providing convenience for patients . It has been suggested that brachytherapy may become a standard of treatment for skin cancer in the near future . 
 = = = Blood vessels = = = 
 Brachytherapy can be used in the treatment of coronary in @-@ stent restenosis , in which a catheter is placed inside blood vessels , through which sources are inserted and removed . In treating In @-@ stent restenosis ( ISR ) Drug <unk> stents ( DES ) have been found to be superior to <unk> Brachytherapy ( <unk> ) . However , there is continued interest in vascular brachytherapy for persistent restenosis in failed stents and vein grafts . The therapy has also been investigated for use in the treatment of peripheral vasculature stenosis and considered for the treatment of atrial fibrillation . 
 = = Side effects = = 
 The likelihood and nature of potential acute , sub @-@ acute or long @-@ term side @-@ effects associated with brachytherapy depends on the location of the tumour being treated and the type of brachytherapy being used . 
 = = = Acute = = = 
 Acute side effects associated with brachytherapy include localised bruising , swelling , bleeding , discharge or discomfort within the implanted region . These usually resolve within a few days following completion of treatment . Patients may also feel fatigued for a short period following treatment . 
 Brachytherapy treatment for cervical or prostate cancer can cause acute and transient urinary symptoms such as urinary retention , urinary incontinence or painful urination ( <unk> ) . Transient increased bowel frequency , diarrhoea , constipation or minor rectal bleeding , may also occur . Acute and subacute side effects usually resolve over a matter of days or a few weeks . In the case of permanent ( seed ) brachytherapy for prostate cancer , there is a small chance that some seeds may migrate out of the treatment region into the bladder or urethra and be passed in the urine . 
 Brachytherapy for skin cancer may result in a shedding of the outer layers of skin ( <unk> ) around the area of treatment in the weeks following therapy , which typically heals in 5 – 8 weeks . If the cancer is located on the lip , ulceration may occur as a result of brachytherapy , but usually resolves after 4 – 6 weeks . 
 Most of the acute side effects associated with brachytherapy can be treated with medication or through dietary changes , and usually disappear over time ( typically a matter of weeks ) , once the treatment is completed . The acute side effects of HDR brachytherapy are broadly similar to EBRT . 
 = = = Long @-@ term = = = 
 In a small number of people , brachytherapy may cause long @-@ term side effects due to damage or disruption of adjacent tissues or organs . Long @-@ term side effects are usually mild or moderate in nature . For example , urinary and digestive problems may persist as a result of brachytherapy for cervical or prostate cancer , and may require ongoing management . 
 Brachytherapy for prostate cancer may cause erectile dysfunction in approximately 15 @-@ 30 % of patients . However , the risk of erectile dysfunction is related to age ( older men are at a greater risk than younger men ) and also the level of erectile function prior to receiving brachytherapy . In patients who do experience erectile dysfunction , the majority of cases can successfully be treated with drugs such as Viagra . Importantly , the risk of erectile dysfunction after brachytherapy is less than after radical prostatectomy . 
 Brachytherapy for breast or skin cancer may cause scar tissue to form around the treatment area . In the case of breast brachytherapy , fat necrosis may occur as a result of fatty acids entering the breast tissues . This can cause the breast tissue to become swollen and tender . Fat necrosis is a benign condition and typically occurs 4 – 12 months after treatment and affects about 2 % of patients . 
 = = Safety around others = = 
 Patients often ask if they need to have special safety precautions around family and friends after receiving brachytherapy . If temporary brachytherapy is used , no radioactive sources remain in the body after treatment . Therefore , there is no radiation risk to friends or family from being in close proximity with them . 
 If permanent brachytherapy is used , low dose radioactive sources ( seeds ) are left in the body after treatment - the radiation levels are very low and decrease over time . In addition , the irradiation only affects tissues within a few millimeters of the radioactive sources ( i.e. the tumour being treated ) . As a precaution , some people receiving permanent brachytherapy may be advised to not hold any small children or be too close to pregnant women for a short time after treatment . Radiation oncologists or nurses can provide specific instructions to patients and advise for how long they need to be careful . 
 = = Types = = 
 Different types of brachytherapy can be defined according to ( 1 ) the placement of the radiation sources in the target treatment area , ( 2 ) the rate or ‘ intensity ’ of the irradiation dose delivered to the tumour , and ( 3 ) the duration of dose delivery . 
 = = = Source placement = = = 
 The two main types of brachytherapy treatment in terms of the placement of the radioactive source are interstitial and contact . 
 In the case of interstitial brachytherapy , the sources are placed directly in the target tissue of the affected site , such as the prostate or breast . 
 Contact brachytherapy involves placement of the radiation source in a space next to the target tissue . This space may be a body cavity ( intracavitary brachytherapy ) such as the cervix , uterus or vagina ; a body lumen ( <unk> brachytherapy ) such as the trachea or oesophagus ; or externally ( surface brachytherapy ) such as the skin . A radiation source can also be placed in blood vessels ( intravascular brachytherapy ) for the treatment of coronary in @-@ stent restenosis . 
 = = = Dose rate = = = 
 The dose rate of brachytherapy refers to the level or ‘ intensity ’ with which the radiation is delivered to the surrounding medium and is expressed in Grays per hour ( Gy / h ) . 
 Low @-@ dose rate ( LDR ) brachytherapy involves implanting radiation sources that emit radiation at a rate of up to 2 Gy · h − 1 . LDR brachytherapy is commonly used for cancers of the oral cavity , oropharynx , sarcomas and prostate cancer 
 Medium @-@ dose rate ( MDR ) brachytherapy is characterized by a medium rate of dose delivery , ranging between 2 Gy · h − 1 to 12 Gy · h − 1 . 
 High @-@ dose rate ( HDR ) brachytherapy is when the rate of dose delivery exceeds 12 Gy · h − 1 . The most common applications of HDR brachytherapy are in tumours of the cervix , esophagus , lungs , breasts and prostate . Most HDR treatments are performed on an outpatient basis , but this is dependent on the treatment site . 
 Pulsed @-@ dose rate ( PDR ) brachytherapy involves short pulses of radiation , typically once an hour , to simulate the overall rate and effectiveness of LDR treatment . Typical tumour sites treated by PDR brachytherapy are gynaecological and head and neck cancers . 
 = = = Duration of dose delivery = = = 
 The placement of radiation sources in the target area can be temporary or permanent . 
 Temporary brachytherapy involves placement of radiation sources for a set duration ( usually a number of minutes or hours ) before being withdrawn . The specific treatment duration will depend on many different factors , including the required rate of dose delivery and the type , size and location of the cancer . In LDR and PDR brachytherapy , the source typically stays in place up to 24 hours before being removed , while in HDR brachytherapy this time is typically a few minutes . 
 Permanent brachytherapy , also known as seed implantation , involves placing small LDR radioactive seeds or pellets ( about the size of a grain of rice ) in the tumour or treatment site and leaving them there permanently to gradually decay . Over a period of weeks or months , the level of radiation emitted by the sources will decline to almost zero . The inactive seeds then remain in the treatment site with no lasting effect . Permanent brachytherapy is most commonly used in the treatment of prostate cancer . 
 = = Procedure = = 
 = = = Initial planning = = = 
 In order to accurately plan the brachytherapy procedure , a thorough clinical examination is performed to understand the characteristics of the tumour . In addition , a range of imaging modalities can be used to visualise the shape and size of the tumour and its relation to surrounding tissues and organs . These include x @-@ ray radiography , ultrasound , computed axial tomography ( CT or CAT ) scans and magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) . The data from many of these sources can be used to create a 3D visualisation of the tumour and the surrounding tissues . 
 Using this information , a plan of the optimal distribution of the radiation sources can be developed . This includes consideration of how the source carriers ( applicators ) , which are used to deliver the radiation to the treatment site , should be placed and positioned . <unk> are non @-@ radioactive and are typically needles or plastic catheters . The specific type of applicator used will depend on the type of cancer being treated and the characteristics of the target tumour . 
 This initial planning helps to ensure that ‘ cold spots ’ ( too little irradiation ) and ‘ hot spots ’ ( too much irradiation ) are avoided during treatment , as these can respectively result in treatment failure and side @-@ effects . 
 = = = Insertion = = = 
 Before radioactive sources can be delivered to the tumour site , the applicators have to be inserted and correctly positioned in line with the initial planning . 
 Imaging techniques , such as x @-@ ray , fluoroscopy and ultrasound are typically used to help guide the placement of the applicators to their correct positions and to further refine the treatment plan . CAT scans and MRI can also be used . Once the applicators are inserted , they are held in place against the skin using sutures or adhesive tape to prevent them from moving . Once the applicators are confirmed as being in the correct position , further imaging can be performed to guide detailed treatment planning . 
 = = = Creation of a virtual patient = = = 
 The images of the patient with the applicators in situ are imported into treatment planning software and the patient is brought into a dedicated shielded room for treatment . The treatment planning software enables multiple 2D images of the treatment site to be translated into a 3D ‘ virtual patient ’ , within which the position of the applicators can be defined . The spatial relationships between the applicators , the treatment site and the surrounding healthy tissues within this ‘ virtual patient ’ are a copy of the relationships in the actual patient . 
 = = = Optimizing the irradiation plan = = = 
 To identify the optimal spatial and temporal distribution of radiation sources within the applicators of the implanted tissue or cavity , the treatment planning software allows virtual radiation sources to be placed within the virtual patient . The software shows a graphical representation of the distribution of the irradiation . This serves as a guide for the brachytherapy team to refine the distribution of the sources and provide a treatment plan that is optimally tailored to the anatomy of each patient before actual delivery of the irradiation begins . This approach is sometimes called ‘ dose @-@ painting ’ . 
 = = = Treatment delivery = = = 
 The radiation sources used for brachytherapy are always enclosed within a non @-@ radioactive capsule . The sources can be delivered manually , but are more commonly delivered through a technique known as ‘ afterloading ’ . 
 Manual delivery of brachytherapy is limited to a few LDR applications , due to risk of radiation exposure to clinical staff . 
 In contrast , afterloading involves the accurate positioning of non @-@ radioactive applicators in the treatment site , which are subsequently loaded with the radiation sources . In manual afterloading , the source is delivered into the applicator by the operator . 
 Remote afterloading systems provide protection from radiation exposure to healthcare professionals by securing the radiation source in a shielded safe . Once the applicators are correctly positioned in the patient , they are connected to an ‘ afterloader ’ machine ( containing the radioactive sources ) through a series of connecting guide tubes . The treatment plan is sent to the afterloader , which then controls the delivery of the sources along the guide tubes into the pre @-@ specified positions within the applicator . This process is only engaged once staff are removed from the treatment room . The sources remain in place for a pre @-@ specified length of time , again following the treatment plan , following which they are returned along the tubes to the afterloader . 
 On completion of delivery of the radioactive sources , the applicators are carefully removed from the body . Patients typically recover quickly from the brachytherapy procedure , enabling it to often be performed on an outpatient basis . 
 Between 2003 and 2012 in United States community hospitals , the rate of hospital stays with brachytherapy ( internal radiation therapy ) had a 24 @.@ 4 percent average annual decrease among adults aged 45 – 64 years and a 27 @.@ 3 percent average annual decrease among adults aged 65 – 84 years . Brachytherapy was the OR procedure with the greatest change in occurrence among hospital stays paid by Medicare and private insurance . 
 = = Radiation sources = = 
 Commonly used radiation sources ( radionuclides ) for brachytherapy 
 = = Electronic brachytherapy = = 
 Electronic brachytherapy involves placement of miniature low energy x @-@ ray tube sources into a pre @-@ positioned applicator within body / tumour cavities to rapidly deliver high doses to target tissues while maintaining low doses to distant non @-@ target tissues . 
 = = History = = 
 Brachytherapy dates back to 1901 ( shortly after the discovery of radioactivity by Henri Becquerel in 1896 ) when Pierre Curie suggested to Henri @-@ Alexandre Danlos that a radioactive source could be inserted into a tumour . It was found that the radiation caused the tumour to shrink . Independently , Alexander Graham Bell also suggested the use of radiation in this way . In the early twentieth century , techniques for the application of brachytherapy were pioneered at the Curie institute in Paris by Danlos and at St Luke 's and Memorial Hospital in New York by Robert Abbe . 
 Interstitial radium therapy was common in the 1930s . Gold seeds filled with radon were used as early as 1942 until at least 1958 . Gold shells were selected by Gino <unk> around 1920 to shield beta rays while passing gamma rays . Cobalt needles were also used briefly after world war II . Radon and cobalt were replaced by radioactive tantalum and gold , before iridium rose in prominence . First used in 1958 , iridium is the most commonly used artificial source for brachytherapy today . 
 Following initial interest in brachytherapy in Europe and the US , its use declined in the middle of the twentieth century due to the problem of radiation exposure to operators from the manual application of the radioactive sources . However , the development of remote afterloading systems , which allow the radiation to be delivered from a shielded safe , and the use of new radioactive sources in the 1950s and 1960s , reduced the risk of unnecessary radiation exposure to the operator and patients . This , together with more recent advancements in three @-@ dimensional imaging modalities , computerised treatment planning systems and delivery equipment has made brachytherapy a safe and effective treatment for many types of cancer today . 
 = = Environmental hazard = = 
 Due to the small size of brachytherapy sources and low control in early decades , there is a risk that some of these have escaped into the environment to become orphaned sources . A radium needle was found in a Prague playground in 2011 , radiating 500 µSv / h from one metre away . 
 = Life Is Strange = 
 Life Is Strange is an episodic graphic adventure video game developed by Dontnod Entertainment and published by Square Enix . It is available for Linux , Microsoft Windows , OS X , PlayStation 3 , PlayStation 4 , Xbox 360 and Xbox One , and consists of five episodes released periodically throughout 2015 . 
 The game 's plot focuses on Maxine Caulfield , a photography student who discovers that she has the ability to rewind time at any moment , leading her every choice to enact the butterfly effect . After having foreseen an approaching storm , Max must take on the responsibility to prevent it from destroying her town . The player 's actions will adjust the narrative as it unfolds , and reshape it once allowed to travel back in time . Fetch quests and making environmental changes represent the forms of puzzle solving in addition to using branching choices for conversation . 
 Development of Life Is Strange began in April 2013 . It was formed with an episodic format in mind , for reasons both financial and creative . The developers conducted research on the setting by travelling to the Pacific Northwest , and subverted known archetypes to make the characters . Player feedback influenced the adjustments made to the episodes . Story and character arc serve as the central point in the game rather than traditional graphic adventure tropes like point @-@ and @-@ click puzzles . The voice recording sessions took place in Los Angeles , California . 
 During its release , Life Is Strange received generally favourable reviews commending the character development , rewind game mechanic and tackling of taboo subjects . Common criticisms included the slang that was used , poor lip @-@ syncing in earlier episodes , and tonal inconsistencies in the story . It had sold one million digital copies by the end of July 2015 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Life Is Strange is a graphic adventure played from a third @-@ person view . The mechanic of rewinding time allows the player to redo any action that has been taken . The player can examine and interact with objects , which enables puzzle solving in the form of fetch quests and making changes to the environment . Items that are collected before time travelling will be kept in the inventory after the fact . 
 The player can explore various locations in the fictional setting of Arcadia Bay and communicate with non @-@ playable characters . Dialogue exchanges can be rewound while branching options are used for conversation . Once an event is reset , the details provided earlier are permitted to avail themselves in the future . In some instances , choices in dialogue will alter and affect the story through short or long @-@ term consequences . For each one of the choices , something good in the short @-@ term could turn out worse later . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Life Is Strange takes place during the week of 7 October 2013 and is told from the perspective of Maxine Caulfield , a twelfth grade student of Blackwell Academy in the fictional town of Arcadia Bay , Oregon . 
 The prologue begins with Max ( Hannah Telle ) being thrown into the vision of a lighthouse destroyed by a swelling tornado . She awakes instantly in the class of her teacher Mark Jefferson ( Derek Phillips ) . To restore her composure , she proceeds to the restroom . There , Max witnesses classmate Nathan Prescott ( Nik Shriner ) murder a girl . In a single , sudden effort , she rewinds time and is moved back into the classroom from before . Informed of the following outcome , she hurries off to rescue the girl using her recently developed ability . It is revealed that the person Max saved was her childhood friend Chloe Price ( Ashly Burch ) . The two reunite and go for a walk to the same lighthouse from her nightmare . Max then reveals to Chloe her capacity to travel back in time . It is made known that what she thought was a dream is rather the reckoning of a future event , and the storm , an approaching disaster headed for the town . 
 The following day , Max observes fellow student Kate Marsh ( <unk> Hutton ) being subjected to bullying for a viral video depicting her kissing several students at a party . It is suggested that she may have been drugged , and Max suspects Nathan as the perpetrator . Max visits the diner where Chloe 's mother Joyce ( Cissy Jones ) works as a waitress and meets Chloe there . They decide to experiment with Max 's power at Chloe 's secret hideout , a scrapyard . However , this strains Max and results in her having a nosebleed and fainting . Chloe takes her back to Blackwell Academy . During class , everyone is called out to the courtyard . Kate is up on the roof of the girls ' dorm with the intention to jump . Max stops time unexpectedly and uses the ability in an attempt to reach Kate . At this point , she has the opportunity to convince Kate to get down from the roof and come with her . Ultimately , Max vows to uncover what happened to Kate and Chloe 's missing friend Rachel Amber . 
 Max and Chloe break into the principal 's office that night to investigate . After they search through his files , Chloe insists on entering the pool for a swim . The campus security — now alerted — comes to inspect the activity inside . They flee back to Chloe 's place . The next morning , Max and Chloe depart for the diner to sneak into the motorhome of Frank Bowers ( Daniel Bonjour ) , a drug dealer and Rachel 's friend . They learn that Rachel was having a romantic relationship with Frank and lied to Chloe about it . Chloe storms off feeling betrayed . Back at the dormitory , Max examines a childhood photo of her and Chloe . Without notice , she is transported to the day that picture was taken . Faced with the chance to save Chloe 's father William ( Joe <unk> ) from dying in a traffic collision , she conceals the keys to his car , which inadvertently creates an alternative reality where Chloe has been paralysed from the neck down . 
 In the alternative reality , Max comes across the photo that let her save Chloe 's father , but now instead uses it to undo her decision and restore Chloe to health . It manages to re @-@ establish the original timeline . Max and Chloe continue their investigation and obtain clues that lead them to an abandoned barn owned by the influential Prescott family . They discover a bunker hidden underneath that contains pictures of Kate and Rachel tied up and intoxicated — Rachel is shown in one image being buried at Chloe 's secret hideout . They speed in the direction of the scrapyard . Rachel is found dead and buried , much to Chloe 's despair . Max follows Chloe to a school party to confront Nathan , believing he will target another student there as his next victim . They receive a text message from Nathan threatening to destroy the evidence , which returns them to the scrapyard . There , they are ambushed by Jefferson , who <unk> Max and shoots Chloe in the head . 
 Max is held captive inside the bunker with Jefferson , who reveals that he has been drugging and kidnapping young girls in order to photograph them and , as such , capture their innocence . Max uses her powers to escape into a photograph . Emerging back at the beginning in Jefferson 's class , she informs Chloe 's stepfather David Madsen ( Don McManus ) , the head of security at Blackwell , of her kidnapper 's identity . Jefferson is caught , Chloe is rescued and Max is afforded the opportunity to go to San Francisco and have one of her photos displayed in an art gallery . She calls Chloe from the event , realising that , for all her effort , the storm has reached Arcadia Bay . Max teleports to the time she took the gallery photo , which eventually leads her to sojourn alternative realities as they devolve into a dreamscape nightmare . By the story 's end , Max arrives at the lighthouse with Chloe . They confront the fact that Max brought the approaching superstorm into existence by availing herself of the time travel abilities in the first place , and the only way to prevent it is for her to go back in time once more and allow Chloe to be killed by Nathan . Max must make a choice : sacrifice Chloe 's life to save Arcadia Bay , or sacrifice Arcadia Bay in order to spare Chloe . 
 = = Development = = 
 Life Is Strange was Dontnod Entertainment 's second title starring a female protagonist ( the first being Remember Me ) . It was disclosed in a developer diary that , as with its first project , efforts were made by potential publishers to have a male protagonist put in place instead . Square Enix was the only publisher with no intention to change it . Dontnod co @-@ founder Jean @-@ Maxime Moris brought up the Gamergate controversy in the same context as an example of " a great debate to have " , but put emphasis on that they were not using the issue to stand out from the rest . 
 The development of Life Is Strange was started in April 2013 with a team of 15 people , which expanded once collaborations with Square <unk> commenced . It was originally codenamed What If but then retitled to distinguish itself from the film of the same name . The game was born of the idea for the rewind mechanic , which the developer had already experimented on with their last game Remember Me . The lead character Max was created with the ability to rewind time to supplement this mechanism . The episodic format was chosen by the studio for creative reasons , financial restrictions and marketing purposes , allowing them to tell the story in its preferred slow pace . The Pacific Northwest was picked as the setting for the purpose of conveying a nostalgic and autumnal feel to the game . The development team visited the region , took photographs , looked at local newspapers and used Google Street View to make sure the environment was accurately portrayed . 
 It was decided early on that most of the budget be spent on the writing and voice actors . The original story was written in French by Jean @-@ Luc Cano , and converted into a game script by the co @-@ directors and design team . It was subsequently handed over to Christian Divine and Cano to be fine tuned in English . Story and character development were highlighted over point @-@ and @-@ click puzzles , making choice and consequence integral to how the narrative unfolds . Hannah Telle auditioned for Max Caulfield in July 2014 and was offered the part ; Ashly Burch auditioned for both Max and her given role Chloe Price . The recording sessions were done in Los Angeles , California , with the French developer brought in via Skype . 
 Although it holds significant differences from Remember Me , the game addresses similar themes of memory and identity . Life Is Strange was specified as an analogue look at human identity in contrast to Remember Me , the digital view of the same theme . Running on an improved version of Unreal Engine 3 , it makes use of the tools and special effects like lighting and depth of field engineered for Remember Me as well as subsequent advances . Visual effects like post @-@ processes , double exposure and overlapping screen space particles were used as an artistic approach to be displayed while the lead character rewinds time . The textures seen in the game were entirely hand painted , adapted to achieve what art director Michel Koch called " impressionistic rendering " . Elements were adjusted based on player feedback , with influences like The Walking Dead , Gone <unk> and Heavy Rain in mind . The Catcher in the Rye was an additional source of inspiration , whose protagonist Holden Caulfield shares a surname with Max , the game 's lead . The characters were created using known archetypes , at first to establish an entry point for the player , and then to subvert them . For the sake of serving the realism , the supernatural elements were designed as a metaphor for the characters ' inner conflict , and experts were consulted to tackle the subject of teen suicide . 
 The score was composed by Jonathan <unk> of the band Syd Matters . Inspired by modern indie folk music , the soundtrack was intended to inform the mood of the game . The music contains a blend of licensed tracks and composed pieces , considered by Dontnod creative director Jean @-@ Maxime Moris as " 50 % of the experience " . Featured artists include José González , Mogwai , Breton , Amanda Palmer , Brian Viglione , Bright Eyes , Message to Bears , Local Natives , Syd Matters , Sparklehorse , Angus & Julia Stone , alt @-@ J , Mud Flow and Foals . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Square Enix and Dontnod announced Life Is Strange on 11 August 2014 . The episodes were released digitally on PC via Steam , PlayStation 3 and PlayStation 4 via PlayStation Network , and Xbox 360 and Xbox One via Xbox Live between 30 January 2015 and 20 October 2015 . In November 2014 , the publisher expressed interest in having physical copies released of the game , but at the time added that they were 100 % focused on the digital release . One year later , the retail edition was set to be released for the PC , PS4 and Xbox One in North America on 19 January 2016 and in Europe on 22 January 2016 ; the limited edition featured an artbook , the soundtrack , score and a director 's commentary . 
 A Japanese version was released for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 3 and PlayStation 4 on 3 March 2016 . Feral Interactive was tasked with porting Life Is Strange for OS X , released on 16 June 2016 , and Linux , released on 21 July 2016 . That same day , the first episode was made indefinitely available for free on Linux , PC , OS X , PS3 , PS4 , Xbox 360 and Xbox One . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Life Is Strange received generally favourable reviews , having aggregated a Metacritic score of 85 / 100 on PlayStation 4 and Xbox One . While criticised for its lip @-@ syncing and use of dialogue , critics notably lauded the character development and time travel component , suggesting that there should be more games like it . Eurogamer thought of it as " one of the best interactive story games of this generation " and Hardcore Gamer declared it the sleeper hit of 2015 . 
 Kevin VanOrd of GameSpot called Episode 1 : Chrysalis " an involving slice of life that works because its situations eloquently capture a peculiar early @-@ college state of mind " , while Game Informer 's Kimberley Wallace stated that she found the tackling of " subjects that are usually taboo for video games " impressive . Destructoid 's Brett <unk> noticed that the episode 's strongest characteristic was exploration — both " self- and worldly " . However , Mitch Dyer of IGN wrote that the story was ultimately obstructed by its " laughable " script and " worse performances " . In response to Episode 2 : Out of Time , Polygon 's Megan Farokhmanesh echoed the view that the emphasis on self @-@ exploration had considerable impact on the enjoyment of the game . Critics opined that the ending was an " emotional high point " and that it brought meaning to the choices from both the first and second episodes . Writing for USgamer , Mike Williams disparaged the pacing of Episode 2 : Out of Time as " slower and less exciting " than that of episode one . 
 Episode 3 : Chaos Theory was thought by Adnan Riaz of Hardcore Gamer to be a dramatic improvement that presented a " thrilling , poignant , fascinating and ... enticing " narrative whose outcome from past decisions also added a sense of realism . Additionally , Peter Paras of Game Revolution complimented the character beats , particularly the development of Chloe Price , who he said " really comes into her own as [ a ] fully @-@ formed character " . Though GameSpot 's Alexa Ray Corriea said that the fetch quests interfered with its emotional quality , the episode built up to a " killer cliffhanger " according to Farokhmanesh . GameZone 's Matt Liebl deemed Episode 4 : Dark Room " easily the most emotional episode " and said that the mystery of Rachel Amber had done a " tremendous job in keeping us hooked " . Tom Hoggins of The Telegraph regarded the developer 's venture into subjects like social division , online bullying , parental conflict and suicide as " bold " . Criticism was directed at its " cheap ways " of progressing the plot — character inconsistency and superfluous shock value — resulting in tonal problems , with the episode 's puzzles and relationships given more approval . The final episode , <unk> , was commended for having offered a " fitting conclusion " to the coming of age story of Max Caulfield and the relationship between the two leads was similarly noted as having been carried out successfully . One stealth sequence was described as " tedious " and " out @-@ of @-@ place " while other aspects inhabiting the same course of events were favoured . Reviewers were essentially divided on the ending , citing the episode 's subtitle as something that mirrored their own feelings toward it . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 The first episode was ranked fifth among the best selling PlayStation 3 and PlayStation 4 video games of February 2015 . Life Is Strange reached one million sales in July 2015 , having accumulated over 1 @.@ 2 million unique players worldwide . The attach rate to units between the complete season and season pass proved to be " extremely strong " , divulged Square Enix . The retail edition made seventh place in the top ten UK game sales chart for the week ending 23 January 2016 . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 = William Beach Thomas = 
 Sir William Beach Thomas , KBE ( 22 May 1868 – 12 May 1957 ) was a British author and journalist known for his work as a war correspondent and his writings about nature and country life . 
 Beach Thomas was the son of a rural clergyman . He attended Shrewsbury School and the University of Oxford before embarking on a short @-@ lived career as a schoolmaster . Finding that work unpleasant , he turned his attention to writing articles for newspapers and periodicals , and began to write books . 
 During the early part of the First World War Beach Thomas defied military authorities to report news stories from the Western Front for his employer , the Daily Mail . As a result , he was briefly imprisoned before being granted official accreditation as a war correspondent . His reportage for the remainder of the war received national recognition , despite being criticised by some and parodied by soldiers . His book With the British on the Somme ( 1917 ) portrayed the English soldier in a very favourable light . Both France and Britain rewarded him with knighthoods after the war , but Beach Thomas regretted some of his wartime output . 
 Beach Thomas 's primary interest as an adult was in rural matters . He was conservative in his views , and feared that the post – Second World War socialist governments regarded the countryside only from an economic perspective . He was an advocate for the creation of national parks in England and Wales , and mourned the decline of traditional village society . He wrote extensively , particularly for The Observer newspaper and The Spectator , a conservative magazine . His book The English Landscape ( 1938 ) includes selections from his contributions to Country Life magazine . 
 = = Childhood and education = = 
 William Beach Thomas was born on 22 May 1868 in Godmanchester , in the county of Huntingdonshire , England . He was the second son of Daniel George Thomas , appointed rector of Hamerton in 1872 , and Rosa <unk> . The countryside location of his father 's parish inspired an affection in Beach Thomas , which greatly influenced his later observational writings about natural history and rural subjects . Beach Thomas was not a hyphenated double @-@ barrelled name ; he used his second name as part of his surname . 
 Beach Thomas attended Shrewsbury School from 1882 . He was a keen sportsman there and was appointed huntsman to the Royal Shrewsbury School Hunt , the world 's oldest cross @-@ country running club . He continued his interest in sports after earning an exhibition to Christ Church , Oxford in 1887 and became a Blue , representing the university in various running events over several years . He became president of the Oxford University Athletics Club and played association football , rugby union and cricket at college level . J. B. Atkins , who competed against him for the Cambridge University athletics team , said : " With his stately height and gigantic stride , he was magnificent in action ; his final effort , always , triumphant , when he saw the goal of all , the tape , waiting for him , was a sight never to be forgotten – though I had a strong reason for regretting it at the time . " His exhibition was superseded by a scholarship but he was not academically successful , managing only a third @-@ class degree . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Athletic prowess and the time spent in achieving it may have contributed to Beach Thomas 's poor academic performance but probably also assisted him in getting his first job . He taught at Bradfield School , a public school , after leaving Oxford in 1891 . Although he described teaching as " uncongenial " , he subsequently took a similar position at Dulwich College in 1897 , where he remained until the following year . Journalism became the object of his interest ; he contributed columns for The Globe , The Outlook and The Saturday Review , as well as for many other publications of which he was not a member of staff . He also wrote a book entitled Athletics , published by Ward Lock & Co in 1901 , following his 1900 contribution of a chapter titled Athletics and Schools to the Athletics volume in the Badminton Library series , published by Longman , Green & Co and edited by Montague Shearman . He became a regular reviewer for The Times Literary Supplement from its formation in 1902 . 
 The Daily Mail took on Beach Thomas as a writer of material relating to the countryside . Lord Northcliffe , who owned the newspaper , recognised that Beach Thomas would need to live in a rural environment if he was to perform his duties well . This understanding delighted Beach Thomas because it meant he could limit his visits to London . He moved to the <unk> Valley in Hertfordshire , and thereafter held Northcliffe in high regard . 
 Beach Thomas 's From a Hertfordshire Cottage was published in 1908 , followed by a three @-@ volume collaboration with A. K. Collett , The English Year ( 1913 – 14 ) . He did not entirely abandon his interest in athletics and was one of those in Britain who criticised his country 's poor performance in the 1912 Olympic Games . Writing that the Olympics were by then being seen as a measure of " national vitality " , he explained 
 We could not run , so it appeared , either long distances or short ; we could not jump either broad or high ; we could not throw the javelin ... The men accepted defeat as if the Olympic Games were a competition of parlour tricks in a provincial drawing @-@ room . 
 = = War correspondent = = 
 The Daily Mail sent Beach Thomas to France as a war correspondent during the First World War . Many newspapers were keen to support the war effort and to take advantage of the demand for news from the front . The British military authorities were opposed to the presence of journalists , preferring instead to control the media by issuing official press releases . Lord Kitchener in particular was opposed to their presence , having had bad experiences of journalists during the Boer War . He formed a press bureau headed by F. E. Smith , and demanded that all reports be channelled through the bureau for review by censors ; the resulting output was bland and impersonal . The newspapers countered with subterfuge . Beach Thomas was one of several journalists who managed to reach the front lines in Belgium . He was discovered there and imprisoned for some time by the British Army . He described the episode as " the longest walking tour of my life , and the queerest . " Even these early unapproved reports , which consisted mostly of human interest stories because there was little opportunity for contact with the British Expeditionary Force , were censored at home owing to a paradox that Beach Thomas described : " the censors would not publish any article if it indicated that the writer had seen what he wrote of . He must write what he thought was true , not what he knew to be true . " 
 When the British government relented in mid @-@ 1915 , having been warned by Theodore Roosevelt that the reporting limitations were affecting public opinion in the United States , Valentine Williams became the Daily Mail 's first accredited war correspondent . No longer in prison , Beach Thomas resumed his war reporting in December of the same year , when Williams enlisted in the Irish Guards . As with the other accredited journalists , he was paid by the War Office rather than by his newspaper and they were all assured that they would be able to publish memoirs of their service to offset the differential between an officer 's pay and that of a journalist . Beach Thomas filed reports from places such as the Somme in a format matching that of his colleagues , who regularly downplayed the unpleasant aspects of the conflict such as the nature of death . His reports were published in the Daily Mirror as well as the Daily Mail . 
 The soldiers derided the attempts that were made to indoctrinate them , but the British public was more susceptible . Philip Gibbs , a fellow war correspondent , noted that he and his colleagues " identified absolutely with the Armies in the field ... There was no need of censorship in our despatches . We were our own censors . " The journalistic support for the cause was appreciated by military commanders such as Douglas Haig , who saw the propaganda generated by the correspondents as an integral part of the Allies ' efforts . Haig eventually went so far as to ask Gibbs and Beach Thomas to produce his own weekly news @-@ sheet . Public opinion at home may have been mollified , even uplifted , by the efforts of the correspondents but the troops were not , despite the high demand among them for newspapers from home . One soldier , Albert Rochester , was court martialled for attempting to send to the Daily Mail a letter that stated the realities as he saw them and was critical of Beach Thomas 's work , noting the " ridiculous reports regarding the love and fellowship existing between officers and men . " Beach Thomas himself later regretted his wartime reports of the Somme , saying , " I was thoroughly and deeply ashamed of what I had written for the good reason that it was untrue ... the vulgarity of enormous headlines and the enormity of one 's own name did not lessen the shame . " 
 Northcliffe 's brother , Lord Rothermere , expressed frustration with the war correspondents : " They don 't know the truth , they don 't speak the truth , and we know that they don 't " . Stephen Badsey , a historian who specialises in World War I , has noted that their situation was not easy as they " found themselves as minor players trapped in a complicated hierarchical structure dominated by politicians , generals and newspaper owners . " Beach Thomas , however , received particular opprobrium . Paul Fussell , the historian , describes him as " notoriously fatuous " during the war period . Peter Stothard , editor of The Times between 1992 and 2002 , describes him as " a quietly successful countryside columnist and literary gent who became a calamitous Daily Mail war correspondent " and believes that he may have been the inspiration for the character of William Boot in Evelyn Waugh 's Scoop . John Simpson , a war correspondent , describes him as " charming but unlovable " and thinks that the troops despised Beach Thomas more than they did the other British war correspondents , even though all those journalists were playing a similar disinformation role . They considered his writing to be a trivialisation of the realities of war , jingoistic , pompous and particularly self @-@ promoting , often giving the reader an impression that he was writing from the battlefield when in fact he was being fed information of dubious value by the authorities while based in their headquarters . 
 An example of his reporting is : 
 Soon after 6pm the spasmodic barking of the night @-@ time cannonade ( now normal in spite of its intensity ) gave place to a " kettle @-@ drum bombardment " . The " fun " was " fast and furious " and two minutes after the orchestra opened our men leaped from their trenches . They were not unaccompanied . In spite of the harvest moon , we had brought up a certain number of armoured cars which the moonlight transformed into fantastic monsters ... " <unk> <unk> " is the French term . They looked like blind creatures emerged from the primeval slime . To watch one crawling round a battered wood in the half @-@ light was to think of " the Jabberwock , with eyes of flame " that : " Came <unk> through the <unk> wood , / And <unk> as it came ! " 
 His style was parodied using the by @-@ line of <unk> <unk> in the Wipers Times , a trench newspaper , but he was lauded by the readership back in Britain . One example from the Wipers Times , based on a report published in the Daily Mail of 18 September 1916 , was : 
 In the grey and purple light of a September morn [ the first tanks used in war ] went over . Like great prehistoric monsters they leapt and skipped with joy when the signal came . It was my great good fortune to be a passenger on one of them . How can I clearly relate what happened ? All is one chaotic mingling of joy and noise . No fear ! How could one fear anything in the belly of a <unk> , peripatetic <unk> . Wonderful , epic , on we went , whilst twice a minute the <unk> gun on the roof barked out its message of defiance . At last we were fairly in amongst the Huns . They were round us in millions and in millions they died ... With a triumphant snort we went through Bapaume pushing over the church in a playful moment and then steering a course for home , feeling that our perspiring <unk> had thoroughly enjoyed its run over the disgruntled , discomfited , disembowelled earth . And so to rest in its lair ready for the morrow and what that morrow might hold . I must get back to the battle . 
 Beach Thomas published a book based on his wartime experiences in 1917 , entitled With the British on the Somme . It was a favourable depiction specifically of the English soldier , somewhat contrary to the official line that tried to emphasise that this was a British war rather than an English one . A review in The Times Literary Supplement noted that Beach Thomas 
 rightly emphasised the feats of the English soldier ... as distinct from the Scot , the Irishman or the Colonial . This is as it should be , for the average newspaper reader of late months , even years , has been saturated with epics of different Colonials , Irish regiments and <unk> Companies ... the plain Thomas Atkins [ has been ] overlooked to a great extent for far too long . 
 In 1918 Northcliffe asked Beach Thomas to travel to the US . According to Beach Thomas , the rationale was that " he didn 't know what the Americans were doing , and they did not know what we were thinking " . He met with influential people such as Henry Ford , Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson during this visit . 
 Beach Thomas sometimes accompanied George V and the Prince of Wales on their visits to France , noting on one occasion a situation he considered reminiscent of Henry II and Thomas à Beckett : 
 We were walking to see a new heavy howitzer installed in its camouflage in an open grove . About us ran and skipped , appeared and disappeared , round this tree and that , the conscientious wielder of a cinema . The thing got more and more on the Prince 's nerves until the irritation was irrepressible , and he turned to me and said with a sort of angry humour : " Will no @-@ one kill that photographer ? " 
 Beach Thomas 's war work led to state recognition , as it did for many of the correspondents and newspaper owners ; France appointed him a Chevalier of the Legion of Honour in 1919 and he was appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( KBE ) in 1920 . In 1923 , Gibbs said of the KBE award , which he too received : " I was not covetous of that knighthood and indeed shrank from it so much that I entered into a compact with Beach Thomas to refuse it . But things had gone too far , and we could not reject the title with any decency . " This quandary was caused by realisation of the gulf between what they had reported and what had actually happened . 
 = = Later years = = 
 After the war , Beach Thomas stayed in Germany until 1919 and returned there in 1923 at the time of the Occupation of the Ruhr . He also undertook a tour of the world for the Daily Mail and The Times in 1922 . His main focus , however , returned to his lifelong interest in matters of the countryside , notably in his writings for The Observer from 1923 to 1956 . Beach Thomas was also a regular contributor of notes on nature , gardening and country life to The Spectator for almost 30 years , with some short breaks between 1935 and 1941 , when H. E. Bates took responsibility . In 1928 he produced a history of the magazine under the title of The Story of the ' Spectator ' , in commemoration of its centenary . He wrote many more books and articles in his later years , as well as two autobiographical books : A Traveller in News ( 1925 ) and The Way of a Countryman ( 1944 ) . Fond of peppering quotations throughout his writing , his style was considered to be clear but his hand was poor ; a profile of him in The Observer said " perhaps he gave less pleasure to those who had to decipher his handwriting . Rarely has more limpid English been conveyed in a script more obscure . " 
 George Orwell wrote in the Manchester Evening News : 
 It is uncertain whether the general public would think of Sir William Beach Thomas primarily as a war correspondent or as a naturalist , but he is in no doubt about the matter himself . The world , as he sees it , really centres round the English village , and round the trees and hedges of that village rather than the houses and the people . 
 Even as traditional English village living was in collapse , he saw the romanticised paternalism and general life of the village as the epitome of English society and equivalent to anything that might be found elsewhere in the world . He said that one of the aspects of village life he admired was that " comparative wealth [ there ] is admired , not envied " . He also viewed the natural world as something to be wondered at rather than scientifically examined . In his last column for The Spectator , written in September 1950 , he wrote : 
 The country scene is a department of art , not of science . The essential is the discovery of beauty , not of knowledge . Science comes second , and a bad second , to art . We do not listen to the nightingale in order to find out whether his song is erotic or polemic . We listen for the pleasure of the mood that the song and the scene engender . Flight matters more than its mechanics . The prime value of knowledge itself is to enlarge the circle of wonder . The chronicler does a better deed if he helps someone to enjoy the country more than if he <unk> or <unk> or <unk> or <unk> . 
 In his desire to encourage a love of the countryside , especially during the Second World War , Beach Thomas was similar to other writers on rural matters , such as G. M. Trevelyan and H. J. Massingham . He described Massingham as " perhaps the best of all present writers on Rural England " and considered him among those writers who were " so fond of the past that they seem sometimes almost to despair of the future . " Malcolm Chase , a historian , says that these authors , including Beach Thomas himself , advocated an ultra @-@ conservative , socially reactionary and idealistic philosophy that formed an important part of a national debate about the future of the land and agriculture . This attitude was coupled with an increasing public interest in pastimes such as cycling , motoring and walking ; it was supported by the publication of popular , fairly cheap and colourful articles , books and maps that catered both to those pursuing such interests and those who were concerned about conservation and the effects of the influx of urban and suburban visitors . John Musty , in his comparative literary review of the works of Beach Thomas and Massingham , believes that Beach Thomas had a more " gentle touch " than Massingham , whose writings have " frequently been judged as narrow and reactionary " ; he quotes Beach Thomas as saying of the likes of Massingham that they " preach an impossible creed , albeit an attractive one . " 
 Much of one book , The English Landscape ( 1938 ) , had previously appeared in various issues of Country Life magazine , and in part echoed concerns raised by Clough Williams @-@ Ellis in works such as England and the Octopus ( 1928 ) . Williams @-@ Ellis believed that building on greenfield land was too great a price to pay for socio @-@ economic progress . Beach Thomas argued in favour of protecting open spaces by creating national parks , for which he thought that the coastline would be the most suitable candidate . He stressed the relationship between the people and the land and saw a need for planning control to manage human ingress into areas that remained mostly untouched . In 1934 he supported the Nature Lovers Association in their appeal to make the mountainous Snowdonia region , near the coast of North Wales , such an entity . He also supported the Commons , Open Spaces and Footpaths Preservation Society . 
 In 1931 Beach Thomas lamented the inability of the National Farmers Union of England and Wales to arrest what he saw as the decline of the farming industry . In A Countryman 's Creed ( 1946 ) he harked back to a lost world , perhaps even a world that was more of his imagination than it ever was fact . As F. R. Leavis had done before him , Beach Thomas sought a rural revival to curtail what he perceived to be the rapid changes to traditional modes of living that had been evident in particular in the aftermath of the First World War and which were now ideologically challenged following the substantial victory of the socialist Labour Party in the 1945 general election . The new government was a threat to Beach Thomas 's view of the world because , in the words of literary critic Robert Hemmings , it saw the countryside " as merely a giant dairy and granary for the city . " 
 Beach Thomas was opposed to the use of the toothed steel trap for catching rabbits , supporting the RSPCA in its efforts to outlaw the device and noting that it both inflicted unnecessary pain and was indiscriminate in nature , sometimes trapping other animals such as domesticated cattle and pet dogs . 
 = = Personal life and death = = 
 Beach Thomas married Helen Dorothea Harcourt , a daughter of Augustus George Vernon Harcourt , in April 1900 , and with her had three sons and a daughter . One of the sons was killed while serving as a naval officer during the Second World War , predeceasing his parents . Helen survived her husband , who died on 12 May 1957 at their home , " High Trees " , <unk> , Wheathampstead , Hertfordshire . He was buried in the village churchyard . Among the obituaries to Beach Thomas were those published in Nature and The Times . 
 = = Books = = 
 Aside from his journalism , Beach Thomas wrote and contributed to many books , all published in London and some also in places such as New York . These include : 
 Athletics at School ( chapter in Athletics , ed . Montague Shearman , Longmans , Green & Co . : 1898 ) 
 Athletics ( Ward , Lock & Co . : 1901 ) 
 The Road to Manhood ( G. Allen : 1904 ) 
 On Taking a House ( Edward Arnold : 1905 ) 
 From a Hertfordshire Cottage ( Alston Rivers : 1908 ) 
 Preface to C. D. McKay 's The French Garden : a diary and manual of intensive cultivation ( Associated Newspapers : 1908 , reprinted as The French Garden In England , 1909 ) 
 Our Civic Life ( Alston Rivers : 1908 ) 
 The English Year ( three volumes , co @-@ authored with A. K. Collett ; T. C. & E. C. Jack , 1913 – 14 ) 
 With the British on the Somme ( Methuen : 1917 ) 
 Birds Through The Year ( co @-@ authored with A. K. Collett ; T. C. & E. C. Jack , 1922 ) 
 An Observer 's <unk> ( Collins : 1923 ) 
 A Traveller in News ( Chapman and Hall : 1925 ) 
 England Becomes Prairie ( Ernest Benn : 1927 ) 
 The Story of the ' Spectator ' ( Methuen : 1928 ) 
 The Happy Village ( Ernest Benn : 1928 ) 
 Events of the Great War ( G. Routledge & Sons : 1930 ) 
 A Letter to My Dog ( G. Routledge & Sons : 1931 ) 
 Why the Land Dies ( Faber & Faber : 1931 ) 
 Introduction to Land and Life : The Economic National Policy for Agriculture ( Viscount Astor and Keith Murray . , Gollancz : 1932 ) 
 The Yeoman 's England ( A. Maclehose & Co . : 1934 ) 
 Village England ( A. Maclehose & Co . : 1935 ) 
 The Squirrel 's Granary : A Countryman 's Anthology ( A. Maclehose & Co . : 1936 , republished by A. & C. Black in 1942 as A Countryman 's Anthology ) 
 Hunting England : a survey of the sport and of its chief grounds etc ( B. T. Batsford : 1936 ) 
 The Home Counties ( chapter in Britain and the Beast , ed . Clough Williams @-@ Ellis , B. T. Batsford : 1937 ) 
 The English Landscape ( Country Life : 1938 ) 
 The Way of a Countryman ( M. Joseph : 1944 ) 
 The Poems of a Countryman ( M. Joseph : 1945 ) 
 A Countryman 's Creed ( M. Joseph : 1946 ) 
 In Praise of Flowers ( Evans Bros. : 1948 ) 
 The English Counties Illustrated ( Odhams : 1948 , ed . <unk> Joad ; chapters on Hertfordshire and Huntingdonshire ) 
 The Way of a Dog ( M. Joseph : 1948 ) 
 Hertfordshire ( R. Hale : 1950 ) 
 A Year in the Country ( A. Wingate : 1950 ) 
 Gardens ( Burke : 1952 ) 
 Introduction to The New Forest and Hampshire in Pictures ( Odhams : 1952 ) 
 = False catshark = 
 The false catshark or sofa shark ( Pseudotriakis microdon ) is a species of ground shark in the family Pseudotriakidae , and the sole member of its genus . It has a worldwide distribution , and has most commonly been recorded close to the bottom over continental and insular slopes , at depths of 500 – 1 @,@ 400 m ( 1 @,@ 600 – 4 @,@ 600 ft ) . Reaching 3 @.@ 0 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) in length , this heavy @-@ bodied shark can be readily identified by its elongated , keel @-@ like first dorsal fin . It has long , narrow eyes and a large mouth filled with numerous tiny teeth . It is usually dark brown in color , though a few are light gray . 
 With flabby muscles and a large oily liver , the false catshark is a slow @-@ moving predator and scavenger of a variety of fishes and invertebrates . It has a viviparous mode of reproduction , featuring an unusual form of oophagy in which the developing embryos consume ova or egg fragments released by the mother and use the yolk material to replenish their external yolk sacs for later use . This species typically gives birth to two pups at a time . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) presently lacks sufficient data to assess the conservation status of the false catshark . While neither targeted by fisheries nor commercially valuable , it is caught incidentally by longlines and bottom trawls , and its low reproductive rate may render it susceptible to population depletion . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The false catshark was first described by Portuguese ichthyologist Félix de Brito <unk> in the Jornal do <unk> <unk> , <unk> e <unk> in 1868 . He based his account on a 2 @.@ 3 m ( 7 @.@ 5 ft ) long adult male caught off <unk> , Portugal . Brito <unk> thought the specimen resembled a member of the genus Triakis , except lacking a nictitating membrane ( though it is now known that this species does in fact have this trait ) . Thus , he assigned it to the new genus Pseudotriakis , from the Greek pseudo ( " false " ) . At the time , Triakis was classified with the catsharks , hence " false catshark " . The specific name microdon comes from the Greek mikros ( " small " ) and odontos ( " tooth " ) . Other common names for this species are dumb shark ( from its Japanese name <unk> ) and keel @-@ dorsal shark . 
 Pacific populations of the false catshark were once regarded as a separate species , P. <unk> . However , morphological comparisons have failed to find any consistent differences between P. microdon and P. <unk> , leading to the conclusion that there is only one species of false catshark . The closest relatives of the false catshark are the <unk> ( Gollum ) . Pseudotriakis and Gollum share a number of morphological similarities . Phylogenetic analysis using protein @-@ coding genes has found that the amount of genetic divergence between these taxa is less than that between some other shark species within the same genus . This result suggests that the many autapomorphies ( unique traits ) of the false catshark evolved relatively recently , and supports the grouping of Pseudotriakis and Gollum together in the family Pseudotriakidae . 
 = = Description = = 
 <unk> and soft @-@ bodied , the false catshark has a broad head with a short , rounded snout . The nostrils have large flaps of skin on their anterior rims . The narrow eyes are over twice as long as high , and are equipped with rudimentary nictitating membranes ; behind the eyes are large spiracles . The huge mouth is arched and bears short furrows at the corners . There are over two hundred rows of tiny teeth in each jaw , arranged in straight lines in the upper jaw and diagonal lines in the lower jaw ; each tooth has a pointed central cusp flanked by one or two smaller cusplets on either side . The five pairs of gill slits are fairly small . 
 The pectoral fins are small and rounded , with fin rays only near the base . The first dorsal fin is highly distinctive , being very long ( roughly equal to the caudal fin ) and low , resembling the keel of a ship ; it originates over the pectoral fin rear tips and terminates over the pelvic fin origins . The second dorsal fin is larger than , and originates ahead of , the anal fin ; both these fins are positioned very close to the caudal fin . The caudal fin has a long upper lobe with a ventral notch near the tip , and an indistinct lower lobe . The dermal denticles are shaped like arrowheads with a central ridge , and are sparsely distributed on the skin . This species is typically plain dark brown in color , darkening at the fin margins . However , a few individuals are instead light gray with irregular darker mottling made from fine dots . The false catshark grows up to 3 @.@ 0 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) long and 125 kg ( 276 lb ) in weight . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Though rarely encountered , the false catshark has been caught from locations scattered around the world , indicating a wide circumglobal distribution . In the western Atlantic , it has been reported from Canada , the United States , Cuba , and Brazil . In the eastern Atlantic , it is known from the waters of Iceland , France , Portugal , and Senegal , as well as the islands of Madeira , the Azores , the Canaries , and Cape Verde . Records from the Indian Ocean have come from off Madagascar , the Aldabra Group , Mauritius , Indonesia , and Australia . In the Pacific Ocean , it has been documented from Japan , Taiwan , Indonesia , the Coral Sea , New Zealand , and the Hawaiian Islands . 
 Inhabiting continental and insular slopes , the false catshark mostly occurs between the depths of 500 and 1 @,@ 400 m ( 1 @,@ 600 and 4 @,@ 600 ft ) , though it has been recorded as deep as 1 @,@ 900 m ( 6 @,@ 200 ft ) . Individuals occasionally wander into relatively shallower waters over the continental shelf , perhaps following submarine canyons or suffering from an abnormal condition . The false catshark generally swims close to the sea floor and has been found at seamounts , troughs , and deepwater reefs . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The soft fins , skin , and musculature of the false catshark suggest a sluggish lifestyle . An enormous oil @-@ filled liver makes up 18 – 25 % of its total weight , allowing it to maintain near @-@ neutral buoyancy and hover off the bottom with little effort . This species likely captures prey via quick bursts of speed , with its large mouth allowing it to consume food of considerable size . It feeds mainly on bony fishes such as cutthroat eels , grenadiers , and snake mackerel , and also takes <unk> , squids , octopodes , and <unk> shrimp . It likely also scavenges , as examination of stomach contents have found surface @-@ dwelling fishes such as frigate mackerel , needlefishes , and <unk> . One specimen caught off the Canary Islands had swallowed human garbage , including potatoes , a pear , a plastic bag , and a soft drink can . There is a record of a false catshark found with bite marks from a great white shark ( Carcharodon carcharias ) . 
 Unusual among the ground sharks , the false catshark is viviparous with the developing embryos practicing intrauterine oophagy . Adult females have a single functional ovary , on the right , and two functional uteruses . A female 2 @.@ 4 m ( 7 @.@ 9 ft ) long was found to contain an estimated 20 @,@ 000 ova in her ovary , averaging 9 mm ( 0 @.@ 35 in ) across . During gestation , the developing embryos are initially nourished by yolk , and later transition to feeding on ova or egg fragments ovulated by the mother . Excess egg material ingested by the embryo is stored within its external yolk sac ; when close to birth , the embryo then transfers the yolk from the external yolk sac into an internal yolk sac to serve as a post @-@ birth food reserve . The typical litter size is two pups , one per uterus , though litters of four may be possible . The gestation period is probably longer than one year , possibly lasting two or three years . Newborns measure 1 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 5 m ( 3 @.@ 9 – 4 @.@ 9 ft ) long . Males and females probably mature sexually at around 2 @.@ 0 – 2 @.@ 6 m ( 6 @.@ 6 – 8 @.@ 5 ft ) and 2 @.@ 1 – 2 @.@ 5 m ( 6 @.@ 9 – 8 @.@ 2 ft ) long respectively . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 The false catshark is an infrequent bycatch of longlines and bottom trawls . It has minimal economic value , though its meat , fins , and liver oil may be utilized . In Okinawa , its oil is traditionally used to seal the hulls of wooden fishing boats . Like other deepwater sharks , this species is thought to be highly susceptible to overfishing due to its slow reproductive rate . However , it is rarely caught and there is no information available on its population . Therefore , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has listed it as Data Deficient . 
 = Harry Patch ( In Memory Of ) = 
 " Harry Patch ( In Memory Of ) " is a song by the English alternative rock band Radiohead . The band wrote and recorded the song as a tribute to the British supercentenarian Harry Patch , the last surviving soldier to have fought in the trenches during World War I. The song was self @-@ released on 5 August 2009 as a downloadable single and sold for £ 1 from the band 's website , with all proceeds donated to The Royal British Legion . 
 Recorded in an abbey shortly after Patch 's death , the song consists of Thom Yorke 's singing and a string arrangement composed by Jonny Greenwood , absent of Radiohead 's typical mix of rock and electronic instrumentation . The lyrics are from the perspective of a soldier in the First World War , and include modifications of quotations from Patch . While reception to the song was generally positive , with many critics praising the song 's message , others panned the song as overly sombre . The Patch family voiced their approval of the song 's message and the band 's charitable use of the proceeds . 
 = = Recording and music = = 
 According to a post by Yorke on Radiohead 's blog Dead Air Space , " Harry Patch ( In Memory Of ) " was inspired by a " very emotional " 2005 interview with Harry Patch on the Today programme on BBC Radio 4 . Yorke wrote that " The way he talked about war had a profound effect on me . " The song was recorded live in an abbey , only a few weeks before Patch died on 25 July 2009 at the age of 111 . Along with follow @-@ up single " These Are My Twisted Words " , " Harry Patch ( In Memory Of ) " represents the earliest releases from the recording sessions that would result in Radiohead 's next album , The King of Limbs , although neither song is included on that album . 
 The song has no standard rock instrumentation , and instead comprises an orchestral string arrangement composed by Jonny Greenwood and Yorke 's vocals . Strings introduce the song with a series of repeated arpeggiated notes , which continue as Yorke 's singing begins . There is a bridge described as a " grim , delicately furious peak " halfway through the song . Pitchfork Media 's Mark Richardson compared the track to Gavin Bryars ' 1971 composition Jesus ' Blood Never Failed Me Yet and Samuel Barber 's 1936 Adagio for Strings . Critics from Rolling Stone , The Village Voice , and The Daily Telegraph drew comparisons between the song 's string arrangements and the score to the film There Will Be Blood , primarily composed by Greenwood ; however , Jim Fusilli of The Wall Street Journal believed that the two works " [ bear ] no resemblance " to each other . Andrea Rice of American Songwriter simply noted that the song 's style was far removed from " anything emblematic of Radiohead " . 
 While Radiohead has expressed anti @-@ war sentiments in the past — including a contribution to the 1995 War Child charity compilation The Help Album — " Harry Patch ( In Memory Of ) " marks the first time that a Radiohead song explicitly refers to war in its lyrics . For this reason , the song marks a departure from Yorke 's typically abstract writing . The lyrics are from the perspective of a soldier in the midst of First World War trench warfare . Several of the lines , including " Give your leaders each a gun and then let them fight it out themselves " and " The next will be chemical but they will never learn " , are adapted from quotations by Patch . Both Luke Lewis of NME and Simon Vozick @-@ Levinson of Entertainment Weekly compared the lyrics to Wilfred Owen 's First World War @-@ era poem Dulce et Decorum est . Rice referred to Yorke 's voice in the song as an " innocent and youthful falsetto " and the NME said his singing is " subdued to the point where you really need to read the lyrics " . 
 = = Release = = 
 " Harry Patch ( In Memory Of ) " premiered on BBC Radio 4 's Today programme on the morning of 5 August 2009 , one day before Patch 's burial . It became available for purchase later that day on Radiohead 's online store <unk> as a download for £ 1 , or US $ 1 @.@ 68 at the time of release . All proceeds from the song are donated to The Royal British Legion , a charity supporting those who are serving or have served in the British Armed Forces . The track can also be streamed from the Today section of BBC Online , where it was posted along with a description and the lyrics . Based on internet traffic data for Radiohead 's website taken from Alexa Internet , The Guardian 's Chris Salmon believed that if the single had been released conventionally it would have likely cracked the UK Singles Chart 's top ten . 
 The song 's unconventional release , carried out " in classic Radiohead fashion " according to Mehan Jayasuriya of PopMatters , was praised by The Guardian 's John Harris : " Welcome , once again , to the future of popular music : no need for albums , or marketing campaigns , or grand announcements — just a song by Radiohead , recorded mere weeks ago , premiered on yesterday 's Today programme , and now available to download . " Caleb <unk> of Wired noted the song 's " abrupt creation " and the sudden announcement of The King of Limbs as part of Radiohead 's move towards an unpredictable release schedule for new recorded material . In a feature for The Quietus , Wyndham Wallace argues that the track 's release is in line with broader music industry trends towards " instant gratification " , kick @-@ started by the digital release of Radiohead 's previous album In Rainbows . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reception was generally positive . Jim Fusilli of The Wall Street Journal referred to the song as " a masterly achievement " , highlighting Yorke 's " eerie " vocals and Greenwood 's " elegant " arrangement , and concluding that " with Radiohead , the unexpected isn 't merely a ploy . It 's a new approach to modern music that 's often thrilling . " Dan Martin of The Guardian described the song as " a desolate lament over bleak , circling strings that build as the song progresses " and wrote that " considering the solemnity of the subject , the song finds Radiohead at their most understated and serene " . Vozick @-@ Levinson of Entertainment Weekly called the song " a gorgeous anti @-@ war ballad " and said that " Needless to say , it 's very much worth any Radiohead fan 's pound , regardless of the exchange rate . " NME named the track as one of the ten best tracks of the week and called it an " <unk> " , " affecting , slow @-@ burn statement " that " rather than hectoring , [ ... ] states simply the horrors of war that Patch spoke so movingly about " . 
 Critic Allan Raible of ABC News compared the song to earlier Radiohead songs " How to Disappear Completely " and " Pyramid Song " and called it " one of the most beautiful compositions Thom Yorke and company have ever released . " Richardson gave the song a score of seven out of ten in Pitchfork 's song review feature The Playlist , and wrote that while it could be criticized as " a noble but failed experiment , overly maudlin and sentimental even if it is surface @-@ level pretty " , the song 's " simplicity and unsubtle affect , especially coming from this band , wind up being strengths . " In a later column , Richardson would further defend the song from charges of excessive sentimentality and attributes the song 's emotional success to its severe subject , death : " If these pieces were connected to thoughts of breaking up with a girlfriend or getting fired or lamenting cold weather or any of a million other of life 's tragedies , they wouldn 't work , at least not in the same way . They need that huge weight [ of death ] [ ... ] on the other end to balance them out . " Kyle Anderson of MTV.com called the song a " slow , florid affair " and placed its " typically dark " lyrics in the context of Radiohead 's previous political activism , such as their participation in the anti @-@ human trafficking MTV EXIT campaign . 
 Praise for the song was not universal . Rob Harvilla of Village Voice wrote that the track offered " nothing terribly earth @-@ shattering " and thought that " the contrast between Thom 's dolphin @-@ soothing calm and lyrics like ' I 've seen hell upon this earth / The next one will be chemical / But they will never learn ' might just ruin your lunch . " David Malitz of The Washington Post complained : " It 's a little too Sigur Ros @-@ y and doesn 't really go anywhere " but acknowledged it " [ s ] till kept my interest for five and half minutes " . 
 Patch 's grandson Roger Patch voiced his family 's approval of the song , saying : 
 " Our family is very touched that Radiohead has reached out to its followers and especially the younger generation through the single that echoes Harry 's interview in 2005 . Harry loved music and would be 100 per cent behind Radiohead in raising awareness of the suffering of conflict — not least the futility of it — in a way that can also benefit the Legion . It 's a great idea which we support wholeheartedly . " 
 Peter <unk> , national chairman of The Royal British Legion , thanked Radiohead for their support and said " Radiohead has picked up the torch from Harry Patch to hold it high . [ ... ] Radiohead uses Harry 's own words to remind us of the horrors of war , and we believe Harry would be pleased . " 
 = NSB El 18 = 
 NSB El 18 is a class of 22 electric locomotives built by Adtranz and Swiss Locomotive and Machine Works ( SLM ) for the Norwegian State Railways ( NSB ) . The class is a modification of the Swiss Federal Railways Re 460 locomotive and built at Adtranz Strømmen in 1996 and 1997 . The class remains the only mainline electric locomotive used by NSB , and is predominantly used on some intercity services and all night trains on the Bergen Line , Dovre Line and Sørland Line , as well as some regional trains . 
 The locomotives are 18 @.@ 5 metres ( 61 ft ) long and weigh 83 tonnes ( 82 long tons ; 91 short tons ) . They have three @-@ phase asynchronous motors with a maximum power output of 5 @,@ 880 kilowatts ( 7 @,@ 890 hp ) , giving a tractive effort of 275 kilonewtons ( 62 @,@ 000 lbf ) and a maximum speed of 200 km / h ( 120 mph ) . They have a Bo 'Bo ' wheel arrangement and regenerative brakes . The exterior was designed by Pininfarina and the cabs have pressurization . The units are numbered 2241 through <unk> . 
 = = History = = 
 During the early 1990s , NSB was in need of new electric haulage for their passenger trains , as both classes El 11 and El 13 were in need of replacement . El 17 , the latest purchase , had proved unreliable , and NSB wanted to remove them from mainline service . In 1993 , Re 460 and <unk> locomotives were tested in Norway , with the Re 460 being tested from 28 August through 8 October . NSB was satisfied with both units , and stated that it would be possible to increase the train weight on the intercity services from 700 to 800 t ( 690 to 790 long tons ; 770 to 880 short tons ) . During the first half of 1994 , NSB leased two Re 460s to have sufficient locomotives for operation during the 1994 Winter Olympics . 
 When the deadline for bids for the units was reached on 8 May 1994 , five bids had been received . GEC Alsthom offered a modification of the French SNCF Class BB <unk> and AEG offered a variation of the German prototype <unk> . Siemens offered two models , the <unk> and an adaptation of the Austrian <unk> Class 1014 . Siemens ' proposal for the former was branded <unk> and was a cooperation between Kværner and NSB 's workshop at <unk> in Drammen . Siemens would deliver the overall design and electrical components , Kværner would build the mechanical components and the assembly would occur in Drammen . The final offer was from Asea Brown Boveri ( ABB , which by delivery would merge to become Adtranz ) and SLM for " Lok 2000 " , a modification of the Swiss Re 460 . 
 Prior to the final negotiations , union representatives for the train drivers stated that Lok 2000 was their preference , and that NSB could expect a dispute if they chose a different model . The representatives stated that they were " tired of experimenting with Norwegian solutions " . Another important aspect for NSB was that as much of the production as possible take place in Norway . The final negotiations were made with ABB / SLM and AEG and on 2 September , and NSB approved the agreement with ABB / SLM for a purchase of 22 units . The contract was signed on 27 September , and the 22 units cost approximately 700 million Norwegian krone . 
 NSB considered ordering the units with support for both the Norwegian and Swedish 15 kV 16 2 ⁄ 3 Hz AC system , and the Danish 25 kV 50 Hz AC system . This would have allowed the trains to operate directly to Denmark via the Øresund Bridge , which was then under construction . The dual @-@ voltage system was dropped during the procurement process , but NSB stated that if they needed such units , compatibility could be provided in future orders of the class . The units were built by Adtranz Strømmen at Strømmen outside Oslo , and delivered between 3 September 1996 and 12 June 1997 . The units are numbered 2241 through <unk> . When entering service , the locomotives replaced NSB 's oldest units , El 13 , which were then retired . This reduced NSB 's average locomotive age from 31 to 18 1 ⁄ 2 years at the time of the end of the delivery . 
 During 1997 , there were five incidents where NSB 's Nordic Mobile Telephone equipment interfered with the locomotive 's electronics , causing the emergency brakes to activate . This caused a temporary halt until the motorman had unlocked the brakes . The problem was fixed by moving NSB 's mobile senders . The units were taken into use on the Bergen Line from 5 January 1997 . Later they entered into use on the Dovre and Sørland Lines , and then on regional trains around Oslo , such as the Vestfold Line . In August 1998 , NSB stated that El 18 used more power than some of the substation transformers along the line could handle , particularly along the Vestfold Line . Part of the problem was caused by a mechanism in the locomotives whereby the motor was turned off if the wheels spin . The result was that the full power output of the El 18 along parts of the railway network could not be utilized . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 The locomotives have a maximum power output of 5 @,@ 880 kW ( 7 @,@ 890 hp ) , and are capable of a continual power output of 5 @,@ 400 kW ( 7 @,@ 200 hp ) . This gives a maximum speed of 200 km / h ( 120 mph ) and a tractive effort of 275 kN ( 62 @,@ 000 lbf ) . The locomotive is fed 15 kV 16 2 ⁄ 3 Hz AC power from the pantograph . This is then converted to direct current before being converted to three @-@ phase electricity through one of three gate turn @-@ off thyristors . Each bogie has three rectifiers , each connected to a transformer that is again connected to two inverters . The motors are three @-@ phase asynchronous motors located in the bogie frame and equipped with regenerative brakes . There is also an auxiliary three @-@ phase power supply which powers the compressor , pumps , ventilators and other auxiliary equipment , operated by four separate inverters . The controller is a 16 @-@ bit microprocessor that communicates using optical fibre cables . The rectifier , auxiliary rectifiers , controllers and the error and diagnostic system is of the same type as used on the NSB Class 70 multiple units . 
 Each unit weighs 83 t ( 82 long tons ; 91 short tons ) . The body is 18 @,@ 500 millimeters ( 60 ft 8 in ) long , 3 @,@ 000 mm ( 9 ft 10 in ) wide and 4 @,@ 322 mm ( 14 ft 2 @.@ 2 in ) tall . The center distance between the bogies is 11 @,@ 000 mm ( 36 ft 1 in ) and the center wheel distance in the bogies is 2 @,@ 800 mm ( 9 ft 2 in ) . The wheel diameter is 1 @,@ 125 mm ( 3 ft 8 @.@ 3 in ) — this is 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) larger than the Re 460 . The El 18 has a Knorr <unk> mechanical braking system , but unlike the Swiss versions does not have a rail brake . The design of the locomotive was by the Italian company Pininfarina . The machine room is designed with a center aisle , the driver 's cabs have pressurization applied to avoid air pressure dropping when running through tunnels , and the cabs are equipped with air conditioning . 
 El 18 is a modification of the Swiss Re 460 . The class was originally built in 119 units from 1992 to 1995 for the Swiss State Railways , where it was given the brand Lok 2000 . It was part of a project to create a series of new intercity locomotives and cars . Bern – <unk> – Simplon @-@ Bahn received eight units in 1994 ( as Re 465 ) , the Finnish State Railways received 46 units between the years 1995 @-@ 2003 ( as Sr2 ) and the Kowloon – Canton Railway Corporation received 2 units in 1997 . The units are designed to haul heavy passenger trains along existing curved railways at high speeds . It is designed as a universal locomotive , so it is also suitable for freight trains . 
 = Tropical Storm Hermine ( 1980 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Hermine caused significant flooding in Mexico during September 1980 . The eleventh tropical cyclone and eight named storm of the 1980 Atlantic hurricane season , Hermine developed from a tropical wave that emerged into the Atlantic from the west coast of Africa on September 11 . After uneventfully crossing the Atlantic Ocean , the system developed a well @-@ defined circulation while in the Caribbean Sea on September 20 and was then classified as a tropical depression . After becoming a tropical cyclone , the depression steadily strengthened as it tracked nearly due westward . By September 21 , it strengthened into Tropical Storm Hermine and brushed the northern coast of Honduras shortly thereafter . It nearly became a hurricane before it made landfall in Belize on September 22 . After weakening over the Yucatan Peninsula , Hermine restrengthened to near @-@ hurricane status again over the Gulf of Mexico before making landfall in the Mexican state of Veracruz . Hermine steadily weakened inland and eventually dissipated on September 26 . 
 In Belize , the storm knocked out communications , though damage in that country was minimal . Heavy rainfall in Guatemala triggered landslides , causing eight fatalities . Additionally , portions of the Pan @-@ American Highway were shut down due to flooding . In Mexico , many areas reported at least 10 inches ( 250 mm ) of precipitation , while a few locations experience more than 30 inches ( 760 mm ) of rain . At the capital city of Mexico City , ten districts reported significant street flooding . As a result of torrential rainfall , at least 30 fatalities occurred , with dozens more missing , and leaving 25 @,@ 000 homeless . However , no estimates of damage associated with the storm were produced . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic from the west coast of Africa on September 11 , though the system lacked a well @-@ defined circulation . The tropical wave tracked westward for several days with minimal development , until reaching near the Lesser Antilles where a low @-@ level cloud banding feature appeared , along with an increase in central convection . This suggested a possible low @-@ level circulation , though an Air Force Reserve Flight on September 17 indicated little evidence of a circulation . On the following day , the system crossed the Lesser Antilles and entered the Caribbean Sea . As it passed near Jamaica on September 20 , a low @-@ level circulation became more apparent on satellite imagery . It is estimated that Tropical Depression Eleven developed at 1200 UTC on that day , while it was centered about 240 miles ( 385 km ) south of Kingston , Jamaica . However , the National Hurricane Center did not initiate advisories until 2200 UTC on September 20 . The depression tracked just north of due west , and by September 21 , it was upgraded to Tropical Storm Hermine . 
 Later on September 21 , Hermine passed only 5 miles ( 8 km ) offshore of northeast Honduras . An Air Force Reserve flight investigated if landfall occurred , though Hermine had remained offshore . After the storm moved to the northwest away from Honduras , it began to significantly strengthen . By September 22 , maximum sustained winds had increased to 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . Shortly thereafter , Hermine made landfall near Belize City at the same intensity . The storm weakened somewhat over the Yucatán Peninsula , and sustained winds were 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) when Hermine emerged into the Bay of Campeche on September 23 . The storm quickly began to re @-@ strengthen as it tracked generally westward in the Gulf of Mexico . Although several computer models suggested a northward turn , Hermine drifted southwestward , possibly due to high terrain over Mexico . Hermine attained its peak intensity with winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 993 mbar ( 29 @.@ 3 inHg ) early on September 24 , as measured by reconnaissance aircraft . After peak intensity , Hermine weakened slightly to a 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) tropical storm . At 1200 UTC on September 24 , the storm made landfall near Coatzacoalcos , Veracruz , Mexico . Hermine steadily weakened inland and by late 1500 UTC on September 25 , it was downgraded to a tropical depression . Later that day , the National Hurricane Center noted that a low @-@ level circulation could no longer be located , and by early on the following day , Hermine dissipated over the Mexican state of Oaxaca . 
 = = Impact = = 
 On September 21 , the government of Belize issued a gale warning , as well as a hurricane watch , for most of the eastern coast of the country . It was canceled after Tropical Storm Hermine had moved inland . In eastern Mexico , an estimated 15 @,@ 000 people evacuated from low @-@ lying areas . Additionally , the Government of Mexico sent " advices " to " interests " in the Yucatan Peninsula . Officials in Mexico urged numerous residents along the southern Gulf of Mexico coast and surrounding states to evacuate prior to the storm 's arrival . Timely warnings were later credited for reducing the loss of life . 
 While crossing the southern Yucatán Peninsula , Hermine brought locally heavy rains and strong winds to eastern Mexico and much of Belize – then a colony of the United Kingdom . Between 9 and 10 inches ( 230 and 250 mm ) of rain fell at the Philip S. W. Goldson International Airport . In Quintana Roo , more than 7 in ( 180 mm ) of precipitation fell in localized areas , leading to floods . The storm also temporarily knocked out communication to all of Belize and Chetumal , Mexico . According to officials in the region , little damage took place during Hermine 's passage . Heavy rains in Guatemala triggered landslides , killing at least eight people after crushing a bus . Portions of the Pan American Highway were shut down due to debris . 
 Tropical Storm Hermine and the remnants caused heavy rainfall across along most of the southern and eastern parts of Mexico . Rainfall totals from Hermine peaked at 31 @.@ 15 in ( 791 mm ) in San Pedro <unk> , Oaxaca . When the remnants of Hermine reached the Pacific coast of Mexico , several inches of rain were recorded . Throughout the country , the hardest hit areas were Veracruz , Oaxaca , Chiapas and Guerrero . More than 30 people were killed by the storm and dozens more left missing . Ten districts in Mexico City were brought to a standstill as flood waters blocked off streets . In the small towns of <unk> and <unk> , flooding killed eight people and left twenty more missing . In addition to the loss of life , at least 25 @,@ 000 residents were left homeless due to severe flooding . Two small dams broke due to excessive rains near Tuxtla Gutiérrez , prompting the evacuation of 2 @,@ 000 residents in nearby areas . In response to the storm , an estimated 15 @,@ 000 personnel were deployed to assist in relief efforts . 
 = Attack on the USNS Card = 
 The Attack on the USNS Card was a Viet Cong operation during the Vietnam War . It took place in the port of Saigon in the early hours of May 2 , 1964 , and mounted by commandos from the 65th Special Operations Group ( <unk> <unk> <unk> 65 ) . 
 The Card was first commissioned into the United States Navy during World War II , playing a significant role in destroying German Navy submarines as the flagship of Task Group 21 @.@ 14 . Decommissioned in 1945 , the Card was reactivated in 1958 and entered service with the Military Sea Transport Service , transporting military equipment to South Vietnam as part of the United States military commitment to that country . 
 With the USNS Card a regular visitor to the port , it became a target for local Viet Cong commando units . Shortly after midnight on May 2 , 1964 , two Viet Cong commandos climbed out of the sewer tunnel near the area where the Card was anchored , and they attached two loads of explosives to the ship ’ s hull . The attack was a success and the Card sank 48 feet , and five civilian crew members were killed by the explosions . The ship was refloated 17 days later , and was towed to the Philippines for repairs . 
 = = Background = = 
 The USNS Card was a Bogue class escort carrier that had served in the United States Navy with distinction . The Card ’ s hull was laid down on October 27 , 1941 ; originally intended as a cargo ship , the ship was reclassified ACV @-@ 11 and converted into an escort carrier with a displacement of 9 @,@ 800 tons . On July 15 , 1943 , the Card was reclassified CVE @-@ 11 and became the flagship of Task Group 21 @.@ 14 ( TG21.14 ) , a hunter @-@ killer group formed to destroy German submarines in the North Atlantic . During the periods between July and November , the Card ’ s aircraft and the escort vessels of TG21.14 destroyed a total of five German submarines . On November 11 , 1943 , the Card and her escort destroyers were awarded the Presidential Unit Citation for their success as part of TG21.14 , and the Card became the first escort carrier to receive such an award for combating German submarines . By the end of World War II , the Card and her aircraft destroyed a total of 11 German submarines , which made it the second most successful ship of its class . 
 After 1945 the Card was decommissioned and briefly put out of service when it was transferred to the Atlantic Reserve Fleet . On May 16 , 1958 , the Card re @-@ entered service with the Military Sea Transport Service , under the control of the United States Navy . The ship was manned by a civilian crew and was prefixed " USNS " ( United States Naval Ship ) instead of " USS " ( United States Ship ) as it was in service but not commissioned . With the war 's escalation , the United States government stepped up military support for South Vietnam 's fight against the Communist National Liberation Front ( also known as the Viet Cong ) . On December 15 , 1961 , the USNS Card left Quonset Point , Rhode Island , with a cargo of H @-@ 21 Shawnee helicopters and U.S. soldiers from Fort Devens , Massachusetts , bound for Vietnam . At Subic Bay in the Philippines , the cargo and troops were transferred to the USS Princeton , which arrived and unloaded off the coast of Da Nang the following month . 
 From 1961 onwards , the Card and the USNS Core regularly docked in Saigon to unload heavy artillery , M @-@ 113 armored personnel carriers , aircraft , helicopters and ammunition for the South Vietnamese government . The Port of Saigon was situated between the Te and Ben Nghe Canals , and was about 700 meters ( 2 @,@ 300 ft ) wide from one side to the other . To facilitate the arrival of the Card and other American ships which pulled into Saigon , the South Vietnamese military often deployed navy vessels to conduct patrols around the port , while the surrounding shores were protected by an elite Army of the Republic of Vietnam ( " ARVN " ) airborne battalion . The port itself was guarded round the clock by South Vietnamese police , as undercover South Vietnamese agents operated across the river in the Thu Thiem area to disrupt Viet Cong activities there . Undeterred by the level of protection which the South Vietnamese government normally afforded to American ships , Tran Hai <unk> — commander of the Viet Cong ’ s Saigon @-@ Gia Dinh Military District — ordered the 65th Special Operations Group to attack the USNS Card . 
 = = Sinking of the USNS Card = = 
 = = = Failed attempt on the USNS Core = = = 
 Despite their best efforts to control Viet Cong activities across the river in the Thu Thiem area , the South Vietnamese military and police could not stop Viet Cong agents from operating there . So Viet Cong members of the 65th Special Operations Group were able to watch U.S. and South Vietnamese military activities at the port , while they were preparing to attack American targets . Lam Son Nao , a commando of the 65th Special Operations Group , was also an employee at the port facility . As his unit was assigned with the mission to attack the American escort carrier , Nao took advantage of his position as an employee at the port facility , to reconnoitre the Card to design the best strategy to sabotage the ship and all the military hardware on board . Nao ’ s father had previously worked at the port facility as a tradesman , so he memorised all the underground tunnels and sewerage systems which ran in and out of the facility . He advised Nao that the best way to enter the area where the American ships normally anchored , was via the sewer tunnel opposite Thu Thiem . 
 On one occasion while he was bathing in the Saigon River , Nao decided to inspect the sewer tunnel which his father had advised him to use . Nao concluded that the tunnel would provide the best way to get in and out of the American area , but using it also presented challenges . The sewerage tunnel contained both wastes and toxic oils which could cause blindness , so Nao and his men would have to close their eyes as they move through the tunnel , in order to avoid blindness . Furthermore , Nao and his men must wash their bodies to get rid of the deadly odours to avoid detection , and probably arrest , by South Vietnamese authorities . After Nao had surveyed the tunnels which lead into the port , he presented his plan of attack to the Saigon @-@ Gia Dinh Military District Headquarters . Nao decided to utilise high explosives , enough to sink a ship , and detonate it using a timer so that his men could get away safely . Nao ’ s superiors approved the plan , and they ordered him to launch the attack before sunrise to avoid killing local Vietnamese civilians . 
 Nao then returned to Saigon and began assembling the equipment required for the attack which included C4 plastic explosives , TNT , wires , mine detonators and batteries . Nao also trained new commandos , namely Nguyen Phu Hung and Nguyen Van Cay , to support his operation . To ensure that his operation would go smoothly , Nao measured the height , length and width of the sewer tunnel to assemble the bomb devices to the right size , so it could be carried through the tunnel unhindered . Towards the end of 1963 , Nao received news that the Card had arrived in Saigon with another load of armoured personnel carriers , artillery and aircraft . But the aircraft carrier turned out to be the sister @-@ ship the USNS Core . On the evening of December 29 , 1963 , Nao and Cay managed to carry their bomb devices through the sewer tunnel which had about 80 kilograms ( 180 lb ) of explosives . The commandos attached the explosives to Core ’ s hull , set the timer and retreated back into the sewer to wait for the outcome . 
 However , the bombs failed to explode as planned , because the battery had expired due to long periods of storage . Determined the operation would remain a secret , the commandos snuck back to the Core and retrieved the explosive devices . Not long afterwards , the Core and its crew sailed out of Saigon , intact without any damage . Nao , on the other hand , reported the failure of his mission to the Saigon @-@ Gia Dinh Military District Headquarters ; his superiors did not express disappointment in the failure of the operation , but instead they encouraged Nao and his men to destroy the Card at all costs . Finally on May 1 , 1964 , Viet Cong reconnaissance teams spotted the USNS Card sailed through <unk> Rai Bay and entered Long Tau River , so they immediately reported the information to the 65th Special Operations Group in Saigon . As usual , the Card docked at the commercial port district in the city to unload another shipment of cargo and military helicopters , as well as upload a batch of helicopters scheduled to be returned to the United States . 
 = = = Successful attack = = = 
 When Nao received news the Card had arrived in Saigon , he inspected the equipment which now included a new battery and a redesigned bomb . Again , Nao decided to set off the bombs during the early hours of May 2 , so that he and his fellow operative could escape safely and avoid inflicting casualties on the local population . But due to illness , Cay declined to take part in the operation , so Hung had to replace him . At around 9am on May 1 , Nao rushed to Hung ’ s home , where the latter was given a hand grenade and was notified of an upcoming operation without much detail . At 6pm , after Nao had finished unloading the bombs onto one canoe , he and Hung traveled down the Saigon River in two separate canoes , towards the commercial port district . Both men than pulled over in the Thu Thiem area , to avoid detection from South Vietnamese authorities by intermingling with the local workers who lived there . While waiting for the right time , Nao briefed Hung on the objectives of the operation , which was to sink the largest American ship at the Saigon Port , and promptly report the results back to headquarters . 
 Shortly after 6 : 30pm as both men headed towards Warehouse Number 0 at the commercial port district , a police patrol boat spotted them and quickly gave chase . Nao than ordered Hung to throw the hand grenade and both men would retreat towards the local village , if their bombs were discovered by the police . The police patrol stopped about 20 meters ( 66 ft ) away from Nao ’ s canoe , and the patrol boat commander questioned both men about their activities during that time of the evening . In response , Nao claimed that he and Hung intended to go to the other side of the river , to buy some new clothes at the market . To avoid delaying the operation , Nao bribed the patrol boat commander 1000 Vietnamese dong , as the South Vietnamese police were widely known for their corruption . When the patrol boat commander received the bribe , he gave both Nao and Hung permission to move on but demanded another bribe when they return . When the commandos arrived at the sewer tunnel , they assembled the bomb device with each man carrying 40 kilograms ( 88 lb ) of explosives down through the tunnel . 
 Once the commandos finally got out of the tunnel , they both swam towards the broadside of the Card which anchored near the opening of the sewer . As planned , Nao and Hung attached two bombs on the ship , with one near the bilge and one at the engine compartment , just above the water surface . After the bombs had been attached to the Card ’ s hull , Nao inspected both bombs to ensure they had been assembled properly . After that Nao stuck the battery onto a pole and connected it to the bombs with wires , then set the timer . At <unk> , the bombs were completed and both commandos retreated back into the sewer tunnel , and climbed into their canoes on the other side and rowed back to Thu Thiem . Again , the police patrol boat was waiting for Nao and Hung to arrive , because the commander wanted another bribe . As Nao and Hung approached the patrol boat , an explosion was heard and a bright light could be seen in the commercial port area . The South Vietnamese police patrol boat than started its engine and raced towards the Card , instead of extracting another bribe . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 For the Viet Cong commandos of the 65th Special Operations Group , the explosion on the Card signalled a successful mission . By the time the sun rose over Saigon , the Card had sunk 48 feet ( 15 m ) into the river with its engine compartment completely flooded . Furthermore , five American civilians who worked on the ship died as a result of the attack . Due to the rapid response from the ship ’ s crew and the local authorities , flooding inside the ship was quickly stopped and it was stabilized . An inspection later revealed that the explosion had torn open a hole which measured 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) long and 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) high , on the starboard side of the ship . In the days that followed , five U.S. Navy divers were deployed to Saigon from the Philippines , in addition to several salvage teams from U.S. bases in Japan and the Military Sea Transport Service Command . Amongst the divers was founding US Navy Seals member Roy Boehm , who claimed to have recovered the remains of a <unk> Demolition Pack , a specialised explosive charge used by US navy frogmen . <unk> speculated that the explosives used in the attack had actually been stolen from his own South Vietnamese Navy unit by a group of deserters who had been mistreated by a South Vietnamese officer . 
 The USS Reclaimer rescue and salvage ship , which was heading for the Philippines at the time , was ordered to change course and sailed for Saigon . Meanwhile , the tug boat USS Tawakoni based at Subic Bay in the Philippines was placed on standby , and later received similar orders to head for South Vietnam . Upon their arrival in Saigon , U.S. Navy divers and salvage teams tried to pump water out from the Card ’ s flooded compartments , but their initial attempts were hindered by a combination of malfunctions in the pumping equipment , and the poor diving conditions in the river . Ultimately it took the salvors 17 days to refloat the Card , and when that was completed they began the process of moving the ship out of Saigon by installing a 6 @-@ inch pump and a load of generators inside the Card to get rid of excess water while at sea . The Reclaimer and the Tawakoni then towed the damaged Card out of Saigon , and headed for Subic Bay where it underwent further repairs . 
 Shortly after the Card was sunk , North Vietnam made full use of the incident for propaganda purposes . On October 20 , 1964 , the North Vietnamese government issued a postage stamp which proclaimed an " Aircraft Carrier of America sunk in the Harbor of Saigon " , to praise the Viet Cong commandos who carried out the attack . The U.S. Navy refused to admit the Card had been sunk even for a brief period of time , instead it simply stated the Card was damaged and quickly repaired . For the remainder of 1964 , the Viet Cong launched further attacks on U.S. targets such as the Brinks Hotel and Bien Hoa Air Base , but there were no significant responses from the U.S. military . The Card was returned to service by 11 December 1964 and remained in service until 1970 , when she was placed into the Reserve Fleet . 
 = Typhoon Nelson ( 1985 ) = 
 Typhoon Nelson , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Ibiang , was the worst tropical cyclone to affect Southern China in 16 years . Typhoon Nelson , which developed on August 16 , originated from an area of thunderstorm activity well east of the Philippines . It gradually intensified over the next several days while moving northwest . Nelson reached typhoon intensity early on August 20 and two days later , attained peak intensity before turning west . The cyclone brushed northern Taiwan early on August 23 after weakening slightly . Nelson then briefly restrengthened to peak intensity . During the afternoon of August 23 , it made landfall in eastern China before dissipating on August 25 . 
 Nelson brought heavy rains to Taiwan . Approximately 900 @,@ 000 families were left without power and 100 @,@ 000 telephone lines lost service . More than 20 @,@ 000 trees were uprooted . Across the country , five people were killed . Affecting a country already inundated by summer rains , Typhoon Nelson brought additional flooding and significant damage to much of Southern China . There , the storm killed 48 individuals and hurt 329 others . More than 5 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed while another 6 @,@ 000 were damaged . Around 2 @,@ 000 travelers were stranded due to flooding . Throughout China , losses from the storm totaled to $ 53 million ( 1985 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Nelson can be traced back to a small and disorganized , but persistent area of disturbed weather , which was first observed on August 15 . At this time , the convection was located 280 km ( 175 mi ) northwest of Saipan . Initially , the system was located near the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) , which enhanced the disturbance 's convection . The disturbance was also located near a cold core upper @-@ level low and a tropical upper @-@ tropospheric trough ( TUTT ) . By 0300 UTC on August 15 , the system had become slightly more organized . Three hours later , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) started watching the system . Thereafter , a dramatic increase in convection occurred over the northeast quadrant of the system . As such , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) started watching the system early on August 16 . Several hours later , a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert ( TCFA ) was issued , even though a Hurricane Hunter aircraft did not locate a surface circulation . Early on August 17 , the TCFA was re @-@ issued . That afternoon , the disturbance became more organized , with classifications via the Dvorak technique yielding winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . Based on this , both the JTWC and the JMA upgraded the disturbance into Tropical Storm Nelson . 
 During the evening , a Hurricane Hunter aircraft reported a barometric pressure of 989 mbar ( 30 inHg ) ; however , they noted that the strongest winds were 170 km ( 105 mi ) north @-@ northwest from the center . Early on August 18 , data from another aircraft also noted that a subtropical ridge had extended west of Nelson ; consequently , the JTWC correctly anticipated Nelson to move west @-@ northwest . At midday , the JMA upgraded Nelson to a severe tropical storm . Subsequently , data from the JMA indicated that Nelson began to level off in intensity as the stronger winds remained displaced form the center . However , the JTWC upgraded Nelson to typhoon intensity following Hurricane Hunter reports of a 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) eye , winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) , and a pressure of 979 mbar ( 28 @.@ 9 inHg ) . At 0000 UTC on August 20 , the JMA estimated that Nelson attained typhoon strength , with winds of 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) . Nearing Taiwan , Nelson once again held on to its intensity for 36 hours before strengthening slightly . Late on August 21 , the JTWC announced that Nelson reached peak intensity , with 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) , equivalent to a Category 2 hurricane on the United States @-@ based Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale ( SSHWS ) . Early on August 22 , the JMA reported that Nelson attained peak winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) . 
 Shortly after its peak , the storm weakened slightly thereafter as the typhoon passed between the Yaeyama Islands and the Miyako Islands . According to the JMA , the storm re @-@ attained peak intensity at 0000 UTC on August 23 . At this time , the agency assessed the pressure of the system at 955 mbar ( 28 @.@ 2 inHg ) . Shortly thereafter , Nelson skirted northern Taiwan , passing 45 km ( 30 mi ) from Taipei . After entering the Formosa Strait , the storm moved ashore southwest of <unk> at 1400 UTC on August 23 . At the time of landfall , the JMA estimated winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . By August 25 , both the JMA and JTWC had ceased tracking Nelson , as it had moved inland over China . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = Taiwan = = = 
 Due to the threat of Nelson , a typhoon warning was issued for the island . After the storm battered the island , rail and street traffic in the northern part of the island was halted due to mudslides . Both Chiang Kai @-@ shek International Airport and the Taipei Songshan Airport in Taipei were closed for about 12 hours . Approximately 900 @,@ 000 families were left without electrical service and 100 @,@ 000 telephone lines were disrupted . Water supplies in many areas were also affected and about 20 @,@ 000 trees in Taipei were damaged . As much as 440 mm ( 17 in ) of rain fell in some parts of the island of Taiwan . 
 Five people perished in the country . Three men were killed in Taipei , two when they were struck by wind @-@ blown objects and one when a house collapsed . Elsewhere , a fatality was reported because of a landslide in Taichung . Moreover , at least 15 other people were reportedly injured throughout Taiwan . A woman in the harbor city of Keelung was struck in the head and seriously injured by a broken window . 
 = = = China = = = 
 Already affecting an area that was inundated by prior flooding partially caused by Typhoon Mamie , Nelson brought additional flooding and significant damage to much of Southern China . The storm was accountable for 48 lives and 329 injuries in the province of Fujian . More than 5 @,@ 000 dwellings were destroyed ; 6 @,@ 000 others were damaged . Around 2 @,@ 000 travelers were stranded . A total of 969 fishing boats sunk , and about 178 @,@ 500 acres ( 72 @,@ 235 ha ) of crops were lost . Power lines were downed in 11 counties , which included Putian and the provincial capital of Fuzhou . Many highways received flooding . Water and electrical supplies were cut in Putian City . Along <unk> Island and <unk> , many houses were demolished and considerable damaged occurred to crops such as sugar cane . The offshore island of <unk> was the hardest hit , where 15 villages lost power . Typhoon Nelson was considered the worst typhoon to hit China in 16 years , but also helped relieve drought conditions in the southern portion of the nation . 
 = Fringe ( season 3 ) = 
 The third season of the American science fiction television series Fringe commencing airing on the Fox network on September 23 , 2010 , and concluded on May 6 , 2011 . Twenty @-@ two episodes long , the season was produced by Bad Robot Productions in association with Warner Bros. Television , and its showrunners were Jeff Pinkner and J.H. Wyman . Lead actors Anna Torv , John Noble , and Joshua Jackson reprised their roles as FBI agent Olivia Dunham and the father @-@ son duo Walter and Peter Bishop . Previous series regulars Lance Reddick , Jasika Nicole , and Blair Brown also returned , along with recurring guest stars Kirk Acevedo , Seth Gabel , and Ryan McDonald . 
 Building off the finale from the previous season , Fringe 's third season dealt with a war between the prime and parallel universes . During the first part of the season , odd @-@ numbered episodes mostly took place in the parallel universe and have a red title sequence , while even @-@ numbered episodes mostly took place in the prime universe and have the original blue title sequence . In episode eight , " Entrada " , the title sequence is a mixture of blue and red , and since have been either blue or red or both to signify the universal focus of the episode . In the rest of the season , however , the episodes focus on the prime universe with brief shifts to the parallel universe . 
 Wyman and Pinkner saw Fringe as two shows , where they could provide a detailed mythology that was equally compelling in both universes . Eager to explore " what @-@ if " moments , historical idiosyncrasies and other differences were inserted to help disambiguate the two worlds . Much of the season was designed around a doomsday device , as they believed its mysteriousness was " a great story engine for us . " The nineteenth episode , " Lysergic Acid Diethylamide " , contained long sequences of animation in order to facilitate guest actor 's Leonard Nimoy 's retirement from acting . While the writers had attempted to continue the idea of the " mythalone " for both casual and devoted fans , Fringe mythology became more visible in the last episodes of the season . Equating the final three episodes to a chapter in a novel , the writers " linked [ them ] in one continuous story arc . " 
 The third season was positively received by television critics , and it earned 77 out of 100 on the aggregate review website Metacritic , indicating critical reception as " generally favorable . " Reviewers reacted well to the exploration of the parallel universe , and the performances of Torv and Noble , who each played differing versions of their original characters , were lauded . Fringe ended its third season with an average of 5 @.@ 83 million viewers per episode , placing 99th for the network television season . The New York Times called the series " the best major @-@ network show that no one is watching . " Despite its low ratings , Fox renewed the series for a fourth season on March 24 , 2011 . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 Following Peter 's rescue from the parallel universe , the prime universe Fringe team comes to learn of the Wave Sink Device , the machine that Walternate was attempting to use to destroy the prime universe . They are unaware that Fauxlivia has replaced Olivia , and she works to help the Fringe Division to identify the components hidden across the globe for a similar Wave Form Device in the prime universe . She also gets romantically close to Peter . 
 Olivia is held in Walternate 's laboratories in the parallel universe , and given drugs and conditioning to make her believe she is Fauxlivia , and subsequently a willing test subject for Walternate 's tests of the powers of Cortexiphan . Olivia slowly breaks this conditioning , and on one trial , is able to cross over to the prime universe to relay a warning to Peter about Fauxilivia . Her identity exposed , Fauxilivia is extracted back to the parallel universe by Walternate 's shapeshifters , while Olivia gets help from Broyles to cross back to the prime universe . Olivia is distraught after her return , knowing about Peter 's relationship with Fauxilivia . However , after some time , the two reconcile and admit they have feelings for each other . 
 In the prime universe , the Fringe team learn more of the Wave Sink Device from Sam Weiss , understanding it was created by a long @-@ advanced race known as the First People , with the power to destroy or create universes , but is only powered by Peter 's biology . The two devices in both universes are <unk> entangled , allows one to alter the other universe . Walter surmises that Walternate wants to engage the device to destroy the prime universe in hopes of healing the parallel universe damaged by his crossing in 1985 . In the parallel universe , Walternate discovers Fauxilivia is pregnant with Peter 's child and discreetly accelerates the pregnancy , as to obtain a sample of the child 's blood to activate the Device . The effects on the prime universe are numerous but the parallel universe shows no sign of healing . Walter directs teams to move the prime universe Device to Liberty Island , the same location where the parallel device , as to minimize the affected areas , and then instructs Peter to use the device to counteract the parallel version . Instead , when Peter enters the device , he witnesses a future where the parallel universe was destroyed and the prime universe on verge of the same collapse , and finds that Walter would set a plan in motion to send the Device back into the far past via a wormhole ( creating the First People myth ) , and having it trigger this memory when Peter uses it . After this experience , Peter uses the device to link the two together , fusing the two rooms from the prime and parallel universe into a bridge , allowing the two sides to meet one another . However , shortly after this , Peter disappears to the apparent obliviousness of both Fringe teams ; the Observers , looking on , assert that Peter has erased himself from the timeline to let this event happen . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 Fringe is produced by Bad Robot Productions in association with Warner Bros. Television . Co @-@ creator J.J. Abrams continued to work as executive producer along with fellow co @-@ creators Alex Kurtzman and Roberto Orci , who returned as consulting producers . Bryan Burk and Joe Chappelle also returned as executive producers , while Akiva Goldsman worked as consulting producer . Executive producers Jeff Pinkner and J.H. Wyman continued in their role as showrunners for the third season , which involved overseeing every episode and sometimes directly contributing episode scripts . As with every season , they laid out the third season 's storyline a year in advance . 
 = = = Writing and filming = = = 
 The season finale of the second season introduced the parallel universe to viewers . Fringe 's producers debated over how much of this universe to depict in the third season , but ultimately decided that showing the doppelgangers would " fit more into our own character ’ s lives and show different aspects of their personalities " . As a result , Fringe began its third season by alternating between episodes , with each depicting one universe . The Fox network was initially resistant to this design , as executives were " really concerned that if the episodes didn 't have [ ' over here ' ] Walter or Peter in them , it wouldn ’ t feel like our show anymore . " Jeff Pinkner and J.H. Wyman explained that the series had to constantly evolve , " otherwise we ’ ll get bored , the cast will get bored , the audience will get bored " ; after the first several episodes of the season , Fox agreed it was a positive change . 
 The producers saw the season as " two shows " ; Wyman noted , " It 's on us to make the mythology over there just as compelling as the mythology here , so we will enjoy both of them . We have our characters going back and forth , there or here , but there 's a whole set of nice characters that you 'll become very interested in very quickly . It 's interesting because it gives you that gearshift . " Wyman later added that parallel universe plot device " really allowed us to explore the characters deeper via their doppelgängers , to illuminate characters we already know . It ’ s been a real gas for all of us involved in making the show . " Historical idiosyncrasies were inserted into the parallel universe , such as a still @-@ living John F. Kennedy , the non @-@ existence of the FBI , and the Back to the Future franchise starring Eric Stoltz rather than Michael J. Fox . The writers loved creating an entire new world , and asked themselves what life would have been like in its most mundane forms , such as within daily routines . Pinkner thought it allowed them to create and explore many " what @-@ if " moments , such as if the September 11 attacks had occurred against the White House instead of the Twin Towers , or if the Statue of Liberty still possessed its shiny copper sheen . " Entrada " , the eighth episode , was the first of the season to divide its time between both universes . 
 Many of the episodes involved the discovery and construction of a doomsday device , which Pinkner believed to be " a good thing to design a season around " because its mysteriousness was " a great story engine for us . " While the writers tried to maintain the concept of the " mythalone , " a storyline that was attractive to both casual and devoted Fringe fans , the series became more invested in its mythology towards the end of the third season . " Lysergic Acid Diethylamide " , the season 's nineteenth episode , was the first of the series to contain sequences of animation . While previous guest actor Leonard Nimoy had retired , the writers still had storylines involving his character , William Bell . They were able to record his voice , and consequently worked with Zoic Studios to develop the episode . This unorthodox storytelling device was consistent with the nineteenth episodes of other seasons , including " Brown Betty " and " Letters of Transit " . 
 The final three episodes of the season were " linked in one continuous story arc , " and meant to seem like " you 're turning the last page of a chapter in a novel . And usually in a good novel , the last pages [ of a chapter ] compels you forward with a new understanding of what the subject matter is and you get deeper and you can ’ t wait to turn that page . " The crew wrote the finale before the season was officially renewed , but deigned to leave it unchanged once discovering that a fourth season had been approved . Pinkner explained that " we wrote the episode , perhaps foolishly , assuming that we would be on for Season 4 . We never for one second entertained that it would be the end of the series . So therefore , we didn 't have to change a word ! " The finale was designed to establish the groundwork by " open [ ing ] a new chapter " for the new season , which included Peter having never existed . Its futuristic storyline was meant to " inform the present of the show with some thematic elements , " establishing to viewers that " our world is going to break down . " 
 Different title sequences were inputted to help disambiguate the two universes , as well as establish other versions of their world . Blue and red represented the prime and parallel universes , respectively while " Entrada " featured a mixture of blue and red in its title sequence . An episode set in 1985 began with a retro title sequence , and the finale 's version of the title sequence was silver @-@ gray and black . Each opening credit sequence contained specific words that were meant to serve as " signposts " for both current and future episodes , such as the finale sequences ' use of " thought extraction " and " dual maternity " . Like the previous season , the third season was filmed in Vancouver . Because of its heritage buildings and antique storefronts , many of the scenes set in the alternate universe were shot in New Westminster , an area outside Vancouver . Filming of the live action parts of " Lysergic Acid Diethylamide " were shot along west Hastings Street . Executive producer Joe Chappelle returned to direct five episodes , while producer Brad Anderson was responsible for directing four . Other new and returning directors included Thomas Yatsko , Jeffrey Hunt , Kenneth Fink , David Straiton , Frederick E. O. Toye , Chuck Russell , and Charles Beeson ; they each directed one episode . In addition , Dennis Smith and Jeannot Szwarc each directed two episodes . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = Main cast = = = 
 Anna Torv as Olivia Dunham ( 21 episodes ) 
 Joshua Jackson as Peter Bishop ( 19 episodes ) 
 Lance Reddick as Phillip Broyles ( 19 episodes ) 
 Blair Brown as Nina Sharp ( 10 episodes ) 
 Jasika Nicole as Astrid Farnsworth ( 21 episodes ) 
 John Noble as Dr. Walter Bishop ( 22 episodes ) 
 Most of the series ' main cast returned for the third season . Anna Torv portrayed two versions of Olivia Dunham , each from their own universe , while Joshua Jackson returned as her love interest , Peter Bishop , and John Noble played Peter 's father , Dr. Walter Bishop . Lance Reddick starred as FBI agent Phillip Broyles , and Jasika Nicole played junior FBI agent / Walter 's lab assistant Astrid Farnsworth . Lastly , Blair Brown returned as Massive Dynamic executive Nina Sharp . 
 = = = Recurring cast = = = 
 Michael Cerveris depicted September / The Observer in every episode of the season , while Eugene Lipinski played another Observer , December , for two episodes . Seth Gabel and Kirk Acevedo returned as parallel universe Fringe agents Lincoln Lee ( 10 episodes ) and Charlie Francis ( 6 episodes ) , respectively . The parallel universe also featured Andre Royo as Henry Higgins , Amy Madigan as Marilyn Dunham , and Philip Winchester as Frank Stanton , all for three episodes . Ryan McDonald played two versions of Brandon Fayette for twelve episodes , and Orla Brady guest starred as Elizabeth Bishop for one episode . Sebastian Roché returned from the second season to play one of the season 's antagonists Thomas Jerome Newton for two episodes , along with Gerard Plunkett as Senator Van Horn . Kevin Corrigan depicted Samuel Weiss for three episodes , Karen Holness played Diane Broyles for two , Clark Middleton played Edward Markham and J. R. Bourne played Agent Edwards , each for one episode . 
 The season featured single episodes with special guest appearances by Christopher Lloyd as Roscoe Joyce , Jorge Garcia as Massive Dynamic security guard Kevin , Paula Malcomson as Dana Gray , Emily Meade as Ella Dunham , Brad Dourif as Moreau , and Leonard Nimoy as William Bell . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings and broadcast = = = 
 Fringe 's second season ended with an average of 6 @.@ 252 million viewers per episode and a 2 @.@ 3 ratings share for adults 18 – 49 , causing the series to finish in 79th place out of all the season 's network television shows . Despite its middling ratings , Fringe received a full third season renewal on March 6 , 2010 . 
 At the beginning of the 2010 – 11 United States network television schedule , Fringe remained in its Thursday timeslot for the first nine episodes of the third season , where it faced tough competition from the high @-@ rated Grey 's Anatomy and CSI : Crime Scene Investigation . The season premiere aired on September 23 , 2010 to 5 @.@ 83 million viewers in the United States , earning a 2 @.@ 1 rating for viewers 18 – 49 . This was thirty percent down from the previous season 's premiere , " A New Day in the Old Town " . On its initial broadcast on November 4 , the fifth episode hit a then @-@ season low of 1 @.@ 8 / 5 in the adult demographic . Fox moved Fringe to a new Friday night timeslot on January 21 , 2011 , where it typically broadcast opposite Supernatural , Dateline NBC , and CSI : NY . Because of the night 's " death slot " status , this move made television critics and fans nervous that Fringe was near cancellation . For the first few episodes in its new timeslot , its ratings remained consistent with previous Thursday episodes , but soon began to drop . 
 There were some positive aspects of the third season 's ratings however . Among adults aged 18 to 49 , Fringe placed first in its Friday timeslot . Total viewers , as well as the ratings share for adults and teenagers , surpassed Fox 's average for that same timeslot . Furthermore , the average household income of Fringe 's adult viewers was higher than the total U.S. adult population average , and its adult viewers also had a higher index of having four or more years of college . Despite its low ratings , Fringe was officially renewed for a fourth season on March 24 , 2011 to the surprise of observers – six days before the renewal , Fringe had reached a new series ratings low . The renewal came in the wake of campaigns conducted by Fringe actors , fans of the series , and television critics . Kevin Reilly , Fox 's entertainment president , commented that " the series ' ingenious producers , amazingly talented cast and crew , as well as some of the most passionate and loyal fans on the planet , made this fourth @-@ season pickup possible . " 
 Fringe ended its third season with an average of 5 @.@ 83 million viewers per episode , finishing in 99th place for the American network television season . Time shifted viewing played a significant part in Fringe 's third season ratings . According to a report released by Nielsen Company , Fringe was the only network television series among the top ten of most time @-@ shifted shows of 2011 . The report continued that time shifting increased the series ' overall audience by eighty percent . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Film aggregate review site Metacritic gave the third season 77 out of 100 based on six critical reviews , indicating the critical reception was " generally favorable " . Critic Josh Wigler , writing for Comic Book Resources , lauded the season 's first two episodes , explaining " For the third season of the critically acclaimed Fox series , executive producers and co @-@ showrunners Jeff Pinkner and J.H. Wyman have responded to their audience 's demands by creating a new kind of episode : the mythalone , designed to propel the story and characters forward while still keeping the show accessible to new viewers on a weekly basis ... it 's nothing short of amazing that the new mythalone approach to Fringe works wonders , if only in the first two episodes of the new season . " 
 After watching the first three episodes , Aaron Riccio of Slant Magazine also praised the new season , writing " The plots have generally been the " fringe " of Fringe ; the meat has been in the characters ' developing feelings for one another . Now the two are not only on equal footing , but they 're both firing on full cylinders ... Afraid , perhaps , to toy with viewers the way that Lost did , Fringe keeps the action moving , rapidly <unk> its mysteries , and that decision proves to be a wise one . Rather than waiting for a future payoff , Fringe is cashing in with every episode , showing us the escalating war between worlds — and with likeable characters and compelling cases to boot . Ironically , it 's by branching out in two different directions that the show has become , more than ever , the centerpiece of a <unk> Thursday night lineup . " 
 In December 2010 , the New York Times wrote Fringe " has kept its plates spinning entertainingly well into its third season " and called it " the best major @-@ network show that no one is watching " . Because of its " ultra @-@ daring " and " bold " storylines , IGN gave Fringe their award for " Best Sci @-@ Fi Series " in 2010 . They noted , " With stellar performances , sci @-@ fi intrigue and a newly introduced Doomsday machine in play that almost guarantees the two worlds will face off Thunderdome @-@ style , this series just keeps getting better and better . " For 2011 , Fringe 's third season helped the show place sixth on Digital Spy 's top 25 television shows of the year , which described the season as " exemplary " . Similarly , The A.V. Club named Fringe the sixteenth best television series of 2011 , in particular highlighting " Lysergic Acid Diethylamide " and " The Firefly " . 
 As the third season involved doppelgangers of known characters , specific actors were selected for praise from critics . Lead actress Anna Torv was lauded from multiple quarters for portraying two Olivias , one from each universe . Critics were more divided about her performance as William Bell ( Leonard Nimoy ) , with some praising it and others remaining undecided or critical . John Noble 's performances as Walter Bishop and his doppelganger " Walternate " received positive recognition from critics , with one noting he was " astonishing me with every performance . " Specific episodes that were isolated for praise among critics included " Entrada " , " Subject 13 " , and " The Day We Died " . " Lysergic Acid Diethylamide " was lauded for its risky premise . 
 In her 2011 book Into the Looking Glass : Exploring the Worlds of Fringe , author Sarah Clarke Stuart noted that the third season 's " apocalyptic nature was fitting for an audience in the midst of such seemingly world @-@ ending economic turmoil in 2010 – 2011 . " To Clarke Stuart , Walter 's remark in the episode " 6B " that the world is tearing apart reflected " the sentiments of American viewers who were facing job loss and displacement at an unprecedented level . " 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 For the 1st Critics ' Choice Television Awards , it was nominated for Best Drama Series and Anna Torv was nominated for Best Actress in Drama Series . John Noble won for Best Supporting Actor in Drama Series . At Entertainment Weekly 's annual viewer @-@ voted EWwy awards , Fringe won for Best Drama , while Torv won for Best Actress in a Drama . Fringe won accolades at the 37th Saturn Awards for Best Network Television Series , Best Actress in Television for Torv , and Best Supporting Actor in Television for Noble . 
 = = Home video releases = = 
 The third season of Fringe was released on Blu @-@ ray and DVD in region 1 on September 6 , 2011 , in region 2 on September 26 , 2011 and in region 4 on October 26 , 2011 . The sets includes all 22 episodes of season three on a 4 @-@ disc Blu @-@ ray set and a 6 @-@ disc DVD presented in anamorphic widescreen . Special features include two commentary tracks — " The Plateau " with Monica Owusu @-@ Breen , Jeff Pinkner and Timothy Good , and " Lysergic Acid Diethylamide " with Jay Worth , <unk> Vu , and Tanya Swerling . Behind @-@ the @-@ scenes featurettes include " Duality of Worlds " , a four @-@ part featurette , exploring The Other You , Visualizing an Alternate World , A Machine of Destiny and The Psychology of Duality . Other featurettes include " Animating the ' Lysergic Acid Diethylamide ' Episode " , " Constructing an <unk> Soundscape " and " Experience ' Os ' ( Episode 316 ) in <unk> Maximum Episode Mode with Pop @-@ Up Experience @-@ Enhancing Commentaries and <unk> . Also included are a gag reel and trailers . Exclusive to the Blu @-@ ray release is a featurette titled " Glimmer to the Other Side " . 
 = Natasha Falle = 
 Natasha Falle ( born 1973 ) is a Canadian professor at Humber College in Toronto , Ontario , Canada who was forcibly prostituted from the ages of 15 to 27 and now opposes prostitution in Canada . Falle grew up in a middle @-@ class home and , when her parents divorced , her new single @-@ parent home became unsafe , and Falle ran away from home . At the age of 15 , Falle became involved in the sex industry in Calgary , Alberta . 
 Falle 's pimp kept her falsely imprisoned and trafficked her across the country . He married her and tortured her , breaking several of her bones and burning her body . In order to cope with the trauma of prostitution and violence , Falle became dependent on cocaine and almost died . Eventually , she got out of prostitution and , with her mother 's support , went through drug rehabilitation , finished high school , and eventually received a diploma in Wife Assault and Child Advocacy from George Brown College . 
 In 2001 , Falle began counselling women in prostitution at Streetlight Support Services , and counselled more than 800 women in the subsequent decade , 97 % of whom wrote on their intake surveys that they wanted to exit the sex industry . In order to make this statistic more widely known , Falle founded Sex Trade 101 . She began offering training for police and she partners with the Toronto Police Service 's sex crimes unit . Falle was one of the main proponents of Member of Parliament ( MP ) Joy Smith 's private member 's bill , Bill C @-@ 268 , which was passed in June 2010 as An Act to amend the Criminal Code ( minimum sentence for offences involving trafficking of persons under the age of eighteen years ) , and she helped the Canadian government formulate their appeal of the decision of the Ontario Superior Court of Justice in Bedford v. Canada to strike down various prostitution laws . Falle advocates adopting a law in Canada analogous to Sweden 's Sex Purchase Act , which would decriminalize the selling of sex and criminalize the purchasing of sex . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Natasha Falle grew up in a middle @-@ class home in Nova Scotia ; a suburb of Toronto , Ontario ; and a suburb of Calgary , Alberta . Her mother managed stores in the wedding industry and her father was a police officer with a vice squad , arresting drug dealers and pimps . While she was growing up , Falle had multiple family members with addictions . Through verbal and psychological abuse , Falle 's parents divorced when she was a young teenager , and she subsequently lived in a single @-@ parent home with her mother . They moved into an apartment in downtown Toronto . Falle 's father did not pay her mother alimony . There was often no money for food , so Falle began stealing food to survive . 
 Falle had no role models . She began writing poetry about suicide and wearing black clothing . She acted out by stealing cars and using drugs recreationally . She started out with soft drugs and then moved on to using psychedelic mushrooms and LSD . Her associates in these criminal activities , who came from similarly dysfunctional backgrounds , provided her with a sense of belonging that she no longer found at home . Falle 's mother had a series of boyfriends who abused her and made the house unsafe , so Falle ran away from home . She slept at friends ' houses , on their couches and in tents in their backyards , concealing her presence from her friends ' parents . 
 = = Prostitution = = 
 = = = Initiation = = = 
 Shortly before she turned 15 , Falle met two child prostitutes who were also in their early teens . One of these girls was pregnant by her 42 @-@ year @-@ old pimp . The two girls offered Falle a place to sleep at their apartment while their pimp was away ; feeling there was no alternative , she accepted . Out of concern for Falle 's safety , they taught her how to put a condom on a penis by practicing on a cucumber . These children effectively groomed Falle . She stayed at the apartment for several days , and she was watched by various men . By the time the pimp returned , Falle had moved on . 
 After she turned 15 , Falle had her first experience in the sex industry at a party in a bar in Chinatown , Calgary . A 25 @-@ year @-@ old man at the party who had forged identity documents convinced her to sell sex for money and give him half of her earnings . Falle found this man well @-@ dressed and attractive and did not think that he fit the stereotypical image of a pimp . She had nowhere to sleep that night and had no money for food , so she accepted his offer . The man to whom she sold sex that night had teeth that were rotten . They had sex on a soiled mattress in a poorly ventilated restaurant attic , and she received $ 100 . 
 Falle convinced five of her friends who came from dysfunctional homes to join her in prostitution . Falle said that she and the other girls she knew her age who had gone into prostitution had felt as though that was their only remaining option . She said they all tried to stay free of pimps , organized crime , and drugs , but eventually succumbed . Falle later said , " We were prey for every paedophile , pervert , pimp and drug dealer that was out there . " The man who had recruited Falle in Chinatown became her pimp . Adults began advertising Falle 's sexual services in newspapers . Falle engaged in both indoor and outdoor prostitution , working as an escort , in strip clubs , and at massage parlours . At the legal establishments where she engaged in prostitution , escort drivers engaged in organized crime , selling guns , alcohol , cocaine , and stolen goods and pimping children in massage parlours . 
 = = = Abuse = = = 
 Falle 's pimp kept her imprisoned for the years that he prostituted her , and trafficked her across Canada to Edmonton , Vancouver , and Kelowna . Falle later said of herself and the other women in prostitution she knew , " I couldn 't admit that I was not there by choice . We couldn 't live in our own skin if we admitted that . We needed to believe that it was our choice . " Falle 's pimp told her he would marry her if she made enough money for him through prostitution . When she had made the amount of money her pimp required , she was 17 years old . The two got married that year . 
 Falle 's pimp regularly beat her and she began to suffer from battered person syndrome . The worst beating she received was in a brothel where she and four other teenagers engaged in prostitution . Over the years that she was married to her pimp , she hoped he would change . She later said that she " wanted to love him , believe he 'd never do it again . " She tried to make him enough money through prostitution to convince him not to find another girl . He threatened her family , and conditioned her not to call the police when he did so . Fear of being labelled a " snitch " or " rat " prevented her from going to the police . None of the other women she knew in the sex industry were in healthy relationships . At her peak , Falle owned a Ford Mustang , bought her pimp a Mercedes @-@ Benz , and lived in a four @-@ bedroom penthouse apartment , but she continued to experience violence . She used her material possessions to elevate herself above the women around her who were dependent on cocaine ; she dismissed them as " crackheads " and " <unk> " . 
 Some of the men who purchased sex with Falle were police officers , and she knew girls who used drugs with their drug counselors . Falle was brainwashed to believe that her only worth lay in prostitution , which she later said was why it took her so long to exit prostitution . While engaging in prostitution , Falle was frequently threatened by other women in the sex industry , she was verbally abused by her clients , she was stalked , and she was threatened with guns on multiple occasions , including by her pimp . She was also drugged several times , and was once sexually assaulted by an escort driver after having been drugged by him . At one point , she was kidnapped . She had to resort to pulling a knife on people at times when she was threatened with violence . Because of various instances of violence during her time in prostitution , Falle was injured in a variety of ways . Her pimp broke several of her bones and burned her body . 
 = = = Effects and aftermath = = = 
 In order to cope with the psychological trauma of prostitution and violence , Falle became dependent on cocaine . Within two years , she was spending $ 500 per night on cocaine . Her drug use resulted in delusions and caused her to become schizophrenic , and subsequently distrustful of those around her , fearing that people were coming to take away her drugs . 
 Eventually , the personal horror stories Falle heard from other women in her situation convinced her that she needed to get out of prostitution . Her substance dependence became so severe that she almost died . Her best friend was killed by her pimp . By this point , many of her friends in the sex industry had died , and she thought that she would be next . One night , Falle was hiding alone in a hotel room when she found a Bible placed there by <unk> International . She began reading the Psalms and later said , " For the first time I understood what God was saying to me . That night my life began to move in a new direction . " On her 27th birthday , Falle left her husband and returned to her mother . Because of the delusions , Falle did not recognize her mother , thinking she had been replaced with a clone . Falle told her mother about being dependent on cocaine , entering prostitution , and marrying her pimp . Her mother accepted her back . It took several more years before Falle gave up hope that her husband would change . 
 Falle participated in a diversion program that allowed her to return to school . She said that she required a lot of support in order to fully exit prostitution , and found that support in her mother , her school , and Streetlight Support Services . Falle underwent a month of drug rehabilitation , which convinced her to become a counsellor . She then spent 90 days at the Toronto West Detention Centre and took seven months to finish high school . She went on to graduate from a college and a university . She received a diploma in Wife Assault and Child Advocacy from George Brown College and graduated with honours . To remove the burns her pimp had inflicted on her , she had laser surgery that cost thousands of dollars . 
 Falle uses the term " sex trade survivor " to describe herself . In 2012 , Falle sought to bring a lawsuit against her former pimp to demonstrate to other women who are or have been forcibly prostituted that it is possible to oppose one 's pimp . In 2013 , she said that , while she has left much aggression and profanity behind since leaving the sex industry , some of the issues that she developed will stick with her until the end of her life . Jonathan <unk> of the Sudbury Star wrote that " Falle 's story about her descent in and escape from prostitution is so horrific you almost don 't believe the details . " Sam <unk> of the Toronto Sun wrote that , after 12 years of prostitution , Falle still has " attractive looks and [ a ] sharp mind . " 
 = = Activism = = 
 = = = Streetlight Support Services = = = 
 In 2001 , Falle began counselling women in prostitution at Streetlight Support Services . Once she received her diploma from George Brown College , she redeveloped the organization 's Choices program , a four @-@ week program that helps women leave prostitution . Between 1997 and 2005 , Choices helped 325 women out of the sex trade . Women entered into the program through the criminal justice system after being arrested for offences related to prostitution . By 2011 , Falle had <unk> more than 800 women . Of these women , 97 % wrote on their intake surveys that they wanted to exit the sex industry , and 95 % wrote that they had been physically abused by either a pimp , a client , or another woman in the sex industry . Falle believed these statistics to be representative of women in prostitution in Canada because the women she counselled did not come to her by choice ; they were required to undergo the counselling by court order . In 2010 , Falle said that hundreds of the women she had met were controlled by pimps , either as sexual partners or as traffickers . She also said that women in prostitution tend to be moved around a lot because they tend to fetch higher prices when they are new to a region . One of the women she counselled through Streetlight Support Services had been kept in a closet when she was not providing sexual services to men . 
 = = = Sex Trade 101 = = = 
 Because Streetlight Support Services is administered by the office of the Attorney General of Ontario , Falle could not be politically active in her capacity as a counsellor with them . Falle said , " I couldn 't be silent anymore , because the strong voices that we were hearing were the minority few saying [ prostitution ] is liberating , it 's a job choice ... I couldn 't stand that lie anymore . " She said that this minority only want to continue in prostitution because " they 've never had a healthy comparison . " Falle founded and became the director of Sex Trade 101 , a Toronto @-@ based nonprofit organization dedicated to protecting the rights of women who have been in prostitution . She founded Sex Trade 101 because she saw women in the sex industry as victims rather than as criminals , and she believed that the Criminal Code depicted them as criminals . She founded the organization in order to make it more widely known that the vast majority of women in the sex industry want to leave . She met many women who had no family to support them in exiting the sex industry , and she decided to found an organization to provide that support . The organization helps prostitution victims exit the sex industry and improve their lives . 
 Sex Trade 101 calls itself " Toronto 's only sex trade survivors and abolitionist organization " and is composed of 12 women who had escaped forced prostitution and who offer training for police in order to change perceptions about people involved in the sex trade . The organization is also involved in prevention work in high schools . The organization offers mentorship and peer support groups for women who are currently or were formerly in prostitution . It also partners with other organizations including the Servants Anonymous Society of Calgary and <unk> , an Owen Sound @-@ based interactive theatre company . In 2012 , Falle and Bridget Perrier represented Sex Trade 101 in Owen Sound where they launched <unk> , a mentorship program to aid women and youth who are at risk of sexual victimization , to help people exit the sex trade , and to provide support once they have exited . At the workshop that launched this program , Falle said that some people in the sex industry engage in survival sex — trading sex for food , a place to sleep , alcohol , drugs , or the feeling that they are loved . She said that rural communities are common places for women and children to be groomed into prostitution . She identified Bruce — Grey — Owen Sound as particularly vulnerable because of the substance abuse in the area . By 2013 , Sex Trade 101 had served more than 1 @,@ 000 women . In May 2012 , Falle spoke about human trafficking at high schools in Vancouver primarily because of the influence of a parent concerned about human trafficking in the area and its dangers to children . 
 = = = Police = = = 
 Falle is a professor at Humber College in Toronto , where she teaches in the police foundations program , educating on the subject of social justice . One of her students , Brittany <unk> , said that Falle 's lectures would have a significant impact on <unk> 's career as a police officer , saying , " She was one of the best speakers I have ever heard . " Falle partners with the Toronto Police Service 's sex crimes unit , which developed the statistic that the average age for a girl to become involved in prostitution in Canada is 14 . According to Falle 's research , the average age is between 13 and 16 . York Regional Police drugs and vice unit Detective Thai Truong said that all law enforcement personnel should hear stories like Falle 's because " they remind us that they are not just prostitutes or escorts , but they are somebody 's daughter , somebody 's sister , somebody 's wife . " 
 = = = Bill C @-@ 268 = = = 
 In June 2010 , Kildonan — St. Paul Member of Parliament ( MP ) Joy Smith 's private member 's bill , Bill C @-@ 268 , was passed as An Act to amend the Criminal Code ( minimum sentence for offences involving trafficking of persons under the age of eighteen years ) . Falle was one of the bill 's five main proponents , the others being Timea Nagy , a woman who was trafficked from Hungary to Canada at the age of 20 and kept as a sex slave in a strip club ; Tamara Cherry , a Toronto Sun journalist who writes about human trafficking in Canada ; Brian McConaghy , a former RCMP officer who works with Ratanak International — another anti @-@ human @-@ trafficking organization ; and Grand Chief of the Assembly of Manitoba Chiefs Ron Evans , who raised awareness about victims of the sex industry in Manitoba . Later that year , Falle said that the best way to fight human trafficking is to influence public opinion . 
 Later in 2010 in Winnipeg , Falle received an award at the first annual Honouring Heroes ceremony , which was organized by Joy Smith , who is also an anti @-@ human @-@ trafficking activist . Falle called Smith an angel , saying , " It 's only been in the last few years since all those missing and murdered aboriginal women turned up dead did anybody care about us . So to have her speak out the way she is against [ prostitution ] is so empowering . " Falle was one of five award recipients at the ceremony , the other four being the other primary proponents of Bill C @-@ 268 . 
 = = = Bedford v. Canada = = = 
 Falle took a sustained interest in Bedford v. Canada , a case that began in the fall of 2010 when laws against keeping a brothel , communicating in order to facilitate prostitution , and living off the avails of prostitution were struck down by the Ontario Superior Court of Justice as unconstitutional . When Falle first heard about this decision , she cried , and expressed surprise and disappointment . She said that she did not believe that the average Canadian realized the implications of striking down these laws , which she said were that " your next door neighbours can run a brothel right beside you . Your children could be exposed to condoms left on their driveway , johns propositioning them . " She also expressed her concern that striking down anti @-@ prostitution laws normalizes prostitution as a career option for children to consider . She also said that , without the laws , " pimps will be legitimate businesspeople [ and ] billboards advertising brothels could start appearing on roadsides . " Ron <unk> , a lawyer attempting to have the anti @-@ prostitution laws declared unconstitutional , said , " the reality is there are consenting adults who want to go into " prostitution . Falle was angered by this statement , and replied that 97 % of women in the sex industry are not engaging in prostitution by choice , and that " the voices of the overwhelming majority of women who want to get out of prostitution are being drowned out by a vocal few . " 
 The Government of Canada disagreed with Ontario 's ruling and announced that the decision would be appealed . Falle helped the Crown formulate their case . That November , Falle was a panelist at a debate about the case . At the debate , which was hosted by the Queen 's Law and Public Policy Club at Queen 's University , Falle said that , whatever the outcome of the appeal , she was glad that the case was removing the taboos surrounding talking about prostitution . The following June , Falle and more than twelve others intervened in the case , arguing that the laws should be reinstated to protect women from pimps . As part of this anti @-@ prostitution coalition , Falle said that all areas of the sex industry are unsafe , including escort agencies and strip clubs . Falle testified in the lower courts , saying that " the more they say the women are there by choice , the harder it is for us to convince police , social workers and everyone else that these people are vulnerable . " She also said that striking down anti @-@ prostitution laws sends a message to men that it is acceptable to harass women . Falle said that all the applicants in Bedford v. Canada — including Terri @-@ Jean Bedford , the dominatrix seeking to have the anti @-@ brothel law struck down — entered the sex industry as children . For this reason , Falle argued that neither of these women chose a life of prostitution as a consenting adult ; that life had already been chosen for them by the time that they had reached the age of consent . Falle encouraged Canadians to take an interest in Bedford v. Canada because any Canadian girl can become a victim of prostitution . 
 Eventually , the laws against pimping and communicating provisions were determined to be constitutional and were retained . As of 2013 , the constitutionality of the law against brothels was still under review . Falle said that brothels should not be legalized , saying , " I know firsthand and ... from the disclosures of the many women that I 've been able to counsel over the years that most violence happens behind closed doors . " Falle said that if brothels were legalized , the police would have less legal ability to find women and children victimized by human trafficking . Bedford said that legalizing brothels would make prostitution safer for women because it would allow prostitution to take place indoors . Falle responded that most prostitution has already moved indoors , as the internet has made most street solicitation unnecessary , and argues that the move indoors has not made the women safer . She said that when she was in prostitution , she was even a little safer outdoors because of the added visibility to the public . In discussion of the case , Falle said , " I don 't know anyone in the prostitution business who hasn ’ t ended up dead , in jail , or on drugs . " She intended to bring a pimp stick to the Supreme Court of Canada in June 2013 as a visual aid in explaining how pimps often abuse the women they prostitute . 
 = = = Advocacy events = = = 
 In October 2010 , Falle picketed a courthouse in downtown Toronto in recognition of International Day of No Prostitution . She was joined by Trisha <unk> , Bridget Perrier , Katarina MacLeod , and Christine <unk> ; all were former human trafficking victims and sex workers . At the protest , Falle said that " only 1 % of prostitutes say they enjoy sex with johns and 97 % say they want to get out . " 
 In January 2011 , Falle appeared at the Party for Freedom at York University in Toronto , which launched the Alliance Against Modern Slavery , a nonprofit organization seeking to combat human trafficking through partnerships , education , and research . Falle was joined by <unk> Grant , human trafficking victim Jessie Foster 's mother ; Kevin Bales , co @-@ founder and president of Free the Slaves ; Kate Todd , a singer @-@ songwriter and actor ; Janelle Belgrave of Samba <unk> Drummers and Peace Concept ; Roger Cram of Hiram College ; and Jeff Gunn , a guitarist . That September , Falle attended Toronto 's second annual Freedom Walk , which was hosted by Stop Child Trafficking Now , Freedom Relay Canada , and Oakville 's Free @-@ Them . At this event aimed at raising awareness about human trafficking nationally and internationally , Falle was joined by other abolitionists including Tara Teng , who was Miss Canada at the time ; Trisha <unk> , co @-@ founder of EVE ; Shae Invidiata , founder of Free @-@ Them ; Timea Nagy ; Constable <unk> <unk> ; MP Joy Smith ; MP Olivia Chow ; and MP Terence Young . 
 In October 2012 , Falle was the keynote speaker at a symposium on street prostitution and human trafficking , which took place at Croatian Hall in Greater Sudbury and was attended by approximately 100 people . Sergeant Corinne <unk> of the Greater Sudbury Police Service said that the manner in which Falle was aided in her transition out of prostitution is a good example for local social and health services to follow in helping other women exit the sex industry . The following month , Falle told her story at a lunch hosted by The Salvation Army in Vancouver . That year , Falle said , " Where there 's high @-@ track prostitutes , escorts , strippers and <unk> ; there 's pimp violence . " 
 In March 2013 , Falle spoke at the 57th Session of the United Nations Commission on the Status of Women , where she sat on a panel called " Survivors Speak : Prostitution and Sex Trafficking " that was sponsored by Coalition Against Trafficking in Women . That May , Falle spoke at a fundraiser for the Servants Anonymous Society of Calgary , an organization that supports sex workers in the city . It was her first time in Calgary since she had been part of the sex industry there . The fundraiser was called " Cry of the Streets : An Evening for Freedom " and raised money for Servants Anonymous <unk> Exit , a women 's shelter for those seeking to leave the sex industry . At the fundraiser , Falle advocated adopting a law in Canada analogous to Sweden 's Sex Purchase Act , which decriminalized the selling of sex and criminalized pimping and the purchasing of sex . Falle argued in support of modelling prostitution law in Canada after Sweden 's laws because she believes that prostitution cannot be regulated . At another time , she had said that " it 's not Canada 's laws that make prostitution unsafe , it 's the johns who are raping and abusing the women and their pimps . " Also in 2013 , Falle said that the average age at which girls get involved in prostitution in Canada is 14 , and that their emotional intelligence does not develop while in prostitution , preventing many of them from leaving . She also said that prostitution has grown significantly in Canada since she left the sex industry , and that most human trafficking victims in Canada were born and raised in Canada . 
 = Mascarene grey parakeet = 
 The Mascarene grey parakeet or Thirioux ’ s grey parrot ( Psittacula bensoni ) , is an extinct species of parrot which was endemic to the Mascarene islands of Mauritius and Réunion in the western Indian Ocean . It has been classified as a member of the tribe Psittaculini , along with other parrots from the islands . 
 Subfossil bones of the Mascarene grey parakeet found on Mauritius were first described in 1973 as belonging to a smaller relative of the broad @-@ billed parrot in the genus Lophopsittacus . Apart from their size , the bones were very similar to those of other Mascarene parrots . The subfossils were later connected with 17th- and 18th @-@ century descriptions of small grey parrots on Mauritius and Réunion , together with a single illustration published in a journal describing a voyage in 1602 , and the species was instead reassigned to the genus Psittacula . 
 The Mascarene grey parakeet was grey , had a long tail , and was larger than other species of the Psittacula genus , which are usually green . The grey parrots were said to be easy to hunt , as the capture of one would result in its calling out to summon the whole flock . They were also considered to be crop pests and being such easy prey meant that they were extensively hunted . Coupled with deforestation , this pushed them into extinction . This had happened by the 1730s on Réunion and by the 1760s on Mauritius . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 In 1973 , English ornithologist Daniel T. Holyoak described some small parrot bones that he had discovered among a collection of broad @-@ billed parrot ( Lophopsittacus mauritianus ) subfossils in the Zoology Museum of Cambridge University . These remains had been collected by Louis Etienne Thirioux in the early 20th century , who had found them in a cave on Le Pouce mountain , on the Mascarene island of Mauritius . They were placed in the zoology museum by 1908 . Apart from their size and robustness , Holyoak did not find the bones to be distinct from those of the Mascarene parrot genera Lophopsittacus , Mascarinus ( the Mascarene parrot ) , Necropsittacus ( the Rodrigues parrot ) , and Psittacula ( which had two or three other species inhabiting the Mascarene islands ) . Because of their similarities , Holyoak considered all these genera to be closely related . 
 Holyoak provisionally placed the new species in the same genus as the broad @-@ billed parrot , naming it Lophopsittacus bensoni ; the name honours the English ornithologist Constantine W. Benson , for his work on birds from the Indian Ocean , and in classifying bird collections at Cambridge . Holyoak also mentioned the possibility that the remains could represent a small subspecies of Necropsittacus or a wide @-@ beaked form of Mascarinus , but maintained that they were best considered as belonging to a distinct species . The holotype specimen is a mandibular symphysis , with the specimen number UMZC <unk> . Other known remains include upper mandibles , a palatine bone , and <unk> . The species has since been excavated from the Mare aux Songes swamp on Mauritius , from which subfossils of most of the other endemic bird species have been identified as well . 
 Old , vague accounts of several different now @-@ extinct Mascarene parrots have created much confusion for the scientists who subsequently examined them . In 1967 , American ornithologist James Greenway speculated that 17th- and 18th @-@ century reports of then @-@ unidentified grey parrots on Mauritius referred to the broad @-@ billed parrot . In 1987 , English ecologist Anthony S. Cheke correlated the L. bensoni subfossils with the grey parrots reported from Mauritius and Réunion , which had previously been ignored , or considered references to broad @-@ billed parrots . Further study of contemporary accounts indicates that the broad @-@ billed parrot was not grey , but had multiple colours . 
 In 2007 , the English palaeontologist Julian P. Hume reclassified L. bensoni as a member of the genus Psittacula , as he found it to be generically distinct from Lophopsittacus , but morphologically similar to the Alexandrine parakeet ( Psittacula eupatria ) . Hume also pointed out that an engraving accompanying the 1648 published version of Dutch Captain Willem Van West @-@ Zanen 's journal may be the only definite depiction of this species . The engraving shows the killing of dodos ( depicted as penguin @-@ like ) , a dugong , and parrots on Mauritius in 1602 ; the depicted method of catching parrots matches that used on Mascarene grey parakeets according to contemporary accounts . Hume coined the new common name " Thirioux 's grey parrot " in honour of the original collector . The IOC World Bird List instead used the common name " Mascarene grey parakeet " . 
 The population of grey parrots described from the island of Réunion ( referred to as Psittacula cf. bensoni by Hume ) is thought to have been conspecific with that on Mauritius . Until subfossils of P. bensoni are found on Réunion , it cannot be confirmed whether the grey parrots of the two islands belonged to the same species . In the 1860s , French naturalists Charles Coquerel and Auguste Vinson suggested these could have been parrots of the genus Coracopsis , but fossils of neither that genus nor Psittacula have ever been found on Réunion . Whilst Coracopsis parrots are known to have been introduced to that island in the 1700s , a population did not become established . While no live or dead Mascarene grey parakeets are known with certainty to have been exported , Hume has suggested that a brown parrot specimen — once housed in Cabinet du Roi but now lost — may have been a discoloured old Mascarene grey parakeet , or perhaps a lesser vasa parrot ( Coracopsis nigra ) . This specimen was described by Comte de Buffon in 1779 . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 Based on morphological features , the Alexandrine parakeet has been proposed as the founder population for all Psittacula species on Indian Ocean islands , with new populations settling during the species 's southwards colonisation from its native South Asia . Features of that species gradually disappear in species further away from its range . Many endemic Mascarene birds , including the dodo , are descended from South Asian ancestors , and Hume has proposed that this may also be the case for all the parrots there . Sea levels were lower during the Pleistocene , so it was possible for species to colonise some of these less isolated islands . 
 Although most extinct parrot species of the Mascarenes are poorly known , subfossil remains show that they shared common features such as enlarged heads and jaws , reduced pectoral bones , and robust leg bones . Hume has suggested that they all have a common origin in the radiation of the Psittaculini tribe , basing this theory on morphological features and the fact that Psittacula parrots have managed to colonise many isolated islands in the Indian Ocean . The Psittaculini could have invaded the area several times , as many of the species were so specialised that they may have evolved significantly on hotspot islands before the Mascarenes emerged from the sea . Other members of the Psittacula genus from the Mascarenes include the extant echo parakeet ( Psittacula eques echo ) of Mauritius , as well as the extinct Réunion parakeet ( Psittacula eques eques ) , and Newton 's parakeet ( Psittacula exsul ) of Rodrigues . A 2011 genetic study found that the Mascarene parrot ( Mascarinus mascarinus ) of Réunion was most closely related to the lesser vasa parrot from Madagascar and nearby islands , and therefore unrelated to the Psittacula parrots , undermining the theory of their common origin . A 2015 genetic study by Jackson et al. found the other Mascarene Psittacula taxa to group within a clade of rose @-@ ringed parakeet ( Psittacula krameri ) subspecies from Asia and Africa . 
 = = Description = = 
 Contemporary accounts describe the Mascarene grey parakeet as a grey , long @-@ tailed parrot . Subfossils show that its beak was about 30 % longer than that of the sympatric echo parakeet , and that it had a comparatively broad beak . Members of the Psittacula genus commonly have large , red beaks , and long tail feathers , with the central ones being the longest . It also differed from its congeners in other osteological details . It was skeletally similar to the Alexandrine parakeet , but some of its bones were larger and more robust . Its colouration also separated it from all other members of Psittacula , the majority of which are green or partially green . 
 Based on subfossils , the Mascarene grey parakeet was smaller than the broad @-@ billed parrot and the Rodrigues parrot , but similar in size to the Mascarene parrot , though with a wider beak . The mandibular symphysis ( central jaw ridge ) was 2 @.@ 7 – 2 @.@ 9 mm ( 0 @.@ 11 – 0 @.@ 11 in ) thick along the mid @-@ line , the palatine ( part of the palate ) was 31 @.@ 1 mm ( 1 @.@ 22 in ) , and the tarsometatarsus ( bone in the lower leg ) was 22 – 22 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 87 – 0 @.@ 89 in ) . The grey parrots from Réunion were described as being larger than the sympatric Réunion parakeet . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 According to Anthony S. Cheke and Julian Hume , the anatomy of the Mascarene grey parakeet suggests that its habits were largely terrestrial . Like the extinct Mauritian duck and the Mascarene coot , it appears that the Mascarene grey parakeet inhabited both Mauritius and Réunion . Both populations were said to be easy to hunt by capturing one individual and making it call out , which would summon an entire flock . 
 Willem van West @-@ Zanen , who visited Mauritius in 1602 , was the first to mention grey parrots there , and he also described the hunting methods used : 
 ... some of the people went bird hunting . They could grab as many birds as they wished and could catch them by hand . It was an entertaining sight to see . The grey parrots are especially tame and if one is caught and made to cry out , soon hundreds of the birds fly around ones ’ ears , which were then hit to the ground with little sticks . 
 The Dutch sailor Willem Ysbrandtszoon Bontekoe was on Réunion in 1618 , and described the same behaviour , in the first account of the grey parrots there : 
 Coming further inland we found [ a ] great number of geese , doves , grey parrots and other birds , also many land @-@ turtles ... And what we most did marvel at , when we held one of the parrots and other birds and squeezed it till it screamed , there came all the others from thereabout as if they would free it and let themselves be caught as well , so we had enough of them to eat . 
 In 1705 , Jean Feuilley gave a more detailed description of the parrots of Réunion and their ecology : 
 There are several sorts of parrot , of different sizes and colours . Some are the size of a hen , grey , the beak red [ Mascarene parrot ] ; others the same colour the size of a pigeon [ Mascarene grey parakeet ] , and yet others , smaller , are green [ Réunion parakeet ] . There are great quantities , especially in the Sainte @-@ Suzanne area and on the mountainsides . They are very good to eat , especially when they are fat , which is from the month of June until the month of September , because at that time the trees produce a certain wild seed that these birds eat . 
 Many other endemic species of Mauritius and Réunion were lost after the arrival of humans , so that the ecosystems of these islands are severely damaged and hard to reconstruct . Before humans arrived , the islands were entirely covered in forests , very little of which remains today , because of deforestation . The surviving endemic fauna is still seriously threatened . On Mauritius , the Mascarene grey parakeet lived alongside other recently extinct birds such as the dodo , the red rail , the broad @-@ billed parrot , the Mauritius blue pigeon , the Mauritius owl , the Mascarene coot , the Mauritian shelduck , the Mauritian duck , and the Mauritius night heron . On Réunion , it lived alongside the Réunion ibis , the hoopoe starling , the Mascarene parrot , the Réunion parakeet , the Réunion swamphen , the Réunion owl , the Réunion night heron , and the Réunion pink pigeon . 
 = = Extinction = = 
 To the sailors who visited the Mascarene islands from 1598 onwards , the fauna was mainly interesting from a culinary standpoint . Of the eight or so parrot species endemic to the Mascarenes , only the echo parakeet has survived . The others likely all vanished due to a combination of extensive hunting and deforestation . Due to being easily caught , the Mascarene grey parakeet was often hunted in abundance by early visitors to Mauritius and Réunion . As they fattened themselves from June to September , they were particularly sought after at this time of the year . An account by Admiral Steven van der Hagen from 1606 even suggests that the grey parrots of Mauritius were sometimes killed for amusement . 
 In the 1720s , Sieur Dubois stated that the grey parrots on Réunion were especially sought after during their fat season , and also claimed they were crop @-@ pests : 
 Grey parrots , as good [ to eat ] as the pigeons ... All the birds of this island have their season at different times , being six months in the low country and six months in the mountains , when returning , they are very fat and good to eat ... The sparrows [ <unk> ] , grey parrots , pigeons and other birds , bats [ Pteropus sp . ] , cause plenty of damage , some to cereals others to fruit . 
 The fact that they were said to damage crops probably contributed to them being hunted . The French settlers began to clear forests using the slash @-@ and @-@ burn technique for deforestation in the 1730s , which in itself would have had a large effect on the parrot population and on the other animals that nest in tree cavities . 
 The grey parrots appear to have been common on Mauritius until the 1750s in spite of the pressure from humans , but since they were last mentioned by Charpentier de Cossigny in 1759 ( published in 1764 ) , they had probably become extinct shortly after this time . The grey parrots of Réunion were last mentioned in 1732 , also by Cossigny . This final account gives an insight as to how he regarded the culinary quality of parrots from Réunion : 
 The woods are full of parrots , either completely grey [ Mascarene grey parrot ] or completely green [ Réunion parakeet ] . They were eaten a lot formerly , the grey especially , but both are always lean and very tough whatever sauce one puts on them . 
 The 1648 engraving possibly depicting this species was captioned with a Dutch poem , here in English naturalist Hugh Strickland 's 1848 translation : 
 = Sweet Sacrifice = 
 " Sweet Sacrifice " is a song by American rock band Evanescence . It was released on May 25 , 2007 , as the third single from their second studio album , The Open Door . It was written by Amy Lee and Terry Balsamo while the production was handled by Dave Fortman . " All That I 'm Living For " was initially planned to be the third single , as announced at live concerts and online . However , due to requests from the band and fan reaction , Wind @-@ up reconsidered its release and announced that " Sweet Sacrifice " would be the band 's third single from The Open Door . Evanescence 's lead singer Amy Lee wrote the song about the abusive relationship that inspired all of the songs on the group 's debut record Fallen ( 2003 ) . 
 " Sweet Sacrifice " is a rock song written in a moderate tempo . Several critics found a metaphor to Evanescence 's former guitarist Ben Moody in the song . Upon its release , " Sweet Sacrifice " received mostly positive reviews by critics ; many deemed the song as a highlight on the album and praised Lee 's vocals , which some described as " haunting " . Although the song failed to chart as highly as the band 's previous singles , it appeared on the charts in Turkey and Germany , as well as the Billboard Hot Mainstream Rock Tracks chart . " Sweet Sacrifice " was nominated in the category for Best Hard Rock Performance at the 50th Grammy Awards . A music video for the song , directed by Paul R. Brown , was filmed in California between March 9 and March 10 , 2007 ; It contained mostly live performances . " Sweet Sacrifice " was also added on the set @-@ list on Evanescence 's The Open Door Tour . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " Sweet Sacrifice " was written by Amy Lee and Terry Balsamo while the production was handled by Dave Fortman . It was recorded in Record Plant Studios , Los Angeles , mixed by Dave Fortman at Ocean Way Studios , Los Angeles and mastered by Ted Jensen at Sterling Sound , New York . The programming was done by DJ Lethal . Talking about The Open Door , Lee said that lot of people expected the new songs on the album to be similar with " My Immortal " ( 2003 ) before adding that " ' Weight of the World ' , ' Sweet Sacrifice ' and ' All That I 'm Living For ' are so amazing to me because of the adrenaline . Especially when we play them live . " She further revealed the inspiration behind the song , 
 It 's the one song on The Open Door that 's about the same abusive relationship which was the source of all the songs on Fallen . It was appropriate to put this song at the beginning , but it comes from a much stronger standpoint than Fallen . It 's not saying , " I 'm trapped in fear and somebody save me . " It 's saying , " Fear is only in our minds ... I 'm not afraid anymore . " 
 The band announced at live concerts and online that their upcoming third single from The Open Door would be " All That I 'm Living For , " however , due to requests from the band and fan reaction , Wind @-@ up announced that " Sweet Sacrifice " would be the band 's third single from The Open Door . The original single was released in Germany on May 25 , 2007 , featuring a basic and premium version . Elsewhere , it was scheduled for a release on May 8 , 2007 through Amazon.com but it was later canceled . 
 = = Composition = = 
 According to the sheet music published on the website Musicnotes.com by Alfred Music Publishing , " Sweet Sacrifice " is an alternative metal and gothic metal song , set in common time and performed in moderate tempo of 96 beats per minute . It is written in the key of F # minor and Lee 's vocals for the song range from the musical note of A # 3 to G5 . According to IGN 's Ed Thompson , Lee sings the lines " It 's true we 're all a little insane / But it 's so clear now that I 'm unchained " , with her " haunting vocals " . Some critics found dark lyrics like " I dream in darkness , I sleep to die , erase the silence , erase my life , our burning ashes darken the day , a world of nothingness , blow me away " accompanied with " rumbling guitars " and a string section . A writer for the website Sputnikmusic found similarities between the songs on Fallen and " Sweet Sacrifice " . The main theme for the song is getting over from an abusive relationship . Jordan Reimer of The Daily Princetonian concluded that Lee sings the lines " You know you live to break me " and " Are you still too weak to survive your mistakes ? " to Evanescence 's past guitarist Ben Moody . That was somehow echoed by Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone who said that the lyrics " One day I 'm gonna forget your name / And one sweet day , you 're gonna drown in my lost pain " are aimed at Moody . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Bill Lamb of the website About.com , put the song on his list of Top Tracks on The Open Door alongside " Lacrymosa " , " Call Me When You 're Sober " , " Your Star " and " Good Enough " . In his review of The Open Door , Ed Thompson of IGN , highlighted the song as the " best track " on the album and put it on his list " Definitely Download " . The Washington Post 's Richard Harrington wrote that " There 's no shortage of soaring , dynamic rockers on ' The Open Door , ' including ' Sweet Sacrifice , ' " among others . Brendan Butler of Cinema Blend concluded that " Call Me When You 're Sober and " Sweet Sacrifice " were the only " radio @-@ friendly " songs on the album before adding that " those are the only songs that don 't excruciatingly wane after a minute . " 
 Sara Berry of St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch wrote " the CD 's opening track , ' Sweet Sacrifice , ' features disquieting lines like ' I dream in darkness / I sleep to die / Erase the silence / Erase my life . ' The lyrics are par for the course on this lineup of overwhelmingly melancholy compositions . Still , it 's well @-@ executed music , and it 's an ideal soundtrack for life 's moodier moments . " Jon Dolan of the magazine Entertainment Weekly found the song to be a " bruising breakup lament that turns into an anthem of freedom . " Giving the song a negative review , Alex Nun of musicOMH wrote that " Sweet Sacrifice " was " a turgid attempt to recapture past glories , the heard @-@ before riffs and shockingly average vocals act as a slap from the proverbial wet fish . " The song was nominated for Best Hard Rock Performance at the 50th Grammy Awards . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 A music video directed by Paul R. Brown was filmed in Burbank , California between March 9 and March 10 , 2007 . The music video leaked onto the Internet on April 4 , 2007 , after briefly being available for digital download on iTunes Store . It initially premiered on Yahoo ! Music on April 5 . The video was compared with the psychological thriller film directed by Tarsem Singh , The Cell ( 2000 ) . Lee said that the main inspiration is " like we 're in the walls of our minds , sort of " . During an interview with MTV News , she further revealed the concept of the video , " It 's mostly live performance . It 's not so much fluff and flying and tricks and wolves and stuff . It 's more really just about the song , and that is unique for us . We usually do crazy stuff . It 's gonna be sort of like a video within the video . Since the song is our heaviest single , we really wanted to focus on mostly performance but still have something about it that 's really unique . And I think [ Paul ] really hit the nail on the head . " The video starts with Lee laying on a couch and as the song progresses , she starts singing the lyrics " It 's true , we 're all a little insane , but it 's so clear now that I am unchained " while getting up from it . She wears a red dress and red make @-@ up on her face . Later another scenes , show her singing in a room similar to The Cell , while the band is performing in another room . 
 = = = Live performances and usage in media = = = 
 " Sweet Sacrifice " was part of the set list during the band 's second worldwide The Open Door Tour ( 2006 ) . Some of the performances included those in The Great Saltair in Saltair , Utah on October 25 , 2006 , and on April 4 , 2007 in Dunkin ' Donuts Center in Providence , Rhode Island . It was later played live at the Sydney Entertainment Centre in Sydney , Australia on March 29 , 2012 . The song is used in the direct @-@ to @-@ video film Smokin ' Aces 2 : Assassins ' Ball . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 There are two versions of the single that have been released , they have different photos by Amy V. Cooper . 
 Basic Maxi CD ( Part 1 ) 
 " Sweet Sacrifice " ( Album version ) - 3 : 05 
 " Weight of the World " ( Live from Tokyo ) - 3 : 44 
 Premium Maxi CD ( Part 2 ) 
 " Sweet Sacrifice " ( Album version ) - 3 : 05 
 " Weight of the World " ( Live from Tokyo ) - 3 : 44 
 " Sweet Sacrifice " ( Radio mix ) - 3 : 03 
 Interview with Amy Lee and John <unk> * - 5 : 07 
 Note 
 ( * ) The interview was filmed for AOL Music at <unk> Studios in New York on August 3 , 2006 . It touches on the creative process of recording The Open Door as well as Lee and <unk> 's musical opinions . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits for " Sweet Sacrifice " are taken from The Open Door liner notes . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 On the German Singles Chart , " Sweet Sacrifice " peaked at number 75 , where it stayed one week . However , the song fell out of the chart on July 8 , 2007 , spending a total of 4 weeks on the chart . It also peaked at number 11 on the Turkish Singles Chart , and number 24 on Billboard 's Hot Mainstream Rock Tracks . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = John Le Mesurier = 
 John Le Mesurier ( / lə <unk> / , born John Elton Le Mesurier Halliley ; 5 April 1912 – 15 November 1983 ) was an English actor . He is perhaps best remembered for his comedic role as Sergeant Arthur Wilson in the BBC television situation comedy Dad 's Army ( 1968 – 77 ) . A self @-@ confessed " jobbing actor " , Le Mesurier appeared in more than 120 films across a range of genres , normally in smaller supporting parts . 
 Le Mesurier became interested in the stage as a young adult and enrolled at the Fay Compton Studio of Dramatic Art in 1933 . From there he took a position in repertory theatre and made his stage debut in September 1934 at the Palladium Theatre in Edinburgh in the J. B. Priestley play Dangerous Corner . He later accepted an offer to work with Alec Guinness in a John Gielgud production of Hamlet . He first appeared on television in 1938 as Seigneur de <unk> in the BBC broadcast of The Marvellous History of St Bernard . During the Second World War Le Mesurier was posted to British India , as a captain with the Royal Tank Regiment . He returned to acting and made his film debut in 1948 , starring in the second feature comedy short Death in the Hand , opposite Esme Percy and Ernest Jay . He undertook a number of roles on television in 1951 including Educating Archie alongside Tony Hancock . 
 Le Mesurier had a prolific film career , appearing mostly in comedies , usually in roles portraying figures of authority such as army officers , policemen and judges . As well as Hancock 's Half Hour , Le Mesurier appeared in Hancock 's two principal films , The Rebel and The Punch and Judy Man . In 1971 Le Mesurier received his only award : a British Academy of Film and Television Arts " Best Television Actor " award for his lead performance in Dennis Potter 's television play Traitor ; it was one of the few lead roles he played during the course of his career . 
 He took a relaxed approach to acting and felt that his parts were those of " a decent chap all at sea in a chaotic world not of his own making " . Le Mesurier was married three times , most notably to the actress Hattie Jacques . A heavy drinker of alcohol for most of his life , Le Mesurier died in 1983 , aged 71 , from a stomach haemorrhage , brought about by a complication of cirrhosis of the liver . After his death , critics reflected that , for an actor who normally took minor roles , the viewing public were " enormously fond of him " . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Le Mesurier was born John Elton Le Mesurier Halliley , in Bedford on 5 April 1912 . His parents were Charles Elton Halliley , a solicitor , and Amy Michelle ( née Le Mesurier ) , whose family were from Alderney in the Channel Islands ; both families were affluent , with histories of government service or work in the legal profession . While John was an infant the family settled in Bury St Edmunds , in West Suffolk . He was sent to school , first to Grenham House in Kent , and later to Sherborne School in Dorset where one of his fellow @-@ pupils was Alan Turing . Le Mesurier disliked both schools intensely , citing insensitive teaching methods and an inability to accept individualism . He later wrote : " I resented Sherborne for its closed mind , its collective capacity for rejecting anything that did not conform to the image of manhood as portrayed in the ripping yarns of a scouting manual " . 
 From an early age Le Mesurier had been interested in acting and performing ; as a child he had frequently been taken to the West End of London to watch Ralph Lynn and Tom Walls perform in the popular series of farces at the Aldwych Theatre . These experiences fuelled an early desire to make a career on the stage . After leaving school he was initially persuaded to follow his father 's line of work , as an articled clerk at Greene & Greene , a firm of solicitors in Bury St Edmunds ; in his spare time he took part in local amateur dramatics . In 1933 he decided to leave the legal profession , and in September of that year enrolled at the Fay Compton Studio of Dramatic Art ; a fellow @-@ student was Alec Guinness , with whom he became close friends . In July 1934 , the studio staged their annual public revue in which both Le Mesurier and Guinness took part ; among the judges for the event were John Gielgud , Leslie Henson , Alfred Hitchcock and Ivor Novello . Le Mesurier received a Certificate of Fellowship , while Guinness won the Fay Compton prize . After the revue , rather than remain at the studio for further tuition Le Mesurier took an opportunity to join the Edinburgh @-@ based Millicent Ward Repertory Players at a salary of £ <unk> ( £ 3 @.@ 50 ) a week . 
 = = = Career = = = 
 = = = = 1934 – 46 = = = = 
 The Millicent Ward repertory company typically staged evening performances of three @-@ act plays ; the works changed each week , and rehearsals were held during the daytime for the following week 's production . Under his birth name John Halliley , Le Mesurier made his stage debut in September 1934 at the Palladium Theatre in Edinburgh in the J. B. Priestley play Dangerous Corner , along with three other newcomers to the company . The reviewer for The Scotsman thought that Le Mesurier was well cast in the role . Appearances in While Parents Sleep and Cavalcade were followed by a break , as problems arose with the lease of the theatre . Le Mesurier then accepted an offer to appear with Alec Guinness in a John Gielgud production of Hamlet , which began in Streatham in the spring of 1935 and later toured the English provinces . Le Mesurier understudied Anthony Quayle 's role of Guildenstern , and otherwise appeared in the play as an extra . 
 In July 1935 , Le Mesurier was hired by the Oldham repertory company , based at the Coliseum Theatre ; his first appearance with them was in a version of the Wilson Collison play , Up in Mabel 's Room ; he was sacked after one week for missing a performance after oversleeping . In September 1935 , he moved to the Sheffield Repertory Theatre to appear in Mary , Mary , Quite Contrary , and also played Malvolio in Shakespeare 's Twelfth Night . Le Mesurier later commented on the slow progress of his career : " had I known it was going to take so long , I might well have given the whole thing up " . In 1937 he joined the Croydon Repertory Theatre , where he appeared in nine productions in 1936 and 1937 . During this period Le Mesurier changed his professional name from John Halliley to John Le Mesurier ; his biographer Graham McCann observes that " he never bothered , at least in public , to explain the reason for his decision " . Le Mesurier used his new name for the first time in the September 1937 production of Love on the Dole . 
 Le Mesurier first appeared on television in 1938 , thus becoming one of the medium 's pioneering actors . His initial appearance was in a production of The Marvellous History of St Bernard in which he appeared as Seigneur de <unk> in a play adapted from a 15th @-@ century manuscript by Henri <unk> . Alongside the television appearance , he continued to appear on stage in Edinburgh and Glasgow with the Howard and Wyndham Players , at least until late 1938 when he returned to London and re @-@ joined Croydon Repertory Theatre . His second spell with the troupe ended a few months later when , from May to October 1939 he appeared in Gas Light , first in London and subsequently on tour . The reviewer in The Manchester Guardian considered that Le Mesurier gave " a faultless performance " , and that " the character is not <unk> . One may praise it best by saying that Mr. Le Mesurier gives one a really uncomfortable feeling in the stomach " . 
 From November to December 1939 , Le Mesurier toured Britain in a production of Goodness , How Sad , during which time he met the director 's daughter , June Melville , whom he married in April 1940 . After spending January and February 1940 in French Without Tears at the Grand Theatre in Blackpool , he returned to London where he was employed by the Brixton Theatre , appearing in a series of productions . In his time in repertory , Le Mesurier took on a variety of roles across a number of genres ; his biographer Graham McCann observed that his range included " comedies and tragedies , thrillers and fantasies , tense courtroom dramas and frenzied farces , Shakespeare and Ibsen , Sheridan and Wilde , Molière and Shaw , Congreve and Coward . The range was remarkable " . 
 In September 1940 Le Mesurier 's rented home was hit by a German bomb , destroying all his possessions , including his call @-@ up papers . In the same bombing raid , the theatre in Brixton in which he was working was also hit . A few days later he reported for basic training with the Royal Armoured Corps ; in June 1941 he was commissioned into the Royal Tank Regiment . He served in Britain until 1943 when he was posted to British India where he spent the rest of the war . Le Mesurier later claimed that he had had " a comfortable war , with captaincy thrust upon me , before I was demobbed in 1946 " . 
 = = = = 1946 – 59 = = = = 
 On his return to Britain , Le Mesurier returned to acting , although he initially struggled for work , finding only a few minor roles . In February 1948 he made his film debut in the second feature comedy short Death in the Hand , which starred Esme Percy and Ernest Jay . He followed this with equally small roles in the 1949 film Mother Riley 's New Venture — although his name was misspelt on the credits as " Le <unk> " — and the 1950 crime film Dark Interval . During the same period he also frequently appeared on stage in Birmingham . 
 Le Mesurier undertook a number of roles on television in 1951 , including that of Doctor Forrest in The Railway Children , the blackmailer Eduardo Lucas in Sherlock Holmes : The Second Stain , and Joseph in the nativity play A Time to be Born . In the same year Tony Hancock joined Le Mesurier 's second wife , Hattie Jacques ( the couple had married in 1949 following his divorce from June Melville earlier that year ) in the radio series Educating Archie . Le Mesurier and Hancock became friends ; they would often go for drinking sessions around Soho , where they ended up in jazz clubs . When Hancock left Educating Archie in 1954 to work on his own radio show , Hancock 's Half Hour , he maintained his friendship with Le Mesurier , and Jacques joined the cast for the fourth series of Hancock 's show , in 1956 . 
 In 1952 , as well as appearing in the films Blind Man 's Bluff and Mother Riley Meets the Vampire , Le Mesurier also appeared as the doctor in Angry Dust at the New Torch Theatre , London . Parnell Bradbury , writing in The Times , thought Le Mesurier had played the role extraordinarily well , although Harold Hobson , writing in The Sunday Times , thought that " the trouble with Mr. John Le Mesurier 's Dr. Weston is that he approaches the man too <unk> ... [ it is ] a notion of genius that would be unacceptable anywhere outside Victorian melodrama " . In 1953 , he had a role as a bureaucrat in the short film The Pleasure Garden , which won the Prix de Fantasie <unk> at the Cannes Film Festival in 1954 . After a long run of small roles in second features , his 1955 portrayal of the registrar in Roy Boulting 's comedy Josephine and Men , " jerked him out of the rut " , according to Philip Oakes . 
 Following his appearance in Josephine and Men , John and Roy Boulting cast Le Mesurier as a psychiatrist in their 1956 Second World War film , Private 's Progress . The cast featured many leading British actors of the time , including Ian Carmichael and Richard Attenborough . Dilys Powell , reviewing for The Sunday Times , thought that the cast was " embellished " by Le Mesurier 's presence , among others . Later in 1956 Le Mesurier again appeared alongside Attenborough , with small roles in Jay Lewis 's The Baby and the Battleship and Roy Boulting 's Brothers in Law , the latter which also featured Carmichael and Terry @-@ Thomas . He was also active in television , in a variety of roles in episodes of Douglas Fairbanks Presents , a series of short dramas . 
 Le Mesurier 's friendship with Tony Hancock provided a further source of work when Hancock asked him to be one of the regular supporting actors in Hancock 's Half Hour , when it moved from radio to television . Le Mesurier subsequently appeared in seven episodes of the show between 1957 and 1960 , and then in two episodes of a follow @-@ up series entitled Hancock . In 1958 he appeared in ten films , among them Roy Boulting 's comedy Happy Is the Bride , about which Dilys Powell wrote in The Sunday Times : " [ M ] y vote for the most entertaining contributions ... goes to the two fathers , John Le Mesurier and Cecil Parker " . In 1959 , the busiest year of his career , Le Mesurier took part in 13 films , including I 'm All Right Jack , which was critically and commercially the most successful of Le Mesurier 's credited films that year , although he also had an uncredited role as a doctor in Ben @-@ Hur . 
 = = = = 1960 – 68 = = = = 
 Le Mesurier appeared in nine films in 1960 , as well as nine television programmes , including episodes of Hancock 's Half Hour , Saber of London and Danger Man . His work the following year included a part in Peter Sellers 's directorial debut Mr. Topaze , a film which failed both critically and commercially . He provided the voice of Mr. Justice Byrne in a recording of excerpts from the transcript of R v Penguin Books Ltd . — the court case concerning the publication of D. H. Lawrence 's Lady Chatterley 's Lover — which also featured Michael Hordern and Maurice Denham . J.W. Lambert , reviewing for The Sunday Times , wrote that Le Mesurier gave " precisely the air of confident incredulity which the learned gentleman exhibited in court " . Later that year he played Hancock 's office manager in the first of Tony Hancock 's two principal film vehicles , The Rebel . 
 In 1962 he appeared in Wendy Toye 's comedy film We Joined the Navy before teaming up again with Peter Sellers in Only Two Can Play , Sidney Gilliat 's film of the novel That Uncertain Feeling by Kingsley Amis ; Powell noted with pleasure " the armour of his gravity pierced by polite bewilderment " . She compared Le Mesurier with the well @-@ known American straight @-@ face comedian , John McGiver . After appearing in another Sellers film in 1962 — Waltz of the Toreadors — Le Mesurier joined him in the 1963 comedy The Wrong Arm of the Law . Powell again reviewed the pair 's film , commenting that " I thought I knew by now every shade in the acting of John Le Mesurier ( not that I could ever get tired of any of them ) ; but there seems a new shade here " . In the same year he appeared in a third Sellers film , The Pink Panther , as a defence lawyer , and in the second Tony Hancock vehicle , The Punch and Judy Man . Le Mesurier played Sandman in the latter film ; Powell wrote that the role " allowed a gentler and subtler character than usual " . He also appeared in a series of advertisements for <unk> flour in 1964 , providing the voice @-@ over for the animated character Fred the <unk> ; he continued as the voice until 1983 . 
 In a change from his usual comedic roles , Le Mesurier portrayed the Reverend Jonathan Ives in Jacques Tourneur 's 1965 science fiction film , City Under the Sea , before returning to comedy in Where the Spies Are , a comedy @-@ adventure film directed by Val Guest , which starred David Niven . In 1966 Le Mesurier also played the role of Colonel Maynard in the ITV sitcom George and the Dragon , with Sid James and Peggy Mount . The programme ran to four series between 1966 and 1968 , totalling 26 episodes . He also took a role in four episodes of a Coronation Street spin @-@ off series , Pardon the Expression , in which he starred opposite Arthur Lowe . 
 = = = = 1968 – 77 = = = = 
 In 1968 Le Mesurier was offered a role in a new BBC situation comedy playing an upper @-@ class Sergeant Arthur Wilson in Dad 's Army , although he was the second choice after Robert <unk> . Le Mesurier was unsure about taking the part as he was finishing the final series of George and the Dragon and did not want another long @-@ term television role . He was persuaded both by an increase in his fee — to £ 262 10s ( £ 262 @.@ 50 ) per episode — and by the casting of his old friend Clive Dunn as Corporal Jones . Le Mesurier was initially unsure of how to portray his character , and was advised by series writer Jimmy Perry to make the part his own . Le Mesurier decided to base the character on himself , later writing that " I thought , why not just be myself , use an extension of my own personality and behave rather as I had done in the army ? So I always left a button or two undone , and had the sleeve of my battle dress slightly turned up . I spoke softly , issued commands as if they were invitations ( the sort not likely to be accepted ) and generally assumed a benign air of helplessness " . Perry later observed that " we wanted Wilson to be the voice of sanity ; he has become John " . 
 Nicholas de Jongh , in a tribute written after Le Mesurier 's death , suggested that it was in the role of Wilson that Le Mesurier became a star . His interaction with Arthur Lowe 's character Captain George Mainwaring was described by The Times as " a memorable part of one of television 's most popular shows " . <unk> <unk> , writing for the British Film Institute 's Screenonline , agreed , and commented that " it was the hesitant exchanges of one @-@ upmanship between Le Mesurier 's Wilson , a figure of delicate gentility , and Arthur Lowe 's pompous , middle class platoon leader Captain Mainwaring , that added to its finest moments " . Le Mesurier enjoyed making the series , particularly the fortnight the cast would spend in Thetford each year filming the outside scenes . The programme lasted for nine series over nine years , and covered eighty episodes , ending in 1977 . 
 During the filming of the series in 1969 , Le Mesurier was flown to Venice over a series of weekends to appear in the film Midas Run , an Alf <unk> @-@ directed crime film that also starred Richard Crenna , Anne Heywood and Fred Astaire . Le Mesurier became friends with Astaire during the filming and they often dined together in a local cafe while watching horse @-@ racing on television . In 1971 Norman Cohen directed a feature film of Dad 's Army ; Le Mesurier also appeared as Wilson in a stage adaptation , which toured the UK in 1975 – 76 . Following the success of Dad 's Army , Le Mesurier recorded the single " A Nightingale Sang in Berkeley Square " with " Hometown " on the reverse side ( the latter with Arthur Lowe ) . This , and an album , Dad 's Army , featuring the whole cast , was released on the Warner label in 1975 . 
 In between the annual shooting of Dad 's Army , Le Mesurier acted in films , including the role of the prison governor opposite Noël Coward in the 1969 Peter Collinson @-@ directed The Italian Job . The cinema historian Amy Sargeant likened Le Mesurier 's role to the " mild demeanour " of his Sergeant Wilson character . In 1970 , Le Mesurier appeared in Ralph Thomas 's Doctor in Trouble as the purser ; he also made an appearance in Vincente Minnelli 's On a Clear Day You Can See Forever , a romantic fantasy musical . 
 In 1971 Le Mesurier played the lead role in Dennis Potter 's television play Traitor , in which he portrayed a " boozy British aristocrat who became a spy for the Soviets " ; his performance won him a British Academy of Film and Television Arts " Best Television Actor " award . Writing for the British Film Institute , Sergio Angelini considered " Le Mesurier is utterly compelling throughout in an atypical role " . Chris Dunkley , writing in The Times , described the performance as " a superbly persuasive portrait , made vividly real by one of the best performances Mr Mesurier [ sic ] has ever given " . The reviewer for The Sunday Times agreed , saying that Le Mesurier , " after a lifetime supporting other actors with the strength of a pit @-@ prop , gets the main part ; he looks , sounds and feels exactly right " . Reviewing for The Guardian , Nancy Banks @-@ Smith called the role " his Hamlet " , and said that it was worth waiting for . Although delighted to have won the award , Le Mesurier commented that the aftermath proved " something of an anticlimax . No exciting offers of work came in " . 
 Le Mesurier made a cameo appearance in Val Guest 's 1972 sex comedy Au Pair Girls , and starred alongside Warren Mitchell and Dandy Nichols in Bob Kellett 's The Alf Garnett Saga . In 1974 he played a police inspector in a similar Val Guest comedy , Confessions of a Window Cleaner , alongside Robin Askwith and Antony Booth . The following year he also narrated Bod , an animated children 's programme from the BBC ; there were thirteen episodes in total . 
 = = = = 1977 – 83 = = = = 
 In 1977 Le Mesurier portrayed Jacob Marley in a BBC television adaptation of A Christmas Carol , which starred Michael Hordern as Ebenezer Scrooge ; Sergio Angelini , writing for the British Film Institute about Le Mesurier 's portrayal , considered that " although never frightening , he does exert a strong sense of melancholy , his every move and inflection seemingly tinged with regret and remorse " . In 1979 he portrayed Sir Gawain in Walt Disney 's Unidentified Flying <unk> , directed by Russ Mayberry , and co @-@ starring Dennis Dugan , Jim Dale and Kenneth More . The film , an adaptation of Mark Twain 's novel A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur 's Court , was hailed by Time Out as " an intelligent film with a cohesive plot and an amusing script " and cited it as " one of the better Disney attempts to hop on the sci @-@ fi bandwagon " . The reviewers praised the cast , particularly Kenneth More 's Arthur and Le Mesurier 's Gawain , which they said were " rather touchingly portrayed as friends who have grown old together " . 
 Le Mesurier played The Wise Old Bird in the 1980 BBC Radio 4 series The Hitchhiker 's Guide to the Galaxy and appeared on the same station as Bilbo Baggins in the 1981 radio version of The Lord of the Rings . In the spring of 1980 he took the role of David Bliss alongside Constance Cummings — as Judith Bliss — in a production of Noël Coward 's 1920s play Hay Fever . Writing for The Observer , Robert Cushman thought that Le Mesurier played the role with " deeply grizzled torpor " , while Michael Billington , reviewing for The Guardian , saw him as a " grey , gentle wisp of a man , full of half @-@ completed gestures and seraphic smiles " . 
 He took on the role of Father Mowbray in Granada Television 's 1981 adaptation of Brideshead Revisited . He guest @-@ starred in episodes of the British comedy television series The Goodies , and in an early episode of Hi @-@ de @-@ Hi ! . His final film appearance was also Peter Sellers 's final cinema role , The Fiendish Plot of Dr. Fu Manchu , which was completed just months before Sellers 's death in July 1980 . 
 In 1982 Le Mesurier reprised the role of Arthur Wilson for It Sticks Out Half a Mile , a radio sequel to Dad 's Army , in which Wilson had become bank manager of the <unk> @-@ on @-@ Sea branch , while Arthur Lowe 's character , Captain George Mainwaring , was trying to apply for a loan to renovate the local pier . The death of Lowe in April 1982 meant that only a pilot episode was recorded , and the project was suspended . It was revived in 1982 with Lowe 's role replaced by two other Dad 's Army cast members : Pike , played by Ian Lavender , and Hodges , played by Bill Pertwee . A pilot and twelve episodes were subsequently recorded , and broadcast in 1984 . Le Mesurier also teamed up with another ex @-@ Dad 's Army colleague , Clive Dunn , to record a novelty single , " There Ain 't Much Change from a Pound These Days " / " After All These Years " , which had been written by Le Mesurier 's stepson , David Malin . The single was released on KA Records in 1982 . 
 He appeared opposite Anthony Hopkins in a four @-@ part television series , A Married Man , in March 1983 , before undertaking the narration on the short film The Passionate Pilgrim , an Eric Morecambe vehicle , which was Morecambe 's last film before his death . 
 = = = Personal life = = = 
 In 1939 , Le Mesurier accepted a role in the Robert Morley play Goodness , How Sad ! , directed by June Melville — whose father Frederick owned a number of theatres , including the Lyceum , Prince 's and Brixton . Melville and Le Mesurier soon began a romance , and were married in April 1940 . Le Mesurier was conscripted into the army in September 1940 ; after his demobilisation in 1946 , he discovered that his wife had become an alcoholic : " She became careless about appointments and haphazard professionally " . As a result , the couple separated and were divorced in 1949 . 
 In June 1947 , Le Mesurier went with fellow actor Geoffrey Hibbert to the Players ' Theatre in London , where among the performers was Hattie Jacques . Le Mesurier and Jacques began to see each other regularly , although Le Mesurier was still married , albeit estranged from his wife . In 1949 , when his divorce came through , Jacques proposed to Le Mesurier , asking him , " Don 't you think it 's about time we got married ? " . The couple married in November 1949 and had two sons , Robin and Kim . 
 Jacques began an affair in 1962 with her driver , John Schofield , who gave her the attention and support that Le Mesurier did not . When Jacques decided to move Schofield into the family home , Le Mesurier moved into a separate room and tried to repair the marriage . He later commented about this period : " I could have walked out , but , whatever my feelings , I loved Hattie and the children and I was certain — I had to be certain — that we could repair the damage " . The affair caused a downturn in his health ; he collapsed on holiday in Tangier in 1963 and was hospitalised in Gibraltar . He returned to London to find the situation between his wife and her lover was unchanged , which caused a relapse . 
 During the final stages of the breakdown of his marriage , Le Mesurier met Joan Malin at the Establishment club in Soho in 1963 . The following year he moved out of his marital house , and that day proposed to Joan , who accepted his offer . Le Mesurier allowed Jacques to bring a divorce suit on grounds of his own infidelity , to ensure that the press blamed him for the break @-@ up , thus avoiding any negative publicity for Jacques . Le Mesurier and Malin married in March 1966 . A few months after they were married , Joan began a relationship with Tony Hancock , and left Le Mesurier to move in with the comedian . Hancock was a self @-@ confessed alcoholic by this time , and was verbally and physically abusive to Joan during their relationship . After a year together , with Hancock 's violence towards her worsening , Joan attempted suicide ; she subsequently realised that she could no longer live with Hancock and returned to her husband . Despite this , Le Mesurier remained friends with Hancock , calling him " a comic of true genius , capable of great warmth and generosity , but a tormented and unhappy man " . 
 Le Mesurier was a heavy drinker , but was never noticeably drunk . In 1977 he collapsed in Australia and flew home , where he was diagnosed with cirrhosis of the liver and ordered to stop drinking . Until then he had not considered himself an alcoholic , although he accepted that " it was the cumulative effect over the years that had done the damage " . It was a year and a half before he drank alcohol again , when he avoided spirits and drank only beer . Jacques claimed that his calculated vagueness was the result of his dependence on cannabis , although according to Le Mesurier the drug was not to his taste ; he smoked it only during his period of abstinence from alcohol . Le Mesurier 's favoured pastime was visiting the jazz clubs around Soho , such as The Establishment or Ronnie Scott 's , and he observed that " listening to artists like Bill Evans , Oscar Peterson or Alan Clare always made life seem that little bit brighter " . 
 Towards the end of his life Le Mesurier wrote his autobiography , A <unk> Actor ; the book was published in 1984 , after his death . Le Mesurier 's health visibly declined from July 1983 when he was hospitalised for a short time after suffering a haemorrhage . When the condition recurred later in the year he was taken to Ramsgate Hospital ; after saying to his wife , " It 's all been rather lovely " , he slipped into a coma and died on 15 November 1983 , aged 71 . His remains were cremated , and the ashes buried at the Church of St. George the Martyr , Church Hill , Ramsgate . His epitaph reads : " John Le Mesurier . Much loved actor . Resting . " His self @-@ penned death notice in The Times of 16 November 1983 stated that he had " <unk> out " and that he " sadly misses family and friends " . 
 After Le Mesurier 's death fellow comedian Eric Sykes commented : " I never heard a bad word said against him . He was one of the great drolls of our time " . Le Mesurier 's fellow Dad 's Army actor Bill Pertwee mourned the loss of his friend , saying , " It 's a shattering loss . He was a great professional , very quiet but with a lovely sense of humour " . Director Peter Cotes , writing in The Guardian , called him one of Britain 's " most accomplished screen character actors " , while The Times obituarist observed that he " could lend distinction to the smallest part " . 
 The Guardian reflected on Le Mesurier 's popularity , observing that " No wonder so many whose lives were very different from his own came to be so enormously fond of him " . A memorial service was held on 16 February 1984 at the " Actors ' Church " , St Paul 's , Covent Garden , at which Bill Pertwee gave the eulogy . 
 = = Approach to acting = = 
 Le Mesurier took a relaxed approach to acting , saying , " You know the way you get jobbing gardeners ? Well , I 'm a jobbing actor ... as long as they pay me I couldn 't care less if my name is billed above or below the title " . Although Le Mesurier played a wide range of parts , he became known as " an indispensable figure in the gallery of second @-@ rank players which were the glory of the British film industry in its more prolific days " . He felt his characterisations owed " a lot to my customary expression of bewildered innocence " and tried to stress for many of his roles that his parts were those of " a decent chap all at sea in a chaotic world not of his own making " . 
 Philip French of The Observer considered that when playing a representative of bureaucracy , Le Mesurier " registered something ... complex . A feeling of exasperation , disturbance , anxiety [ that ] constantly lurked behind that handsome bloodhound face " . The impression he gave in these roles became an " inimitable brand of bewildered persistence under fire which Le Mesurier made his own " . The Times noted of him that although he was best known for his comedic roles , he , " could be equally effective in straight parts " , as evidenced by his BAFTA @-@ award @-@ winning role in Traitor . Director Peter Cotes agreed , adding , " he had depths unrealised through the mechanical pieces in which he generally appeared " ; while Philip Oakes considered that , " single @-@ handed , he has made more films watchable , even absorbing , than anyone else around " . 
 = = Portrayals = = 
 Le Mesurier 's second and third marriages have been the subject of two BBC Four biographical films , the 2008 Hancock and Joan on Joan Le Mesurier 's affair with Tony Hancock — with Le Mesurier played by Alex Jennings — and the 2011 Hattie on Jacques 's affair with John Schofield — with Le Mesurier played by Robert Bathurst . 
 = = Filmography and other works = = 
 = Strawberry Panic ! = 
 Strawberry Panic ! ( <unk> ・ <unk> ! , <unk> Panikku ! ) is a series of Japanese illustrated short stories written by Sakurako Kimino , which focus on a group of teenage girls attending three affiliated all @-@ girl schools on Astraea Hill . A common theme throughout the stories is the intimate lesbian relationships between the characters . The original artist was Chitose Maki , who was succeeded by Namuchi Takumi when production of the manga and light novels began . 
 Following Strawberry Panic ! ' s first run in Dengeki G 's Magazine it was six months before results began to indicate that the series was a success , and that its fans were growing in number ; the manga and light novels which followed were a reflection of its popularity . The series became sufficiently popular for Seven Seas Entertainment to license the manga series and light novels for English language distribution . Strawberry Panic ! was one of the debut titles on the company 's light novel and yuri manga production lines . An anime series was produced in 2006 by Madhouse and is licensed by Media Blasters . A visual novel was produced in 2006 by MediaWorks for the PlayStation 2 . 
 There is a slight difference in the title of the series between media and national affiliation . The original short stories , manga , light novels , and video game used the exclamation mark in the title ; the anime excluded it . When the manga and light novel series were licensed for English language distribution , Seven Seas Entertainment did not use the exclamation mark in the title . The appearance of the logo for Strawberry Panic ! has changed four times . The subtitle " Girls ' School in Fullbloom " was added during the short stories stage , and later appeared on the Japanese covers of the light novels , manga , and video game version , but was excluded from the anime adaptation and the English covers of the light novels and manga . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The setting for Strawberry Panic ! is Astraea Hill ( <unk> , <unk> no Oka ) , a very large hilltop where the three affiliated schools of Miator , Spica and Lulim , are located . Each school has its own student council , which governs the matters of each respective school . Periodically the three student councils , along with the Etoiles , meet in the Astraea Joint Student Council . The Astraea Hill school system employs the Scottish system of grade numbering . Students are ranged from grades one through six , the equivalent of the three years of junior @-@ high and high school in Japan , and seventh through twelfth grade in North America . 
 The hill is known as a sacred area which no men are allowed to enter . A prominent feature is a very large Catholic church in the center of the hill near a small lake ; the church can be seen from a long distance away . There is a horse ranch at Spica . The students may go and study for their classes at a library on the lake 's shore . Although only implied in the anime , the manga explains that the library building has another name , " The Secret Garden " . It is well @-@ known on campus as a rendezvous for secret lovers . 
 Students living on campus occupy a dormitory referred to as the " Strawberry Dorms " ( <unk> , Ichigo Sha , lit . " Strawberry House " ) , although its correct name is Astraea Dormitory , named after Astraea Hill . The building is a triangular shape , allowing for the segregation of students from the three schools ; each section is about the same size . It was built about 100 years before the story begins , around the same time that Miator was established , for students whose homes are far away . Each student is assigned a roommate in their year until graduation . If there is an odd number of students enrolled in a given year , one of the new students must live alone until a student in their year transfers into their school . 
 The building 's name is based on its similarity to the cross @-@ section of a strawberry viewed from above . When Strawberry Panic ! was initially created , the three schools were arranged in a triangle , with the Strawberry Dorms in the center , and the dormitory was not a single building but three separate dormitories also arranged in a triangle around a central courtyard . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The plot of Strawberry Panic ! revolves around the lives of the adolescents who attend one of three affiliated all @-@ girl schools which share a campus and dormitories . The schools are : St. Miator 's Girls ' Academy , St. Spica 's Girls ' Institute , and St. Lulim 's Girls ' School . There are twelve characters the story revolves around , four at each school . The story 's main character is Nagisa Aoi , a young girl entering her fourth year at St. Miator after being transferred from another school . On first entering the campus grounds , she is overcome with joy by the overall appearance of the surrounding area , but her joy is soon turned to sorrow as she accidentally stumbles down a hill , causing her to be lost and disoriented . While walking around the grounds trying to work out where she is , Nagisa comes across an older student named Shizuma Hanazono , who happens to be Astraea Hill 's Etoile , a very important person who acts as a representative between the different schools and has specific duties that she must fulfill . Nagisa is instantly overcome by Shizuma 's beauty , and after Shizuma kisses her on the forehead , Nagisa loses consciousness and awakens in the school 's infirmary . In an adjacent chair is another girl of the same age , Tamao Suzumi , who informs her that they are to be roommates in the dormitory . 
 In the ensuing story , Nagisa is introduced to other students from each of the three schools ; some she admires , some she is intimidated by , and some are merely friends encountered while attending St. Miator . The series encompasses the relationships the characters build with each other , climaxing whenever two of the characters start dating . The central focuses of Strawberry Panic ! are the lesbian relationships and friendships between the girls from the three schools and the Etoile position and competition ; the anime is more relationship @-@ heavy while the manga is more competition @-@ heavy . The story of what happens to the other half of St. Miator 's Etoile pairing is explored in the latter portion of the anime . Depending on the media type , the depiction of the relationships between the girls is variously presented , with more explicit fan service – appealing visuals of the girls in provocative situations – in the anime adaptation than in the manga or light novels . A hint of astronomical star imagery is seen throughout the series , as well as minor Catholic religious undertones including a St. Mary statue on campus and a large Catholic church in the center of Astraea Hill . 
 = = = Main characters and schools = = = 
 At each of the three schools , there are four main characters , who comprise the original twelve characters created for the short stories when the series began . Only those twelve appear in the subsequently adapted visual novel version . Other characters were introduced in the manga and light novel versions to create plotlines and conflict , and these additional characters are also featured in the anime adaptation . 
 St. Miator 's Girls ' Academy 
 St. Miator 's Girls ' Academy ( <unk> , Sei <unk> <unk> ) , the oldest of the three schools which has a history of over 100 years , is known for upholding old traditions . It was founded on a monastery and is seen as the school for " brides " , reinforced by the existence of extracurricular classes including tea ceremony , flower arrangement , and Japanese dancing . It is not unusual for students to be engaged before graduation . The school uniform is a long black dress , designed in the Gothic Lolita fashion . At Miator , the class names are associated with objects from nature , such as moon ( 月 , tsuki ) , flower ( 花 , hana ) and snow ( <unk> , yuki ) . In the Strawberry Dorms , there is a concept called the room temp system for students from Miator . Every underclassman entering the dormitories , if they are chosen to serve the upperclassman as room temps , perform maid duties , which include cleaning the room of the students they are assigned to serve . 
 Nagisa Aoi is the main character of the story . She is a cheerful girl who finds pleasure in making new friends , which she finds easy to do because of her open personality and sociable attitude . The first person she meets at Miator is Shizuma Hanazono , a mysterious upperclassman and the Etoile as the story begins , which gives Miator significant influence . Nagisa at first finds that she is strangely affected when in the presence of Shizuma , who in turn is extremely interested in Nagisa in both the manga and the anime . The next girl she meets is Tamao Suzumi , who becomes her close friend and roommate . Tamao is well regarded among her fellow Miator students ; among the first @-@ years , she is seen as a viable Etoile candidate . She expresses some light and playful interest in Nagisa , but it is much less overt than Shizuma 's interest and is very downplayed in the manga . The last main character from Miator is Chiyo <unk> , a timid first year student who is employed as the room temp for Nagisa and Tamao ; in the anime , she deeply admires Nagisa . 
 St. Spica 's Girls ' Institute 
 St. Spica 's Girls ' Institute ( <unk> , Sei Supika Jogakuin ) has the white colored buildings and uniforms , and was built after Miator . The school prides itself in advancing the independence of women who play a role in improving society . It is well known for its culture and the accomplishments of its sports program compared to the other two schools . Spica has what is known as the St. Spica Choir , or the " Saintly Chorus , " which consists of students from Spica who perform at special events and even concerts for students at Astraea Hill . At Spica , the class names are numbers in French , such as un ( one ) , deux ( two ) , and trois ( three ) . Spica and Miator compete with each other quite aggressively , which often ends in dispute when students from these two schools get together . 
 Hikari Konohana , a shy and quiet girl , is the main focus among the main characters who attend Spica . The next Spica character is Yaya <unk> , a rebellious girl who is Hikari 's best friend and roommate in the dormitory . In the anime , she is very much enamored with Hikari , but Hikari sees her as a friend ; in the manga , Yaya is not a prominent character . Both she and Hikari are members of the St. Spica Choir . Hikari meets an older girl named Amane Ohtori early on in the story who is seen much like a prince from a fairy tale by other Spica students due to often riding a white horse named Star Bright . Amane is admired by many of the students from Spica as well as students from the other two schools , although she does not enjoy the attention . In the anime , Hikari admires her deeply , and she and Amane have mutual interest in each other . The final girl from Spica is Tsubomi <unk> , a young first year student who acts maturely for her age and gets on Yaya 's nerves . She too is in the St. Spica Choir , although Hikari was her main motivation for joining . In the anime , her interest in Hikari seems to purely be one of friendship ; in the manga , she , like Yaya , is not a prominent character . Tsubomi once remarked that Yaya was more skilled than Hikari at singing in the choir . 
 St. Lulim 's Girls ' School 
 St. Lulim 's Girls ' School ( <unk> ・ <unk> , Sei Ru Rimu <unk> ) ( originally Le Lim ) is the newest of the three schools , and has pink colored buildings and uniforms . Its uniform is modeled after a traditional Japanese school uniform style . At Lulim , the class names are the letters from the Latin alphabet : A , B , C , etc . Students at St. Lulim 's are traditionally free and relaxed , and are rarely seen fighting . The students enjoy a lot of freedom in terms of activities , or the clubs they are allowed to form . In effect , there are a wide range of clubs at St. Lulim 's ranging from dancing , to cooking , to anything else a group of at least three people can think up . 
 Of the three schools , St. Lulim has the least emphasis on romance between characters , although the Lulim characters are typically found together . The leader of their friendly group is Chikaru Minamoto , the student council president of Lulim , and a born leader . She has a friendly and supportive personality which she often uses to offer advice or simply a shoulder to cry on . The other three girls include Kizuna Hyūga , a very outgoing and excitable girl who enjoys following Chikaru 's decisions , finding fun in doing so . She is very expressive in her actions and words , not wasting a chance to introduce herself to anyone new . Her close friend is Remon Natsume , who is much like Kizuna in personality , but is not as accident @-@ prone as her . Of the pair , Kizuna is the more talkative ; Remon often agrees with her companion and will offer up an opinion when need be . Lastly , there is Kagome <unk> , the youngest of the group , who is typically accompanied by her stuffed bear Percival ( <unk> , <unk> ) which she often talks to as if it were alive . Although she does not talk or express her emotions much , she has a heightened perception of others ' emotions and can tell when those around her are distraught or in emotional pain . 
 = = = Etoile system = = = 
 Etoile ( <unk> , Etowāru ) is a French word meaning star . The Etoile system of Astraea Hill is employed as the internal politics between the schools and governs school operations . Little is shown as to the influence the teachers and sisters have on the inter @-@ school politics . The system is designed for two Etoiles to be instated at the same time in order to work as a team . In the anime , Shizuma Hanazono is the sole Etoile , the other Etoile having died , which is explained in the latter part of the story . The two Etoiles are seen as figureheads for Astraea Hill . Although Astraea has three schools , both Etoiles must come from the same school . They have certain specific duties , such as greeting new students arriving at Astraea Hill , participating in important school events , and serving as mediator between disputes in student council meetings of the three schools , among others . They are given a private greenhouse in which to grow flowers for use during school events . 
 The Etoiles are elected after going through what is known as The Etoile Election ( <unk> , Etowāru @-@ sen ) , which consists of three competitions in the light novels and the manga versions . The higher scoring pairs from the first two competitions carry on to the third competition , and the pair that wins the third competition becomes the Etoile Couple . In the anime , the competition aspect of the story is toned down . Still , it facilitates the culmination of the story in the finale , and thus serves an important purpose . Once the winners have been named , a special ceremony marks the end of the election , at which the president of the student council from the school that won the election presents two necklaces for the winners to wear during their tenure as Etoiles . They are both identical except for the colors of the pendants : one is red , the other is blue . The older student receives the blue pendant and the younger of the two is given the red pendant . 
 = = Production = = 
 Since the first issue of ASCII Media Works ' Dengeki G 's Magazine was published , the editors of the magazine have hosted reader participation games whose outcome is directly influenced by the people who read the magazine . Strawberry Panic ! ' s origin was in the October 2003 issue of Dengeki G 's Magazine where it was announced after the ending of Sakurako Kimino 's previous work Sister Princess that a new reader participation project would start the following month . In the November 2003 issue , the first batch of characters from St. Miator were introduced ( Nagisa , Shizuma , Tamao , and Chiyo ) and it was revealed how readers could participate in the project . The initial system had the three main girls of Nagisa , Hikari , and Kizuna ( given without surnames ) who were sisters and at the same time younger sisters of the readers of the magazine , effectively putting the reader in the position of the elder brother . Each girl entered her respective school and became the main character of that school . It was explained that the coupling of the main characters could be to an upperclassman , a classmate , or an underclassman , but had to stay within the school they attended . For example , Nagisa , who attended Miator could not be coupled with another character from either Spica or Lulim at first . Playing the role of the elder brother , the reader gave advice to the younger sisters who were bewildered by their new lives at each of the schools . Thus , the readers had the ability to influence the coupling formations which would later be written by Kimino as short stories serialized in Dengeki G 's Magazine . 
 In December 2003 , the characters from Spica ( Hikari , Amane , Yaya , and Tsubomi ) and Lulim ( Kizuna , Chikaru , Remon , and Kagome ) were introduced and in the January 2004 issue the first illustrations of the three schools and the Strawberry Dorms were published , drawn by Chitose Maki ; the reader participation game began in this issue . Polls were posted in the January 2004 issue where the readers could vote on how the story would start and progress in the following months . Before the votes were counted , the first three short stories were written and published in the February 2004 issue of Dengeki G 's Magazine . Each story featured an illustration of the two girls who were the couple paired in each respective story . 
 When the results of the polls were printed in the March 2004 issue , the rules of the game had been changed from the original concept , showing that readers wanted to focus on the relationships between the girls , and in this respect , the readers could vote on who they wanted to be coupled together . The number of votes for this first round were less than 2000 . Noting this , the editorial staff lifted the restriction on only coupling within the same school , along with the restriction of only allowing the three main girls of Nagisa , Hikari , and Kizuna to couple . This resulted in a total of 66 different possibilities between the twelve characters in the series . In this issue , it was explained that four events were planned for the stories that followed : Easter , Athletic Carnival , Cultural Festival , and Christmas Bazaar . The " Etoile " title was born in this issue , which was initially used to crown the best couple voted first by the readers in each of the four events to follow . These events were going to be carried out by the three schools in cooperation . It became such that the planning of the schools resulted in them in a triangle position , having the dormitories at the center . The reader 's position as the elder brother was canceled in this issue , and the game became a simple popularity vote for coupling . Due to this new system , Nagisa , Hikari , and Kizuna ceased to be sisters ; surnames were later added to clarify this . After the first story arc of the short stories concluded , it was shown that the number of votes had increased sharply due to the new voting mechanisms . The Etoile voting was announced in the July 2004 issue to take place every month as opposed to every two months which had been the case beforehand . The deadline for voting was shifted to the middle of every month , and online voting was introduced . In September 2004 , the voting for the next Etoile was shifted to be online @-@ only ; the voting for the Dormitory Panic arc became mail voting only . 
 The reader participation game ended after ten rounds of voting in the February 2005 issue of Dengeki G 's Magazine where it was announced that the series would be continued in other forms , such as the light novels and manga that followed . The original short stories and the poll results of the reader participation game were used as a basis for subsequent releases of Strawberry Panic ! . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Short stories = = = 
 The first results of the polls from the reader participation project appeared in the form of the first three short stories which resulted from direct fan involvement in the March 2004 issue of Dengeki G 's Magazine . The stories were written by Sakurako Kimino and illustrated by Chitose Maki . Over the following months , the stories continued , producing the first story arc named the Etoile Chapter ( <unk> , Etowāru @-@ hen ) containing eighteen stories which ran between March and July 2004 . Due to the concerns that there was not enough time between the Athletic Festival ( an early summer event ) and the Cultural Festival ( an autumn event ) , the second , and last , story arc named the Dormitory Panic Chapter ( <unk> , <unk> Panikku @-@ hen ) containing seven stories began the next month , running between August 2004 and January 2005 . The second arc 's stories , which were longer than the earlier pieces , involved taking one of the three main characters , performing coupling for them with one of the other eleven girls and presenting them in various situations . None of the original stories were ever published again in bound volumes . The stories themselves were more or less vignettes , in which each gave a brief glimpse into what was referred to as a " yuri coupling " . 
 Between May and September 2005 , a revised series of the short stories was produced ; once per month , five more supplementary short stories were published during this time period , each of which was longer than any of the previous pieces . Although each individual story had its own title , the stories were under the collective title of " The Girls , who art in heaven " . After the ending of this short compilation in September 2005 , it was decided that the original illustrator , Chitose Maki , would be replaced by Namuchi Takumi for future Strawberry Panic ! projects . 
 = = = Internet radio show = = = 
 Between November 2005 and December 2006 , Lantis Web Radio hosted a radio show entitled Mai & Ai no Dengeki G 's Radio Strawberry Panic ! : Oneesama to Ichigo <unk> ( <unk> & <unk> ’ <unk> <unk> ・ <unk> ! ~ <unk> ~ ) . The show was hosted by Mai Nakahara , who voiced Nagisa Aoi in the anime edition , and Ai Shimizu , who voiced both Tamao Suzumi and Kizuna Hyūga in the anime . The show contained sixty @-@ one episodes , which were divided between three CDs ; the first went on sale on March 8 , 2006 . The other two releases came out on July 5 , 2006 and January 11 , 2007 in Japan . The radio show included nine guests who had played other voice acting roles in the anime version , and Rino , singer of the opening theme " Sweetest " in the PlayStation 2 game version . 
 = = = Manga = = = 
