 The Strawberry Panic ! manga , written by Sakurako Kimino and illustrated by Namuchi Takumi , was serialized in Dengeki G 's Magazine between September 30 , 2005 and February 28 , 2007 with a new chapter released once a month . Two bound volumes have been published in Japan under MediaWorks ' Dengeki Comics label . The first went on sale on March 27 , 2006 featuring Nagisa and Shizuma on the cover , and the second volume came out on October 27 , 2006 featuring Nagisa and Tamao on the cover . While the manga 's story is unfinished , Strawberry Panic ! has not made an appearance in Dengeki G 's Magazine since the publication of the April 2007 issue on February 28 , 2007 . Major differences between the anime and manga center around the plot and character interaction . Characters have vastly different character designs , such as Shion <unk> and Kaname <unk> . The manga introduces the Etoile election early on while the anime waits until the latter part of the series for dramatic effect . The first volume was released in English on December 23 , 2007 , the second in March 2008 , and the omnibus with two additional chapters in October 2010 , published by Seven Seas Entertainment . 
 = = = Light novels = = = 
 The announcement that a Strawberry Panic ! light novel series was to be written based on the original short stories appeared in the April 2005 issue of Dengeki G 's Magazine . Work on writing and illustrating the novels began in May 2005 , by the same two people who worked on the manga . The announcement that the writing was finished appeared in the September 2005 issue of the same magazine , although the first novel was published by MediaWorks on their Dengeki Bunko publishing label , on March 10 , 2006 . The first volume had Shizuma and Nagisa on the cover and the second volume , released on August 9 , 2006 , had Amane and Hikari on the cover . The third and last volume , released on December 10 , 2006 , had Chikaru and Kizuna on the cover . 
 Seven Seas Entertainment announced on September 13 , 2006 that they had licensed the right to release the English translations of the Strawberry Panic ! light novels and the manga series . After several delays , the English version of the first light novel was released in March 2008 , and the second volume light novel was released on July 8 , 2008 . An omnibus volume containing the three light novels was released in June 2011 . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 The anime series , entitled Strawberry Panic ( without the exclamation mark ) , was produced by the Japanese animation studio Madhouse and directed by Masayuki <unk> . The series was composed by Tatsuhiko <unk> , and featured two other screenwriters Hideo Takayashiki and Kazuyuki <unk> . The character design was done by <unk> Sakai , working from the original designs by Chitose Maki and later Namuchi Takumi . The twenty @-@ six episode anime aired in Japan between April 3 and September 25 , 2006 , and has a central yuri theme . 
 The anime series is mainly based on the short stories and manga which preceded it . The anime focuses on Nagisa Aoi and , to a slightly lesser extent , Hikari Konohana , and the three girls that they each are or become close to at their respective schools ; some admire them or wish to be their friend , and others are vying for their affections . Of particular focus are the romantic relationships between Nagisa and Shizuma Hanazono and between Hikari and Amane Ōtori . The series culminates in the election of the new Etoile pairing , although this aspect of the story is downplayed compared to the manga . Fan service , or giving appealing visuals of the girls nude or in provocative situations , is seen in the anime , but only briefly . 
 In Japan , eight DVD compilations , in regular and special editions , were released containing three episodes each , between June 23 , 2006 , and January 25 , 2007 . The regular and special editions are similar in content , but the special editions are packaged in jacket sleeve , and contain an original booklet which includes additional merchandise such as portable plates and straps . The special edition includes different versions of the opening and closing themes , and deleted scenes . Media Blasters released five English @-@ subtitled DVDs of Strawberry Panic between March 4 , 2007 and November 11 , 2008 . The English @-@ subtitled DVDs contain five episodes , except for its first release , which contains six . The series premiered on Toku in the United States on December 31 , 2015 . 
 = = = Audio CDs = = = 
 The original soundtrack for the anime adaptation was first released on September 6 , 2006 by Lantis . On September 21 , 2006 , the soundtrack for the video game was released by the same company . The two opening themes for the anime , " Shōjo Meiro de Tsukamaete " and " Kuchibiru Daydream " were sung by Aki Misato . The " Shōjo Meiro de Tsukamaete " single was released on April 26 , 2006 , and reached an Oricon chart position of thirty @-@ eight ; " Kuchibiru Daydream " was released on August 9 , 2006 , and achieved forty @-@ seven in the charts . The two main closing themes for the anime , " Himitsu Dolls " ( released on May 24 , 2006 ) and " Ichigo Tsumi Monogatari " ( released on August 23 , 2006 ) , were sung by Mai Nakahara and Ai Shimizu as a duet . The final closing theme in the last episode was a slower remix version of " Shōjo Meiro de Tsukamaete " , sung by Aki Misato . 
 There have been three drama CDs released based on the anime adaptation . The first , entitled Strawberry Panic Lyric 1 " Miator volume " was released in Japan on July 26 , 2006 . It featured the same voice actresses from the anime , and featured thirteen characters . It came with a CD containing twelve tracks of small scenes involving the characters in various situations . The second drama CD , Strawberry Panic Lyric 2 " Spica volume " was released on October 25 , 2006 and a third was released on December 6 , 2006 titled Strawberry Panic Lyric 3 " Lulim volume " . 
 = = = Visual novel = = = 
 A visual novel named Strawberry Panic ! Girls ' School in Fullbloom was released on the PlayStation 2 on August 24 , 2006 in Japan by MediaWorks . Two versions of the game were released , a regular edition and a limited edition which included a drama CD ; there is a different cover for each of the versions . The drama CD contained three tracks , one for students of each school . 
 There are three playable characters , one from each of the schools : Nagisa , Hikari , and Kizuna . They have no family names in the game , as when the series of short stories were first published . While Ai Shimizu maintained her role for Kizuna in the game , Miyuki Sawashiro performed the voice for Tamao Suzumi . The game features a " boy mode " and a " girl mode " . Choosing the male version means that the story is told via emails from the player 's younger sister ; choosing the female version means that the story is told in the player 's own diary . The player is given the chance to pair their chosen character with one of the other nine available girls , not including the other possible playable characters . There are twenty @-@ seven different combinations depending on which girl the player chooses at the start of the game . 
 The game is played over the course of a school semester ; the first day of school is on April 1 . In " boy mode " , each day concludes with a super deformed image of the heroine the player chose at the onset of the game slumped over her computer in her room ; an email message from a girl that she interacted with during the day in on the monitor . As the heroine sleeps , the object of her affection appears in a thought bubble above her head . In " girl mode " , she is seen writing in her diary instead . The first day in the game requires no interaction from the player . The player gets through the first day by reading the text and getting acquainted with the girls . The game uses an angel and devil system where miniature angel and devil versions of each girl float beside her when critical decisions have to be made ; this is not restricted to the three playable characters . It also features a " Strawberry chance " system , where the outcome of some scenes changes if the player presses one of the analog sticks fast enough after the message " Chance ! " ( <unk> ! , <unk> ! ) is displayed in the upper right screen corner . 
 = = Reception = = 
 During the reader participation game running in Dengeki G 's Magazine , voting polls were first posted in the January 2004 issue of Dengeki G 's Magazine , which were to determine who would be the subjects in the couplings between the characters of each respective school . The results were printed in the March 2004 issue , after about 1 @,@ 979 votes had been cast . The three couples with the highest number of votes were Nagisa / Tamao at 481 votes , Hikari / Amane at 343 votes , and Kizuna / Chikaru at 260 votes . The results from the second round of voting were published in the May 2004 issue of the magazine which included the figures for the sixty @-@ four different combinations between the twelve girls . The three couples with the highest number of votes this time were Nagisa / Tamao again at 150 votes , Nagisa / Amane at 114 votes , and Hikari / Amane for a second time at 102 votes . In the third round of voting in the July 2004 issue , the number of votes increased dramatically ; the number one voted couple for the third time in a row was Nagisa / Tamao at 1 @,@ 215 votes . 
 The Strawberry Panic ! short stories were initially panned by Erica Friedman as being " distinctly derivative of Maria @-@ sama ga Miteru " . Friedman is the president of Yuricon , an anime convention geared towards fans of yuri anime and manga , and ALC Publishing , a publishing house dedicated to yuri . Friedman described the stories as , " candy apples without the apples - all sugary , and gooey and sweet , with not much of anything else to support it " . After initially having this stance for the entire series , including an early opinion on the anime version , Friedman later changed her opinion slightly , writing that " [ the anime ] turned out pretty good " . She went on to say , " There 's no denying that Strawberry Panic ! wasn 't brilliant , but considering that it was meant to be trashy , it pulled out a few moments of dignity and elegance out of the trash heap . " Jason Thompson regarded the Strawberry Panic ! manga as " a nearly plotless cascade [ where ] everything seems rushed , and it is difficult to keep track of the characters and plot . " 
 The five subtitled DVDs released by Media Blasters were reviewed by Anime News Network ( ANN ) . The first DVD was declared rental @-@ worthy by ANN , citing the characters as being " a lot of fun " and the series as being a " very laid @-@ back show " that would work well as a relaxing watch over a weekend . The content , however , was described as getting the series off to a " slow start " , with limitations of the first six episodes being the lack in fan service , humor , and that it " struggles to find any other reason to be compelling " . The second DVD , containing episodes seven through eleven , was reviewed as failing to " materialize much real plot " and content of the episodes was described as existing " only to appeal to otaku who can get excited about moe content " . The third DVD , compiling episodes twelve through sixteen , shows " signs of an actual plot " and contains a " sudden explosion of fan service " , which are noted as " noteworthy developments " in the review . In the fourth DVD , containing episodes seventeen through twenty @-@ one , " the series ' romantic side does finally pay off with a romantic arc that actually engages " . In the fifth and final DVD containing the last five episodes , the Hikari and Amane relationship is described as lacking chemistry , although the Nagisa and Shizuma pairing is regarded as satisfying . 
 Strawberry Panic ! was one of the premier titles in the Light Novel and Strawberry ( for yuri manga ) production lines when it was licensed for English language distribution by Seven Seas Entertainment . In an interview with Seven Seas Entertainment founder Jason DeAngelis , he was posed the question , " How do you attract a fan base for a novel before its release in English ? " His response was , " We try to choose titles that are already well @-@ known , like Pita @-@ Ten , Shinigami no Ballad or Strawberry Panic ! .... In terms of attracting a fan base , though , in the end it 's all about word @-@ of @-@ mouth . If the material is great , it will stand out on its own and find its audience . The small format that we 're publishing these books in is frankly stunning , and it will definitely attract fans who may not have heard of the property otherwise . " 
 Strawberry Panic ! Girls ' School in Fullbloom received a total review score of 26 / 40 ( out of the four individual review scores of 6 , 7 , 7 , and 6 ) from the Japanese gaming magazine Famitsu . The game is listed by MediaWorks as one of their most @-@ popular game titles . 
 = Where 's Herb ? = 
 Where 's Herb ? was an advertising campaign for the fast food chain Burger King in 1985 and 1986 . The television commercials featured a fictional character named Herb , who was described as never having eaten a Burger King burger in his life . They called on fans to visit their local Burger King in the hope of finding Herb and winning a prize . The campaign also included an " I 'm not Herb " promotion , in which customers could get a discounted Whopper by including the phrase in their order . At first , people were confused because they did not know what Herb looked like . When his appearance was revealed , however , many people lost interest in the promotion . The promotion was poorly received and was the last campaign that the J. Walter Thompson firm was hired to design for Burger King . 
 = = Campaign = = 
 When the commercials were created , Burger King was suffering due to their marketing efforts . The promotion was designed to counter the marketing efforts of McDonald 's , which was spending an estimated US $ 80 to 100 million to promote the <unk> ( McDonald 's Lettuce and Tomato ) , and Wendy 's , which had found success with its " Where 's the beef ? " commercials . The Herb commercials , launched in November 1985 , were created by the J. Walter Thompson advertising firm at an expense of approximately US $ 40 million . Donald Dempsey , J. Walter Thompson 's Executive Vice President of Marketing , oversaw the creation of the campaign , and it continued under the direction of Tom Sawyer , the company 's Vice President of Marketing . Before settling on the name Herb , the firm considered such names as Mitch and Oscar . 
 The campaign began with three weeks of " cryptic " messages designed to create interest in the promotion . Herb was mentioned in newspaper advertisements , on banners at football games , and in flyers distributed to the public . On November 24 , 1985 , the first commercials were aired on CBS , NBC , and ABC . The premise of the commercials was that Herb was the only person in the United States who had not eaten a burger from Burger King . The advertising agency created a fictional biography for the character , claiming that he was raised in Wisconsin , had worked in a cheese factory , and had also sold decoy ducks . The character is commonly referred to as " Herb the Nerd " . 
 The Herb character was played by actor Jon <unk> , who would randomly appear at Burger King restaurants nationwide . Herb 's identity was not revealed until Super Bowl XX in January 1986 ; he was shown to be wearing white socks , black " flood pants " , and thick @-@ rimmed glasses . If a customer spotted Herb at a Burger King , he or she would win $ 5 @,@ 000 . Everyone in the restaurant when Herb was discovered was also entered into a draw for the promotion 's grand prize of $ 1 million . The draw was won by Christopher Kelly of Louisville , Kentucky , who was present when Herb was spotted at the Burger King in the city 's Oxmoor Center mall . 
 In addition to encouraging people to search for Herb , Burger King added an " I 'm not Herb " promotion to their marketing campaign . Because Burger King claimed to be angry at Herb for not eating at their restaurants , they offered a 99 @-@ cent Whopper hamburger to everybody except Herb . To get the discounted price , customers had to say , " I 'm not Herb " while ordering . Customers named Herb were told to say , " I 'm not the Herb you 're looking for " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The campaign led to controversy in early 1986 . A 15 @-@ year @-@ old boy spotted Herb at the Burger King restaurant in Bessemer , Alabama and believed that he had won $ 5 @,@ 000 . Because he was under the age of 16 , the minimum age for participating in the promotion , the prize money was given to the boy 's older friend , who was with him at the time . Burger King defended their decision , stating that the restriction was intended to dissuade students from skipping school to search for Herb . The boy 's parents complained to their representative in the Alabama State Senate . The matter was then brought before the full State Senate , which passed a resolution condemning Burger King 's actions as " consumer fraud " . 
 The World Wrestling Federation had Herb appear as a guest timekeeper during the boxing match between Roddy Piper and Mr. T at WrestleMania 2 at the Nassau Coliseum on April 7 , 1986 . Clara <unk> , the star of the " Where 's the beef ? " commercials from Wendy 's , also appeared at the event , working as guest timekeeper during a battle royal . 
 The promotion met with some positive reviews . Time called it " clever " , and a columnist for the Chicago Tribune stated that Herb was " one of the most famous men in America " . Ultimately , however , the Herb promotion has been described as a flop . The advertising campaign lasted three months before it was discontinued . One Burger King franchise owner stated that the problem was that " there was absolutely no relevant message " . Although some initial results were positive , the mystique was lost after Herb 's appearance was revealed during the Super Bowl . Burger King 's profits fell 40 % in 1986 . As a result of the poorly received campaign , Burger King dropped J. Walter Thompson from their future advertising . The US $ 200 million account was initially given to N. W. Ayer . After 18 months it went to another agency , as Ayer was having problems , and Burger King wanted to improve the bottom line . 
 Other restaurants , including Wendy 's , capitalized on the promotion by advertising that Herb ate at their locations . 
 = The D 'oh @-@ cial Network = 
 " The D 'oh @-@ cial Network " , also known as The ( Annoyed Grunt ) <unk> Network , is the eleventh episode of the twenty @-@ third season of the American animated sitcom The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 15 , 2012 . In the episode , Lisa is sad that she has no real friends . She discovers that it is easier to make friends on the Internet and therefore creates a social networking website called SpringFace . It becomes incredibly popular in Springfield and Lisa gets many online friends . However , they still ignore her in real life , and the website starts to cause trouble in the town when people use it while driving and cause accidents . Lisa is put on trial and the court orders her to close down SpringFace . 
 The episode is a satire of the social networking website Facebook and parodies the film The Social Network , which tells the story of how Facebook was founded . The Winklevoss twins , who sued Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg for stealing their idea , are featured in the episode . Actor Armie Hammer portrayed the twins in both The Social Network and " The D 'oh @-@ cial Network " . This episode also features a guest appearance by talk show host David Letterman as himself , appearing in the Simpsons opening sequence . Around 11 @.@ 48 million Americans tuned in to watch the episode during its original broadcast . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode starts in a courtroom where Lisa is on trial . The Blue @-@ Haired Lawyer is accusing her of bringing devastation upon Springfield because of her selfish desire to be accepted by others . Lisa starts telling everyone in the courtroom about her side of the story . A few months ago , she and her family went to the new mall in town . There , she encountered her schoolmates Sherri and Terri and asked them if she could spend some time with them at the mall . The two twins said no to Lisa , which made her realize that she has no real friends . Later , Lisa went on Homer 's computer and discovered that it is easier to make friends online than in real life , and thus she started a social networking website called SpringFace to get friends . The site became instantly popular among all the citizens of Springfield and Lisa made over a thousand friends in a short period of time . However , Lisa soon noticed that these friends only talked to her on SpringFace and not in real life . She also discovered that the website grew too big to control , with people becoming so addicted to it that they even used it while driving their cars . This caused chaos in the town after numerous car crashes and deaths . 
 In the present time , the court orders Lisa to shut down SpringFace , and Lisa agrees to do this . The people of Springfield throw away their smartphones and computers soon after the website is closed . When Lisa looks outside her window , she sees Sherri and Terri and a bunch of their friends playing Marco Polo , and they invite Lisa to join them . Patty and Selma are then seen competing in a rowing race against the Winklevoss twins at the London 2012 Olympics , with Patty and Selma winning . This is followed by a short entitled " A Simpsons ' Show 's Too Short ' Story " , animated in the dark , grim style of American artist Edward Gorey . It tells the story of how Bart was a troublemaker from the day he was born , and shows him and Milhouse wrapping Springfield Elementary School in toilet paper . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The D 'oh @-@ cial Network " was written by J. Stewart Burns and directed by Chris Clements as part of the twenty @-@ third season of The Simpsons ( 2011 – 2012 ) . It was the second episode written by Burns that season , the first being " Holidays of Future Passed " . According to Hayden Childs of The A.V. Club , the episode satirizes the phenomenon of the social networking website Facebook . He commented that " the thrust of the satire can be summed up with the age @-@ old cry of parents to their offspring to put that damn thing down and go outside already . " Childs added that the episode points out " the most blatant of the many faults of Facebook — namely , its hypnotic ability to distract people in a semi @-@ narcissistic haze [ ... ] " . 
 " The D 'oh @-@ cial Network " also parodies the 2010 drama film The Social Network , which portrays the founding of Facebook by Mark Zuckerberg and the subsequent lawsuit by American rowers Cameron Winklevoss and Tyler Winklevoss who claimed Zuckerberg stole their idea . The Social Network , like the episode , features a scene in which the Winklevoss twins are seen rowing . In July 2011 , it was announced in Entertainment Weekly that American actor Armie Hammer would make a guest appearance in " The D 'oh @-@ cial Network " , playing the Winklevoss twins . Hammer previously attained that role in The Social Network . According to The Simpsons showrunner Al Jean , the staff of the show decided not to ask the Winklevoss twins to guest star in the episode as themselves because " We [ the staff ] were like , ' Wait , [ Hammer ] played them , that 's who people think they are , we should just get him . ' " Hammer met with the producers of the series in May 2011 to record his lines . 
 American talk show host David Letterman also guest starred in " The D 'oh @-@ cial Network " , appearing as himself in the couch gag in the Simpsons opening sequence at the beginning of the episode . The couch gag sees the Simpson family arriving in New York City to the tune of " Rhapsody in Blue " to be guests on Late Show with David Letterman . The Simpsons music editor Chris Ledesma wrote on his blog that there was originally a discussion among the staff of the show about how the sequence would be scored . According to Ledesma , Jean " wanted something <unk> @-@ <unk> that represented New York City . Thoughts immediately turned to the music of George Gershwin . Woody Allen had used ' Rhapsody in Blue ' to great effect in Manhattan and probably connected forever in people ’ s minds the black & white images of New York with the melodies of that piece . " Ledesma wrote that acquiring the license to use the musical piece was expensive , but Jean thought " it would be the perfect piece to use for the couch gag . " The dark cabaret band Tiger <unk> performed their version of the Simpsons theme over the closing credits of the episode . The Simpsons creator Matt Groening , a fan of the band , was responsible for recruiting its members to the show . 
 = = Release = = 
 The episode originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 15 , 2012 . It was watched by approximately 11 @.@ 48 million people during this broadcast , and in the demographic for adults aged 18 – 49 , the episode received a 5 @.@ 4 Nielsen rating and a thirteen percent share . This was a large increase over the previous episode of the series , " Politically Inept , with Homer Simpson " , which received a 2 @.@ 3 rating . However , " The D 'oh @-@ cial Network " was preceded by a popular National Football League playoffs game that helped improve its rating . The episode became the highest @-@ rated broadcast in Fox 's Animation Domination lineup that night in terms of both total viewers and in the 18 – 49 demographic , finishing ahead of new episodes of Family Guy and Napoleon Dynamite . For the week of January 9 – 15 , 2012 , " The D 'oh @-@ cial Network " placed third in the ratings among all prime @-@ time broadcasts in the 18 – 49 demographic , being beaten only by two football games . This meant The Simpsons was the top scripted show among adults aged 18 – 49 that week . 
 The reception of " The D 'oh @-@ cial Network " by television critics has been generally mixed . The Guardian reviewer Sam Wollaston called the episode " lovely " , arguing that while " The Simpsons perhaps doesn 't deliver as often as it once did , " this episode proved " it still can , after all this time . " The Evening Herald 's Pat Stacey wrote that it has " been a while since The Simpsons delivered a gold medal @-@ standard performance , yet at least there were satisfying flashes of silver [ in this episode ] . " She added that she " liked the moment when Hans Moleman is hit by Homer 's car and frantically hammers the ' <unk> ' button as he sails through the air . " 
 Hayden Childs of The A.V. Club thought the episode was less successful at satirizing Facebook compared to the episode " Holidays of Future Passed " . He explained that there is " a moment in ' Holidays ' when Lisa steps into the future version of the Internet and is immediately besieged by a mountain of friend requests . That was a small yet sharp parody of Facebook ’ s ubiquity , but [ ' The D 'oh @-@ cial Network ' ] lays into the same topic with a less deft touch . " Childs added that the episode " has a few good jokes to keep the proceedings moving along , but not enough to rescue [ it ] from mediocrity . " He concluded that he thought the story ended too fast with Lisa shutting down her website and the citizens of Springfield returning to their everyday technology @-@ lacking life : " That ’ s a bit too quick a turn , [ ... ] slapping a moralistic tone onto all of the preceding satire . " David Crawford of Radio Times commented that " The D 'oh @-@ cial Network " features " a rather thin attempt to parody The Social Network " . Yahoo ! TV 's Brian Davis criticized the episode for being too " straightforward in terms of the satire " as it was " generally obvious [ ... ] what each reference and joke was referring to . " 
 = Sinking of the RMS Titanic = 
 The sinking of the RMS Titanic occurred on the night of 14 April through to the morning of 15 April 1912 in the North Atlantic Ocean , four days into the ship 's maiden voyage from Southampton to New York City . The largest passenger liner in service at the time , Titanic had an estimated 2 @,@ 224 people on board when she struck an iceberg at around 23 : 40 ( ship 's time ) on Sunday , 14 April 1912 . Her sinking two hours and forty minutes later at 02 : 20 ( 05 : 18 GMT ) on 15 April resulted in the deaths of more than 1 @,@ 500 people , which made it one of the deadliest peacetime maritime disasters in history . 
 Titanic received six warnings of sea ice on 14 April but was travelling near her maximum speed when her lookouts sighted the iceberg . Unable to turn quickly enough , the ship suffered a glancing blow that buckled her starboard ( right ) side and opened five of her sixteen compartments to the sea . Titanic had been designed to stay afloat with four of her forward compartments flooded but not more , and the crew soon realised that the ship would sink . They used distress flares and radio ( wireless ) messages to attract help as the passengers were put into lifeboats . In accordance with existing practice , Titanic 's lifeboat system was designed to ferry passengers to nearby rescue vessels , not to hold everyone on board simultaneously . So with the ship sinking fast and help still hours away , there was no safe refuge for many of the passengers and crew . Compounding this , poor management of the evacuation meant many boats were launched before they were totally full . 
 Titanic sank with over a thousand passengers and crew still on board . Almost all those who jumped or fell into the water drowned within minutes due to the effects of hypothermia . RMS Carpathia arrived on the scene about an hour and a half after the sinking and had rescued the last of the survivors by 09 : 15 on 15 April , some nine and a half hours after the collision . The disaster caused widespread outrage over the lack of lifeboats , lax regulations , and the unequal treatment of the three passenger classes during the evacuation . Subsequent inquiries recommended sweeping changes to maritime regulations , leading to the establishment in 1914 of the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea ( SOLAS ) , which still governs maritime safety today . 
 = = Background = = 
 At the time of her entry into service on 2 April 1912 , Royal Mail Ship ( RMS ) Titanic was the second of three Olympic @-@ class ocean liner sister ships , and was the largest ship in the world . She and her sister , RMS Olympic , were almost one and half times the gross register tonnage of Cunard 's RMS Lusitania and RMS Mauretania , the previous record holders , and were nearly 100 feet ( 30 m ) longer . Titanic could carry 3 @,@ 547 people in speed and comfort , and was built on a hitherto unprecedented scale . Her reciprocating engines were the largest that had ever been built , standing 40 feet ( 12 m ) high and with cylinders 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) in diameter requiring the burning of 600 long tons ( 610 t ) of coal per day . 
 Her passenger accommodations , especially those of the ship 's First Class section , were said to be " of unrivalled extent and magnificence " , indicated by the fares that First Class accommodation commanded . The Parlour Suites ( the most @-@ expensive and most @-@ luxurious suites on the ship ) with private promenade cost over $ 4 @,@ 350 ( equivalent to $ 106 @,@ 660 today ) for a one @-@ way transatlantic passage . Even Third Class , though considerably less luxurious than Second and First Classes , was unusually comfortable by contemporary standards and was supplied with plentiful quantities of good food , providing its passengers with better conditions than many of them had experienced at home . 
 Titanic 's maiden voyage began shortly after noon on 10 April 1912 when she left Southampton on the first leg of her journey to New York . A few hours later she called at Cherbourg in northern France , a journey of 80 nautical miles ( 148 km ; 92 mi ) , where she took on passengers . Her next port of call was Queenstown ( now Cobh ) in Ireland , which she reached around midday on 11 April . She left in the afternoon after taking on more passengers and stores . 
 By the time she departed westwards across the Atlantic she was carrying 892 crew members and 1 @,@ 320 passengers . This was only about half of her full passenger capacity of 2 @,@ 435 , as it was the low season and shipping from the UK had been disrupted by a coal miners ' strike . Her passengers were a cross @-@ section of Edwardian society , from millionaires such as John Jacob Astor and Benjamin Guggenheim , to poor emigrants from countries as disparate as Armenia , Ireland , Italy , Sweden , Syria and Russia seeking a new life in America . 
 The ship was commanded by 62 @-@ year @-@ old Captain Edward John Smith , the most senior of the White Star Line 's captains . He had four decades of seafaring experience and had served as captain of the RMS Olympic , from which he was transferred to command Titanic . The vast majority of the crew who served under him were not trained sailors , but were either engineers , firemen , or stokers , responsible for looking after the engines ; or stewards and galley staff , responsible for the passengers . The 6 watch officers and 39 able @-@ bodied seamen constituted only around 5 percent of the crew , and most of these had been taken on at Southampton so had not had time to familiarise themselves with the ship . 
 The ice conditions were attributed to a mild winter that caused large numbers of icebergs to shift off the west coast of Greenland . In addition , it is now known that in January 1912 , the Moon came closer to the Earth than at any time in the previous 1 @,@ 400 years , at the same time as the Earth made its closest annual approach to the Sun . This caused exceptionally high tides that may have resulted in a larger number of icebergs than usual reaching the shipping lanes a few months later . The weather improved significantly during the course of the day , from brisk winds and moderate seas in the morning to a crystal @-@ clear calm by evening , as the ship entered an arctic high pressure system . There was no moon on the clear night . 
 = = 14 April 1912 = = 
 = = = Iceberg warnings ( 09 : 00 – 23 : 39 ) = = = 
 During 14 April 1912 , Titanic 's radio operators received six messages from other ships warning of drifting ice , which passengers on Titanic had begun to notice during the afternoon . The ice conditions in the North Atlantic were the worst for any April in the previous 50 years ( which was the reason why the lookouts were unaware that they were about to steam into a line of drifting ice several miles wide and many miles long ) . Not all of these messages were relayed by the radio operators . At the time , all wireless operators on ocean liners were employees of the Marconi Company and not members of their ship 's crew ; their primary responsibility was to send messages for the passengers , with weather reports as a secondary concern . 
 The first warning came at 09 : 00 from RMS Caronia reporting " bergs , growlers and field ice " . Captain Smith acknowledged receipt of the message . At 13 : 42 , RMS Baltic relayed a report from the Greek ship Athenia that she had been " passing icebergs and large quantities of field ice " . This too was acknowledged by Smith , who showed the report to J. Bruce Ismay , the chairman of the White Star Line , aboard Titanic for her maiden voyage . Smith ordered a new course to be set , to take the ship farther south . 
 At 13 : 45 , the German ship SS Amerika , which was a short distance to the south , reported she had " passed two large icebergs " . This message never reached Captain Smith or the other officers on Titanic 's bridge . The reason is unclear , but it may have been forgotten because the radio operators had to fix faulty equipment . 
 SS Californian reported " three large bergs " at 19 : 30 , and at 21 : 40 , the steamer Mesaba reported : " Saw much heavy pack ice and great number large icebergs . Also field ice . " This message , too , never left the Titanic 's radio room . The radio operator , Jack Phillips , may have failed to grasp its significance because he was preoccupied with transmitting messages for passengers via the relay station at Cape Race , Newfoundland ; the radio set had broken down the day before , resulting in a backlog of messages that the two operators were trying to clear . A final warning was received at 22 : 30 from operator Cyril Evans of the Californian , which had halted for the night in an ice field some miles away , but Phillips cut it off and signalled back : " Shut up ! Shut up ! I 'm working Cape Race . " 
 Although the crew was aware of ice in the vicinity , the ship 's speed was not reduced , and she continued to steam at 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) , only 2 knots ( 3 @.@ 7 km / h ; 2 @.@ 3 mph ) short of her maximum speed of 24 knots ( 44 km / h ; 28 mph ) . Titanic 's high speed in waters where ice had been reported was later criticised as reckless , but it reflected standard maritime practice at the time . According to Fifth Officer Harold Lowe , the custom was " to go ahead and depend upon the lookouts in the crow 's nest and the watch on the bridge to pick up the ice in time to avoid hitting it . " 
 The North Atlantic liners prioritised time @-@ keeping above all other considerations , sticking rigidly to a schedule that would guarantee their arrival at an advertised time . They were frequently driven at close to their full speed , treating hazard warnings as advisories rather than calls to action . It was widely believed that ice posed little risk ; close calls were not uncommon , and even head @-@ on collisions had not been disastrous . In 1907 SS Kronprinz Wilhelm , a German liner , had rammed an iceberg and suffered a crushed bow , but was still able to complete her voyage . That same year , Titanic 's future captain , Edward Smith , declared in an interview that he could not " imagine any condition which would cause a ship to founder . Modern shipbuilding has gone beyond that . " 
 = = = " Iceberg right ahead ! " ( 23 : 39 ) = = = 
 = = = = Collision = = = = 
 As Titanic approached her fatal crash , most passengers had gone to bed and command of the bridge had passed from Second Officer Charles Lightoller to First Officer William Murdoch . Lookouts Frederick Fleet and Reginald Lee were occupying the crow 's nest , 29 metres ( 95 ft ) above the deck . The air temperature had fallen to near freezing and the ocean was completely calm . Colonel Archibald Gracie , one of the survivors of the disaster , later wrote that " the sea was like glass , so smooth that the stars were clearly reflected . " It is now known that such exceptionally calm water is a sign of nearby pack ice . 
 Although the air was clear , there was no moon , and with the sea so calm , there was nothing to give away the position of the nearby icebergs ; had the sea been rougher , waves breaking against the icebergs would have made them more visible . Because of a mix @-@ up at Southampton the lookouts had no binoculars ; but reportedly binoculars would not have been effective in darkness which was total except for starlight and the ship 's own lights . The lookouts were nonetheless well aware of the ice hazard , as Lightoller had ordered them and other crew members to " keep a sharp look @-@ out for ice , particularly small ice and growlers " . 
 At 23 : 30 , Fleet and Lee noticed a slight haze on the horizon ahead of them , but did not make anything of it . Nine minutes later , at 23 : 39 , Fleet spotted an iceberg in Titanic 's path . He rang the lookout bell three times and telephoned the bridge to inform Sixth Officer James Moody . Fleet asked " Is there anyone there ? " Moody replied , " Yes , what do you see ? " Fleet replied : " Iceberg , right ahead ! " After thanking Fleet , Moody relayed the message to Murdoch , who ordered Quartermaster Robert Hichens to change the ship 's course . Murdoch is generally believed to have given the order " Hard a <unk> " which would result in the ship 's tiller being moved all the way to starboard ( the right side of the ship ) in an attempt to turn the ship to port ( left ) . He also rang " Full Astern " on the ship 's telegraphs . 
 According to Fourth Officer Joseph Boxhall , Murdoch told Captain Smith that he was attempting to " hard @-@ a @-@ port around [ the iceberg ] " , suggesting that he was attempting a " port around " manoeuvre – to first swing the bow around the obstacle , then swing the stern so that both ends of the ship would avoid a collision . There was a delay before either order went into effect ; the steam @-@ powered steering mechanism took up to 30 seconds to turn the ship 's tiller , and the complex task of setting the engines into reverse would also have taken some time to accomplish . Because the centre turbine could not be reversed , both it and the centre propeller , positioned directly in front of the ship 's rudder , were simply stopped . This reduced the rudder 's effectiveness , therefore impairing the turning ability of the ship . Had Murdoch simply turned the ship while maintaining her forward speed , Titanic might have missed the iceberg with feet to spare . 
 In 2010 , Louise Patten asserted that her grandfather Charles <unk> claimed that the helmsman Robert Hitchins initially panicked and turned the rudder the wrong way and that subsequently Bruce Ismay ordered the boat to continue " Slow Ahead " in the belief that Titanic was unsinkable . This had never been revealed because of the insurance implications . 
 In the event , Titanic 's heading changed just in time to avoid a head @-@ on collision , but the change in direction caused the ship to strike the iceberg with a glancing blow . An underwater spur of ice scraped along the starboard side of the ship for about seven seconds ; chunks of ice dislodged from upper parts of the <unk> fell onto her forward decks . A few minutes later , all of Titanic 's engines were stopped , leaving the ship facing north and drifting in the Labrador Current . 
 = = = = Effects of the collision = = = = 
 The impact with the iceberg was long thought to have produced a huge opening in Titanic 's hull , " not less than 300 feet ( 91 m ) in length , 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) above the level of the keel " , as one writer later put it . At the British enquiry following the accident , Edward Wilding ( chief naval architect for Harland and Wolff ) , calculating on the basis of the observed flooding of forward compartments forty minutes after the collision , testified that the area of the hull opened to the sea was " somewhere about 12 square feet " . He also stated that " I believe it must have been in places , not a continuous rip " , but that the different openings must have extended along an area of around 300 feet , to account for the flooding in several compartments . The findings of the enquiry state that the damage extended about 300 feet , and hence many subsequent writers followed this statement . Modern ultrasound surveys of the wreck have found that the damage consisted of six narrow openings in an area of the hull covering only about 12 to 13 square feet ( 1 @.@ 1 to 1 @.@ 2 m2 ) in total . According to Paul K. Matthias , who made the measurements , the damage consisted of a " series of deformations in the starboard side that start and stop along the hull ... about 10 feet [ 3 @.@ 0 m ] above the bottom of the ship . " 
 The gaps , the longest of which measures about 39 feet ( 12 m ) long , appear to have followed the line of the hull plates . This suggests that the iron rivets along the plate seams snapped off or popped open to create narrow gaps through which water flooded . An engineer from Titanic 's builders , Harland and Wolff , suggested this scenario at the British Wreck Commissioner 's inquiry following the disaster but his view was discounted . Titanic 's discoverer Robert Ballard has commented that the assumption that the ship had suffered a major breach was " a byproduct of the mystique of the Titanic . No one could believe that the great ship was sunk by a little sliver . " Faults in the ship 's hull may have been a contributing factor . Recovered pieces of Titanic 's hull plates appear to have shattered on impact with the iceberg , without bending . 
 The plates in the central 60 % of the hull were held together with triple rows of mild steel rivets , but the plates in the bow and stern were held together with double rows of wrought iron rivets which were – according to materials scientists Tim <unk> and Jennifer McCarty – near their stress limits even before the collision . These " Best " or No. 3 iron rivets had a high level of slag inclusions , making them more brittle than the more usual " Best @-@ Best " No. 4 iron rivets , and more prone to snapping when put under stress , particularly in extreme cold . But Tom <unk> , a retired archivist of Harland & Wolff , pointed out that Olympic , Titanic 's sister ship , was riveted with the same iron and served without incident for nearly 25 years , surviving several major collisions , including being rammed by a British cruiser . When the Olympic rammed and sank the U @-@ boat U @-@ 103 with her bow , the stem was twisted and hull plates on the starboard side were buckled without impairing the hull 's integrity . 
 Above the waterline , there was little evidence of the collision . The stewards in the first class dining room noticed a shudder , which they thought might have been caused by the ship shedding a propeller blade . Many of the passengers felt a bump or shudder but did not know what it was . Those on the lowest decks , nearest the site of the collision , felt it much more directly . Engine Oiler Walter Hurst recalled being " awakened by a grinding crash along the starboard side . No one was very much alarmed but knew we had struck something " . Fireman George <unk> heard a " heavy thud and grinding tearing sound " from the starboard hull . 
 The ship began to flood immediately , with water pouring in at an estimated rate of 7 long tons ( 7 @.@ 1 t ) per second , fifteen times faster than it could be pumped out . Second Engineer J. H. Hesketh and Leading Stoker Frederick Barrett were both struck by a jet of icy water in No. 6 boiler room and escaped just before the room 's watertight door closed . This was an extremely dangerous situation for the engineering staff ; the boilers were still full of hot high @-@ pressure steam and there was a substantial risk that they would explode if they came into contact with the cold seawater flooding the boiler rooms . The stokers and firemen were ordered to reduce the fires and vent the boilers , sending great quantities of steam up the funnel venting pipes . They were waist @-@ deep in freezing water by the time they finished their work . 
 Titanic 's lower decks were divided into sixteen compartments . Each compartment was separated from its neighbour by a bulkhead running the width of the ship ; there were fifteen bulkheads in all . Each bulkhead extended at least to the underside of E Deck , nominally one deck , or about 11 feet ( 3 @.@ 4 m ) , above the waterline . The two nearest the bow and the six nearest the stern went one deck further up . 
 Each bulkhead could be sealed by watertight doors . The engine rooms and boiler rooms on the tank top deck had vertically closing doors that could be controlled remotely from the bridge , lowered automatically by a float if water was present , or closed manually by the crew . These took about 30 seconds to close ; warning bells and alternate escape routes were provided so that the crew would not be trapped by the doors . Above the tank top level , on the <unk> Deck , F Deck and E Deck , the doors closed horizontally and were manually operated . They could be closed at the door itself or from the deck above . 
 Although the watertight bulkheads extended well above the water line , they were not sealed at the top . If too many compartments were flooded , the ship 's bow would settle deeper in the water , and water would spill from one compartment to the next in sequence , rather like water spilling across the top of an ice cube tray . This was what happened to Titanic , which had suffered damage to the <unk> tank , the three forward holds and No. 6 boiler room , a total of five compartments . Titanic was only designed to float with any two compartments flooded , but it could remain afloat with certain combinations of three or even four compartments ( the first four ) open to the ocean . With five compartments , the tops of the bulkheads would be submerged and the ship would continue to flood . 
 Captain Smith felt the collision in his cabin and immediately came to the bridge . Informed of the situation , he summoned Thomas Andrews , Titanic 's builder , who was among a party of engineers from Harland and Wolff observing the ship 's first passenger voyage . The ship was listing five degrees to starboard and was two degrees down by the head within a few minutes of the collision . Smith and Andrews went below and found that the forward cargo holds , the mailroom and the squash court were flooded , while No. 6 boiler room was already filled to a depth of 14 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) . Water was spilling over into No. 5 boiler room , and crewmen there were battling to pump it out . 
 Within 45 minutes of the collision , at least 13 @,@ 500 long tons ( 13 @,@ 700 t ) of water had entered the ship . This was far too much for Titanic 's ballast and bilge pumps to handle ; the total pumping capacity of all the pumps combined was only 1 @,@ 700 long tons ( 1 @,@ 700 t ) per hour . Andrews informed the captain that the first five compartments were flooded , and therefore Titanic was doomed . By his estimate , she could remain afloat for no longer than about two hours . 
 From the time of the collision to the moment of her sinking , at least 35 @,@ 000 long tons ( 36 @,@ 000 t ) of water flooded into Titanic , causing her displacement to nearly double from 48 @,@ 300 long tons ( 49 @,@ 100 t ) to over 83 @,@ 000 long tons ( 84 @,@ 000 t ) . The flooding did not proceed at a constant pace , nor was it distributed evenly throughout the ship , due to the configuration of the flooded compartments . Her initial list to starboard was caused by asymmetrical flooding of the starboard side as water poured down a passageway at the bottom of the ship . When the passageway was fully flooded , the list corrected itself but the ship later began to list to port by up to ten degrees as that side also flooded asymmetrically . 
 Titanic 's down angle altered fairly rapidly from zero degrees to about four and a half degrees during the first hour after the collision , but the rate at which the ship went down slowed greatly for the second hour , worsening only to about five degrees . This gave many of those aboard a false sense of hope that the ship might stay afloat long enough for them to be rescued . By 1 : 30 , the sinking rate of the front section increased until Titanic reached a down angle of about ten degrees . 
 = = 15 April 1912 = = 
 = = = Preparing to abandon ship ( 00 : 05 – 00 : 45 ) = = = 
 At 00 : 05 on 15 April , Captain Smith ordered the ship 's lifeboats uncovered and the passengers mustered . He also ordered the radio operators to begin sending distress calls , which wrongly placed the ship on the west side of the ice belt and directed rescuers to a position that turned out to be inaccurate by about 13 @.@ 5 nautical miles ( 15 @.@ 5 mi / 25 km ) . Below decks , water was pouring into the lowest levels of the ship . As the mail room flooded , the mail <unk> made an ultimately futile attempt to save the 400 @,@ 000 items of mail being carried aboard Titanic . Elsewhere , air could be heard being forced out by <unk> water . Above them , stewards went door to door , rousing sleeping passengers and crew – Titanic did not have a public address system – and told them to go to the Boat Deck . 
 The thoroughness of the muster was heavily dependent on the class of the passengers ; the first @-@ class stewards were in charge of only a few cabins , while those responsible for the second- and third @-@ class passengers had to manage large numbers of people . The first @-@ class stewards provided hands @-@ on assistance , helping their charges to get dressed and bringing them out onto the deck . With far more people to deal with , the second- and third @-@ class stewards mostly confined their efforts to throwing open doors and telling passengers to put on lifebelts and come up top . In third class , passengers were largely left to their own devices after being informed of the need to come on deck . 
 Many passengers and crew were reluctant to comply , either refusing to believe that there was a problem or preferring the warmth of the ship 's interior to the bitterly cold night air . The passengers were not told that the ship was sinking , though a few noticed that she was listing . Around 00 : 15 , the stewards began ordering the passengers to put on their lifebelts , though again , many passengers took the order as a joke . Some set about playing an impromptu game of association football with the ice chunks that were now strewn across the foredeck . 
 On the boat deck , as the crew began preparing the lifeboats , it was difficult to hear anything over the noise of high @-@ pressure steam being vented from the boilers and escaping via the valves on the funnels above . Lawrence Beesley described the sound as " a harsh , deafening boom that made conversation difficult ; if one imagines 20 locomotives blowing off steam in a low key it would give some idea of the unpleasant sound that met us as we climbed out on the top deck . " The noise was so loud that the crew had to use hand signals to communicate . 
 Titanic had a total of 20 lifeboats , comprising 16 wooden boats on davits , 8 on either side of the ship , and 4 collapsible boats with wooden bottoms and canvas sides . The <unk> were stored upside down with the sides folded in , and would have to be erected and moved to the davits for launching . Two were stored under the wooden boats and the other two were lashed atop the officers ' quarters . The position of the latter would make them extremely difficult to launch , as they weighed several tons each and had to be manhandled down to the boat deck . On average , the lifeboats could take up to 68 people each , and collectively they could accommodate 1 @,@ 178 – barely half the number of people on board and a third of the number the ship was licensed to carry . The shortage of lifeboats was not because of a lack of space nor because of cost . Titanic had been designed to accommodate up to 68 lifeboats – enough for everyone on board – and the price of an extra 32 lifeboats would only have been some $ 16 @,@ 000 , a tiny fraction of the $ 7 @.@ 5 million that the company had spent on Titanic . In an emergency , lifeboats at the time were intended to be used to transfer passengers off the distressed ship and onto a nearby vessel . It was therefore commonplace for liners to have far fewer lifeboats than needed to accommodate all their passengers and crew , and of the 39 British liners of the time of over 10 @,@ 000 long tons ( 10 @,@ 000 t ) , 33 had too few lifeboat places to accommodate everyone on board . The White Star Line desired the ship to have a wide promenade deck with uninterrupted views of the sea , which would have been obstructed by a continuous row of lifeboats . 
 Captain Smith was an experienced seaman who had served for 40 years at sea , including 27 years in command . He would certainly have known that even if all the boats were fully occupied , a thousand people would remain on the ship as she went down . As Smith began to grasp the enormity of what was about to happen , he appeared to have become paralysed by indecision . He had ordered passengers and crew to muster , but now failed to order his officers to put the passengers into the lifeboats ; he did not adequately organise the crew ; he failed to convey crucial information to his officers and crew ; he sometimes gave ambiguous or impractical orders and he never gave the command to abandon ship . Even some of his bridge officers were unaware for some time after the collision that the ship was sinking ; Fourth Officer Joseph Boxhall did not find out until 01 : 15 , barely an hour before the ship went down , while Quartermaster George Rowe was so unaware of the emergency that after the evacuation had started , he phoned the bridge from his watch station to ask why he had just seen a lifeboat go past . Smith did not advise his officers that the ship did not have enough lifeboats to save everyone . He did not supervise the loading of the lifeboats and seemingly made no effort to find out if his orders were being followed . 
 The crew was likewise unprepared for the emergency , as lifeboat training had been minimal . Only one lifeboat drill had been conducted while the ship was docked at Southampton . It was a cursory effort , consisting of two boats being lowered , each manned by one officer and four men who merely rowed around the dock for a few minutes before returning to the ship . The boats were supposed to be stocked with emergency supplies , but Titanic 's passengers later found that they had only been partially provisioned despite the efforts of the ship 's chief baker , Charles Joughin and his staff to do so . No lifeboat or fire drills had been conducted since Titanic left Southampton . A lifeboat drill had been scheduled for the Sunday morning before the ship sank , but was cancelled for unknown reasons by Captain Smith . 
 Lists had been posted on the ship assigning crew members to specific lifeboat stations , but few appeared to have read them or to have known what they were supposed to do . Most of the crew were not seamen , and even some of those had no prior experience of rowing a boat . They were now faced with the complex task of coordinating the lowering of 20 boats carrying a possible total of 1 @,@ 100 people 70 feet ( 21 m ) down the sides of the ship . Thomas E. Bonsall , a historian of the disaster , has commented that the evacuation was so badly organised that " even if they had the number [ of ] lifeboats they needed , it is impossible to see how they could have launched them " given the lack of time and poor leadership . 
 By about 00 : 20 , 40 minutes after the collision , the loading of the lifeboats was under way . Second Officer Lightoller recalled afterwards that he noticed Smith standing near the bridge looking out at the ocean in a trance @-@ like daze . According to Lightoller , " I yelled at the top of my voice , ' Hadn 't we better get the women and children into the boats , sir ? ' He heard me and nodded reply . " Smith then ordered Lightoller and Murdoch to " put the women and children in and lower away " . Lightoller took charge of the boats on the port side and Murdoch took charge of those on the starboard side . The two officers interpreted the " women and children " evacuation order differently ; Murdoch took it to mean women and children first , while Lightoller took it to mean women and children only . Lightoller lowered lifeboats with empty seats if there were no women and children waiting to board , while Murdoch allowed a limited number of men to board if all the nearby women and children had embarked . Neither officer knew how many people could safely be carried in the boats as they were lowered and they both erred on the side of caution by not filling them . They could have been lowered quite safely with their full complement of 68 people , especially with the highly favourable weather and sea conditions . Had this been done , an extra 500 people could have been saved ; instead , hundreds of people , predominantly men , were left on board as lifeboats were launched with many seats vacant . 
 Few passengers at first were willing to board the lifeboats and the officers in charge of the evacuation found it difficult to persuade them . The millionaire John Jacob Astor declared : " We are safer here than in that little boat . " Some passengers refused flatly to embark . J. Bruce Ismay , realising the urgency of the situation , roamed the starboard boat deck urging passengers and crew to board the boats . A trickle of women , couples and single men were persuaded to board starboard lifeboat No. 7 , which became the first lifeboat to be lowered . 
 = = = Departure of the lifeboats ( 00 : 45 – 02 : 05 ) = = = 
 At 00 : 45 , lifeboat No. 7 was rowed away from Titanic with 28 passengers on board ( despite a capacity of 65 ) . Lifeboat No. 6 , on the port side , was the next to be lowered at 00 : 55 . It also had 28 people on board , among them the " unsinkable " Margaret " Molly " Brown . Lightoller realised there was only one seaman on board ( Quartermaster Robert Hichens ) and called for volunteers . Major Arthur Godfrey Peuchen of the Royal Canadian Yacht Club stepped forward and climbed down a rope into the lifeboat ; he was the only male passenger whom Lightoller allowed to board during the port side evacuation . Peuchen 's role highlighted a key problem during the evacuation : there were hardly any seamen to man the boats . Some had been sent below to open gangway doors to allow more passengers to be evacuated , but they never returned . They were presumably trapped and drowned by the rising water below decks . 
 Meanwhile , other crewmen fought to maintain vital services as water continued to pour into the ship below decks . The engineers and firemen worked to vent steam from the boilers to prevent them from exploding on contact with the cold water . They re @-@ opened watertight doors in order to set up extra portable pumps in the forward compartments in a futile bid to reduce the torrent , and kept the electrical generators running to maintain lights and power throughout the ship . Steward F. Dent Ray narrowly avoided being swept away when a wooden wall between his quarters and the third @-@ class accommodation on E deck collapsed , leaving him waist @-@ deep in water . Two engineers , Herbert Harvey and Jonathan Shepherd ( who had just broken his left leg after falling into a manhole minutes earlier ) , died in boiler room No. 5 when , at around 00 : 45 , the bunker door separating it from the flooded No. 6 boiler room collapsed and they were swept away by " a wave of green foam " according to leading fireman Frederick Barrett who barely escaped from the boiler room . 
 In boiler room No. 4 , at around 01 : 20 , water began flooding in from below , possibly indicating that the bottom of the ship had also been holed by the iceberg . The flow of water soon overwhelmed the pumps and forced the firemen and trimmers to evacuate the forward boiler rooms . Further aft , Chief Engineer William Bell , his engineering colleagues , and a handful of volunteer firemen and greasers stayed behind in the unflooded No. 1 , 2 and 3 boiler rooms and in the turbine and reciprocating engine rooms . They continued working on the boilers and the electrical generators in order to keep the ship 's lights and pumps operable and to power the radio so that distress signals could be sent . They remained at their posts until the very end , thus ensuring that Titanic 's electrics functioned until the final minutes of the sinking . None of the ship 's 35 engineers and electricians survived . Neither did any of the Titanic 's five postal clerks , who were last seen struggling to save the mail bags they had rescued from the flooded mail room . They were caught by the rising water somewhere on D deck . 
 Many of the third @-@ class passengers were also confronted with the sight of water pouring into their quarters on E , F and G decks . Carl Jansson , one of the relatively small number of third @-@ class survivors , later recalled : 
 Then I run down to my cabin to bring my other clothes , watch and bag but only had time to take the watch and coat when water with enormous force came into the cabin and I had to rush up to the deck again where I found my friends standing with lifebelts on and with terror painted on their faces . What should I do now , with no lifebelt and no shoes and no cap ? 
 The lifeboats were lowered every few minutes on each side , but most of the boats were greatly under @-@ filled . No. 5 left with 41 aboard , No. 3 had 32 aboard , No. 8 left with 39 and No. 1 left with just 12 out of a capacity of 40 . The evacuation did not go smoothly and passengers suffered accidents and injuries as it progressed . One woman fell between lifeboat No. 10 and the side of the ship but someone caught her by the ankle and hauled her back onto the promenade deck , where she made a second successful attempt at boarding . First @-@ class passenger Annie Stengel broke several ribs when an overweight German @-@ American doctor and his brother jumped into No. 5 , squashing her and knocking her unconscious . The lifeboats ' descent was likewise risky . No. 6 was nearly flooded during the descent by water discharging out of the ship 's side , but successfully made it away from the ship . No. 3 came close to disaster when , for a time , one of the davits jammed , threatening to pitch the passengers out of the lifeboat and into the sea . 
 By 01 : 20 , the seriousness of the situation was now apparent to the passengers above decks , who began saying their goodbyes , with husbands escorting their wives and children to the lifeboats . Distress flares were fired every few minutes to attract the attention of any ships nearby and the radio operators repeatedly sent the distress signal <unk> . Radio operator Harold Bride suggested to his colleague Jack Phillips that he should use the new SOS signal , as it " may be your last chance to send it " . The two radio operators contacted other ships to ask for assistance . Several responded , of which RMS Carpathia was the closest , at 58 miles ( 93 km ) away . She was a much slower vessel than Titanic and , even driven at her maximum speed of 17 kn ( 20 mph ; 31 km / h ) , would have taken four hours to reach the sinking ship . Another to respond was SS Mount Temple , which set a course and headed for Titanic 's position but was stopped en @-@ route by pack ice . 
 Much nearer was the SS Californian , which had warned Titanic of ice a few hours earlier . <unk> at his ship being caught in a large field of drift ice , the Californian 's captain , Stanley Lord , had decided at about 22 : 00 to halt for the night and wait for daylight to find a way through the ice field . At 23 : 30 , 10 minutes before Titanic hit the iceberg , Californian 's sole radio operator , Cyril Evans , shut his set down for the night and went to bed . On the bridge her Third Officer , Charles Groves , saw a large vessel to starboard around 10 to 12 mi ( 16 to 19 km ) away . It made a sudden turn to port and stopped . If the radio operator of the Californian had stayed at his post fifteen minutes longer , hundreds of lives might have been saved . A little over an hour later , Second Officer Herbert Stone saw five white rockets exploding above the stopped ship . Unsure what the rockets meant , he called Captain Lord , who was resting in the chartroom , and reported the sighting . Lord did not act on the report , but Stone was perturbed : " A ship is not going to fire rockets at sea for nothing , " he told a colleague . 
 By this time , it was clear to those on Titanic that the ship was indeed sinking and there would not be enough lifeboat places for everyone . Some still clung to the hope that the worst would not happen : Lucien Smith told his wife , " It is only a matter of form to have women and children first . The ship is thoroughly equipped and everyone on her will be saved . " Charlotte Colyer 's husband Harvey called to his wife as she was put in a lifeboat , " Go , Lottie ! For God 's sake , be brave and go ! I 'll get a seat in another boat ! " 
 Other couples refused to be separated . Ida Straus , the wife of Macy 's department store co @-@ owner Isidor Straus , told her husband : " We have been living together for many years . Where you go , I go . " They sat down in a pair of deck chairs and waited for the end . The industrialist Benjamin Guggenheim changed out of his life vest and sweater into top hat and evening dress , and declared his wish to go down with the ship like a gentleman . 
 At this point , the vast majority of passengers who had boarded lifeboats were from first- and second @-@ class . Few third @-@ class ( steerage ) passengers had made it up onto the deck , and most were still lost in the maze of corridors or trapped behind barriers and partitions that segregated the accommodation for the steerage passengers from the first- and second @-@ class areas . This segregation was not simply for social reasons , but was a requirement of United States immigration laws , which mandated that third @-@ class passengers be segregated to control immigration and to prevent the spread of infectious diseases . First- and second @-@ class passengers on transatlantic liners disembarked at the main piers on Manhattan Island , but steerage passengers had to go through health checks and processing at Ellis Island . In at least some places , Titanic 's crew appear to have actively hindered the steerage passengers ' escape . Some of the barriers were locked and guarded by crew members , apparently to prevent the steerage passengers from rushing the lifeboats . Irish survivor Margaret Murphy wrote in May 1912 : 
 Before all the steerage passengers had even a chance of their lives , the Titanic 's sailors fastened the doors and <unk> leading up from the third @-@ class section ... A crowd of men was trying to get up to a higher deck and were fighting the sailors ; all striking and scuffling and swearing . Women and some children were there praying and crying . Then the sailors fastened down the hatchways leading to the third @-@ class section . They said they wanted to keep the air down there so the vessel could stay up longer . It meant all hope was gone for those still down there . 
 A long and winding route had to be taken to reach topside ; the steerage @-@ class accommodation , located on C through G decks , was at the extreme ends of the decks , and so was the farthest away from the lifeboats . By contrast , the first @-@ class accommodation was located on the upper decks and so was nearest . Proximity to the lifeboats thus became a key factor in determining who got in them . To add to the difficulty , many of the steerage passengers did not understand or speak English . It was perhaps no coincidence that English @-@ speaking Irish immigrants were disproportionately represented among the steerage passengers who survived . Many of those who did survive owed their lives to third @-@ class steward John Edward Hart , who organised three trips into the ship 's interior to escort groups of third @-@ class passengers up to the boat deck . Others made their way through open barriers or climbed emergency ladders . 
 Some , perhaps overwhelmed by it all , made no attempt to escape and stayed in their cabins or congregated in prayer in the third @-@ class dining room . Leading Fireman Charles Hendrickson saw crowds of third @-@ class passengers below decks with their trunks and possessions , as if waiting for someone to direct them . Psychologist Wynn Craig Wade attributes this to " stoic passivity " produced by generations of being told what to do by social superiors . August Wennerström , one of the male steerage passengers to survive , commented later that many of his companions had made no effort to save themselves . He wrote : 
 Hundreds were in a circle [ in the third @-@ class dining saloon ] with a preacher in the middle , praying , crying , asking God and Mary to help them . They lay there and yelled , never lifting a hand to help themselves . They had lost their own will power and expected God to do all the work for them . 
 = = = = Launching of the last lifeboats = = = = 
 By 01 : 30 , Titanic 's downward angle in the water was increasing and the ship was now listing slightly more to port , but not more than 5 degrees . The deteriorating situation was reflected in the tone of the messages sent from the ship : " We are putting the women off in the boats " at 01 : 25 , " Engine room getting flooded " at 01 : 35 , and at 01 : 45 , " Engine room full up to boilers . " This was Titanic 's last intelligible signal , sent as the ship 's electrical system began to fail ; subsequent messages were jumbled and broken . The two radio operators nonetheless continued sending out distress messages almost to the very end . 
 The remaining boats were filled much closer to capacity and in an increasing rush . No. 11 was filled with five people more than its rated capacity . As it was lowered , it was nearly flooded by water being pumped out of the ship . No. 13 narrowly avoided the same problem but those aboard were unable to release the ropes from which the boat had been lowered . It drifted astern , directly under No. 15 as it was being lowered . The ropes were cut in time and both boats made it away safely . 
 The first signs of panic were seen when a group of passengers attempted to rush port @-@ side lifeboat No. 14 as it was being lowered with 40 people aboard . Fifth Officer Lowe in charge of the boat fired three warning shots in the air to control the crowd , without causing injuries . No. 16 was lowered five minutes later . Among those aboard was stewardess Violet Jessop , who would repeat the experience four years later when she survived the sinking of one of Titanic 's sister ships , Britannic , in the First World War . Collapsible boat C was launched at 01 : 40 from a now largely deserted area of the deck , as most of those on deck had moved to the stern of the ship . It was aboard this boat that White Star chairman and managing director J. Bruce Ismay , Titanic 's most controversial survivor , made his escape from the ship , an act later condemned as cowardice . 
 At 01 : 45 , lifeboat No. 2 was lowered . While it was still at deck level , Lightoller had found the boat occupied by a number of men who , he wrote later , " weren 't British , nor of the English @-@ speaking race ... [ but of ] the broad category known to sailors as ' <unk> ' . " After he evicted them by threatening them with his revolver , he was unable to find enough women and children to fill the boat and lowered it with only 25 people on board out of a possible capacity of 40 . John Jacob Astor saw his wife off to safety in No. 4 boat at 01 : 55 but was refused entry by Lightoller , even though 20 of the 60 seats aboard were unoccupied . 
 The last boat to be launched was collapsible D , which left at 02 : 05 with 25 people aboard ; two more men jumped on the boat as it was being lowered . The sea had reached the boat deck and the forecastle was deep underwater . First class passenger Edith Evans gave up her place in the boat , and ultimately died in the disaster . She was one of only four women in first class to perish in the sinking . Captain Smith carried out a final tour of the deck , telling the radio operators and other crew members : " Now it 's every man for himself . " 
 As passengers and crew headed to the stern , where Father Thomas Byles was hearing confessions and giving <unk> , Titanic 's band played outside the gymnasium . The Titanic had two separate bands of musicians . One was a quintet led by Wallace Hartley that played after dinner and at religious services while the other was a trio who played in the reception area and outside the café and restaurant . The two bands had separate music libraries and arrangements and had not played together before the sinking . Around 30 minutes after colliding with the iceberg , the two bands were called by Captain Smith who ordered them to play in the first class lounge . Passengers present remember them playing lively tunes such as " Alexander 's Ragtime Band " . It is unknown if the two piano players were with the band at this time . The exact time is unknown , but the musicians later moved to the boat deck level where they played before moving outside onto the deck itself . 
 Part of the enduring folklore of the Titanic sinking is that the musicians played the hymn " Nearer , My God , to Thee " as the ship sank , but this appears to be dubious . The claim surfaced among the earliest reports of the sinking , and the hymn became so closely associated with the Titanic disaster that its opening bars were carved on the grave monument of Titanic 's bandmaster , Wallace Hartley , one of those who perished . Violet Jessop said in her 1934 account of the disaster that she had heard the hymn being played . In contrast , Archibald Gracie emphatically denied it in his own account , written soon after the sinking , and Radio Operator Harold Bride said that he had heard the band playing ragtime then " Autumn " , by which he may have meant Archibald Joyce 's then @-@ popular waltz " Songe d 'Automne " ( Autumn Dream ) . George Orrell , the bandmaster of the rescue ship , Carpathia , who spoke with survivors , related : " The ship 's band in any emergency is expected to play to calm the passengers . After Titanic struck the iceberg the band began to play bright music , dance music , comic songs – anything that would prevent the passengers from becoming panic @-@ stricken ... various awe @-@ stricken passengers began to think of the death that faced them and asked the bandmaster to play hymns . The one which appealed to all was ' Nearer My God to Thee ' . " According to Gracie , who was near the band until that section of deck went under , the tunes played by the band were " cheerful " but he didn 't recognise any of them , claiming that if they had played ' Nearer , My God , to Thee ' as claimed in the newspaper " I assuredly should have noticed it and regarded it as a tactless warning of immediate death to us all and one likely to create panic . " Several survivors who were among the last to leave the ship claimed that the band continued playing until the slope of the deck became too steep for them to stand , Gracie claimed that the band stopped playing at least 30 minutes before the vessel sank . Several witnesses support this account including A. H. <unk> , a first class passenger who testified : " I do not wish to detract from the bravery of anybody , but I might mention that when I first came on deck the band was playing a waltz . The next time I passed where the band was stationed , the members had thrown down their instruments and were not to be seen . " 
 Bride heard the band playing as he left the radio cabin , which was by now awash , in the company of the other radio operator , Jack Phillips . He had just had a fight with a man who Bride thought was " a stoker , or someone from below decks " , who had attempted to steal Phillips ' lifebelt . Bride wrote later : " I did my duty . I hope I finished [ the man ] . I don 't know . We left him on the cabin floor of the radio room , and he was not moving . " The two radio operators went in opposite directions , Phillips aft and Bride forward towards collapsible lifeboat B. 
 Archibald Gracie was also heading aft , but as he made his way towards the stern he found his path blocked by " a mass of humanity several lines deep , covering the boat deck , facing us " – hundreds of steerage passengers , who had finally made it to the deck just as the last lifeboats departed . He gave up on the idea of going aft and jumped into the water to get away from the crowd . Others made no attempt to escape . The ship 's designer , Thomas Andrews , was reportedly last seen in the first @-@ class smoking room , having removed his lifebelt , staring at the painting above the fireplace . Captain Smith 's fate is unclear as there are conflicting accounts of his death ; he either entered the wheelhouse on the bridge and died there when it was engulfed or jumped into the water just before the bridge was submerged and subsequently perished in the water , possibly near Collapsible B. 
 = = = Last minutes of sinking ( 02 : 15 – 02 : 20 ) = = = 
 At about 02 : 15 , Titanic 's angle in the water began to increase rapidly as water poured into previously unflooded parts of the ship through deck hatches . Her suddenly increasing angle caused what one survivor called a " giant wave " to wash along the ship from the forward end of the boat deck , sweeping many people into the sea . The parties who were trying to lower collapsible boats A and B , including Chief Officer Henry Wilde , First Officer Murdoch , Second Officer Charles Lightoller and Colonel Archibald Gracie , were swept away along with the two boats ( boat B floated away upside @-@ down with Harold Bride trapped underneath it , and boat A ended up partly flooded and with its canvas not raised ) . Bride , Gracie and Lightoller made it onto boat B , but Murdoch and Wilde perished in the water . 
 Lightoller opted to abandon his post to escape the growing crowds , and dived into the water from the roof of the officers ' quarters . He was sucked into the mouth of a ventilation shaft but was blown clear by " a terrific blast of hot air " and emerged next to the capsized lifeboat . The forward funnel collapsed under its own weight , crushing several people as it fell into the water and only narrowly missing the lifeboat . It closely missed Lightoller and created a wave that washed the boat 50 yards ( 46 m ) clear of the sinking ship . Those still on Titanic felt her structure shuddering as it underwent immense stresses . As first @-@ class passenger Jack Thayer described it : 
 Occasionally there had been a muffled thud or deadened explosion within the ship . Now , without warning she seemed to start forward , moving forward and into the water at an angle of about fifteen degrees . This movement with the water rushing up toward us was accompanied by a rumbling roar , mixed with more muffled explosions . It was like standing under a steel railway bridge while an express train passes overhead mingled with the noise of a pressed steel factory and wholesale breakage of china . 
 Eyewitnesses saw Titanic 's stern lifting high into the air as the ship tilted down in the water . It was said to have reached an angle of 30 – 45 degrees , " revolving apparently around a centre of gravity just astern of midships , " as Lawrence Beesley later put it . Many survivors described a great noise , which some attributed to the boilers exploding . Beesley described it as " partly a groan , partly a rattle , and partly a smash , and it was not a sudden roar as an explosion would be : it went on successively for some seconds , possibly fifteen to twenty " . He attributed it to " the engines and machinery coming loose from their bolts and bearings , and falling through the compartments , smashing everything in their way " . 
 After another minute , the ship 's lights flickered once and then permanently went out , plunging Titanic into darkness . Jack Thayer recalled seeing " groups of the fifteen hundred people still aboard , clinging in clusters or bunches , like swarming bees ; only to fall in masses , pairs or singly as the great <unk> of the ship , two hundred fifty feet of it , rose into the sky . " 
 Titanic was subjected to extreme opposing forces – the flooded bow pulling her down while the air in the stern kept her to the surface – which were concentrated at one of the weakest points in the structure , the area of the engine room hatch . Shortly after the lights went out , the ship split apart . The submerged bow may have remained attached to the stern by the keel for a short time , pulling the stern to a high angle before separating and leaving the stern to float for a few minutes longer . The forward part of the stern would have flooded very rapidly , causing it to tilt and then settle briefly until sinking . The ship disappeared from view at 02 : 20 , 2 hours and 40 minutes after striking the iceberg . Thayer reported that it rotated on the surface , " gradually [ turning ] her deck away from us , as though to hide from our sight the awful spectacle ... Then , with the deadened noise of the bursting of her last few gallant bulkheads , she slid quietly away from us into the sea . " 
 Titanic 's surviving officers and a number of prominent survivors testified that the ship had sunk in one piece , a belief that was affirmed by the British and American inquiries into the disaster . Archibald Gracie , who was on the promenade deck with the band ( by the second funnel ) , stated that " Titanic 's decks were intact at the time she sank , and when I sank with her , there was over seven @-@ sixteenths of the ship already under water , and there was no indication then of any impending break of the deck or ship " . Ballard argued that many other survivors ' accounts indicated that the ship had broken in two as it was sinking . As the engines are now known to have stayed in place along with most of the boilers , the " great noise " heard by witnesses and the momentary settling of the stern were presumably caused by the break @-@ up of the ship rather than the loosening of her fittings or boiler explosions . 
 After they went under , the bow and stern took only a few minutes to sink 3 @,@ 795 metres ( 12 @,@ 451 ft ) , spilling a trail of heavy machinery , tons of coal and large quantities of debris from Titanic 's interior . The two parts of the ship landed about 600 metres ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) apart on a gently undulating area of the seabed . The streamlined bow section continued to descend at about the angle it had taken on the surface , striking the seabed prow @-@ first at a shallow angle at an estimated speed of 25 – 30 mph ( 40 – 48 km / h ) . Its momentum caused it to dig a deep gouge into the seabed and buried the section up to 20 metres ( 66 ft ) deep in sediment before it came to an abrupt halt . The sudden deceleration caused the bow 's structure to buckle downwards by several degrees just forward of the bridge . The decks at the rear end of the bow section , which had already been weakened during the break @-@ up , collapsed one atop another . 
 The stern section seems to have descended almost vertically , probably rotating as it fell . Empty tanks and cofferdams imploded as it descended , tearing open the structure and ripping off the poop deck . The section landed with such force that it buried itself about 15 metres ( 49 ft ) deep at the rudder . The decks pancaked down on top of each other and the hull plating splayed out to the sides . Debris continued to rain down across the seabed for several hours after the sinking . 
 = = = Passengers and crew in the water ( 02 : 20 – 04 : 10 ) = = = 
 In the immediate aftermath of the sinking , hundreds of passengers and crew were left dying in the icy sea , surrounded by debris from the ship . Titanic 's disintegration during her descent to the seabed caused buoyant chunks of debris – timber beams , wooden doors , furniture , panelling and chunks of cork from the bulkheads – to rocket to the surface . These injured and possibly killed some of the swimmers ; others used the debris to try to keep themselves afloat . 
 With a temperature of 28 ° F ( − 2 ° C ) , the water was lethally cold . Second Officer Lightoller described the feeling of " a thousand knives " being driven into his body as he entered the sea . Some of those in the water would have died almost instantly from heart attacks caused by the sudden stress on their cardiovascular systems . Others progressed through the classic symptoms of hypothermia : extreme shivering at first , followed by a slowing and weakening pulse as body temperature dropped , before losing consciousness and dying . 
 Those in the lifeboats were horrified to hear the sound of what Lawrence Beesley called " every possible emotion of human fear , despair , agony , fierce resentment and blind anger mingled – I am certain of those – with notes of infinite surprise , as though each one were saying , ' How is it possible that this awful thing is happening to me ? That I should be caught in this death trap ? ' " Jack Thayer compared it to the sound of " locusts on a summer night " , while George Rheims , who jumped moments before Titanic sank , described it as " a dismal moaning sound which I won 't ever forget ; it came from those poor people who were floating around , calling for help . It was horrifying , mysterious , supernatural . " 
 The noise of the people in the water screaming , yelling , and crying was a tremendous shock to the occupants of the lifeboats , many of whom had up to that moment believed that everyone had escaped before the ship sank . As Beesley later wrote , the cries " came as a thunderbolt , unexpected , inconceivable , incredible . No one in any of the boats standing off a few hundred yards away can have escaped the paralysing shock of knowing that so short a distance away a tragedy , unbelievable in its magnitude , was being enacted , which we , helpless , could in no way avert or diminish . " 
 Only a few of those in the water survived . Among them were Archibald Gracie , Jack Thayer and Charles Lightoller , who made it to the capsized collapsible boat B. Around 12 crew members climbed on board Collapsible B , and they rescued those they could until some 35 men were clinging precariously to the upturned hull . Realising the risk to the boat of being swamped by the mass of swimmers around them , they paddled slowly away , ignoring the pleas of dozens of swimmers to be allowed on board . In his account , Gracie wrote of the admiration he had for those in the water ; " In no instance , I am happy to say , did I hear any word of rebuke from a swimmer because of a refusal to grant assistance ... [ one refusal ] was met with the manly voice of a powerful man ... ' All right boys , good luck and God bless you ' . " Several other swimmers ( probably 20 or more ) reached Collapsible boat A , which was upright but partly flooded , as its sides had not been properly raised . Its occupants had to sit for hours in a foot of freezing water , and many died of hypothermia during the night . 
 Farther out , the other eighteen lifeboats – most of which had empty seats – drifted as the occupants debated what , if anything , they should do to rescue the swimmers . No. 4 boat , having remained near the sinking ship , seems to have been closest to the site of the sinking at around 50 metres ( 160 ft ) away ; this had enabled two people to drop into the boat and another to be picked up from the water before the ship sank . After the sinking , seven more men were pulled from the water , though two later died . Collapsible D rescued one male passenger who jumped in the water and swam over to the boat immediately after it had been lowered . In all the other boats , the occupants eventually decided against returning , probably out of fear that they would be capsized in the attempt . Some put their objections more bluntly ; Quartermaster Hichens , commanding lifeboat No. 6 , told the women aboard his boat that there was no point returning as there were " only a lot of <unk> there . " 
 After about twenty minutes , the cries began to fade as the swimmers lapsed into unconsciousness and death . Fifth Officer Lowe , in charge of lifeboat No. 14 , " waited until the yells and shrieks had subsided for the people to thin out " before mounting an attempt to rescue those in the water . He gathered together five of the lifeboats and transferred the occupants between them to free up space in No. 14 . Lowe then took a crew of seven crewmen and one male passenger who volunteered to help , and then rowed back to the site of the sinking . The whole operation took about three @-@ quarters of an hour . By the time No. 14 headed back to the site of the sinking , almost all of those in the water were dead and only a few voices could still be heard . 
 Lucy , Lady Duff @-@ Gordon , recalled after the disaster that " the very last cry was that of a man who had been calling loudly : ' My God ! My God ! ' He cried monotonously , in a dull , hopeless way . For an entire hour there had been an awful chorus of shrieks , gradually dying into a hopeless moan , until this last cry that I speak of . Then all was silent . " Lowe and his crew found four men still alive , one of whom died shortly afterwards . Otherwise , all they could see were " hundreds of bodies and lifebelts " ; the dead " seemed as if they had perished with the cold as their limbs were all cramped up . " 
 In the other boats , there was nothing the survivors could do but await the arrival of rescue ships . The air was bitterly cold and several of the boats had taken on water . The survivors could not find any food or drinkable water in the boats , and most had no lights . The situation was particularly bad aboard collapsible B , which was only kept afloat by a diminishing air pocket in the upturned hull . As dawn approached , the wind rose and the sea became increasingly choppy , forcing those on the collapsible boat to stand up to balance it . Some , exhausted by the ordeal , fell off into the sea and were drowned . It became steadily harder for the rest to keep their balance on the hull , with waves washing across it . Archibald Gracie later wrote of how he and the other survivors sitting on the upturned hull were struck by " the utter helplessness of our position . " Some swimmers who had reached collapsible A had not enough strength to come aboard , and had to cling to the boat 's sides . The bodies of the majority of the people who died during the night were lowered into the sea to make more room for the survivors . 
 = = = Rescue and departure ( 04 : 10 – 09 : 15 ) = = = 
 Titanic 's survivors were rescued around 04 : 00 on 15 April by the RMS Carpathia , which had steamed through the night at high speed and at considerable risk , as the ship had to dodge numerous icebergs en route . Carpathia 's lights were first spotted around 03 : 30 , which greatly cheered the survivors , though it took several more hours for everyone to be brought aboard . The 30 or more men on collapsible B finally managed to board two other lifeboats , but one survivor died just before the transfer was made . Collapsible A was also in trouble and was now nearly awash ; many of those aboard ( maybe more than a half ) had died overnight . The remaining survivors – an unknown number of men , estimated to be between 10 – 11 and more than 20 , and one woman – were transferred from A into another lifeboat , leaving behind three bodies in the boat , which was left to drift away . It was recovered a month later by the White Star liner Oceanic , with the bodies still aboard . 
 Those on Carpathia were startled by the scene that greeted them as the sun came up : " fields of ice on which , like points on the landscape , rested innumerable pyramids of ice . " Captain Arthur Rostron of Carpathia saw ice all around , including 20 large bergs measuring up to 200 feet ( 61 m ) high and numerous smaller bergs , as well as ice floes and debris from Titanic . It appeared to Carpathia 's passengers that their ship was in the middle of a vast white plain of ice , studded with icebergs appearing like hills in the distance . 
 As the lifeboats were brought alongside Carpathia , the survivors came aboard the ship by various means . Some were strong enough to climb up rope ladders ; others were hoisted up in slings , and the children were hoisted in mail sacks . The last lifeboat to reach the ship was Lightoller 's boat No. 12 , with 74 people aboard a boat designed to carry 65 . They were all on Carpathia by 09 : 00 . There were some scenes of joy as some families and friends were reunited , but in most cases hopes died as loved ones failed to reappear . 
 At 09 : 15 , two more ships appeared on the scene – Mount Temple and Californian , which had finally learned of the disaster when her radio operator returned to duty – but by then there were no more survivors to be rescued . Carpathia had been bound for Fiume , Austria @-@ Hungary ( now Rijeka , Croatia ) , but as she had neither the stores nor the medical facilities to cater for the survivors , Rostron ordered that a course be calculated to return the ship to New York , where the survivors could be properly looked after . Carpathia departed the area , leaving the other ships to carry out a final , fruitless , two @-@ hour search . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Grief and outrage = = = 
 When Carpathia arrived at Pier 34 in New York on the evening of 18 April after a difficult voyage through pack ice , fog , thunderstorms and rough seas , some 40 @,@ 000 people were standing on the wharves , alerted to the disaster by a stream of radio messages from Carpathia and other ships . It was only after Carpathia docked – three days after Titanic 's sinking – that the full scope of the disaster became public knowledge . 
 Even before Carpathia arrived in New York , efforts were getting underway to retrieve the dead . Four ships chartered by the White Star Line succeeded in retrieving 328 bodies ; 119 were buried at sea , while the remaining 209 were brought ashore to the Canadian port of Halifax , Nova Scotia , where 150 of them were buried . Memorials were raised in various places – New York , Washington , Southampton , Liverpool , Belfast and Lichfield , among others – and ceremonies were held on both sides of the Atlantic to commemorate the dead and raise funds to aid the survivors . The bodies of most of Titanic 's victims were never recovered , and the only evidence of their deaths was found 73 years later among the debris on the seabed : pairs of shoes lying side by side , where bodies had once lain before eventually decomposing . 
 The prevailing public reaction to the disaster was one of shock and outrage , directed against a number of issues and people : why were there so few lifeboats ? Why had Ismay saved his own life when so many others died ? Why did Titanic proceed into the icefield at full speed ? The outrage was driven not least by the survivors themselves ; even while they were aboard Carpathia on their way to New York , Beesley and other survivors determined to " awaken public opinion to safeguard ocean travel in the future " and wrote a public letter to The Times urging changes to maritime safety laws . 
 In places closely associated with Titanic , the sense of grief was deep . The heaviest losses were in Southampton , home port to 699 crewmembers and also home to many of the passengers . Crowds of weeping women – the wives , sisters and mothers of crew – gathered outside the White Star offices in Southampton for news of their loved ones . Most of them were among the 549 Southampton residents who perished . In Belfast , churches were packed , and shipyard workers wept in the streets . The ship had been a symbol of Belfast 's industrial achievements , and there was not only a sense of grief but also one of guilt , as those who had built Titanic came to feel that they had been responsible in some way for her loss . 
 = = = Public inquiries and legislation = = = 
 In the aftermath of the sinking , public inquiries were set up in Britain and the United States . The US inquiry began on 19 April under the chairmanship of Senator William Alden Smith , while the British inquiry commenced in London under Lord Mersey on 2 May 1912 . They reached broadly similar conclusions : the regulations on the number of lifeboats that ships had to carry were out of date and inadequate ; Captain Smith had failed to take proper heed of ice warnings ; the lifeboats had not been properly filled or crewed ; and the collision was the direct result of steaming into a danger area at too high a speed . Captain Lord of the Californian was strongly criticised by both inquiries for failing to render assistance to Titanic . 
 Neither inquiry found negligence by the International Mercantile Marine Co . ( the parent company ) or the White Star Line ( which owned the Titanic ) to be a factor . The US inquiry concluded that those involved had followed standard practice , and the disaster could thus only be categorised as an " act of God " , and the British inquiry concluded that Smith had followed long @-@ standing practice which had not previously been shown to be unsafe ( the inquiry noted that British ships alone had carried 3 @.@ 5 million passengers over the previous decade with the loss of just 73 lives ) and concluded that he had done " only that which other skilled men would have done in the same position . " The British inquiry also warned that " What was a mistake in the case of the Titanic would without doubt be negligence in any similar case in the future . " 
 The disaster led to major changes in maritime regulations to implement new safety measures , such as ensuring that more lifeboats were provided , that lifeboat drills were properly carried out and that radio equipment on passenger ships was manned around the clock . An International Ice Patrol was set up to monitor the presence of icebergs in the North Atlantic , and maritime safety regulations were harmonised internationally through the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea ( SOLAS ) ; both measures are still in force today . 
 = = = Cultural impact and wreckage = = = 
 Titanic 's sinking has become a cultural phenomenon , commemorated by artists , film @-@ makers , writers , composers , musicians and dancers from the time immediately after the sinking to the present day . On 1 September 1985 a joint US @-@ French expedition led by Robert Ballard found the wreck of Titanic , and the ship 's rediscovery led to an explosion of interest in Titanic 's story . Numerous expeditions have been launched to film the wreck and , controversially , to salvage objects from the debris field . The first major exhibition of recovered artefacts was held at London 's National Maritime Museum in 1994 – 95 . In 1997 , James Cameron 's eponymous film became the first movie ever to take $ 1 billion at the box office , and the film 's soundtrack became the best selling soundtrack recording of all time . 
 The wreck is steadily decaying , turning to oxide at a rate of 0 @.@ 5 – 1 ton per day ( assuming one ten @-@ thousandth of an inch per day on all surfaces ) . Eventually Titanic 's structure will collapse , and she will be reduced to a patch of rust on the seabed , with any remaining scraps of the ship 's hull mingled with her more durable fittings , like the propellers , bronze capstans , compasses and the <unk> . 
 = = Casualties and survivors = = 
 The number of casualties of the sinking is unclear , due to a number of factors , including confusion over the passenger list , which included some names of people who cancelled their trip at the last minute , and the fact that several passengers travelled under aliases for various reasons and were double @-@ counted on the casualty lists . The death toll has been put at between 1 @,@ 490 and 1 @,@ 635 people . The figures below are from the British Board of Trade report on the disaster . 
 Less than a third of those aboard Titanic survived the disaster . Some survivors died shortly afterwards ; injuries and the effects of exposure caused the deaths of several of those brought aboard Carpathia . Of the groups shown in the table , 49 % of the children , 26 % of the female passengers , 82 % of the male passengers and 78 % of the crew died . The figures show stark differences in the survival rates of the different classes aboard Titanic , especially among women and children . Although less than 10 percent of first- and second @-@ class women ( combined ) were lost , 54 % of those in third class died . Similarly , five of six first @-@ class and all second @-@ class children survived , but 52 of the 79 in third class perished . The only first @-@ class child to perish was Loraine Allison , aged 2 . <unk> , the heaviest losses were suffered by the second @-@ class men , of whom 92 % died . Additionally , among the pets brought aboard three survived the sinking . 
 = WTF ? ! = 
 WTF ? ! is the seventeenth studio album by German industrial band KMFDM , released on April 26 , 2011 , on KMFDM Records and Metropolis Records . The regular line @-@ up of Sascha Konietzko , Lucia Cifarelli , Jules Hodgson , Andy Selway , and Steve White was joined by a handful of musicians from other industrial and alternative metal acts . The album took about twice as long as usual for the band to produce , and underwent a significant amount of modification during its recording . 
 WTF ? ! reached No. 8 on Billboard 's Dance / Electronic Albums chart . Its first single , " Krank " , hit No. 15 on the Billboard Singles chart , while its second , " Amnesia " , hit No. 3 on the Deutsche Alternative Charts . Critics were generally very positive about the album , and while some felt the album was relatively creative , most felt it stayed close to the same formula the band had used for years . 
 = = Background = = 
 Band leader Sascha Konietzko first mentioned a new album that would feature " a slew of guest musicians " in March 2010 . Former collaborator Bill Rieflin returned to help with WTF ? ! , and Koichi Fukuda also added guitar work . William Wilson , who had previously performed vocals on " Day of Light " , and Free Dominguez , of the group Kidneythieves , were brought in as guest vocalists for one song apiece . In an interview in September 2010 , Konietzko said the new album would be named Zilch . A remixed version of " Rebels in Control " was made available on the band 's website in December 2010 as a show of support for Wikileaks editor @-@ in @-@ chief Julian Assange , and was streamed more than 75 @,@ 000 times in two days . The name of the forthcoming album was also revealed to have been changed to WTF ? ! around the same time . 
 = = Production = = 
 Konietzko explained in an April 2011 interview that the album had taken fourteen months to complete , about twice as long as usual . He said that everything on the album " went through a grinder , was then re @-@ constituted and went through a whole process of re @-@ birthing yet once again " , adding that every single component of the album was redone at least once . Konietzko also commented before the album 's release that due to the significant time difference between his location ( Hamburg , Germany ) and the rest of the band ( on the United States west coast ) , " I take my rest and they work , so it 's like we get two full work days in a 24 hour frame . " 
 The song " <unk> " marks the first time the band has written a song with Italian lyrics , and is a translation of " Liebeslied " from the band 's 1990 album Naïve . The song " Death and Burial of C.R. " is lyrically based on the English nursery rhyme " Who Killed Cock Robin " . The song " Vive La Mort ! " includes the lyrics " aces and eights " , a reference to Wild Bill Hickok 's last hand . 
 = = Release = = 
 The concept for the album cover was conceived jointly by Konietzko and longtime band associate and cover artist Aidan " Brute ! " Hughes . Hughes stated that he achieved a look similar to the angelic look of Renaissance paintings of the Madonna with the artwork . 
 The album 's first single , " Krank " , was released March 8 , 2011 , and debuted at No. 15 on the Billboard Singles Chart . WTF ? ! was released on April 26 , 2012 , and reached No. 8 on Billboard 's Dance / Electronic Albums chart on May 14 , 2011 . It also debuted at No. 1 on the iTunes Electronic Album chart . The song " Amnesia " was released as a single on May 22 , 2012 . It peaked at No. 3 on the Deutsche Alternative Charts in mid @-@ July . 
 The band toured North America in support of the album in August 2011 , with Wilson accompanying the band as a guest vocalist . A longer tour of Europe took place in October and November . 
 = = Reception = = 
 WTF ? ! received very positive reviews , with critics split over whether the album broke new ground compared to previous releases . Some felt the album explored new musical territory . Trey Spencer of Sputnikmusic praised the album and the band 's creativity , saying KMFDM had " stepped outside of their comfort zone by ... opening up to a little experimentation . " William Dashiell Hammett of COMA Music Magazine was strongly complimentary , saying , " The level of musicianship and creativity shown on this album is breathtaking . " 
 Most critics felt KMFDM stayed close to its usual sound on WTF ? ! . David Jeffries of Allmusic commented , " The ' ultra heavy beat ' sounds as ' ultra ' and ' heavy ' as ever on WTF ? ! " He went on to say the album was " an outstanding blast of dark dancefloor destruction " and saying the album should be on " the top shelf " . Gregory <unk> of <unk> mostly praised the album , saying that while the band doesn 't " break new creative ground " on WTF ? ! , which he said wasn 't the " heaviest , fastest or most experimental album " , it was " still rock @-@ solid , sporting some outstanding melodies and rhythms , and many memorable moments " . Ilker Yücel of ReGen Magazine called WTF ? ! a " hard @-@ hitting dose of industrial rock that is as familiar as it is unusual " . He concluded his review by saying , " In short , it ’ s KMFDM by @-@ the @-@ numbers , and after 27 years , that 's not a bad thing at all . " Mark von Pfeiffer of Magnetic said , " WTF ? is typical : electronic used to augment electric to over @-@ human speeds and volumes , outrageous claims made in the 3rd @-@ person " . He also thought the album was more accessible , saying , " This is industrial , but edible for most anyone looking for a bit of roughage on their playlist . " Petra Whiteley of Reflections of Darkness called WTF ? ! " a solid release bursting with power and determination " . She also said of KMFDM , " musically they are not far of their centre and typical sound , which is not a bad thing " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 All credits come from 2011 liner notes . 
 = = = Band members = = = 
 Sascha Konietzko – vocals , synthesizers , programming , drum programming ( 1 – 3 , 5 , 7 – 11 ) , party balloon solo ( 3 ) , bass guitar ( 3 , 7 – 8 , 11 ) , guitar ( 9 ) , feedback guitar ( 7 ) , metal percussion ( 9 ) , production , mixing 
 Lucia Cifarelli – vocals 
 Jules Hodgson – guitar , synths ( 3 ) , all programming and instruments ( 4 ) , drum programming ( 5 ) , mixing 
 Andy Selway – drums 
 Steve White – guitar , drum programming ( 6 ) , synths ( 6 ) , bass guitar ( 9 ) , keyboards ( 9 ) 
 = = = Additional personnel = = = 
 Free Dominguez – vocals ( 5 ) 
 Che Eckert – news speak ( 3 ) 
 Michael " Quirk " Dorsett – <unk> ( 7 ) 
 Koichi Fukuda – guitar ( 2 ) 
 Sebastian <unk> – drum programming ( 3 , 10 ) , synth production ( 3 , 10 ) 
 Bill Rieflin – nervous chatter ( 7 ) , jaw shivers ( 7 ) 
 William Wilson – vocals ( 9 ) 
 Frank De Wulf – TB @-@ 303 riff ( 1 ) 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Brian Gardner – mastering 
 Brute ! – artwork 
 Justin Gammon – layout 
 <unk> Management – post production coordination 
 = Æthelwulf = 
 Æthelwulf ( Old English for " Noble Wolf " ) was King of Wessex from 839 to 858 . In 825 his father , King Egbert , defeated King Beornwulf of Mercia , ending a long Mercian dominance over Anglo @-@ Saxon England south of the Humber . Egbert sent Æthelwulf with an army to Kent , where he expelled the Mercian sub @-@ king and was appointed sub @-@ king . After 830 , Egbert maintained good relations with Mercia , and this was continued by Æthelwulf when he became king in 839 , the first son to succeed his father as West Saxon king since 641 . 
 The Vikings were not a major threat to Wessex during Æthelwulf 's reign . In 843 he was defeated in a battle against the Vikings at Carhampton in Somerset , but achieved a major victory at the Battle of <unk> in 851 . In 853 he joined a successful Mercian expedition to Wales to restore the traditional Mercian hegemony , and in the same year his daughter Æthelswith married King Burgred of Mercia . In 855 Æthelwulf went on pilgrimage to Rome . In preparation he gave a " decimation " , donating a tenth of his personal property to his subjects ; he appointed his eldest surviving son Æthelbald to act as King of Wessex in his absence , and his next son Æthelberht to rule Kent and the south @-@ east . Æthelwulf spent a year in Rome , and on his way back he married Judith , the daughter of the West Frankish King Charles the Bald . 
 When Æthelwulf returned to England , Æthelbald refused to surrender the West Saxon throne , and Æthelwulf agreed to divide the kingdom , taking the east and leaving the west in Æthelbald 's hands . On Æthelwulf 's death in 858 he left Wessex to Æthelbald and Kent to Æthelberht , but Æthelbald 's death only two years later led to the re @-@ unification of the kingdom . 
 In the twentieth century Æthelwulf 's reputation among historians was poor : he was seen as excessively pious and impractical , and his pilgrimage was viewed as a desertion of his duties . Historians in the twenty @-@ first century see him very differently , as a king who consolidated and extended the power of his dynasty , commanded respect on the continent , and dealt more effectively than most of his contemporaries with Viking attacks . He is regarded as one of the most successful West Saxon kings , who laid the foundations for the success of his son , Alfred the Great . 
 = = Background = = 
 At the beginning of the ninth century , England was almost completely under the control of the Anglo @-@ Saxons , with Mercia and Wessex the most important southern kingdoms . Mercia was dominant until the 820s , and it exercised overlordship over East Anglia and Kent , but Wessex was able to maintain its independence from its more powerful neighbour . Offa , King of Mercia from 757 to 796 , was the dominant figure of the second half of the eighth century . King Beorhtric of Wessex ( 786 – 802 ) , married Offa 's daughter in 789 . Beorhtric and Offa drove Æthelwulf 's father Egbert into exile , and he spent several years at the court of Charlemagne in Francia . Egbert was the son of Ealhmund , who had briefly been King of Kent in 784 . Following Offa 's death , King Coenwulf of Mercia ( 796 – 821 ) maintained Mercian dominance , but it is uncertain whether Beorhtric ever accepted political subordination , and when he died in 802 Egbert became king , perhaps with the support of Charlemagne . For two hundred years three kindreds had fought for the West Saxon throne , and no son had followed his father as king . Egbert 's best claim was that he was the great @-@ great @-@ grandson of Ingild , brother of King Ine ( 688 – 726 ) , and in 802 it would have seemed very unlikely that he would establish a lasting dynasty . 
 Almost nothing is recorded of the first twenty years of Egbert 's reign , apart from campaigns against the Cornish in the 810s . The historian Richard Abels argues that the silence of the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle was probably intentional , concealing Egbert 's purge of Beorhtric 's magnates and suppression of rival royal lines . Relations between Mercian kings and their Kentish subjects were distant . Kentish ealdormen did not attend the court of King Coenwulf , who quarrelled with Archbishop Wulfred of Canterbury ( 805 – 832 ) over the control of Kentish monasteries ; Coenwulf 's primary concern seems to have been to gain access to the wealth of Kent . His successors Ceolwulf I ( 821 – 23 ) and Beornwulf ( 823 – 26 ) restored relations with Archbishop Wulfred , and Beornwulf appointed a sub @-@ king of Kent , Baldred . 
 England had suffered Viking raids in the late eighth century , but no attacks are recorded between 794 and 835 , when the Isle of Sheppey in Kent was ravaged . In 836 Egbert was defeated by the Vikings at Carhampton in Somerset , but in 838 he was victorious over an alliance of Cornishmen and Vikings at the Battle of Hingston Down , reducing Cornwall to the status of a client kingdom . 
 = = Family = = 
 Æthelwulf was the son of Egbert , King of Wessex from 802 to 839 . His mother 's name is unknown , and he had no recorded siblings . So far as is known , his wife <unk> was the mother of all his children . She was the daughter of Oslac , described by Asser , biographer of their son Alfred the Great , as " King Æthelwulf 's famous butler " , a man who was descended from Jutes who had ruled the Isle of Wight . Æthelwulf had six known children . His eldest son , Æthelstan , was old enough to be appointed King of Kent in 839 , so he must have been born by the early 820s , and he died in the early 850s . The second son , Æthelbald , is first recorded as a charter witness in 841 , and if , like Alfred , he began to attest when he was around six , he would have been born around 835 ; he was King of Wessex from 858 to 860 . Æthelwulf 's third son , Æthelberht , was probably born around 839 and was king from 860 to 865 . The only daughter , Æthelswith , married Burgred , King of Mercia , in 853 . The other two sons were much younger : Æthelred was born around 848 and was king from 865 to 871 , and Alfred was born around 849 and was king from 871 to 899 . In 856 Æthelwulf married Judith , daughter of Charles the Bald , King of West Francia and future Holy Roman Emperor , and his wife <unk> . <unk> had probably died , although it is possible that she had been repudiated . There were no children from Æthelwulf 's marriage to Judith , and after his death she married his eldest surviving son and successor , Æthelbald . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Æthelwulf was first recorded in 825 , when Egbert won the crucial Battle of Ellandun against King Beornwulf of Mercia , ending the long Mercian ascendancy over southern England . Egbert followed it up by sending Æthelwulf with <unk> , Bishop of Sherborne , and Wulfheard , Ealdorman of Hampshire , with a large army into Kent to expel sub @-@ king Baldred . Æthelwulf was descended from kings of Kent , and he was sub @-@ king of Kent , and of Surrey , Sussex and Essex , which were then included in the sub @-@ kingdom , until he inherited the throne of Wessex in 839 . His sub @-@ kingship is recorded in charters , in some of which King Egbert acted with his son 's permission , such as a grant in 838 to Bishop <unk> of Rochester , and Æthelwulf himself issued a charter as King of Kent in the same year . Unlike their Mercian predecessors , who alienated the Kentish people by ruling from a distance , Æthelwulf and his father successfully cultivated local support by governing through Kentish ealdormen and promoting their interests . In Abels 's view , Egbert and Æthelwulf rewarded their friends and purged Mercian supporters . Historians take differing views on the attitude of the new regime to the Kentish church . At Canterbury in 828 Egbert granted privileges to the bishopric of Rochester , and according to the historian of Anglo @-@ Saxon England Simon Keynes , Egbert and Æthelwulf took steps to secure the support of Archbishop Wulfred . However , the medievalist Nicholas Brooks argues that Wulfred 's Mercian origin and connections proved a liability . Æthelwulf seized an estate in East Malling from the Canterbury church on the ground that it had only been granted by Baldred when he was in flight from the West Saxon forces ; the issue of archiepiscopal coinage was suspended for several years ; and the only estate Wulfred was granted after 825 he received from King Wiglaf of Mercia . 
 In 829 Egbert conquered Mercia , only for Wiglaf to recover his kingdom a year later . The scholar D. P. Kirby sees Wiglaf 's restoration in 830 as a dramatic reversal for Egbert , which was probably followed by his loss of control of the London mint and the Mercian recovery of Essex and Berkshire , and the historian Heather Edwards states that his " immense conquest could not be maintained " . However , in the view of Keynes : 
 It is interesting ... that both Egbert and his son Æthelwulf appear to have respected the separate identity of Kent and its associated provinces , as if there appears to have been no plan at this stage to absorb the southeast into an enlarged kingdom stretching across the whole of southern England . Nor does it seem to have been the intention of Egbert and his successors to maintain supremacy of any kind over the kingdom of Mercia ... It is quite possible that Egbert had relinquished Mercia of his own volition ; and there is no suggestion that any residual antagonism affected relations between the rulers of Wessex and Mercia thereafter . 
 In 838 King Egbert held an assembly at Kingston in Surrey , where Æthelwulf may have received royal consecration by the archbishop . Egbert restored the East Malling estate to Wulfred 's successor as Archbishop of Canterbury , Ceolnoth , in return for a promise of " firm and unbroken friendship " for himself and Æthelwulf and their heirs , and the same condition is specified in a grant to the see of Winchester . Egbert thus ensured support for Æthelwulf , who became the first son to succeed his father as West Saxon king since 641 . At the same meeting Kentish monasteries chose Æthelwulf as their lord , and he undertook that , after his death , they would have freedom to elect their heads . Wulfred had devoted his archiepiscopate to fighting against secular power over Kentish monasteries , but Ceolnoth now surrendered effective control to Æthelwulf , whose offer of freedom from control after his death was unlikely to be honoured by his successors . Kentish ecclesiastics and laymen now looked for protection against Viking attacks to West Saxon rather than Mercian royal power . 
 Egbert 's conquests brought him wealth far greater than his predecessors had enjoyed , and enabled him to purchase the support which secured the West Saxon throne for his descendants . The stability brought by the dynastic succession of Egbert and Æthelwulf led to an expansion of commercial and agrarian resources , and to an expansion of royal income . The wealth of the West Saxon kings was also increased by the agreement in 838 – 39 with Archbishop Ceolnoth for the previously independent West Saxon minsters to accept the king as their secular lord in return for his protection . However , there was no certainty that the hegemony of Wessex would prove more permanent than that of Mercia . 
 = = King of Wessex = = 
 When Æthelwulf succeeded to the throne of Wessex in 839 , his experience as sub @-@ king of Kent had given him valuable training in kingship , and he in turn made his own sons sub @-@ kings . According to the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , on his accession " he gave to his son Æthelstan the kingdom of the people of Kent , and the kingdom of the East Saxons and of the people of Surrey and of the South Saxons " . However , Æthelwulf did not give Æthelstan the same power as his father had given him , and although Æthelstan attested his father 's charters as king , he does not appear to have been given the power to issue his own charters . Æthelwulf exercised authority in the south @-@ east and made regular visits there . He governed Wessex and Kent as separate spheres , and assemblies in each kingdom were only attended by the nobility of that country . The historian Janet Nelson says that " Æthelwulf ran a Carolingian @-@ style family firm of plural realms , held together by his own authority as father @-@ king , and by the consent of distinct élites . " He maintained his father 's policy of governing Kent through ealdormen appointed from the local nobility and advancing their interests , but gave less support to the church . In 843 Æthelwulf granted ten hides at Little Chart to <unk> , the brother of the leading Kentish ealdorman <unk> , and <unk> succeeded to the post on his brother 's death in 853 . In 844 Æthelwulf granted land at Horton in Kent to Ealdorman Eadred , with permission to transfer parts of it to local landowners ; in a culture of reciprocity , this created a network of mutual friendships and obligations between the beneficiaries and the king . Archbishops of Canterbury were firmly in the West Saxon king 's sphere . His ealdormen enjoyed a high status , and sometimes attested charters above the king 's sons . His reign is the first for which there is evidence of royal priests , and Malmesbury Abbey regarded him as an important benefactor , who is said to have been the donor of a shrine for the relics of Saint Aldhelm . 
 After 830 , Egbert had followed a policy of maintaining good relations with Mercia , and this was continued by Æthelwulf when he became king . London was traditionally a Mercian town , but in the 830s it was under West Saxon control ; soon after Æthelwulf 's accession it reverted to Mercian control . King Wiglaf of Mercia died in 839 and his successor , Berhtwulf , revived the Mercian mint in London ; the two kingdoms appear to have struck a joint issue in the mid @-@ 840s , possibly indicating West Saxon help in reviving Mercian coinage , and showing the friendly relations between the two powers . Berkshire was still Mercian in 844 , but by 849 it was part of Wessex , as Alfred was born in that year at the West Saxon royal estate in Wantage , then in Berkshire . However , the local Mercian ealdorman , also called Æthelwulf , retained his position under the West Saxon kings . Berhtwulf died in 852 and cooperation with Wessex continued under Burgred , his successor as King of Mercia , who married Æthelwulf 's daughter Æthelswith in 853 . In the same year Æthelwulf assisted Burgred in a successful attack on Wales to restore the traditional Mercian hegemony over the Welsh . 
 In ninth @-@ century Mercia and Kent , royal charters were produced by religious houses , each with its own style , but in Wessex there was a single royal diplomatic tradition , probably by a single agency acting for the king . This may have originated in Egbert 's reign , and it becomes clear in the 840s , when Æthelwulf had a Frankish secretary called Felix . There were strong contacts between the West Saxon and Carolingian courts . The Annals of St Bertin took particular interest in Viking attacks on Britain , and in 852 Lupus , the Abbot of <unk> and a protégé of Charles the Bald , wrote to Æthelwulf congratulating him on his victory over the Vikings and requesting a gift of lead to cover his church roof . Lupus also wrote to his " most beloved friend " Felix , asking him to manage the transport of the lead . Unlike Canterbury and the south @-@ east , Wessex did not see a sharp decline in the standard of Latin in charters in the mid @-@ ninth century , and this may have been partly due to Felix and his continental contacts . Lupus thought that Felix had great influence over the King . Charters were mainly issued from royal estates in counties which were the heartland of ancient Wessex , namely Hampshire , Somerset , Wiltshire and Dorset , with a few in Kent . 
 An ancient division between east and west Wessex continued to be important in the ninth century , with the boundary being Selwood Forest on the borders of Somerset , Dorset and Wiltshire . The two bishoprics of Wessex were Selborne in the west and Winchester in the east . Æthelwulf 's family connections seem to have been west of Selwood , but his patronage was concentrated further east , particularly on Winchester , where his father was buried , and where he appointed Swithun to succeed <unk> as bishop in 852 – 853 . However , he made a grant of land in Somerset to his leading ealdorman , Eanwulf , and on 26 December 846 he granted a large estate to himself in South Hams in west Devon . He thus changed it from royal demesne , which he was obliged to pass on to his successor as king , to bookland , which could be transferred as the owner pleased , so he could make land grants to followers to improve security in a frontier zone . 
 = = Viking threat = = 
 Viking raids increased in the early 840s on both sides of the English Channel , and in 843 Æthelwulf was defeated by the companies of thirty @-@ five Danish ships at Carhampton in Somerset . In 850 sub @-@ king Æthelstan and Ealdorman Ealhhere of Kent won a naval victory over a large Viking fleet off Sandwich in Kent , capturing nine ships and driving off the rest . Æthelwulf granted Ealhhere a large estate in Kent , but Æthelstan is not heard of again , and probably died soon afterwards . The following year the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle records five different attacks on southern England . A Danish fleet of 350 Viking ships took London and Canterbury , and when King Berhtwulf of Mercia went to their relief he was defeated . The Vikings then moved on to Surrey , where they were defeated by Æthelwulf and his son Æthelbald at the Battle of <unk> . According to the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle the West Saxon levies " there made the greatest slaughter of a heathen that we have heard tell of up to the present day " . The Chronicle frequently reported victories during Æthelwulf 's reign won by levies led by ealdormen , unlike the 870s when royal command was emphasised , reflecting a more consensual style of leadership in the earlier period . 
 In 850 a Danish army wintered on Thanet , and in 853 ealdormen Ealhhere of Kent and Huda of Surrey were killed in a battle against the Vikings , also on Thanet . In 855 Danish Vikings stayed over the winter on Sheppey , before carrying on their pillaging of eastern England . However , during Æthelwulf 's reign Viking attacks were contained and did not present a major threat . 
 = = Coinage = = 
 The silver penny was almost the only coin used in middle and later Anglo @-@ Saxon England . Æthelwulf 's coinage came from a main mint in Canterbury and a secondary one at Rochester ; both had been used by Egbert for his own coinage after he gained control of Kent . During Æthelwulf 's reign , there were four main phases of the coinage distinguishable at both mints , though they are not exactly parallel and it is uncertain when the transitions took place . The first issue at Canterbury carried a design known as <unk> , which had been used by Egbert for one of his own issues . This was replaced by a portrait design in about 843 , which can be subdivided further ; the earliest coins have cruder designs than the later ones . At the Rochester mint the sequence was reversed , with an initial portrait design replaced , also in about 843 , by a non @-@ portrait design carrying a cross @-@ and @-@ wedges pattern on the obverse . 
 In about 848 both mints switched to a common design known as Dor ¯ b ¯ / Cant – the characters " Dor ¯ b ¯ " on the obverse of these coins indicates either <unk> ( Canterbury ) or <unk> ( Rochester ) , and " Cant " , referring to Kent , appeared on the reverse . It is possible that the Canterbury mint continued to produce portrait coins at the same time . The Canterbury issue seems to have been ended in 850 – 851 by Viking raids , though it is possible that Rochester was spared , and the issue may have continued there . The final issue , again at both mints , was introduced in about 852 ; it has an inscribed cross on the reverse and a portrait on the obverse . Æthelwulf 's coinage became debased by the end of his reign , and though the problem became worse after his death it is possible that the debasement prompted the changes in coin type from as early as 850 . 
 Æthelwulf 's first Rochester coinage may have begun when he was still sub @-@ king of Kent , under Egbert . A hoard of coins deposited at the beginning of Æthelwulf 's reign in about 840 , found in the Middle Temple in London , contained 22 coins from Rochester and two from Canterbury of the first issue of each mint . Some numismatists argue that the high proportion of Rochester coins means that the issue must have commenced before Egbert 's death , but an alternative explanation is that whoever hoarded the coins simply happened to have access to more Rochester coins . No coins were issued by Æthelwulf 's sons during his reign . 
 Ceolnoth , Archbishop of Canterbury throughout Æthelwulf 's reign , also minted coins of his own at Canterbury : there were three different portrait designs , thought to be contemporary with each of the first three of Æthelwulf 's Canterbury issues . These were followed by an inscribed cross design that was uniform with Æthelwulf 's final coinage . At Rochester , Bishop <unk> produced only one issue , a cross @-@ and @-@ wedges design which was contemporary with Æthelwulf 's <unk> issue . 
 In the view of the numismatists Philip Grierson and Mark Blackburn , the mints of Wessex , Mercia and East Anglia were not greatly affected by changes in political control : " the remarkable continuity of moneyers which can be seen at each of these mints suggests that the actual mint organisation was largely independent of the royal administration and was founded in the stable trading communities of each city " . 
 = = Decimation Charters = = 
 The early twentieth @-@ century historian W. H. Stevenson observed that : " Few things in our early history have led to so much discussion " as Æthelwulf 's Decimation Charters ; a hundred years later the charter expert Susan Kelly described them as " one of the most controversial groups of Anglo @-@ Saxon diplomas " . Both Asser and the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle say that Æthelwulf gave a decimation , in 855 , shortly before leaving on pilgrimage to Rome . According to the Chronicle " King Æthelwulf conveyed by charter the tenth part of his land throughout all his kingdom to the praise of God and to his own eternal salvation " . However , Asser states that " Æthelwulf , the esteemed king , freed the tenth part of his whole kingdom from royal service and tribute , and as an everlasting inheritance he made it over on the cross of Christ to the triune God , for the redemption of his soul and those of his predecessors . " According to Keynes , Asser 's version may just be a " loose translation " of the Chronicle , and his implication that Æthelwulf released a tenth of all land from secular burdens was probably not intended . All land could be regarded as the king 's land , so the Chronicle reference to " his land " does not necessarily refer to royal property , and since the booking of land – conveying it by charter – was always regarded as a pious act , Asser 's statement that he made it over to God does not necessarily mean that the charters were in favour of the church . 
 The Decimation Charters are divided by Susan Kelly into four groups : 
 1 . Two dated at Winchester on 5 November 844 . In a charter in the Malmesbury archive , Æthelwulf refers in the proem to the perilous state of his kingdom as the result of the assaults of pagans and barbarians . For the sake of his soul and in return for masses for the king and ealdormen each Wednesday , " I have decided to give in perpetual liberty some portion of hereditary lands to all those ranks previously in possession , both to God 's servants and handmaidens serving God and to laymen , always the tenth hide , and where it is less , then the tenth part . " 
 2 . Six dated at Wilton on Easter Day , 22 April 854 . In the common text of these charters , Æthelwulf states that " for the sake of his soul and the prosperity of the kingdom and [ the salvation of ] the people assigned to him by God , he has acted upon the advice given to him by his bishops , <unk> , and all his nobles . He has granted the tenth part of the lands throughout his kingdom , not only to the churches , but also to his thegns . The land is granted in perpetual liberty , so that it will remain free of royal services and all secular burdens . In return there will be liturgical commemoration of the king and of his bishops and ealdormen . " 
 3 . Five from Old Minster , Winchester , connected with the Wilton meeting but generally considered spurious . 
 4 . One from Kent dated 855 , the only one to have the same date as the decimation according to Chronicle and Asser . The king grants to his thegn Dunn property in Rochester " on account of the decimation of lands which by God 's gift I have decided to do " . Dunn left the land to his wife with reversion to Rochester Cathedral . 
 None of the charters are original , and Stevenson dismissed all of them as fraudulent apart from the Kentish one of 855 . Stevenson saw the decimation as a donation of royal demesne to churches and laymen , with those grants which were made to laymen being on the understanding that there would be reversion to a religious institution . Up to the 1990s , his view on the authenticity of the charters was generally accepted by scholars , with the exception of the historian H. P. R. Finberg , who argued in 1964 that most are based on authentic diplomas . He coined the terms the First Decimation of 844 , which he saw as the removal of public dues on a tenth of all bookland , and the Second Decimation of 854 , the donation of a tenth of " the private domain of the royal house " to the churches . He considered it unlikely that the First Decimation had been carried into effect , probably due to the threat from the Vikings . Finberg 's terminology has been adopted , but his defence of the First Decimation generally rejected . In 1994 Keynes defended the Wilton charters in group 2 , and his arguments have been widely accepted . 
 Historians have been divided on how to interpret the Second Decimation , and in 1994 Keynes described it as " one of the most perplexing problems " in the study of ninth @-@ century charters . He set out three alternatives : 
 1 . It conveyed a tenth of the royal demesne – the lands of the crown as opposed to the personal property of the sovereign – into the hands of churches , ecclesiastics and laymen . In Anglo @-@ Saxon England property was either folkland or bookland . The transmission of folkland was governed by the customary rights of kinsmen , subject to the king 's approval , whereas bookland was established by the grant of a royal charter , and could be disposed of freely by the owner . Booking land thus converted it by charter from folkland to bookland . The royal demesne was the crown 's folkland , whereas the king 's bookland was his own personal property which he could leave by will as he chose . In the decimation Æthelwulf may have conveyed royal folkland by charter to become bookland , in some cases to laymen who already rented the land . 
 2 . It was the booking of a tenth of folkland to its owners , who would then be free to convey it to a church . 
 3 . It was a reduction of one tenth in the secular burdens on lands already in the possession of landowners . The secular burdens would have included the provision of supplies for the king and his officials , and payment of various taxes . 
 Some scholars , for example Frank Stenton , author of the standard history of Anglo @-@ Saxon England , along with Keynes and Abels , see the Second Decimation as a donation of royal demesne . In Abels ' view Æthelwulf sought loyalty from the aristocracy and church during the king 's forthcoming absence from Wessex , and displayed a sense of dynastic insecurity also evident in his father 's generosity towards the Kentish church in 838 , and in an " avid attention " in this period to compiling and revising royal genealogies . Keynes suggests that " Æthelwulf 's purpose was presumably to earn divine assistance in his struggles against the Vikings " , and the mid @-@ twentieth @-@ century historian Eric John observes that " a lifetime of medieval studies teaches one that an early medieval king was never so political as when he was on his knees " . The view that the decimation was a donation of the king 's own personal estate is supported by the Anglo @-@ Saxonist Alfred Smyth , who argues that these were the only lands the king was entitled to alienate by book . The historian Martin Ryan prefers the view that Æthelwulf freed a tenth part of land owned by laymen from secular obligations , who could now endow churches under their own patronage . Ryan sees it as part of a campaign of religious devotion . According to the historian David Pratt , it " is best interpreted as a strategic ' tax cut ' , designed to encourage cooperation in defensive measures through a partial remission of royal dues " . Nelson states that the decimation took place in two phases , in Wessex in 854 and Kent in 855 , reflecting the fact that they remained separate kingdoms . 
 Kelly argues that most charters were based on genuine originals , including the First Decimation of 844 . She says : " Commentators have been unkind [ and ] the 844 version has not been given the benefit of the doubt " . In her view Æthelwulf then gave a 10 % tax reduction on bookland , and ten years later he took the more generous step of " a widespread distribution of royal lands " . Unlike Finberg , she believes that both <unk> were carried out , although the second one may not have been completed due to opposition from Æthelwulf 's son Æthelbald . She thinks that the grants of bookland to laymen in the Second Decimation were unconditional , not with reversion to religious houses as Stevenson had argued . However , Keynes is not convinced by Kelly 's arguments , and thinks that the First Decimation charters were <unk> or early twelfth @-@ century fabrications . 
 = = Pilgrimage to Rome and later life = = 
 In the early 850s Æthelwulf decided to go on pilgrimage to Rome . According to Abels : " Æthelwulf was at the height of his power and prestige . It was a propitious time for the West Saxon king to claim a place of honour among the kings and emperors of <unk> . " His eldest surviving sons Æthelbald and Æthelberht were then adults , while Æthelred and Alfred were still young children . In 853 Æthelwulf sent his younger sons to Rome , perhaps accompanying envoys in connection with his own forthcoming visit . Alfred , and possibly Æthelred as well , were invested with the " belt of consulship " . Æthelred 's part in the journey is only known from a contemporary record in the liber vitae of San Salvatore , Brescia , as later records such as the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle were only interested in recording the honour paid to Alfred . Abels sees the embassy as paving the way for Æthelwulf 's pilgrimage , and the presence of Alfred , his youngest and therefore most expendable son , as a gesture of goodwill to the papacy ; confirmation by Pope Leo IV made Alfred his spiritual son , and thus created a spiritual link between the two " fathers " . Kirby argues that the journey may indicate that Alfred was intended for the church , while Nelson on the contrary sees Æthelwulf 's purpose as affirming his younger sons ' <unk> , thus protecting them against being tonsured by their elder brothers , which would have rendered them ineligible for kingship . 
 Æthelwulf set out for Rome in the spring of 855 , accompanied by Alfred and a large retinue . The King left Wessex in the care of his oldest surviving son , Æthelbald , and the sub @-@ kingdom of Kent to the rule of Æthelberht , and thereby confirmed that they were to succeed to the two kingdoms . On the way the party stayed with Charles the Bald in Francia , where there were the usual banquets and exchange of gifts . Æthelwulf stayed a year in Rome , and his gifts to St Peter included a gold crown weighing four pounds ( 1 @.@ 8 kilograms ) , two gold goblets , a sword bound with gold , four silver @-@ gilt bowls , two silk tunics and two gold @-@ interwoven veils . He also gave gold to the clergy and leading men and silver to the people of Rome . According to the historian Joanna Story , his gifts rivalled those of Carolingian donors and the Byzantine emperor and " were clearly chosen to reflect the personal generosity and spiritual wealth of the West Saxon king ; here was no Germanic ' hillbilly ' from the backwoods of the Christian world but , rather , a sophisticated , wealthy and utterly contemporary monarch " . According to the twelfth @-@ century chronicler William of Malmesbury , he helped to pay for the restoration of the Saxon quarter for English pilgrims , which had recently been destroyed by fire . 
 The pilgrimage puzzles historians and Kelly comments that " it is extraordinary that an early medieval king could consider his position safe enough to abandon his kingdom in a time of extreme crisis " . She suggests that Æthelwulf may have been motivated by a personal religious impulse . Ryan sees it as an attempt to placate the divine wrath displayed by Viking attacks , whereas Nelson thinks he aimed to enhance his prestige in dealing with the demands of his adult sons . In Kirby 's view : 
 Æthelwulf 's journey to Rome is of great interest for it did not signify abdication and a retreat from the world as their journeys to Rome had for Cædwalla and Ine and other Anglo @-@ Saxon kings . It was more a display of the king 's international standing and a demonstration of the prestige his dynasty enjoyed in Frankish and papal circles . 
 On his way back from Rome Æthelwulf again stayed with King Charles the Bald , and may have joined him on a campaign against a Viking warband . On 1 October 856 Æthelwulf married Charles 's 12- or 13 @-@ year @-@ old daughter , Judith , at <unk> . The marriage was considered extraordinary by contemporaries and by modern historians . Carolingian princesses rarely married and were usually sent to nunneries , and it was almost unknown for them to marry foreigners . Judith was crowned queen and anointed by Hincmar , Archbishop of Rheims . Although empresses had been anointed before , this is the first definitely known anointing of a Carolingian queen . In addition West Saxon custom , described by Asser as " perverse and detestable " , was that the wife of a king of Wessex could not be called queen or sit on the throne with her husband – she was just the king 's wife . 
 Æthelwulf returned to Wessex to face a revolt by Æthelbald , who attempted to prevent his father from recovering his throne . Historians give varying explanations for both the rebellion and the marriage . In Nelson 's view , Æthelwulf 's marriage to Judith added the West Saxon king to the family of kings and princely allies which Charles was creating . Charles was under attack both from Vikings and a rising among his own nobility , and Æthelwulf had great prestige due to his victories over the Vikings ; some historians such as Kirby and Pauline Stafford see the marriage as sealing an anti @-@ Viking alliance . The marriage gave Æthelwulf a share in Carolingian prestige , and Kirby describes the anointing of Judith as " a charismatic sanctification which enhanced her status , blessed her womb and conferred additional throne @-@ worthiness on her male offspring . " These marks of a special status implied that a son of hers would succeed to at least part of Æthelwulf 's kingdom , and explain Æthelbald 's decision to rebel . The historian Michael Enright denies that an anti @-@ Viking alliance between two such distant kingdoms could serve any useful purpose , and argues that the marriage was Æthelwulf 's response to news that his son was planning to rebel ; his son by an anointed Carolingian queen would be in a strong position to succeed as king of Wessex instead of the rebellious Æthelbald . Abels suggests that Æthelwulf sought Judith 's hand because he needed her father 's money and support to overcome his son 's rebellion , but Kirby and Smyth argue that it is extremely unlikely that Charles the Bald would have agreed to marry his daughter to a ruler who was known to be in serious political difficulty . Æthelbald may also have acted out of resentment at the loss of patrimony he suffered as a result of the decimation . 
 Æthelbald 's rebellion was supported by <unk> , Bishop of Sherborne , and Eanwulf , ealdorman of Somerset , even though they appear to have been two of the king 's most trusted advisers . According to Asser , the plot was concerted " in the western part of Selwood " , and western nobles may have backed Æthelbald because they resented the patronage Æthelwulf gave to eastern Wessex . Asser also stated that Æthelwulf agreed to give up the western part of his kingdom in order to avoid a civil war . Some historians such as Keynes and Abels think that his rule was then confined to the south @-@ east , while others such as Kirby think it is more likely that it was Wessex itself which was divided , with Æthelbald keeping Wessex west of Selwood , Æthelwulf holding the centre and east , and Æthelberht keeping the south @-@ east . Æthelwulf insisted that Judith should sit beside him on the throne until the end of his life , and according to Asser this was " without any disagreement or dissatisfaction on the part of his nobles " . 
 = = King Æthelwulf 's ring = = 
 King Æthelwulf 's ring was found in a cart rut in <unk> in Wiltshire in about August 1780 by one William Petty , who sold it to a silversmith in Salisbury . The silversmith sold it to the Earl of Radnor , and the earl 's son , William , donated it to the British Museum in 1829 . The ring , together with a similar ring of Æthelwulf 's daughter Æthelswith , is one of two key examples of <unk> ninth @-@ century metalwork . They appear to represent the emergence of a " court style " of West Saxon metalwork , characterised by an unusual Christian iconography , such as a pair of peacocks at the Fountain of Life on the Æthelwulf ring , associated with Christian immortality . The ring is inscribed " Æthelwulf Rex " , firmly associating it with the King , and the inscription forms part of the design , so it cannot have been added later . Many of its features are typical of ninth @-@ century metalwork , such as the design of two birds , beaded and speckled borders , and a saltire with arrow @-@ like terminals on the back . It was probably manufactured in Wessex , but was typical of the uniformity of animal ornament in England in the ninth century . In the view of the expert on medieval art Leslie Webster : " Its fine <unk> style ornament would certainly fit a mid ninth @-@ century date . " In Nelson 's view , " it was surely made to be a gift from this royal lord to a brawny follower : the sign of a successful ninth @-@ century kingship " . The art historian David Wilson sees it as a survival of the pagan tradition of the generous king as the " ring @-@ giver " . 
 = = Æthelwulf 's will = = 
 Æthelwulf 's will has not survived , but Alfred 's has and it provides some information about his father 's intentions . The kingdom was to be divided between the two oldest surviving sons , with Æthelbald getting Wessex and Æthelberht Kent and the south @-@ east . The survivor of Æthelbald , Æthelred and Alfred was to inherit their father 's bookland – his personal property as opposed to the royal lands which went with the kingship – and Abels and Yorke argue that this probably means that the survivor was to inherit the throne of Wessex as well . Other historians disagree . Nelson states that the provision regarding the personal property had nothing to do with the kingship , and Kirby comments : " Such an arrangement would have led to fratricidal strife . With three older brothers , Alfred 's chances of reaching adulthood would , one feels , have been minimal . " Æthelwulf 's moveable wealth , such as gold and silver , was to be divided between " children , nobles and the needs of the king 's soul " . For the latter , he left one tenth of his hereditary land to be set aside to feed the poor , and he ordered that three hundred mancuses be sent to Rome each year , one hundred to be spent on lighting the lamps in St Peter 's at Easter , one hundred for the lights of St Paul 's , and one hundred for the pope . 
 = = Death and succession = = 
 Æthelwulf died on 13 January 858 . According to the Annals of St Neots , he was buried at Steyning in Sussex , but his body was later transferred to Winchester , probably by Alfred . Æthelwulf was succeeded by Æthelbald in Wessex and Æthelberht in Kent and the south @-@ east . The prestige conferred by a Frankish marriage was so great that Æthelbald then wedded his step @-@ mother Judith , to Asser 's retrospective horror ; he described the marriage as a " great disgrace " , and " against God 's prohibition and Christian dignity " . When Æthelbald died only two years later , Æthelberht became King of Wessex as well as Kent , and Æthelwulf 's intention of dividing his kingdoms between his sons was thus set aside . In the view of Yorke and Abels this was because Æthelred and Alfred were too young to rule , and Æthelberht agreed in return that his younger brothers would inherit the whole kingdom on his death , whereas Kirby and Nelson think that Æthelberht just became the trustee for his younger brothers ' share of the bookland . 
 After Æthelbald 's death Judith sold her possessions and returned to her father , but two years later she eloped with Baldwin , Count of Flanders . In the 890s their son , also called Baldwin , married Æthelwulf 's granddaughter Ælfthryth . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 Æthelwulf 's reputation among historians was poor in the twentieth century . In 1935 the historian R. H. Hodgkin attributed his pilgrimage to Rome to " the <unk> piety which had led him to desert his kingdom at a time of great danger " , and described his marriage to Judith as " the folly of a man senile before his time " . To Stenton in the 1960s he was " a religious and unambitious man , for whom engagement in war and politics was an unwelcome consequence of rank " . One dissenter was Finberg , who in 1964 described him as " a king whose valour in war and princely munificence recalled the figures of the heroic age " , but in 1979 Enright said : " More than anything else he appears to have been an impractical religious enthusiast . " Early medieval writers , especially Asser , emphasise his religiosity and his preference for consensus , seen in the concessions made to avert a civil war on his return from Rome . In Story 's view " his legacy has been clouded by accusations of excessive piety which ( to modern sensibilities at least ) has seemed at odds with the demands of early medieval kingship " . In 839 an unnamed Anglo @-@ Saxon king wrote to the Holy Roman Emperor Louis the Pious asking for permission to travel through his territory on the way to Rome , and relating an English priest 's dream which foretold disaster unless Christians abandoned their sins . This is now believed to have been an unrealised project of Egbert at the end of his life , but it was formerly attributed to Æthelwulf , and seen as exhibiting what Story calls his reputation for " dramatic piety " , and irresponsibility for planning to abandon his kingdom at the beginning of his reign . 
 In the twenty @-@ first century he is seen very differently by historians . Æthelwulf is not listed in the index of Peter Hunter Blair 's An Introduction to Anglo @-@ Saxon England , first published in 1956 , but in a new introduction to the 2003 edition Keynes listed him among people " who have not always been accorded the attention they might be thought to deserve ... for it was he , more than any other , who secured the political fortune of his people in the ninth century , and who opened up channels of communication which led through Frankish realms and across the Alps to Rome " . According to Story : " Æthelwulf acquired and cultivated a reputation both in Francia and Rome which is unparalleled in the sources since the height of Offa 's and Coenwulf 's power at the turn of the ninth century " . 
 Nelson describes him as " one of the great underrated among Anglo @-@ Saxons " , and complains that she was only allowed 2 @,@ 500 words for him in the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography , compared with 15 @,@ 000 for Edward II and 35 @,@ 000 for Elizabeth I. She says : 
 Æthelwulf 's reign has been relatively under @-@ appreciated in modern scholarship . Yet he laid the foundations for Alfred 's success . To the perennial problems of husbanding the kingdom 's resources , containing conflicts within the royal family , and managing relations with neighbouring kingdoms , Æthelwulf found new as well as traditional answers . He consolidated old Wessex , and extended his reach over what is now Devon and Cornwall . He ruled Kent , working with the grain of its political community . He borrowed ideological props from Mercians and Franks alike , and went to Rome , not to die there , like his predecessor Ine , ... but to return , as Charlemagne had , with enhanced prestige . Æthelwulf coped more effectively with Scandinavian attacks than did most contemporary rulers . 
 = Guardians of the Galaxy ( film ) = 
 Guardians of the Galaxy is a 2014 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics superhero team of the same name , produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures . It is the tenth film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe . The film was directed by James Gunn , who wrote the screenplay with Nicole Perlman , and features an ensemble cast including Chris Pratt , Zoe Saldana , Dave Bautista , Vin Diesel , Bradley Cooper , Lee Pace , Michael Rooker , Karen Gillan , Djimon Hounsou , John C. Reilly , Glenn Close , and Benicio del Toro . In Guardians of the Galaxy , Peter Quill forms an uneasy alliance with a group of extraterrestrial misfits who are fleeing after stealing a powerful artifact . 
 Perlman began working on the screenplay in 2009 . Producer Kevin Feige first publicly mentioned Guardians of the Galaxy as a potential film in 2010 and Marvel Studios announced it was in active development at the San Diego Comic @-@ Con International in July 2012 . Gunn was hired to write and direct the film that September . In February 2013 , Pratt was hired to play Peter Quill / Star @-@ Lord , and the supporting cast members were subsequently confirmed . Principal photography began in July 2013 at Shepperton Studios , England , with filming continuing in London before wrapping up in October 2013 . Post @-@ production was finished on July 7 , 2014 . 
 Guardians of the Galaxy premiered in Hollywood on July 21 , 2014 . It was released in theaters August 1 , 2014 in the United States in the 3D and IMAX 3D formats . The film became a critical and commercial success , grossing $ 773 @.@ 3 million worldwide and becoming the highest @-@ grossing superhero film of 2014 , as well as the third highest @-@ grossing film in North America of 2014 . The film garnered praise for its humor , action , soundtrack , visual effects , direction , musical score , and acting . A sequel titled Guardians of the Galaxy Vol . 2 is scheduled to be released on May 5 , 2017 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1988 , following his mother 's death , a young Peter Quill is abducted from Earth by the Ravagers , a group of space pirates led by Yondu <unk> . Twenty @-@ six years later on the planet Morag , Quill steals an orb , after which Korath , a subordinate to the fanatical Kree , Ronan , intercepts him . Although Quill escapes with the orb , Yondu discovers his theft and issues a bounty for his capture , while Ronan sends the assassin Gamora after the orb . 
 When Quill attempts to sell the orb on the Nova Empire capital world , Xandar , Gamora ambushes him and steals it . A fight ensues , drawing in a pair of bounty hunters : the genetically and cybernetically modified raccoon Rocket , and the tree @-@ like humanoid Groot . The Nova Corps arrives and captures the four , detaining them in the Kyln . While there , a powerful inmate , Drax , attempts to kill Gamora due to her association with Ronan , who killed his family . Quill convinces Drax that Gamora can bring Ronan to him . Gamora reveals that she has betrayed Ronan , unwilling to let him use the orb 's power to destroy planets , starting with Xandar . Learning that Gamora has a buyer for the orb , she , Quill , Rocket , Groot , and Drax work together to escape from the Kyln . 
 Elsewhere , Ronan meets with Gamora 's adoptive father , Thanos , to discuss her betrayal . Accompanied by Drax , Quill 's group escapes the Kyln in his ship – the Milano – and flees to Knowhere , a remote criminal outpost in space built in the giant severed head of a Celestial . A drunken Drax summons Ronan while the rest of the group meet Gamora 's contact , the collector Taneleer Tivan . Tivan opens the orb , revealing an Infinity Stone , an item of immeasurable power that destroys all but the most powerful beings who wield it . Suddenly , Tivan 's tormented assistant grabs the Stone , triggering an explosion that engulfs Tivan 's archive . 
 Ronan arrives and easily defeats Drax , while the others flee by ship , pursued by Ronan 's followers and Gamora 's sister Nebula . Nebula destroys Gamora 's ship , leaving her floating in space , and Ronan 's forces capture the orb . Quill contacts Yondu before following Gamora into space , giving her his helmet to survive ; Yondu arrives and retrieves the pair . Rocket , Drax , and Groot threaten to attack Yondu 's ship to rescue them , but Quill negotiates a truce by convincing Yondu that they can recover the orb . Quill 's group agrees that facing Ronan means certain death , but that they cannot let him use the Infinity Stone to destroy the galaxy . On Ronan 's flagship , the Dark Aster , Ronan embeds the Stone in his warhammer , taking its power for himself . He contacts Thanos , threatening to kill him after the destruction of Xandar ; hateful of her adoptive father , Nebula allies with Ronan . 
 Near Xandar , the Ravagers , the Nova Corps , and Quill ’ s group confront and breach the Dark Aster . Ronan uses his empowered warhammer to destroy the Nova Corps fleet . On the Dark Aster , after Gamora defeats Nebula ( who escapes ) , she unlocks Ronan 's chambers , but the group find themselves outmatched by his power until Rocket crashes the Milano through the Dark Aster . The damaged Dark Aster crash @-@ lands on Xandar , with Groot sacrificing himself to shield the group . Ronan emerges from the wreck and prepares to destroy Xandar , but Quill distracts him , allowing Drax and Rocket to destroy Ronan 's warhammer . Quill grabs the freed Stone , and with Gamora , Drax , and Rocket sharing its burden , they use it to destroy Ronan . 
 In the aftermath , Quill tricks Yondu into taking a container supposedly containing the Stone , and gives the real Stone to the Nova Corps . As the Ravagers leave Xandar , Yondu remarks that it turned out well that they did not deliver Quill to his father per their contract . Quill 's group , now known as the Guardians of the Galaxy , have their criminal records expunged , and Quill learns that he is only half @-@ human , his father being part of an ancient , unknown species . Quill finally opens the last present he received from his mother : a cassette tape filled with her favorite songs . The Guardians leave in the rebuilt Milano along with a sapling cut from Groot . 
 In a post @-@ credits scene , Tivan sits in his destroyed archive with two of his living exhibits : a canine cosmonaut and an anthropomorphic duck . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Chris Pratt as Peter Quill / Star @-@ Lord : 
 The half human , half alien leader of the Guardians who was abducted from Missouri as a child in 1988 and raised by a group of alien thieves and smugglers called the Ravagers . About the character , Pratt said , " He had a hard time as a kid , and now he goes around space , making out with hot alien girls and just being a rogue and a bit of a jerk , and through teaming up with these guys , finds a higher purpose for himself . " He also added that the character is a mix of Han Solo and Marty McFly . Pratt , who was mostly known for playing supporting characters , notably the portly Andy Dwyer on the television series Parks and Recreation , initially turned down the role . Pratt had lost weight to portray fit characters in films such as Moneyball and Zero Dark Thirty , and had given up ambitions to play the lead role in action films after humbling auditions for Star Trek and Avatar . Casting director Sarah Finn suggested Pratt to Gunn , who dismissed the idea despite struggling to cast that role . Despite this , Finn arranged for a meeting between the two , at which point Gunn was immediately convinced that Pratt was perfect for the role . Pratt also won over Feige , despite having gained weight again for Delivery Man . Prior to filming , Pratt underwent a strict diet and training regimen to lose 60 lb ( 27 kg ) in six months . Pratt signed a multi @-@ film contract with Marvel , and was granted a temporary leave from his work on Parks and Recreation in order to accommodate his participation in the film . Wyatt <unk> portrays a young Quill . 
 Zoe Saldana as Gamora : 
 An orphan from an alien world who seeks redemption for her past crimes . She was trained by Thanos to be his personal assassin . Saldana said that she became Gamora through make @-@ up rather than computer generated imagery ( CGI ) or performance capture . On taking the role , Saldana said , " I was just excited to be asked to join by James Gunn and to also play someone green . I 've been blue before [ in Avatar ] . " Saldana described Gamora as " ... a warrior , she ’ s an assassin and she ’ s very lethal but what saves her is the same thing that can doom her . She has a sense of righteousness . She ’ s a very righteous individual . " 
 Dave Bautista as Drax the Destroyer : 
 A warrior who seeks to avenge his family 's death at the hands of Ronan . On relating to the character , Bautista said , " I can just relate to Drax so much it 's not even funny . Just the simple things that we have in common . Simple things like the tattoos , the tragedy – because you know , I had a bit of tragedy in my life as well . So it 's really easy for me to pull from that . " Bautista also said that there was " a lot of comic relief to Drax " , but the character was not aware of it . Bautista stated that he did not do much preparation for role , because " Luckily , for me , I 'm a lifelong athlete and I adapted real quick . " Bautista 's makeup took approximately four hours to apply , though it could be removed in just 90 minutes . Drax has various scarring patterns on his body , which replace the simple tattoos from the comics , each having a specific story . Additionally , his skin tone was changed from the bright green in the comics to a muddier grey , to avoid visual similarities to the Hulk . 
 Vin Diesel as Groot : 
 A tree @-@ like humanoid who is the accomplice of Rocket . Diesel stated that he provided the voice and motion capture for Groot , after originally being in talks to star in a new Phase Three Marvel film . Diesel also provided Groot 's voice for several foreign @-@ language releases of the film . Krystian Godlewski portrayed the character on set , though his acting was not used in the final character CGI . On the character , which Gunn based on his dog , Gunn said , " All the Guardians start out the movie as bastards – except Groot . He 's an innocent . He 's a hundred percent deadly and a hundred percent sweet . He 's caught up in Rocket 's life , really . " Gunn added that the design and movement of Groot took " the better part of a year " to create . Gunn added , " The ways in which Vin Diesel says , ' I am Groot , ' I am astounded . All of the ' I am <unk> ' that were earlier voices didn 't sound very good at all ... Vin came in and in one day , laid down all these ' I am Groot ' tracks , and he 's a perfectionist . He made me explain to him with ever [ sic ] ' I am Groot , ' exactly what he was saying ... It was amazing when we first put that voice in there how much the character changed and how much he influenced the character . " Regarding the limited words used by Groot , Diesel said in many ways this was , " ... the most challenging thing to ask an actor to do . " Diesel found an emotional note in his performance , invoking the death of his friend and Fast and Furious co @-@ star Paul Walker , saying , " This was in December [ 2013 ] , and the first time I came back to dealing with human beings after dealing with death , so playing a character who celebrates life in the way Groot does was very nice . " Groot 's form and size @-@ changing abilities are seen , with Gunn stating that he has the ability to grow in the film . 
 Bradley Cooper as Rocket : 
 A genetically engineered raccoon @-@ like bounty hunter and mercenary , and is a master of weapons and battle tactics . Gunn worked with live raccoons to get the correct feel for the character , and to make sure it was " not a cartoon character " , saying , " It 's not Bugs Bunny in the middle of the Avengers , it 's a real , little , somewhat mangled beast that 's alone . There 's no one else in the universe quite like him , he 's been created by these guys to be a mean @-@ ass fighting machine . " Gunn also based the character on himself . Describing Rocket in relation to the rest of the Guardians , Cooper said , " I think Rocket is dynamic . He 's the sort of Joe Pesci in Goodfellas guy . " Cooper voiced Rocket , while Sean Gunn ( James ' younger brother ) stood in for the character during filming . James Gunn said that for the role of Rocket , some physical movement from Cooper , including facial expressions and hand movements , was recorded as potential reference for the animators , though much of Sean Gunn 's acting is used throughout the film . Before Cooper was cast , James Gunn said that it was a challenge finding a voice for Rocket , that he was looking for someone that could balance " the fast @-@ talking speech patterns that Rocket has , but also can be funny , because he is really funny . But also has the heart that Rocket has . Because there are actually some pretty dramatic scenes with Rocket . " 
 Lee Pace as Ronan the Accuser : 
 A Kree radical who agrees to retrieve an artifact for Thanos in exchange for eradicating his mortal enemies , the <unk> . Ronan and his Sakaaran army hunt down the Guardians when they interfere with his goals . Describing Ronan , Gunn said , " He is the primary villain , and he is a really twisted guy , he has a really religious bent in this film . He has a very sick and twisted view of what morality is ; strength is virtue and weakness is sin and that is what he lives by , and I think he is very scary because of his beliefs , which are real to him . " Pace , who originally auditioned for Peter Quill , described Ronan as a " psycho " and a " monster " . 
 Michael Rooker as Yondu <unk> : 
 A blue @-@ skinned bandit who is the leader of the Ravagers and a paternal figure to Quill . Yondu helps Quill to steal the orb before Quill betrays him , leaving Yondu and the Ravagers to chase the Guardians . On the character , Rooker said , he has " some interesting issues – not a good guy , not a bad guy . There 's hope and there 's a heart inside Yondu . " Gunn created the film 's version of the character specifically with Rooker in mind , while borrowing the character 's mohawk and use of a whistle @-@ controlled arrow from the comics . Rooker fully committed to the role once he knew his role on the TV series The Walking Dead would be ending . Rooker 's makeup took approximately four hours to apply . 
 Karen Gillan as Nebula : 
 An adopted daughter of Thanos who was raised with Gamora as siblings and is a loyal lieutenant in the employ of Ronan and Thanos . About the character , Gillan said , " She is the female villain of the film ... She is very sadistic and evil , but I like to think for a very valid reason . " She also added , " I think she 's a really interesting character . What I like to play around with is how jealous she is . She 's Gamora 's sister , and there 's a lot of sibling rivalry . That 's the most interesting aspect to me , because jealously can consume you and turn you bitter , and ugly . And she 's a total sadist , so that 's fun too . " Gillan researched the ancient Spartans , shaved off her hair , and trained for two months for the role . The character 's makeup took approximately four and a half hours to be applied . 
 Djimon Hounsou as Korath : 
 A Kree ally of Ronan who is a feared intergalactic hunter . As to why he took the role Hounsou said , " I have a four @-@ year old son who loves superheroes from Spider @-@ Man to Iron Man to Batman . He 's got all the costumes . One day he looks at me and says ' Dad , I want to be light @-@ skinned so I could be Spider @-@ Man . Spider @-@ Man has light skin . ' That was sort of a shock . This is why I am excited to be a part of the Marvel Universe , so I could hopefully provide that diversity in the role of the superhero . " 
 John C. Reilly as Rhomann Dey : 
 A corpsman in the Nova Corps , the Nova Empire 's military and police force . 
 Glenn Close as Irani Rael : 
 The leader of the Nova Corps , known as Nova Prime , whose mission is to protect the citizens of the Nova Empire and keep peace . Close stated that she " had always wanted to be in a movie like [ Guardians of the Galaxy ] , and that it would be " the most fun to play something like the Judi Dench [ as M or ] Samuel L. Jackson [ as Nick Fury ] role " . She said that she took the role because she " love [ s ] to do stuff that 's different " and wanted to show that she " [ has ] always been up for anything . " She also stated that her contract has " several " films on it , and that she would be open to working on other Marvel Studios films in addition to returning for Guardians sequels . 
 Benicio del Toro as Taneleer Tivan / The Collector : 
 An obsessive keeper of the largest collection of interstellar fauna , relics , and species in the galaxy who operates out of a place in space named Knowhere . Describing del Toro 's performance , Gunn said , " He 's like an outer @-@ space Liberace . That 's what it says in the script , which he 's kind of doing . " On bringing the character to life , del Toro said , " What James [ Gunn ] wanted , that I found out little by little as I was doing it , is that he wanted me to explore and just keep pushing the character and keep creating [ him ] as I was in front of the camera . " 
 Additionally , Josh Brolin appears , uncredited , as Thanos through voice acting and performance capture . Sean Gunn stood in for Thanos during filming and portrays <unk> , Yondu 's first mate in the Ravagers . Alexis Denisof reprises his role as Thanos 's vizier , " The Other " , from The Avengers . Ophelia Lovibond plays Carina , the Collector 's slave ; Peter Serafinowicz plays <unk> <unk> Saal , a Nova Corps officer ; Gregg Henry plays Quill 's grandfather ; Laura Haddock plays Quill 's mother , Meredith ; Melia <unk> plays <unk> ; Christopher Fairbank plays The Broker ; Mikaela Hoover plays Nova Prime 's assistant ; Marama Corlett plays a pit boss at the bar , The Boot ; Emmett J. Scanlan plays a Nova riot guard ; Alexis Rodney plays <unk> Dar ; Tom Proctor plays <unk> , a <unk> ; and Spencer Wilding plays a prison guard who confiscates Quill 's Walkman . Canine actor Fred appears as Cosmo . Stephen <unk> had a supporting role . Naomi Ryan also had a supporting role in the film , though it was cut in the final version . Cameos in the film include : James Gunn as a Sakaaran ; Stan Lee as a <unk> Ladies ' Man ; Lloyd Kaufman as an inmate ; Nathan Fillion as the voice of an inmate ; Rob Zombie as the voice of the Ravager Navigator ; composer Tyler Bates as a Ravager pilot ; and Seth Green as the voice of Howard the Duck . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Marvel Studios President Kevin Feige first mentioned Guardians of the Galaxy as a potential film at the 2010 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , stating , " There are some obscure titles , too , like Guardians of the Galaxy . I think they 've been revamped recently in a fun way in the [ comic ] book . " Feige reiterated that sentiment in a September 2011 issue of Entertainment Weekly , saying , " There 's an opportunity to do a big space epic , which Thor sort of hints at , in the cosmic side " of the Marvel Cinematic Universe . Feige added , should the film be made , it would feature an ensemble of characters , similar to X @-@ Men and The Avengers . 
 Feige announced that the film was in active development at the 2012 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International during the Marvel Studios panel , with an intended release date of August 1 , 2014 . He stated that the film 's titular team would consist of the characters Star @-@ Lord , Drax the Destroyer , Gamora , Groot , and Rocket Raccoon . Two pieces of concept art were also displayed , one of Rocket Raccoon , and one featuring the entire team . In August 2012 , Gunn entered talks to direct the film , beating out other contenders , including Peyton Reed and the duo Ryan Fleck and Anna Boden . The Avengers director Joss Whedon , who signed a deal to creatively consult on all of the films leading up to The Avengers sequel , was enthusiastic about the selection of Gunn to direct , saying " James [ Gunn ] is what makes me think it will work ... He is so off the wall , and so crazy , but so smart , such a craftsman and he builds from his heart . He loves the raccoon . Needs the raccoon ... He has a very twisted take on it , but it all comes from a real love for the material . It 's going to be hard for [ the human characters ] to keep up . " 
 = = = = Writing = = = = 
 Nicole Perlman , who was enrolled in Marvel 's screenwriting program in 2009 , was offered several of their lesser known properties to base a screenplay on . Out of those , Perlman chose Dan Abnett and Andy Lanning 's Guardians of the Galaxy , due to her interest in space and science fiction . " I can ’ t tell you what the other titles were that [ Marvel ] were offering up on the table , but I can tell you that one of them was a little bit more appropriate for me , just based on gender , " she says . " I think they were a little taken aback when I chose Guardians , because there were ones that would make a lot more sense if you were a romantic @-@ comedy writer or something like that . " Perlman spent two years writing a draft , immersing herself in the Guardians universe . In late 2011 , Perlman was asked to create another draft , and in early 2012 , James Gunn was brought in to contribute to the script . Gunn eventually rewrote the script entirely because " it didn ’ t work " for him ; he would use the film The Dirty Dozen as a reference to convey his ideas of the film to Marvel . Gunn later explained that Perlman 's draft was very different from the script he used during filming , including a different story , character arcs and no Walkman ; he stated , " In Nicole ’ s script everything is pretty different ... it 's not about the same stuff . But that 's how the WGA works . They like first writers an awful lot . " In August 2012 , Marvel Studios hired writer Chris McCoy to rewrite Perlman 's script , however , it is unclear what contribution he had to the final script , since he did not receive production credit . 
 In December 2014 , Gunn revealed that character introductions were the " hardest scenes to crack " , with Thanos ' introduction the most difficult . He felt that " having Thanos be in that scene was more helpful to the Marvel [ Cinematic U ] <unk> than it was to Guardians of the Galaxy , " yet he still wanted Thanos in the film , without " [ belittling ] the actual antagonist of the film , which is Ronan . " To solve his dilemma , Gunn chose to have Ronan kill " The Other " , Thanos ' vizier , saying , " I thought that was interesting , because we ’ ve had the Other , who ’ s obviously very powerful even in comparison to Loki , and then we see Ronan wipe his ass with him . So that I liked , but even that was sort of difficult , because it played as funnier when I first wrote it , and the humor didn ’ t work so much . " 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 In September 2012 , Gunn confirmed that he had signed on to direct the film and rewrite the script . By the end of November , Joel Edgerton , Jack Huston , Jim Sturgess , and Eddie Redmayne signed deals to test for the role of Peter Quill , as did Lee Pace , which he confirmed a week later in early December . Other actors who were considered for the role included Thor : The Dark World 's Zachary Levi , Joseph Gordon @-@ Levitt , and Michael Rosenbaum . Chris Pratt was cast in the role in February 2013 , as part of a multi @-@ film deal that he signed with Marvel . 
 In January 2013 , filming was scheduled to take place at Shepperton Studios in London , United Kingdom , and Marvel Studios announced that the film would be released in 3D . Victoria Alonso , an executive producer on the film , said that filming would begin in June . She also said that both Rocket Raccoon and Groot would be created through a combination of CGI and motion capture , going on to say that " You can 't do any motion capture with a raccoon – they won 't let you put the suit on . But we will do <unk> , probably , for some of the behavior ... we definitely will have performers to emulate what James Gunn will lead to be , the behavior and the performance . He 's very clear on where he wants to take the characters . " In March 2013 , Feige discussed Guardians of the Galaxy in relation to the Marvel Cinematic Universe , saying , " It 's much more of a standalone film . It takes place in the same universe . And when we 've been on the other side of that universe in other movies , you might see those characteristics in Guardians , but the Avengers are not involved with what 's happening out there at this time . " Feige also stated that 95 % of the film would take place in space . In mid @-@ March , Dave Bautista was signed to play Drax the Destroyer . Other actors who had been considered for the role included Isaiah Mustafa , Brian Patrick Wade and Jason Momoa . By the following week , sculptor Brian Muir , who sculpted Darth Vader 's mask for the Star Wars films , was revealed to be working on the film . 
 In early April 2013 , Zoe Saldana entered into negotiations to star as Gamora in the film , and it was confirmed she had been cast later that month . Also in April , Michael Rooker joined the film 's cast as Yondu , and it was announced that Ophelia Lovibond had been cast in a supporting role . By this point in time , Lee Pace was in final negotiations to play the villain of the film . In May , Marvel offered John C. Reilly the role of Rhomann Dey . At the same time , it was disclosed that filmmakers were looking at actors including Hugh Laurie , Alan Rickman , and Ken Watanabe , for another role , and that Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely were providing finishing touches to the script . A few days later , Glenn Close was cast as the head of the Nova Corps in the film , followed shortly by the casting of Karen Gillan as the film 's lead female villain . By June 2013 , Benicio del Toro was cast in the film , as part of a multi @-@ film deal with Marvel Studios . Later in the month , it was confirmed that Reilly had been cast as Rhomann Dey . 
 Special effects makeup designer David White took head and body casts of actors , such as Bautista , to experiment with materials used to create the characters . White said , " James always pushed for practical and makeup effects . He wanted , like me , to see the real deal there on set . " White was careful not to use " modern " creature designs to ensure they did not fall short in Gunn 's uniquely envisioned world . White and his team created upwards of 1 @,@ 000 prosthetic makeup applications and 2 @,@ 000 molds of different colored aliens . For the specific aesthetic look to the film , Gunn wanted to create " a colorful science @-@ fiction world " , and include elements of 1950s and 60s pulp movies , citing the Ravagers ' spaceships , which he compared to muscle cars , as an example of the latter . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began around July 6 , 2013 in London , United Kingdom , under the working title of Full Tilt . Filming took place at Shepperton Studios and Longcross Studios . Later in July , Gunn and the film 's cast flew from London to attend San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , where it was revealed that Pace would play Ronan the Accuser , Gillan would be Nebula , del Toro as The Collector , and that Djimon Hounsou had been cast as Korath . Close was later revealed to play Nova Prime Irani Rael . Also at San Diego Comic @-@ Con , Feige stated that Thanos would be a part of the film as the " mastermind " . On August 11 , 2013 , filming began at London 's Millennium Bridge , which was selected as a double for Xandar . In August 2013 , Marvel announced that Bradley Cooper would voice Rocket Raccoon . On September 3 , 2013 , Gunn said that filming was " a little over half [ way ] " complete . Also in September , Vin Diesel stated that he was voicing Groot . However , Marvel did not confirm Diesel 's involvement in the film at the time . On October 12 , 2013 , Gunn announced on social media that filming had completed . 
 Director of photography Ben Davis used Arri Alexa XT cameras for the film , saying , " I ’ m traditionally a photochemical fan , but going with the digital format was the right way for this movie ... the Alexa [ provided ] the right look for this particular film . " During the opening scenes in the 1980s , Davis chose <unk> Cooke <unk> ( Crystal ) Express anamorphic prime lenses because they " had more anamorphic artifacts and aberrations , which [ he ] felt added something . " Davis used spherical Panavision <unk> for the rest of the film . Additionally , Davis worked closely with production designer Charles Wood in order to achieve the correct lighting looks for each scene . Dealing with two fully CGI characters forced Davis to shoot scenes multiple times , usually once with the references for the characters and once without them in the shot . 
 Gunn revealed that his brother , Sean Gunn , took on multiple roles during the filming process , such as standing in for Rocket , which he noted was beneficial for the other actors , including Saldana , Pratt , and Bautista , who responded positively to Sean and his on @-@ set performances . Special effects makeup designer David White made two life @-@ size versions of Rocket and a bust of Groot as aids for visual effects , with White saying , " it gives [ the filmmakers ] a good indication of where visual effects needs to pick up and whether Rocket can actually reach certain things or use certain devices . " These busts were also used to see how the on @-@ set lighting would affect the characters , to assist with the visual effects lighting process . 
 In January 2015 , Disney revealed that the film came in " slightly over the agreed budget " at $ 232 @.@ 3 million , with Disney receiving a rebate of $ 36 @.@ 4 million from the British government . It was previously estimated to have had a $ 170 million budget . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 In November 2013 , Gunn stated that he attempted to use as many practical effects as possible while filming to aid the use of CGI and motion capture during post @-@ production , saying , " Our sets are enormous . We have a prison that is 350 @,@ 000 pounds of steel . Anybody who knows me knows I love the mix of practical and CGI effects ... I can 't wait for people to see it , because it 's astonishingly beautiful . " After the release of Thor : The Dark World , Feige stated that the Infinity Stones would be a focus in the film , as well as going forward into the Phase Three slate of films within the MCU . In a separate interview for The Dark World in November , Feige added that a third , unknown Infinity Stone would be seen in the film , referred to as the " Power Stone " by the Collector . The mid @-@ credits scene in The Dark World revealed Lovibond 's role as the Collector 's aide , later named Carina . In December 2013 , Marvel confirmed that Diesel would voice Groot . 
 A few weeks of additional filming , involving the film 's main cast and crew , occurred in March 2014 at Walt Disney Studios in Burbank , California . In April 2014 , Gunn described Thanos as the " head of the snake " in the film , and confirmed he would appear via performance capture . In May 2014 , Gunn stated that the film features an " enormous " amount of smaller and minor characters from the Marvel Universe , adding that he felt the film had the most characters overall of any Marvel Studios film to date . Costume supervisor Dan Grace added to this by saying , " We really , really get the feeling of the scale and scope of the galaxy . We visit five planets , we see a hundred different races . " The film introduces the alien race Sakaaran , who act as Ronan 's mercenaries , as a replacement to the <unk> , as the <unk> film rights belonged to 20th Century Fox . 
 By the end of May , Josh Brolin was revealed as the voice of Thanos , with Feige confirming in July that Brolin also provided the performance capture for the character . Thanos communicates via hologram for much of the film , though he does appear in a scene with Ronan and Nebula . In June 2014 , Feige added that Thanos and his followers are " the biggest piece of connective tissue that will eventually lead us back into Avengers films in the future . " On casting Brolin , Feige said , 
 We reached out to him and it was one of those things that does not happen all the time but when it does it ’ s very nice , where he was totally intrigued . He was a fan of what we did , he met with Jeremy Latcham in a hotel in London and learned about the characters a little bit . I spoke to him on the phone a few times . We ran it by James who loved it , ran it by Joss [ Whedon ] who loved it because Thanos is in this universe because of Avengers . Then we shot him and recorded for it . 
 On July 7 , 2014 , Gunn announced on social media that he had completed work on the film . In August , regarding the post @-@ credit scene , Gunn revealed that the scene did not involve Howard the Duck when it was originally filmed , rather he was added during post @-@ production , a decision made by " some combination of [ Gunn ] and the editor Fred Raskin " . As the decision to add the character was made late in the post @-@ production process , he had to be designed that day , before being handed off to Sony Pictures Imageworks to animate . Also in August , regarding the pre @-@ credit scene of Groot dancing , Gunn stated that he himself danced to provide motion reference for the animators , and that the decision was made to place the scene before the credits , rather than during or after them , because of positive responses from a test audience , which made Marvel and Gunn feel that they didn 't want " people walking out and missing this thing " . Marvel used design firm Sarofsky once again for the film 's title sequences , after liking their work for Captain America : The Winter Soldier . Sarofsky developed a custom typeface based on the font used in the teaser posters for the opening credits , which was tinted orange to offer a better contrast to the film 's blue and grey imagery . One of the typography solutions offered before the final product wound up being repurposed as the locator cards seen throughout the film . 
 = = = = Visual effects = = = = 
 The film featured 2 @,@ 750 visual effects shots , which make up approximately 90 % of the film . The visual effects were created by : Moving Picture Company ( MPC ) , who worked on creating Groot , as well as Morag , Xandar , the Dark Aster and the final battle on Xandar ; Framestore , who worked on creating Rocket , extending the Kyln prison set and constructing Knowhere ; Luma Pictures , who worked on Thanos ; Method Studios , who worked on creating the Orb opening and revealing its powers , as well as the holographic displays at the Nova Corps command center ; Lola VFX ; Cantina Creative ; Sony Pictures Imageworks , who worked on Howard the Duck and creating the Dark Aster shots with MPC ; <unk> VFX ; Secret Lab ; Rise Visual Effects Studios ; and Technicolor VFX . <unk> and post @-@ visualizations were done by Proof and The Third Floor , with Proof also contributing to the creation of Rocket and Groot . 
 Producer Nik Korda noted how helpful it was to have Sean Gunn and Krystian Godlewski portray Rocket and Groot on set , as it provided references for lighting and on @-@ set performances to the animators . When creating Groot , MPC realized early on that his eyes would be essential in maintaining the character 's human qualities , as his face couldn 't move in the way that humans ' do . MPC visual effects supervisor Nicolas <unk> explained that , " When you look at humans what makes the eyes interesting is the imperfections – trying to make these two irises not aimed at the same place – trying to make them strange and look more human . " Textures for Groot came from a number of sources , including inspiration from a botanical garden in London , and the character was modeled as individual branches , rigged individually , to simulate a muscle system for the character . 
 One of the major challenges for Framestore in creating Rocket was his fur . Framestore 's Rachel Williams explained that , since " raccoon fur is made up from a layer of short fine hair and a layer of longer thicker hairs " , these layers were separated and animated individually , removing the need to use " guide hairs " to control the movements of thick sections of fur . Framestore and MPC worked closely sharing assets , to ensure shots of Rocket at MPC would match the Rocket created by Framestore , and vice versa for when Groot was needed by the other studio . 
 In order to give Thanos " the performance and the weight that he deserved " , Luma Pictures created a new facial animation system to re @-@ create Josh Brolin as a fully CG character , using his " eyes , some of his cheek , how his muscles move when he talks " . The character 's large jaw , and the deep groves that run down his face , had " to be carefully planned out with the movement of his face . " 
 = = Music = = 
 In August 2013 , Gunn revealed that Tyler Bates would be composing the film 's score . Gunn stated that Bates would write some of the score first so that he can film to the music , as opposed to scoring to the film . In February 2014 , Gunn revealed that the film would incorporate songs from the 1960s and 1970s , such as " Hooked on a Feeling " , on a mixtape in Quill 's Walkman , which acts as a way for him to stay connected to the Earth , home , and family he lost . In May 2014 , Gunn added that using the songs from the 60s and 70s were " cultural reference points " , saying , " It ’ s striking the balance throughout the whole movie , through something that is very unique , but also something that is easily accessible to people at the same time . The music and the Earth stuff is one of those touchstones that we have to remind us that , yeah , [ Quill ] is a real person from planet Earth who ’ s just like you and me . Except that he ’ s in this big outer space adventure . " 
 When choosing the songs , Gunn revealed he " started the process by reading the Billboard charts for all of the top hits of the ' 70s " , downloading " a few hundred " songs that were " semi @-@ familiar — ones you recognize but might not be able to name off the top of your head " and creating a playlist for all the songs that would fit the film tonally . He added that he " would listen to the playlist on my speakers around the house — sometimes I would be inspired to create a scene around a song , and other times I had a scene that needed music and I would listen through the playlist , visualizing various songs , figuring out which would work the best . " Most of the songs were played on set to help " the actors and the camera operators find the perfect groove for the shot " , with David Bowie 's " <unk> Daydream " the only song chosen and added during post @-@ production . Gunn also said that the opening scenes were designed with " Hooked on a Feeling " in mind ; however once Gunn discovered " Come and Get Your Love " , the song used in the sequence , Gunn felt it was a " better fit . " 
 Three albums were released by Hollywood Records on July 29 , 2014 : The film 's score , Guardians of the Galaxy ( Original Score ) , which features the music composed by Bates for the film ; Guardians of the Galaxy : Awesome Mix Vol . 1 ( Original Motion Picture Soundtrack ) , which comprises the twelve songs from Quill 's mixtape ; and a deluxe edition featuring both albums . By August 2014 , the album which mirrored Quill 's mixtape had reached the top of the Billboard 200 chart , becoming the first soundtrack album in history consisting entirely of previously released songs to top the chart . Hollywood Records also released a cassette version of the Awesome Mix Vol . 1 soundtrack on November 28 , 2014 , as an exclusive to Record Store Day participants . The cassette , which is the first cassette Disney Music Group has released since 2003 , comes with a digital download version of the album . 
 = = Release = = 
 The world premiere of Guardians of the Galaxy was held on July 21 , 2014 , at the Dolby Theatre in Hollywood . The film was released theatrically in the United Kingdom on July 31 , 2014 , and in the United States on August 1 , in 3D and IMAX 3D . The film was released in 4 @,@ 080 theaters in the United States , making it the widest August release , breaking the five year record held by G.I. Joe : The Rise of Cobra ( 4 @,@ 007 theatres ) . The breakdown of venues was : 354 IMAX screens , 3 @,@ 200 3D screens , 350 large format screens and 240 D @-@ Box screens . In its sixth weekend , Guardians of the Galaxy was playing in 69 territories , its most . 
 In June 2014 , Gunn stated that the film had always been planned as a 3D film , and " Unlike many directors , I 've been actively involved with converting every shot to 3D , making sure it works perfectly for the story and the film , making sure it 's spectacular and immersive without being silly , distracting , or overly showy . " Gunn also revealed that the IMAX 3D version would include shifting aspect ratios , to make the viewing experience " even fuller and more encompassing . I 've personally chosen all the places where the changes occur ... The changing aspect ratios in this case are actually a part of the storytelling . " In July 2014 , Gunn revealed that there were multiple scenes he had cut from the film , and he was investigating how to release them , either in an extended cut of the film , or as bonus features on the film 's home media release . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 At Disney 's D23 Expo in August 2013 , Feige presented footage first revealed at the San Diego Comic @-@ Con in July 2013 . The first trailer for the film debuted on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! on February 18 , 2014 , with a special introduction by Chris Pratt . The Los Angeles Times said the trailer delivered " some spirited alien action , with exploding spaceships and muscled bad guys , not to mention a few purely comedic moments , " while spotlighting " a number of the offbeat characters . " Total Film noted the similarity of the trailer 's opening clip to the 1981 film , Raiders of the Lost Ark , which Gunn stated was a big influence for Guardians , and made note of the " edgy " humor used throughout . Total Film also noted the similarity of the trailer to the one debuted at Comic @-@ Con and D23 , with a few new shots featuring Nebula and the Collector . Social media response to the trailer was strong , with 88 @,@ 000 mentions across Twitter , Facebook and various blogs in a 12 @-@ hour period . Those numbers were comparable to trailers for other superhero films like Man of Steel and The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 2 , and noteworthy for the late night time period in which it premiered . The trailer received 22 @.@ 8 million views in the 24 hours after it debuted . After the debut of the trailer , Blue Swede 's version of " Hooked on a Feeling " , which was prominently used throughout the trailer , went up 700 % in sales the following day . The line from Serafinowicz 's character , " What a bunch of A @-@ holes . " , was only intended to be featured in the trailers , but due to its positive reception , was included in the final cut of the film . 
 In March 2014 , the Marvel 's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. episode " T.A.H.I.T.I. " introduced the Kree race to the MCU , which began a storyline that recurs throughout the series and involves finding a hidden Kree city . Also in March , ABC aired a one @-@ hour television special titled , Marvel Studios : Assembling a Universe , which included a sneak peek of Guardians of the Galaxy . Starting in April 2014 , a two @-@ part comic was released , titled Marvel 's Guardians of the Galaxy Prelude . Written by Dan Abnett and Andy Lanning , with art by Wellington Alves , the first issue focused on the background of Nebula and her bond with Thanos ; the second issue featured the adventures of Rocket and Groot before they join forces with the other Guardians . In June 2014 , Mike <unk> , senior VP of Marvel Studios , described the marketing approach for Guardians of the Galaxy by saying that Marvel had " built a robust marketing program for the theatrical release that carefully integrates traditional advertising , social media , digital marketing , strategic promotional partnerships , organic entertainment integrations [ and ] publicity . " 
 In July 2014 , Marvel launched a viral marketing campaign for the film called " Galaxy <unk> " , a fictional travel website that allows users to book passage to some of the planets depicted in the film , including Xandar , Morag , and Knowhere . Beginning July 4 , 2014 , a sneak peek of the film was presented at Disneyland and Disney 's Hollywood Studios in the Magic Eye and ABC Sound Studio theaters , respectively . Approximately 14 minutes of the film was screened on July 7 , 2014 , in IMAX 3D in the United States , and 3D theaters and IMAX 3D in Canada , along with two trailers . The screening was met with positive reviews , praising the humor , the 3D and IMAX conversion , and Cooper 's portrayal of Rocket . However , it was criticized for beginning partway through the film , not allowing viewers to easily acclimate to the film 's tone , and for how the general audience might respond to a film within the MCU without established characters making appearances . 
 On July 12 , 2014 , Gunn and the actors from the film promoted Guardians of the Galaxy at the Lido 8 Cineplex in Singapore . On July 17 , 2014 , Disney Interactive released an action RPG video game titled Guardians of the Galaxy : The Universal Weapon for iOS , Android and Windows devices . The game 's original story was written by Dan Abnett , and was meant to complement the film . On July 21 , Pratt , Saldana , Bautista , Diesel and Cooper appeared on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! to promote the film and debut some additional exclusive content . On July 29 , Pratt and Saldana rang the opening bell of the New York Stock Exchange as part of the film 's marketing strategy . 
 On August 14 , Marvel released the scene of Groot dancing , which was shortly followed by an announcement from Funko that they were releasing a toy " Dancing Groot " . The Hollywood Reporter noted that the quick release of the scene from Marvel two weeks after the film 's theatrical release , along with the rush announcement from Funko , indicated the popularity of both the character and the scene . The scene also produced the word " <unk> " , coined by Michael Rooker , in which a person dances similar to Groot , with the word entering the social media lexicon . Also in August , Marvel held a special screening of the film at Children 's Hospital Los Angeles , where Pratt dressed as Star @-@ Lord to entertain the patients . 
 = = = = Merchandise = = = = 
 In June 2012 , Marvel filed eleven trademark applications for Guardians of the Galaxy , covering a variety of consumer products , from video games to cosmetics . Disney Consumer Products partnered with Mad Engine , C @-@ Life , New Era , Hasbro , Disguise , Rubies , Sideshow Collectibles , Lego , <unk> , iHome , Funko , Freeze , Fast Forward , and Innovative Designs to produce merchandise for the film , with releases starting in June 2014 . Mad Engine and C @-@ Life were partnered as the core apparel outfitters , producing a line of T @-@ shirts and fleece jackets , while New Era produced headwear and hats . Hasbro produced toys for the film ; Disguise and Rubies produced the costumes ; and Sideshow Collectibles was given charge of the collectibles . Lego announced three toy sets based on scenes from the film , while iHome created character speakers , Funko made vinyl bobble heads , Freeze crafted 1980s @-@ inspired apparel , and backpacks and stationery were made by Fast Forward and Innovative Designs . Despite first films in a potential new franchise usually being off @-@ limits to licensees , Marvel used Iron Man 's success as evidence of unknown characters becoming hits with audiences to attract partnerships . <unk> embraced Rocket as the film 's potential breakout character , with Drax and Gamora being used for older demographics ; Star @-@ Lord ’ s obsession with 1980s nostalgia , including his " Awesome Mix Vo . 1 " cassette , has also served as a basis for tie @-@ in products . In August 2014 , Funko announced a toy based on " Dancing Groot " , while in October 2014 , Marvel and KID designs announced a replica of dancing Groot , for release in December 2014 . 
 In December 2014 , Disney made a second marketing push , to coincide with the film 's home media release with additional merchandise . Merchandise partners included : KID designs with its replica dancing Groot ; Funko ’ s <unk> line with a plush Rocket ; Mattel ’ s Hot Wheels character cars ; C @-@ Life , Hybrid @-@ Jem Sportswear , Freeze , MZ Berger , <unk> , AME and Her Universe with apparel ; <unk> with jewelry and watches ; American Greetings with cards ; Jay Franco with <unk> ; and <unk> with <unk> . Additional partners included Mad Engine , Just Play and Dragon Models . Paul Gitter , senior vice president of Marvel licensing at Disney Consumer Products said , " The demand for Guardians of the Galaxy merchandise has been truly out of this world . Our merchandising and retail partners are doing a tremendous job of providing creative and innovative ways for fans to continue interacting with these popular characters and showcase their fandom year round . " 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Guardians of the Galaxy was released for digital download by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on November 18 , 2014 and on Blu @-@ ray , Blu @-@ ray 3D , and DVD on November 24 , 2014 , in the United Kingdom and on December 9 in the United States . The digital and Blu @-@ ray releases include behind @-@ the @-@ scenes featurettes , audio commentary , deleted scenes , a blooper reel , and an exclusive preview of Avengers : Age of Ultron . As of October 4 , 2015 , the film has earned over $ 118 million in sales in the US . 
 The film was also included in the 13 @-@ disc box set , titled " Marvel Cinematic Universe : Phase Two Collection " , which includes all of the Phase Two films in the Marvel Cinematic Universe . It was released on December 8 , 2015 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Guardians of the Galaxy earned $ 333 @.@ 2 million in North America and an estimated $ 441 million in other countries , for a worldwide total of $ 773 @.@ 3 million . The film became the third highest @-@ grossing film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe , behind The Avengers and Iron Man 3 . It was the third highest @-@ grossing 2014 film ( behind Transformers : Age of Extinction and The Hobbit : The Battle of the Five Armies ) and the highest @-@ grossing superhero film of 2014 . It had a worldwide opening weekend of $ 160 @.@ 7 million . Deadline.com calculated the net profit for the film to be $ 204 @.@ 2 million , when factoring together " production budgets , P & A , talent participations and other costs , with box office grosses , and ancillary revenues from VOD to DVD and TV , " placing it fifth on their list of 2014 's " Most Valuable Blockbusters " . 
 = = = = North America = = = = 
 Guardians of the Galaxy earned $ 11 @.@ 2 million on its Thursday night pre @-@ opening , surpassing Captain America : The Winter Soldier 's gross ( $ 10 @.@ 2 million ) for the biggest Thursday evening start for a movie in 2014 . IMAX accounted for 17 % of the total gross ( $ 1 @.@ 9 million ) , which was the biggest August pre @-@ release in IMAX format . On its opening day , the film earned $ 37 @.@ 8 million , including the Thursday night earnings . Guardians of the Galaxy was the number one movie during its opening weekend and grossed $ 94 @.@ 3 million , setting an August weekend record . During the opening weekend , IMAX earnings amounted to $ 11 @.@ 7 million and 3 @-@ D showings accounted for 45 % of ticket sales . The film 's success was partially attributed to its appeal to both genders : the opening weekend audience was 44 % female , which is the biggest proportion ever for a MCU film ; 55 % of the opening @-@ weekend audience was over the age of 25 . 
 Although the film fell to second place in its second and third weekends , behind Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles , the film was number one in its fourth , fifth and sixth weekend . By doing so , it became the first film in 2014 to top the domestic box office in non @-@ consecutive weeks , the first film of the summer ( May – August ) to be the number one film in three weekends and the first MCU film to be the top film for four weeks , surpassing Captain America : The Winter Soldier and The Avengers , both of which were number one for three weeks , and tied The Dark Knight for the most weeks at number one among comic book @-@ based films . Phil <unk> , vice president and chief analyst of <unk> felt Guardians success was " unconventional " and was " shattering expectations " . The film remained in the top 10 for ten weekends . 
 The film was the top grossing film of summer 2014 ( ahead of Transformers : Age of Extinction ) , first of 2014 to pass $ 300 million for its domestic gross , and was the third highest @-@ grossing domestic film of 2014 ( behind American Sniper and The Hunger Games : Mockingjay – Part 1 ) . The film was said to have " injected life " into an otherwise lower than normal summer box office . 
 = = = = Outside North America = = = = 
 Guardians of the Galaxy was released in 42 international markets and grossed $ 67 @.@ 4 million on its opening weekend . The biggest debuts came from Russia ( $ 13 million ) , the United Kingdom ( $ 10 @.@ 8 million ) , Mexico ( $ 6 @.@ 5 million ) , Brazil ( $ 6 @.@ 5 million ) and South Korea ( $ 4 @.@ 7 million ) . The film topped the weekend box office two times , in its first and second weekends . In its eleventh weekend , the film opened in China , earning $ 29 @.@ 8 million , its largest , and became the third highest opening in the country for any Disney release , behind Iron Man 3 and Captain America : The Winter Soldier , and was an all @-@ time industry record opening in October . The following weekend saw an additional $ 21 @.@ 3 million from China , making China the highest grossing market with $ 69 million . The film 's three biggest markets in total earnings were : China ( $ 96 @.@ 5 million ) ; the UK ( $ 47 @.@ 4 million ) ; and Russia ( $ 37 @.@ 5 million ) . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 91 % approval rating with an average rating of 7 @.@ 8 / 10 based on 277 reviews . The website 's consensus reads , " Guardians of the Galaxy is just as irreverent as fans of the frequently zany Marvel comic would expect — as well as funny , thrilling , full of heart , and packed with visual splendor . " Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned a score of 76 out of 100 , based on 46 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . CinemaScore audiences gave Guardians of the Galaxy an " A " grade rating on an A + to F scale , while earning an " A + " among under @-@ 18 and 25- to 34 @-@ year @-@ old viewers . 
 Scott Foundas of Variety said " James Gunn 's presumptive franchise @-@ starter is overlong , overstuffed and sometimes too eager to please , but the cheeky comic tone keeps things buoyant — as does Chris Pratt ’ s winning performance " , and praised the film 's look created by cinematographer Ben Davis , production designer Charles Wood , and special effects makeup designer David White . Justin Lowe of The Hollywood Reporter also praised the film 's look , and felt " A well @-@ matched ensemble rises to the challenge of launching a heroic origin film with distinctive style , abundant thrills and no shortage of humor . " The Daily Telegraph 's Robbie Collin said , " A brand new summer family blockbuster this may be , but it plays by old , half @-@ forgotten rules ; trimming out the clutter and cross @-@ referencing for snappy , streamlined , Saturday @-@ cartoon fun " . Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times said , " Blessed with a loose , anarchic B @-@ picture soul that encourages you to enjoy yourself even when you 're not quite sure what 's going on , the scruffy Guardians is irreverent in a way that can bring the first Star Wars to mind , in part because it has some of the most unconventional heroes this side of the Mos Eisley Cantina . " Manohla Dargis of The New York Times said , " While Guardians takes you down one after another crazy narrative turn , it also pulls you into – and , for the most part , keeps you in – a fully realized other world . " Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times said , " Guardians of the Galaxy is a late summer treat — a mostly lighthearted and self @-@ referential comic @-@ book movie with loads of whiz @-@ bang action , some laugh @-@ out @-@ loud moments and a couple of surprisingly beautiful and touching scenes as well , " calling it " a refreshing confection of entertainment . " Jim Starlin , creator of Drax the Destroyer , Gamora , and Thanos , said it " might be Marvel 's best movie yet " . 
 Jake Coyle of the Associated Press was more critical of the film , calling it " terribly overstuffed and many of the jokes get drowned out by the special effects ... The pervasive movie references detract from the stab at freshness , and Guardians depends all too much on the whimsy of ' 70s anthems for an original beat . " He also felt that Close , Reilly and del Toro were underused in the film . Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle said , " In place of wit , Guardians offers a sort of generalized willingness to be amusing , an atmosphere of high spirits that feels like lots of people pumping air into a tire that has a hole in it . Everyone is clearly working , but nothing is really happening – and yet the effort is so evident that there 's an impulse to reward it . " Kyle Smith of the New York Post also had a negative response to the film , comparing it to Howard the Duck and Green Lantern , and criticizing the dialogue , villains , soundtrack , lack of suspense , and the characters of Quill , Rocket , and Drax . The film received mixed reviews in China , where viewers complained that the film 's " poor subtitle translation not only spoiled the fun of watching it , but also made it difficult to understand its humor . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Sequel = = 
 Guardians of the Galaxy Vol . 2 is scheduled to be released on May 5 , 2017 , again written and directed by James Gunn . Pratt , Saldana , Bautista , Diesel , Cooper , Rooker , Gillan , Sean Gunn and Close all reprise their roles in the film , and are joined by Pom <unk> as Mantis , Elizabeth <unk> as Ayesha , Chris Sullivan as <unk> , and Kurt Russell as Ego . 
 = Monroe Edwards = 
 Monroe Edwards ( 1808 – January 27 , 1847 ) was an American slave trader , forger and convicted criminal who was the subject of a well @-@ publicized trial and conviction in 1842 . Originally from Kentucky , Edwards moved to New Orleans then settled in Texas . He smuggled slaves into Brazil in 1832 , and used the proceeds to purchase land in Texas . In 1836 he was again smuggling slaves , this time into Texas . After attempting to swindle his partner out of the profits of the venture , partly with forged documents , Edwards was forced to flee the Republic of Texas to the United States . He then tried to scam money out of various abolitionists in the United States and the United Kingdom , partly with forged letters of introduction . He traveled to the United Kingdom , but his schemes were mainly unsuccessful and he returned to the United States in mid @-@ 1841 . 
 Edwards ' largest swindle involved forged letters from cotton brokers in New Orleans , which he used to secure bank drafts for large sums that he then cashed . His fabrications caught up with him and he was arrested and tried for the forgeries in June 1842 . Convicted partly because his distinctive good looks made him memorable and easily recognizable , and partly from making the same spelling errors in his fakes , Edwards was sentenced to 10 years in prison and died in 1847 while incarcerated . Several sensational accounts of his offenses and trial were published after his death , and he was mentioned in Herman Melville 's 1853 short story " Bartleby , the Scrivener " . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Edwards was born in 1808 in Danville , Kentucky . His father was reported to be Amos Edwards or Moses Edwards , but the name of his mother is unknown . His brother was Amos Edwards , and his uncle was Haden Edwards who lived in Nacogdoches . Nothing is known with certainty of his childhood . As a grown man , he was considered very handsome , and usually dressed fashionably . Some accounts give him the title " Colonel " . 
 Around 1822 , Edwards was sent to New Orleans to learn business from a merchant named Mr. Morgan . By the late 1820s Morgan had established a trading post on San Jacinto Bay near Galveston in what was then Mexican Texas . Some time after , Edwards met a slave trader and joined his new acquaintance on a smuggling trip to acquire slaves in Africa . This first effort ended when they were shipwrecked , but a second attempt in 1832 successfully smuggled slaves into Brazil . Edwards invested the profits from this venture into land in Texas , where in late 1833 he established a plantation on the San Bernard River in present @-@ day Brazoria County , Texas ; he named his new home " Chenango " . Unconnected with his slave trading , Edwards was arrested in 1832 as part of the Anahuac Disturbances , and was briefly imprisoned during the uprising against the Mexican government which ruled Texas . 
 = = Slave trading and forgery = = 
 Edwards ' next efforts in smuggling involved a new partner , Christopher Dart , a lawyer from Natchez , Mississippi . In 1835 Dart invested $ 40 @,@ 000 to buy the contracts of indentured blacks in Cuba and smuggle them into Texas as slaves . Instead providing money for the partnership , Edwards ' contribution was land certificates . At the time , Texas was a Mexican border province . In 1829 , Mexico had abolished slavery as well as the importation of slaves , but gave Texas an exemption from emancipating slaves who were already in the territory . To circumvent the ban on importing slaves , traders instead reclassified them as indentured servants with 99 @-@ year contracts . The Mexican government cracked down on this practice in 1832 , limiting terms of indenture to a maximum of 10 years . Edwards secured further financing from a New Orleans company named George Knight and Company and then went to Cuba where he purchased slaves . 
 In February 1836 Edwards landed 170 black people in Texas , taking advantage of the confusion surrounding the end of the Texas Revolution and the establishment of the independent Republic of Texas , which had not yet outlawed the importation of slaves . William Fisher , the customs collector on the Brazos River , wrote to the Texas Constitutional Convention that Edwards did not report the importation to the authorities , and Fisher went to Edwards ' plantation to confront Edwards . Because of uncertainty about the legality of importing slaves , Fisher did not seize the slaves but referred the issue to the newly formed Texas Government after securing a monetary bond from Edwards . Although the new Texas Republic eventually outlawed the importation of slaves from anywhere but the United States , Edwards ' landing of slaves from Cuba in early 1836 was never prosecuted . After this , Edwards also established a slave market on Galveston Bay , near present @-@ day San Leon . In 1837 , he was sued by Robert Peebles for fraud involving the sale of a slave with tuberculosis to Peebles . Peebles won the case . 
 Edwards then tried to change the deal with Dart . Instead of dividing the smuggled slaves between the two men , Edwards tried to keep all the slaves and instead repay the money Dart had advanced him , with some interest . Dart sued , and at the trial in March 1839 Edwards offered two forged documents claiming that Dart had sold his interest in the slaves to Edwards . In forging the documents , Edwards originally secured Dart 's signature on a document written in a type of ink that could later be chemically removed . After Dart signed the document , Edwards then removed the original wording of the document and substituted a deed selling Dart 's interest in the land and slaves . The documents were determined to be forgeries and on April 2 , 1840 , Dart was awarded $ 89 @,@ 000 . Edwards fled the Republic of Texas to the United States . 
 As part of a plot to discredit both Dart and the government of Texas , Edwards persuaded some abolitionists in Cincinnati to give him money with which he would supposedly liberate the slaves on his plantation in Texas , which he no longer owned . Edwards also tried to get money from the American and Foreign Anti @-@ Slavery Society in New York , but its leader , Lewis Tappan , did not trust him and no money was forthcoming from that source . Edwards then went to England , bearing forged letters of introduction from , among others , Daniel Webster and the American Secretary of State , John Forsyth . One of these letters was to Lord Spencer , who was so impressed he gave Edwards £ 250 as a loan . While in England , Edwards defrauded a company in Liverpool of about $ 20 @,@ 000 , and then used part of the funds to repay Lord Spencer . The Republic of Texas ambassador in London warned the English government against Edwards . Tappan also sent warnings , so Edwards was unable to acquire more money in England and had returned to the United States by June 1841 . 
 = = Final scheme = = 
 Edwards ' next fraudulent scheme involved forging letters to cotton brokers in New Orleans , and using the signatures obtained from their replies to forge letters to brokers in New York City , saying that the fake John Caldwell – Edwards ' alias – had a large amount of cotton on deposit with the New Orleans brokers . Edwards used those letters to secure fraudulent loans from brokers on the security of the non @-@ existent cotton . Two New York brokers – Brown Bros. & Co. and Jacob Little – gave Edwards bank drafts for $ 25 @,@ 000 each . Edwards then cashed the drafts pretending to be Caldwell , but without attempting to disguise his appearance . Unluckily for Edwards , in September 1841 Brown Brothers was informed by the New Orleans brokers that there was no cotton on account for Caldwell , and this prompted the bankers to offer a reward for information on the forger . The police began to search for the forger of the letters , but were unsuccessful until Edwards attempted to distract their attention to an acquaintance , Alexander Powell , who happened to look much like him . Edwards sent an anonymous letter to the New York police , stating that the forger they were hunting was sailing to England , as Powell was about to do . Edwards assumed that by the time the police acted , Powell 's ship would already have sailed . The ship was delayed and the police were able to catch Powell , who told them that Edwards was their forger . 
 After his arrest , Edwards was imprisoned in the Tombs , New York City 's jail . When he was arrested , he had more than $ 44 @,@ 000 in a trunk in his room . While in jail awaiting trial , Edwards forged a letter alleging he had funds in New Orleans , and then showed the letter to one of his lawyers in order to reassure the lawyer about Edwards ' ability to pay for legal counsel . In an attempt to delay his trial , Edwards also forged a letter from a supposed witness , Charles Johnson , stating that he was in Cuba and would not be able to come and testify for Edwards for a while ; this gained Edwards a three @-@ month delay . 
 = = Trial = = 
 Edwards ' trial was in June 1842 and was a media sensation . He secured a defense team of six lawyers , including John J. Crittenden , a sitting U. S. Senator , and Thomas F. Marshall , a sitting U. S. Representative . Both Crittenden and Marshall absented themselves from their legislative duties during the trial . One of the junior lawyers was William M. Evarts , who presented the opening remarks for the defense . Another defense lawyer was John Worth Edmonds , who Edwards paid with a forged check . Edwards ' handsome appearance worked against him , when one of the bankers who had cashed the drafts identified him in court and remarked that he remembered Edwards because of his striking good looks . Edwards had also neglected to dispose of a marked bank bag from one of the banks that cashed the fraudulently obtained draft . A final tie @-@ in was the commonality of misspellings between letters from Edwards and the forged letters . The trial ended with Edwards being convicted and given a 10 @-@ year prison sentence . The trial 's proceedings were published by a New York newspaper , The Herald , and ran to 50 @,@ 000 copies . None of Edwards ' lawyers were ever paid for their services . He was sent to Sing Sing prison , where he attempted to use forged letters to escape . Edwards died in prison on January 27 , 1847 , of consumption . He was insane at the time of his death . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Edwards earned a mention in Herman Melville 's story " Bartleby , the Scrivener " , who used the names of contemporary events and people to give a modern feel to his short stories . One of Melville 's characters asks Bartleby , when imprisoned in the Tombs , if he is a " gentleman forger " like Edwards . The career of Melville 's narrator in " Bartleby " parallels that of Edmonds , who defended Edwards then went on to be the prison inspector at Sing Sing during Edwards ' prison term , and was known for his attempts to improve the treatment of the prisoners . Melville 's narrator also tries to secure better treatment for Bartleby . The narrator 's description of Bartleby just prior to death , in the words of Robert Wilson , " eerily echoed " the state of Edwards just prior to his death . 
 Edwards was known during and after his trial as the " Great Forger " . The main account of his life and trial is Life and Adventures of the Accomplished Forger and <unk> , Colonel Monroe Edwards , which was written by an editor of the National Police Gazette in 1848 . The account , which was probably written by George Wilkes , is the fullest account of Edwards ' life , but mingles fact with fiction to the extent that it has been listed in bibliographies of American fiction . Wilkes ' account is the source for the story of Kitty Clover , supposedly a slave who loved Edwards , rescued him , and followed him throughout his life . There are other accounts , including two anonymous narratives published in 1842 . 
 = SpongeBob 's Truth or Square = 
 SpongeBob 's Truth or Square is a 2009 made @-@ for @-@ television one @-@ hour comedy special directed by Andrew Overtoom , Alan Smart , and Tom Yasumi . It stars Tom Kenny , Bill Fagerbakke , Rodger Bumpass , Clancy Brown , Carolyn Lawrence , and Mr. Lawrence . The special originally aired on Nickelodeon in the United States on November 6 , 2009 , celebrating the tenth anniversary of the American animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants . 
 The television series follows the adventures of the title character in the underwater city of Bikini Bottom . In the special , SpongeBob and his friends are accidentally locked inside the Krusty Krab on the day of its " eleventy @-@ seventh " anniversary celebration . As they crawl through the ventilation system trying to escape , they look back on shared memories through flashback moments . 
 SpongeBob 's Truth or Square was written by Luke Brookshier , Nate Cash , Steven Banks , and Paul Tibbitt . Rosario Dawson , LeBron James , Tina Fey , Will Ferrell , Craig Ferguson , Robin Williams , and Ricky Gervais guest starred in the special as themselves . Upon release , the special attracted an estimated 7 @.@ 7 million viewers , and met mixed reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 SpongeBob realizes that the Krusty Krab restaurant is celebrating its " eleventy @-@ seventh " anniversary . He remembers his first visit to the Krusty Krab and tells Gary about it . SpongeBob then leaves to go to the Krusty Krab , but as soon as he exits his house , he bumps into the back of a long line of customers waiting to get into the restaurant as well . SpongeBob jumps on top of every person in the line , eventually reaching the Krusty Krab . 
 Mr. Krabs tells SpongeBob and Squidward that it is a perfect opportunity for his business rival , Plankton to steal the Krabby Patty formula . Mr. Krabs has hired Patrick as a security guard so he does not have to pay for a real one , and SpongeBob spectacularly decorates the Krusty Krab . Patrick , Squidward , and Mr. Krabs follow SpongeBob into the freezer where he shows them a giant Krabby Patty ice sculpture that he made himself . However , in attempt to take the ice sculpture outside , they accidentally knock SpongeBob out the open freezer door ; he then rebounds off the kitchen door and back into the freezer . The impact shuts the door and it locks , trapping all four friends inside . Mr. Krabs remembers that there is a way to escape without using the door , which is through the ventilation system . While finding their way through the maze of air vents , they look back at some memorable moments in their lives . 
 To get out of the air shaft , SpongeBob molds Squidward , Patrick , and Mr. Krabs into a battering ram to bust out the shaft , and he finally makes it out , only to find that all the customers have left after waiting for so long without getting any food . However , SpongeBob summons them all back as he sings a song in honor of the Krusty Krab to the tune of O Tannenbaum . Meanwhile , Plankton finally finds the perfect opportunity to steal the Krabby Patty secret formula . He fails , having been caught by Mr. Krabs . The eleventy @-@ seventh anniversary celebration then goes ahead . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and music = = = 
 Truth or Square was written by Luke Brookshier , Nate Cash , Steven Banks , and Paul Tibbitt . The writers have described the television special as " Seinfeld @-@ esque " that parodies the recycled flashback episodes seen in Seinfeld , Friends and other U.S. shows . The featured song , " We 've Got Scurvy " , was sung by American singer and actress Pink . 
 = = = Cast = = = 
 SpongeBob 's Truth or Square stars the series main cast members including Tom Kenny , Bill Fagerbakke , Rodger Bumpass , Clancy Brown , Carolyn Lawrence , and Mr. Lawrence . In addition to the series cast , it featured Rosario Dawson , Craig Ferguson , Will Ferrell , Tina Fey , LeBron James , Triumph , the Insult Comic Dog , and Robin Williams as guest actors appearing as themselves in the live @-@ action sequences , while Ricky Gervais provided vocal cameo as the narrator . Nickelodeon animation president Brown Johnson said " Over the past decade , SpongeBob has become one of the most beloved characters in television history [ ... ] And we 're excited to cap off the year 's celebration with this star @-@ studded special anniversary event . " 
 = = = Directing and animating = = = 
 Andrew Overtoom , Alan Smart , and Tom Yasumi served as the special 's animation directors . It was a part of the series ' tenth anniversary celebration . 
 The title sequence of SpongeBob for the special was made exclusively for the series ' tenth anniversary . It was animated in stop motion animation , with Cee Lo Green performing the theme . Mark Caballero , Seamus Walsh and Chris Finnegan of Screen Novelties , in 2009 , animated its opening titles . Finnegan claimed that the crew were " thrill [ ed ] " to do the title sequence because " the original title sequence is so recognizable and everyone seen it over and over and it 's so great in its own way . " Executive producer and the episode 's writer Paul Tibbitt said " We don 't just want to redraw it [ the original title sequence ] , we want it to be something special and different [ ... ] So we thought we would do it in three dimensions [ ... ] " Nickelodeon animation president Brown Johnson lauded the new title sequence and said it is " SO great ! " Some traditional animation on scraps of brown paper are intermixed into the stop motion . 
 Tibbitt said that the " biggest surprise " for him in the new title sequence was " the treatment of Painty the Pirate in the beginning " as seen in a fortune teller machine . Mark Caballero , one of its animators , explained " our idea was like our goal is like the more disturbing , the better because I don 't think there is a fortune telling machine out there that doesn 't disturb when you see it . Tibbitt said " it was a great idea [ ... ] I was just expecting maybe a 3D version of the painting but we got something totally different and it 's very cool . " 
 = = Release = = 
 In a press release , Nickelodeon officially announced the special " event " on October 13 , 2009 . According to the network , the special include " SpongeBob 's first visit to the Krusty Krab as a baby , a vintage Krusty Krab TV commercial , how SpongeBob found his beloved pineapple house , and the time that SpongeBob and Sandy got married ! " Prior to the official announcement of the television special , Entertainment Weekly broke the news by releasing a clip featuring a scene where SpongeBob and Sandy getting married . 
 It originally aired on Nickelodeon in the United States on November 6 , 2009 , along with " The Ultimate SpongeBob SpongeBash " marathon , Square Roots : The Story of SpongeBob SquarePants documentary , and a special SpongeBob episode entitled " To SquarePants or Not to SquarePants " . 
 On November 10 , 2009 , it was released on the DVD compilation of the same name in the United States and Canada , on November 16 , 2009 in region 2 , and on October 29 , 2009 in region 4 . The DVD consists of five season six episodes , a short called Behind the Scenes of the SpongeBob Opening , and karaoke @-@ mode songs : " <unk> " , " Campfire Song " , and " We 've Got Scurvy " . It was also released in the series ' season six DVD compilation , alongside 24 other episodes including the special episode " SpongeBob vs. The Big One " . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 In 2009 , Burger King tied @-@ in with Nickelodeon to release a toyline based on the special . The toyline features SpongeBob , Patrick , Squidward , Mr. Krabs , Sandy , Plankton , Gary , and a <unk> ' SpongeBob . 
 The book titled The Great Escape ! that was a tie @-@ in to the special was released . The book was written by Emily <unk> , published by Simon Spotlight / Nickelodeon , and was released on September 8 , 2009 . Another tie @-@ in book to the special was also released . The book titled Good Times ! was written by Erica David , illustrated by the Artifacts Group , and published by Simon Spotlight / Nickelodeon . Good Times ! was first released on September 8 , 2009 , then in 2011 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The premiere of SpongeBob 's Truth or Square on Friday , November 6 drew 7 @.@ 7 million total viewers , ranking as basic cable 's number @-@ one entertainment show for the week . It was also ranked as the week 's number one program among children in the demographic groups ages 6 – 11 and 2 @-@ 11 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 SpongeBob 's Truth or Square received mixed critical response from critics and fans . Nancy Basile of the About.com gave the special positive reviews and wrote " I had doubts that the recent Truth or Square special of SpongeBob SquarePants would be funny or clever . I was quite wrong . " She added that " My kids and I were mesmerized . " Jose Strike of the Animation World Network positively reacted to the special and wrote " Truth or Square is a major treat ; in fact , I 'm so happy I think I 'll drop on the deck and flop like a fish ... " Ian Jane of DVD Talk said " Truth or Square isn 't your typical episode , as it mixes up a lot of live action material in with the more traditional animated sequences to very unusual effect . " He added " [ ... ] but there 's enough here in terms of the gags and the jokes that even if it 's not a classic episode , it 's still one worth seeing . " Nickelodeon animation president Brown Johnson said that the special is her favorite among the series . 
 However , it was not immune to negative reception , and was criticized mainly due to the " Patchy the Pirate " segments . Paul Mavis from DVD Talk said " Truth or Square is a strange mix of some truly memorable animated SpongeBob moments interrupted unfortunately by the largely unfunny Patchy the Pirate segments . " He added " All of those amusing moments in Truth or Square , along with the A Charlie Brown Christmas ending , make one forget the patchy Patchy segments in Truth or Square . " Roy Hrab of DVD Verdict gave the episode a negative review saying " Wow ... This is without a doubt the lamest SpongeBob episode I have ever seen [ ... ] In fact , nothing interesting happens at all . The Patchy interludes and reliance on cameos merely draws attention to the episode 's lack of substance . " 
 In 2010 , Tom Kenny won at the 37th Annie Awards for Best Voice Acting in a Television Production category for his performance as the voice of SpongeBob SquarePants in the special . 
 = = Video game = = 
 The video game SpongeBob 's Truth or Square that was based on this SpongeBob SquarePants television special was released for PlayStation Portable , Wii , Xbox 360 , and Nintendo DS . The game was first announce by THQ on May 21 , 2009 . Randy Shoemaker , the vice president for global brand management at THQ , said " SpongeBob 's Truth or Square provides the ultimate SpongeBob experience for kids , parents and SpongeBob fans of all ages [ ... ] The game delivers innovative new gameplay features combined with a story that celebrates 10 incredibly fun and zany years of SpongeBob . Whether you 're an avid SpongeBob fan or a first @-@ time gamer , you 'll want to join the top adventure this game offers . " It was published by THQ , developed by Heavy Iron Studios , and was released on October 26 , 2009 in North America . 
 = Nationals ( Glee ) = 
 " Nationals " is the twenty @-@ first episode of the third season of the American musical television series Glee , and the sixty @-@ fifth overall . Written by Ali Adler and directed by Eric Stoltz , the episode is the second of two new episodes that aired back @-@ to @-@ back on Fox in the United States on May 15 , 2012 . It features New Directions facing off against Vocal Adrenaline at the Nationals show choir competition in Chicago , and several special guest stars : Whoopi Goldberg as NYADA dean Carmen Tibideaux , Jonathan Groff as Vocal Adrenaline director Jesse St. James , Lindsay Lohan as herself judging the competition and Rex Lee playing a Chicago alderman who is another of the judges . 
 The episode received mostly positive reviews , both in general and for the musical performances in particular . While reviewers were not impressed with the judging scene and highly critical of the inclusion of Emma and Will 's having sex for the first time as part of the post @-@ victory sequence , the overall quality was lauded by many . The musical numbers were widely praised , and although some critics felt that Vocal Adrenaline gave better performances than New Directions , the three main competition soloists — Rachel ( Lea Michele ) , Finn ( Cory Monteith ) and Unique ( Alex Newell ) — were especially singled out for encomiums . However , none of the episode 's seven songs charted on the Billboard Hot 100 , though two of the New Directions competition songs , Rachel 's " It 's All Coming Back to Me Now " and the group number featuring Finn and her , " Paradise by the Dashboard Light " , did chart on the Billboard Canadian Hot 100 . 
 Upon its initial airing , this episode was viewed by 6 @.@ 03 million American viewers and received a 2 @.@ 5 / 7 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic . The total viewership was down slightly from " Props " in the previous hour , and more significantly down from " Prom @-@ asaurus " the week before . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The New Directions glee club is in Chicago for the national show choir competition , but Mercedes ( Amber Riley ) is sick in her hotel bed with a bad fever and stomach pains , possibly due to food poisoning . Will ( Matthew Morrison ) drafts Quinn ( Dianna Agron ) and Tina ( Jenna Ushkowitz ) into the Troubletones number to add vocal heft with Mercedes sidelined , and Sue ( Jane Lynch ) starts medical measures to restore her to health . During final rehearsals , fights break out among the New Directions members , but are easily resolved because the intensity of their focus is on winning . 
 On the day of the show , Rachel ( Lea Michele ) is accosted by Jesse St. James ( Jonathan Groff ) , her former boyfriend and current director of rival show choir Vocal Adrenaline . Jesse tries to hurt her confidence by bringing up her failed NYADA audition before Carmen Tibideaux ( Whoopi Goldberg ) , but she realizes his intent and that his own uncertainty is showing . 
 The Nationals judges are introduced : Lindsay Lohan , Perez Hilton , and Chicago alderman Martin Fong ( Rex Lee ) . New Directions is the first group to compete , and Mercedes arrives just in time to go onstage with the group , healthy again thanks to Sue . The Troubletones lead off with " The Edge of Glory " . Rachel then performs " It 's All Coming Back to Me Now " . Carmen arrives during the number , for which Rachel receives a standing ovation . The finale is " Paradise by the Dashboard Light " , which also brings the audience to its feet , and gets an approving whistle from Carmen . Later , in the lobby , Jesse approaches Carmen and recommends Rachel for NYADA . 
 Mercedes and Kurt go to the Vocal Adrenaline dressing room to wish lead singer Wade " Unique " Adams ( Alex Newell ) good luck , but he tells them that he that he has chosen not to perform because he can no longer take the pressure of his new celebrity status . Kurt suggests that Unique , Wade 's transgender alter ego , might be able to handle what Wade is unable to , and the teen starts to get ready . On stage , Unique and Vocal Adrenaline perform " Starships " and " Pinball Wizard " . The judges name Unique the Nationals MVP , but they award the Nationals trophy to New Directions , with Vocal Adrenaline in second place . 
 Back at McKinley , the glee club members are treated as heroes by the school . Sue is restored as sole coach of the Cheerios , displacing co @-@ coach Roz Washington ( NeNe Leakes ) . At their apartment , Emma ( Jayma Mays ) and Will have sex for the first time . Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) arranges with Finn and Rachel for New Directions to perform the next night at the Teacher of the Year ceremony , which is won by Will . The group congratulates Will and performs " We Are the Champions " . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by co @-@ executive producer Ali Adler and directed by Eric Stoltz . Shooting of the episode had begun by April 18 , 2012 , and continued at least through April 27 , 2012 ; the final episode of the season began filming the following Monday , April 30 , 2012 . 
 The final day of shooting the Nationals competition scenes , April 26 , 2012 , was also the day that the show celebrated filming its 400th musical performance . 
 The New Directions portion of the competition includes three songs : Lady Gaga 's " The Edge of Glory " performed by the Troubletones , Celine Dion 's " It 's All Coming Back to Me Now " sung by Michele , and a group performance of Meat Loaf 's " Paradise by the Dashboard Light " with Monteith and Michele as primary leads . These three songs were released as singles for digital download , along with an additional four from the episode : Nicki Minaj 's " Starships " and The Who 's " Pinball Wizard " , both performed by Newell with Vocal Adrenaline , as well as Queen 's " We Are the Champions " performed by New Directions featuring Monteith , Michele , Agron , Colfer , Naya Rivera and Mark Salling , and Grouplove 's " Tongue Tied " , also by New Directions . " The Edge of Glory " and " We Are the Champions " are also featured on the soundtrack album Glee : The Music , The Graduation Album , with the former song retitled " Edge of Glory " in both single and album releases . 
 Special guest stars include Goldberg as NYADA dean Carmen Tibideaux , Groff as Vocal Adrenaline director Jesse St. James , and actress Lindsay Lohan and gossip columnist Perez Hilton as themselves , in the role of celebrity judges for the competition . Rex Lee plays Alderman Martin Fong , another judge . 
 Recurring guest stars appearing in the episode include glee club members Sam Evans ( Chord Overstreet ) , Rory Flanagan ( Damian McGinty ) , Joe Hart ( Samuel Larsen ) and Sugar Motta ( Vanessa Lengies ) , Principal Figgins ( Theba ) , football coach Shannon Beiste ( Dot @-@ Marie Jones ) , cheerleader Becky Jackson ( Lauren Potter ) , synchronized swimming coach Roz Washington ( Leakes ) , retiring teacher Mrs. Hagberg ( Mary Gillis ) and Vocal Adrenaline transgender lead vocalist Wade " Unique " Adams ( Newell ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Nationals " was first broadcast on May 15 , 2012 in the United States on Fox , as the second hour in a two @-@ hour special evening with " Props " having aired in the first hour at the show 's regular broadcast time . It received a 2 @.@ 5 / 7 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , and attracted 6 @.@ 03 million American viewers during its initial broadcast , slightly lower than the 2 @.@ 5 / 8 rating / share and 6 @.@ 09 million viewers during " Props " in the hour before , but a significant decrease from the 2 @.@ 7 / 8 rating / share and 6 @.@ 67 million viewers of the previous week 's episode , " Prom @-@ asaurus " , which was broadcast on May 8 , 2012 . 
 In Canada , which also aired the episode as the second hour of a two @-@ episode special on the same day as its American premiere , viewership rose significantly , by over 16 % to 1 @.@ 56 million viewers from the 1 @.@ 34 million viewers for the first hour . " Nationals " was the tenth most @-@ viewed show of the week as compared to " Props " , which had been fourteenth most @-@ viewed . " Nationals " viewership was still down by over 5 % from the 1 @.@ 65 million viewers who watched " Prom @-@ asaurus " the week before . 
 Although the United Kingdom also aired these two episodes together , " Nationals " aired in the show 's regular time slot , while " Props " aired an hour earlier than usual . Viewership fell in the second hour , though it remained higher than the previous week . " Nationals " first aired on May 17 , 2012 , and was watched on Sky 1 by 776 @,@ 000 viewers . This was down slightly from the 795 @,@ 000 viewers in the earlier hour , but was an increase of over 4 % from the previous week 's episode , " Prom @-@ asaurus " , which attracted 744 @,@ 000 viewers . 
 In Australia , " Nationals " was broadcast on May 24 , 2012 , a week after " Props " aired , rather than on the same night as in the other three . It was watched by 618 @,@ 000 viewers , up slightly from the 607 @,@ 000 viewers for " Props " on May 17 , 2012 . Glee was the seventeenth most @-@ watched program of the night for the second week in a row . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode was given positive reviews by most critics . Michael Slezak of TVLine described it as a " spectacular hour of jaw @-@ dropping musical numbers and satisfying plot developments " , and The A.V. Club 's Todd VanDerWerff called it " one of the finest episodes the show 's ever done and perhaps the best it 's done since the season one finale " . He gave it an " A " grade . Jeff Dodge of BuddyTV said that episode gave " quality to go along with some great music " , and Entertainment Weekly 's Erin Strecker wrote that the evening 's two episodes were a " return to form for the show " . Rae Votta of Billboard , on the other hand , said that by having " Props " and " Nationals " air back to back , " they both lose their individual potent high points and come out blander than they deserve " , and characterized " Nationals " as " jarring and strange " . 
 Both Huffington Post 's Crystal Bell and Washington Post 's Jen Chaney wanted to " be honest " about Vocal Adrenaline vs. New Directions in the competition : Bell said that Vocal Adrenaline " put on the better show " and Chaney wrote that they were " better than New Directions " : " their dance moves were sharper and more in sync , and Unique 's Minaj @-@ esque magnetism factor sold the whole thing " . VanDerWerff wrote that he " could quibble that Vocal Adrenaline had stronger choreography overall " or that he " found Unique a more engaging performer than Rachel " , but that as " New Directions also used its whole ensemble better than Vocal Adrenaline did " , he felt that " either outcome seemed reasonable " . Dodge simply stated , " We all knew that New Directions would win and they 'd get their happily ever after , but it was exciting to see it finally all play out . " Bell wrote that " seeing the judges debate behind @-@ the @-@ scenes kind of takes away the entire title " , though she appreciated Lohan 's Freaky Friday reference . VanDerWerff said that the judging scene " wasn 't very good " , and Votta described it as " mostly waste [ d ] " . Futterman wrote that there was " not really any emotion " in Lohan 's lines , though Strecker thought that the " lines they gave her were pretty funny — if not a bit sad " . 
 Reviewers were critical of what Votta called " a really regrettable sequence where Emma leaves a pamphlet about losing her virginity on Schue 's desk and then they finally have sex " . Bell characterized it as " weird and uncomfortable , and the reasoning was horrendously misogynistic " , and VanDerWerff thought that making it part of the post @-@ Nationals victory montage as " a little too creepy , at best " . Votta thought that though the victory segment " should feel joyous " , it instead feels " awkward and emotion @-@ less " . Will 's being awarded " Teacher of the Year " was called " surprising " by Strecker , who hearkened back to him having " discovered that he wasn 't so good " at teaching Spanish " a few months ago " . Bell asked how it was " possible " for Quinn to so rapidly recover her ability to walk and then dance , something also touched on by VanDerWerff , who was again critical of " Fox 's rampant abuse of the Twitter hashtag thing " by displaying onscreen hashtags during the episode . Strecker praised Jesse 's scenes , and said she " couldn 't stop cracking up " . 
 = = = Music and performances = = = 
 As with the episode , the musical performances were mostly received with enthusiasm by reviewers . VanDerWerff wrote that the " big performances " were " all aces " . Of the seven songs , the one that received the fewest comments was " Tongue Tied " , which Strecker described as " montage music " and graded a " B " . As Chaney noted , it " wasn 't a number so much as a musical celebration of New Directions ' championship status " , but it nevertheless received an " A − " grade from her and from Slezak . Rolling Stone 's Erica Futterman called it a " spirited take on Grouplove " . 
 Of all the songs performed in competition , " The Edge of Glory " was given the most mixed reception . Chaney gave the song a " C " grade , and said that while it " started strong " the energy level was " lacking " , a word that Futterman used to describe the performance as a whole , to which she added " emotionless and rushed " . A diametric view of the song was evident in the " A − " grades given by both Slezak and Strecker , and the latter also complimented the " different " arrangement while both were enthusiastic about the entire set of three songs : Slezak said New Directions " completely killed it " , and Strecker said this song " kicked off what was a truly an all @-@ time great performance " . 
 That performance continued with " It 's All Coming Back to Me Now " , which was widely praised . Dodge said that it , like the prior song , was " covered to perfection " . Although Chaney said she hated that song , she wrote that Michele hit it " out of the park " and gave it an " A " , the same grade Strecker gave with the encomium " outstanding " , and added that she then " rewatched three times " . An " A " was not sufficient for Slezak , who declared that it was " one of Glee 's five best vocals ever " and gave it an " A + " . Futterman " loved " the song except for its ending , which she described as " an abrupt cliffhanger " . 
 The New Directions set closed with " Paradise by the Dashboard Light " . While a number of reviewers , including Chaney and Dodge , questioned the choice of the song for a variety of reasons , they expressed enthusiasm with the final result . <unk> Saskin of MTV called it a " quirky yet catchy song choice " that " was the episode 's standout " , and both Slezak and Strecker gave it an " A " grade ; the latter said it was the " real group number " of the three and added , " The vocals , choreography and energy were all top @-@ notch . " Chaney 's grade of " A − " came with the declaration that " this may have been Finn at his absolute best " and Futterman said he did " a surprisingly decent Meatloaf " ; Futterman added that the " already theatrical song is somehow made better by the show choir arrangement " . VanDerWerff described it as " one of the better New Directions group performances " . 
 The two Vocal Adrenaline performances were generally very well received ; as noted above , Bell and Chaney used very similar words to explain why they thought Vocal Adrenaline was " better " than New Directions . " Starships " , the first number , was also the more praised of the two : Houston Chronicle 's Bobby Hankinson said that it " stole the show " for him , and was the best musical number of the night . Flandez called it " an electric and sassy delivery " by Unique , and Strecker asked " is there anything she can 't do " before she gave the performance an " A − " . Futterman thought it felt " more subdued than the warp @-@ speed of Minaj 's hit " though she added that the " stage acrobatics trump everything anyone else does " , and Saskin said it " was fun to watch , but the vocals don 't add much to the original version " . Slezak gave it an " A " grade and praised the " dazzling " choreography of both numbers . " Pinball Wizard " was called " turbo @-@ charged from beginning to end " by Flandez , and both Strecker and Slezak gave the song a " B + " grade ; the former 's enthusiasm was tempered by the arrangement , which was not very " different from just karaoke of the original " , and the dancing on the pinball machines as " a bit much for my taste " . Futterman said that Unique " riffs the hell out the song " , but added that " the robot dancers of Vocal Adrenaline make it hard to glean any personality from the performance " . Dodge wrote , " This one I 'm liking even less than the first " , but Saskin said , " Mercedes needs to watch out , because Unique sure can belt it out ! " 
 The episode 's closing number , " We Are the Champions " , received excellent grades : A from Slezak and Chaney , and an " A − " from Strecker . Saskin wrote that it was " a new Glee classic " , and Chaney said it " worked wonderfully as an assertion of the New Directions ' championship status " . Futterman described the performance as " rife with emotion " and added , " It 's moments like this that are pure and straight to the show 's original appeal " , while Strecker complimented the song choice and how " it really showcased the group 's harmonies " . In December 2012 , TV Guide listed the rendition as one of Glee 's best performances . 
 = = = Chart history = = = 
 Two of the seven singles released for the episode charted on the Billboard Canadian Hot 100 : " It 's All Coming Back to Me Now " , which debuted at number seventy @-@ five , and " Paradise by the Dashboard Light " , which debuted at number ninety @-@ four . Neither song charted on the US Billboard Hot 100 , but two other singles from the episode affected the charting there of songs by the original artists . " Tongue Tied " sold 22 @,@ 000 copies in the Glee version , and did well enough in the Grouplove original to re @-@ enter the Billboard Hot 100 at number seventy @-@ four , close to the song 's previous chart high of sixty @-@ nine , while " Starships " sold 18 @,@ 000 in the Glee version and 174 @,@ 000 in the Nicki Minaj original , which moved from six to five on the Hot 100 , matching its highest chart position to date . " It 's All Coming Back to Me Now " charted at number one at the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles on June 2 , 2012 . 
 = Lisa vs. Malibu Stacy = 
 " Lisa vs. Malibu Stacy " is the fourteenth episode of The Simpsons ' fifth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 17 , 1994 . In the episode , Lisa challenges the makers of the Malibu Stacy doll to create a less sexist doll . Together with the original creator of Malibu Stacy , Stacy Lovell , Lisa creates the doll Lisa Lionheart in an effort to positively influence young girls . 
 The episode was written by Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein , and directed by Jeffrey Lynch . The episode 's plot was inspired by the Teen Talk Barbie line of talking dolls , which spoke short phrases typical of a middle class American teenager . Kathleen Turner guest starred in the episode as Stacy Lovell , creator of Malibu Stacy . It features cultural references to action figures such as Ken and G.I. Joe . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 6 , and was the second highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dr. Hibbert introduces a frail Ben Matlock to a crowd of excited seniors at the Grand Opening of the Center for Geriatric Medicine . After seeing his idol mobbed to the ground by fans , Abe becomes aware of his mortality and gives the family their inheritances early . He leaves the family a box of old silver dollars ( which Abe explains he got when Rockefeller flew by his house in a balloon , dropping money ) that they decide to spend at the mall right away . At the mall , Lisa sees the new talking Malibu Stacy doll in a toy store . Throughout the trip home , Abe will not stop telling stories and spouting useless advice , making the family shun him . Grampa asks if its because he reminds them of the grim spectre of death , but Homer explains that although they love him , Grampa is an annoying old crank who is unpleasant to spend time with . Lisa is anxious to hear what the talking Malibu Stacy has to say , but is disappointed with her sexist phrases ( such as " Don 't ask me , I 'm just a girl " and " Thinking too much gives you wrinkles " ) . Lisa is angry that no one else can see the ridiculousness of the doll . She and Abe sit at the kitchen table , bemoaning how they are treated because of their age while both of them decide to change , Abe to get a job , and Lisa to find Malibu Stacy 's creator , Stacy Lovell . 
 Lisa visits Waylon Smithers , owner of the world 's largest Malibu Stacy collection , and asks for help in finding Lovell , who was ousted from the Malibu Stacy company in 1974 . Lisa bikes to Lovell 's house and plays one of the doll 's phrases over the intercom . The gate immediately opens . Lisa and Lovell decide to create a new talking doll , Lisa Lionheart , voiced by Lisa herself . The doll is quietly released , but the executives of Malibu Stacy have a meeting in which they agree that Lisa 's doll is a real threat because it might hurt the sales of their doll . Meanwhile , Abe struggles with his new job at Krusty Burger , suffering a war flashback at the drive @-@ in and losing his false teeth making burgers . He soon becomes angry at the way seniors are treated , and quits . After a slow initial release , Lisa Lionheart suddenly gains popularity among the fans of Malibu Stacy after being featured in Kent Brockman 's news show . At the mall , as kids , and Smithers , rush out to buy Lisa Lionheart , a cart of new Malibu Stacy dolls with new hats is wheeled right into the path of the group running for the Lionheart display . Lisa appeals to them that it is just the same doll with a " stupid , cheap " hat , but they all prefer to stick with Malibu Stacy , largely due to the encouragement of Smithers , except for one little girl , who leaves with a Lisa Lionheart doll . Despite the fact that the doll is a failure , Lisa takes heart that her message was able to get through to at least one little girl . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein , and directed by Jeffrey Lynch . Before the episode aired , Malibu Stacy had already appeared many times on the show as one of Lisa 's dolls . The staff were trying to come up with an idea for an episode by going through the companies in the Simpsons universe , and Oakley suggested an episode involving the Malibu Stacy company . The plot of the episode was inspired by the Teen Talk Barbie line of talking dolls that caused controversy in the United States in the early 1990s . In July 1992 , Mattel released Teen Talk Barbie , which spoke a number of phrases including " Will we ever have enough clothes ? " , " I love shopping ! " , and " Wanna have a pizza party ? " Each doll was programmed to say four out of 270 possible phrases , so that no two dolls were likely to be the same . One of these 270 phrases was " Math class is tough ! " . Although only about 1 @.@ 5 % of all the dolls sold said the phrase , it led to criticism from the American Association of University Women because they deemed that to be demeaning to women . In October 1992 , Mattel announced that Teen Talk Barbie would no longer say the phrase , and offered a swap to anyone who owned a doll that did . 
 Oakley and Weinstein decided to include Abe in the episode because they had an " obsession " with old people . Weinstein said they both " love them and seem to really hate them " at the same time . He also said that they enjoy writing for characters such as Abe and Mr. Burns because of their " out @-@ datedness " , and because he and Oakley get to use dictionaries for looking up " old time slang " . Executive producer David Mirkin thought it was difficult to make Abe funny because he is a " boring and tedious " character . He thinks that even though " Abe 's doing all these complaints , what makes him funny is that the things he says are actually funny in the context of the boring and tedium . " Mirkin thought this was a " big challenge , and Bill and Josh pulled it off very well . " 
 When the episode was in production , Oakley 's wife Rachel Pulido was an enthusiastic Barbie collector . Oakley therefore spent a lot of time going to Barbie conventions across the United States and met many different collectors . At one convention , Oakley met the man who owned the world 's largest Barbie collection . The meeting between the two inspired the part of the episode where Lisa visits Smithers and it is revealed that Smithers is the owner of the world 's largest Malibu Stacy collection . Kathleen Turner guest starred in the episode as Stacy Lovell . Mirkin thought Turner was " completely game " when she showed up at the recording studio to record her lines as she " nailed " her lines really fast . He added that he enjoyed directing her and he thought she had one of the best performances ever on The Simpsons . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 At the beginning of the episode , Abe watches his idol Ben Matlock talk to a crowd of excited seniors at the Grand Opening of the Center for Geriatric Medicine . Ben Matlock is a character from the NBC / ABC television series Matlock , portrayed by Andy Griffith and created by Dean Hargrove . The crowd cheer for Matlock by singing a slightly changed version of the " We Love You , Conrad " song from stage musical Bye Bye Birdie . Homer dances on giant piano keys recessed in the floor of the toy store , spoofing a scene from the 1988 film Big . Lisa wants Lisa Lionheart to have " the wisdom of Gertrude Stein , the wit of Cathy <unk> , the tenacity of Nina <unk> , the common sense of Elizabeth Cady Stanton , and the down @-@ to @-@ earth good looks of Eleanor Roosevelt . " 
 Stacy Lovell 's list of husbands features the action figures Ken , Johnny West , G.I. Joe , Doctor Colossus , and Steve Austin . Lisa 's story about the Malibu Stacy doll saying phrases that are considered demeaning to women is based on the Teen Talk Barbie line of dolls and how they caused controversy . During one scene in the episode , one girl 's Malibu Stacy doll says " My Spidey Sense is tingling ! Anyone call for a web @-@ slinger ? " , a reference to a practical joke by the Barbie Liberation Organization in the early 1990s in which the <unk> of talking Barbie and G.I. Joe toys were swapped . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Lisa vs. Malibu Stacy " finished 23rd in the ratings for the week of February 14 – 20 , 1994 , with a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 6 , equivalent to 11 million viewing households . It was the second highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following Beverly Hills , 90210 . 
 Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson thought the episode was " good but not great " , despite " more than a few strong moments , like the hilarious shot of Bart at the gay rights parade . " He added that " most years this would be an A @-@ list program , but it ’ s one of season five ’ s lesser lights despite a generally high level of quality . " The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , described the episode as " Lisa at her crusading best , Homer at his stupidest and Abe getting all the best lines again , especially at Krusty Burgers . Kathleen Turner 's spot as the real Malibu Stacy is superb . " <unk> Lockhart of The Easterner called the episode a " classic " and added : " The episode takes on misogynist views , but in a humorous way , that only The Simpsons can master . " Patrick Bromley of DVD Verdict gave the episode a grade of A , and DVD Talk 's Bill Gibron gave it a score of 5 out of 5 . The episode is one of Oakley and Weinstein 's favorites from their time as writers on the show . One of Mirkin 's favorite jokes on the show is the scene in this episode where Abe cycles down the street , shouting " Look at me , I 'm acting young ! " before Lisa 's Malibu Stacy doll catches the front wheel of the bike , sending Abe flying into an open grave . 
 In the book The Simpsons and Philosophy : The D 'oh ! of Homer , Aeon J. Skoble cited the episode as an example in his piece titled : " Do We Admire or Laugh at Lisa ? " . He wrote : " The fact that the less intellectual doll is vastly preferred over Lisa 's doll , even though Lisa 's objections are reasonable , demonstrates the ways in which reasonable ideas can be made to take a back seat to having fun and going with the flow . This debate is often played out in the real world , of course : Barbie is the subject of perennial criticism along the lines of Lisa 's critique of Malibu Stacy , yet remains immensely popular , and in general , we often see intellectual critiques of toys dismissed as ' out of touch ' or elitist . " 
 = Your Cheatin ' Heart = 
 " Your Cheatin ' Heart " is a song written and recorded by country music singer @-@ songwriter Hank Williams in 1952 , regarded as one of country 's most important standards . Country music historian Colin Escott writes that " the song - for all intents and purposes - defines country music . " He was inspired to write the song while driving with his fianceé from Nashville , Tennessee to Shreveport , Louisiana . After describing his first wife Audrey Sheppard as a " Cheatin ' Heart " , he dictated in minutes the lyrics to Billie Jean Jones . Produced by Fred Rose , Williams recorded the song on his last session at Castle Records in Nashville , Tennessee , on September 23 . 
 " Your Cheatin ' Heart " was released in January 1953 . Propelled by Williams ' recent death during a trip to a New Year 's concert in Canton , Ohio , the song became an instant success . It topped Billboard 's Country & Western chart for six weeks , while over a million units were sold . The success of the song continued . Joni James ' version reached number two on Billboard 's Most Played in Jukeboxes the same year , while Ray Charles ' 1962 version reached number 29 on the Billboard Hot 100 and 13 on the UK Singles Chart . The song ranked at 217 on Rolling Stone 's 500 Greatest Songs of All Time , and was ranked number 5 on Country Music Television 's 100 Greatest Songs in Country Music . 
 = = Background = = 
 By 1952 , Williams was enjoying a successful streak , releasing multiple hits , including " Honky Tonk Blues " , " Half as Much " , " Settin ' the Woods on Fire " , " Jambalaya ( On the Bayou ) " and " You Win Again " . While his career was soaring , his marriage to Audrey Sheppard became turbulent . He developed serious problems with alcohol , morphine and painkillers prescribed to ease his severe back pain caused by spina bifida . The couple divorced on May 29 , and Williams moved in with his mother . Soon after , Williams met Billie Jean Jones backstage at the Ryman Auditorium , a native of Shreveport , Louisiana , " who was , at the time , dating Faron Young . Williams started dating Jones , upon the end of her relationship with Young and soon began to plan their marriage . While driving from Nashville , Tennessee to Shreveport to announce the wedding to her parents , Williams talked to her about his previous marriage and described Audrey Sheppard as a " cheatin ' heart " , adding that one day she would " have to pay " . Inspired by his line , he instructed Jones to take his notebook and write down the lyrics of the song that he quickly dictated to her . The finished composition included the line " You 'll walk the floor , the way I do " , which evoked Ernest Tubb 's hit " Walking the Floor Over You " . 
 = = Recording and release = = 
 Williams recorded the song on September 23 at the Castle Studios in Nashville . The session , which became Williams ' last , also produced the A @-@ side " Kaw @-@ Liga " , as well as the songs " I Could Never Be Ashamed of You " and " Take These Chains from My Heart " . It was produced by Williams ' publisher Fred Rose , who made minor arrangements of the lyrics of " Your Cheatin ' Heart " . Williams described the song to his friend , Braxton <unk> , as he was about to play it , as " the best heart song ( he ) ever wrote " . Williams is backed on the session by Tommy Jackson ( fiddle ) , Don Helms ( steel guitar ) , Chet Atkins ( lead guitar ) , Jack Shook ( rhythm guitar ) , and Floyd " Lightnin ' " Chance ( bass ) . 
 While traveling to a scheduled New Year 's show in Canton , Ohio , the driver found Williams dead on the backseat of the car during a stop in Oak Hill , West Virginia . " Your Cheatin ' Heart " was released at the end of January 1953 . Propelled by Williams ' death , the song and the A @-@ side " Kaw @-@ Liga " became a hit , selling over a million records . Billboard initially described the songs as " superlative tunes and performances " , emphasizing the sales potential . Within a short time from its release , the song reached number one on Billboard 's Top C & W Records , where it remained for six weeks . 
 A demo version of Williams singing " Your Cheatin ' Heart " with just his guitar , likely recorded in 1951 , is also available . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Released in the wake of his passing , the song became synonymous with the myth of Hank Williams as a haunted , lonely figure who expressed pain with an authenticity that became the standard for country music . The name of the song was used as the title of Hank Williams ' 1964 biopic . " Your Cheatin ' Heart " , as well as other songs by Williams were performed on the movie , with George Hamilton dubbing the soundtrack album recorded by Williams ' son , Hank Williams , Jr . In the 2003 documentary series Lost Highway , country music historian Ronnie Pugh comments , " It 's Hank 's anthem , it 's his musical last will and testament . It 's searing , it 's powerful , it 's gripping . If you want to say this is his last and best work , I wouldn 't argue with that . " AllMusic described the track as the " signature song " of Hank Williams , and an " unofficial anthem " of country music . Rolling Stone called it " one of the greatest country standards of all time " , ranking it at number 217 on their list of the 500 Greatest Songs of All Time . The song ranked at number 5 in Country Music Television 's 100 Greatest Songs in Country Music in 2003 @,@ 
 Two Pepsi Super Bowl commercials featured the song , one aired during Super Bowl XXX , featured Williams ' recording while a Coca @-@ Cola <unk> grabbed a Pepsi . The second one , aired during Super Bowl XLVI , featured the same situation , but with the song covered by Jennifer Nettles of Sugarland . The song forms the title of the 1990 TV drama ' Your Cheatin ' Heart ' by John Byrne . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 A version of the song by Joni James , released in 1953 , reached number 2 on Billboard 's Most Played in Jukeboxes . James later declared that she did not hear Williams ' original version of the song , but decided to record it after reading the lyrics . 
 In 1953 Frankie Laine 's version reached number 18 on the Most Played in Jukeboxes chart . 
 Louis Armstrong recorded it for Decca Records . 
 Dean Martin sang the song on the Colgate Comedy Hour in 1953 . 
 Gene Vincent recorded a version on December 6 , 1957 at the Capitol Tower in Hollywood . 
 The song appears on Elvis Presley 's 1965 LP Elvis for Everyone . 
 In 1962 , a version by Ray Charles reached number 29 on the Billboard Hot 100 and 23 on the R & B chart , while it also charted at number 13 on the UK Singles Chart . 
 Nat King Cole recorded it for his 1962 album Ramblin ' Rose . 
 George Jones included the song on his 1962 LP My Favorites of Hank Williams . 
 King Curtis cut the song for his 1962 LP Country Soul . 
 Patsy Cline recorded it for her 1962 album <unk> Yours . 
 Del Shannon chose to record the song for his 1964 LP Del Shannon Sings Hank Williams . 
 Fats Domino released it as a single in February 1964 and it appears on his album Let the Four Winds Blow . 
 Jerry Lee Lewis recorded the song during his tenure at Sun Records and it also appears on his 1964 album Live at the Star Club , Hamburg . 
 Ernest Tubb included it on his 1968 LP Ernest Tubb Sings Hank Williams . 
 Loretta Lynn included it on her 1966 album " I Like ' Em Country " . 
 Stonewall Jackson included the song on his 1969 LP A Tribute to Hank Williams . 
 James Brown recorded a funky version of the song for his 1969 album Soul on Top . 
 The song appears on the 1973 Glen Campbell LP Glen Travis Campbell . 
 Mick Jagger references the song in the lyrics to the Rolling Stones 1974 single " It 's Only Rock ' n ' Roll ( But I Like It ) . " 
 Moe Bandy recorded the song for his 1983 tribute Sings the Songs of Hank Williams . 
 The The recorded the song for their 1995 tribute album Hanky Panky . 
 LeAnn Rimes recorded the song for her 1999 self @-@ titled album . 
 Beck recorded the song for the 2001 tribute album Timeless : Hank Williams Tribute . 
 Frantic Flintstones recorded their cover of the song in 2002 for their album " Rock it Boy " . 
 Van Morrison covered the song on his 2006 album Pay the Devil . 
 Kelly Clarkson included the song on her 2012 EP The <unk> Sessions Vol . 2 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = = Hank Williams = = = 
 = = = Cover versions = = = 
 = Claire Redfield = 
 Claire Redfield ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is a fictional character in the Resident Evil ( Biohazard in Japan ) horror franchise by Capcom . Claire is the younger sister of Chris Redfield , an American special police officer who is a protagonist of the first Resident Evil game , and is herself a protagonist of the video games Resident Evil 2 and Resident Evil - Code : Veronica , where she is a zombie outbreak survivor turned a vigilante . She returned as an abducted activist in the video game Resident Evil : Revelations 2 after being absent from the main series for a decade and half since Code : Veronica . 
 Claire has also appeared in various other media , including several additional video games , the computer @-@ animated film Resident Evil : Degeneration , and the non @-@ canon live @-@ action films Resident Evil : Extinction , Resident Evil : Afterlife and the upcoming Resident Evil : The Final Chapter , as well as in the promotion and merchandise for the franchise . She was very well received by critics and became one of the most popular Resident Evil characters . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In video games = = = 
 Claire first appears in Resident Evil 2 ( 1998 ) , which revolves around her search for her missing brother Chris , an officer in the local police special force STARS . Claire arrives in the Midwestern United States town of Raccoon City to find it overrun by zombies . She soon meets up with a rookie cop Leon S. Kennedy , but along the way she is separated from him . The rest of the game focuses on Claire 's struggle to escape from the city alive . She maintains radio contact with Leon and teams up with a young girl named Sherry , while fighting against the various undead creatures infesting the Raccoon Police Department building , including the mutated scientist William Birkin . Claire eventually escapes from the city through the Umbrella Corporation 's underground research complex along with Leon and Sherry , after the three of them manage to destroy Birkin . As revealed in the epilogue of Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis , Claire left to continue her search for Chris , while Leon and Sherry were rescued by the U.S. military . 
 Claire , still searching for her brother , is a playable for the bulk of Resident Evil - Code : Veronica ( 2000 ) , set three months after the events of Resident Evil 2 . After an unsuccessful infiltration of Umbrella 's medical branch in Paris , Claire finds herself imprisoned on Umbrella @-@ owned Rockfort Island . She escapes following another viral outbreak caused by a rival corporation of Umbrella 's and teams up with fellow ex @-@ prisoner Steve Burnside . Claire manages to discover the whereabouts of her brother and send a message to Leon . Claire , Steve and the arriving Chris escape from the island , only to find themselves in another of Umbrella 's secret labs , this time in Antarctica , before they are taken captive by the antagonist Alexia Ashford . The second half of the game follows Chris trying to save his captured sister from Umbrella . Chris finds his way into the Antarctic lab and rescues her before their final battle with Alexia , which costs Steve 's life , and the siblings escape from the facility via the transport airplane he used to get there . During the game 's ending they vow to put an end to the Umbrella Corporation . In the PlayStation 2 version , Veronica X , Claire also has a brief encounter with the series ' main villain Albert Wesker that would have resulted in her death had Wesker not been called away by his associates . 
 Claire returned as a protagonist in the episodical game Resident Evil : Revelations 2 ( 2015 ) , set between the events of Resident Evil 5 and Resident Evil 6 . Claire is now a member of TerraSave , a non @-@ profit humanitarian aid and protest activism organization . The game follows her and Barry Burton 's daughter Moira as they get kidnapped and find themselves trapped in a mysterious abandoned prison island . There they fight Alex Wesker and the " Afflicted " creatures . In the end both of them survive the events along with Barry , who arrived to look for them , and a little girl named Natalia Korda . 
 Claire is also playable in Resident Evil : The Darkside Chronicles ( 2009 ) , which retells the events of Resident Evil 2 and Code : Veronica , and in Resident Evil : Uprising , a mobile game version of Resident Evil 2 . She is a further playable in the uncanonical spin @-@ off games Resident Evil : The Mercenaries 3D ( 2011 ) , and in Resident Evil : Operation Raccoon City ( 2012 ) where she is also on the game 's bosses in the game 's main mode . In addition , Claire is one of two playable characters in Resident Evil : Zombie Busters , which started as a browser game in the Capcom Party line and in 2011 was converted for mobile phones . She is also an unlockable bonus character in sports game Trick 'N <unk> ( 1999 ) , and in 2013 she has been added to the browser @-@ based social game Onimusha Soul , for which she was redesigned to fit the feudal Japan theme . 
 = = = = Behind the scenes = = = = 
 Claire Redfield was originally known as ' Elza Walker ' , the female lead in the original version of Resident Evil 2 ( in 1997 , after a year of work , this version of the game was scrapped by the development team and is now widely referred to as " Resident Evil 1 @.@ 5 " ) . In the released version of the game , rewritten by Noboru Sugimura , Elza Walker , a blond college student and motorcycle racer , was changed into Chris Redfield 's sister named Claire . Her appearance and background remained mostly unchanged , but she was given an explanation for her skills with firearms and other weapons and her reason for coming to Raccoon City was to search for Chris , as opposed to trying to recruit fans at Raccoon City university to form a racing team back in her hometown . She was also given physical features which more closely resemble her brother , her signature jacket with " Made in Heaven " printed on the back , and a sheath for a standard @-@ issue STARS knife from Chris . These changes that occurred were done to connect Resident Evil 2 to the original game . 
 Code : Veronica producer Shinji Mikami said " Claire became a lot tougher than I Imagined . I thought she should look the same , but the game director made her that way because she had such an experience in Resident Evil 2 , she could handle any situation now ! " For Revelations 2 , the now hardened and aggressive Claire was redesigned to be a contrasting character to the young , immature and easily scared Moira Burton , who was defined as a purely supporting character , and they both serve different roles in the story and have different functions . Producer <unk> Okabe said : " Really , only after did we look back and say , ' Oh , I guess they are both girls . ' Which is good , because it means we ’ re treating them as whole characters and not just as their gender . What we settled on is the idea that you have different roles -- it isn ’ t two against the world , it ’ s one against the world with a helper . " Okabe also said the game 's writer Dai Satō " is a big fan of her personally " which was one of the factors that led to Claire 's return . 
 = = = In films = = = 
 In Paul W. S. Anderson 's film Resident Evil : Extinction ( 2007 ) , Claire is the leader of a convoy of zombie apocalypse survivors who , at the end of the film , go to Alaska in search of a safe haven . A live action spin @-@ off featuring Claire as the main character has also been suggested . In Resident Evil : Afterlife ( 2010 ) , Claire is ambushed by the Umbrella Corporation and manipulated by a device that controls her and impairs her memory by injecting a drug into her bloodstream , before she is rescued by Alice and reunited with her brother Chris . Together , the three manage to defeat Albert Wesker with the help of convoy survivor K @-@ Mart , who had been a close friend of Alice and Claire , and find themselves preparing to fend off an attack by Umbrella led by a device @-@ controlled Jill Valentine . Claire did not return in Resident Evil : Retribution , where she , Chris , and K @-@ Mart are presumed dead but were captured by Umbrella . She is set to return in the sixth and last film in the series , Resident Evil : The Final Chapter , again to be portrayed by Larter . 
 The character of Claire Redfield from the Resident Evil live @-@ action universe did not exist in the early drafts of Extinction , as Jill Valentine was supposed to re @-@ appear from her debut in Resident Evil : Apocalypse . Later , Anderson and producer Jeremy Bolt decided to have a separate game character appear alongside the previous film 's lead Alice : " We thought , rather than bring Jill back , put her with another game heroine . " The Extinction version of Claire has no connection to the video game character and her look has been completely redesigned , including having blonde hair . Since Afterlife , however , Larter was dressed in the outfit more resembling Claire 's costumes in the games and she is red @-@ haired in the follow @-@ up films . 
 The video game series ' Claire plays a major role in the computer @-@ animated film Resident Evil : Degeneration ( 2008 ) , reuniting her with Leon S. Kennedy . The film is set seven years after the events of Resident Evil 2 and Claire has become a prominent TerraSave member . In it , Claire and the police officer Angela Miller are rescued from a bio @-@ terrorist incident at the <unk> Airport by Leon . Together , the three of them also survive a zombie outbreak at the <unk> Corporation 's research complex , and eventually expose and arrest the corrupt scientist Frederic Downing . 
 = = = Other appearances = = = 
 A romantic comedy retelling of the story of Resident Evil 2 , centered on Claire , Leon and Ada , was released by <unk> Publishing in the two @-@ issue Taiwanese comic Èlíng Gǔbǎo II in 1999 . Claire is prominently in S.D. Perry 's 1999 novels Resident Evil : City of the Dead ( a novelization of Resident Evil 2 ) and Resident Evil Code Veronica ( a novelization of the game of the same title and the last book in the series ) , as well as in the 1998 – 1999 manhua Shēnghuà Wēijī 2 ( " Biological Crisis 2 " ) , and in the comic book adaptation series Resident Evil by Capcom ( 1998 ) and Resident Evil : Code Veronica by WildStorm ( 2002 ) . 
 In Perry 's 1999 original @-@ story novel Resident Evil : Underworld , Claire , Leon , Rebecca Chambers and several STARS officers infiltrate an Umbrella facility in Utah to uncover their secrets . She is also one of main characters in Naoki Serizawa 's manga Biohazard : heavenly island , serialized in Weekly Shōnen Champion magazine in 2015 , in which she is a TerraSave investigator on an isolated South American island . 
 Claire appeared in George A. Romero 's Japanese TV commercial for Resident Evil 2 and in a viral marketing video to promote Resident Evil 5 ( despite her not appearing in actual game ) . Several action figures of Claire were released by various manufacturers , including one by Toy Biz in 1998 , as well as two by Moby Dick Toys , two by Palisades Toys , and one by Volks in 2001 . A Claire block @-@ style figure was also released by Dragon in the Kubrick 's Resident Evil line , while Vanilla Chop produced a resin kit . One of costumes for the character C. Viper in the fighting game Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 was inspired by Claire 's iconic look in Resident Evil 2 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The character of Claire Redfield was very well received by critics and general public alike for her good looks and survival prowess . Readers of German magazine Mega Fun voted her as # 2 " Video @-@ Babe " of 1998 . She was one of the seven nominees for the Nintendo Power Awards 1999 in the category " Best New Hero " for Resident Evil 2 ( the Nintendo 64 version ) , placing third by popular vote , and the staff of Eurogamer nominated her for the Gaming Globes 2000 awards in the category " Female Lead Character " . Claire was chosen as one of the 20 " muses " of video games by Brazilian magazine <unk> in 2001 . Rob Wright of Tom 's Games listed Claire among the 50 greatest female characters in video game history in 2007 and CHIP ranked her as 16th on their 2008 list of top " girls of gaming " . Her guest appearance in Trick 'N <unk> placed fifth in GamesRadar 's 2010 list of best character cameos and in 2015 Entertainment Monthly placed Claire Redfield and Steve Burnside among the top ten tragic relationships in video games . 
 Several publications included Claire among the most attractive video game characters . Dreamcast Magazine ranked this " gun @-@ toting , zombie killing , foxy babe " as the fifth top " girl on the Dreamcast " in 2000 , while Dreamcast Das <unk> Magazin opined she is more beautiful than Lara Croft . Omar Ali of Gaming Target included Claire Redfield and Jill Valentine together in his 2001 list of " all time favorite leading ladies in video games " noting them for being " two girls who made the dead rise up with their looks . " In 2008 , she was included in GameDaily 's list of top " hottest game babes " ( ranked 42nd ) and in UGO 's list of top " videogame hotties " ( ranked 46th ) . In 2011 , Peter Rubin of Complex ranked the live @-@ action version of Claire as 15th on the list of " hottest women in video game movies " and rated Ali Larter 's likeness to the character at 56 % . That same year , Rich Knight of Complex pitted the video game version of Claire against Jill Valentine in the feature " Battle of the Beauties " , category " zombie killer " , but chose Jill over her . Lisa Foiles of The Escapist ranked Claire as the third " cutest redhead " in video games and Brazilian <unk> 's Portal Play Game ranked Claire as the 56th best @-@ looking video game woman ever in 2014 . There was also an urban legend @-@ style rumor of a nude code for Claire in Resident Evil - Code : Veronica . 
 GameDaily featured her among the " chicks who will kick your ass " listed alongside Ada Wong , Jill and Sheva Alomar , and Jesse Schedeen of IGN chose her as one of the characters to recruit for an ultimate counter @-@ zombie strike force . The book Level Up ! : The Guide to Great Video Game Design called Claire a " perfect example " of the theme " opposites attracts " , as she and her fellow Raccoon City survivor Sherry ( a little girl dressed in a Japanese school uniform in RE2 ) " couldn 't be more different . " Featuring her in their 2009 list of top nine greatest video game heroines of all time , Peter Hartlaub of the San Francisco Chronicle chose Claire as an example of a positive female game character that " Brandi Chastain would be proud of . " In 2015 , The Guardian 's Holly Nielsen listed Claire among the attractive female characters who in her opinion " were intelligently written and who were not overtly sexy " and Gita Jackson of Paste wrote an article about Claire Redfield 's wardrobe , which " shows us that femininity , emotionality and practicality aren ’ t exclusive from each other . " Official PlayStation Magazine ( UK ) retrospective on RE2 opined Claire and Leon both " demonstrat [ ed ] the absolute apex of apocalyptic fashion . " 
 IGN included Claire among the characters they would like to see returning for Resident Evil 6 , with Schedeen calling Claire " leagues above that walking bag of useless called Sheva . " PlayStation Universe also chose Claire in her original outfit from Resident Evil 2 as one of the five characters they wanted to appear in Resident Evil 6 's Mercenaries mode as she " is long overdue a canonical appearance in the series . " In 2012 , <unk> producer Hiroyuki Kobayashi wrote they have " heard a lot of love for Jill and Claire recently and people asking if they ’ ll be in the next Resident Evil . " Including Claire among the 30 best characters in the three decades of Capcom 's history , GamesRadar staff commented in 2013 : " Sadly she 's fallen into the background of the series , which makes sense she avoided work as a government zombie hunter , but we hope Capcom has plans for her in the future . Here 's a suggestion : a co @-@ op focused RE that teams Claire up with the almost as underused Jill . It 's your move Capcom . " Reacting to Claire 's return in Revelations 2 IGN 's Mitch Dyer wrote : " The Resident Evil series places women in prominent , powerful , playable roles . Jill Valentine , Rebecca Chambers , Sheva Alomar , and Ada Wong , to name a few . Still , they 're often opposite a male lead . This is the first time a Resident Evil game has revolved around the story of two women . It 's fun to get to play as Claire again . " According to a CVG preview of Revelations 2 , " she 's older , calmer and more capable , but she still retains everything that made her compelling in the first place . Where Rachael from the first Revelations was part <unk> , part melted @-@ ice cream , Claire feels distinct from many women in the <unk> universe in that there 's more to her than lady @-@ lumps and lycra . She 's the perfect choice for the game 's brand of isolated horror . " 
 = Laura Secord = 
 Laura Secord ( / <unk> / SEE @-@ <unk> ; née Ingersoll ; 13 September 1775 – 17 October 1868 ) was a Canadian heroine of the War of 1812 . She is known for having walked 20 miles ( 32 km ) out of American @-@ occupied territory in 1813 to warn British forces of an impending American attack . Her contribution to the war was little known during her lifetime , but since her death she has been frequently honoured in Canada . Though Secord had no relation to it , most Canadians associate her with the Laura Secord <unk> company , named after her on the centennial of her walk . 
 Laura Secord 's father , Thomas Ingersoll , lived in Massachusetts and fought on the side of the Patriots during the Revolutionary War ( 1775 – 1783 ) . In 1795 he moved his family to the Niagara region of Upper Canada after he had applied for and received a land grant . Shortly after , Laura married Loyalist James Secord , who was later seriously wounded at the Battle of Queenston Heights early in the War of 1812 . While he was still recovering in 1813 , the Americans invaded the Niagara Peninsula , including Queenston . During the occupation , Secord acquired information about a planned American attack , and stole away on the morning of 22 June to inform Lieutenant James FitzGibbon in the territory still controlled by the British . The information helped the British and their Mohawk warrior allies repel the invading Americans at the Battle of Beaver Dams . Her effort was forgotten until 1860 , when Edward , Prince of Wales awarded the impoverished widow £ 100 for her service on his visit to Canada . 
 The story of Laura Secord has taken on mythological overtones in Canada . Her tale has been the subject of books , plays , and poetry , often with many embellishments . Since her death , Canada has bestowed honours on her , including schools named after her , monuments , a museum , a memorial stamp and coin , and a statue at the Valiants Memorial in the Canadian capital . 
 = = Personal history = = 
 = = = Family history and early life = = = 
 Thomas Ingersoll ( 1749 – 1812 ) married the seventeen @-@ year @-@ old Elizabeth Dewey on 28 February 1775 . Their first child , Laura , was born in Great Barrington in the colonial Province of Massachusetts Bay on 13 September 1775 . Thomas 's family had lived in Massachusetts for five generations . He was descended from Richard Ingersoll , who had arrived in Salem , Massachusetts , from Bedfordshire , England , in 1629 . Thomas was born in 1749 in Westfield , Massachusetts . Elizabeth , daughter of Israel Dewey , was also born in Westfield , on 28 January 1758 . Thomas moved to Great Barrington in 1774 , where he settled into a house on a small piece of land by the Housatonic River . Over the next several years , his success as a <unk> allowed him to increase his landholdings and expand his house as his family grew . He spent much time away from home , as he rose through the ranks in the military on the side of the American revolutionaries during the American Revolutionary War . Upon his return to Great Barrington , he was made a magistrate . 
 Elizabeth gave birth to three more girls : Elizabeth Franks on 17 October 1779 ; Mira ( or Myra ) in 1781 ; and Abigail in September 1783 . Abigail was given up for adoption in 1784 to an aunt with the surname Nash . Elizabeth Ingersoll died 20 February 1784 , and Thomas remarried to Mercy Smith , widow of Josiah Smith , on 26 May 1785 . Mercy had no children . She has been credited with teaching her stepdaughters to read and do needlework before her death from tuberculosis in 1789 . By adolescence , Laura was caring for her sisters and looking after the household affairs . Thomas remarried four months after Mercy 's death , on 20 September 1789 , to Sarah " Sally " Backus , a widow with a daughter , Harriet . The couple had a further four girls and three boys . The first boy , Charles Fortescue , was born on 27 September 1791 . Charlotte ( born 1793 ) and Appolonia ( born 1794 ) were the last members of this branch of the Ingersoll family to be born in Massachusetts . 
 Thomas helped suppress Shays ' Rebellion in 1786 , which earned him the rank of major , but in the years following , he witnessed and was offended by the continuing persecution of Loyalists . He realized that in the depressed economic conditions that followed the Revolutionary War , and with his own deep debts , he was unlikely to see his former prosperity again . In 1793 , Thomas met in New York City with Mohawk leader Joseph Brant , who offered to show him the best land for settlement . He and four associates travelled to Upper Canada to petition Lieutenant Governor John Simcoe for a land grant . They received 66 @,@ 000 acres ( 27 @,@ 000 ha ; 103 sq mi ) in the Thames Valley , and founded Oxford @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Thames ( later known as Ingersoll , Ontario ) , on condition that they populate it with forty other families within seven years . After winding up their affairs in Great Barrington , the Ingersoll family moved to Upper Canada in 1795 . 
 = = = Upper Canada , marriage and children = = = 
 Thomas Ingersoll supported his family in their early years in Upper Canada by running a tavern in Queenston while land was being cleared and roads built in the settlement . The family stayed in Queenston until a log cabin was completed on the settlement in 1796 . After Simcoe returned to England in 1796 , opposition grew in Upper Canada to the " Late Loyalists " such as Thomas who had arrived in Canada for the land grants . The grants were greatly reduced , and Thomas 's contract was cancelled for not having all of its conditions fulfilled . Feeling cheated , in 1805 he moved the family to Credit River , close to York ( present @-@ day Toronto ) , where he successfully ran an inn until his 1812 death following a stroke . Sally continued to run it until her own death in 1833 . 
 Laura remained in Queenston when the family moved . She married the wealthy James Secord , likely in June 1797 . The Secord family originated in France , where the name was spelled D <unk> or <unk> . Five Secord brothers , who were Protestant Huguenots , fled from persecution in France and founded New Rochelle , New York in 1688 . At the time of the American Revolution , Loyalist members of the family anglicized their surname to Secord . 
 The Secord couple lived in a house built in St. Davids , the first floor of which was a shop . Secord gave birth to her first child , Mary , in St. Davids in 1799 . Mary was followed by Charlotte ( 1801 ) , Harriet ( 10 February 1803 ) , Charles Badeau ( 1809 — the only male child ) and Appolonia ( 1810 ) . 
 = = = War of 1812 = = = 
 James Secord served in the 1st Lincoln Militia under Isaac Brock when the War of 1812 broke out . He was among those who helped carry away Brock 's body after Brock was killed in the first attack of the Battle of Queenston Heights in October 1812 . James himself was severely wounded in the leg and shoulder during the battle . Laura heard of his predicament and rushed to his side . Some sources suggest that she found three American soldiers preparing to beat him to death with their <unk> . She begged them to save her husband 's life , reportedly offering her own in return , when American Captain John E. Wool happened upon the situation and reprimanded the soldiers . This story may have been a later embellishment and may have originated with her grandson , James B. Secord . When the Secords arrived home , they found that the house had been looted in Laura 's absence . Spending the winter in St. Davids , Laura spent the next several months nursing her wounded husband back to health . 
 On 27 May 1813 , the American army launched an attack across the Niagara River , and captured Fort George . Queenston and the Niagara area fell to the Americans . Men of military age were sent as prisoners to the U.S. , though the still @-@ recuperating James Secord was not among them . That June , a number of U.S. soldiers were billeted at the Secords ' home . 
 = = = Secord 's walk = = = 
 On the evening of 21 June , Laura Secord heard of plans for a surprise American attack on British troops led by Lieutenant James FitzGibbon at Beaver Dams , which would have furthered American control in the Niagara Peninsula . It is unclear how she became aware of these plans . According to tradition she overheard a conversation among the billeted Americans as they ate dinner . As her husband was still recovering from his October injuries , Secord set out herself early the next morning to warn the Lieutenant . She reportedly walked 20 miles ( 32 km ) from present @-@ day Queenston through St. Davids , Homer , Shipman 's Corners and Short Hills at the Niagara Escarpment before she arrived at the camp of allied Mohawk warriors who led her the rest of the way to FitzGibbon 's headquarters at the <unk> House . A small British force and a larger contingent of Mohawk warriors were then readied for the American attack . Most of the American forces were casualties or taken prisoner in the Battle of Beaver Dams on 24 June . No mention of Secord was made in reports that immediately followed the battle . 
 = = = Post @-@ war years = = = 
 After the war , with the Secords ' Queenston store in ruins , the family was impoverished . Only James 's small war pension and the rent from 200 acres of land they had in Grantham Township supported them . 
 The Secords ' sixth child , Laura Anne , was born in October 1815 , and their last child , Hannah , was born in 1817 . The Secords ' eldest daughter Mary wedded a doctor , William <unk> , on 18 April 1816 . On 27 March 1817 , Mary gave birth in Ireland to Elizabeth <unk> , the first of Laura and James 's grandchildren . Mary had another daughter , also named Mary , in Jamaica , and brought her children back to Queenston with her in 1821 following her husband 's death . 
 The struggling James petitioned the government in 1827 for some sort of employment . Lieutenant @-@ Governor Peregrine Maitland did not offer him a position , but offered something to Laura . He asked her to be in charge of the yet @-@ to @-@ be @-@ completed Brock 's Monument . At first , she turned it down , but then reluctantly accepted it . When Brock 's Monument opened in 1831 , Secord learned the new Lieutenant @-@ Governor , John Colborne , intended to give the keys to the widow of a member of the monument committee who had died in an accident . On 17 July 1831 , Secord petitioned Colborne to honour Maitland 's promise , and included another certificate from FitzGibbon attesting her contribution to the war . She wrote that Colonel Thomas Clarke had been told by Maitland , " it was too late to think of [ the committee member 's widow ] Mrs. Nichol as I have pledged my word to Mrs. Secord that as soon as possible she should have the key . " Despite her pleas , Secord did not receive the keys to the monument . 
 In 1828 , the Secords ' daughter , Appolonia , died at 18 of typhus , and James was appointed registrar of the Niagara Surrogate Court . He was promoted to judge in 1833 , and his son Charles Badeau took over the registrar position . Charles Badeau 's first son , Charles Forsyth Secord , was born 9 May 1833 . His is the only line of Secords that survived into the 21st century . 
 James became a customs collector in 1835 at the port of Chippawa . The position came with a home in Chippawa , into which the family moved . Charles Badeau took over the Queenston home . Daughter Laura Ann and her son moved into the home in 1837 following her husband 's death . 
 = = = Later life and death = = = 
 James Secord died of a stroke on 22 February 1841 . He was buried , according to his wishes , at Drummond Hill ( now in Niagara Falls ) . James 's death left Laura destitute . His war pension came to an end , and she was unable to keep the land that she still had profitable , and sold off much of it . Governor @-@ General Sydenham denied a 27 February 1841 petition she sent for her son to take over James 's customs position . Sydenham also denied a petition she sent that May for a pension for herself , as James had already received a pension for decades . 
 Possibly with help from better @-@ off members of the family , Secord moved to a red brick cottage on Water Street in November 1841 . Daughter Harriet and her own two daughters joined her in May 1842 , after the alcohol poisoning death of Harriet 's husband . The three would stay with Secord for the rest of her life . Youngest daughter Hannah also moved in when she was widowed in 1844 , and brought two daughters with her . Though she lacked training , for a short time Secord ran a small school out of the home in an effort to support herself . This venture came to an end when the public common school system was introduced in the 1840s . 
 Over the years , the Secords unsuccessfully petitioned the government for some kind of acknowledgement . In 1860 , when Secord was 85 , the Prince of Wales heard of her story while travelling in Canada . At Chippawa , near Niagara Falls , he was made aware of Laura Secord 's plight as an aging widow and sent an award of £ 100 . It was the only official recognition that she received during her lifetime . 
 Laura Secord died in 1868 at the age of 93 . She was interred next to her husband in the Drummond Hill Cemetery in Niagara Falls . Her grave is marked by a monument with a bust on top , and is close to a monument marking the Battle of Lundy 's Lane . The inscription on her grave marker reads : 
 To perpetuate the name and fame of Laura Secord , who walked alone nearly 20 miles by a circuitous difficult and perilous route , through woods and swamps and over <unk> roads to warn a British outpost at <unk> 's Falls of an intended attack and thereby enabled Lt. FitzGibbon on 24 June 1813 , with fewer than 50 men of the H.M. 49th Regt . , about 15 militiamen and a small force of Six Nations and other Indians under Capt. William Johnson Kerr and Dominique Ducharme to surprise and attack the enemy at <unk> ( or Beaver Dams ) and after a short engagement , to capture Col. <unk> of the U.S. Army and his entire force of 542 men with two field pieces . 
 = = Memory and legend = = 
 Her granddaughter described Secord as being 5 feet 4 inches ( 163 cm ) with brown eyes and a fair complexion . James FitzGibbon wrote she was " of slight frame and delicate appearance " . She was skilled at needlework , dressmaking and cooking . According to biographer Peggy Dymond Leavey , her many grandchildren enjoyed hearing their grandmother tell stories of her early life , and her Anglican faith increased with age . 
 In his report of the battle , FitzGibbon stated only that he " received information " about the threat ; it is possible he omitted mention of Secord to protect her family during wartime . He first wrote of Secord in a certificate dated 26 February 1820 , in support of a petition by her husband for a licence to operate a stone quarry in Queenston . In 1827 FitzGibbon wrote : 
 I do hereby <unk> that on the <unk> day of June 1813 , Mrs. Secord , Wife of James Secord , <unk> then of St. David 's , came to me at the Beaver Dam after Sun Set , having come from her house at St. David 's by a circuitous route a distance of twelve miles , and informed me that her Husband had learnt from an American officer the preceding night that a Detachment from the American Army then in Fort George would be sent out on the following morning ( the 23d . ) for the purpose of Surprising and capturing a Detachment of the 49th <unk> then at Beaver Dam under my Command . In Consequence of this information , I placed the Indians under Norton together with my own Detachment in a Situation to intercept the American Detachment and we occupied it during the night of the 22d . – but the Enemy did not come until the morning of the 24th when his Detachment was captured . Colonel Boerstler , their commander , in a conversation with me confirmed fully the information communicated to me by Mrs. Secord and accounted for the attempt not having been made on the <unk> as at first intended . 
 FitzGibbon wrote in a certificate dated 23 February 1837 that Secord did " acquaint " him with the Americans ' intentions , but does not state whether he used the information . A diary entry of Mohawk chief John Norton talks of " a loyal Inhabitant [ who ] brought information that the Enemy intended to attack " , but does not name the " Inhabitant " . Dominique Ducharme , leader of the <unk> Mohawks in the Battle of Beaver Dams , made no mention of Secord in his reports , nor of receiving information from either Secord or FitzGibbon about the impending American attack . 
 Secord wrote two accounts of her walk , the first in 1853 , and the second in 1861 . Neither account contains details that can be corroborated with military accounts of the battle , such as specific dates or details about troops . Her account changed throughout her life . Historian Pierre Berton noted that she never stated clearly how she learned of the impending attack . She told FitzGibbon that her husband had learned about it from an American officer , but years later told her granddaughter that she had overheard the plans directly from the American soldiers billeted in her home . Berton suggested that Secord 's informant could have been an American still residing in the United States , who would have been charged with treason had Secord revealed her source . In the 1860s , as Secord 's story gained prominence , historian William Foster Coffin added new details , which included the claim that Laura had brought a cow with her as an excuse to leave her home in case the American patrols questioned her . 
 A number of writers have questioned Secord 's story . W. Stewart Wallace , in his 1932 book , The Story of Laura Secord : A Study in Historical Evidence , concluded her story was mostly myth , and that she played no significant role in the outcome of the Battle of Beaver Dams . Historian George Ingram contended in his 1965 book The Story of Laura Secord Revisited that Secord 's debunking had been taken too far . Ruth MacKenzie also burnished Secord 's reputation with Laura Secord : The Legend and the Lady in 1971 . 
 The question of Secord 's actual contribution to the British success has been contested . In the early 1920s , historians suggested that Native scouts had already informed FitzGibbon of the coming attack well before Secord had arrived on 23 June . Historian Ernest Cruikshank wrote in 1895 that " Scarcely had Mrs Secord concluded her narrative , when [ Ducharme 's ] scouts came in ... they had encountered the advance guard of the enemy . " Later , two testimonials were found which FitzGibbon wrote in 1820 and 1827 , which supported Secord 's claim . FitzGibbon asserted that Laura Secord had arrived on 22 June ( not 23 June ) , and that " in consequence of this information " he had been able to intercept the American troops . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Historian Cecilia Morgan argues that the Secord story became famous in the 1880s when upper @-@ class women sought to strengthen the emotional ties between Canadian women and the British Empire . She writes that they needed a female heroine to validate their claims for women 's suffrage . The first product of their campaign was Sarah Anne Curzon 's verse drama Laura Secord : The Heroine of 1812 in 1887 . The play was responsible for " a deluge of articles and entries on Secord that filled Canadian histories and school textbooks at the turn of the 20th century " . Although critics gave the play negative reviews , it was the first full work devoted to her story and popularized her image . 
 Secord has been compared to French @-@ Canadian heroine Madeleine de <unk> and to American Revolution hero Paul Revere . Her story has been retold and commemorated by generations of biographers , playwrights , poets , novelists and journalists . 
 After she discovered a newspaper clipping of the story , early feminist Emma Currie began a lifelong interest in Secord 's life . After she tracked down information from relatives as far away as Great Barrington , she published a biographical account in 1900 called The Story of Laura Secord , and later successfully petitioned to have a Secord memorial erected in Queenston Heights . The cut stone granite monument stands 7 feet ( 210 cm ) and was dedicated in 1901 . In 1905 , her portrait was hung in Parliament . Playwright Merrill Denison made a radio play of her story in 1931 which mixed serious history with parody . 
 On the centennial of her walk in 1913 , and to capitalize on Canadian patriotic feelings , Frank O 'Connor founded Laura Secord <unk> . The chain 's first location opened on Yonge and Elm Streets in Toronto . The chocolates came in black boxes adorned with a cameo of Secord . By the 1970s , the company had become the largest candy retailer in Canada . Among most Canadians , the name Laura Secord is more strongly associated with the chocolate company than the historical figure . 
 The Secords ' Queenston homestead was fired upon and looted during the War of 1812 . Restored and given to the Niagara Parks Commission in 1971 , it is now a museum and gift shop at Partition and Queen streets in Queenston . Thomas Ingersoll 's old home on Main Street in Great Barrington , Massachusetts , was used as the town 's Free Library from 1896 until 1913 , after which the Mason Library was built on the site . The Great Barrington Historic District Commission made 18 October 1997 Laura Secord Day , and dedicated a plaque in her honour before Mason Library . 
 Laura Secord is the namesake of a number of schools , including Laura Secord Public School ( also known as Laura Secord Memorial School , 1914 – 2010 ) in Queenston , École Laura Secord School in Winnipeg , Manitoba ( built 1912 ) , and Laura Secord Elementary School in Vancouver , British Columbia . Beaver Dams Battlefield Park has a plaque dedicated to Secord . In 1992 , Canada Post issued a Laura Secord commemorative stamp . In 2003 , the Minister of Canadian Heritage declared Secord a " Person of National Historical Significance " , and in 2006 Secord 's was one of fourteen statues dedicated at the Valiants Memorial in Ottawa . To commemorate the 200th anniversary of her walk , Secord 's image adorned a circulation quarter issued by the Royal Canadian Mint and a postage stamp from Canada Post . 
 = = = = Books = = = = 
 = = = = Journals and magazines = = = = 
 = = = = Newspapers = = = = 
 = = = = Web = = = = 
 = Benzylpiperazine = 
 Benzylpiperazine ( BZP ) is a recreational drug with euphoriant and stimulant properties . The effects produced by BZP are comparable to those produced by amphetamine . Adverse effects have been reported following its use including acute psychosis , renal toxicity and seizures . No deaths have been reported following a sole ingestion of BZP , although there have been at least two deaths from the combination of BZP and MDMA . Its sale is banned in several countries , including Australia , Canada , New Zealand , the United States , the Republic of Ireland , the United Kingdom , Bulgaria , Romania and other parts of Europe . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Development history = = = 
 It is often claimed that BZP was originally synthesized as a potential <unk> ( anti @-@ parasitic ) agent for use in farm animals . However , there are some references to BZP in medical literature that predate interest in piperazines as <unk> . Even so , the majority of the early work with the piperazines were investigations into their potential use as <unk> with the earliest clinical trials in the literature relating to piperazine being articles in the British Medical Journal in the 1950s . It was discovered that BZP had side effects and was largely abandoned as a worm treatment . It next appears in the literature in the 1970s when it was investigated as a potential antidepressant medication , but rejected when research reported that BZP had amphetamine @-@ like effects and was liable to abuse . The study suggested that BZP “ should be placed under statutory control similar to those regulating the use of amphetamine . ” 
 = = = Recreational history = = = 
 In the early 1990s , the United States Drug Enforcement Administration noted the drug was being used recreationally in California . It also reported that BZP was being used as an adulterant in illicit drugs . Not long after , there was an explosion in the drug 's use worldwide – a situation which was soon followed by legislative control in many countries . Since 1999 , benzylpiperazine use grew sharply in New Zealand due to an initial complete lack of regulation . The New Zealand government attempted to ban the product as of 18 December 2007 , but the necessary second reading of the bill did not happen in time for the law to be passed . It was so widely used that an estimated 5 million pills were sold in New Zealand in 2007 . <unk> @-@ based stimulants began to appear in Europe in 2000 but remained virtually unavailable in the rest of the world until recently . In early 2006 , pills containing the active ingredients BZP and TFMPP began to appear in the city of Vancouver , Canada , where they first gained popularity with late night party @-@ goers as a safer alternative to many of the illicit street drugs commonly available there . In 2007 piperazine based party @-@ pill formulations started to become widely available nationwide which has caused concern with local authorities such as Health Canada and subsequently BZP has gained much media attention in 2008 . As of May 2008 piperazines such as BZP and TFMPP have been under evaluation by Health Canada in order to determine whether or not party @-@ pills pose a significant health risk to individuals . At this time no official decision has been made regarding these specific piperazines becoming restricted substances , or if they should be banned altogether in Canada . In the United States , it is still used as an adulterant in ecstasy mimic tablets . 
 = = Production and distribution = = 
 BZP is a piperazine derivative which comes as either the hydrochloride salt or a free base . The hydrochloride salt is a white solid while the base form is a slightly yellowish @-@ green liquid . BZP base is corrosive and causes burns . 
 In countries where its purchase is legal , BZP products are often produced in small specialist laboratories . The raw materials can be purchased from various chemical supply agencies and formed into tablets or capsules using relatively cheap production techniques . The resulting product can be marketed at extremely high markup , so end @-@ user prices can be as high as 300 times the bulk cost of raw ingredients . 
 BZP is often marketed ostensibly as a " dietary supplement " to avoid meeting stricter laws that apply to medicines and drugs , despite the fact that BZP has no dietary value . As of late 2005 , the Misuse of Drugs Act ensured it can no longer be classified or marketed as a dietary supplement in New Zealand . Some retailers claim that BZP is a " natural " product , describing it as a " pepper extract " or " herbal high , " when in fact the drug is entirely synthetic , and has not been found to occur naturally . 
 = = Pharmacodynamics = = 
 BZP has been shown to have a mixed mechanism of action , acting on the serotonergic and dopaminergic receptor systems in a similar fashion to MDMA . BZP has amphetamine @-@ like actions on the serotonin reuptake transporter , which increase serotonin concentrations in the extracellular fluids surrounding the cell and thereby increasing activation of the surrounding serotonin receptors . BZP has a lower potency effect on the noradrenaline reuptake transporter and the dopamine reuptake transporter . BZP has a high affinity action at the <unk> @-@ <unk> , it is an antagonist at the receptor , like <unk> , which inhibits negative feedback , causing an increase in released noradrenaline . 
 BZP also acts as a non @-@ selective serotonin receptor agonist on a wide variety of serotonin receptors ; binding to <unk> receptors may explain its mild hallucinogenic effects at high doses , while partial agonist or antagonist effects at the <unk> receptors may explain some of <unk> peripheral side effects , as this receptor is expressed very densely in the gut , and binding to <unk> receptors may explain the common side effect of headaches , as this receptor is known to be involved in the development of migraine headaches . 
 = = Effects = = 
 The effects of BZP are largely similar to amphetamines , with one study finding that former amphetamine addicts were unable to distinguish between dextroamphetamine and BZP administered intravenously . Users report alertness , euphoria and a general feeling of well being . The perception of certain sensations such as taste , colour or music may be subjectively enhanced . The average duration is longer than that of dextroamphetamine , typically lasting 4 – 6 hours with reports as long as 8 hours depending on the dose . A recent study has shown that mixtures of BZP with other piperazine drugs such as TFMPP share certain <unk> traits with MDMA . 
 = = = Subjective effects = = = 
 Upon ingestion of between 50 mg and 200 mg of BZP , the user may experience any or all of the following : 
 Initial Effects : 
 Feelings of euphoria , wonder , amazement , well @-@ being , energy and elation 
 Rapid mood elevation 
 Enhanced sociability 
 Enhanced appreciation of music 
 Increased desire to move , also slight increase in stereotypy 
 Skin tingling 
 Decreased appetite 
 Repetitive thought patterns 
 Actual and perceived changes in body temperature 
 Mild jaw clenching / bruxism 
 Increased heart rate 
 Dilation of pupils ( see photo ) 
 Nausea 
 Flushing 
 Mild xerostomia ( dry mouth ) 
 Slight urinary incontinence , often described as " leaking " a small amount of urine after urinating ( not due to loss of bladder control ) 
 Later Effects : 
 Mild headache 
 Nausea 
 Hangover @-@ like symptoms ( common with high doses ) 
 Fatigue 
 <unk> ( similar to acid indigestion / heartburn ) 
 Increased hunger ( and sometimes thirst ) 
 Insomnia 
 Confusion 
 Depression ( particularly with frequent / heavy use ) 
 = = = Tolerance = = = 
 Research into BZP 's tolerance is sparse . Anecdotal evidence from online sources claim tolerance to the central action of BZP will develop quickly . Due to tiredness associated with the body 's recovery from stimulants , such as BZP , it is uncommon for users to be able to sustain a week @-@ long intake . 
 = = = Toxic effects = = = 
 As with most sympathomimetic stimulants there appear to be significant side effects associated with BZP use . BZP reportedly produces insomnia and a mild to severe hangover after the drug effect wears off , however , some manufacturers in New Zealand have started including recovery pills which contain 5 @-@ HTP and vitamins which allegedly ease these hangovers . 
 The major side effects include dilated pupils , blurred vision , dryness of the mouth , extreme alertness , pruritus , confusion , agitation , tremor , extrapyramidal symptoms ( dystonia , akathisia ) , headache , dizziness , anxiety , insomnia , vomiting , chest pain , hallucinations , paresthesia , tachycardia , hypertension , palpitations , collapse , hyperventilation , sweating , hyperthermia and problems with urine retention . The more severe toxic effects include psychosis or adverse psychiatric events , renal toxicity , respiratory failure , hyperthermia , serotonin syndrome , rhabdomyolysis and seizure . Blood benzylpiperazine concentrations have been measured either to confirm clinical intoxication or as part of a medicolegal death investigation . 
 = = = = Christchurch study = = = = 
 The majority of the toxic effects information came from a study conducted between 1 April 2005 to 1 September 2005 . The study recorded all presentations associated with party pill use at the Emergency Department of Christchurch Hospital , New Zealand by recording them on a prospective data collection form . The aim was to study the patterns of human toxicity related to the use of benzylpiperazine @-@ based ' party pills ' . 61 patients presented on 80 occasions . Patients with mild to moderate toxicity experienced symptoms such as insomnia , anxiety , nausea , vomiting , palpitations , dystonia and urinary retention . Significantly , fourteen toxic seizures were recorded with two patients suffering life @-@ threatening toxicity with status epilepticus and severe respiratory and metabolic acidosis . It was concluded that BZP appears to induce toxic seizures in neurologically normal subjects . The results of this study and others like it showed that BZP can cause unpredictable and serious toxicity in some individuals , but the data and dosage collection were reliant on self reporting by drug users , which may result in under @-@ reporting ( or over @-@ reporting ) , and there were complicating factors like the frequent presence of alcohol and other drugs . 
 = = = Risk of fatality = = = 
 A retrospective study carried out at an Auckland emergency department found that BZP presentations only made a minor contribution to their overdose database with most cases not producing any significant toxicity . Several cases where BZP individually or combined with alcohol or other medicines or illicit drugs resulting in complications exist . One such example is the well publicised case of a combination of BZP and MDMA by a 23 @-@ year @-@ old from Greymouth , New Zealand . Ben Rodham , a DJ , ingested a combination of BZP and MDMA in February 2007 , which nearly resulted in his death . Rodham was put into an induced coma in an effort to prevent him from dying . He later recovered . 
 In a case in Zurich in 2001 a 23 @-@ year @-@ old who had taken BZP and ecstasy ( MDMA ) died from a massive cerebral edema 57 hours after hospital admission . 
 = = = Addictive effects = = = 
 One in every 45 ( 2 @.@ 2 % ) last @-@ year users of BZP in New Zealand is classed as dependent upon it , although 97 @.@ 9 % of users said that " it would not be difficult to stop using legal party pills " , and 45 @.@ 2 % of people who reported using both BZP and illegal drugs such as methamphetamine reported that they used BZP so that they did not have to use methamphetamine , which was perceived as more harmful . Still , most of the people who use BZP , even though they say it is quite easy to stop , do not want to , and continue to use the drug , feeling that it helps them to reach higher levels of mood , sociability , and energy . Studies undertaken on animals have indicated that BZP can substitute for methamphetamine in addicted rats , although it is one @-@ tenth as potent and produces correspondingly weaker addictive effects . 
 = = Legal issues = = 
 The drug was classified as a Schedule I controlled substance in the United States in 2002 , following a report by the DEA which incorrectly stated that BZP was 10 to 20 times more potent than amphetamine , when in fact BZP is ten times less potent than <unk> . BZP is banned in all Australian states . Victoria , the last state in which it was legal , changed its classification on 1 September 2006 . This is the date BZP and piperazine analogs become illegal in the federal schedules which are now enacted by all Australian states and territories . BZP is also a banned substance in Japan , along with TFMPP . Both Australia and Japan admit that their scheduling decisions were made primarily in response to the Schedule 1 classification given to BZP in the USA , although some instances of BZP use had been reported by law enforcement authorities in both countries . BZP is also banned in Greece , Poland , Italy , Ireland , Malta , Estonia , Denmark and Sweden . 
 In Canada , Benzylpiperazine and salts of benzylpiperazine are classified as Schedule III controlled substances under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act . 
 <unk> and salts of piperazine are classified as Prescription Only Medicines in the UK . Any products containing salts of piperazine would be <unk> under the Medicines Act and consequently anyone manufacturing and supplying it legally must hold the relevant licenses to do so . BZP is not a salt of piperazine , but <unk> of BZP products as containing " piperazine blend " resulted in some prosecutions of suppliers in the UK by the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency , although none were successful . In May 2009 , the Home Office announced plans to ban BZP , and launched a consultation on the proposal . In October 2009 , it was announced that from 23 December 2009 , BZP and related piperazines would be Class C drugs under the Misuse Of Drugs Act . 
 BZP is not controlled under any UN convention , so the compounds themselves are legal throughout most of the world , although in most countries their use is restricted to pharmaceutical manufacturing and recreational use is unknown . 
 Benzylpiperazine is , however , to be the subject of a European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction ( EMCDDA ) risk assessment , the results of which may determine what , if any , control will placed on BZP throughout the European Union . The risk assessment comes about as the result of a joint Europol – EMCDDA report which concluded that BZP needs to be looked at in more detail . The results were published in June 2007 . The report concluded that the use of BZP can lead to medical problems even if the long effects are still unknown . Taking this concession as a basis , the European Commission has decided to ask the Council to place BZP under control of the UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances . On 4 March 2008 , the EU requested countries to place BZP under control within a year and France complied in May 2008 . 
 Based on the recommendation of the <unk> , the New Zealand government has passed legislation which placed BZP , along with the other piperazine derivatives TFMPP , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , into Class C of the New Zealand Misuse of Drugs Act 1975 . A ban was intended to come into effect in New Zealand on 18 December 2007 , but the law change did not go through until the following year , and the sale of BZP and the other listed piperazines became illegal in New Zealand as of 1 April 2008 . An amnesty for possession and usage of these drugs was in effect until October 2008 , at which point they became completely illegal . 
 = = Chemical derivatives = = 
 Pharmaceuticals 
 <unk> – Antidepressant 
 <unk> – Antipsychotic 
 <unk> – <unk> 
 <unk> – Gastrointestinal agent 
 <unk> – <unk> 
 <unk> – <unk> agent 
 <unk> – <unk> 
 <unk> – Antidepressant 
 <unk> – <unk> agent 
 <unk> – <unk> 
 <unk> – <unk> 
 Designer drugs 
 4 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 @-@ benzylpiperazine ( <unk> , <unk> ) 
 4 @-@ Methyl @-@ 1 @-@ benzylpiperazine ( <unk> ) 
 4 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 @,@ 5 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 @-@ benzylpiperazine ( 2C @-@ B @-@ BZP ) 
 1 @,@ 4 @-@ <unk> ( <unk> ) 
 3 @,@ 4 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 @-@ benzylpiperazine ( <unk> ) 
 <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> are all known to metabolize to BZP . 
 All <unk> are also technically <unk> . 
 = 1981 Entumbane Uprising = 
 The 1981 Entumbane Uprising , also known as the Battle of Bulawayo or Entumbane II , occurred between 8 and 12 February 1981 in and around Bulawayo , Zimbabwe amid political tensions in the newly independent state . Zimbabwe People 's Revolutionary Army ( ZIPRA ) guerrillas , mainly in the city 's western suburb of Entumbane , rebelled , creating a situation that threatened to develop into a fresh civil war , barely a year after the end of the Bush War . The Rhodesian African Rifles ( RAR ) and other white @-@ commanded elements of the former Rhodesian Security Forces , fighting for the Zimbabwean government as part of the new Zimbabwe National Army , put down the uprising . Groups of Zimbabwe African National Liberation Army ( ZANLA ) fighters attacked both ZIPRA and the government forces during the revolt , which followed a smaller outbreak of fighting between guerrillas in November 1980 . 
