 The uprising began in earnest around 20 : 00 local time on 11 February when fighting broke out between the two guerrilla factions in Entumbane , each of which also attacked the local RAR headquarters . When ZIPRA armoured personnel carriers moved on Bulawayo from Essexvale , to the south @-@ east , four armoured cars from the former Rhodesian Armoured Corps , supported by A Company , 1RAR , engaged and defeated them . Meanwhile , C and D Companies , 1RAR were pocketed by numerically superior groups of ZIPRA fighters . By the evening of 12 February , the uprising was over ; C and D Companies were relieved , ZIPRA ceased their attacks and their armoured battle group at Essexvale surrendered to the National Army . 
 The official count of those killed during the uprising was 260 people ; historians place the number of dead higher . The Zimbabwe National Army suffered no fatal casualties . Binda calls the battle the RAR 's greatest victory , writing that the troops were greatly outnumbered , but won through superior professionalism and discipline . Several analysts comment on the irony that Mugabe and ZANU – PF were saved from a major rebellion by white @-@ led ex @-@ Rhodesian troops . The battle was the RAR 's last ; its personnel were reassigned to other units when it was disbanded later in 1981 . The rebellion 's defeat , meanwhile , prompted mass desertions by ZIPRA guerrillas fearing retribution from the Mugabe administration . Indeed , the uprising partially fuelled Mugabe 's bloody Gukurahundi campaign against Matabeleland later in the 1980s . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Chimurenga = = = 
 Following the Unilateral Declaration of Independence by the mostly white minority government of Rhodesia ( or Southern Rhodesia ) from the United Kingdom in 1965 , the southern African country entered a period of international isolation as an unrecognised state under Ian Smith . Black nationalist movements , backed by communist powers and themselves variously Marxist – Leninist , launched military campaigns to overthrow Rhodesia 's government and bring majority rule to the country ; the main nationalist groups were the Zimbabwe African National Union ( ZANU ) , which was Chinese @-@ backed , mostly Shona and influenced by Maoism , and the rival Zimbabwe African People 's Union ( ZAPU ) , which was largely Ndebele , more orthodoxly Marxist – Leninist and supported by the Warsaw Pact and associated nations , prominently Cuba . Each nationalist group fielded a guerrilla army — ZANU 's was called the Zimbabwe African National Liberation Army ( ZANLA ) , while ZAPU 's was the Zimbabwe People 's Revolutionary Army ( ZIPRA ) . ZAPU was led by Joshua Nkomo , a trade unionist from Bulawayo in Matabeleland , while ZANU was headed from 1975 by a former teacher from Mashonaland , Robert Mugabe . 
 The black nationalist campaigns , referred to by the revolutionaries as the Second Chimurenga ( liberation war ) , began in earnest in December 1972 . During the ensuing Bush War , ZANLA and ZIPRA fought the Rhodesian Security Forces , and also regularly clashed with each other , despite their parent organisations being superficially allied from 1976 as the Patriotic Front . The war ended in December 1979 with the Lancaster House Agreement in London , following which Britain took interim direct control of the country to oversee fresh elections during early 1980 . These were won by ZANU , which added " Patriotic Front " to its name ( thereby becoming " ZANU – PF " ) , and Mugabe became the first Prime Minister of Zimbabwe when the UK granted independence in April 1980 . Nkomo was made Minister of Home Affairs in the new government . 
 = = = Post @-@ independence tensions = = = 
 With the transfer of political power , the Rhodesian Army , ZANLA and ZIPRA began to be merged to form the new Zimbabwe National Army . ZANLA and ZIPRA personnel were mixed into new battalions , guerrillas were picked out for officer training , and old Rhodesian units were variously disbanded or earmarked for reform . In some cases the latter meant only a change of symbolism and nomenclature ; the Rhodesian Air Force , for example , remained almost all white as the Air Force of Zimbabwe . Every one of the approximately 34 @,@ 000 guerrillas was promised a place in the new army . In the meantime they would wait in respective ZANLA and ZIPRA assembly camps around the country with pay and rations identical to those of black privates in the old Rhodesian forces . 
 Though the Chimurenga was over , tensions between ZANLA and ZIPRA cadres , officially referred to in the war 's aftermath as " associated forces " , endured , particularly in Matabeleland . These rifts were partially tribal @-@ based , but largely political ; ZIPRA fighters complained that their counterparts from ZANLA seemed to be favoured for promotions and supplies , while ZANLA suspected ZIPRA of plotting insurrection . ZANU – PF politicians began to call for a one @-@ party state , saying that this would make Zimbabwe stronger . As the process of military integration dragged on , groups of fighters from both forces deserted and roamed the countryside , robbing stores and killing white farmers . Sources differ regarding how much of this was perpetrated by ZANLA personnel and how much by ZIPRA men ; each side blamed the other . Mugabe accused ZIPRA elements of " refusing to recognise the sovereignty of the government " , but stopped short of attacking the ZAPU leadership . With the new army 's ex @-@ guerrilla battalions still far from ready , the Zimbabwean government leaned heavily on former Rhodesian units under white command to maintain law and order during this period . Feeling he needed to secure ZANU – PF 's position , Mugabe signed a secret deal with North Korea in October 1980 whereby the Asian country would provide instructors and equipment for an elite brigade that would handle political dissidents and report directly to the Prime Minister . 
 After the Minister of Finance Enos Nkala railed against Nkomo and ZAPU at a Bulawayo political rally in November 1980 , saying they had " become the enemy of ZANU – PF " and should be challenged by " vigilante committees " , ZANLA and ZIPRA veterans clashed near the city 's western township of Entumbane for two days . Hundreds were killed or wounded before the Prime Minister sent ex @-@ Rhodesian units to intervene . This incident deepened the feeling of distrust and unease that permeated the country and the National Army 's integrated battalions . Concerned by ZAPU 's apparent political marginalisation , ZIPRA commanders in Matabeleland built up their forces . Over 6 @,@ 000 ZIPRA troops assembled at <unk> River Mine , to the north @-@ west of Bulawayo , with Soviet @-@ made T @-@ 34 tanks , BTR @-@ 152 armoured personnel carriers ( APCs ) and anti @-@ aircraft guns ; another ZIPRA base at Essexvale , to the south @-@ east , formed an armoured battle group including 10 T @-@ 34s . Tensions escalated further when Mugabe removed Nkomo from Home Affairs on 10 January 1981 and made him a minister without portfolio instead , in what many in Zimbabwe saw as a demotion . According to Brigadier Mike Shute , then head of the Zimbabwe National Army 's 1 Brigade , groups of ZANLA and ZIPRA guerrillas , theoretically under his command , were soon " all over the place and having continual clashes and minor battles with each other " . Many became convinced that a second civil war was imminent . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 The Zimbabwe National Army 's only regular infantry unit in the Bulawayo area during the first months of 1981 was the 1st Battalion of the Rhodesian African Rifles ( RAR ) , a regiment of mostly white @-@ officered black troops led by Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Mick McKenna and based at Methuen Barracks on the outskirts of Bulawayo . This had been officially redesignated the 11th Infantry Battalion of the new National Army , but few reforms had taken place so far and in practice the regiment remained almost entirely as before , right down to the old Rhodesian uniforms and insignia . At the end of January 1981 , McKenna had about 500 men ( including officers ) , and a troop of four Eland 90 armoured cars , formerly of the Rhodesian Armoured Corps , under Sergeant Stephen " Skippy " Devine , an Australian veteran of the Rhodesian Light Infantry . 
 Amid the rising tensions in Zimbabwe , Shute and McKenna identified Entumbane , the township on the western outskirts of Bulawayo where the November 1980 clashes had started , as a likely flashpoint . There ZANLA and ZIPRA had camps directly next to each other , each with about 1 @,@ 500 guerrillas . In late January 1981 , McKenna set up an operational headquarters in a beer hall overlooking the two guerrilla camps ; this building , surrounded by six @-@ foot walls , was dubbed " the Alamo " at the suggestion of Lieutenant F W " <unk> " Fleetwood , an American officer in A Company , 1RAR . Worried that a new Entumbane clash would prompt the ZIPRA forces at <unk> River Mine and Essexvale to join the fray , McKenna set up a string of observation posts on each of the roads leading towards Bulawayo . 
 On 8 February , ZANLA cadres at Connemara Barracks in Gwelo surprised their ZIPRA counterparts , killed over 60 of them and forced the rest to flee into the bush . When the ZIPRA portion of the 13th Infantry Battalion , based at Glenville Camp near Entumbane , learned of this later in the day , it waited until its instructors from the British Army left in the evening , then attacked its ZANLA comrades , killing 12 of them and scattering the rest . Charged with restoring order , McKenna sent Devine 's armoured cars and D Company , 1RAR , commanded by the American Lieutenant Dave Hill , to Glenville . Arriving late in the evening , the Elands drove into the camp and flattened the ZIPRA tents , killing many of the occupants and clearing the way for Hill 's troops . Taken totally by surprise , the ZIPRA troops put up little resistance ; 40 were killed and many more captured , including two officers , Captains <unk> and Dlamini . On the morning of 9 February , the British instructors were bewildered to find the ZANLA half of their unit gone , and the remaining ZIPRA men squatting in rows in 1RAR captivity . " What happened ? " asked the British sergeant . " I am afraid that while you were away , your battalion fell apart , " replied McKenna . 
 ZIPRA personnel in Bulawayo used civilian vehicles to smuggle weapons and equipment , including mortars , into their Entumbane camp over the next few days . C Company , 1RAR , comprising 96 men under Major Lionel Dyck ( including a detachment from Support Company ) and eight armoured vehicles , noticed this while they were garrisoning the Alamo on 11 February . The major reported to Brigade headquarters that the number of ZIPRA troops at Entumbane appeared to have swelled considerably , and that the chain link fence surrounding the camp had been taken down . Superiors ordered him not to intervene . Anticipating an imminent attack , Dyck used a silenced rifle to shoot out the floodlights surrounding the Alamo , lined up his vehicles against the surrounding walls so his men could stand on them while defending , and ranged mortars on a variety of targets in the ZIPRA complex . 
 = = Uprising = = 
 Soon after fighting broke out between ZANLA and ZIPRA members of a recently integrated Zimbabwe National Army battalion at <unk> , just north @-@ east of Bulawayo , the two guerrilla camps at Entumbane began exchanging rifle , machine gun and mortar fire at about 20 : 00 on 11 February . Dyck , at the Alamo , reported that both sides were also attacking his position . He radioed Brigade HQ for instructions and was told to pull out ; he replied that this was impossible as he was surrounded . At Shute 's orders , McKenna mobilised the rest of the battalion at an airfield near Brady Barracks within an hour . Meanwhile , a detachment of ZIPRA armoured vehicles left Essexvale for Bulawayo , and was spotted on the road by one of McKenna 's observation posts . Devine was sent with his Elands to intercept them , supported by 12 1RAR men under Major Tony Husher . At an intersection on the outskirts of the city , Devine encountered a ZIPRA BTR @-@ 152 APC and impacted it with a single HEAT round , killing all 20 combatants inside . McKenna then told Devine to advance to the city limits , where he and Husher set up an ambush on the road . Husher 's men shot out all nearby overhead street lights , and some of them went to scout ahead ; Devine positioned two of his Elands on each of the two lanes of the road under cover of darkness . 
 Meanwhile , at Entumbane , the ZIPRA fighters overran the ZANLA camp , killing many and forcing the rest to flee . Sporadic fighting between ZANLA and ZIPRA guerrillas spread into Bulawayo itself , continuing through the night and into the morning . About 700 ZIPRA combatants continued to attack C Company 's position at the Alamo , putting it under constant machine gun and mortar fire . <unk> , Dyck responded in kind . About 02 : 00 on 12 February , a ZIPRA guerrilla with an RPD machine gun took up a position in a house to the Alamo 's south @-@ east and " became a nuisance " , as the major put it ; he and Sergeant Vini <unk> went out with an RPG @-@ 7 rocket launcher and fired at the corner of the house , bringing it down on the gunner and killing him . 
 On the road , two ZIPRA BTR @-@ 152s from Essexvale advanced towards Bulawayo , firing indiscriminately in all directions , and were spotted by Devine around 01 : 30 . The Elands waited in the darkness until the ZIPRA vehicles were about 200 metres ( 660 ft ) away , then fired . Both APCs were directly hit and most of the men inside killed ; the survivors ran off into the night . Fleetwood then arrived at the head of a 1RAR platoon to support Devine and Husher . Around the same time , men of A Company , 1RAR captured a ZIPRA commander who was trying to enter Bulawayo through a back road in a Peugeot station wagon , and 3 Platoon , A Company captured six ZIPRA officers driving into town on the Essexvale Road in a Toyota Land Cruiser . McKenna ordered Hill and D Company to help Dyck by taking up a position between the city and Entumbane . A group of ZIPRA unsuccessfully attacked D Company as it moved west to high ground at Lurkers ' Ridge , just south @-@ east of the Alamo . B Company , meanwhile , took up positions on the railway line just north @-@ east of Lurkers ' Ridge . McKenna told Dyck over the radio that reinforcements would come and to " hang in there " . 
 By about 05 : 00 , Dyck 's ammunition supplies were running low , and the ZIPRA attackers had hit the Alamo a number of times with RPG fire . Nobody inside was killed by these rockets , but when Dyck 's dog was wounded , the major flew into a rage and ordered his men to pour more aggressive machine gun fire on the advancing ZIPRA combatants . He requested air support from Brigade HQ in the form of a Lynx light bomber . The air force turned down the request , but Flight Lieutenant Colin James took off anyway in his Lynx armed with an FN MAG machine gun and SNEB rockets . The ZIPRA cadres concentrated a huge amount of fire on James ' aircraft , and hit it several times , but failed to shoot it down ; the pilot put in a number of ground attacks before returning to base . He reported afterwards that a bullet had entered through the floor of his cockpit and hit his helmet . The 1RAR officers and men expressed great admiration for James 's bravery during this air strike , but his air force superiors were furious that he had gone into the operational area against orders . 
 A National Army relief column including the detachments under Husher , Fleetwood and Devine assembled at Lurkers ' Ridge during the morning of 12 February . Under the command of Captain Tony Clark , it flanked through the townships south of the Alamo , engaging ZIPRA guerrillas along the way , then turned north to relieve Dyck . The Elands led the way , with Devine himself standing upright in the turret of one of them with a machine gun . At one point this was shot out of his hands , prompting him to briefly stop the advance so he could jump down into the street to collect it . By the time the relief column reached the Alamo at 13 : 00 , C Company had been pocketed for 16 hours . Four wounded 1RAR soldiers were evacuated , and Dyck left the building to point out targets for Devine 's armoured cars . During the afternoon , A Company relieved D Company at <unk> 's Ridge , and the ZANLA and ZIPRA guerrillas withdrew into the townships and the surrounding country , sporadically exchanging fire . Devine was sent to Essexvale to engage the rest of ZIPRA 's armoured battle group , which surrendered when he arrived ; the T @-@ 34 tanks were later found by the Zimbabwe National Army to be nonfunctional . By the evening of 12 February , the rebellion was over . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Hundreds of people died in the uprising . The official count released at the time was 260 , but historians place the number higher ; Martin Meredith records " more than 300 " dead , while Alexandre Binda writes that the Zimbabwe National Army units alone killed over 400 guerrillas . The Zimbabwe National Army reported no fatal casualties . Hill and Husher were each awarded the Bronze Cross of Zimbabwe for their part in putting down the rebellion , while Dyck received the Silver Cross . In his history of the Rhodesian African Rifles , Binda describes Entumbane as the regiment 's greatest victory , commenting that it was won " by dint of professionalism , discipline and determination " in the face of forces that were far larger numerically . Major Michael P Stewart of the United States Army writes that 1RAR 's actions at Entumbane " saved Mugabe 's government from certain civil war " , and provided the " final blow to the military might of ZIPRA " . A number of analysts comment on the irony that Mugabe and ZANU – PF , who had spent years fighting white rule and the Rhodesian forces during the 1970s , were secured in power barely a year after the Bush War 's end by ex @-@ Rhodesian troops under white command . Binda furthermore highlights the irony that the RAR 's finest hour ( in his view ) came while fighting for Mugabe . 
 Mugabe said that undisciplined ZIPRA guerrillas had instigated the uprising ; he called them " disloyal , misguided and politically motivated armed hooligans and political malcontents " and said that according to information before him their ultimate goal had been to topple his government . He told parliament that there had been a " definite organised pattern " amid the ZIPRA groups that had rebelled . Local ZIPRA commanders claimed ZANLA had started the fighting , while Nkomo and the mayor of Bulawayo blamed Nkala 's inflammatory speech and similar statements from other ZANU – PF politicians . A month after the uprising , ZANU – PF set up a commission tasked with investigating the " mutinous disturbances " at Entumbane and in the integrated battalions at <unk> , Glenville and Connemara . This body reported to Mugabe in June 1981 , but its findings have never been made public . According to the historian Norma <unk> , it blamed both ZANU – PF and ZAPU and therefore " fell short of government expectations " . 
 <unk> <unk> of King 's College London marks the Entumbane episode as the start of the Zimbabwe National Army 's politicisation . The ex @-@ Rhodesians ' enthusiasm and success during the battle , coupled with Mugabe 's readiness to deploy them , convinced many in ZAPU that ZANU – PF and the white community had united against them , and intensified ZAPU opposition to the government . ZIPRA guerrillas deserted from the assembly points and the National Army en masse following the rebellion 's failure , fearing for their safety . Mugabe 's sense of resolve regarding his political rivals was greatly strengthened , meanwhile ; Entumbane satisfied him that white army officers and airmen could be counted on in future conflicts with ZAPU . The Entumbane engagement was the RAR 's last — its companies were allocated to other 1 Brigade units later in 1981 during the military reform process — but a number of its white officers subsequently led units of the Zimbabwean special forces during the 1980s . Dyck , for example , headed the 1st Parachute Battalion . 
 The Mugabe administration promptly decided to reduce the future army 's size by about 30 @,@ 000 and to disarm and demobilise all ZANLA and ZIPRA personnel who had not yet been integrated , thereby breaking the promise of a place in the army for every guerrilla . After ZIPRA commander <unk> <unk> refused to give the disarming order at Entumbane , Nkomo oversaw a parade of the camp and gave the command to disarm himself , doing so " for the sake of peace " , in <unk> 's words , despite his own opposition to the idea . Mugabe publicly announced his deal with North Korea in August 1981 , and 106 North Korean instructors arrived the same month . Nkomo accused the Prime Minister of creating " a special partisan army divorced from the national army " for the " possible imposition of a one @-@ party state " . In February 1982 , Mugabe announced that huge arms caches had been discovered on ZAPU @-@ owned properties and that this was evidence of a planned ZAPU coup . He likened Nkomo 's presence in the government to " a cobra in the house " and promptly fired him , concurrently arresting ZIPRA leaders and seizing ZAPU property . 
 The new North Korean @-@ trained unit , dubbed 5 Brigade , passed out in December 1982 , and was deployed by Mugabe to Matabeleland , where it remained for the next five years . In what became known as Gukurahundi , it perpetrated a number of brutal massacres and atrocities against civilians in Matabeleland accused of supporting " dissidents " , far exceeding anything that had occurred during the Bush War . Estimates for the number of deaths range from 10 @,@ 000 to 30 @,@ 000 . The campaign officially ended in December 1987 when Mugabe and Nkomo signed a unity accord merging ZAPU into ZANU – PF with the stated goal of a one @-@ party state . 
 = Quarter pony = 
 The Quarter Pony is a breed of pony that is similar to the American Quarter Horse . It stands up to 14 @.@ 2 hands ( 58 inches , 147 cm ) high and was developed from American Quarter Horse foundation bloodstock . The breed was originally developed from Quarter Horses that did not meet the American Quarter Horse Association 's height requirement . It is bred to look like a small Quarter Horse , although the various registries also allow crosses with other breeds , including Paint horse , Appaloosa and Pony of the Americas , all stock types . There are three registries for the Quarter Pony , all with slightly different registration requirements . The first registry was begun in 1964 , and two more were started in the 1970s . The breed is used today in a variety of Western riding disciplines . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The Quarter Pony is bred to be an American Quarter Horse built on a smaller scale . Breeders focus most on the height and conformation of the breed , and insist that their ponies display Quarter Horse @-@ type characteristics and stand between 11 @.@ 2 and 14 @.@ 2 hands ( 46 and 58 inches , 117 and 147 cm ) high . Depending on the registry , the Quarter Pony may come in any color or combination or colors , including pinto patterns such as tobiano and overo and spotted Appaloosa patterns . In the early years of the breed , only solid colors were allowed . The breed averages 13 @.@ 2 hands ( 54 inches , 137 cm ) high , however , some breeders are working to breed taller animals between 13 @.@ 2 and 14 hands ( 54 and 56 inches , 137 and 142 cm ) high . The breed has a short , broad head with small ears and wide @-@ set eyes , set on a slightly arched neck . The shoulders are sloping , the withers sharp , the chest broad and deep . The back is short and the hindquarters broad and deep . 
 Quarter Ponies are often used in western riding activities as mounts for children because of their small size , and calm , even temperament . Larger ponies are more suitable for adult riders and sometimes used for rodeo events such as steer wrestling . 
 The Quarter Pony is recognized by several different breed registries that each have different requirements . The American Quarter Pony Association requires that , although parentage may be unknown , the pony must have conformation that is desirable for breeding and be easily recognizable as having Quarter Pony or Quarter Horse <unk> pinto , leopard complex ( Appaloosa ) , and white horses are not eligible for registration , nor are gaited ponies . The National Quarter Pony Association requires that stallions be registered with the AQHA before they can be registered with the <unk> . Mares must have one parent registered with the AQHA , be registered with the AQHA themselves , or go through a special registration process . Geldings simply have to be of Quarter Horse type to be eligible for registration . Horses with Pinto or Appaloosa markings , or with excessive white , are not eligible for registration . The International Quarter Pony Association allows Pinto and Appaloosa markings , and simply requires that ponies be of Quarter @-@ type conformation and good disposition for registry . Any type of pony meeting these requirements may be registered through the hardship registration program , which includes a special inspection . However , if ponies have a parent registered with an approved breed registry ( approved breeds include the Quarter Pony , Quarter Horse , Paint horse , Appaloosa and Pony of the Americas ) , they are automatically eligible for registration , with no inspection required . Crosses with gaited breeds are not accepted for registration . 
 = = History = = 
 The Quarter Pony was originally developed from horses that did not meet the American Quarter Horse Association 's original height requirement of 14 @.@ 2 hands ( 58 inches , 147 cm ) high . This height requirement was later removed , but the Quarter Pony breed continued . Breeders and registries encourage known bloodlines from Quarter Horses , but these are not required by all registries . 
 The American Quarter Pony Association was begun in 1964 with the ideals of a registry which would register small horses and ponies of western type , whose breeding could be unknown but which were desirable for breeding purposes . Crossbred and purebred animals are eligible for registration , as are animals registered with other registries that meet the entry requirements . In 1975 , the National Quarter Pony Association was begun to preserve the smaller , stockier type Quarter Horse when breeding trends were leaning towards taller , leaner animals . The <unk> now registers horses in several foreign countries , as well as all US states and Canadian provinces . The International Quarter Pony Association , begun in the 1970s , also registers Quarter Ponies , and is a worldwide association for ponies of Quarter Horse type . The Quarter Pony Association is an association affiliated with the International Quarter Pony Association , with the goal of promoting the Quarter Pony . In 2005 , the <unk> and the <unk> became one organization , with the <unk> acting as the registry and the <unk> as the membership branch . As of 2005 , there were an estimated 3 @,@ 000 Quarter Ponies registered with all registering organizations . Registries say that registrations of adult animals outnumber those for foals every year , as many owners wait until the pony is old enough to be shown under saddle before registering them . 
 = 4X = 
 4X is a genre of strategy @-@ based video and board games in which players control an empire and " <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> " . The term was first coined by Alan Emrich in his September 1993 preview of Master of Orion for Computer Gaming World . Since then , others have adopted the term to describe games of similar scope and design . 
 4X computer games are noted for their deep , complex gameplay . Emphasis is placed upon economic and technological development , as well as a range of non @-@ military routes to supremacy . Games can take a long time to complete since the amount of micromanagement needed to sustain an empire increases as the empire grows . 4X games are sometimes criticized for becoming tedious for these reasons , and several games have attempted to address these concerns by limiting micromanagement , with varying degrees of success . 
 The earliest 4X games borrowed ideas from board games and 1970s text @-@ based computer games . The first 4X computer games were turn @-@ based , but real @-@ time 4X games are not uncommon . Many 4X computer games were published in the mid @-@ 1990s , but were later outsold by other types of strategy games . Sid Meier 's Civilization is an important example from this formative era , and popularized the level of detail that later became a staple of the genre . In the new millennium , several 4X releases have become critically and commercially successful . 
 In the board ( and card ) game domain , 4X is less of a distinct genre , in part because of the practical constraints of components and playing time . The Civilization board game that gave rise to Sid Meier 's Civilization computer game , for instance , has no exploration and no extermination . Unless extermination is targeted at non @-@ player entities , it tends to be either nearly impossible ( because of play balance mechanisms , since player elimination is usually considered an undesirable feature ) or certainly unachievable ( because victory conditions are triggered before extermination can be completed ) in board games . 
 = = Definition = = 
 The term " 4X " originates from a 1993 preview of Master of Orion in Computer Gaming World by Alan Emrich , in which he rated the game " XXXX " as a pun on the XXX rating for pornography . The four Xs were an abbreviation for " <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> " . Other game commentators adopted the " 4X " label to describe a game genre with specific gameplay conventions : 
 Explore means players send scouts across a map to reveal surrounding territories . 
 Expand means players claim new territory by creating new settlements , or sometimes by extending the influence of existing settlements . 
 Exploit means players gather and use resources in areas they control , and improve the efficiency of that usage . 
 Exterminate means attacking and eliminating rival players . Since in some games all territory is eventually claimed , eliminating a rival 's presence may be the only way to achieve further expansion . 
 These four elements of gameplay have been described as the four phases of a 4X computer game session . These phases often overlap with each other and vary in length depending on the game design . For example , the Space Empires series and Galactic Civilizations II : Dark Avatar have a long expansion phase , because players must make large investments in research to explore and expand into every area . 
 = = = Difficulties in definition = = = 
 While many computer strategy games arguably contain a similar " explore , expand , exploit , exterminate " cycle , game journalists , developers and enthusiasts generally apply " 4X " to a more specific class of games , and contrast 4X games with other strategy games such as Command & Conquer . Hence , writers have tried to show how 4X games are defined by more than just having each of the four Xs . Computer gaming sites have stated that 4X games are distinguished by their greater complexity and scale , and their intricate use of diplomacy beyond the standard " friend or foe " seen in other strategy games . Reviewers have also stated that 4X games feature a range of diplomatic options , and that they are well known for their large detailed empires and complex gameplay . In particular , 4X games offer detailed control over an empire 's economy , while other computer strategy games simplify this in favor of combat @-@ focused gameplay . 
 = = Game design = = 
 4X computer games are a subgenre of strategy games , and include both turn @-@ based and real @-@ time strategy titles . The gameplay involves building an empire , which takes place in a setting such as Earth , a fantasy world , or in space . Each player takes control of a different civilization or race with unique characteristics and strengths . Most 4X games represent these racial differences with a collection of economic and military bonuses . 
 = = = Research and technology = = = 
 4X games typically feature a technology tree , which represents a series of advancements that players can unlock to gain new units , buildings , and other capabilities . Technology trees in 4X games are typically larger than in other strategy games , featuring a larger selection of choices . Empires must generate research resources and invest them in new technology . In 4X games , the main prerequisite for researching an advanced technology is knowledge of earlier technology . This is in contrast to non @-@ 4X real @-@ time strategy games , where technological progress is achieved by building structures that grant access to more advanced structures and units . 
 Research is important in 4X games because technological progress is an engine for conquest . Battles are often won by superior military technology or greater numbers , with battle tactics playing a smaller part . In contrast , military upgrades in non @-@ 4X games are sometimes small enough that technologically basic units remain important throughout the game . 
 = = = Combat = = = 
 Combat is an important part of 4X gameplay , because 4X games allow a player to win by exterminating all rival players , or by conquering a threshold amount of the game 's universe . Some 4X games , such as Galactic Civilizations , resolve battles automatically , whenever two units from warring sides meet . This is in contrast to other 4X games , such as Master of Orion , that allow players to manage battles on a tactical battle screen . Even in 4X games with more detailed control over battles , victory is usually determined by superior numbers and technology , with battle tactics playing a smaller part . 4X games differ from other combat @-@ focused strategy games by putting more emphasis on research and economics . Researching new technology will grant access to new combat units . Some 4X games even allow players to research different unit components . This is more typical of space 4X games , where players may assemble a ship from a variety of engines , shields , and weaponry . 
 = = = Peaceful competition = = = 
 4X games allow rival players to engage in diplomacy . While some strategy games may offer shared victory and team play , diplomatic relations tend to be restricted to a binary choice between an ally or enemy . 4X games often allow more complex diplomatic relations between competitors who are not on the same team . Aside from making allies and enemies , players are also able to trade resources and information with rivals . 
 In addition to victory through conquest , 4X games often offer peaceful victory conditions or goals that involve no extermination of rival players ( although war may be still be a necessary by @-@ product of reaching said goal ) . For example , a 4X game may offer victory to a player who achieves a certain score or the highest score after a certain number of turns . Many 4X games award victory to the first player to master an advanced technology , accumulate a large amount of culture , or complete an awe @-@ inspiring achievement . Several 4X games award " diplomatic victory " to anyone who can win an election decided by their rival players , or maintain peace for a specified number of turns . Galactic Civilizations has the diplomatic victory , which involves having at alliances with at least 4 factions and no other faction be out of your alliance , there are two ways to accomplish this , ally with all factions , or ally with the minimum number of factions then destroy the rest . 
 = = = Complexity = = = 
 4X games are known for their complex gameplay and strategic depth . Gameplay usually takes priority over elaborate graphics . Whereas other strategy games focus on combat , 4X games also offer more detailed control over diplomacy , economics , and research ; creating opportunities for diverse strategies . This also challenges the player to manage several strategies simultaneously , and plan for long @-@ term objectives . 
 To experience a detailed model of a large empire , 4X games are designed with a complex set of game rules . For example , the player 's productivity may be limited by pollution . Players may need to balance a budget , such as managing debt , or paying down maintenance costs . 4X games often model political challenges such as civil disorder , or a senate that can oust the player 's political party or force them to make peace . 
 Such complexity requires players to manage a larger amount of information than other strategy games . Game designers often organize empire management into different interface screens and modes , such as a separate screen for diplomacy , managing individual settlements , and managing battle tactics . Sometimes systems are intricate enough to resemble a minigame . This is in contrast to most real @-@ time strategy games . Dune II , which arguably established the conventions for the real @-@ time strategy genre , was fundamentally designed to be a " flat interface " , with no additional screens . 
 = = = Gameplay = = = 
 Since 4X games involve managing a large , detailed empire , game sessions usually last longer than other strategy games . Game sessions may require several hours of play @-@ time , which can be particularly problematic for multiplayer matches . For example , a small @-@ scale game in Sins of a Solar Empire can last for over 12 hours . However , fans of the genre often expect and embrace these long game sessions ; Emrich wrote that " when the various parts are properly designed , other X 's seem to follow . Words like <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ( to one 's significant others ) " . Turn @-@ based 4X games typically divide these sessions into hundreds of turns of gameplay . 
 Because of repetitive actions and long @-@ playing times , 4X games have been criticized for excessive micromanagement . In early stages of a game this is usually not a problem , but later in a game directing an empire 's numerous settlements can demand several minutes to play a single turn . This increases playing @-@ times , which are a particular burden in multiplayer games . 4X games began to offer AI governors that automate the micromanagement of a colony 's build orders , but players criticized these governors for making poor decisions . In response , developers have tried other approaches to reduce micromanagement , and some approaches have been more well received than others . Commentators generally agree that Galactic Civilizations succeeds , which <unk> attributes to the game 's use of programmable governors . Sins of a Solar Empire was designed to reduce the incentives for micromanagement , and reviewers found that the game 's interface made empire management more elegant . On the other hand , Master of Orion III reduced micromanagement by limiting complete player control over their empire . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 Early 4X games were influenced by board games and text @-@ based computer games from the 1970s . Andromeda Conquest and Reach for the Stars were published in 1983 , and are now seen retrospectively as 4X games . Although Andromeda Conquest was only a simple game of empire expansion , Reach for the Stars introduced the relationship between economic growth , technological progress , and conquest . 
 Prior to Sid Meier , Robert T. Smith created the precursor of all 4X strategy video games : Armada 2525 ( followed up by a version with enhanced graphics : Armada 2525 Deluxe ) . However , due to the financial problems of the publishing company Interstel Corporation , Armada 2525 never got enough marketing and attention from gamers . Future 4X space strategy games such as Master of Orion would go on to adopt the gameplay and concepts found in Armada 2525 . 
 Armada 2526 , the spiritual successor to Armada 2525 was released by <unk> Games in 2009 , 19 years after the original Armada 2525 was released in 1990 . 
 In 1991 , Sid Meier released Civilization and popularized the level of detail that has become a staple of the genre . Sid Meier 's Civilization was influenced by board games such as Risk and the Avalon Hill board game also called Civilization . A notable similarity between the Civilization computer game and board game is the importance of diplomacy and technological advancement . Sid Meier 's Civilization was also influenced by personal computer games such as the city management game SimCity and the wargame Empire . Civilization became widely successful and influenced many 4X games to come . 
 In 1991 , two highly influential space games were released . VGA Planets was released for the PC , while Spaceward Ho ! was released on the Macintosh . Although 4X space games were ultimately more influenced by the complexity of VGA Planets , Spaceward Ho ! earned praise for its relatively simple yet challenging game design . Spaceward Ho ! is notable for its similarity to the 1993 game Master of Orion , with its simple yet deep gameplay . Master of Orion also drew upon earlier 4X games such as Reach for the Stars , and is considered a classic game that set a new standard for the genre . In a preview of Master of Orion , Emrich coined the term " XXXX " to describe the emerging genre . Eventually , the " 4X " label was adopted by the game industry , and is now applied to several earlier game releases . 
 = = = Peak = = = 
 Following the success of Civilization and Master of Orion , other developers began releasing their own 4X games . In 1994 , Stardock launched its first version of the Galactic Civilizations series for OS / 2 , and the long @-@ standing Space Empires series began as shareware . Ascendancy and Stars ! were released in 1995 , and both continued the genre 's emphasis on strategic depth and empire management . Meanwhile , the Civilization and Master of Orion franchises expanded their market with versions for the Macintosh . Sid Meier 's team also produced Colonization in 1994 and Civilization II in 1996 , while <unk> released Master of Orion in 1993 , Master of Magic in 1994 and Master of Orion II in 1996 . 
 By the late 1990s , real @-@ time strategy games began outselling turn @-@ based games . As they surged in popularity , major 4X developers fell into difficulties . Sid Meier 's Firaxis Games released Sid Meier 's Alpha Centauri in 1999 to critical acclaim , but the game fell short of commercial expectations . Civilization III encountered development problems followed by a rushed release in 2001 . Despite the excitement over Master of Orion III , its release in 2003 was met with criticism for its lack of player control , poor interface , and weak AI . Game publishers eventually became risk @-@ averse to financing the development of 4X games . 
 = = = Real Time Hybrid 4X = = = 
 Eventually real @-@ time 4X games were released , such as Imperium Galactica in 1997 , Starships Unlimited in 2001 , and Sword of the Stars in 2006 , featuring a combination of turn @-@ based strategy and real @-@ time tactical combat . The blend of 4X and real @-@ time strategy gameplay led Ironclad Games to market their 2008 release Sins of a Solar Empire as a " <unk> " game . This combination of features earned the game a mention as one of the top games from 2008 , including GameSpot 's award for best strategy game , and IGN 's award for best PC game . 
 Cross @-@ fertilization between board games and video games continued . For example , some aspects of Master of Orion III were drawn from the first edition of the board game Twilight Imperium . Even Sins of a Solar Empire was inspired by the idea of adapting the board game Buck Rogers Battle for the 25th Century into a real @-@ time video game . Going in the opposite direction , Eagle Games made a board game adaptation of Sid Meier 's Civilization in 2002 , completely different from the board game that had inspired the computer game in the first place . 
 = = = Recent history = = = 
 In 2003 , Stardock released a remake of Galactic Civilizations , which was praised by reviewers who saw the game as a replacement for the Master of Orion series . In 2004 the Creative Assembly released the critically acclaimed Rome : Total War , which has spawned many sequels . Civilization IV was released at the end of 2005 and was considered the PC game of the year according to several reviewers , including GameSpot and GameSpy . It is now considered one of the greatest computer games in history , having been ranked the second @-@ best PC game of all time by IGN . By 2008 , the Civilization series had sold over eight million copies , followed the release of Civilization Revolution for game consoles soon after and Civilization V in 2010 . Meanwhile , Stardock released Galactic Civilizations II , which was considered the sixth @-@ best PC game of 2006 by GameSpy . Additionally , French developer Amplitude Studios released both Endless Space and Endless Legend . These successes have led Stardock 's Brad Wardell to assert that 4X games have excellent growth potential , particularly among less hardcore players . This is in addition to the loyal base of 4X gamers who have supported free software releases such as <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Golden Age of Civilizations . , and C @-@ evo . 
 = Ken Hall ( footballer ) = 
 Ken Hall ( born 13 November 1980 ) is a former Australian rules football player from Tasmania . He played junior football in his home state and spent two years in the seniors at North Hobart . Hall then moved to Victoria in 2001 to play for Essendon Football Club 's reserves side in the Victorian Football League ( VFL ) . 
 He played for the reserves for a year before being drafted onto Essendon 's rookie list for the 2002 season . Hall was promoted to the senior list midway through 2002 and subsequently made his Australian Football League ( AFL ) debut , although he did not record a statistic in what was to be his only AFL match . He was retained on the Bombers ' rookie list for 2003 and was again elevated to the senior list during the season . Although he was often named as an emergency after his promotion , Hall was unable to break into the senior team and Essendon delisted him at the end of 2003 , ending his AFL career . 
 After being delisted Hall played with the Tasmanian Devils in the VFL for four seasons , before rejoining his old side , Tasmanian Football League ( TFL ) team North Hobart , in 2008 . He won two best and fairest awards and captained the club in his time with North Hobart before retiring at the conclusion of the 2011 season . 
 = = Early career = = 
 A Tasmanian native , Hall played junior football for North Hobart Football Club 's under @-@ 18 side in the Tasmanian Football League ( TFL ) , as well as representing his under @-@ 18 state side , the Tassie Mariners , in the TAC Cup . He broke his wrist while playing for North Hobart 's under @-@ 18s in 1997 and broke the same wrist again in April 1998 , this time while playing for the Mariners . Hall recovered from the injury by August and was back playing for the Mariners . 
 In 1999 , Hall was no longer eligible in the under @-@ 18s and so became a regular fixture in North Hobart 's senior side . He played as a defender , occasionally being required to shut down the opposition 's star players , and was regularly named as one of the Demons ' better players . Hall started the 2000 season playing as a centre half @-@ forward for the Demons , despite his relatively small size . In the first game of the year he kicked a match winning goal as North Hobart defeated Clarence by 11 points . By May , Hall was again playing on the half @-@ back line . His form in defence was described as " reliable " and " solid " in the middle of the season by The Mercury . The young Demons side unexpectedly reached the finals and caused an upset in the semi final against the heavily favoured Burnie Dockers ; Hall was named as the Demons ' " best player without question " by The Mercury . At the conclusion of the season , Hall was named as back pocket in the Tasmanian side and as the North Hobart played with the most potential . 
 With the breakup of the TFL at the end of the 2000 season , many of Tasmania 's best young footballers , including Hall , moved interstate to try and break into the Australian Football League ( AFL ) and other quality leagues . Hall began training with AFL side Essendon in December 2000 in the hope of being drafted . The Bombers lost draft picks that year due to salary cap violations and Hall went undrafted , but was instead placed on the Bombers ' supplementary list , playing with Essendon 's reserves side in the Victorian Football League ( VFL ) . 
 = = AFL career = = 
 After impressing with the reserves in 2001 , Hall was drafted by Essendon with the 46th selection in the 2002 AFL Rookie Draft , thereby placing him on the Bombers ' rookie list . Speaking to The Mercury , Hall described the opportunity as exciting said that it has always been his dream to play in the AFL . In the lead @-@ up to the 2002 season Hall played in all three of Essendon 's pre @-@ season matches , of which the Bombers lost every game . Rookie listed players must be promoted to the senior list before they play a senior AFL match , so Hall began the 2002 season playing in the VFL for Essendon 's reserves team . 
 When Dean Solomon suffered a season @-@ ending knee injury in late March , Hall was one of three players in contention to be promoted to the senior list in place of Solomon . After approximately one month of assessment Hall was deemed the most impressive of Essendon 's three rookies and was elevated to the senior list . In early June , Hall played particularly well in defence for the reserves against the Murray Kangaroos , and was subsequently in consideration to play for Essendon 's senior team . Essendon had been plagued by injury throughout 2002 and this , coupled with Hall 's good form in the VFL , resulted in him making his AFL debut in round 12 against Hawthorn . After a poor performance in his debut match , in which he did not record a statistic and spent most of the match on the bench , Hall was dropped backed to the VFL side the following round . Despite showing good form in the VFL for the remainder of 2002 , Hall was unable to break back into the senior Bombers line @-@ up . Although Hall failed to have an impact at AFL level , he played well at VFL level and was third in the reserves ' best and fairest award . 
 Hall was retained on the Bombers ' rookie list for 2003 . Although Essendon had another poor pre @-@ season , losing four of the five matches they played , Hall played in each of the games . He was described as " perform [ ing ] well " in The Age newspaper , and even kicked a goal in the first match . After spending the majority of his career prior to 2003 as a defender , Hall was trialled as a midfielder for the 2003 season , a move which reaped immediate results as he became a " goalscoring weapon " for the Bendigo Bombers — Essendon 's new VFL @-@ affiliate side — as well as becoming well known for his penetrating kicking ability . 
 In early August , Hall kicked four goals in a close win against the Northern <unk> in the VFL , and three days later , Essendon coach Kevin Sheedy declared that Hall and two others were in contention to be promoted to the senior list , even though he had missed out on being elevated two weeks prior . Sheedy proceeded to promote Hall , in place of the injured Joel Reynolds , in order to " see if [ Hall ] will be a viable option come finals time " . He was immediately named in Essendon 's 25 @-@ man squad to play against the Western Bulldogs , but failed to make the starting 22 . 
 Despite not playing a senior match for the entirety of the regular season , there was media speculation that Hall may be selected for Essendon 's elimination final against Fremantle , due to Sheedy stating that he had " little choice " but to select a youthful team for the match and that " it wouldn 't worry [ him ] " to choose an inexperienced player . However , Sheedy elected not to play Hall in the match , instead selecting him as an emergency . Essendon won the match and moved on to the semi final , where Hall was again an emergency . Essendon lost the semi final and was eliminated from the finals series , ending the Bombers ' season . Although he regularly pushed for selection in 2003 and finished equal second in Bendigo 's best and fairest count , Hall was delisted at season 's end . 
 = = Post @-@ AFL career = = 
 After being delisted by the Bombers , Hall was pursued by multiple clubs ; he had offers from VFL sides Coburg , the Tasmanian Devils , Williamstown and Bendigo , as well as South Australian National Football League ( SANFL ) club West Adelaide , before deciding to sign with Devils because he wanted to come home to family and friends . Hall started the 2004 season playing as a forward and , despite moving into the midfield by mid @-@ season , he was still a regular goalkicker . In June he was named in the VFL representative squad to play against the West Australian Football League , but he missed out on the match due to a hip flexor injury that sidelined him for a month . Hall finished the home and away season in fifth place in the The Mercury 's Tasmanian Devils Player of the Year award and in equal third place in the Devils ' best and fairest . 
 In 2005 Hall was among the best on the ground in an interstate match between the VFL and the SANFL , finished in third in the Devils ' best and fairest count , and was runner up in The Mercury 's Tasmanian Devils Player of the Year award . The 2006 season saw Hall named best on ground in his 100th VFL match , a 24 @-@ point win over Frankston . He was again runner up in The Mercury 's Tasmanian Devils Player of the Year award and also finished as runner up in the team 's best and fairest count . In 2007 journalist Matt Burgan , writing for the AFL website , named Hall in his best 22 players currently from Tasmania , with Hall and Cameron Thurley the only two players who were not listed with an AFL club at the time of selection . Hall was named in the Devils ' leadership group at the beginning of the 2007 season . He represented Tasmania in an interstate match against Queensland and was awarded the Lefroy Medal as best on ground for the Tasmanians . Hall finished the year winning his first Tasmanian Devils Player of the Year award and coming third in the best and fairest . 
 After 134 matches and 109 goals in the VFL , Hall left the Devils at the end of the 2007 season , citing work and family reasons — his wife Lauren was expecting their first child in December 2007 . He proceeded to rejoin North Hobart Football Club in the TFL for 2008 . In his first year with the club Hall won the George Miller Medal , awarded to North Hobart 's best and fairest player for the season . In 2009 , he was described as North Hobart 's " star player " , represented the TFL in a match against the <unk> , and was his team 's only representative in the top 10 of the Tassie Medal , awarded to the league 's best and fairest player . 
 By 2010 , Hall was the captain of North Hobart , and was one of only four players in the TFL to have senior AFL experience . Hall had another good season in 2010 ; he won his second George Miller Medal , and was described by his coach as one of the league 's five best players and the " best tackler in the competition " . Despite carrying a nagging ankle injury , Hall started the 2011 season well , with The Mercury 's Brett Stubbs writing that he was arguably the second best player in the league . He missed five weeks during the middle of the season and , although he was named best on ground in his comeback match , Hall said that another injury would probably be the end of his career . He played out the reason of the season and finished in ninth place in the State League Player of the Year award , was named on the half @-@ back flank in the TFL Team of the Year , and finished in the top 20 in the Tassie Medal count . 
 Hall retired from football at the end of the 2011 season ; his coach at North Hobart described Hall as irreplaceable . He came out of retirement in 2013 to spend one season playing for St Virgil 's Old Scholars in the Old Scholars Football Association where he was also an assistant coach . Hall finished second in the league best and fairest in his solitary season for the club . 
 = John Crichton @-@ Stuart , 2nd Marquess of Bute = 
 John Crichton @-@ Stuart , 2nd Marquess of Bute , KT , FRS ( 10 August 1793 – 18 March 1848 ) , styled Lord Mount Stuart between 1794 and 1814 , was a wealthy aristocrat and industrialist in Georgian and early Victorian Britain . He developed the coal and iron industries across South Wales and built the Cardiff Docks . 
 Bute 's father , John , Lord Mount Stuart , died a few months after he was born and as a young child he was brought up first by his mother , the former Lady Elizabeth McDougall @-@ Crichton , and later by his paternal grandfather , John Stuart , 1st Marquess of Bute . He travelled widely across Europe before attending Cambridge University . He contracted an eye condition and remained partially sighted for the rest of his life . Having inherited large estates across Britain , he married his first wife , Lady Maria North , in 1818 , and together they lived a relatively secluded life in Mount Stuart House in Scotland , one of Bute 's four seats . Bute was dour but industrious , with a flair for land management . He focused his daily routine around extensive correspondence with his estate managers , making biennial tours of his lands around the country . The couple did not conceive any children , and Maria died in 1841 . Bute remarried four years later , to Lady Sophia Rawdon @-@ Hastings , and she gave birth to Bute 's only child , John , in 1847 . 
 Bute was a member of the House of Lords and controlled the votes of several members of the House of Commons . He was a political and religious conservative , a follower of the Duke of Wellington , but rarely took part in national debates unless his own commercial interests were involved . Early on , Bute realised the vast wealth that lay in the South Wales coalfields and set about commercially exploiting them through local ironmasters and colliers . He constructed the Cardiff Docks , a major project which , despite running heavily over budget , enabled further exports of iron and coal and magnified the value of his lands in Glamorganshire . When violence broke out in the Merthyr Rising of 1831 , Bute led the government response from Cardiff Castle , despatching military forces , deploying spies and keeping Whitehall informed throughout . The contemporary press praised the marquess as " the creator of modern Cardiff " , and on his death he left vast wealth to his son . 
 = = Background and personal life = = 
 Bute was the son of John , Lord Mount Stuart , and the former Lady Elizabeth <unk> @-@ Crichton . His parents were both from wealthy , aristocratic backgrounds ; his father was due to become the Marquess of Bute , with extensive landholdings in Scotland and in South Wales , and his mother was the sole heir to the Crichton estates , with over 63 @,@ 980 acres ( 25 @,@ 890 ha ) of land in Scotland . Bute 's father died in a riding accident in February 1794 , leaving Elizabeth to give birth to Bute 's younger brother , Patrick Stuart , later that year . 
 Initially Bute was brought up at Dumfries House by his mother and grandmother , but following their deaths he passed into the care of his grandfather , the 1st Marquess of Bute , and travelled with him across England and Europe . His family considered him to be clever and he went to study at Christ 's College in Cambridge in 1809 . Over the next few years he visited the Mediterranean , Scandinavia and Russia , taking a keen interest in land economics . He developed an eye condition during this period and became partially blind , leaving him unable to travel without assistance or to tolerate bright lights , and finding it difficult to read or write . 
 His maternal grandfather , Lord Dumfries , died in 1803 , followed by his paternal grandfather in 1814 , with Bute inheriting both sets of estates and adding Crichton to his surname after Lord Dumfries . As a consequence he held many hereditary titles and posts : in addition to being the Marquess of Bute , he was also the Earl of Windsor , Viscount Mountjoy , Baron Mount Stuart , Baron Cardiff , the Earl of Dumfries and Bute , the Viscount of Ayr and Kingarth , Baron Crichton , Lord Crichton of Sanquhar and Cumnock , and Lord Mount Stuart <unk> and Inchmarnock , and a Baronet of Nova Scotia . He was the Keeper of <unk> Castle , the Lord Lieutenant and Custos <unk> of Glamorgan , the Lord Lieutenant , the hereditary Sheriff and Coroner of <unk> , and the High Steward of Banbury . 
 Bute had four major seats , Mount Stuart House on the Isle of Bute , Dumfries House in Ayrshire , Luton Hoo in Bedfordshire , and Cardiff Castle in South Wales , with his London town house on Campden Hill in Kensington . Bute preferred to live in Mount Stuart House ; he disliked London and only spent a few weeks in Cardiff Castle each year . Twice each year he would travel from Mount Stuart House through Ayrshire to Edinburgh , down through northern England to London , and on to Cardiff and his South Wales estates . In November 1843 , a fire swept through Luton Hoo House , destroying the interior ; the house 's historic library survived , however , and most of its famous collection of paintings were rescued from the blaze ; it was subsequently sold off by Bute . 
 Concerned about his growing blindness , and not enjoying the social life in London , Bute retired to his estates on the Isle of Bute for the next six years . While recovering , Bute married his first wife , Lady Maria North , in 1818 . Maria was one of the three daughters of the 3rd Earl of Guilford , and a wealthy heiress . £ 40 @,@ 000 was settled on her at the time of her marriage and she was due to inherit a third of her father 's extensive estates . Contemporaries considered Maria a kind and pleasant woman , but she was often unwell and the marriage proved childless . In 1820 his portrait was painted by Henry Raeburn , and published two years later as an engraving by William Ward . In 1827 his father @-@ in @-@ law died and Maria inherited lands worth over £ 110 @,@ 000 . 
 The historian John Davies describes Bute as " dour , remote and overbearing on first acquaintance " but with a " sense of responsibility , considerable imagination and an enormous capacity for hard work " . By the aristocratic standards of the day , Bute lived a reclusive lifestyle . As a result of his personality and poor eyesight , he did not enjoy hunting , shooting , or large social gatherings , nor did he like racehorses or gambling . His first wife 's illnesses added to this sense of exclusion from wider aristocratic society . Compared to other landowners of the period , Bute was relatively philanthropic , giving away around seven to eight percent of his rental income from South Wales in charitable donations , for example . He was keen to fund local schools and to construct new churches , partially because in doing so he was able to discourage any moves towards Nonconformism and the disestablishment of the official Church . 
 In 1841 Lady Maria died , and Bute blamed his excessive focus on the dock programme for exacerbating his wife 's illness . As a result of the original marriage agreement , Bute continued to draw the incomes from his late wife 's property for the remainder of his life , even though officially the estates would ultimately pass to Maria 's sister , Lady Susan , on his own death . He was created a Knight of the Thistle in 1843 by Queen Victoria . In 1845 Bute fell from his horse and injured his eyes further in the accident , making it still harder from him to read and write . Bute remarried the same year , this time to Lady Sophia Rawdon @-@ Hastings , the daughter of the Marquess of Hastings . Sophia was obsessive , hard to please and did not get on well with John 's family , especially his brother . She soon became pregnant , but gave birth to a stillborn child ; the couple 's second child , whom they named John , was successfully born in 1847 . 
 Bute 's relationship with his brother Patrick was often difficult . Their political views did not coincide , as Patrick was much more liberal than Bute and favoured political reform . Although Bute arranged for Patrick to become a Member of Parliament in 1818 , in 1831 their differing views resulted in Bute removing him from Parliament . For many years , Patrick had good reason to expect that Bute would die childless , leaving him to inherit the family estates ; after Bute 's death , he disputed the occupancy of Cardiff Castle with Lady Sophia . 
 = = <unk> and industrialist = = 
 = = = Estate management = = = 
 Bute was determined to develop his different estates and receive the best possible return from them . He was an active , ambitious manager , quick to generate new ideas for the properties , and spent the majority of his time managing his properties . Despite his poor eyesight , he wrote at least six letters to his managers each day . He had a detailed understanding of his various estates and businesses ; he attempted to keep up with affairs in Glamorgan , for example , by reading the local Welsh newspapers from his house in Scotland and through exchanging letters with influential local figures . Bute recognised that his land holdings were too extended and disparate to be easily managed and attempted to rationalise them . He attempted to sell his Luton estates in the early 1820s but failed to obtain an adequate price ; he successfully sold them in the early 1840s . Luton and Luton Hoo was finally sold in 1845 , by then comprising around 3 @,@ 600 acres ( 1 @,@ 500 ha ) . 
 Unusually for an aristocrat of the period , Bute owned almost all of his lands fully , as an owner in fee simple , rather than having his rights diluted through arrangements with trustees . When he married in 1818 , Bute placed his English and Wales estates into a trustee arrangement for any future children , but this agreement expired with Lady Maria 's death in 1842 ; when he remarried in 1845 a similar trustee agreement was set up , although in this version the Glamorgan estates were administered separately from his other holdings in England and Wales . Bute continued to run his network of estates and estate managers personally , helped by <unk> Bruce , a barrister @-@ agent and close friend . 
 As early as 1815 , Bute had his Glamorgan estates fully surveyed , which highlighted that the estates had been neglected for many years and were now in a poor condition . Edward Richards became the senior official in charge of the estates by 1824 and represented Bute on both estate and political affairs across the region . Despite this , Bute retained the final authority over even quite minor issues on the estates , including making decisions on the buttons to be used on local school uniforms or the reuse of a broken flag pole , for example , which could result in considerable delays as letters were sent between South Wales and Scotland . As the complexity of the Glamorgan estates grew , more officials were appointed to help manage the docks , farms and mineral interests , but these all reported separately to Bute , putting increasing pressure on the marquess . 
 On the Isle of Bute , the marquess expanded his properties , purchasing land in <unk> , <unk> and <unk> Mill . 
 = = = Glamorganshire = = = 
 Bute was closely involved in the developments across Glamorganshire during the first half of the 19th century . The region saw tremendous economic and social changes in a short period of time . The population almost trebled in the first forty years of the century and industrial outputs soured , with the output of pig iron increasing from 34 @,@ 000 to 277 @,@ 000 tons between 1796 and 1830 . Industry and mining replaced agriculture as the main sources of work . In driving forward and responding to these changes , Bute transformed his South Wales estate into a major industrial enterprise . 
 Bute 's land holdings in Glamorgan were spread out across the county and he took steps to consolidate them , selling around 1 @,@ 800 acres ( 730 ha ) of some of the outlying properties in the west and investing heavily in buying 4 @,@ 600 acres ( 1 @,@ 900 ha ) of land around Cardiff between 1814 and 1826 . The rising prices of land and the costs of the docks brought an end to this expansion . Estimating the profitability of the Glamorgan estates is challenging because of the way that the accounts were drawn up during the period , but estimates suggest that once land purchases and the dock building cost were factored in , the estates cost the <unk> much more than they delivered in income . Bute borrowed heavily ; he had inherited debts of £ 62 @,@ 500 , but by the time of his death owed £ 493 @,@ 887 . Financing and supporting this debt was difficult , particularly during the early 1840s , when credit was hard to come by , and John was forced to juggle lenders and different lines of credit . He believed that ultimately his investments would provide a rich return , and in 1844 noted that he thought " well of the prospects of my income in the distance " . 
 The economic growth across South Wales drove up the demand for new housing for the growing work force . Bute was not prepared to sell any of his lands for housing , and did not see much profit in building and renting housing himself , but was prepared to lease land in the growing urban areas and mining communities for land development . Initially he attempted to negotiate 63 year long leases , which would have given his successors additional , early flexibility in how they managed the land , but these proved unpopular so he reverted to offering the more typical 99 year leases . None of the contracts offered by Bute allowed the lessee to buy the freehold or automatically renew the lease at the end of this term , which ultimately resulted in substantial political difficulties for the third and fourth marquesses when there was a storm of complaints in the late 19th and early 20th century . Bute left the style of the early developments up to the lessees , but was concerned by the poor results . Bute then began to approve the designs for new buildings personally , laying out some grand streets in the centre of Cardiff and retaining open areas for eventual use as parks . Very little money was invested in the sewage and drainage systems for his new developments , however , and a damning 1850 inquiry showed that this had resulted in cholera outbreaks across the town . 
 At the start of the 19th century , scientific investigation began to indicate that the Glamorgan valleys were rich with coal deposits . Bute , who already owned coal mines in County Durham , commissioned further surveys in 1817 and 1823 – 24 which showed that there were potentially huge profits to be made from the reserves , both from the coal sitting beneath Bute 's own lands , but also from the coal under common lands in the region that Bute could claim through his feudal titles . Bute set about consolidating his rights and existing investments during the late 1820s and 1830s , acquiring extensive rights to the coalfields in the process . Bute established and managed a few <unk> – such as that at Rhigos – directly , but given the investment costs and attention they took up , generally preferred to lease out his coal fields and claim a royalty on the coal mined instead . The lessees might be iron @-@ masters , who used the coal in their own operations , or colliery owners who sold the coal on to industrial or domestic customers . The profits increased from £ 872 in the second half of 1826 , to £ 10 @,@ 756 in 1848 – 49 . 
 = = = Cardiff Docks = = = 
 Between 1822 and 1848 Bute played a central role in the creation of the Cardiff Docks . The idea was first put forward to Bute by one of his staff in 1822 , who suggested that , with the right investment , Cardiff could be transformed into a major port for exporting coal and iron . The existing sea port , used by the Glamorganshire Canal , was small and inefficient . The new port would then deliver a direct return to Bute from shipping rates , improve the value of his lands in Cardiff itself and increase the value of the royalties he could charge on his coal fields . Initially Bute opposed plans for docks put forward by the local ironmasters , but then changed his mind and pushed forward with his own scheme shortly afterwards . 
 The first phase was to build a new dock and connecting canal in Cardiff , making the Glamorganshire Canal redundant in the process , at an estimated cost of £ 66 @,@ 600 , considered to opponents to be a " wild speculation " . Parliamentary permission was acquired in 1830 , despite opposition from the local canal companies of iron masters . The project proved more complex than originally planned , driving Bute to become irritable and angry with almost all of his associates , but the dock opened successfully in 1839 . The costs of building the docks had been far more than anticipated , however . Instead of the original estimate , construction costs had soared to £ 350 @,@ 000 , reaching £ 10 @,@ 000 a month in 1837 . Bute had to mortgage his local estates to raise the sums required to finish the project . To make matters worse , when they first opened the docks did not receive the traffic he had expected , particularly from the larger ships ; Bute put this down to a coalition of ironmasters and others intent on ruining him . 
 Bute responded by putting commercial pressure on shipping companies to abandon the Glamorganshire Canal and using his feudal rights to force shippers to move their wharfs to his docks . His efforts paid off and although trade through the docks only came to 8 @,@ 000 tons in 1839 , they then rose quickly , reaching 827 @,@ 000 tons by 1849 . Between 1841 and 1848 the docks brought in a gross income of just under £ 68 @,@ 000 , a relatively disappointing figure compared to the size of the investment . Successive marquesses would find themselves under huge pressure to continue investing and expanding in the docks and subsequent phases of construction over the coming decades . 
 = = Politics = = 
 = = = National = = = 
 Bute was born into the pre @-@ Reform system of government in Britain . The British Parliament was divided into the hereditary House of Lords and the elected House of Commons , but voting systems varied widely across England and in many cases only very small numbers of local people were enfranchised to vote . Some members of the House of Lords , termed " patrons " , often controlled these " closed " or " nominated " seats in the Commons , effectively appointing their own candidates . Criticism of the system , led by the Whigs , grew during the first half of Bute 's life . 
 Bute was a member of the House of Lords , able to vote on national affairs , but he had a reputation for not attending unless to vote on acts relating to his estates or business interests . When he did vote , it was usually as a moderate conservative , and Bute himself described himself as a follower of the Duke of Wellington , by then a leading Tory politician . John was in favour of Catholic Emancipation , opposed to slavery , the New Poor Law and the Game Laws . Like Wellington , he was in favour of repealing the Corn Laws . He passionately opposed electoral reform , however , and any attempts to disestablish the Church of England or Scotland . Bute had strong views on the necessity of encouraging the poor to work , and was in favour of removing the Irish poor from the mainland back to Ireland . He was a notoriously poor public speaker . 
 In addition to his personal role in Parliament , Bute sought to control the votes of members of the House of Commons , primarily to ensure the passage of legislation affecting his business interests . Initially , the Isle of Bute had only 21 voters who were dominated by his private estate , but it only returned a Member of Parliament in alternate elections , and his estates in Luton were too limited to allow him to influence the electoral process there . The best remaining option for Bute was to control the voting in Cardiff , but even here he had to choose his candidate carefully and apply careful financial pressure through his control of leases and rents to ensure their election . 
 In 1832 the Reform Act was passed by Parliament , widening the electorate across the country . The Isle of Bute 's electorate rose to 300 and acquired a permanent Member of Parliament , still controlled by Bute . Cardiff saw a short @-@ term drop in its electorate as a result of the act , and Bute benefited from the granting of the vote to many of his richer agricultural tenants . In the aftermath of the reforms , Bute secretly sponsored the creation of the conservative newspaper the Glamorgan Monmouth and Brecon Gazette and Merthyr Guardian , to increase support across the county , and underwrote its losses for many years . 
 From 1842 to 1846 he acted as Her Majesty 's High Commissioner to the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland . He was known for his generosity as a host in this role . He was in office during the schism in the Church of Scotland known as " the Disruption " , when many many ministers of the Church broke away from the established Church to form the Free Church . Bute took a firm line on the matter : when his head @-@ gardener at Mount Stuart House joined the Free Church , he was immediately sacked , and when the minister at one of Bute 's churches in the north of the island attempted to hold a Free Church ceremony there , Bute demanded the keys to the church to be returned and had the property closed up . 
 = = = South Wales = = = 
 = = = = Re @-@ establishing authority = = = = 
 Bute was determined to control the local government around Cardiff , considering it part of his rights and duties as a major landowner and aristocrat . On inheriting his estates , however , he found himself facing a difficult political situation . The Butes ' grip on Glamorganshire had been weakened in the late 18th century , and the management of their political interests had been left for many years in the hands of John Wood , a local solicitor , whose family was embroiled in local politics , with their own set of interests . Glamorgan was also politically split between factions in the west and the east of the county , with most of Bute 's estates in the eastern half . Bute 's residence in the area , Cardiff Castle , was understaffed and regarded as unsuitable as a residence ; consequently he lacked the easy local patronage that would have come with a major , properly functioning establishment . 
 There were tensions between Bute and the new industrialists around the region , including ironmasters such as John Guest , the master of the Dowlais Ironworks . Bute was a financial competitor or landlord with many of these men , and keen to drive as good a deal as possible in his negotiations with them . He also had political differences , seeing himself as a benevolent feudal lord in South Wales , and perceiving the local iron @-@ masters as arrogant , power @-@ hungry individuals , abusing their economic power towards communities and workers . 
 Nonetheless , Bute was able to personally appoint the Constable of Cardiff Castle , and the constable by law acted as the effective mayor of Cardiff , ran the town 's council and had wide powers when appointing local officials . He inherited the title of Lord @-@ Lieutenant of the county in 1815 , giving him the right to recommend the appointments of new magistrates and various other civic posts ; potential candidates for these posts were advised to vote for Bute 's representatives at elections . In 1825 he became the colonel in chief of the Royal Glamorgan Militia , and used this authority to instruct the militia to vote for his candidates . Those who publicly voted against Bute faced charitable donations and support being cut off . His later control of the Cardiff Docks also helped to provide patronage and influence voting behaviour . 
 In 1817 , John Wood died in the midst of a financial scandal , and Bute decided to appoint two of his rivals to the posts of Constable and Cardiff 's Town Clerk . This would have reaffirmed Bute 's power to change the appointments and broken the Wood 's family hold on local power , but it provoked a storm of local political wrangling . The Wood family turned on Bute , arguing that he should abandon his claims to control local Welsh affairs from Scotland . Bute replied by trying to crush the Wood family 's bank and stacking the town council with his appointees in early 1818 . The Woods successfully took legal action , challenging Bute 's authority to take these actions , and anti @-@ Bute violence flared that summer , resulting in arrests by Special Constables appointed by Bute . The pro @-@ Bute faction in Cardiff rallied and the Woods were defeated at the Parliamentary elections that year , the results reaffirming Bute 's authority over the town council . 
 = = = = Merthyr Rising = = = = 
 Bute played a role in the event of the Merthyr Rising , a large , armed industrial protest that occurred in Merthyr Tydfil in South Wales in 1831 . Political tensions amongst the working classes in Glamorgan had grown during the 1820s : although wages were impressive by contemporary standards during good years , they deteriorated quickly during depressions , plunging many into destitution ; sanitation and health standards in the fast @-@ growing industrial communities were appalling , child mortality rates were extremely high . 1831 saw a severe economic depression , with wages falling quickly and food prices rising , and complaints against the local debt courts and their bailiffs were numerous . Nationally , the electoral reform movement was making considerable protests and protests against the Corn Laws – which kept the prices of food high – were growing . In South Wales , several of the major ironmasters were associated with these movements , promoting reform under the Whig administration voted into power between April and June 1831 . 
 By late 1830 , and certainly by the spring of 1831 , trouble in South Wales looked likely and , probably in response , Bute broke from his normal annual plans and in May travelled south from Scotland to Cardiff Castle . With a reform bill looking likely , tensions grew between the different political factions in Glamorganshire and how the potential new parliamentary seats should be shared out , especially between Bute and his conservative allies , Crawshay and Guest . Radical demonstrations occurred in Methyr Tyfil , one of the largest industrial communities , in May , and the crowd set light to effigies of conservative politicians . Violence broke out and arrests were made on 10 May ; the prisoners were released by the angry crowd and the local authorities effectively lost any control of the town . A general insurrection ensued on 30 May . 
 Two local magistrates , J. Bruce and Anthony Hill , were stranded in the Castle Inn in Methyr Tyfil . They swore in around 70 men as special constables , but they were heavily outnumbered by the radical crowds . Bruce wrote an urgent letter to Bute in Cardiff Castle , asking for urgent advice on whether to call in the armed forces , and querying whether the Marquess had readied the Militia for action . Huge crowds marched on the local iron works , stopping production . The messages from Methyr Tyfil reached Bute that afternoon , who began to assemble the Eastern and Central Yeomanry militia units and transport ready for deployment . Bute paused until the morning , hoping to hear better news , but messengers bought more desperate news from Bruce and Hill , and the Yeomanry were dispatched . Meanwhile , an 80 @-@ man unit of the 93rd Foot had arrived in the Castle Inn from Brecon . Bute continued to keep Whitehall informed of the events by letter throughout . 
 On the morning of 3 May , the 93rd Foot reached the Castle Inn , where the magistrates had been joined by the established figures of the town , deputised as constables , including the High Sheriff and most of the ironmasters . Outside , the radical crowds had grown to an estimated number of between 7 @,@ 000 and 10 @,@ 000 . Tensions rose alarmingly and the Riot Act was read in English and Welsh . Violence flared , the crowds attempted to seize the soldiers ' weapons and the soldiers responded with volleys of musket fire . The town 's working classes exploded in anger and set about searching the region for weapons . A messenger escaped the inn to reach Bute in Cardiff , who set about mobilising all the remaining armed forces he had available . Bute also despatched Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Richard Morgan of the Militia into <unk> to replace the commander of the 93rd Foot who had been badly injured . 
 The men in the Castle Inn retreated to Penydarren House , who were joined by the initial reinforcements from the Yeomanry , bringing the establishment 's numbers to around 300 , not all of them were armed and able to fight . They faced increasingly well armed insurgents and Bute became increasingly concerned about the quality of the opposition facing his men . Bute sent spies into the insurgency , and nearby Cyfarthfa Castle was pressed into service as an observation post . Bute mobilised military pensioners , and used them to start to bring Penydarren House additional weaponry from Cardiff ; he was advised to be careful , however , in case the shipments fell into the hands of the insurgency . Morgan 's forces were able to prevent the radical crowds from entering either Penydarren or <unk> , and Bute arrested potential insurgents in Cardiff . 
 On 16 May , Morgan was in a position to advance in force into Merthyr , pushing forward and taking advantage of the poor communications between the various elements of the insurgency . The uprising collapsed , and over the next few days the authorities regained control , making arrests and forcing the workers back to business . Government inquiries into the incident began and Bute , amongst others , provided analysis and reports to Whitehall . In the aftermath , Richard Lewis , one of the radical crowd , was hanged in Cardiff . The execution proved controversial and it is unknown whether Bute , who had by then left to attend Parliament in London , approved of the decision . 
 = = = = Later years = = = = 
 Concerns over possible violent outbreaks continued for many years . Chartism became prominent in the region in the late 1830s , again causing Bute considerable worries in 1839 and leading to him encouraging the mobilisation of military forces to deal with the threat . Bute began to advocate the creation of a police force to suppress the problems in the northern valleys , for once allying himself with the local ironmasters to overcome rural opposition to the scheme . In 1841 the scheme was passed by the Glamorgan magistrates , with a chief constable and headquarters established that year . 
 In 1835 an act of Parliament reformed the local government structure , introducing a new town corporation structure with an elected mayor for the first time . Bute had to work harder to maintain his influence over the new corporation , using the various levers of influence at his disposal . He was successful , and in practice the elected officials and councillors were controlled Bute and his interests . 
 = = Death = = 
 Bute died in Cardiff on 18 March 1848 , and was buried in <unk> , alongside Maria , his first wife . His funeral had 31 carriages in attendance and drew large crowds , although his funeral was snubbed by the local ironmasters . The national press gave his death little coverage , but the local Daily Chronicle noted Bute 's unusual achievement in building up the industrial base of his South Wales estates , and particularly praised his role in constructing the Cardiff Docks . The Cardiff Docks , whose opening in 1837 had led the press to praise Bute as " the creator of modern Cardiff " , continued to transform the city over the rest of the century . They would also form a financial liability to Bute successors , the costs of the continual investment needed to maintain and grow the facilities partially off @-@ setting the huge profits that Bute 's son enjoyed from the South Wales coalfields . 
 A subscription was raised across Glamorgan to pay for a statue to be made of him , which was erected in Cardiff 's High Street in 1853 , outside the town hall . In 2000 the statue , Cardiff 's oldest , was moved to Bute Square , but the location was renamed Callaghan Square in 2002 , leading to proposals from local officials that Bute 's statue might be better relocated once again , potentially to outside Cardiff Castle . 
 = Crash Bandicoot : The Huge Adventure = 
 Crash Bandicoot : The Huge Adventure , released in Europe as Crash Bandicoot XS and in Japan as Crash Bandicoot Advance , is a platform game published by Universal Interactive Studios ( along with Konami in the Japanese release ) and developed by Vicarious Visions for the Game Boy Advance . It was released in North America on February 25 , 2002 , in Europe on March 15 , 2002 and in Japan on July 18 , 2002 . 
 Crash Bandicoot : The Huge Adventure is the seventh installment in the Crash Bandicoot video game series and the first Crash Bandicoot game to be released on a handheld console . The game acts as alternate sequel to the first four games , along with N @-@ Tranced for the same platform . The game 's story centers on a plot to shrink the Earth by the main antagonist , Doctor Neo Cortex , through the use of a gigantic weapon named the " Planetary Minimizer " . The protagonist of the story , Crash Bandicoot , must gather Crystals in order to power a device that will return the Earth to its proper size , defeating Doctor Cortex and his minions along the way . 
 The game stemmed from an agreement between Universal Interactive Studios and Konami that enabled them to produce and publish ( respectively ) a Crash Bandicoot game for next @-@ generation handheld game systems , ending the franchise 's exclusivity to Sony @-@ produced consoles . Crash Bandicoot : The Huge Adventure received generally favorable reviews from critics . The game was praised for its graphics and overall design , but critics noted the game 's lack of innovation . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Crash Bandicoot : The Huge Adventure is a platform game in which the player controls Crash Bandicoot , who must gather 20 Crystals and reverse the shrinkage of the Earth at the hands of Doctor Neo Cortex , the main antagonist of the story . Much of the game takes place in a series of hubs , from which Crash can teleport to various areas of the Earth . Initially , only the first of four hubs is available for play . Each hub features five levels and a boss level . The goal in each level is to find and obtain a hidden Crystal . After completing all five levels in a hub , the boss level must be completed , in which Crash must defeat the boss character guarding the area . By defeating the boss , a new hub will be accessible for play . When all 20 Crystals are collected and the Earth has been enlarged to its proper size , the game is won . 
 Besides Crystals , Gems and Colored Gems can be collected for extra accomplishment . Gems are rewarded to the player if all of the crates in a level are broken open or if a secret area is completed . Colored Gems are found in special levels and lead to hidden areas . " Relics " can be won by re @-@ entering a level where the Crystal has already been retrieved . To obtain a Relic , the player must initiate the " Time Trial " mode and race through a level in the pre @-@ designated time displayed before entering a level . To begin a Time Trial run , the player must enter a level and activate the floating stopwatch near the beginning of the level to activate the timer ; if the stopwatch is not touched , the level is played regularly . The player must then race through the level as quickly as possible . Scattered throughout the level are yellow crates with the numbers 1 , 2 or 3 on them . When these crates are broken , the timer is frozen for the number of seconds designated by the box . Sapphire , Gold and Platinum Relics can be won depending on the player 's final time . 
 At the beginning of the game , Crash has the ability to jump to navigate ledges , spin in a tornado @-@ like fashion to break open crates and defeat enemies , deliver a body slam to break open tough objects and can either slide across the ground or crouch and crawl to get past low areas . Crash can expand on these abilities by defeating boss characters , often resulting in more powerful attacks or increased jumping and running prowess . Crash starts the game with six lives . Crash loses a life when he is struck by an enemy attack or suffers any other type of damage . More lives can be earned by instructing Crash to collect 100 " Wumpa Fruits " or break open a special crate to collect a life . Crash can be shielded from enemy attack by collecting an Aku Aku mask . Collecting three of these masks allows temporary invulnerability from all minor dangers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Eight returning characters from previous Crash titles star in Crash Bandicoot : The Huge Adventure . The protagonist of the game , Crash Bandicoot , is an anthropomorphic bandicoot who must reverse the shrinkage of the Earth caused by the main antagonist Doctor Neo Cortex . Crash 's genius sister , Coco Bandicoot , is the creator of the machine necessary to reverse the effects of Cortex 's " Planetary Minimizer " . Aiding Crash is Aku Aku , an ancient wooden mask who can temporarily protect Crash from harm . The main antagonist of the series , Doctor Neo Cortex , is a mad scientist who shrinks the Earth down to the size of a grapefruit with his new " Planetary Minimizer " . Overseeing Cortex 's plot is Uka Uka , the evil twin brother of Aku Aku . Cortex 's minions consist of Tiny Tiger , a hulking muscle @-@ bound beast , Dingodile , a flamethrower @-@ wielding dingo @-@ crocodile hybrid and Doctor N. Gin , Cortex 's cyborg right @-@ hand man . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 In a space station orbiting the Earth , Uka Uka is upset with Doctor Neo Cortex for failing him once again , but Cortex promises a plan that will bring the Earth 's inhabitants down to size . Cortex then introduces his Planetary Minimizer , which he immediately uses to shrink the Earth down to the size of a grapefruit . The situation is brought to Aku Aku 's attention when Cortex taunts the now @-@ microscopic people of Earth . When Aku Aku informs Crash of the Earth 's predicament , Coco assumes that Cortex is using the Crystals to power his shrinking machine , and requests that Crash find the same kind of Crystals in various locations around the world , which she will use to build a device that will reverse the effects of Cortex 's Minimizer . 
 After Crash fends off Dingodile , Doctor N. Gin and Tiny Tiger , Cortex decides to deal with Crash himself by firing the Planetary Minimizer at him . Unfortunately for him , Crash tricks him into shrinking the colored Gems that stabilize the Minimizer , causing it to malfunction . The unrestrained effects of the Minimizer fuse Cortex and the previous bosses together , creating a monster known as Mega @-@ Mix , who chases Crash down the space station 's hallway in an attempt to kill him . Fortunately , Crash escapes back to the Earth just in time for Coco to use the Crystals that he has gathered to return the Earth back to normal again . The Earth is returned to its original size , while the space station above Earth explodes and Cortex and the others escape in an escape pod . 
 = = Development = = 
 On September 21 , 2000 , Konami and Universal Studios announced that they had entered an agreement that would enable Konami to publish a Crash Bandicoot game for next @-@ generation game systems , with Universal Interactive handling the production of the games . The Game Boy Color was originally included alongside the Game Boy Advance in the deal . The agreement served to break the Crash Bandicoot franchise 's exclusivity to Sony @-@ produced consoles and effectively made Crash Bandicoot a mascot character for Universal rather than Sony . That December , Vicarious Visions approached Universal and showed off some of their technology on the Game Boy Advance . Fairly impressed with their work , Universal asked Vicarious Visions to submit a concept . Liking the submitted concept , Universal commissioned a prototype ; the prototype resembled a handheld version of the PlayStation Crash Bandicoot games . Vicarious Visions was then given developmental duties for the Game Boy Advance Crash Bandicoot game . 
 The game was tentatively titled Crash Bandicoot Advance and went through the titles Crash Bandicoot X / S and Crash Bandicoot : The Big Adventure before arriving at its final name . The game was developed over the course of nine months from conception to completion . The team working on the game expanded to as much as seven programmers at the height of the game 's development . The graphics and animation for the game were created in Maya . Some of the original animation and textures from Crash Bandicoot 3 : Warped were repurposed and used as a basis for the Game Boy Advance game . The sprite for the Crash Bandicoot character features between 1000 and 1500 frames of animation . The audio for the game was supplied by Shin 'en Multimedia , with Manfred <unk> creating the sound effects and Todd Masten composing the music . Shin 'en Multimedia was assisted by Universal Sound Studios while creating the game 's audio . The game uses a static random access memory battery , allowing the player to save their progress . The game was designed with battery saving in mind from the beginning of production , as keeping track of all the data would prove extremely cumbersome with a password system . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Crash Bandicoot : The Huge Adventure received generally favorable reviews from critics . Louis Bedigian of GameZone , praising many of the game 's elements , concluded that the game was not overshadowed by the series ' previous successful titles and offered a new experience . IGN 's Craig Harris commented positively on the " solid controls and level design " and said that the game 's overall design on the Game Boy Advance was " amazingly tight " . Andrew Reiner of Game Informer , while critical of the short levels , praised the game for its graphical prowess . Four @-@ Eyed Dragon of GamePro commended the game as " a superb @-@ looking , straightforward platformer that no interested GBA gamer should miss . " Scott Alan Marriott of Allgame ( " All Game Guide " at the time ) and Scott Osborne of GameSpy , while acknowledging the game 's lack of innovation , stated that the translation of the graphics , gameplay and feel of the PlayStation Crash games onto the Game Boy Advance was executed well . However , Giancarlo Varanini of GameSpot cited the game 's lack of innovation in a more negative manner . A Nintendo Power reviewer noted that the game 's challenges were generally more difficult and sometimes more frustrating than those of the Mario games . Play Magazine 's reviewer criticized the " straight @-@ ahead " nature of the side @-@ scrolling , but called it " a great , little game " otherwise . Electronic Gaming Monthly remarked that " Crash for the GBA is what the PS2 game wanted to be . " 
 = Lyman Hall ( academic ) = 
 Lyman Hall ( February 18 , 1859 – August 16 , 1905 ) was a professor and president of the Georgia School of Technology ( now called the Georgia Institute of Technology , commonly referred to as Georgia Tech ) . He is perhaps best known for bringing what is now the School of Materials Science & Engineering to Georgia Tech . Hall 's administration also introduced degrees in electrical engineering and civil engineering in December 1896 , textile engineering in February 1899 , and engineering chemistry in January 1901 . Hall died in 1905 , reportedly due to the stress of fundraising for a new chemistry building which now bears his name . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in 1859 in Americus , Georgia , he attended Mercer University in Penfield , Georgia . He was admitted to the United States Military Academy in 1877 , and graduated in 1881 . Due to a physical disability , he was unable to have a military career ; instead , he taught mathematics at the Georgia Military Academy in Kirkwood , Georgia for two years and subsequently at the South Carolina Military Academy in Charleston , South Carolina ( now known as " The Citadel " ) from 1883 to 1886 . He was then a professor at the Moreland Park Military Academy before Georgia Tech recruited him . 
 = = Career = = 
 In 1888 , Captain Lyman Hall was appointed Georgia Tech 's first mathematics professor ( and consequently head of the school 's mathematics department ) . He had a solid background in engineering due to his time at West Point and often incorporated surveying and other engineering applications into his coursework . He had an energetic personality and quickly assumed a leadership position among the faculty . At the first faculty meeting on October 5 , 1888 , he was elected secretary . On June 25 , 1895 , Professor Hall was invited to speak to Georgia Tech 's board about the school 's needs . While there were no recorded minutes , subsequent board actions suggest that he recommended the construction of on @-@ campus dormitories to reduce disciplinary problems , and a more proactive recruitment of students . 
 Previous president Isaac S. Hopkins tendered his resignation in May 1895 because he had been elected president of the First Methodist Church of Atlanta and he could not do " justice to both to the school and the church " . While several successors were considered , Samuel M. Inman proposed that the decision be postponed . Georgia Tech 's trustees correspondingly elected Hall as the chairman of the faculty ( acting president ) From January 1 , 1896 to July 1 , 1896 . On June 24 , the trustees elected him the institute 's second president . 
 As president , Hall was noted for his aggressive fundraising and improvements to the school , including his special project , the Aaron S. French Textile School . In February 1899 , Georgia Tech opened the first textile engineering school in the Southern United States , with $ 10 @,@ 000 from the Georgia General Assembly , $ 20 @,@ 000 of donated machinery , and $ 13 @,@ 500 from supporters . It named the A. French Textile School , after its chief donor and supporter , Aaron S. French . 
 Lyman Hall 's other goals included enlarging Tech and attracting more students , so he expanded the school 's offerings beyond mechanical engineering ; the new degrees introduced during Hall 's administration included electrical engineering and civil engineering in December 1896 , textile engineering in February 1899 , and engineering chemistry in January 1901 . Hall also became infamous as a disciplinarian , even suspending the entire senior class of 1901 for returning from Christmas vacation a day late . 
 Lyman Hall died on August 16 , 1905 during a vacation at a New York health resort . His death while still in office was attributed to stress from his strenuous fund raising activities ( this time , for a new Chemistry building ) . Later that year , the school 's trustees named the new chemistry building the " Lyman Hall Laboratory of Chemistry " in his honor . 
 = = Lyman Hall building = = 
 Erected in 1905 and named in his honor , The Lyman Hall Laboratory of Chemistry at Georgia Tech is commonly referred to by students as " Lyman Hall " or simply " Lyman " , due to the common mistaken impression that the word " Hall " is a mere descriptor . It now houses the Bursar 's Office after being completely gutted in 1988 , but the quote from geologist Sir Archibald Geikie 's 1905 published work remains on the front of the building : " In the first place I would put accuracy . " 
 The 1903 to 1906 school announcements describe the architecture of the building in great detail : 
 The Lyman Hall Laboratory of Chemistry , which is in the shape of a T , is of brick with limestone trimmings , and is two stories in height , with a full basement . Each floor has an approximate area of 5 @,@ 600 square feet . The lecture @-@ rooms , stock @-@ rooms , library , offices , gas analysis laboratory , photographic and spectroscopic rooms occupy the front , and the laboratories the rear wing . Especial care has been given to lighting and ventilation , the laboratories being lighted on three sides . For the removal of noxious gases , they are amply provided with hoods , each of which has a separate flue leading to a tight wooden fume @-@ box <unk> just under the roof . This box communicates with the outer air , and can be provided with forced draught if necessary . The Chemical and Physical laboratories have been fitted up with reference to practical work , and such addition will be made from time to time as may be required for experimental research . The apparatus and appliances are of the newest and best forms , and will be increased as occasion may demand . 
 The building is located within the Georgia Institute of Technology Historic District , and it is included in the 12 @-@ building area listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 = Chiswick = 
 Chiswick ( / <unk> / <unk> @-@ <unk> ) is a district of west London , England . Most of it is in the London Borough of Hounslow . Other parts of the W4 postcode area , including Chiswick Park tube station , Acton Green , and much of Bedford Park are in the London Borough of Ealing . It contains Hogarth 's House , the former residence of the 18th @-@ century English artist William Hogarth ; Chiswick House , a neo @-@ Palladian villa regarded as one of the finest in England ; and Fuller 's Brewery , London 's largest and oldest brewery . It occupies a meander of the River Thames used for competitive and recreational rowing , with several rowing clubs on the river bank . The finishing post for the Boat Race is just downstream of Chiswick Bridge . 
 Chiswick was historically the ancient parish of St Nicholas in the county of Middlesex , with an agrarian and fishing economy beside the river centred on Church Street . Having good communications with London from an early time , Chiswick became a popular country retreat , and as part of the suburban growth of London in the late 19th and early 20th centuries the population significantly expanded . It became the Municipal Borough of Brentford and Chiswick in 1932 and has formed part of Greater London since 1965 , when it was merged into the London Borough of Hounslow . <unk> include Bedford Park , Grove Park , the Glebe Estate , Strand @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Green and those with named tube stations , Turnham Green and Gunnersbury , within its three full @-@ sized wards of the United Kingdom . 
 On a border , the Chiswick or Great West Road Roundabout is the start of the North Circular Road ( A406 ) , South Circular Road ( A205 ) with the eponymous road flying over this . West of Chiswick 's Hogarth Roundabout , the Great West Road from central London converts to the M4 motorway , providing a second mode of transport connection to Heathrow Airport and the M4 corridor . The Great Chertsey Road ( A316 ) runs south @-@ west from the Hogarth Roundabout , becoming the M3 motorway . 
 Historic figures who lived in Chiswick include the poets Alexander Pope and W. B. Yeats , the Italian revolutionary Ugo Foscolo , the Impressionist painter Camille Pissarro and the novelist E. M. Forster . 
 = = History = = 
 Chiswick was first recorded <unk> as the Old English <unk> meaning " Cheese Farm " ; the riverside area of Duke 's Meadows is thought to have supported an annual cheese fair up until the 18th century . 
 Chiswick grew up as a village around St Nicholas Church from c . 1181 on Church Street , its inhabitants practising farming , fishing and other riverside trades including a ferry , important as there were no bridges between London Bridge and Kingston throughout the Middle Ages . The area included three other small settlements , the fishing village of Strand @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Green , Little Sutton and Turnham Green on the west road out of London . 
 A decisive skirmish took place on Turnham Green early in the English Civil War . In November 1642 , royalist forces under Prince Rupert , marching from Oxford to retake London , were halted by a larger parliamentarian force under the Earl of Essex . The royalists retreated and never again threatened the capital . 
 In 1864 , John Isaac Thornycroft , founder of the John I. Thornycroft & Company shipbuilding company , established a yard at Church Wharf at the west end of Chiswick Mall . The shipyard built the first naval destroyer , HMS Daring of the Daring class , in 1893 . To cater for the increasing size of warships , Thornycroft moved its shipyard to Southampton in 1909 . 
 In 1822 , the Royal Horticultural Society leased 33 acres ( 13 @.@ 4 ha ) of land in the area south of the High Road between what are now Sutton Court Road and Duke ’ s Avenue . This site was used for its fruit tree collection and its first school of horticulture , and housed its first flower shows . The area was reduced to 10 acres ( 4 @.@ 0 ha ) in the 1870s , and the lease was terminated when the Society ’ s garden at Wisley , Surrey , was set up in 1904 . Some of the original pear trees still grow in the gardens of houses built on the site . 
 The population of Chiswick grew almost tenfold during the 19th century , reaching 29 @,@ 809 in 1901 , and the area is a mixture of Georgian , Victorian and Edwardian housing . Suburban building began in Gunnersbury in the 1860s and in Bedford Park , on the borders of Chiswick and Acton , in 1875 . 
 During the Second World War , Chiswick was bombed repeatedly , with both incendiary and high explosive bombs . Falling anti @-@ aircraft shells and shrapnel also caused damage . The first V @-@ 2 rocket to hit London fell on Chiswick on 8 September 1944 , killing three people , injuring 22 others and causing extensive damage to surrounding trees and buildings . Six houses were demolished by the rocket and many more suffered damage . There is a memorial where the rocket fell on Staveley Road , and a War Memorial at the east end of Turnham Green . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Chiswick St Nicholas was an ancient , and later civil , parish in the Ossulstone hundred of Middlesex . In 1878 the parish gained a triangle of land in the east which had formed a detached part of Ealing . From 1894 to 1927 the parish formed the Chiswick Urban District . In 1927 it was abolished and its former area was merged with that of Brentford Urban District to form Brentford and Chiswick Urban District . The amalgamated district became a municipal borough in 1932 . The borough of Brentford and Chiswick was abolished in 1965 , and its former area was transferred to Greater London to form part of the London Borough of Hounslow . With these changes , Chiswick Town Hall is no longer the local government centre but is still used for some council services . There was a Brentford and Chiswick Parliament constituency from 1918 to 1974 . 
 Chiswick forms part of the Brentford and Isleworth Parliament constituency . The MP is Ruth Cadbury ( Labour ) , elected at the May 2015 general election replacing Mary Macleod ( Conservative ) . For elections to the London Assembly Chiswick is in the South West constituency , represented since 2000 by Tony Arbour , of the Conservative Party . For elections to Hounslow London Borough Council , Chiswick is represented by three electoral wards : Turnham Green , Chiswick <unk> and Chiswick Riverside . Each ward elects three councillors , who serve four @-@ year terms . For 2010 – 14 , all nine councillors were Conservatives . It was one of 35 major centres identified in the statutory planning document of Greater London , the London Plan of 2008 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Chiswick occupies a meander of the River Thames , 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) west of Charing Cross . The district is built up towards the north with more open space in the south , including the grounds of Chiswick House and Duke 's Meadows . Chiswick has one main shopping area , the Chiswick High Road , forming a long high street in the north . The river forms the southern boundary with Kew , including North Sheen , Mortlake and Barnes in the London Borough of Richmond upon Thames . It includes the uninhabited island of Chiswick Eyot , joined to the mainland at low tide . In the east Goldhawk Road and British Grove border Hammersmith in the London Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham . In the north are Bedford Park and South Acton in the London Borough of Ealing , with a boundary partially delineated by the District line . To the west , within Hounslow , are the districts of Gunnersbury and Brentford . Chiswick is in the W4 postcode district of the London post town , which in a tribute to its ancient parish includes Bedford Park and South Acton , mostly within the London Borough of Ealing . 
 Bedford Park , designed largely by Norman Shaw , was described by Nikolaus Pevsner as the first place " where the relaxed , informal mood of a market town or village was adopted for a complete speculatively built suburb " . Some of the most beautiful period mansion blocks in the area , such as Heathfield Court and Arlington Mansions , line the sides of Turnham Green – the site of the Battle of Turnham Green in 1642 . Other suburbs of Chiswick include Grove Park ( south of the A4 , close to Chiswick railway station ) and Strand on the Green , a fishing hamlet until the late 18th century . In 1896 , Bedford Park was advertised as being in Chiswick , though at that time much of it was in Acton . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Chiswick High Road contains a mix of retail , restaurants , food outlets and expanding office and hotel space . The wide streets encourage cafes , pubs and restaurants to provide pavement seating . Lying between the offices at the Golden Mile Great West Road and Hammersmith , office developments and warehouse conversions to offices began from the 1960s . The first in 1961 was 414 Chiswick High Road on the site of the old Empire Cinema . Between 1964 and 1966 , the 18 @-@ storey IBM headquarters was built above Gunnersbury station , designed to accommodate 1500 people . It became the home of the British Standards Institution in 1994 . 
 Chiswick is home to the Griffin Brewery , where Fuller , Smith & Turner brew their prize @-@ winning ales . It and its predecessor companies have been brewing beer on the same site for over 350 years . The original brewery was in the gardens of Bedford House in Chiswick Mall . 
 = = Points of interest = = 
 = = = Chiswick House = = = 
 Chiswick House was designed by the Third Earl of Burlington , and built for him , in 1726 – 29 as an extension to an earlier Jacobean house ( subsequently demolished in 1788 ) ; it is considered to be among the finest surviving examples of Palladian architecture in Britain , with superb collections of paintings and furniture . Its surrounding grounds are among the most important historical gardens in England and Wales , forming one of the first English landscape gardens . 
 = = = Churches = = = 
 St Nicholas Church , near the river Thames , has a 15th @-@ century tower , although the remainder of the church was rebuilt by J.L. Pearson in 1882 – 84 . Monuments in the churchyard mark the burial sites of the 18th @-@ century English artist William Hogarth and William Kent , the architect and landscape designer ; the churchyard also houses a mausoleum ( for Philip James de Loutherbourg ) designed by John Soane , and the tomb of Josiah Wedgwood 's business partner , Thomas Bentley , designed by Thomas Scheemakers . One of Oliver Cromwell 's daughters , Mary Fauconberg , lived at Sutton Court and is buried in the churchyard . Enduring legend has it that the body of Oliver Cromwell was also interred with her , though as the <unk> did not move to Sutton Court until 15 years after his disinterment , it is more likely he was reburied at their home at Newburgh Priory . Private Frederick Hitch VC , hero of Rorke 's Drift , is also buried there . 
 Chiswick 's Roman Catholic church , Our Lady of Grace and St Edward ( the Confessor ) in the Diocese of Westminster , lies on the corner of Dukes Avenue and the High Road . It is a red brick building ; the parish was founded in 1848 , a school began c . 1855 , and a church was opened by Cardinal Wiseman on the present site in 1864 . It was replaced by the present building in 1886 , opened by Cardinal Manning . The heavy debts incurred were paid off and the church consecrated in 1904 . The square tower was added after the First World War by Canon Egan as a war memorial . 
 The church of St. Michael , Sutton Court was designed by W. D. Caroe in 1908 – 1909 . It is a red brick building on Elmwood road , in Tudor style . St Paul 's Church , Grove Park is a Gothic style stone building designed by H. Currey . It was built largely at the Duke of Devonshire 's expense in 1872 . 
 St Michael and All Angels , Bedford Park was initially a temporary iron building from 1876 on Chiswick High Road facing Chiswick Lane . The current building 's foundation stone was laid in 1879 and consecrated in 1880 . It was designed , along with much of Bedford Park , by Norman Shaw , and was called " a very lovely church " by John Betjeman . It is an Anglo @-@ Catholic church , and was attacked on the day it was consecrated for " Popish and Pagan <unk> " by the brewer Henry Smith , churchwarden of St Nicholas , Chiswick . 
 Christchurch , Turnham Green is an early Victorian Gothic building of flint with stone dressings . The main part of the building , by George Gilbert Scott and W. B. Moffat , is from 1843 ; the chancel and northeast chapel were added in 1887 by J. Brooks . 
 The Russian Orthodox Cathedral was built on Harvard Road in 1998 , with a blue and gold dome . 
 = = = Public houses and theatres = = = 
 There are several historic public houses in Chiswick , some of them listed buildings , including the Mawson Arms , the George and Devonshire , the Old Packhorse and The Tabard in Bath Road near Turnham Green station . The Tabard is known for its William Morris interior and its Norman Shaw exterior ; it was built in 1880 . Three more pubs are in Strand @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Green , fronting on to the Thames river path . 
 Chiswick had two well @-@ known theatres in the 20th century . The Chiswick Empire ( 1912 to 1959 ) was at 414 Chiswick High Road . It had 2 @,@ 140 seats , and staged music hall entertainment , plays , reviews , opera , ballet and an annual Christmas pantomime . The Q Theatre ( 1924 to 1959 ) was a small theatre opposite Kew Bridge station . It staged the first works of Terence Rattigan and William Douglas @-@ Home , and many of its plays went on to the West End . 
 The 96 @-@ seat Tabard Theatre ( 1985 ) in Bath Road , upstairs from the Tabard pub but a separate business , is known for new writing and experimental work . 
 = = = Other buildings = = = 
 The Sanderson Factory in Barley Mow Passage , now known as Voysey House , was designed by the architect Charles Voysey in 1902 . It is built in white glazed brick , with Staffordshire blue bricks ( now painted black ) forming horizontal bands , the plinth , and surrounds for door and window openings , and dressings in Portland stone . It was originally a wallpaper printing works , now used as office space . It is a Grade II * listed building . It faces the main factory building and was once joined to it by a bridge across the road . It was Voysey 's only industrial building , and is considered an " important Arts and Crafts factory building " . 
 Chiswick is home to the Arts Educational Schools in Bath Road . 
 = = = Duke 's Meadows = = = 
 Duke 's Meadows stands on land formerly owned by the Duke of Devonshire . In the 1920s , it was purchased by the local council , who developed it as a recreational centre . A promenade and bandstand were built , and the meadows are still used for sport with a rugby club , football pitches , hockey club , several rowing clubs and a golf club . In recent years a local conservation charity , the Dukes Meadows Trust has undertaken extensive restoration work , which saw a long term project of a children 's water play area opened in August 2006 . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Chiswick is situated at the start of the North Circular Road ( A406 ) , South Circular Road ( A205 ) and the M4 motorway , the latter providing a direct connection to Heathrow Airport and the M25 motorway . The Great West Road ( A4 ) runs eastwards into central London via the Hogarth Roundabout where it meets the Great Chertsey Road ( A316 ) which runs south @-@ west , eventually joining the M3 motorway . 
 The southern border of Chiswick runs along the River Thames , which is crossed in this area by Barnes Railway and Foot Bridge , Chiswick Bridge , Kew Railway Bridge and Kew Bridge . River services between Westminster Pier and Hampton Court depart from Kew Gardens Pier just across Kew Bridge . 
 Bus routes on or near Chiswick High Road are ( 27 , 65 , 94 ( from Acton Green ) , 237 , 267 , 272 , 391 , 440 , E3 and H91 ) , as well as the night bus N9 . The 27 and 94 services run 24 hours a day . 
 The District line serves Chiswick with three London Underground stations , Turnham Green , Chiswick Park and Gunnersbury . Turnham Green is an interchange with the Piccadilly line , but only before 06 : 50 and after 22 : 30 , when Piccadilly line trains stop at the station . Chiswick railway station is served by a regular South West Trains service to London Waterloo via Clapham Junction . The North London line crosses Chiswick ( north @-@ south ) ; London Overground stations are Gunnersbury and South Acton . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Chiswick 's local rugby union teams include Chiswick RFC , formerly Old <unk> RFC . The team plays league games on a Saturday at Dukes Meadows . Chiswick 's cricket club , <unk> known as Turnham Green and Polytechnic , plays at Riverside Drive . On Chiswick Common is the Rocks Lane Multi Sports Centre , where there are tennis , five @-@ a @-@ side football and netball courts available to hire to the public . Private tennis coaching for individuals and groups is also available . 
 The Chiswick reach of the Thames is heavily used for competitive and recreational rowing . Championship Course from Mortlake to Putney runs past Chiswick Eyot and Duke 's Meadows . The Boat Race is contested on the Championship Course on a flood tide ( in other words from Putney to Mortlake ) with Duke 's Meadows a popular view @-@ point for the closing stages of the race . The finishing post is just downstream of Chiswick Bridge . Other important races such as the Head of the River Race race the reverse course , on an ebb tide . Chiswick is home to several clubs . The University of London Boat Club is based in its boathouse off Hartington Road , which also houses the clubs of many London colleges and teaching hospitals ; recent members include Tim Foster , Gold medallist at the Sydney Olympics and Frances Houghton , World Champion in 2005 , 2006 and 2007 . Quintin Boat Club lies between Chiswick Quay Marina and Chiswick Bridge . Tideway Scullers School is just downriver of Chiswick Bridge ; its members include single sculling World Champion Mahé Drysdale and Great Britain single sculler Alan Campbell . 
 Chiswick High Road was once home to the <unk> Flag garage and its associated motor racing team . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 = = = Eighteenth century = = = 
 One of the first notable people to have lived in Chiswick was the artist William Hogarth , who lived in Chiswick from 1749 , when he bought the house now known as Hogarth 's House . Hogarth lived in the house until his death in 1764 . He is buried in St Nicholas 's churchyard . The house later belonged to the poet and translator of Dante , Henry Francis Cary , who lived there from 1814 to 1833 . 
 Also in the 18th century , between 1716 and 1719 , the poet Alexander Pope , author of The Rape of the Lock , lived in Chiswick – in the building which is now the Mawson Arms at the corner of Mawson Lane . Another 18th @-@ century resident was the actor Charles Holland , who was born in Chiswick in 1733 . 
 = = = Nineteenth century = = = 
 In the 19th century , the Italian writer , revolutionary and poet Ugo Foscolo , died in exile at Turnham Green in 1827 , and was buried at St Nicholas Churchyard , Chiswick . 
 The inventor of the electric telegraph , Francis Ronalds , lived on Chiswick Lane from 1833 to 1852 . Another engineer , John Edward Thornycroft was born in Chiswick in 1872 ; his father , John Isaac Thornycroft , had founded the Chiswick @-@ based John I. Thornycroft & Company shipbuilding company in 1864 , which Thornycroft later joined and developed . The artist Montague Dawson , regarded as one of the best 20th @-@ century painters of the sea , was born in Chiswick in 1895 . 
 The poet W. B. Yeats lived in Woodstock Road as a boy from 1879 , and came back in 1887 to live in Blenheim Road , where , inspired by Chiswick Eyot , he wrote The Lake Isle of Innisfree . 
 The Pissarro family of painters , the impressionist Camille Pissarro , his eldest son Lucien , as well as Felix and Ludovic @-@ Rodo lived in 62 Bath Road , Chiswick around 1897 ; with Camille Pissarro painting a series of notable landscapes of the area . The landscape artist Lewis <unk> Wood lived at Homefield Road from 1897 to 1908 . 
 = = = Twentieth century = = = 
 In the twentieth century , the novelist E. M. Forster ( 1879 – 1970 ) lived at 9 Arlington Park Mansions in Chiswick from 1939 until at least 1961 . 
 Notable people born before the Second World War include the theatre and film director Peter Brook ( <unk> ) , zoologist and broadcaster Aubrey Manning ( <unk> ) , and marine geologist Frederick Vine ( <unk> ) . Rock musicians John Entwistle ( 1944 – 2002 ) and Pete Townshend ( <unk> ) of The Who were both born in Chiswick during the Second World War . 
 Those born in Chiswick during the post @-@ war period include the musician Phil Collins ( <unk> ) ; the singer Kim Wilde ( 1960- ) ; the illustrator Clifford Harper ( <unk> ) ; the photographer Derek <unk> ( <unk> ) ; the actress Kate Beckinsale ( <unk> ) ; and comedian Mel Smith ( 1952 – 2013 ) . 
 Among those who have lived in Chiswick are the novelist Anthony Burgess ( 1917 @-@ 1993 ) , who lived at 24 Glebe Street in the mid @-@ 1960s ; the actor Hugh Grant ( 1960- ) , who grew up in Chiswick , living next to Arlington Park Mansions on Sutton Lane ; the singer Bruce Dickinson ( <unk> ) of the band Iron Maiden ; the TV presenter Kate Humble ( <unk> ) from 1997 to 2010 ; the actress Elizabeth McGovern ( 1961- ) and her husband the film director Simon Curtis ( 1960- ) ; and the model Cara Delevingne ( <unk> ) . The playwright Michael Frayn ( <unk> ) and his daughter the film maker and novelist Rebecca Frayn live in Chiswick . Chiswick residents in 2016 include the singer Sophie Ellis Bextor , the BBC journalists Jeremy Vine , <unk> <unk> and Fergal Keane , the actor Phyllis Logan , the TV presenters Sarah Greene , Gavin Campbell and Mary Nightingale , and the journalist Alice Arnold . 
 = = Demography and housing = = 
 = = In literature = = 
 The novel Vanity Fair ( 1847 / 8 ) by William Makepeace Thackeray opens at Miss Pinkerton 's Academy for Young Ladies in Chiswick Mall . Louis N. Parker 's play <unk> Walk ( 1915 ) has the imagined setting of " a retired crescent of five very small , old @-@ fashioned houses near Chiswick , on the river @-@ bank . ... They are exactly alike : miniature copies of Queen Anne mansions " . 
 = = Nearest places = = 
 = USS Washington ( BB @-@ 47 ) = 
 USS Washington ( BB @-@ 47 ) , a Colorado @-@ class battleship , was the second ship of the United States Navy named in honor of the 42nd state . Her keel was laid down on 30 June 1919 at Camden , New Jersey , by the New York Shipbuilding Corporation . She was launched on 1 September 1921 , sponsored by Miss Jean Summers , the daughter of Congressman John W. Summers of Washington . 
 On 8 February 1922 , two days after the signing of the Washington Naval Treaty for the Limitation of Naval Armaments , all construction work ceased on the 75 @.@ 9 % <unk> superdreadnought . She was sunk as a gunnery target on 26 November 1924 by the battleships New York and Texas . 
 = = Design = = 
 Washington was 624 feet ( 190 m ) long , and had a beam of 97 @.@ 5 feet ( 29 @.@ 7 m ) and a draft of 30 @.@ 5 feet ( 9 @.@ 3 m ) . She displaced 32 @,@ 600 long tons ( 33 @,@ 123 t ) tons . The ship 's primary armament consisted of eight 16 @-@ inch ( 406 mm ) / 45 caliber guns in four twin gun turrets . This was augmented by a secondary battery of 20 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) / 51 caliber guns . The ship was also armed with eight 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) / 23 caliber antiaircraft guns . 
 The new underwater protection scheme featured five compartments separated by bulkheads on either side of the ship : an outer empty one , three filled , and an empty inner one . In addition , the eight boilers were moved from their location in previous designs and placed in separate spaces to port and starboard of the turbo @-@ electric power plant , forming another line of defense ; the ship could still sail even if one or even an entire side of boilers was incapacitated due to battle damage . This new arrangement forced the chief aesthetic change between the New Mexicos and Tennessees ; the single large funnel of the former was replaced by two smaller funnels in the latter . 
 = = History = = 
 With fiscal year 1917 appropriations , bids on the four Colorados were opened on 18 October 1916 ; though Maryland 's keel was laid on 24 April 1917 . The other three battleships , including Washington , were not laid down until 1919 – 20 . With the cancellation of the first South Dakota class , the Colorados were the last U.S. battleships to enter service for nearly two decades . They were also the final U.S. battleships to use twin gun turrets — the North Carolina and second South Dakota classes used nine 16 " / 45 caliber guns and the Iowas used nine 16 in / 50 caliber in three triple turrets . Washington was laid down on 30 June 1919 . 
 On 8 February 1922 , two days after the signing of the Washington Naval Treaty for the Limitation of all Naval Armaments , all construction work was stopped on the 75 @.@ 9 percent @-@ completed superdreadnought . By that time , she had her underwater armored protection in place . 
 = = Sinking = = 
 The ship was towed out in November 1924 to be used as a gunnery target . On the first day of testing , the ship was hit by two 400 @-@ pound ( 180 kg ) torpedoes and three 1 tonne ( 1 @.@ 1 short tons ) near @-@ miss bombs causing minor damage and a list of three . She then had 400 pounds ( 180 kg ) of TNT detonated on board , but remained afloat . Two days later , the ship was hit by fourteen 14 @-@ inch shells dropped from 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) , but only one penetrated . The ship was finally sunk by Texas and New York with fourteen more 14 @-@ inch shells . After the test , it was decided that the existing deck armor on battleships was inadequate , and that future battleships should be fitted with triple bottoms , which was underwater armor with three layers . 
 = Ya Kun Kaya Toast = 
 Ya Kun Kaya Toast ( Simplified Chinese : <unk> ) is a Singaporean chain of mass @-@ market , retro @-@ ambience cafes selling toast products ( notably kaya toast ) , soft @-@ boiled eggs and coffee . Founded by Loi Ah Koon in 1944 , Ya Kun remained a small family @-@ run stall for decades , but have expanded rapidly since Loi 's youngest son headed the business in 1999 . They have over fifty outlets , mostly franchised , across six countries , and are a Singaporean cultural icon , known for their traditional brand identity and conservative , people @-@ centric corporate culture . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1926 , Loi Ah Koon ( <unk> ) emigrated from Hainan to Singapore , where he worked as a coffee @-@ stall assistant , then started a stall selling coffee , crackers and toast at Telok Ayer Basin , together with two other immigrants , who later dropped out , leaving him to run the stall alone . He married while visiting relatives in Hainan and after his wife settled down with him in Singapore , she suggested cutting each slice of bread into half and combining the toast with her homemade kaya , which created their signature kaya toast . Registered in 1944 as Ya Kun <unk> ( Ya Kun being Ah Koon in Hanyu Pinyin ) , the stall gradually developed a reputation for delicious kaya toast and friendly service . The couple , their eight children and seven other families lived in a three @-@ storey shophouse across the road , where the Hong Leong Building now stands , and as the children grew up , they helped stir the kaya , run errands , charcoal @-@ grill the bread and eventually , manage the stall . 
 Ya Kun <unk> moved to Lau Pa Sat in 1972 , but high rents and renovation of Lau Pa Sat in 1984 sparked a return to the Telok Ayer Market ; nevertheless , the stall continued to attract " customers who came every day , some from as far as Jurong or Woodlands " . In 1998 , the market closed down , so the stall relocated to Far East Square and was renamed Ya Kun Kaya Toast ; the following year , Ah Koon died and his youngest son , Loi Boon Sim Adrin ( <unk> ) , took over the business , determined " to keep his father 's legacy going " . Realising that Ya Kun had a lot of goodwill and potential , Adrin decided to expand the business , so the family opened a second store at Tanjong Pagar and , in 2000 , began franchising the brand . Since Ya Kun were incorporated in 2001 , launched their first overseas outlet ( in Indonesia ) in 2002 and expanded their menu ( adding ice cream toast and the <unk> ) , they have won the 2004 and 2005 <unk> Award , the 2005 to 2007 <unk> Product Award and the 2008 <unk> @-@ <unk> Regional Brands Award . 
 = = Products and stores = = 
 Ya Kun Kaya Toast have over forty Singaporean outlets , about half of which are franchised , and over thirty overseas outlets , all franchised , across seven countries ( China , Indonesia , Japan , Myanmar , South Korea , Taiwan and the Philippines ) ; they plan to expand to Brunei , India , Malaysia , the Maldives , Thailand and the United Arab Emirates in future . The stores have a retro ambience , with wooden tables and stools , Chinese calligraphy of the company name , posters about their history , traditional methods of preparing food and customer service reflecting Chinese family values . Unlike their main competitors , they have a limited menu that revolves around their core product , kaya toast , with cheese , peanut butter and ice cream as alternative spreads for their thin , brown , crispy bread . To appeal to a wider demographic , Ya Kun also sell French toast and <unk> ( their Asian alternative to sandwiches ) ; set meals combine any type of toast with soft @-@ boiled eggs and a beverage , usually coffee or <unk> tarik . 
 Prices at local Ya Kun stores are slightly higher than those at <unk> , but lower than prices of comparable products at Western coffeehouse chains operating in Singapore , while food at overseas Ya Kun outlets is relatively expensive . All outlets obtain their ingredients from the same suppliers and some ingredients , notably the kaya and coffee powder , are made at the Ya Kun factory in Bedok , using recipes that only a few of the Loi family know . The chain are " widely regarded as an institution of good kaya toast " and " a Singaporean cultural icon " that the Singapore Tourism Board has promoted as a tourist attraction . A Ming Pao review praised the " crispy but not hard , fragrant but not burnt " toast and fresh kaya , while a Straits Times review described the toast as " evenly sliced " and of " the right texture " , the eggs as " cooked to perfection " and the <unk> tarik as " not too milky and not overpoweringly sweet either " . 
 = = Management = = 
 Ya Kun Kaya Toast comprises two companies , Ya Kun Singapore , which manages the Ya Kun factory and two corporate outlets , and Ya Kun International , which oversees the chain of outlets and franchising activities . Adrin has an 80 percent share of Ya Kun Singapore and his younger brother , Algie , has a 20 percent share , with other members of the Loi family actively involved in daily activities , while Ya Kun International is fully owned by Adrin Loi . Their corporate culture is conservative and people @-@ centric , with emphasis on preserving their brand identity as their <unk> ( <unk> , " commitment " or " promise " ) to their customers , sustainable growth over actively pursuing new opportunities , nurturing family @-@ like relationships among staff ( they do not fire or <unk> workers ) and avoiding aggressive conflict with competitors . Although Ya Kun do not publicly disclose their financial figures , a 2009 <unk> <unk> article estimated that the company had an annual revenue of S $ 8 million , while a 2012 article in The Star stated they had 300 employees . 
 = = = Cited literature = = = 
 William Koh ( 2010 ) . The Top Toast : Ya Kun and the Singapore Breakfast Tradition . <unk> Learning Asia . ISBN <unk> . 
 = Smoke Gets in Your Eyes ( Homicide : Life on the Street ) = 
 " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " is the eighth episode of the first season of the American police drama television series Homicide : Life on the Street . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on March 24 , 1993 . In the episode , Howard and Bayliss attempt to quit smoking , Gee discovers secret asbestos removal in the squad room , and Munch and Bolander investigate the beating death of a 14 @-@ year @-@ old boy . The episode was written by James Yoshimura and Tom Fontana , and was directed by Wayne Ewing , who doubled as director of photography . 
 The episode featured a cameo appearance by film director and Baltimore native John Waters as a bartender . " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " was originally supposed to be the first season finale , but the episode " Night of the Dead Living " was moved to the end of the season because NBC programmers felt it was too slow @-@ paced to show any earlier in the season . During one scene , Munch and Bolander convince a suspect the copy machine is a dangerous lie @-@ detector machine . This was inspired by a real @-@ life trick used by the Baltimore Police Department and documented in David Simon 's 1991 non @-@ fiction book Homicide : A Year on the Killing Streets , on which the series was based . It was later used in an episode of Simon 's police drama series , The Wire . 
 Since ratings for Homicide had gradually declined throughout the season , NBC announced a decision about whether the series would be renewed would depend on the Nielsen ratings of the final four episodes , including " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " . Nevertheless , it was seen by 7 @.@ 08 million household viewers , which was considered relatively low , although it was an improvement over the previous episode " And the Rockets ' Dead Glare " . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 Howard ( Melissa Leo ) quits smoking , and her partner Felton ( Daniel Baldwin ) fears her edginess will endanger his safety . Bayliss ( Kyle Secor ) also tries to quit smoking , but tries to live vicariously through his smoking partner Pembleton ( Andre Braugher ) . Howard and Bayliss petition Gee ( Yaphet Kotto ) to set up a non @-@ smoking section for the squad room , but an amused Gee refuses because most of the detectives smoke . Howard , Felton , Bayliss and Pembleton find they share a common suspect in a Union Square murder , and plan a joint stakeout . Howard and Bayliss decide to ride together so Pembleton and Felton can smoke in the car . Although outwardly critical and skeptical , Pembleton and Felton are actually impressed with their partners ' willpower and discuss the merits of quitting smoking . Howard and Bayliss , however , talk about nothing but smoking , prompting Bayliss to walk to Pembleton 's car window and ask for a cigarette . As the result , the four detectives almost miss the suspect , and have to engage him in a foot chase to arrest him . 
 Meanwhile , an intrusive public works inspector ( Carter Jahncke ) tests the air quality at the squad room , but insists to an inquisitive Gee that everything is fine . The next day , however , Gee goes upstairs and finds a team wearing protective respirator suits removing hazardous asbestos from the wall . Gee angrily confronts Captain Barnfather ( Clayton LeBouef ) and Colonel Granger ( Gerald F. Gough ) for not informing the detectives about the work , and demands it be stopped until precautionary medical checks can be conducted . Barnfather and Granger insist the removal work is safe , but give in when Gee threatens to go to the media . Meanwhile , Lewis ( Clark Johnson ) brags repeatedly to Crosetti ( Jon Polito ) about his new Ford FE V8 engine and the car he plans to build . Crosetti feigns disinterest , but the next day presents Lewis with a rear @-@ view mirror as a gift . 
 Munch ( Richard Belzer ) and Bolander ( Ned Beatty ) investigate the death of a 14 @-@ year @-@ old boy found dead in a hospital waiting room . The victim , Percy Howell , appeared to suffer sustained blows to the head from a blunt object but waited days before seeking treatment . Although initially suspicious of the boy 's cold and uncaring father ( Dan Moran ) , a devout Christian who makes antisemitic remarks at Munch , the detectives eventually question another teen ( Gavin Goren ) who spent time with Howell right before he died . After convincing the gullible teen that the copy machine was actually an " electrolyte neutron magnetic scanner " that could detect lies , they learn Howell was killed by Colin Dietz ( Joe <unk> ) , the teenage leader of a gang called the Zaps , with a baseball bat . Munch and Bolander arrest Dietz , who says he loved Howell like a brother and the beating was an initiation . Bolander is deeply disturbed by Dietz 's cold casualness in discussing the murder . Later , Bolander talks to a bartender ( John Waters ) about his divorce , and the episode ends with Bolander drinking alone at the bar , quietly singing an Elvis Presley song . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " was written by James Yoshimura based on a story by executive producer Tom Fontana , and was directed by Wayne Ewing , who doubled as director of photography . The title of the episode refers both to Bayliss and Howard seeking to quit smoking , and to the hazardous asbestos being removed from the squad room . The episode includes a cameo appearance by film director John Waters , who plays a bartender speaking with Bolander in the final scene . Waters , a Baltimore native who develops and sets most of his films in the city , would make another guest appearance in the third season episode , " Law & Disorder " in a different cameo role . 
 " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " was originally supposed to be the Homicide : Life on the Street first season finale , but the episode " Night of the Dead Living " was moved to the end of the season . Although originally scheduled as the third episode , NBC programmers were worried " Night of the Dead Living " , which takes place entirely within the detective 's squad room , was too slow @-@ paced for a series still trying to win viewers . Although Homicide producers felt " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " had a sense of resolving storylines , NBC executives believed it was too somber and preferred the ending of " Night of the Dead Living " , which ends with the detectives happily smiling and laughing . 
 During one scene in " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " , Munch and Bolander force a suspect to take a " electrolyte neutron magnetic scan test " , which involved placing his hand on a copy machine and photocopying his hand as they asked him questions . Prior to giving the exam , the detectives loaded papers with the words " True " and " False " into the machine , so when the final copies came out it appeared the machine was giving answers to the questions . The detectives pretended the test was radioactive and dangerous to further make the suspect nervous . This scene was based on a real @-@ life trick used by Baltimore Police Department detectives in 1988 . The real @-@ life instance was featured in Homicide : A Year on the Killing Streets , the 1991 David Simon non @-@ fiction book about a Baltimore Police Department , which was adapted into the Homicide series . This hoax was also used in " More with Less " , the fifth season premiere episode of David Simon 's later police drama series , The Wire . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Ratings for Homicide : Life on the Street gradually declined since the series first premiered . In response , NBC announced to fans that a decision about whether Homicide would be renewed or canceled would depend on how the last four episodes of the season fared in the ratings , including " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " . In its original American broadcast on March 24 , 1993 , the episode was watched by 7 @.@ 08 million households , according to Nielsen Media Research , earning the episode a 7 @.@ 6 rating . This constituted a slight increase in viewership compared to the previous week 's episode , " And the Rockets ' Dead Glare " , which was seen by 6 @.@ 61 million viewers and received a 7 @.@ 1 rating . Homicide ranked low in the Nielsen ratings compared to other shows the week of " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " , ranking 77th for the week of March 15 to 21 , with the CBS news magazine series 60 Minutes ranking number one with 21 @.@ 9 million household viewers . 
 " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " and the rest of the first and second season episodes were included in the four @-@ DVD box @-@ set " Homicide : Life on the Street : The Complete Seasons 1 & 2 " , which was released by A & E Home Video on May 27 , 2003 . 
 = <unk> maskray = 
 The peppered maskray or speckled maskray ( Neotrygon picta ) is a species of stingray in the family Dasyatidae , found in shallow waters off northeastern Australia . This small , thin @-@ bodied ray attains a maximum width of 32 cm ( 13 in ) . It has a diamond @-@ shaped pectoral fin disc with a row of tiny thorns along the midline , and a relatively short , whip @-@ like tail with both upper and lower fin folds . Its upper surface has a speckled color pattern consisting of black spots and brownish reticulations on a light yellow to brown background . 
 Favoring soft @-@ bottomed habitats , the peppered maskray is a bottom @-@ dwelling predator consuming mainly crustaceans ( particularly caridean shrimp ) and polychaete worms . It is viviparous , with litter sizes of one to three . The females supply their developing young with histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) during gestation . Although the peppered maskray is a frequent bycatch of bottom trawl fisheries , it is still common and significant portions of its population appear to lie within unfished waters . As a result , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed it as Least Concern . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 Once thought to be a color morph of the painted maskray ( N. <unk> ) , the peppered maskray was recognized as a distinct species based on molecular data collected for the Barcode of Life project . It was described by Peter Last and William White in a 2008 Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation ( CSIRO ) publication . Their account was based on 13 specimens ; of these , a female 24 cm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) across caught off Rockhampton , Queensland was designated as the holotype . The specific epithet picta is derived from the Latin pictus ( " painted " or " colored " ) . Phylogenetic analysis using mitochondrial and nuclear DNA has found that the peppered and painted maskrays are sister species . The two are estimated to have diverged c . 10 Ma , during the Miocene . 
 = = Description = = 
 The peppered maskray has a thin , diamond @-@ shaped pectoral fin disc roughly 1 @.@ 2 times wider than long , with slightly concave leading margins and narrowly rounded outer corners . The snout forms an obtuse angle and has a pointed tip . The small , closely spaced eyes are followed by crescent @-@ shaped spiracles . The nostrils are elongated and have a skirt @-@ shaped curtain of skin between them ; the posterior margin of the curtain is fringed and forms two lobes . The small mouth is surrounded by papillae and bears prominent furrows at the corners . There are two papillae on the floor of the mouth . The teeth number 33 – 38 rows in the upper jaw and 31 – 40 rows in the lower ; the teeth are small and vary from pointed to blunt . The five pairs of gill slits are S @-@ shaped . The pelvic fins are medium @-@ sized and triangular with angular corners . 
 The whip @-@ like tail measures 1 @.@ 0 – 1 @.@ 3 times as long as the disc and bears slender stinging spines on the upper surface ; smaller rays usually have one sting , larger rays two . The tail is moderately broad and flattened at the base , becoming very thin behind the sting . Both upper and lower fin folds are present past the sting , with the upper fold shorter than the lower . There are up to 22 small , closely spaced thorns along the midline of the back behind the spiracles ; otherwise , the skin is mostly smooth . This species is light yellow to brown above , with a darker reticulated pattern that may vary from faint to obvious , all overlaid by numerous black spots . Like other Neotrygon species , there is a dark marking across the eyes that resembles a mask . The tail has a pattern of saddles or bands behind the sting ; the tip is white and the ventral fin fold darkens to almost black posteriorly . The underside is plain white . This species reaches 32 cm ( 13 in ) across . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The range of the peppered maskray extends along the coast of northeastern Australia , from at least the Wessel Islands off Northern Territory to Hervey Bay in Queensland ; the western boundary of its range is uncertain . It may also be found off New Guinea , though this is unconfirmed . This species is extremely common in some areas , such as the Gulf of Carpentaria . A benthic fish , it is usually found on the inner continental shelf in water less than 25 m ( 82 ft ) deep , but may occur down to 100 m ( 330 ft ) . It favors habitats with sandy or other fine substrate . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The peppered maskray prefers to pick prey from the surface of the substrate , as opposed to digging for them . <unk> shrimp are by far the most important food source . It also consumes polychaete worms and amphipods , and rarely penaeid prawns , molluscs , and small bony fishes . Compared to smaller rays , larger rays have a more varied diet that incorporates a greater proportion of polychaete worms . 
 Reproduction in the peppered maskray is viviparous ; like other stingrays , the developing embryos are initially nourished by yolk and later by histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) provided by the mother . Mature females have a single functional ovary and uterus , on the left side . Females give birth to litters of one to three pups , probably once per year . The newborns are 9 – 11 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 – 4 @.@ 3 in ) across . Males and females reach sexual maturity at around 17 and 18 cm ( 6 @.@ 7 and 7 @.@ 1 in ) across respectively . The maximum lifespan is at least 11 years for males and 18 years for females . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 The peppered maskray lacks economic value and is discarded by fisheries . It is often caught incidentally in bottom trawls , and due to its small size does not benefit from Turtle Exclusion Devices . In particular , this species accounts for approximately 4 @.@ 5 % of the total catch of the Northern Prawn Fishery ( NPF ) in the Gulf of Carpentaria . Over half of the rays caught by the NPF , including almost all the males , are fatally crushed within the trawl . Despite this mortality , the NPF is not believed to have negatively affected the local population because its operational area does not include the waters where this species is most abundant . The peppered maskray is also caught frequently in scallop trawls operated by the Queensland East Coast Trawl Fishery . Elsewhere in its range , fishing pressure is relatively light due to external factors such as fuel prices . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has listed this species under Least Concern , because it remains common and its range includes several Marine Protected Areas . 
 = Folie à Deux ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Folie à Deux " is the nineteenth episode of the fifth season of American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It was written by Vince Gilligan and directed by Kim Manners . The episode originally aired on May 10 , 1998 in the United States on the Fox network . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , a stand @-@ alone plot which is unconnected to the series ' wider mythology , or fictional history . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 11 @.@ 0 , being watched by 17 @.@ 63 million viewers upon its initial broadcast . It received largely positive reviews from critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , Mulder encounters a delusional man , Gary Lambert ( Brian Markinson ) , who believes his boss , Greg Pincus ( John Apicella ) , may be a monster — and decides to take an entire office building , including Mulder , hostage to prove it . Lambert is eventually killed , but somehow , Mulder inherits his ability to see Pincus as a monster . After Mulder claims that Pincus is a monster , he is locked in a psychiatric hospital , only to be saved by Scully : the only person who believes him . 
 The episode 's antagonistic bug creature was created by means of a prosthetic suit that was worn by a stuntwoman . The suit was highly ridiculed behind the scenes . To fix the perceived issues with the monster , the production team gave the film to visual effects editor Laurie Kallsen @-@ George , who digitally altered the footage until it was deemed suitable . The episode 's title is a reference to Folie à deux , a form of insanity shared by two people . It usually begins with one person who conceives of a delusional belief and then spreads it to another ; thus , those two share the same delusion . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Oak Brook , Illinois , Gary Lambert ( Brian Markinson ) , a telemarketer at a company called VinylRight , believes that his seemingly normal boss , Greg Pincus ( John Apicella ) , is an insect @-@ like monster that only he can see . 
 Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) orders Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) to go to Chicago to do a threat assessment of a taped manifesto that mentions VinylRight , which has seen a violent incident at its Kansas City offices . Mulder suspects that the case is a deliberate waste of time and tells Scully not to accompany him . During his meeting with Pincus , Mulder learns that the tape was sent to a local radio station with a demand that it be played twenty @-@ four hours a day ; on the tape , a man – later revealed to be Lambert – claims that a monster " hides in the light " and stalks employees at VinylRight . Mulder calls Scully and asks her to find past X @-@ Files containing the phrase . 
 After one of Lambert 's co @-@ workers , Nancy Aaronson ( Cynthia Preston ) , is turned into a living corpse by Pincus – while appearing normal to everyone else – Lambert flees to his apartment and arms himself with a Type <unk> rifle . Meanwhile , Scully calls Mulder to tell him that she found the phrase " hiding in the light " in a 1992 case from Lakeland , Florida that involved similar accusations of hidden monsters . Mulder admits that Scully should come to Chicago to help him with the investigation . He returns to the VinylRight office and unwittingly walks into the middle of a hostage situation , being held captive by Lambert along with Pincus and the other employees . 
 As Scully arrives on the scene , Lambert divides his hostages into " real people " and " monsters " , claiming that Pincus has turned several employees into zombies . Lambert shoots Mark Backus , one of the purported zombies , when he tries to disarm him whilst briefly distracted by Mulder . When Lambert demands a camera to broadcast his warning , Scully arranges for a SWAT officer disguised as a cameraman to be sent in the building . Lambert , not knowing that the camera broadcasts only in a closed @-@ circuit , tells viewers about Pincus being a monster . As the lights are cut , Lambert forces Mulder to look behind him and see that Pincus , for an instant , is a large insect . Just then , the FBI smashes into the room with an armored vehicle and kills Lambert before he can open fire . 
 Mulder questions Pincus and learns that he was present in during the VinylRight incidents in Kansas City and Florida . At his office , Mulder maps out all the reports of monsters " hiding in the light " against places Pincus has lived and worked . He tries to convince Scully that Lambert might have been right , but she accuses him of succumbing to a " Folie à Deux " , or shared psychosis , with Lambert . Mulder asks Scully to do an autopsy of Mark Backus to see if there is any evidence of Lambert 's claims , but Scully refuses . 
 In an effort to prove Lambert right Mulder goes to Lambert 's home with Agent Rice . There , Mulder finds a map of Pincus ' movements and incidents of reported monsters , like the map Mulder made . Looking out a window Mulder sees a corpse @-@ like Nancy Aaronson , a co @-@ worker Lambert called a zombie , watching him . He runs outside to confront her but she drives away in a car with Pincus . Meanwhile , Skinner asks Scully why Mulder has returned to Chicago . Scully covers for him and finds herself committed to performing the autopsy on Mark Backus . She is still reluctant and orders her assistant to only perform an external examination . He observes that the body has been dead for between 48 and 72 hours instead of the 24 hours since the shooting . 
 Back in Oak Brook , Mulder has followed Pincus to the house of VinylRight employee Gretchen Starns . Mulder looks through the window and sees the monster leaning over the woman as she watches TV . Mulder breaks the window and then kicks in the door . Inside the house he sees that Starns has been transformed into a zombie . Behind him , out of his sight , the monster walks across the ceiling . Mulder catches a glimpse of it crawling up the outside of the house . Later at the FBI office , Starns and Pincus complain to A.D. Skinner about Mulder 's behavior . Mulder , seeing Pincus begin to transform into the creature again , draws his weapon . He is restrained by a disbelieving Skinner and then sedated in a hospital . 
 Mulder tells Scully that he saw the monster doing something to the back of his victim 's head and begs her to look for evidence on the back of Backus 's head . Scully examines Backus 's corpse and finds three puncture marks at the top of the spine marking the corners of an equilateral triangle . 
 Mulder , still restrained in his bed at the hospital , sees the silhouette of the monster at the window . He screams for the nurse , but she has already been bitten and opens the window to let the monster in . Scully tries to visit Mulder but the nurse refuses access . Suddenly Scully sees the nurse as a corpse , realizes that Mulder is in danger , and runs into Mulder 's room . There she sees the monster on the wall and shoots at it . It leaps through the partially open window , breaking the glass and wooden frame . 
 Back at FBI headquarters , Scully testifies to Skinner that she believes Mulder is mentally sound and fit for duty , noting that Pincus and several others mysteriously disappeared , that there was an intruder in Mulder 's room , and that Backus did have some sort of chemical in his system . Afterward she tells Mulder that she said it was Folie à deux , and describes it as ' a madness shared by two ' . But she does not specify who the two were . 
 The episode ends with a different man at a telemarketing agency in <unk> , Missouri noticing the same ominous signs of the creature . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and effects = = = 
 " Folie à Deux " was written by Vince Gilligan . He later recalled that the inspiration for the episode was the idea that " there 's a monster around that only you can see — the clinical definition of madness " and called the conceit " scary " . The title is a reference to Folie à deux , a form of insanity shared by two people . It usually begins with one person who conceives of a delusional belief and then spreads it to another ; thus , those two share the same delusion . 
 The episode 's antagonistic bug creature was created by means of a prosthetic suit that was worn by a stuntwoman . The suit was highly ridiculed behind the scenes . Actor Markinson , upon seeing the costume , said " this is what 's driving me crazy ? " Director Kim Manners was highly critical of the monster and later told people that after the episode would air , his career would be " over " . Gilligan attributed the problems due to the episodic work schedule , he noted , " we 're usually on such a short schedule that there has to be a weak link somewhere " . Gilligan also stated that the " over engineered " aspects of the suit made it somewhat comical . To fix the perceived issues with the monster , the production team gave the filmed footage to visual effects editor Laurie Kallsen @-@ George , who " took the footage with the monster in it , erased the monster completely , took the monster to a different screen [ ... ] animated it , and added speed blur " . The effects took a large amount of time to complete . They were only finished at 7 : 30 the morning the episode was scheduled to air . In the end , the monster is not clearly visible in the installment , which allowed the scariness of the episode to be more real , according to Gilligan . 
 = = = Locations = = = 
 Several of the scenes set at Gretchen Starns ' house were filmed in a " turn @-@ of @-@ the @-@ century " home in North Vancouver , British Columbia . Initially , the producers wanted to set the sequence at a tract home , and emulate the " pastel community " featured in movies like Edward Scissorhands ( 1990 ) and The Truman Show ( 1998 ) . However , when a tract home with the necessary attributes did not turn up , the crew decided to shoot the scene in a " spookier " location . Special effect rigging was then installed on the house to allow the bug creature to scale the wall . The elaborate sequence in which the insect creature crawls across a ceiling was made by creating an upside @-@ down mock house set . The actress portraying the creature then crawled on the set and the footage was flipped in post @-@ production . The scenes featuring an armored car smashing through the wall of VinylRight were filmed on a specially constructed soundstage . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Folie à Deux " originally aired on the Fox network on May 10 , 1998 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on March 10 , 1999 . This episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 11 @.@ 0 , with a 17 share , meaning that roughly 11 @.@ 0 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 17 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 17 @.@ 63 million viewers . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Folie à Deux " received largely positive reviews from critics . Francis Dass of New Straits Times was positive toward the episode , considering it " highly watchable " . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club gave the episode a glowing review and awarded it an " A " . He praised the way it " starts out as what seems like a Mulder @-@ centric episode , then slowly inverts on itself to become a Scully @-@ centric episode " . VanDerWerff also positively critiqued the manner in which " the monster [ ... ] works on a metaphorical level as well " . He concluded that the episode 's main theme — that " [ m ] <unk> is always better when shared by two " — was a " great idea " that resulted in " one of the greatest episodes the show ever did " . John Keegan from Critical Myth awarded the episode a 7 out of 10 and called it " a pleasant enough diversion " from the then @-@ upcoming series feature film . He wrote that , while the episode fits the mold of " the traditional late @-@ season summary of the evolving character dynamic " , the entry manages to frame Scully ’ s psychology " in the limelight " without actually " <unk> [ ing ] Scully herself " . 
 Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a largely positive review and awarded it three stars out of four . Vitaris praised the conceit and called the episode " the scariest [ ... ] of the year " . She applauded the " now you see it , now you don 't " appearance of the bug creature and noted that Pincus ' casting was " just right " . She concluded that the episode was " so well realized " and that " there is so much to enjoy " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode four stars out of five . The two compared the entry to the previous fifth season installment " Bad Blood " , calling " Folie à Deux " its " logical extension " . Shearman and Pearson argued that the episode " provide [ s ] a comedy and an effective monster story at the same time . " 
 = Hitler Diaries = 
 The Hitler Diaries ( German : Hitler @-@ Tagebücher ) were a series of sixty volumes of journals purportedly by Adolf Hitler , but forged by Konrad Kujau between 1981 and 1983 . The diaries were purchased in 1983 for 9 @.@ 3 million Deutsche Marks ( $ 3 @.@ 7 million ) by the West German news magazine Stern , which sold serialisation rights to several news organisations . One of the publications involved was The Sunday Times , who asked their independent director , the historian Hugh Trevor @-@ Roper , to authenticate the diaries ; he did so , pronouncing them genuine . At the press conference to announce the forthcoming publication , Trevor @-@ Roper announced that on reflection he had changed his mind , and other historians also raised questions concerning their validity . Rigorous forensic analysis , which had not been performed previously , quickly confirmed that the diaries were fakes . 
 Kujau , born and raised in East Germany , had a history of petty crime and deception . In the mid @-@ 1970s he began selling Nazi memorabilia which he was smuggling from the East , but soon found he could raise the prices by forging additional authentication details which linked ordinary souvenirs to the Nazi leaders . He began forging paintings by Hitler and an increasing number of notes , poems and letters , until he produced his first diary in the mid- to late 1970s . The West German journalist with Stern who " discovered " the diaries and was involved in their purchase was Gerd Heidemann , who had an obsession with the Nazis . When Stern started buying the diaries , Heidemann stole a significant proportion of the money provided . 
 Kujau and Heidemann both spent time in prison for their parts in the fraud , and several newspaper editors lost their jobs . The story of the scandal has been the basis of two films : Selling Hitler ( 1991 ) for the British ITV channel , and Schtonk ! ( 1992 ) for German cinema . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Operation Seraglio = = = 
 On 20 April 1945 — Adolf Hitler 's 56th birthday — Soviet troops were on the verge of taking Berlin and the Western Allies had already taken several German cities . Hitler 's private secretary , Martin Bormann , put into action Operation Seraglio , a plan to evacuate the key and favoured members of Hitler 's entourage from the Berlin bunker where they were based , the Führerbunker , to an Alpine command centre near Berchtesgaden — Hitler 's retreat in southern Germany . Ten aeroplanes flew out from Gatow airfield under the overall command of General Hans Baur , Hitler 's personal pilot . The final flight out was a Junkers Ju 352 transport plane , piloted by Major Friedrich Gundlfinger — on board were ten heavy chests under the supervision of Hitler 's personal valet Sergeant Wilhelm Arndt . The plane crashed into the <unk> forest , near the Czechoslovak border . 
 Some of the more useful parts of Gundlfinger 's plane were appropriated by locals before the police and SS cordoned off the crash . When Baur told Hitler what had happened , the German leader expressed grief at the loss of Arndt , one of his most favoured servants , and added : " I entrusted him with extremely valuable documents which would show posterity the truth of my actions ! " Apart from this quoted sentence , there is no indication of what was in the boxes . The last of the crash 's two survivors died in April 1980 , and Bormann was assumed to have taken his own life , having disappeared from the Berlin bunker after Hitler 's suicide on 30 April 1945 . In the decades following the war , the possibility of a hidden cache of private papers belonging to Hitler became , according to the journalist Robert Harris , a " tantalizing state of affairs [ that ] was to provide the perfect scenario for forgery " . 
 = = = Konrad Kujau = = = 
 Konrad Kujau was born in 1938 in Löbau , near Dresden , in what would become East Germany . His parents , a shoemaker and his wife , had both joined the Nazi Party in 1933 . The boy grew up believing in the Nazi ideals and <unk> Hitler ; Germany 's defeat and Hitler 's suicide in 1945 did not temper his enthusiasm for the Nazi cause . He held a series of menial jobs until 1957 , when a warrant was issued for his arrest in connection with the theft of a microphone from the Löbau Youth Club . He fled to Stuttgart , West Germany , and soon drifted into temporary work and petty crime . After running a dance bar during the early 1960s with his girlfriend , Edith <unk> — whom he later married — Kujau began to create a fictional background for himself . He told people that his real name was Peter Fischer , changed his date of birth by two years , and altered the story of his time in East Germany . By 1963 the bar had begun to suffer financial difficulties , and Kujau started his career as a counterfeiter , forging 27 Deutsche Marks ' ( DM ) worth of luncheon vouchers ; he was caught and sentenced to five days in prison . On his release he and his wife formed the <unk> Cleaning Company , although it provided little income for them . In March 1968 , at a routine check at Kujau 's lodgings , the police established he was living under a false identity and he was sent to Stuttgart 's <unk> Prison . 
 In 1970 Kujau visited his family in East Germany and discovered that many of the locals held Nazi memorabilia , contrary to the laws of the communist government . He saw an opportunity to buy the material cheaply on the black market , and make a profit in the West , where the increasing demand among Stuttgart collectors was raising memorabilia prices up to ten times the amount he would pay . The trade was illegal in East Germany , and the export of what were deemed items of cultural heritage was banned . Among the items smuggled out of East Germany were weapons . 
 In 1974 Kujau rented a shop into which he placed his Nazi memorabilia ; the outlet also became the venue for late @-@ night drinking sessions with friends and fellow collectors , including Wolfgang Schulze , who lived in the US and became Kujau 's agent there . Kujau inflated the value of items in his shop by forging additional authentication details — for example a genuine First World War helmet , worth a few marks , became considerably more valuable after Kujau forged a note indicating that Hitler had worn it at Ypres in late October 1914 . In addition to notes by Hitler , he produced documents supposedly handwritten by Bormann , Rudolf Hess , Heinrich Himmler , Hermann Göring and Joseph Goebbels . He forged passable imitations of his subjects ' genuine handwriting , but the rest of the work was crude : Kujau used modern stationery such as Letraset to create letterheads , and he tried to make his products look suitably old by pouring tea over them . Mistakes in spelling or grammar were relatively common , particularly when he forged in English ; a supposed copy of the 1938 Munich Agreement between Hitler and Neville Chamberlain read , in part : 
 We regard the <unk> signet last night and the Anglo @-@ German Naval Agreement as symbolic of the desire of our two peoples never to go to war with one another againe . 
 In the mid- to late 1970s Kujau , an able amateur artist , turned to producing paintings which he claimed were by Hitler , who had been an amateur artist as a young man . Having found a market for his forged works , Kujau created Hitler paintings depicting subjects his buyers expressed interest in , such as cartoons , nudes and men in action — all subjects that Hitler never painted , or would want to paint , according to Charles Hamilton , a handwriting expert and author of books on forgery . These paintings were often accompanied by small notes , purportedly from Hitler . The paintings were profitable for Kujau . To explain his access to the memorabilia he invented several sources in East Germany , including a former Nazi general , the <unk> director of a museum and his own brother , whom he re @-@ invented as a general in the East German army . 
 Having found success in passing off his forged notes as those of Hitler , Kujau grew more ambitious and copied , by hand , the text from both volumes of Mein Kampf , even though the originals had been completed by typewriter . Kujau also produced an introduction to a third volume of the work . He sold these manuscripts to one of his regular clients , Fritz Stiefel , a collector of Nazi memorabilia who accepted them and many other Kujau products as genuine . Kujau also began forging a series of war poems by Hitler , which were so amateurish that Kujau later conceded that " a fourteen @-@ year @-@ old collector would have recognised it as a forgery " . 
 = = = Gerd Heidemann = = = 
 Gerd Heidemann was born in Hamburg in 1931 . During the rise of Hitler his parents remained apolitical , but Heidemann , like many other young boys , joined the Hitler Youth . After the war he trained as an electrician , and pursued an interest in photography . He began working in a photographic laboratory and became a freelance photographer for the Deutsche Presse @-@ Agentur and Keystone news agencies , as well as some local Hamburg papers . He had his first work published in Stern in 1951 and four years later joined the paper as a full @-@ time member of staff . From 1961 he covered wars and hostilities across Africa and the Middle East ; he became obsessed with these conflicts and other stories on which he worked , such as the search for identity of the German writer B. Traven . Although he was an excellent researcher — his colleagues called him der <unk> , the Bloodhound — he would not know when to stop investigating , which led to other writers having to finish off the stories from large quantities of notes . 
 On behalf of Stern , in January 1973 Heidemann photographed the Carin II , a yacht that formerly belonged to Göring . The boat was in a poor state of repair and expensive to maintain , but Heidemann took a mortgage on his Hamburg flat and purchased it . While researching the history of the yacht , Heidemann interviewed Göring 's daughter , Edda , after which the couple began an affair . Through this relationship and his ownership of the boat he was introduced to a circle of former Nazis . He began to hold parties on the Carin II , with the former SS generals Karl Wolff and Wilhelm Mohnke as the guests of honour . Wolff and Mohnke were witnesses at Heidemann 's wedding to his third wife in 1979 ; the couple went on honeymoon to South America accompanied by Wolff , where they met more ex @-@ Nazis , including Walter Rauff and Klaus Barbie , who were both wanted in the West for war crimes . 
 The purchase of the yacht caused Heidemann financial problems , and in 1976 he agreed terms with Gruner + Jahr , Stern 's parent company , to produce a book based on the conversations he was having with the former soldiers and SS men . When the book went unwritten — the material provided by the former SS officer was not sufficiently interesting or verifiable for publication — Heidemann borrowed increasingly large sums from his employers to pay for the boat 's upkeep . In June 1978 he advertised the boat for sale , asking 1 @.@ 1 million DMs ; he received no offers . Mohnke recommended that Heidemann speak to Jakob Tiefenthaeler , a Nazi memorabilia collector and a former member of the SS . Tiefenthaeler was not in a position to buy the yacht , but was happy to act as an agent ; his endeavours did not produce a sale . Realising Heidemann 's financial circumstances , Tiefenthaeler provided him with names of other collectors in the Stuttgart area . The journalist made a trip to the south of Germany and met Stiefel , who purchased some of Göring 's effects . 
 = = = Stern , The Sunday Times and Newsweek = = = 
 Stern ( German for " Star " ) , a German weekly news magazine published in Hamburg , was formed by the journalist and businessman Henri Nannen in 1948 to offer scandal , gossip and human interest stories . It was , according to the German media experts Frank Esser and Uwe Hartung , known for its investigative journalism and was politically left @-@ of @-@ centre . In 1981 Nannen resigned from his position of editor of the magazine , and moved to take the role of " publisher " . In his place Stern had three editors : Peter Koch , Rolf <unk> and Felix Schmidt , who were aided by others including the journal 's head of contemporary history , Thomas Walde . Manfred Fischer was CEO of Gruner + Jahr until 1981 when he was promoted to the board of Bertelsmann , their parent company ; he was replaced by Gerd Schulte @-@ Hillen . Wilfried Sorge was one of the Gruner + Jahr managers responsible for international sales . 
 The Sunday Times is a British national broadsheet newspaper , the Sunday sister paper of The Times . In 1968 , under the ownership of Lord Thomson , The Sunday Times had been involved in a deal to purchase the Mussolini diaries for an agreed final purchase price of £ 250 @,@ 000 , although they had only paid out an initial amount of £ 60 @,@ 000 . These turned out to be forgeries undertaken by an Italian mother and daughter , Amalia and Rosa <unk> . In 1981 Rupert Murdoch , who owned several other papers in Australia , New Zealand and the UK , purchased Times Newspapers Ltd , which owned both The Times and its Sunday sister . Murdoch appointed Frank Giles to be the editor of The Sunday Times . The historian Hugh Trevor @-@ Roper became an independent national director of The Times in 1974 . Trevor @-@ Roper — who was created Baron Dacre of Glanton in 1979 — was a specialist on Nazi Germany , who had worked for the British Intelligence Services during and after the Second World War . At the war 's end he had undertaken an official investigation of Hitler 's death , interviewing eyewitnesses to the Führer 's last movements . In addition to the official report he filed , Trevor @-@ Roper also published The Last Days of Hitler ( 1947 ) on the subject . He subsequently wrote about the Nazis in Hitler 's War Directives ( 1964 ) and Hitler 's Place in History ( 1965 ) . 
 Newsweek , an American weekly news magazine , was founded in 1933 . In 1982 the journalist William Broyles was appointed editor @-@ in @-@ chief , while the editor was Maynard Parker ; that year the company had circulation figures of three million readers . 
 = = Production and sale of the diaries = = 
 = = = Production = = = 
 It is unclear when Kujau produced his first Hitler diary . Stiefel says Kujau gave him a diary on loan in 1975 . Schulze puts the date as 1976 , while Kujau says he began in 1978 , after a month 's practice writing in the old German gothic script Hitler had used . Kujau used one of a pile of notebooks he had bought cheaply in East Berlin , and attempted to put the letters " AH " in gold on the front — purchasing plastic , Hong Kong @-@ made letters from a department store , he inadvertently used " FH " rather than " AH " . He took the black ribbon from a genuine SS document , and attached it to the cover using a German army wax seal . For the ink he bought two bottles of Pelikan ink — one black , one blue — and mixed them with water so it would flow more easily from the cheap modern pen he used . Finally he sprinkled tea over the pages and bashed the diaries against his desk to give them an aged look . Kujau showed the first volume to Stiefel , who was impressed and thought it a genuine Hitler diary ; Stiefel wanted to buy it , but when the forger refused , the pair agreed that the collector could have it on loan . 
 In June 1979 Stiefel asked a former Nazi Party archivist , August Priesack , to verify the authenticity of the diary , which he subsequently did . Priesack showed the diary to Eberhard Jäckel of the University of Stuttgart , who also thought the diary to be genuine , and wanted to edit it for publication . News of the diary 's existence soon began to filter through to collectors of Hitler memorabilia . At the end of 1979 Tiefenthaeler contacted Heidemann to say that Stiefel had shown him around his collection , which included a Hitler diary — the only one Kujau had forged to that point . According to Hamilton " the discovery inflamed Heidemann almost to madness " , and he aggressively pressed for what would be a journalistic scoop . 
 Stiefel showed Heidemann the diary in Stuttgart in January 1980 , telling him it was from a plane crash in East Germany , although he refused to tell the journalist the name of his source . The collector spoke to Kujau to see if he would meet Heidemann , but the forger repeatedly refused Heidemann 's requests for nearly a year . Heidemann returned to the Stern offices and spoke to his editor , but both Koch and Nannen refused to discuss the potential story with him , telling him to work on other features . The only person who was interested was Walde , who worked with Heidemann to find the source of the diaries . Their searches for Kujau proved fruitless , so they looked into the crash . Heidemann , who had read Baur 's autobiography , knew of Gundlfinger 's flight , and made a connection between Operation Seraglio and the diary ; in November 1980 the two journalists travelled to Dresden and located the graves of the flight 's crew . 
 In January 1981 Tiefenthaeler gave Kujau 's telephone number to Heidemann , telling the journalist to ask for " Mr Fischer " , one of Kujau 's aliases . During the subsequent phone call Kujau told Heidemann that there were 27 volumes of Hitler 's diaries , the original manuscript of the unpublished third volume of Mein Kampf , an opera by the young Hitler called Wieland der Schmied ( Wieland the Blacksmith ) , numerous letters and unpublished papers , and several of Hitler 's paintings — most of which were still in East Germany . Heidemann offered two million DMs for the entire collection and guaranteed secrecy until everything had been brought over the border . Although the pair did not agree to a deal , they agreed to " the foundations of a deal " , according to Harris ; Kujau 's condition was that he would only deal directly with Heidemann , something that suited the journalist as a way of keeping other members of Stern away from the story . 
 Heidemann and Walde produced a prospectus for internal discussion , outlining what was available for purchase and the costs . The document , signed by Heidemann , finished with a veiled threat : " If our company thinks that the risk is too great , I suggest that I should seek out a publishing company in the United States which could put up the money and ensure that we get the German publication rights . " The pair did not show the prospectus to anyone at Stern , but instead presented it to Gruner + Jahr 's deputy managing director , Dr Jan Hensmann , and Manfred Fischer ; they also requested a 200 @,@ 000 mark deposit from the publisher to secure the rights with Kujau . After a meeting that lasted a little over two hours , and with no recourse to an expert or historian , the deposit was authorised . As soon as the meeting ended , at about 7 pm , Heidemann travelled to Stuttgart , with the deposit money , to meet Kujau . 
 = = = Acquisition = = = 
 At that first meeting on 28 January 1981 , which lasted over seven hours , Heidemann offered Kujau a deposit of only 100 @,@ 000 DMs to agree the deal , which Kujau did not accept . At a second meeting the following day , the reporter revealed an additional lure he had brought with him : a uniform which he said was Göring 's . Kujau tentatively agreed to provide the diaries and told Heidemann that he would call him as soon as he could arrange to receive them from East Germany . As a sign of good faith Heidemann lent the uniform to the forger , to show alongside his collection of other uniforms from the top Nazis ; for his part , Kujau gave the journalist a painting purportedly by Hitler . Both the painting and uniform were fakes . 
 A week later Kujau met Jäckel and Alex Kuhn in connection with the poems he had forged and sold to Stiefel . These had been published by Jäckel and Kuhn in 1980 , but one historian pointed out that one of the poems could not have been produced by Hitler as it had been written by the poet <unk> Menzel . Jäckel was concerned that the poem in question had been accompanied by a letter on Nazi party stationery guaranteeing it as a genuine work by Hitler . Many of the other pieces in Stiefel 's collection were similarly verified , so doubts began to surface over these , too . Kujau claimed ignorance , saying he was only the middleman , but told them that Heidemann , a reputed journalist , had seen the crash site from which the papers originated ; Jäckel advised Stiefel to have his collection forensically examined , and passed 26 suspect poems to the Hamburg district attorney for investigation . Gruner + Jahr also knew about the problems with the poems , and that the source had been Kujau , but he assured them that this source had been elsewhere in East Germany , unconnected to the diaries , and they continued with their deal . 
 Ten days after the meeting with Jäckel and Kuhn , Kujau had prepared three further diaries . The contents were copied from a range of books , newspapers and magazines covering Hitler 's life . Primary among them was the two @-@ volume work by the historian Max <unk> , Hitler : <unk> und <unk> , 1932 – 45 ( Hitler : Speeches and Proclamations , 1932 – 45 ) , which presents Hitler 's day @-@ to @-@ day activities . Many of the diary 's entries were lists of Nazi party promotions and official engagements . Although Kujau created some personal information about Hitler in the diaries , this was , in the opinion of both Harris and Hamilton , trivia . He began working to a schedule of producing three diaries a month . He later stated that he managed to produce one of the volumes in three hours ; on a separate occasion he wrote three diaries in three days . 
 On 17 February 1981 Kujau flew to Stuttgart and gave Heidemann the three recently prepared diaries , for which Heidemann gave him 35 @,@ 000 DMs . This was a great deal less than the 120 @,@ 000 DMs — 40 @,@ 000 DMs per diary — promised to Kujau in the first meeting , from which Heidemann would also claim a 10 % commission ; the reduction in funds was explained by a need to get an " expert opinion " on the authenticity of the diaries , and the balance was later paid . The following day the reporter delivered the diaries to Gruner + Jahr . In the subsequent meeting with Walde , Hensmann , Sorge and Fischer , Heidemann and Walde again insisted on secrecy about the project , to ensure their acquisition of all the diaries — it was agreed that not even the editors of Stern should be told of the discovery . More importantly , according to Harris , it was decided that they should not have the material examined by a forensic scientist or historian until every diary had been obtained . Fischer committed the company to the future purchases by immediately allocating one million DM to the project . The company also set up a dedicated unit to deal with the diaries in an annex to the main Gruner + Jahr offices . It was headed by Walde , and consisted of an assistant , two secretaries and Heidemann . On receipt of the diaries they were photocopied and transcribed from the gothic script into modern German . Heidemann also entered into a private contract with Gruner + Jahr , which was kept secret from the company 's legal and personnel departments . It contained a deal for him to publish books through the company at a generous royalty rate , and agreed that ten years after publication the original diaries would be given to Heidemann for research purposes , to be handed on to the West German government on his death . He was also to be given a bonus of 300 @,@ 000 DMs for recovering the first eight diaries . 
 The delivery of the diaries continued , although there were tensions between Heidemann and Kujau , partly owing to the journalist 's " domineering personality and duplicity " . Because of the nature of the transactions there were no receipts provided by Heidemann to Gruner + Jahr , and the business was conducted by the company on the basis of trust . By the end of February 1981 , 680 @,@ 000 DMs had been paid for the diaries , only around half of which was received by Kujau . Heidemann had pocketed the rest , defrauding both his employer and the forger in the process . 
 Despite the self @-@ imposed restrictions of secrecy placed on the small circle inside Gruner + Jahr , Heidemann could not resist showing one of the volumes to Mohnke , as the entry referred to the SS Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler , Mohnke 's former regiment . Heidemann read out three entries from the diaries — from 15 , 17 and 18 March — which concerned visits made by Hitler to the regiment while in the Lichterfelde and <unk> barracks . Mohnke informed him that the entries were inaccurate , saying that the Lichterfelde barracks were not occupied by the troops on that date , that the regimental name used in the diary was introduced much later , and that so far as he knew Hitler never visited the <unk> barracks . Heidemann was unmoved by his friend 's revelations , and posited that Hitler had probably written what he was planning to do , not what he had done . Harris suggests that this showed that the journalist " had long ceased operating on a rational wavelength about the diaries " . 
 The circle of those at Gruner + Jahr who knew about the diaries grew in May 1981 when Fischer decided to look into the complicated copyright circumstances surrounding Hitler 's property . He discussed the matter with the company 's legal advisor , Dr Andreas Ruppert , who advised speaking to Werner Maser , a historian who acted as a trustee on such matters to the Hitler family . Heidemann visited Maser in June 1981 and came to a deal that enabled the journalist and Stern , for a payment of 20 @,@ 000 DMs , to retain " the rights to all the discovered or purchased documents or notes in the hand of Adolf Hitler ... which have so far not yet been published " . 
 After twelve diaries had been delivered to Gruner + Jahr , Heidemann informed his employers that the price had risen from 85 @,@ 000 DMs to 100 @,@ 000 DMs per diary ; the reason given by Heidemann was that the East German general smuggling the diaries was now having to bribe more people . The additional money was retained by Heidemann and not passed on to Kujau . The journalist was starting to lead a profligate lifestyle on his illicit profits , including two new cars ( a BMW convertible and a Porsche , for a combined total of 58 @,@ 000 DMs ) , renting two new flats on Hamburg 's exclusive <unk> , and jewellery . He also spent considerable sums acquiring new Nazi memorabilia . Some were genuine , such as Wolff 's SS honour dagger ; others were purchased from Kujau , including 300 forged oil paintings , drawings and sketches Kujau claimed were by Hitler . Other items , carrying notes by Kujau attesting to their authenticity , included a gun described as that used by Hitler to commit suicide , and a flag identified as the <unk> ( " Blood Flag " ) , carried in Hitler 's failed Munich Beer Hall Putsch of 1923 , and stained by the blood of Nazis shot by police . 
 The purchases of the diaries continued throughout mid to late 1981 : Gruner + Jahr gave Heidemann 345 @,@ 000 DMs on 29 July , and a further 220 @,@ 000 DMs a week later , which brought the total up to 1 @.@ 81 million DMs since the start of the year . This sum had purchased 18 diaries for the company . Schulte @-@ Hillen , the new managing director , signed an authorisation for a further million DMs for future purchases . Just over two weeks later he signed a further authorisation for 600 @,@ 000 DMs after Heidemann told him that the cost of the diaries had now risen to 200 @,@ 000 DMs each ; Heidemann also passed on the news that there were more than 27 diaries . 
 In mid @-@ December 1982 the author and Holocaust denier David Irving was also involved in tracking the existence of diaries written by Hitler . Priesack had previously told Irving of the existence of one of the diaries with a collector in Stuttgart . In a visit to Priesack to assess his collection of Nazi documents , Irving found out Stiefel 's phone number , from which he worked out the address ; he also obtained photocopies of some of the diary pages from Priesack . Irving visited Stiefel unannounced and tried to find out the name of the source , but the collector misled him as to the origin . Irving examined Priesack 's photocopies and saw a number of problems , including spelling mistakes and the change in writing style between certain words . 
 = = Initial testing and verification ; steps towards publication = = 
 In April 1982 Walde and Heidemann contacted Josef Henke and Klaus <unk> of the Bundesarchiv ( German Federal Archives ) and Max Frei @-@ Sulzer , the former head of the forensic department of the Zürich police , for assistance in authenticating the diaries . They did not specifically mention the diaries , but referred generally to new material . They also did not give the forensic specialists an entire diary , but removed one page only . For comparison purposes they also provided the experts with other samples of Hitler 's writing , a handwritten draft for a telegram : this was from Heidemann 's own collection and had also been forged by Kujau . Within days Walde provided further documents for comparison — all Kujau forgeries . Walde then flew to the US and commissioned Ordway Hilton , another forensic expert . None of those involved were experts in examining Nazi documents , and Hilton could not read German . Stern 's management were too bound up in a secretive approach to be open about their source , or to provide the experts with a complete diary , which would have led to a more thorough examination of wider material . From the samples provided , the experts concluded that the handwriting was genuine . Hilton subsequently reported that " there was just no question " that both documents he had were written by the same person , whom he assumed to be Hitler . 
 The purchase of the diaries continued , and by June 1982 Gruner + Jahr possessed 35 volumes . In early 1983 the company took the decision to work towards a publication date for the diaries . To ensure wide readership and to maximise their returns , Stern issued a prospectus to potentially interested parties , Newsweek , Time , Paris Match and a syndicate of papers owned by Murdoch . Stern rented a large vault in a Swiss bank . They filled the space with Nazi memorabilia and displayed various letters and manuscripts . 
 The first historian to examine the diaries was Hugh Trevor @-@ Roper , who was cautious , but impressed with the volume of documentation in front of him . As the background to the acquisition was explained to him he became less doubtful ; he was falsely informed that the paper had been chemically tested and been shown to be pre @-@ war , and he was told that Stern knew the identity of the Wehrmacht officer who had rescued the documents from the plane and had stored them ever since . By the end of the meeting he was convinced that the diaries were genuine , and later said " who , I asked myself , would forge sixty volumes when six would have served his purpose ? " In an article in The Times on 23 April 1983 he wrote : 
 I am now satisfied that the documents are authentic ; that the history of their wanderings since 1945 is true ; and that the standard accounts of Hitler 's writing habits , of his personality , and even , perhaps , of some public events may , in consequence , have to be revised . 
 The day after Trevor @-@ Roper gave his opinion of authenticity , Rupert Murdoch and his negotiation team arrived in Zürich . A deal was provisionally agreed for $ 2 @.@ 5 million for the US serialisation rights , with an additional $ 750 @,@ 000 for British and Commonwealth rights . While the discussions between Murdoch and Sorge were taking place , the diaries were examined by Broyle and his Newsweek team . After lengthy negotiation Broyle was informed that the minimum price Stern would consider was $ 3 million ; the Americans returned home , informing Hensmann that they would contact him by phone in two days . When Broyle contacted the Germans he offered the amount , subject to authentication by their chosen expert , Gerhard Weinberg . In 1952 Weinberg , a cautious and careful historian , had written the Guide to Captured German Documents , for use by the US military ; the work is described by Hamilton as definitive in its scope of the subject . Weinberg travelled to Zürich and , like Trevor @-@ Roper , was impressed and reassured by the range of items on show ; he was also partly persuaded by Trevor @-@ Roper 's endorsement of the diaries ' authenticity . Weinberg commented that " the notion of anyone forging hundreds , even thousands of pages of handwriting was hard to credit " . 
 Newsweek verbally accepted Hensmann 's offer and he in turn informed Murdoch , giving him the option to raise his bid . Murdoch was furious , having considered the handshake agreement in Zürich final . On 15 April 1983 Murdoch , with Mark Edmiston , the president of Newsweek , met Schulte @-@ Hillen , who , unexpectedly and without explanation , went back on all the previous verbal — and therefore , to his mind , non @-@ binding — agreements and told them the price was now $ 4 @.@ 25 million . Murdoch and Edmiston refused to accede to the new price and both left . The managers of Stern , with no publishing partners , backtracked on their statements and came to a second deal with Murdoch , who drove the price down , paying $ 800 @,@ 000 for the US rights , and $ 400 @,@ 000 for the British and Australian rights . Further deals were done in France with Paris Match for $ 400 @,@ 000 ; in Spain with Grupo Zeta for $ 150 @,@ 000 ; in the Netherlands for $ 125 @,@ 000 ; in Norway for $ 50 @,@ 000 ; and in Italy with Panorama for $ 50 @,@ 000 . Newsweek did not enter into a deal and instead based their subsequent stories on the copies of the diaries they had seen during the negotiation period . 
 = = Released to the news media ; the Stern press conference = = 
 On 22 April 1983 a press release from Stern announced the existence of the diaries and their forthcoming publication ; a press conference was announced for 25 April . On hearing the news from Stern , Jäckel stated that he was " extremely sceptical " about the diaries , while his fellow historian , Karl Dietrich Bracher of the University of Bonn also thought their legitimacy unlikely . Irving was receiving calls from international news companies — the BBC , The Observer , Newsweek , Bild Zeitung — and he was informing them all that the diaries were fakes . The German Chancellor , Helmut Kohl , also said that he could not believe the diaries were genuine . The following day The Times published the news that their Sunday sister paper had the serialisation rights for the UK ; the edition also carried an extensive piece by Trevor @-@ Roper with his opinion on the authenticity and importance of the discovery . By this stage the historian had growing doubts over the diaries , which he passed on to the editor of The Times , Charles Douglas @-@ Home . The Times editor presumed that Trevor @-@ Roper would also contact Giles at The Sunday Times , while Trevor @-@ Roper thought that Douglas @-@ Home would do so ; neither did . The Sunday paper thus remained oblivious of the growing concerns that the diaries might not be genuine . 
 On the evening of 23 April the presses began rolling for the following day 's edition of The Sunday Times . After an evening meeting of the editorial staff , Giles phoned Trevor @-@ Roper to ask him to write a piece rebutting the criticism of the diaries . He found that the historian had made " a 180 degree turn " regarding the diaries ' authenticity , and was now far from sure that they were real . The paper 's deputy editor , Brian MacArthur , rang Murdoch to see if they should stop the print run and re @-@ write the affected pages . Murdoch 's reply was " Fuck Dacre . Publish " . 
 On the afternoon of the 24 April , in Hamburg for the press conference the following day , Trevor @-@ Roper asked Heidemann for the name of his source : the journalist refused , and gave a different story of how the diaries had been acquired . Trevor @-@ Roper was suspicious and questioned the reporter closely for over an hour . Heidemann accused the historian of acting " exactly like an officer of the British army " in 1945 . At a subsequent dinner the historian was evasive when asked by Stern executives what he was going to say at the announcement the following day . 
 At the press conference both Trevor @-@ Roper and Weinberg expressed their doubts at the authenticity , and stated that German experts needed to examine the diaries to confirm whether the works were genuine . Trevor @-@ Roper went on to say that his doubts sprung from the lack of proof that these books were the same ones as had been on the crashed plane in 1945 . He finished his statement by saying that " I regret that the normal method of historical verification has been sacrificed to the perhaps necessary requirements of a journalistic scoop . " The leading article in The Guardian described his public reversal as showing " moral courage " . Irving , who had been described in the introductory statement by Koch as a historian " with no reputation to lose " , stood at the microphone for questions , and asked how Hitler could have written his diary in the days following the 20 July plot , when his arm had been damaged . He denounced the diaries as forgeries , and held aloft the photocopied pages he had been given from Priesack . He asked if the ink in the diaries had been tested , but there was no response from the managers of Stern . Photographers and film crews jostled to get a better picture of Irving , and some punches were thrown by journalists while security guards moved in and forcibly removed Irving from the room , while he shouted " Ink ! Ink ! " . 
 = = Forensic analysis and the uncovering of the frauds = = 
 With grave doubts now expressed about the authenticity of the diaries , Stern faced the possibility of legal action for disseminating Nazi propaganda . To ensure a definitive judgment on the diaries , Dr Hagen , one of the company 's lawyers , passed three complete diaries to Dr Henke at the Bundesarchiv for a more complete forensic examination . While the debate on the diaries ' authenticity continued , Stern published its special edition on 28 April , which provided Hitler 's purported views on the flight of Hess to England , Kristallnacht and the Holocaust . The following day Heidemann again met with Kujau , and bought the last four diaries from him . 
 On the following Sunday — 1 May 1983 — The Sunday Times published further stories providing the background to the diaries , linking them more closely to the plane crash in 1945 , and providing a profile of Heidemann . That day , when The Daily Express rang Irving for a further comment on the diaries , he informed them that he now believed the diaries to be genuine ; The Times ran the story of Irving 's U @-@ turn the following day . Irving explained that Stern had shown him a diary from April 1945 in which the writing sloped downwards from left to right , and the script of which got smaller along the line . At a subsequent press conference Irving explained that he had been examining the diaries of Dr Theodor Morell , Hitler 's personal doctor , in which Morell diagnosed the Führer as having Parkinson 's disease , a symptom of which was to write in the way the text appeared in the diaries . Harris posits that further motives may also have played a part — the lack of reference to the Holocaust in the diaries may have been perceived by Irving as supporting evidence for his thesis , put forward in his book Hitler 's War , that the Holocaust took place without Hitler 's knowledge . The same day Hagen visited the Bundesarchiv and was told of their findings : ultraviolet light had shown a fluorescent element to the paper , which should not have been present in an old document , and that the bindings of one of the diaries included polyester which had not been made before 1953 . Research in the archives also showed a number of factual errors . The findings were partial only , and not conclusive ; more volumes were provided to aid the analysis . 
 When Hagen reported back to the Stern management , an emergency meeting was called and Schulte @-@ Hillen demanded the identity of Heidemann 's source . The journalist relented , and provided the provenance of the diaries as Kujau had given it to him . Harris describes how a bunker mentality descended on the Stern management as , instead of accepting the truth of the Bundesarchiv 's findings , they searched for alternative explanations as to how post @-@ war whitening agents could have been used in the wartime paper . The paper then released a statement defending their position which Harris judges was " resonant with hollow bravado " . 
 While Koch was touring the US , giving interviews to most of the major news channels , he met Kenneth W. Rendell , a handwriting expert in the studios of CBS , and showed him one of the volumes . Rendell 's first impression was that the diaries were forged . He later reported that " everything looked wrong " , including new @-@ looking ink , poor quality paper and signatures that were " terrible renditions " of Hitler 's . Rendell concludes the diaries were not particularly good fakes , calling them " bad forgeries but a great hoax " . He states that " with the exception of imitating Hitler 's habit of slanting his writing diagonally as he wrote across the page , the forger failed to observe or to imitate the most fundamental characteristics of his handwriting . " 
 On 4 May fifteen volumes of the diaries were removed from the Swiss bank vault and distributed to various forensic scientists : four went to the Bundesarchiv and eleven went to the Swiss specialists in St Gallen . The initial results were ready on 6 May , which confirmed what the forensic experts had been telling the management of Stern for the last week : the diaries were poor forgeries , with modern components and ink that was not in common use in wartime Germany . Measurements had been taken of the evaporation of chloride in the ink which showed the diaries had been written within the previous two years . There were also factual errors , including some from <unk> 's Hitler : Speeches and Proclamations that Kujau had copied . Before passing the news to Stern , the Bundesarchiv had already informed the government , saying it was " a ministerial matter " . The managers at Stern tried to release the first press statement that acknowledged the forensic findings and stated that the diaries were forged , but the official government announcement was released five minutes before Stern 's version of events went out . 
 = = Arrests and trial = = 
 Once the government announcement appeared on television , Kujau took his wife and mistress to Austria ; he introduced the latter to Edith as his cleaner . After he saw a news report a few days later , naming him as the forger , and hearing that Stern had paid nine million DMs , he first phoned his lawyer and then the Hamburg State prosecutor ; the forger agreed to hand himself in at the border between Austria and West Germany the following day . When police raided his house , they found several notebooks identical to those used in the fraud . Kujau continued to use a variation of the story he had told Heidemann — that of obtaining the diaries from the East — but he was bitter that the journalist was still at liberty , and had withheld so much of Stern 's money from him . After thirteen days , on 26 May , he wrote a full confession , stating that Heidemann knew all along that the diaries were forgeries . Heidemann was arrested that evening . 
 Following a police investigation that lasted over a year , on 21 August 1984 the trial against Heidemann and Kujau opened in Hamburg . Both men were charged with defrauding Stern of 9 @.@ 3 million DMs . Despite the seriousness of the charges facing the two men , Hamilton considers that " it also appeared clear that the trial was going to be a farce , a real slapstick affair that would enrage the judge and amuse the entire world . " The proceedings lasted until July 1985 , when both men were sent to prison : four years and eight months for Heidemann , four years and six months for Kujau . In September one of the supporting magistrates overseeing the case was replaced after he fell asleep ; three days later the court were " amused " to see pictures of Idi Amin 's underpants , which Heidemann had framed on his wall . At times the case " denigrated into a <unk> match " between Kujau and Heidemann . In his summing up Judge Hans @-@ Ulrich Schroeder said that " the negligence of Stern has persuaded me to soften the sentences against the two main co @-@ conspirators . " Heidemann was found guilty of stealing 1 @.@ 7 million DMs from Stern ; Kujau guilty of receiving 1 @.@ 5 million DMs for his role in the forgeries . Despite the lengthy investigation and trial , at least five million DMs remained unaccounted for . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 When Kujau was released from prison in 1987 he was suffering from throat cancer . He opened a gallery in Stuttgart and sold " forgeries " of Salvador Dalí and Joan Miró , all signed with his own name . Although he prospered , Kujau was later arrested for forging driving licences ; he was fined the equivalent of £ 2 @,@ 000 . He died of cancer in Stuttgart in September 2000 . 
 Heidemann was also released from prison in 1987 . Five years later it was reported in the German newspaper Der Spiegel that in the 1950s he had been recruited by the Stasi , the East German secret police , to monitor the arrival of American nuclear weapons into West Germany . In 2008 he had debts exceeding € 700 @,@ 000 , and was living on social security ; his situation had not changed by 2013 , and he remained bitter about his treatment . 
 Two of Stern 's editors , Koch and Schmidt , lost their jobs because of the scandal . Both complained strongly when told that their resignations were expected , pointing out that they had both wanted to sack Heidemann in 1981 . A settlement of 3 @.@ 5 million DMs ( c . $ 1 million ) was provided to each of them as part of the severance package . The staff at the magazine were angry at the approach taken by their managers , and held sit @-@ ins to protest at the " management 's bypassing traditional editorial channels and safeguards " . The scandal caused a major crisis for Stern and , according to Esser and Hartung , the magazine " once known for its investigative reporting , became a prime example of sensation @-@ seeking checkbook journalism " . Stern 's credibility was severely damaged and it took the magazine ten years to regain its pre @-@ scandal status and reputation . According to the German Historical Institute , the scandal was also " instrumental in discrediting the tendency toward an ' unprejudiced ' and euphemistic assessment of the Third Reich in West German popular culture " . 
 Murdoch moved Giles to the new position of editor emeritus . When Giles asked what the title meant , Murdoch informed him that " It 's Latin , Frank ; the e means you 're out and the <unk> means you deserved it . " Murdoch later said that " circulation went up and it stayed up . We didn 't lose money or anything like that " , referring to the 20 @,@ 000 new readers the paper retained after the scandal broke , and the fact that Stern returned all the money paid to it by the Sunday Times . In April 2012 , during the Leveson Inquiry , he acknowledged his role in publishing the diaries , and took the blame for making the decision , saying " It was a massive mistake I made and I will have to live with it for the rest of my life . " Trevor @-@ Roper died in 2003 . Despite a long and respected career as a historian , according to Richard Davenport @-@ Hines , his biographer , Trevor @-@ Roper 's role in the scandal left his reputation " permanently besmirched " . In January 1984 Broyles resigned as editor of Newsweek , to " pursue new entrepreneurial ventures " . 
 In 1986 the journalist Robert Harris published an account of the hoax , Selling Hitler : The Story of the Hitler Diaries . Five years later Selling Hitler , a five @-@ episode drama @-@ documentary series based on Harris 's book , was broadcast on the British ITV channel . It starred Jonathan Pryce as Heidemann , Alexei Sayle as Kujau , Tom Baker as Fischer , Alan Bennett as Trevor @-@ Roper , Roger Lloyd @-@ Pack as Irving , Richard Wilson as Nannen and Barry Humphries as Murdoch . Later that year Charles Hamilton published the second book to investigate the forgeries : The Hitler Diaries . In 1992 the story of the diaries was adapted to the big screen by Helmut Dietl , in his satirical German @-@ language film Schtonk ! . The film , which starred Götz George as Heidemann and Uwe <unk> as Kujau , won three Deutscher Filmpreis awards , and nominations for a Golden Globe and an Academy Award . 
 In 2004 one of the diaries was sold at auction for € 6 @,@ 400 to an unknown buyer ; the remainder were handed over by Stern to the Bundesarchiv in 2013 , not as a memento of the Nazi past , but as an example of news media history . One of the Sunday Times journalists involved in the story , Brian MacArthur , later explained why so many experienced journalists and businessmen " were so gullible " about the authenticity of the diaries : 
 ... the discovery of the Hitler diaries offered so tempting a scoop that we all wanted to believe they were genuine . Once hoist with a deal , moreover , we had to go on believing in their authenticity until they were convincingly demonstrated as forgeries . ... The few of us who were in on the secret fed in the adrenalin : we were going to write the most stunning scoop of our careers . 
 = Prisoners of the Sun = 
 Prisoners of the Sun ( French : Le Temple du Soleil ) is the fourteenth volume of The Adventures of Tintin , the comics series by Belgian cartoonist Hergé . The story was serialised weekly in the newly established Tintin magazine from September 1946 to April 1948 . Completing an arc begun in The Seven Crystal Balls , the story tells of young reporter Tintin , his dog Snowy , and friend Captain Haddock as they continue their efforts to rescue the kidnapped Professor Calculus by travelling through Andean villages , mountains , and rain forests , before finding a hidden Inca civilisation . 
 Prisoners of the Sun was a commercial success and was published in book form by Casterman the year following its conclusion . Hergé continued The Adventures of Tintin with Land of Black Gold , while the series itself became a defining part of the Franco @-@ Belgian comics tradition . The two @-@ part adventure was adapted into the 1969 film , Tintin and the Temple of the Sun by Belvision Studios , the first feature @-@ length animated Tintin film . Prisoners of the Sun has also been adapted into two episodes of the 1990s television series The Adventures of Tintin , a video game , and a 2001 musical stage production . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The synopsis continues a plot begun in The Seven Crystal Balls . 
 Young reporter Tintin , his dog Snowy , and friend Captain Haddock arrive in Callao , Peru . There , they plan to intercept the arrival of the Pachacamac , a ship carrying their friend Professor Calculus , who is being held by kidnappers . Tintin boards the ship and learns from Chiquito , the former assistant of General Alcazar and one of the abductors , that Calculus is to be executed for wearing a bracelet belonging to the mummified Incan king Rascar Capac . 
 Tintin barely escapes the ship with his life , and he and Haddock alert the authorities ; but the abductors evade the police and take Calculus to the Andes mountains . Tintin and Haddock pursue them to the mountain town of <unk> , where they board a train that is sabotaged in an attempt to kill them . When they attempt to investigate the whereabouts of Calculus , the local Indios prove to be peculiarly tight @-@ lipped . But then Tintin befriends a young Quechua boy named Zorrino after saving him from Spaniard bullies . A mysterious man observes this act of kindness and gives Tintin a medallion , telling him that it will save him from danger . Zorrino informs Tintin that Calculus is taken to the Temple of the Sun , which lies deep within the Andes , and offers to take them there . 
 After many hardships - including being pursued by four Indios who try their best to leave them stranded or dead - Tintin , Haddock , and Zorrino reach the Temple of the Sun , finding it to be a surviving outpost of the Inca civilisation . They are brought before the Prince of the Sun , flanked by Chiquito and Huascar , the mysterious man Tintin encountered in <unk> . Zorrino is saved from harm when Tintin gives him Huascar 's medallion , but Tintin and Haddock are sentenced to death by the Inca prince for their sacrilegious intrusion . The prince tells them they may choose the hour that Pachacamac , the Sun god , will set alight the pyre on which they will be executed . 
 Tintin and Haddock end up on the same pyre as Calculus . Tintin has , however , chosen the hour of their death to coincide with a solar eclipse , and with a little play @-@ acting , the terrified Inca believe that Tintin can command the Sun . The Inca prince implores Tintin to make the Sun show its light again . At Tintin 's command , the Sun returns , and the three are quickly set free . Afterwards , the Prince of the Sun tells them that the seven crystal balls used on the Sanders @-@ Hardiman expedition members , who had excavated Rascar Capac 's tomb , contained a " mystic liquid " obtained from coca that plunged them into a deep sleep . Each time the Inca high priest cast his spell over seven wax figures of the explorers , he could use them as he willed as punishment for their sacrilege . Tintin convinces the Inca prince that the explorers wished only to make known to the world the splendours of their civilisation . The Inca prince orders Chiquito to destroy the wax figures and at that moment in Europe the seven explorers awaken . After swearing an oath to keep the temple 's existence a secret , Tintin , Haddock and Calculus head home , while Zorrino remains with the Inca , having accepted an offer to live among them . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Amidst the German occupation of Belgium during World War II , Hergé had accepted a position working for Le Soir , the largest circulation French language daily newspaper in the country . Confiscated from its original owners , the German authorities permitted Le Soir to reopen under the directorship of Belgian editor Raymond de Becker , although it remained firmly under Nazi control , supporting the German war effort and espousing anti @-@ Semitism . Joining Le Soir on 15 October 1940 , Hergé was aided by old friend Paul Jamin and the cartoonist Jacques Van Melkebeke . Some Belgians were upset that Hergé was willing to work for a newspaper controlled by the then occupying Nazi administration , although he was heavily impressed by the size of Le Soir 's readership , which reached 600 @,@ 000 . Faced with the reality of Nazi oversight , Hergé abandoned the overt political themes that had pervaded much of his earlier work , instead adopting a policy of neutrality . Without the need to satirise political types , entertainment producer and author Harry Thompson observed that " Hergé was now concentrating more on plot and on developing a new style of character comedy . The public reacted positively . " 
 As with two previous stories , The Secret of the Unicorn and Red Rackham 's Treasure , Hergé developed the idea of a twofold story arc , resulting in the two @-@ part The Seven Crystal Balls and Prisoners of the Sun . Hergé planned for the former story to outline a mystery , while the latter would see his characters undertake an expedition to solve it . His use of an ancient mummy 's curse around which the narrative revolved was inspired by tales of a curse of the pharaohs which had been unearthed during the archaeologist Howard Carter 's 1922 discovery of Pharaoh Tutankhamun 's tomb . This was not the first time that Hergé had been inspired by this tabloid story , having previously done so when authoring Cigars of the Pharaoh . 
 The story began serialisation in Le Soir under the title of Les Sept Boules de Cristal on 16 December 1943 . It was , however , interrupted on 2 September 1944 , as Brussels was liberated from German occupation by the Allied forces on 3 September , upon which Le Soir immediately ceased publication . Hergé had been forced to abandon the story after 152 strips , equivalent to fifty pages of the later published book volume . The story had been left hanging after the scene in which Tintin leaves the hospital after seeing the seven members of the expedition enduring a simultaneous fit . Three days later the entire staff were fired and a new editorial team introduced . In October 1945 , Hergé was approached by Raymond Leblanc , a former member of a conservative Resistance group , the National Royalist Movement ( MNR ) , and his associates André Sinave and Albert Debaty . The trio were planning on launching a weekly magazine for children . Leblanc , who had fond childhood memories of Tintin in the Land of the Soviets , thought Hergé would be ideal for it . Hergé agreed , and Leblanc obtained clearance papers for him , allowing him to work . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Hergé had adopted the idea of a person abducted into a lost Incan city from Gaston Leroux 's 1912 novel , The Bride of the Sun , in which the idea of a solar eclipse also appeared . In turn , the idea of European explorers discovering a lost city had been found in both H. Rider Haggard 's She : A History of Adventure ( 1887 ) and Edgar Rice Burroughs ' Tarzan and the Jewels of Opar ( 1916 ) . His use of the eclipse may also have been influenced by accounts claiming that Christopher Columbus subdued a revolt of indigenous groups in Jamaica in 1503 using knowledge of a solar eclipse that had been predicted by Giovanni Muller 's 1474 calendar . 
 Hergé 's principal source of information about the Andes was Charles Wiener 's 1880 book <unk> et <unk> ( " Peru and Bolivia " ) , which contained 1 @,@ 100 engravings from which Hergé could base his own illustrations . In this way , small details about Andean costume and material culture were accurately copied . Part of the ceremonial costume worn by the Incan priest was based upon a colour painting of Mexican Aztecs produced by Else <unk> for the National Geographic Society which Hergé had a copy of in his files . He ensured that his depiction of the Peruvian trains was accurate by basing them upon examples found in a two @-@ volume picture encyclopedia of railways published by <unk> Hachette in 1927 . 
 Hergé sent his assistant , Edgar P. Jacobs , to the Cinquantenaire Museum to study its collections of Incan material , and also used Jacobs as a model for several of the poses that characters adopt in the story . He had a striped poncho specially made , which he then asked Jacobs to model . Hergé later concluded that the scene in which Tintin hoodwinked the Inca with his knowledge of the sun was implausible , suggesting that solar worshipers with a keen knowledge of astronomy like the Inca would have been well aware of the sun and its eclipses . 
 = = = Publication = = = 
 Prisoners of the Sun was the first of The Adventures of Tintin to be serialised in its entirety in the new Tintin magazine . On the magazine 's launch day of 26 September 1946 , readers who had been without Tintin for two years now received two pages per week in full colour under the title La Temple du Soleil ( The Temple of the Sun ) . It began on what is now page 50 of the previous book The Seven Crystal Balls and included two pages outlining the crystal ball mystery , presented as if it were a press cutting . With Jacobs , Hergé completed the cover of the first issue and finished off The Seven Crystal Balls prior to embarking on Prisoners of the Sun , although Hergé included both under the title of The Temple of the Sun . To lessen his workload , a portion of the two pages of Hergé 's strip was an explanatory block of text about Inca society , titled " Qui <unk> les Incas ? " ( " Who were the Incas ? " ) . Covering issues such as geography , history , and religion , each block was signed in Tintin 's name . 
 In May 1947 , the collaboration between Hergé and Jacobs ended after an argument . Hergé had been jealous of the immediate success of Jacobs ' Blake and Mortimer series , and had turned down Jacobs ' request that he be credited as co @-@ creator of the new Adventures of Tintin . 
 On 17 June 1947 , serialisation of the story paused after Hergé disappeared . Doctors diagnosed him as suffering from a mental breakdown as a result of overwork , and to recover he spent time in retreat at the Abbey of Notre @-@ Dame @-@ de @-@ <unk> . In a letter to his wife Germaine , Hergé wrote , " Life has spoilt me ... I no longer draw like I breathe , as I used to not so long ago . Tintin is no longer me ... my Boy Scout spirit has been badly damaged . " He followed this with a holiday to Gland on Lake Geneva , Switzerland with Germaine . Editors of Tintin magazine posted a sarcastic notice in the magazine stating that " Our friend Hergé is in need of a rest . Oh , don 't worry , he 's fine . But in refusing to marshal his forces to bring you a new episode of The Temple of the Sun each week , our friend is a little over @-@ worked . " He disappeared again in early 1948 , this time for six weeks , again to Gland , but according to biographer Pierre Assouline he was accompanied by a young , married woman , with whom he was having an extra @-@ marital affair . Angered by his absence , the editorial board decided to command other artists and writers to continue the story , a threat which made Hergé return to work . 
 While writing Prisoners of the Sun , Hergé decided that he wanted to move to Argentina , and focused his attention on completing all outstanding commissions so that he could focus on his emigration . He enlisted the aid of Van Melkebeke , Guy <unk> , and Frans <unk> to help finish Prisoners ; they gathered at his home on the Avenue Delleur and produced many of the backgrounds within the story . He also employed his friend Bernard Heuvelmans to help devise the ending of the story ; he paid Heuvelmans 43 @,@ 000 Belgian francs for doing so . Ultimately , Hergé changed his mind about moving to Argentina for reasons that remain unknown . Serialisation of Prisoners of the Sun culminated on 22 April 1948 . As with previous adventures , the title had also been serialised in the French Catholic newspaper Cœurs Vaillants , from 30 November 1947 . 
 = = = Republication = = = 
 After the story arc finished serialisation , the publishing company Casterman divided it into two volumes , Les Sept Boules de Cristal and Le Temple du Soleil , which they released in 1948 and 1949 respectively . To fit into the 62 @-@ page format , a number of scenes were deleted from the story 's publication in book form . These included a scene in which Tintin chases away a cat aboard the Pachacamac , Haddock drawing a picture of Tintin on a wall , Haddock chewing coca provided by Zorrino , Tintin shooting a jaguar , and Haddock discovering gold nuggets under the Temple of the Sun but being unable to take them back with him . British Tintin expert Michael Farr noted that none of these scenes were " integral to the narrative " , and that their removal improved its structure . The reformatting also led to an error in the depiction of the solar eclipse . In the original magazine serialisation , Hergé had depicted the moon moving across the sun in the correct direction for the Southern Hemisphere ; for the book publication , the drawings had been altered , with the moon now moving in the incorrect direction . 
 The book was banned by the Peruvian authorities because , in the map of South America contained within it , a region whose ownership was disputed by Peru and Ecuador was shown as being part of the latter country . 
 = = Critical analysis = = 
 Michael Farr described both The Seven Crystal Balls and Prisoners of the Sun as " classic middle @-@ period Tintin " , commenting on their " surprisingly well @-@ balanced narrative " and the fact that they exhibited scant evidence of Hergé 's turbulent personal life . He felt that the inclusion of paranormal elements to the story did nothing to make the narrative less convincing , and observes Hergé 's recurring depiction of his character 's disturbing dreams . Farr opined that the Inca costumes were drawn with " a care and flamboyance that would do great credit to a major opera house production " , while the Andean landscapes were " worthy of a Cecil B. DeMille film spectacular " . Hergé biographer Benoît Peeters noted that Prisoner of the Sun was one of the Adventures to have " most caught the imagination " , something that he attributed to its " exceptional setting or the strength of the plot " . 
 Harry Thompson noted that , like Red Rackham 's Treasure , Prisoners of the Sun was " an epic journey conditioned by the suspense of not knowing what will happen at the end " ; although he thought that , unlike Red Rackham 's Treasure , it " successfully transfers the fear of its unknown adversaries from the first part of the adventure into the second " . He also thought that , despite all the tribulations Hergé faced while creating it , " the pacing , the retention of suspense right to the end , and the fine balance of humour and drama " do not betray the story 's troubled development . 
 Jean @-@ Marc Lofficier and Randy Lofficier believed that the two @-@ story arc represents " one more leap forward in Hergé 's graphic and narrative skills " as a result of the transition to full colour double pages as the initial means of publication . They thought that this improvement was particularly evident in the scenes of the trek through the Andes in Prisoners of the Sun . They stated that with Prisoners of the Sun , the story had switched into " Hitchcockian thriller mode " , a similar technique that Hergé had adopted into a number of previous adventures . They described the character of Zorrino as " basically a Peruvian version " of Chang Chong @-@ Chen , a character introduced to the series in The Blue Lotus . They described the story as " a philosophical parable , perhaps a hidden reflection of Hergé 's spiritual yearnings " ; in this way anticipating the themes that he would make use of in Tintin in Tibet . Ultimately , they awarded both halves of the story arc five out of five . 
 Literary critic Tom McCarthy identified elements within the story that he believed reflected recurring themes within The Adventures of Tintin . He thought that the appearance of Rascar Capac 's jewels reflected Hergé 's use of jewellery as a theme throughout the series , and that the scene in which Tintin commands the sun god to do his bidding reflects a wider theme throughout the series in which " sacred authority " manifests through voice . The scene in which Haddock causes an avalanche of snow by sneezing reflected what McCarthy considered a wider theme of the danger of sound , while Zorrino 's decision to stay among the Inca was interpreted as a reflection of a wider theme of adoption . Commenting on the execution scene , McCarthy believed that it represented Haddock being " sacrificed on the altar of his own illegitimacy " , a concept that he felt had been echoed throughout the series . 
 In his psychoanalytical study of the Adventures of Tintin , the literary critic Jean @-@ Marie Apostolidès believed that The Seven Crystal Balls – Prisoners of the Sun arc reflects a confrontation between civilisations , and between the sacred and the secular . He described the <unk> society depicted by Hergé as a " totalitarian theocracy " , noting that the Tintin of Tintin in the Land of the Soviets and Tintin in the Congo would have approved of such a political system . He then drew comparisons between the Incan Prince of the Sun and the Syldavian King Muskar XII in King Ottokar 's Sceptre , noting that in both the monarch is threatened by losing a treasured cultural artefact to foreigners . Apostolidès also believed that the eclipse scene reflects a change in the power relations between the sacrificed ( Tintin ) and the sacrificer ( the Inca prince ) . Commenting on Tintin 's dream sequence in which he dreams of Calculus , Haddock , and the Thompsons , Apostolidès believed that it reflected a " latent homosexual desire " , comparing it with the dream sequence in The Crab with the Golden Claws . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 In 1969 , the animation company Belvision Studios , which had produced the 1956 – 57 television series Hergé 's Adventures of Tintin , released its first feature @-@ length animated film , Tintin and the Temple of the Sun , adapted from the Seven Crystal Balls @-@ Prisoners of the Sun story arc . Produced by Raymond Leblanc and directed by Eddie Lateste , it was written by Lateste , the cartoonist Greg , Jos <unk> , and <unk> Molnár . Music was by François Rauber and Zorrino 's song was composed by Jacques Brel . 
 In 1991 , a second animated series based upon The Adventures of Tintin was produced , this time as a collaboration between the French studio Ellipse and the Canadian animation company Nelvana . Prisoners of the Sun was the twelfth story to be adapted and was divided into two thirty @-@ minute episodes . Directed by Stéphane Bernasconi , the series has been praised for being " generally faithful " to the original comics , to the extent that the animation was directly adopted from Hergé 's original panels . 
 In 1997 , the French company Infogrames released a video game based on The Seven Crystal Balls @-@ Prisoners of the Sun story arc , titled Prisoners of the Sun . 
 In 2001 , The Seven Crystal Balls and Prisoners of the Sun were adapted into a theatrical musical , Kuifje – De Zonnetempel ( Tintin – The Temple of the Sun ) , which premiered in Dutch at the Stadsschouwburg in Antwerp , the Netherlands , on 15 September . Adapted for the stage by Seth <unk> and Frank Van <unk> , the production was directed by Dirk de <unk> and included music by Dirk <unk> , featuring Tom Van <unk> in the role of Tintin . Didier Van <unk> adapted the musical into French , and it then premiered a year later in Charleroi as Tintin – Le Temple du Soleil . From there , the production was scheduled for Paris in 2003 but was cancelled . It returned for a brief run in Antwerp on 18 October 2007 . 
 = Cross Game = 
 Cross Game ( <unk> , Kurosu <unk> ) is a romantic comedy baseball manga series by Mitsuru Adachi that was serialized by Shogakukan in Weekly Shōnen Sunday between May 11 , 2005 ( issue 22 / 23 ) and February 17 , 2010 ( issue 12 ) . It is collected in 17 tankōbon volumes , with the final volume published in April 2010 , shortly after the end of the anime series . It received the 54th Shogakukan Manga Award for shōnen manga in 2009 , and has been praised internationally as quietly brilliant and a great success . The series was adapted as a 50 @-@ episode anime television series that aired on the TV Tokyo network from April 5 , 2009 to March 28 , 2010 . The first episode of the anime , which covers the time frame of the first volume of the manga , received high praise , even outside Japan . 
 Cross Game is the story of Ko Kitamura and the four neighboring Tsukishima sisters , Ichiyo , Wakaba , Aoba , and Momiji . Wakaba and Ko were born on the same day in the same hospital and are close enough that Wakaba treats Ko as her boyfriend , though nothing is officially declared , while Aoba , one year younger than them , hates how Ko is " taking " her sister away from her . After Wakaba dies , Ko and Aoba slowly grow closer as they strive to fulfill Wakaba 's final dream of seeing them play in the high school baseball championship in Koshien Stadium . 
 The manga is divided into multiple parts . Part One , which consists of volume one , is a prologue that takes place while the main characters are in elementary school , ending with Wakaba 's death . Part Two starts four years later with Ko in his third year of junior high and continues into the summer of his third year of high school . Part Three continues the story without a break , ending with Ko and Aoba traveling to Koshien . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At the start of Part One , Ko Kitamura , son of the owner of Kitamura Sports , lives in the same neighborhood as the batting center run by the Tsukishima family . Due to their proximity and the relationship between their businesses , the Kitamura and Tsukishima families have been close for many years , and their children go back and forth between the two homes . Because Ko and Wakaba are the same age and always together , Aoba is jealous of all the time Ko spends with her older sister . Aoba is a natural pitcher with excellent form , and Ko secretly trains to become as good as she is , even while publicly showing little interest in baseball . Then Wakaba dies in a swimming accident at a summer camp during fifth grade . 
 Part Two starts with Ko in his third year of junior high , as he continues training in secret . When he enters Seishu High School , he joins the baseball club along with his childhood friends , Akaishi and Nakanishi . However , the interim principal ( the regular principal is on medical leave ) has brought in a new head coach , and he in turn brings in transfer students from other schools as ringers just to play baseball . This team , led by their star , Yūhei Azuma , is the clear favorite of the school . Because the three friends refuse to take evaluation tests to join the first @-@ string team , they are placed on the second @-@ string " portable " team under the former head coach , Maeno , who has to use the Seishu Junior High School field for practice . This causes a rivalry between the two parts of the team . In the first summer practice scrimmage between them , the portable team loses by only a narrow margin . 
 During the summer vacation , while the first @-@ string team plays in the prefectural qualifying tournament for Koshien , Maeno has the portable team practice at a recently closed elementary school with the support from a mysterious old man . The portable team also has six practice matches with other local high schools , all of which reached semifinals or higher in the regional preliminaries . Near the end of summer vacation , the interim principal decides to dissolve the portable team . However , Coach Maeno asks for a rematch scrimmage with the first @-@ string team , after which the losing team would be dissolved and that coach would leave . The portable team , playing with Aoba , wins a narrow victory . The first @-@ string team is dissolved , and the head coach and the interim principal leave to work at other schools . 
 In the spring , Ko becomes a second @-@ year student and Aoba enters Seishu High School . Yūhei , who stays at Seishu despite having been on the former first @-@ string team , moves in with Ko 's family after the first @-@ stringers ' dormitory is closed . The reformed Seishu team goes on to prove themselves by defeating <unk> High School in the first round of the summer prefectural qualifying tournament . However , they lose to their second @-@ round opponents , Ryuō , in overtime , ending Seishu 's hopes of Koshien for the year . Ryuō subsequently reaches Koshien , advances up to the semifinals where they are narrowly beaten . However , Ryuō then goes on to win the spring invitational Koshien tournament later that same year . 
 As Ko and Aoba enter their summer break , a girl named Akane Takigawa with a striking resemblance to Wakaba moves in next door to Ko . This causes mixed feelings among the various characters , particularly Ko , Aoba , and Akaishi ( who had also liked Wakaba ) . Akane soon becomes friends with Ko and <unk> , and begins working in the Tsukishima cafe . As another year begins , the romantic subplots further solidify when Yūhei expresses an interest in Aoba . Meanwhile , Seishu gains a new assistant coach in the form of Yūhei 's older brother Junpei , after Ichiyo agrees to marry him if Seishu makes it to Koshien . 
 When the prefectural summer baseball tournament starts , Seishu starts with a dominating shutout against its first @-@ round opponent , <unk> Municipal High School . In the second round , they face Sena Municipal High School led by <unk> Miki , a former Seishu first @-@ string player , which in the first round defeated the team headed by Seishu 's former head coach . Seishu wins with a nearly perfect game , ending Part Two of the story . 
 Part Three starts with the prefectural tournament still in progress . After another win by Seishu , Akane is hospitalized due to an unspecified illness . Initially , Akaishi 's play is affected by worrying about Akane 's condition . Ko continues to perform well and promises Akane to go on a date with her if Seishu reaches Koshien . However , Akane 's illness is more severe than expected , and she is scheduled for surgery on the morning of the prefectural final against Ryuō . Before the game begins , Ko tells Aoba he loves her more than anyone , but in such a way she thinks he is lying until after Seishu wins in extra innings , clinching a Koshien berth . In the final chapter , the morning before traveling to Koshien , Akaishi visits Akane recovering in the hospital and Ko and Aoba head for the train station holding hands . 
 = = Main characters = = 
 Ko Kitamura ( <unk> 光 , Kitamura Kō ) Voiced by : Miyu Irino 
 One of the two protagonists , Ko is in fifth grade in Part One and enters Seishu High School early in Part Two . Despite their age in Part One , he and Wakaba are very close and their families treat them as if they are a couple . While he shows little interest in baseball to outsiders , he has practiced daily at the Tsukishima Batting Center in the 60 @-@ mile @-@ per @-@ hour ( 97 km / h ) cage and above since he was old enough to swing a bat . Ko is described by several other characters , including Ichiyo , <unk> Azuma , and Junpei Azuma , as very like Aoba . In particular , they say the two are both very competitive , and Junpei attributes their frequent squabbling to their similarities . After a sandlot game against Aoba 's team in elementary school , Ko is inspired by her pitching form to become a pitcher himself , and at Wakaba 's urging secretly adopts Aoba 's daily training regimen . Although he does not play baseball in junior high school , Akaishi and Nakanishi convince him to join the high school baseball team . With his changeup pitches , control , and incredible fastball , he becomes the ace pitcher in Seishu High School , as well as a strong hitter . Ko describes himself as having no self @-@ confidence and an excellent liar . Despite being at odds with one another , Ko and Aoba share a deep bond through their love for Wakaba . Ko takes to heart what Aoba has to say and values her opinion more than others . 
 Aoba Tsukishima ( <unk> <unk> , Tsukishima Aoba ) Voiced by : Haruka Tomatsu 
 The other protagonist , Aoba is the third daughter of the Tsukishima family , one year younger than Ko and Wakaba . Aoba is seen as a tomboy by other characters , one who loves baseball very much . Her father has played catch with Aoba since she was little , thus grooming her into a strong pitcher . She has a poster of Ryota Igarashi , a famous fastball pitcher , on her bedroom wall , and when she was young Aoba told Wakaba she was only interested in a guy who could pitch a fastball over 100 miles per hour ( 160 km / h ) . She has an excellent pitching form , on which Ko based his own form , and she has a wide variety of pitches . Although as a girl she cannot play in official inter @-@ school games , in practice games she plays center field or replaces Ko as pitcher . Many younger members of the Seishu baseball team are inspired by how much effort she puts into baseball and coaching them , and work hard to not disappoint her . Ko claims she is secretly disappointed that she will never be able to pitch in an official game , and <unk> Azuma points out that she is using Ko as her proxy to get to Koshien . 
 Aoba is very close to Wakaba in Part One , and according to Ichiyo jealous of how much time Wakaba spends with Ko . She frequently reiterates her intense dislike of Ko throughout the series and often squabbles with him . Despite this , she is very like him in behavior and talents , as several characters comment . After Ko becomes the ace pitcher of Seishu High School , Aoba slowly comes to admit his qualities as a player , and becomes less reluctant to offer advice and even teaches him new breaking pitches . Eventually she admits she has faith in his ability to fulfill Wakaba 's last dream , in which he pitches at Koshien . She is often teased about her similarities with Ko in their behaviors and habits . Her name means " green leaf " or " fresh leaf " . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 Cross Game was written and illustrated by Mitsuru Adachi and published by Shogakukan . It began serialization on May 11 , 2005 in the shōnen manga magazine Shōnen Sunday ( issue 22 / 23 2005 ) , and concluded with the 160th chapter in February 17 , 2010 ( issue 12 2010 ) . The seventeenth and final tankōbon volume is scheduled for release in April 2010 . The series is divided into multiple parts . Part One , " Wakaba 's Season " , consists of volume one , and takes place while the main characters are in elementary school . Part Two , " Aoba 's Season " , covering volumes 2 through 14 , with chapter numbering restarted from 1 , begins four years later with Ko in his third year of junior high school and continues into high school . In October 2008 , the series went on hiatus at the end of Part Two , resuming in March 2009 with the start of Part Three , which is untitled and covers volumes 15 through 17 , with Ko in the summer of his third year of high school . 
 The series is licensed in France by Editions Tonkam , in Italy by <unk> <unk> , in South Korea by Daiwon C.I. , in Hong Kong by Jonesky , in Taiwan by <unk> Publishing Group , in Indonesia by <unk> Media <unk> , and in Thailand by <unk> Publishing . 
 In March 2010 , Viz Media confirmed the series licensing in North America . The first volume , collecting the first three tankōbon volumes , was published October 12 , 2010 , with publication on @-@ going . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 Cross Game was adapted as an anime television series produced by <unk> and directed by Osamu <unk> , with character designs by Yuuji Kondō and music by Kotaro Nakagawa . The series aired on the TV Tokyo network beginning on April 5 , 2009 in the 10 : 00 – 10 : 30 am slot ; episodes began syndication later in April 2009 on AT @-@ X and other channels in Japan , and finished airing on March 28 , 2010 . The first DVD volume of episodes was released in Japan on July 24 , 2009 , with additional DVDs released monthly . 
 The opening theme song , " Summer Rain " , was written by Kentarō <unk> and sung by <unk> . It was released by Warner Music Japan on April 15 , 2009 in both regular and limited edition versions , and peak ranked at # 2 on the Oricon singles chart . The ending theme song for episodes 1 – 13 , " <unk> Dream " ( <unk> , Koi <unk> Mita Yume ) , was composed and sung by Ayaka and arranged by Shintarō Tokita . It was released as a single by Warner Music Japan in both regular and limited edition versions on April 22 , 2009 , and reached # 6 on the Oricon singles chart . The ending theme for episodes 14 @-@ 26 , " Orange Days " ( <unk> , <unk> Days ) by <unk> , was released as a single by Warner Music Japan on August 5 , 2009 . The ending theme song for episodes 27 @-@ 39 was " <unk> na Koi ja <unk> " ( <unk> ) by Tsuru , which was released as a single on November 11 , 2009 . The ending theme song for episodes 40 @-@ 49 was " Rehearsal " ( <unk> , " <unk> " ) by Natsuko Kondō . The final ending theme , for episode 50 , was Loving Maiden ( <unk> , Koisuru Otome ) , also by Kondō . 
 Viz began streaming the Cross Game anime in North America in May 2010 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 2009 , the manga series received the 54th Shogakukan Manga Award for shōnen manga in Japan . The first volume of the French edition won the Prix Tam @-@ Tam <unk> Manga 2007 . The manga was also used in an academic paper presented at the 2007 conference of the International Research Society for Children 's Literature as an example of telling a story using " silent " scenes ( scenes with no dialogue ) to powerfully convey a message . 
 The first two volumes of the Japanese edition were described by Anime News Network ( ANN ) as " quietly brilliant " and " the slice @-@ of @-@ life genre at its best " , saying that despite some " storytelling goofs " , there is " no matching the pleasant feelings that come from reading this series . " The French edition was praised by Manga News as a " great success " and " a pure delight as usual , " citing as key ingredients the " appealing and funny characters " put in funny situations , accessible drawing style , and Adachi 's talent for staging baseball scenes ; Adachi was praised for his ability to mix " the sports world which he cherishes so much and the love relationships that are not yet real but so much implied and awaited " and his skill at rendering moving scenes without dialogue . The reviewer noted that while Adachi 's art style has not changed much since Touch , his layouts are cleaner and his action scenes more dynamic than before . Anime Land praised Adachi for his " sense of the elliptical and staging " , the verisimilitude of his stories , appealing secondary characters , and ability to develop comedy in just one panel . The reviewer claimed Adachi 's handling of Wakaba 's death is " remarkable " and that the event " gave real meaning " to the story . 
 The first episode of the anime series was called the " masterpiece of the new season " by ANN , which also complimented the musical score as " understated but highly effective " . Two reviewers at ANN gave it the highest possible rating , and one said that he would have given it a higher rating if possible . Another praised its " honest and heartfelt storytelling " while saying it would be easy to call the episode 's pacing " almost too @-@ languid " . A fourth reviewer found it to be typical of Adachi anime adaptations , but that the production values were " at best , mediocre and , at times , brushing up against the marginal " . 
 Chris Beveridge of Mania.com , after viewing the first episode , said the series had " an older feeling to it " because of the rounder character designs reminiscent of those from the 1980s and 1990s , calling it a " great look " with a " wonderful simplicity " and backgrounds " filled with detail " . Beveridge called the animation " solid " , and stated that the series had " a whole lot of potential " , making him excited to see more . He was impressed with the way the events of episode one were handled in the second episode , comparing the pacing and style to that of Kimagure Orange Road , which he stated is one of his favorites series . He especially liked the way the budding romance was shown between Ko and Wakaba back in the elementary school days , and how it affected the current relationship between Ko and Aoba . 
 Beveridge called the third episode " understated " , moving at a slower pace which helps to begin showing the true nature of several of the characters , and the good pacing continues into the fourth episode where a dynamic between Akaishi , Nakanishi , and Ko is developed . Beveridge praised the character building in the fifth episode , calling the interaction of Ko and Aoba " very charming " and " reminiscent of real childhoods " , with things " starting to fall into place " for the main focus of the series ( high school baseball ) by the end of the sixth episode . He praises the exposition used in the seventh episode , the protective instinct of Ko , Nakanishi , and Akaishi when it comes to Aoba , the use of flashbacks which show how the past is affecting the characters in the present , and the good pacing which " really sets it apart from almost every other sports show " . 
 = Miracle at St. Anna = 
 Miracle at St. Anna is a 2008 American – Italian epic war film directed by Spike Lee , and adapted by James McBride from his eponymous 2003 novel . The film stars Derek Luke , Michael Ealy , Laz Alonso , Omar Benson Miller , Pierfrancesco Favino and Valentina Cervi . Miracle at St. Anna is set primarily in Italy during German @-@ occupied Europe in World War II . It tells the story of four Buffalo Soldiers of the 92nd Infantry Division who seek refuge in a small Tuscan village , where they form a bond with the residents . The story is presented as a flashback , as one survivor reflects upon his experiences in a frame story set in 1980s New York . Several real @-@ life events that occurred during the war , such as the Sant 'Anna di Stazzema massacre , are re @-@ enacted , placing Miracle at St. Anna within the genre of historical fiction . 
 Lee first learned of the novel in 2004 and approached McBride with the idea of a film adaptation . In Europe , the film 's development attracted the attention of Italian film producers , and Lee ’ s reputation as an acclaimed filmmaker helped secure the $ 45 million budget . A majority of the film was shot in Italy , on several locations affected by World War II . Other filming locations included New York , Louisiana and The Bahamas . Frequent Lee collaborator Terence Blanchard composed the score , and the visual effects were created by Industrial Light & Magic . 
 Miracle at St. Anna premiered at the 2008 Toronto International Film Festival before it was released on September 26 , 2008 . It was met with mostly negative reviews from critics and drew controversy in Italy over historical inaccuracies . During its theatrical run , Miracle at St. Anna was a box office disappointment , grossing only $ 9 @.@ 3 million worldwide , but gained further $ 10 @,@ 1 million from domestic DVD sales . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1983 , Hector Negron , an aged Puerto Rican World War II veteran , works as a post office clerk in New York City . After recognizing a customer , Negron shoots and kills the man with a German Luger pistol . Several hours later , rookie reporter Tim Boyle and Detective Tony Ricci are at the crime scene seeking information . At Negron 's apartment , Boyle , Ricci and other officers discover a finely carved statue head , the Head of the Primavera , a long missing segment from the Ponte Santa Trinita . Also found is a Purple Heart and a photograph revealing that Negron was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross and Silver Star . 
 Negron , in a flashback tells of his war experiences as a young corporal of the segregated 92nd Infantry Division in 1944 Italy . A disastrous attack ensues on German positions across the Serchio River . An officer , Captain Nokes , calls down artillery on the 92nd 's own position , refusing to believe their reports of how far they have advanced . Many American soldiers are killed , leaving Negron stranded on the wrong side of the river with three men : Staff Sergeant Aubrey Stamps , Sergeant Bishop Cummings , and Private Sam Train . Sam rescues an Italian boy named Angelo from a collapsing building , and discovers the Head of the Primavera , which Sam believes to carry magical powers . While traveling through the mountains of Tuscany , the soldiers enter a small village , where they form a bond with the residents . Sam grows especially fond of Angelo , becoming the boy 's father figure . One Italian villager , Renata , soon becomes entangled in a love triangle with Stamps and Bishop , which creates conflict . 
 After Negron gets his damaged backpack radio working , the soldiers contact headquarters and are told to capture an enemy soldier . A local Partisan group arrives with a young German deserter , Hans Brundt , as their prisoner . Earlier , residents of the nearby village of Sant 'Anna di Stazzema were killed by German forces following a betrayal by a Partisan , named Rodolfo , who knows that Brundt can identify him as the traitor . After concealing the fact that German forces are approaching the village in a counterattack , Rodolfo kills Brundt and the Partisan leader before escaping . It is Rodolfo whom Negron will kill 39 years later . Captain Nokes arrives in the village to interrogate Brundt and finds him dead . The Americans prepare to leave the village ahead of a German counterattack , but Sam refuses to leave Angelo behind . After promising to court @-@ martial all four soldiers , Nokes and his contingent drive out of town , but he is killed in the opening German offensive . 
 The remaining American soldiers and Partisans fight the Germans . Sam is fatally wounded after being shot twice while carrying an unconscious Angelo and dies from his injuries . Bishop and Negron hold off the Germans while Stamps tries to move the villagers to safety , but they are too heavily outnumbered . Renata and Stamps are killed , and Bishop dies after successfully reviving Angelo . Negron , in the retreat , is shot in the back and is saved by the radio . After Angelo gives him the Head of the Primavera , Negron gives the boy his rosary and tells him to leave . Negron is spared by a disillusioned German officer who hands over his own Luger and tells Negron to defend himself . American soldiers arrive and secure the village before evacuating the wounded Negron and Angelo , the sole survivors of the German attack . 
 In 1984 , Negron is the defendant in a court proceeding , facing a life sentence for his killing of Rodolfo . He is successfully defended by a powerful executive attorney acting on behalf of a wealthy man . Hector is brought to the Bahamas and is reunited with the Head of the Primavera , accompanied by its new owner who takes out a rosary and reveals himself as an adult Angelo . They both hold Hector 's rosary and happily burst into tears . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Derek Luke as Staff Sergeant Aubrey Stamps : 
 One of four stranded Buffalo Soldiers from the 92nd Infantry Division . Director Spike Lee described Stamps as “ the leader ” of the men , while screenwriter James McBride stated that , “ Stamps is a well @-@ educated college graduate who has both faith and disappointment in the American system . He ’ s deeply divided as to what his place and the place of the Negro in American society is or should be . ” Wesley Snipes was originally cast as Stamps , but could not commit due to his financial troubles . 
 Michael Ealy as Sergeant Bishop Cummings : 
 One of the four soldiers , a womanizer and card player . The character is also known for being arrogant and distrustful , and shows hatred towards his white commanders . Lee stated that the character is “ a happy @-@ go @-@ lucky guy . He does not like to be under the thumb of authority . He likes card games and women . ” Ealy described the character ’ s indifference : “ I think Bishop is the voice that doesn ’ t believe change is going to come , and doesn ’ t believe that he belongs over there fighting . ” Terrence Howard was originally in talks to play Bishop , prior to Ealy 's casting . 
 Laz Alonso as Corporal Hector Negron : 
 Negron first appears in the film 's frame story as a bitter , 70 @-@ year @-@ old World War II veteran living in Harlem , New York who reflects on his experiences during World War II . Negron , a black Puerto Rican , is fluent in English , Spanish and Italian , which enables him to serve as a translator for the Americans and Italians . Alonso first learned of the novel from his agent and read it prior to auditioning for the role . He had to convince Lee that he was fluent in Spanish , and created an audition tape of himself speaking the language , which won him the role . Alonso found difficulty in portraying Negron as an elderly World War II veteran : “ This role was very emotionally draining . Ninety percent of the time , the elderly have outlived most of the people they have loved . When I played Negrón as an old man , I had to focus on everything I ’ ve lost in my life : my dad , friends and love lost , and that was a really depressing thing to do . ” 
 Omar Benson Miller as Private First Class Samuel “ Sam ” Train : 
 The “ biggest ” of the four soldiers , Sam is known for his child @-@ like personality . He befriends a young Italian boy , Angelo <unk> , and becomes a father figure to the child . Sam is first to discover a finely carved statue head , the Head of the Primavera , which he believes to carry magical powers . Miller was a fan of McBride 's novel prior to learning of the film adaptation by Lee . He fought hard to win the role of Sam , which resulted in him physically preparing for the part : “ My physical prep was a little different than everybody else ’ s , because Spike wanted me for the movie , but he told me I had to lose weight to do it . I had nine weeks to lose 60 pounds . We got it done . ” 
 Matteo Sciabordi as Angelo <unk> – The Boy : 
 A young Italian boy who befriends Sam Train . Sciabordi appears in his debut film role . Lee issued a casting call for an Italian child actor . 5 @,@ 000 child actors auditioned for the role prior to Sciabordi ’ s casting . Sciabordi described working with co @-@ star Omar Benson Miller : “ Omar was great fun . We were always playing and he even taught me how to play baseball . ” Luigi Lo Cascio portrays an adult Angelo in the film ’ s final scene . 
 Pierfrancesco Favino as Peppi ” The Great Butterfly ” <unk> : 
 The leader of a Partisan group operating in the area . Favino was the filmmakers ' primary choice for the role . McBride suggested that the character represents the great Partisan leaders who led thousands in Italy throughout World War II : " He 's a deeply thoughtful young man . After witnessing several atrocities , he basically snaps and becomes one of the most ruthless and most clever and most sought @-@ after Partisans . Although he 's ruthless against his enemies , he 's always a fair @-@ minded person , deeply kind , fighting for his country — not fighting to kill Germans , fighting to kill the enemy . He 's a leader with a heart . " 
 Valentina Cervi as Renata <unk> : 
 One of the Italian villagers , who proves to be an instant ally of the four soldiers . Renata soon becomes entangled in a love triangle with Stamps and Bishop , which creates conflict . McBride said of the character , " Renata exemplifies the difficulties Italian women faced during the war . Her husband was drafted and she hasn ’ t heard from him in two years . She 's very smart and is one of the few people in her village who has learned some English . She tries very hard to make her father renounce his Fascist beliefs . " 
 John Turturro plays Detective Antonio " Tony " Ricci , who is charged with investigating a post office murder in 1983 ; Joseph Gordon @-@ Levitt plays Tim Boyle , the investigative reporter assigned to cover the murder and subsequent discovery of an Italian artifact ; and Kerry Washington plays Zana Wilder , a lawyer hired to represent the suspected post office murderer . Naomi Campbell was originally cast as Wilder in September 2007 , but later pulled out due to scheduling conflicts . 
 Other cast members include John Leguizamo , in a cameo appearance , as Enrico ; D. B. Sweeney as Colonel Jack Driscoll , an advocate for the Buffalo Soldiers ; Robert John Burke as General Ned Almond , a high @-@ ranking officer who opposes the 92nd Division ; Omari Hardwick as Platoon Commander <unk> ; <unk> <unk> as Ludovico <unk> , Renata ’ s Fascist father ; Sergio <unk> as Rodolfo <unk> , a Partisan of questionable loyalties ; Lydia Biondi as <unk> , a village healer ; Michael K. Williams as a frightened soldier ; Christian Berkel as German officer <unk> ; Jan Pohl as Hans Brundt , the German deserter ; and Alexandra Maria Lara as Mildred <unk> , nicknamed Axis Sally , an American broadcaster employed by the Germans as a propagandist . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The novel Miracle at St. Anna was written by James McBride originating from his late uncle 's experiences as a World War II soldier . Upon writing the novel , McBride conducted his own research and learned of the 92nd Infantry Division , which consisted of 15 @,@ 000 African @-@ American soldiers , who served in Italy during World War II from August 1944 to November 1945 . McBride interviewed several remaining members of the 92nd Division . " I studied Italian at The New School in New York City , " he explained . " I moved to Italy with my family for six months . I interviewed dozens of Italians — Partisans and Fascists . I interviewed dozens of African @-@ American soldiers who fought in the war , most who have since passed away . I must have read at least 20 books . I went to the Army War College in Carlisle , Pennsylvania . I studied the whole business of what the 92nd did in Italy during the war , to try to get an idea of what really transpired . " The 92nd Division served as the basis for McBride 's novel , which was published in 2003 . 
 Spike Lee first learned of the novel in 2004 and contacted McBride about making a film adaptation . He felt that McBride was the perfect person to write the screenplay , believing that his novel would serve as a guide . Commenting on the difficult process of adapting his book into a screenplay , McBride stated , “ As a novelist , you tend to think internally . You can guide what the character says and you can explore what he or she is thinking . Movies don 't have time to explain . You have to get right to the muscle . ” 
 The film adaptation of Miracle at St. Anna attracted the attention of Italian producers Roberto Cicutto and Luigi Musini , the co @-@ founders of On My Own <unk> <unk> . Cicutto explained that they knew that Lee was " not just coming to Italy to make a film as an American director , but to make a film that belongs to his culture and to our history . " The film 's budget was an estimated $ 45 million . Under their Own My Own production banner , Cicutto and Musini contributed $ 8 @.@ 74 million . Lee 's reputation as an acclaimed filmmaker in Europe , where he served as a jury member of the 2004 Venice Film Festival , also helped the filmmakers obtain two @-@ thirds of the budget from Italy 's RAI Cinema and France 's TF1 ( $ 30 million ) . Touchstone Pictures provided the remainder ( $ 6 @.@ 26 million ) , and later released the film in North America . 
 Lee described Miracle at St. Anna as an " ensemble piece " and aimed for authenticity in his depiction of American and German soldiers battling in Italy . In casting Italian actors , he held a casting call in Rome . The Italian actors , all born in Rome , were coached to sound as though they were from Tuscany . The actors portraying soldiers underwent a two @-@ week boot camp , supervised by senior military advisor Billy Budd , a 15 @-@ year Royal Marine veteran who had served in the Falklands War . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography for Miracle at St. Anna lasted nine weeks , beginning in October 2007 and concluding in December of that year ; filming took place in Italy , New York , Louisiana and The Bahamas . The film was the first by Lee to be shot in Europe , and the director insisted on shooting on locations where the story is set . Filming began in Tuscany , where the Tuscan regional government gave Lee permission to film where the actual events took place . According to producer Luigi Musini , Miracle at St. Anna was shot along the Gothic Line , which was the major line of defense in the final stages of World War II : " The location is highly representative of what the war was in Italy , what our resistance was . True dramatic episodes took place there . ” The first ten days of filming took place on the Serchio River , covering the battle sequence that opens the film . A scene that recreates the Sant 'Anna di Stazzema massacre was shot where the atrocity took place ; the massacre — in which over 500 villagers were murdered by German occupation forces — is re @-@ enacted in the film . Filming then took place in Rome for one month ; in New York for four days ; in White Castle , Louisiana for two days ; and in The Bahamas for two days . 
 = = = = Design and effects = = = = 
 Matthew Libatique served as cinematographer , having previously collaborated with Lee on the films She Hate Me ( 2004 ) and Inside Man ( 2006 ) . Libatique relied on the use of natural light , which proved challenging for scenes shot indoors . The final battle sequence in the film was especially difficult as the film relied on the use of practical effects and difficult weather conditions . Libatique 's solution was to collaborate with Lee , military advisor Billy Budd , and first assistant director Mike Ellis in creating storyboards to choreograph the scenes . Production designer <unk> Zera was tasked with filling outdoor locations with greenery , rebuilding exteriors and constructing the interior of an Italian barn . Costume designer Carlo <unk> consulted with a former Buffalo Soldier of the 92nd Division , prior to designing the American soldiers ' outfits . He also provided contemporary and historical wardrobe pieces . Ernest Dickerson served as the film 's second unit director , cinematographer , and camera operator . The visual effects were created by George Lucas ' Industrial Light & Magic ( ILM ) . After Lee approached him , Lucas allowed ILM 's team of artists to work on the visual effects for the film . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Terence Blanchard composed the film score , marking his twelfth collaboration with Lee . For the score , he attempted to make a distinction between American and German soldiers . " That was first done through the use of percussion , using a higher @-@ pitched , tighter sound for Germans , and a fuller @-@ field drum sound for Americans , " he explained . " I also drew a distinction by using French horns for American forces , and a Wagner <unk> for German forces . " Scoring the film required the use of a 90 @-@ piece orchestra , which was larger than in any of Lee 's previous films . Blanchard also relied on the use of instruments from the 1940s era , including a mandolin , accordion , slide guitar and rope drum . 
 The film 's soundtrack , titled Miracle at St. Anna : Original Soundtrack , was released in CD and digital downloading formats by Hollywood Records on September 23 , 2008 . 
 = = Release = = 
 Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures released Miracle at St. Anna under Touchstone Pictures . The film 's world premiere was at the 2008 Toronto International Film Festival on September 7 , 2008 . The film later premiered in France at the 34th Deauville American Film Festival on September 10 , 2008 . Miracle at St. Anna premiered in New York City at the Ziegfeld Theatre on September 22 , 2008 . Disney released the film in the United States and Canada on September 26 , 2008 . The film was released in Italy on October 3 , 2008 ; in Romania on April 10 , 2009 ; in Bolivia and Brazil on April 30 , 2009 ; in the United Arab Emirates on May 28 , 2009 ; and in Lebanon on September 10 , 2009 . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Miracle at St. Anna grossed $ 7 @,@ 658 @,@ 999 in North America and $ 1 @,@ 404 @,@ 716 from markets elsewhere — a worldwide total of $ 9 @,@ 323 @,@ 833 against a $ 45 million budget . 
 On its opening day in North America , the film debuted at ninth place , grossing $ 967 @,@ 329 from 1 @,@ 185 theaters . The end of the opening weekend saw the film take a total of $ 3 @,@ 477 @,@ 996 — for an average of $ 2 @,@ 935 per theater — finishing as the number eight grossing film of the weekend . Steve Mason of Hollywood.com believed that Miracle at St. Anna 's negative reviews and moviegoers ' declining interest in war films contributed to the film 's poor box office performance . On its second weekend , the film saw a 50 @.@ 1 % decrease in revenue , moving down to fourteenth place and earning an additional $ 1 @,@ 736 @,@ 302 — an average of $ 1 @,@ 465 per theatre . Miracle at St. Anna was pulled out of theatres on November 25 , 2008 after 61 days ( 8 @.@ 7 weeks ) of domestic release . 
 Following its release in North America , Miracle at St. Anna continued to perform poorly in international markets . Its highest gross was in Italy , where it grossed $ 1 @,@ 363 @,@ 754 during its theatrical run . Also contributing to the film 's $ 1 @.@ 4 million gross in international markets was Bolivia ( $ 9 @,@ 821 ) , Brazil ( $ 9 @,@ 821 ) , Lebanon ( $ 3 @,@ 184 ) , Romania ( $ 1 @,@ 465 ) , and the United Arab Emirates ( $ 26 @,@ 492 ) . 
 = = = Litigation = = = 
 Following the theatrical release of Miracle at St. Anna , Spike Lee and the Italian production company On My Own <unk> <unk> brought a lawsuit against TF1 , alleging that the company failed in its contractual agreement with On My Own to distribute the film in international markets , excluding the United States , Canada and Italy . In its defense , TF1 refused to distribute Miracle at St. Anna , claiming that Lee had made a different film than the one promised , and refused to pay On My Own the € 11 million advance needed to distribute the film internationally . 
 On June 21 , 2011 , a Paris court ruled in Lee and On My Own 's favor , believing that TF1 failed to honor the contract , which proved " disastrous " for the film . TF1 was fined € 32 million ( US $ 46 million ) . TF1 was ordered to pay On My Own € 20 million in damages , plus a further € 1 million for moral prejudice ; Lee was awarded € 1 million , while screenwriter James McBride received € 200 @,@ 000 ; TF1 was also ordered to pay € 13 million to BNP Paribas to cover the advance it had failed to pay . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The film has received mostly negative reviews from critics . Rotten Tomatoes sampled 119 reviewers with a 34 % of " fresh " and a weighted average of 5 @.@ 2 / 10 . The website 's consensus states " Miracle at St. Anna is a well @-@ intentioned but overlong , disjointed affair that hits few of the right notes . " Metacritic , another review aggregator , assigned the film a normalized score of 37 % based on 31 reviews from mainstream critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews " . 
 Todd McCarthy of Variety called the film " a clunky , poorly constructed drama designed to spotlight the little @-@ remarked role of black American soldiers in World War II . " James Rocchi , writing for Cinematical , gave the film a mixed review : " When Miracle at St. Anna falters , it 's in the moments that seem like they could have been crafted by any other film maker ; when Miracle at St. Anna succeeds , it 's in the moments that could only have been crafted by Lee . " Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post wrote that the film was " overwrought , overproduced , <unk> and overlong " and that " Miracle at St. Anna finally suffers from the worst filmmaking sin of all : the failure of trust , in the story and the audience . " Claudia Puig of USA Today wrote that the film " aspires to be epic , but mostly it 's just unfocused , sprawling and badly in need of editing " and that " [ i ] t tries hard to be inspiring , but it has jarring tonal shifts , stereotyped characters and a lack of narrative perspective . " Peter Travers of Rolling Stone described the film as " too long , lazily constructed , and crammed with too many characters and subplots for any director to develop fully outside of an HBO miniseries . " 
 Despite a mostly negative reception , Miracle at St. Anna received some praise . Eric D. Snider , writing for Film.com praised the film , writing , " This is beyond the scope of anything Lee has done before , and he rises to the challenge remarkably well , with battle scenes nearly as visceral and jolting as those in Saving Private Ryan and a multi @-@ layered story involving the U.S. Army , the Nazis , and the Italian resistance movement . " Snider criticized the film 's frame story , which he described as " unnecessary and definitely corny . " James Verniere of the Boston Herald awarded the film an " A " grade , calling it a " masterpiece " and a " classic American WWII movie that both acknowledges the rousing tradition of such war epics as The Longest Day ( 1962 ) and The Big Red One ( 1980 ) and adds something new : paying tribute to the World War II African @-@ American soldiers who made the ultimate sacrifice for their country . Roger Ebert , writing for the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , criticized the editing but praised the film overall , describing it as " epic " with " one of the best battle scenes I can remember , on par with Saving Private Ryan ... Miracle at St. Anna contains richness , anger , history , sentiment , fantasy , reality , violence and life . Maybe too much . Better than too little . " 
 = = = = Controversy = = = = 
 Protests were scheduled for the film 's Italian premiere in Viareggio , Italy , by unspecified organizations . The protesters objected to the plotline of a Partisan collaborating with the Nazis . This runs directly counter to the accepted historical version of events , ruled by an Italian military court in 2005 , that the Sant 'Anna di Stazzema massacre was entirely premeditated by the Germans with no reason except the aim to frighten the population . Giovanni Cipollini , deputy head of the National Association of the Italian Partisans , said the film was a " false reconstruction " and a " travesty of history " . However , Lee , unrepentant , stated " I am not apologizing . " He told Italians there was " a lot about your history you have yet to come to grips with . This film is our interpretation , and I stand behind it . " McBride , the novel 's author , stated : " As a black American , I understand what it 's like for someone to tell your history ... unfortunately , the history of World War Two here in Italy is ours as well , and this was the best I could do ... it is , after all , a work of fiction . ” 
 In light of the film 's controversy , Lee was awarded honorary citizenship by the mayor of Sant 'Anna di Stazzema , Michele <unk> , who defended the film , stating , " It 's true that the film depicts a partisan who betrayed civilians . But above it is the tale of those partisans who fought to the death to defend civilians . " 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Miracle at St. Anna was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray disc formats by Touchstone Home Entertainment on February 10 , 2009 . The DVD is available in separate anamorphic widescreen and Blu @-@ ray editions , each with Dolby Digital 5 @.@ 1 and 2 @.@ 0 tracks . Upon its release on DVD , Miracle at St. Anna debuted in eighth place , selling 142 @,@ 782 units in its first week . 
 = Al @-@ Muwaffaq = 
 Abu Ahmad Talha ibn Ja 'far ( Arabic : أبو أحمد <unk> بن <unk> ) ( 842 – June 2 , 891 ) , better known by his laqab as al @-@ Muwaffaq bi @-@ Allah ( Arabic : <unk> بالله , " Blessed of God " ) , was an Abbasid prince and military leader , who acted as the virtual regent of the Abbasid Caliphate for most of the reign of his brother , Caliph al @-@ Mu 'tamid . His stabilization of the internal political scene after the decade @-@ long " Anarchy at Samarra " , his successful defence of Iraq against the Saffarids and the suppression of the Zanj Rebellion restored a measure of the Caliphate 's former power and began a period of recovery , which culminated in the reign of al @-@ Muwaffaq 's own son , the Caliph al @-@ Mu 'tadid . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Talha , commonly known by the <unk> Abu Ahmad , was the son of the Caliph Ja 'far al @-@ Mutawakkil ( r . 847 – 861 ) and a slave concubine , Umm Ishaq . In 861 , he was present in his father 's murder at Samarra by the Turkish military slaves ( ghilman ) : the historian al @-@ Tabari reports that he had been drinking with his father that night , and came upon the assassins while going to the toilet , but after a brief attempt to protect the caliph , he retired to his own rooms when he realized that his efforts were futile . The murder was almost certainly instigated by al @-@ Mutawakkil 's son and heir , al @-@ <unk> , who immediately ascended the throne ; nevertheless Abu Ahmad 's own role in the affair is suspect as well , given his close ties later on with the Turkish military leaders . According to Hugh N. Kennedy , " it is possible , therefore , that Abu Ahmad had already had close links with the young Turks before the murder , or that they were forged on that night " . This murder opened a period of internal upheaval known as the " Anarchy at Samarra " , where the Turkish military chiefs vied with other powerful groups and with each other over control of the government and its financial resources . 
 It was during this period of turmoil , in February 865 , that Caliph al @-@ Musta 'in ( r . 862 – 866 ) and two of the senior Turkish officers , Wasif and Bugha the Younger , fled Samarra to Baghdad , where they could count on the support of the Tahirids . The Turkish army in Samarra then selected al @-@ Musta 'in 's brother al @-@ Mu 'tazz ( r . 866 – 869 ) as Caliph , and Abu Ahmad was entrusted with the conduct of operations against al @-@ Musta 'in and his supporters . The ensuing siege of Baghdad lasted from February to December 865 , after which a negotiated settlement was reached . Contrary to the agreed terms , however , al @-@ Musta 'in was murdered . It was most likely during this time that Abu Ahmad consolidated his relationship with the Turkish military , especially with Musa ibn Bugha , who played a crucial role during the siege . Abu Ahmad further solidified these ties when he secured a pardon for Bugha the Younger . 
 On his return to Samarra , Abu Ahmad was initially received with honour by the Caliph , but soon he was thrown into prison as a potential rival , along with another of his brothers , al @-@ Mu 'ayyad . The latter was soon executed , but Abu Ahmad survived thanks to the protection of the Turkish military . Eventually , he was released and exiled to Basra before being allowed to return to Baghdad . He was so popular there that at the time of al @-@ Mu 'tazz 's death , there was popular agitation in the city in favour of his elevation to Caliph . Instead , al @-@ Muhtadi ( r . 869 – 870 ) was chosen . 
 = = Regent of the Caliphate = = 
 At the time al @-@ Muhtadi was killed by the Turks in June 870 , Abu Ahmad was at Mecca . Immediately he hastened north to Samarra , where he and Musa ibn Bugha effectively sidelined the new Caliph , al @-@ Mu 'tamid ( r . 870 – 892 ) , and assumed control of the government . Al @-@ Muwaffaq differed from most Abbasid princes of his time through his close association with and participation in military affairs . In this his career echoes that of his grandfather , the Caliph al @-@ Mu 'tasim ( r . 833 – 842 ) . Like him , al @-@ Muwaffaq 's power relied to a great extent on his close association with the Turkish military : following the demands of the Turkish rank and file for one of the Caliph 's brothers to be appointed as their commander , bypassing their own leaders , who were accused of misappropriating salaries , he was appointed the main intermediary between the caliphal government and the Turkish military . In return for the Turks ' loyalty he abolished the other competing corps of the caliphal army such as the Maghariba or the <unk> , which are no longer mentioned after ca . 870 . Hugh Kennedy sums up the arrangement thus : " al @-@ Muwaffaq assured their status and their position as the army of the caliphate and al @-@ Muwaffaq 's role in the civil administration meant that they received their pay " . Al @-@ Muwaffaq 's close personal relationship with the Turkish military leadership — initially Musa ibn Bugha , as well as Kayghalagh and Ishaq ibn Kundaj after Musa 's death in 877 — his own prestige as a prince of the dynasty , and the exhaustion after a decade of civil strife , allowed him to establish unchallenged control over the Turks , as indicated by their willingness to participate in costly campaigns under his leadership . 
 Within a short time , Abu Ahmad was conferred an extensive governorate covering most of the lands still under caliphal authority : western Arabia , southern Iraq with Baghdad , and Fars . To denote his authority , he assumed an honorific name in the style of the caliphs , al @-@ Muwaffaq bi @-@ Allah . His power was further expanded in 875 , when the Caliph included him in the line of succession after his own son , Ja 'far al @-@ Mufawwad , and divided the empire in two large spheres of government . The western provinces were given to al @-@ Mufawwad , while al @-@ Muwaffaq was given charge of the eastern ones ; in practice , al @-@ Muwaffaq continued to exercise control over the western provinces as well . With al @-@ Mu 'tamid largely confined to Samarra , al @-@ Muwaffaq and his personal secretaries ( Sulayman ibn Wahb , Sa 'id ibn Makhlad , and Isma 'il ibn Bulbul ) ruled the Caliphate from Baghdad . What little autonomy al @-@ Mu 'tamid enjoyed was further curtailed after the death of the long @-@ serving vizier Ubayd Allah ibn Yahya ibn Khaqan in 877 , when al @-@ Muwaffaq assumed the right to appoint the Caliph 's viziers himself . Al @-@ Muwaffaq 's personal secretary Sa 'id ibn Makhlad was the outstanding figure in the Caliphate 's bureaucracy until his own disgrace in 885 , followed after by Isma 'il ibn Bulbul , who served concurrently as vizier to both brothers . 
 = = = Campaigns = = = 
 As the main military leader of the Caliphate , it fell upon al @-@ Muwaffaq to meet the numerous challenges to caliphal authority that sprung up during these years . Indeed , as Michael Bonner writes , " al @-@ Muwaffaq 's decisive leadership was to save the Abbasid caliphate from destruction on more than one occasion " . The main military threats to the Abbasid Caliphate were the Zanj Rebellion in southern Iraq and the ambitions of Ya 'qub ibn al @-@ Layth , the founder of the Saffarid dynasty , in the east . 
 A humble soldier , Ya 'qub , surnamed al @-@ Saffar ( " the Coppersmith " ) , had exploited the decade @-@ long Samarra strife to first gain control over his native Sistan , and then to expand his control . By 873 he ruled over almost all of the eastern lands of the Caliphate , ousting the hitherto dominant Tahirids from power , a move denounced by al @-@ Muwaffaq . Finally , in 875 he seized control of the province of Fars , which not only provided much of the scarce revenue for the Caliphate 's coffers , but was also dangerously close to Iraq . The Abbasids tried to prevent an attack by Ya 'qub by formally recognizing him as governor over all the eastern provinces and by granting him special honours , including adding his name to the Friday prayer and appointment to the influential position of sahib al @-@ shurta ( chief of police ) in Baghdad . Nevertheless , in the next year Ya 'qub began his advance on Baghdad , until he was confronted and decisively beaten by the Abbasids under al @-@ Muwaffaq and Musa ibn Bugha at the Battle of Dayr al- ' <unk> near Baghdad . The Abbasid victory , a complete surprise to many , saved the capital and allowed for the recovery of Ahwaz , but despite Ya 'qub 's death from illness in 879 the Saffarids remained firmly ensconced in their possession of most of Iran . 
 The struggle against the uprising of the Zanj slaves in the marshlands of southern Iraq — according to Michael Bonner " the greatest slave rebellion in the history of Islam " — which began in September 869 , was longer and more difficult , and almost brought the Caliphate to is knees . Due to the Saffarid threat , the Abbasids could not mobilize against the Zanj until 879 . Consequently , the Zanj initially held the upper hand , capturing much of lower Iraq including Basra and Wasit and defeating the Abbasid armies , which were reduced to trying to contain the Zanj advance . The balance tipped after 879 , when al @-@ Muwaffaq 's son Abu 'l @-@ Abbas , the future Caliph al @-@ Mu 'tadid ( r . 892 – 902 ) , was given the command . Abu 'l @-@ Abbas was joined in 880 by al @-@ Muwaffaq himself , and in a succession of engagements in the marshes of southern Iraq , the Abbasid forces drove back the Zanj towards their capital , <unk> , which fell in August 883 . Another son of al @-@ Muwaffaq , Harun , also participated in the campaigns . He also served as nominal governor of a few provinces , but died young on 7 November 883 . The victory over the Zanj was celebrated as a major triumph for al @-@ Muwaffaq personally and for his regime : al @-@ Muwaffaq received the victory title al @-@ Nasir li @-@ din Allah , " He who upholds the Faith of God " , while his secretary Sa 'id ibn Makhlad received the title Dhu 'l @-@ <unk> , " Holder of the two <unk> " . 
 At the same time , al @-@ Muwaffaq also had to confront the challenge posed by the ambitious governor of Egypt , Ahmad ibn Tulun . The son of a Turkish slave , Ibn Tulun had been the province 's governor since the reign of al @-@ Mu 'tazz , and expanded his power further in 871 , when he expelled the caliphal fiscal agent and assumed direct control of Egypt 's revenue , which he used to create an army of ghilman of his own . Exploiting the rift between the increasingly powerless Caliph and his brother with demonstrations of support for the former , and relying on his powerful army , Ibn Tulun managed to gain control over Syria and the frontier zone with the Byzantine Empire ( the Thughur ) . By 882 , he governed as a de facto independent ruler , adding his own name to the coins alongside the names of the Caliph and his heir . Al @-@ Muwaffaq tried to counter Ibn Tulun 's advances by naming the trusted Musa ibn Bugha as governor of Egypt , but lack of funds foiled his plans , allowing Ibn Tulun to consolidate his power in the west . In 882 , al @-@ Mu 'tamid tried to escape from Samarra to seek sanctuary with Ibn Tulun , but was apprehended and placed under effective house arrest . This event opened the rift between Ibn Tulun and al @-@ Muwaffaq even further . Ibn Tulun tried to declare jihad against the regent , and the latter had curses against the Tulunid read in the mosques across the Caliphate . After Ibn Tulun 's death in 884 , al @-@ Muwaffaq attempted again to retake control of Egypt from Ibn Tulun 's successor Khumarawayh . Khumarawayh however defeated an expedition under Abu 'l @-@ Abbas , and extended his control over most of the Jazira and Cilicia as well . In 886 , al @-@ Muwaffaq was forced to recognize the Tulunids as governors over Egypt and Syria for 30 years , in exchange for an annual tribute of 300 @,@ 000 gold dinars . 
 With the Zanj subdued , after 883 al @-@ Muwaffaq turned his attention again to the east . Ya 'qub al @-@ Saffar 's brother and successor , Amr ibn al @-@ Layth , had acknowledged the Caliph 's suzerainty and had been rewarded with the governorship over the eastern provinces and the position of sahib al @-@ shurta of Baghdad — essentially the same posts the Tahirids had held — in exchange for an annual tribute , but soon he was having trouble asserting his authority , especially in Khurasan , where Rafi ibn Harthama emerged as the leader of the former Tahirid troops . In 884 / 885 , Amr was formally deprived of his governorship of Khurasan in favour of the Dulafid Ahmad ibn Abd al @-@ Aziz , and the army under the vizier Sa 'id ibn Makhlad conquered most of the province of Fars , forcing Amr himself to come west . After initial success against the general <unk> ibn al @-@ Abbas , Amr was routed by Ahmad ibn Abd al @-@ Aziz in 886 , and again in 887 by al @-@ Muwaffaq in person . Nevertheless , the threat by the Tulunids and the Byzantines in the west forced al @-@ Muwaffaq to negotiate a settlement in 888 / 889 that largely restored the previous status quo . In 890 , al @-@ Muwaffaq again attempted to take back Fars , but this time Ahmad ibn Abd al @-@ Aziz was defeated , and another agreement restored peace and Amr 's titles and possessions . 
 Towards the end of the 880s , al @-@ Muwaffaq 's relations with his son Abu 'l @-@ Abbas deteriorated , although the reason is unclear . In 889 , Abu 'l @-@ Abbas was arrested and imprisoned on his father 's orders , where he remained despite the demonstrations of the ghilman loyal to him . He apparently remained under arrest until May 891 , when al @-@ Muwaffaq , already nearing his death , returned to Baghdad after two years in Jibal . By this time , the gout from which he had long suffered had incapacitated him to the extent that he could nor ride , and required a specially prepared litter . It was evident to observers that he was nearing his end . The vizier Ibn Bulbul , who was opposed to Abu 'l @-@ Abbas , called al @-@ Mu 'tamid and al @-@ Mufawwad into the city , but the popularity of Abu 'l @-@ Abbas with the troops and the populace was such that he was released from captivity and recognized as his father 's heir . Al @-@ Muwaffaq died on 2 June , and was buried in al @-@ <unk> near his mother 's tomb . Two days later , Abu 'l @-@ Abbas succeeded his father in his offices and received the oath of allegiance as second heir after al @-@ Mufawwad . In October 892 , al @-@ Mu 'tamid died and Abu 'l @-@ Abbas al @-@ Mu 'tadid brushed aside his cousin to ascend the throne , quickly emerging as " the most powerful and effective Caliph since al @-@ Mutawakkil " ( Kennedy ) . 
 = I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time = 
 " I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time " is a song by American singer @-@ songwriter Mariah Carey , taken from her eleventh studio album , E = MC ² ( 2008 ) . It was written by Carey , Aldrin Davis , Crystal Johnson and Clifford Harris , and produced by the former two . As the song 's hook and instrumentation is derived from sampling DeBarge 's " Stay with Me " , Mark DeBarge and Etterlene Jordan also share songwriting credits . " I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time " was released as the album 's third single in the United States , Australasia and select European countries on July 1 , 2008 . Drawing influence from pop , soul and R & B music genres , and featuring a piano and keyboard @-@ driven melody , the song 's lyrics demonstrate the lengths the protagonist will go for her lover , and how she will be ' lovin ' him long time ' . 
 The song received generally positive reviews from music critics , with many considering it a highlight from the album . Many reviewers complimented its production and clever interpolation of the DeBarge sample , while some criticized it for being too simple for an artist of Carey 's caliber . Though expected by critics to have surely become Carey 's nineteenth chart @-@ topping single in the United States , the track only managed to reach a peak position of number fifty @-@ eight on the Billboard Hot 100 . Throughout other countries where it was released , the song achieved relatively weak charting , peaking within the top forty in Japan and Slovakia , and peaking at numbers sixty @-@ nine and eighty @-@ four in Canada and the United Kingdom , respectively . 
 Carey performed " I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time " on few live televised appearances , in comparison to the strong promotional boost the album 's lead single , " Touch My Body " received . She first performed the song live at the MTV Video Music Awards Japan , on June 2 , 2008 . On July 31 , 2008 , she performed the song as part of a five @-@ piece outdoor concert filmed for Jimmy Kimmel Live ! , as well as at the 2008 Teen Choice Awards to a standing ovation on August 8 , 2008 . Additionally , it was featured on the final scene of You Don 't Mess with the Zohan ( 2008 ) , a film in which Carey made a cameo appearance . The song 's accompanying music video was shot over a three @-@ day interval in Hawaii , and makes usage of the islands scenery , as well as shots of Carey in several bikinis , while swimming with a dolphin . 
 = = Background = = 
 Throughout 2004 , Carey began conceptualizing and working on a new project , eventually titled The Emancipation of Mimi , her tenth studio effort . The album became the best @-@ selling album in the United States of 2005 , and the second best @-@ seller around the world , with over 12 million units sold . It earned a myriad of music industry awards , and brought Carey back to the top of pop music following her decline in 2001 . After completing The Adventures of Mimi Tour , Carey began working on material for her eleventh studio effort , the yet untitled E = MC ² ( 2008 ) . Throughout 2007 , Carey recorded the album in a studio built into her private villa in Anguilla , in the Caribbean . E = MC ² was hailed as one of the most anticipated albums of 2008 , with many critics weighing their opinions on whether Carey would be able to deliver significant success , following her achievements with The Emancipation of Mimi . " Touch My Body " was eventually chosen as the lead single through a vote in between the record executives at Island Records , with the final choices being the former and " I 'm That Chick " ( titled " I 'm That Chick You Like " at that point ) . After choosing the former , the song was sent to radio stations worldwide on February 12 , 2008 and to digital outlets on March 24 , 2008 . 
 " Touch My Body " experiences strong commercial success , becoming Carey 's eighteenth chart @-@ topping single on the Billboard Hot 100 , as well as placing within the top @-@ five in several European countries . As a result , E = MC ² debuted at number one in Canada and the United States , with the highest first @-@ week sales of Carey 's career , and in the top three in Australia and the United Kingdom . Following in a similar formula as her last album , Carey chose a ballad to be the follow @-@ up single , " Bye Bye " . Though receiving praise from music critics , and strong speculation that it would become another worldwide hit for Carey , the song stalled at number nineteen on the Hot 100 , and achieved weak international charting . Subsequently , Carey 's label , Island Records , decided to release an up @-@ tempo and dance @-@ able number that would be easily a " summer hit " . They chose " I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time " , and released it to US radio stations on July 1 , 2008 , and to several European markets throughout August . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time " is a " mid @-@ tempo " , " party jam " , that draws influence from pop , R & B and soul music genres . Critics elaborated on the song 's " soul " influence , with Melissa Ruggieri from The News & Advance described it as a " soul @-@ thumper " , while Digital Spy 's Nick Levine called it a " nod towards classic soul " . The song 's title is derived from the popular line , " me love you long time " , from the 1987 war film , Full Metal Jacket . Additionally , its hook and instrumentation is derived from sampling DeBarge 's " Stay with Me " . Critics also noted how " I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time " " recalls " the melody riff and chord progression of the Hill Street Blues 's theme song . The song 's main source of production comes from its " lush keyboard work " , and Carey 's usage of the " double voice " , which she uses throughout the song 's bridge . Carey described the effect as " layering her voice " , so that the bridge would sound like a " swooning bank of a hundred Mariahs " . The song was written by Carey , Aldrin Davis , Crystal Johnson and Clifford Harris , and features Mark DeBarge and Etterlene Jordan on the songwriting credits , due to the inclusion of the samples . " I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time " was produced by Carey and Davis ( DJ Toomp ) , and is arranged in the key of D Major , with Carey 's vocal range spanning from the low @-@ note of A3 to the high @-@ note of D5 . 
 Lyrically , the song tells of the protagonist 's devotion to her lover , proclaiming that while she knows " you 've got me " , she 'll be " lovin ' him long time " . The first verse begins with " You ain 't even got to worry / About a thing , I 've got you babe / And ain 't nobody takin ' me away / Its not a game I 'm here to stay " , describing her strong emotional attachment to him . As the verse continues , Carey makes references and comparisons to their love and drugs powerful effect over the body and its senses . Carey describes the limits of her love during the chorus , singing " As long as I can breathe " and " Eternally " . During the second verse , she sings how no matter what others say about their relationship , they will continue being together , and describing a private moment they shared , their " Little spot where no one knows " . 
 = = = Lyrical controversy = = = 
 At the time of its release , " I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time " was the subject of controversy with the Asian community , as well as comedian Margaret Cho . In the film Full Metal Jacket , an Asian prostitute approaches US troops and offers to engage in lewd conduct in exchange for money . She uses terms such as " Me so horny " and " me love you long time " , which were heavily parodied and popularized . Accordingly , those terms have been used as humor at the expense of Asian people , and have been described as " racial slurs " by Cho . Other female acts have been known to use the phrase , such as Fergie on her track " London Bridge " ( 2006 ) , and Nelly Furtado in " Maneater " ( 2006 ) . In an interview with MTV News , Cho retracted her earlier comments , and expressed how if used in song , and by a female then it wouldn 't be offensive : " I don 't mind it when it 's used in songs , like when women use it , " Cho continued . " Fergie uses it , that doesn 't bother me . But when it 's shouted in the street and they don 't wait to hear the response ? What if I was actually going to go , ' Oh , OK ' ? They never stick around to hear the answer . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time " received generally positive reviews from music critics . Many complimented the song 's production and incorporation of the " Stay with Me " sample , while others were unimpressed with the chorus in general . Chuck Taylor of Billboard assured the song would endure strong success and radio appeal , and complimented its overall production , as well as Carey 's voice : " [ It 's ] a playful , beach @-@ befitting groove , featuring a bright sample from DeBarge 's " Stay With Me , " lushly woven vocals and Carey 's highs doting on fans with her sonic signature . " The Republican 's Kevin O 'Hare claimed the song would be " destined for hits @-@ ville " , while Jennifer Vineyard from MTV News described it as a " joyful romp " . Similarly , the song was described as a " party jam " by Julien Bittencourt from The Day , and " a fun , flirty tease " from Foster 's Daily Democrat 's Nekesa Mumbi Moody . Cathy Rose A. Garcia from The Korea Times complimented the song 's " laid back R & B vibe " , and felt the song was easily one of the album 's best cuts . Digital Spy 's Nick Levine called " I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time " a " safe @-@ but @-@ classy number " , while aside from an " unfortunate title and chorus " , Gregg Shapiro of Bay Area Reporter said it " virtually glows " . 
 In a separate review for the song , Levine rated it three out of five stars , and wrote " in spite of its predictability , ' I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time ' still makes for a satisfying listen , sounding classy , effortless and as summery as a glass of rosé in the garden after a work . " Journalist for the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation ( NRK ) , Svein Terje <unk> described the song as " One of the album 's best cuts " , while Fox News writer Roger Friedman wrote " its just enough of a new twist to create the most elusive thing of all : a radio smash . Allmusic critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine chose the song as one of his " top picks " from E = MC ² , and wrote " it has a lightness that so much of the album lacks . " Richard Cromelin from the Los Angeles Times highlighted Carey 's unadorned and raw form of singing in the song , writing " her singing is so direct , understated and unglamorous it 's almost shocking -- like seeing a diva without makeup . " <unk> <unk> from Entertainment Weekly called the song a " dance @-@ floor anthem " , while PopMatters Evan Sawdey described it as " certainly worthy of some greatest @-@ hits canonization " . Slant Magazine editor Sal Cinquemani felt " I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time " was a " stroke of genius " , and wrote " [ It ] sounds like a hyperventilating cross between a graduation anthem and an early- ' 80s family sitcom theme song . Listening to it , I felt face to face with a couple of silver spoons : one heroin , the other grape jelly . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time " debuted at number 90 on the Billboard Hot 100 on July 18 , 2008 . In its second week , the song leapt twenty @-@ one places , coming in at number sixty @-@ nine , before eventually peaking at number fifty @-@ eight . The song debuted at number sixty @-@ two on the Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , Carey 's 45th career entry on that chart , and has since peaked at number thirty @-@ six . Similarly , it peaked at number thirty @-@ seven on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Airplay chart . The song peaked at number forty @-@ three on the Hot 100 Airplay . " I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time " debuted at number eighty @-@ seven on the Canadian Hot 100 , rising to number sixty @-@ nine in its second week and eventually peaking at 22 . The song remained on the chart for a total of fourteen weeks . 
 Though not charting on the main single chart , the song managed to peak at number forty @-@ one on the New Zealand Airplay Chart during the week of August 3 , 2008 . On the Japan Hot 100 , the song peaked at number twenty @-@ seven , and stayed only six weeks within the chart . On the Slovakian Singles Chart , " I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time " charted for a total of eight weeks , and peaked at number thirty @-@ nine . The song debuted at number eighty @-@ four on the UK Singles Chart due to digital sales , since it was only released as a promo single . 
 = = Remix = = 
 The songs ' official remix features American rapper T.I .. The remix was produced by Carey and DJ Toomp , and was released for digital download on July 1 , 2008 , the same day as the original version of the song . T.I. has one verse in the song , that is found after Carey 's second chorus , prior to the song 's bridge . On July 11 , 2008 , it was announced that the song would be featured in a remix contest , set to begin on July 15 , 2008 . <unk> Music said that the song 's music stems would be available on its website for remixers to use ; the winner would receive $ 5 @,@ 000 as prize with the chance for the remix to be officially released . Carey 's manager Mark <unk> described the point of the competition , " Mariah is the queen of the remix , this contest is a way for her to continue being a pioneer in the remix world , potentially finding a new sound , a new power , a new energy in the online space , as opposed to just the go @-@ to producers of the moment . " The competition received over 1 @,@ 200 entries , with the winners being The <unk> from Riverside , California . 
 = = Music video = = 
 After her promotional activities ended in Japan , Carey flew to Hawaii for a three @-@ day music video shoot from June 8 – 10 , 2008 . The video was directed by Chris Applebaum and premiered on BET 's 106 & Park on July 3 , 2008 at 6 : 00pm ET / PT and on Yahoo ! Music at midnight on the same day . It later appeared on Total Request Live ( TRL ) on July 7 , 2008 . Aside from the video 's original version , the remix also featured an accompanying video , with some additional scenes from T.I. Some of the scenes were filmed on the beaches of Hawaii , while some of the smaller parts were shot in Wet 'n'Wild Hawaii . According to several reports , Carey was seriously injured on the set of the video during shooting on June 9 . Carey 's representative quickly denied the allegation , and said " She was so excited to be shooting in Hawaii . She wanted all her friends to come down and be a part of the shoot . " After watching the music video , Tim Nixon from The Sun called it " mouth @-@ watering " , and wrote " if she carries on churning out three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ minute visual feasts like this , long may that continue ... " 
 The music video begins with several scenes interspersing , starting with Carey underwater , while holding onto a dolphins fin , as well as Carey lying on a beach at night in a bikini . As the song 's introduction plays , scenes of the Hawaii beaches are shown , as well as close @-@ up glimpses of T.I. Carey then is shown inside a small cabana , singing to the camera and enjoying herself at a small party . Similar scenes of Carey in a gold bikini are shown , as well as more scenes of Hawaiian landscape . By the second verse , Carey , now in a black bikini , is shown at the bottom of a ravine by the beach staring at the sun , then altering to scenes of the party once more . As T.I. ' s verse starts , he 's shown behind a waterfall , in the midst of shrubbery outside , where Mariah then appears sitting in a large body of clear water with golden sand . She then lies in the water , as the scene then switches to her underwater with the dolphin again . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Following the song 's release in Japan , Carey performed " I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time " live at the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards Japan on June 2 . The song was also the theme song for the telecast of the Japanese baseball match Carey attended on May 28 , 2008 . On July 31 , 2008 , Carey performed a free concert at the Hollywood and Highland Center shopping mall in Los Angeles , California in front of over 5 @,@ 000 fans . The concert was filmed and presented on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! , as part of Samsung AT & T Summer Krush concert series . She performed five songs , beginning with " I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time " as a mash @-@ up with " Touch My Body " , and her previous songs , " Shake It Off " and " We Belong Together " from The Emancipation of Mimi ( 2005 ) . As the last song on the short set @-@ list , Carey was joined on stage by Jeezy for a live rendition of " Side Effects " . On August 8 , 2008 , Carey performed a mash @-@ up of the song at the 2008 Teen Choice Awards . She began with " I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time " , and worked into the bridge of " Touch My Body " , before reverting to the former song . The performance garnered a standing ovation from the audience and several notable celebrities , notably Will Smith , Fergie , Chris Brown and Jerry O 'Connell . During the final scene of You Don 't Mess with the Zohan , a film in which Carey was featured as a cameo appearance , the song was played and included on the film 's soundtrack . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits for E = MC ² adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 Mariah Carey - songwriting , producer , vocals , background vocals 
 Aldrin Davis - songwriting , producer 
 Crystal Johnson - songwriting , background vocals 
 Clifford Harris - songwriting 
 Mark DeBarge - songwriting 
 Etterlene Jordan - songwriting 
 Phil Tan - audio mixing 
 Josh Houghkirk - audio mixing 
 Bernie Grundman – mastering 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Gerp 's mouse lemur = 
 Gerp 's mouse lemur ( Microcebus <unk> ) is a species of mouse lemur known only from the Sahafina Forest in eastern Madagascar , near Mantadia National Park . Its discovery was announced in 2012 by a German and Malagasy research team . The Sahafina Forest had not been studied until 2008 and 2009 , when Groupe d 'Étude et de Recherche sur les Primates de Madagascar ( <unk> ) — a Malagasy @-@ based research and conservation group for which the lemur is named — inventoried the forest 's lemurs . 
 Based on genetic studies , measurements , and photos , the research team confirmed the Gerp 's mouse lemur was an undescribed species , distinct from Goodman 's mouse lemur , which is found 58 @-@ kilometre ( 36 mi ) away . Gerp 's mouse lemur is significantly larger , weighing on average 68 @-@ gram ( 2 @.@ 4 oz ) , compared to Goodman 's mouse lemur , which weighs about 44 g ( 1 @.@ 6 oz ) . Jolly 's mouse lemur , which is its closest relative and a neighbor to the south , is comparably larger , but differs in tail length and genetics . 
 Because it is a recently discovered species , little is known about its behavior , communication , ecology , or reproduction . The species appears to be restricted to a small region of lowland evergreen rain forest , and is seriously threatened by forest loss . 
 = = Evolutionary and taxonomic history = = 
 Gerp 's mouse lemur was discovered by German and Malagasy members of the Malagasy organization Groupe d 'Étude et de Recherche sur les Primates de Madagascar ( <unk> ) in a previously unstudied lowland forest known as the Sahafina Forest in eastern Madagascar , near Mantadia National Park . The first recorded specimen ( holotype ) of the species was captured on 25 June 2009 , and was released after genetic samples , measurements , and photographs were taken . At the time , it was not recognized as a distinct species of mouse lemur . Two other paratypes were also measured and recorded , but no physical specimen was obtained by the publication of the initial study . 
 The discovery was published in the journal Primates in 2012 . The species was named after the research and conservation team that described it . Gerp 's mouse lemur differed genetically and physically from all of its nearest neighboring mouse lemur species . Its tail is longer than its closest relative , Jolly 's mouse lemur ( M. <unk> ) , which lives further south and whose tail is 18 % shorter . It also has a higher body mass ( 68 g ( 2 @.@ 4 oz ) ) and is generally larger than Goodman 's mouse lemur ( M. <unk> ) , which weighs about 44 g ( 1 @.@ 6 oz ) . Gerp 's mouse lemur exhibits significant genetic differences from its northern neighbor , Simmons ' mouse lemur ( M. <unk> ) . 
 The genetics tests initially conducted focused on three different loci of mitochondrial DNA : a partial D @-@ loop region , MT @-@ <unk> , and <unk> . D @-@ loop analysis suggested Jolly 's mouse lemur was Gerp 's mouse lemur 's closest relative ( forming a sister group ) . All three tests showed the mouse lemurs sampled from Sahafina formed a monophyletic clade ( an exclusive family group ) and the species was sufficiently distinct from other mouse lemurs . The authors concluded both the molecular and morphological differences supported the declaration of a new species based on the phylogenetic species concept and a more conservative " integrative taxonomic approach " . 
 = = Anatomy and physiology = = 
 Among mouse lemurs , Gerp 's mouse lemur is larger @-@ bodied and has a long tail , which can be used to store fat . The fur is darker on its back , which is brownish @-@ gray with a broad reddish line down the middle , compared to the front , which varies from a light gray to creamy white and extends from the throat to the genitals . The outer arms and legs contrast the rest of the body with their darker color , and the fingers have sparse , whitish @-@ gray fur . The head is reddish in color , with darker brown surrounding the eyes and a noticeable white stripe across the nose and between the eyes . Its ears are prominent , yet small , with dark brown edges . The tail is covered in dense , long , brownish @-@ gray fur . The undercoat is short and dense , while the guard hairs are sparser . The skin visible on the hands and feet is colored pinkish @-@ brown . 
 Gerp 's mouse lemur weighs around 68 g ( 2 @.@ 4 oz ) and has a tail length of approximately 146 @.@ 5 mm ( 5 @.@ 77 in ) . It is a large @-@ bodied mouse lemur , and belongs to a group of large mouse lemurs ( weighing more than 50 grams ( 1 @.@ 8 oz ) ) , including four eastern species — Simmons ' mouse lemur , Jolly 's mouse lemur , the northern rufous mouse lemur ( M. <unk> ) , and MacArthur 's mouse lemur ( M. <unk> ) — as well as six species of western mouse lemur : Claire 's mouse lemur ( M. <unk> ) , <unk> ' mouse lemur ( M. <unk> ) , the <unk> mouse lemur ( M. <unk> ) , the golden @-@ brown mouse lemur ( M. <unk> ) , the gray mouse lemur ( M. murinus ) , and the reddish @-@ gray mouse lemur ( M. griseorufus ) . Most of these larger mouse lemur species have a long tail , as does Gerp 's mouse lemur , with the exception of Jolly 's mouse lemur and the gray mouse lemur . Its ears are small ( measuring 19 to 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 75 to 0 @.@ 79 in ) ) , which conforms with that of other rainforest mouse lemur species , in contrast to larger @-@ eared mouse lemurs of the dry , western forests ( averaging 21 to 24 mm ( 0 @.@ 83 to 0 @.@ 94 in ) ) . As with all mouse lemurs , no body mass differences could be discerned between the sexes . However , larger samples are needed to confirm this . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 No data are available concerning the behavior , communication , ecology , or reproduction of the Gerp 's mouse lemur , although such data may help support its species status . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Gerp 's mouse lemur has only been identified in the Sahafina Forest in eastern Madagascar , about 58 km ( 36 mi ) east of Mantadia National Park , 87 km ( 54 mi ) south of the city of Toamasina , and 18 km ( 11 mi ) from the Indian Ocean . The forest fragment is about 15 @.@ 6 km2 ( 6 @.@ 0 sq mi ) and is surrounded by secondary forest growing in areas previously cut for rice cultivation ( known locally as <unk> ) . 
 The Sahafina Forest ranges from 29 to 230 m ( 95 to 755 ft ) above sea level , whereas nearby Mantadia National Park , home of its closest neighboring mouse lemur population ( Goodman 's mouse lemur ) , ranges from 900 to 1 @,@ 200 m ( 3 @,@ 000 to 3 @,@ 900 ft ) above sea level . No major rivers separate these highland and lowland forests and their respective mouse lemur populations . The initial study did not conclude whether the large <unk> River or one of the smaller rivers — the <unk> and <unk> — further north acts as a species boundary between Gerp 's mouse lemur and Simmons ' mouse lemur ( M. <unk> ) to the north . Approximately 160 km ( 99 mi ) the south lies the <unk> River , a very large river that acts as a biogeographic barrier for many species . In 2010 , a genetically distinct form of mouse lemur was sequenced from Marolambo , 25 km ( 16 mi ) south of the river . The geographic range of Gerp 's mouse lemur is unlikely to extend south of this river , but more studies are needed to confirm this . In total , the area between the rivers to the north and south , the highlands to the west , and the ocean to the east is no larger than 7 @,@ 600 km2 ( 2 @,@ 900 sq mi ) ( smaller than the island of Puerto Rico ) and this is the likely extent of its geographic range . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 There are no protected areas within the known geographic range of Gerp 's mouse lemur . Because it lives in lowland forests , which are more likely to be converted into agricultural land relative to highland rainforests , it faces an elevated conservation risk . Of the 7 @,@ 600 km2 ( 2 @,@ 900 sq mi ) of its potential geographic range , only very small parts remain forested . 
 = Nahuatl = 
 Nahuatl ( / <unk> / ; Nahuatl pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) , known historically as Aztec , is a language or group of languages of the Uto @-@ Aztecan language family . Varieties of Nahuatl are spoken by an estimated 1 @.@ 5 million Nahua peoples , most of whom live in central Mexico . All Nahuan languages are indigenous to Mesoamerica . 
 Nahuatl has been spoken in central Mexico since at least the seventh century CE . It was the language of the Aztecs who dominated what is now central Mexico during the Late Postclassic period of Mesoamerican history . During the centuries preceding the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire , the Aztecs had expanded to incorporate a large part of central Mexico , and its influence caused the variety of Nahuatl spoken by the residents of Tenochtitlan to become a prestige language in Mesoamerica . At the conquest , with the introduction of the Latin alphabet , Nahuatl also became a literary language , and many chronicles , grammars , works of poetry , administrative documents and codices were written in it during the 16th and 17th centuries . This early literary language based on the Tenochtitlan variety has been labeled Classical Nahuatl and is among the most studied and best @-@ documented languages of America . 
 Today , Nahuan languages are spoken in scattered communities , mostly in rural areas throughout central Mexico and along the coastline . There are considerable differences among varieties , and some are mutually unintelligible . Huasteca Nahuatl , with over 1 million speakers , is the most @-@ spoken variety . They have all been subject to varying degrees of influence from Spanish . No modern Nahuan languages are identical to Classical Nahuatl , but those spoken in and around the Valley of Mexico are generally more closely related to it than those on the periphery . Under Mexico 's Ley General de Derechos <unk> de los Pueblos Indígenas ( " General Law on the Linguistic Rights of Indigenous Peoples " ) promulgated in 2003 , Nahuatl and the other 63 indigenous languages of Mexico are recognized as <unk> <unk> ( " national languages " ) in the regions where they are spoken , enjoying the same status as Spanish within their region . 
 Nahuan languages exhibit a complex morphology characterized by <unk> and agglutination . Through a very long period of coexistence with the other indigenous Mesoamerican languages , they have absorbed many influences , coming to form part of the Mesoamerican language area . Many words from Nahuatl have been borrowed into Spanish , and since diffused into hundreds of other languages . Most of these loanwords denote things indigenous to central Mexico which the Spanish heard mentioned for the first time by their Nahuatl names . English words of Nahuatl origin include " avocado " , " <unk> " , " chili " , " chocolate " , " atlatl " , " coyote " , " peyote " , " axolotl " and " tomato " . 
 = = Classification = = 
 As a language label , the term " Nahuatl " encompasses a group of closely related languages or divergent dialects within the Nahuan branch of the Uto @-@ Aztecan language family . The Mexican Instituto Nacional de Lenguas Indígenas ( National Institute of Indigenous Languages ) recognize 30 different individual varieties within the " language group " labeled Nahuatl . The Ethnologue recognizes 28 varieties with separate ISO codes . Sometimes the label also is used to include the Pipil language ( <unk> ) of El Salvador . Regardless of whether the Nahuatl is considered to label a dialect continuum or a group of separate languages , the varieties form a single branch within the Uto @-@ Aztecan family , descended from a single Proto @-@ Nahuan language . Within Mexico the question of whether to consider individual varieties to be languages or dialects of a single language is highly political . This article focuses on describing the general history of the group and on giving an overview of the diversity it encompasses . For details on individual varieties or subgroups , see the individual articles . 
 In the past , the branch of Uto @-@ Aztecan to which Nahuatl belongs has been called " Aztecan " . From the 1990s onward , the alternative designation " Nahuan " has been frequently used as a replacement especially in Spanish @-@ language publications . The Nahuan ( Aztecan ) branch of Uto @-@ Aztecan is widely accepted as having two divisions : " General Aztec " and Pochutec . 
 General Aztec encompasses the Nahuatl and Pipil languages . Pochutec is a scantily attested language , which became extinct in the 20th century , and which Campbell and <unk> classify as being outside of general Aztec . Other researchers have argued that Pochutec should be considered a divergent variant of the western periphery . 
 " Nahuatl " denotes at least Classical Nahuatl together with related modern languages spoken in Mexico . The inclusion of Pipil into the group is debated . Lyle Campbell ( 1997 ) classified Pipil as separate from the Nahuatl branch within general Aztecan , whereas dialectologists like Una Canger , Karen Dakin , Yolanda Lastra and Terrence Kaufman have preferred to include Pipil within General Aztecan branch , citing close historical ties with the eastern peripheral dialects of General Aztec . 
 Current subclassification of Nahuatl rests on research by Canger ( 1980 ) Canger ( 1988 ) and Lastra de Suárez ( 1986 ) . Canger introduced the scheme of a Central grouping and two Peripheral groups , and Lastra confirmed this notion , differing in some details . Canger & Dakin ( 1985 ) demonstrated a basic split between Eastern and Western branches of Nahuan , considered to reflect the oldest division of the proto @-@ Nahuan speech community . Canger originally considered the central dialect area to be an innovative <unk> within the Western branch , but in 2011 , he suggested that it arose as an urban <unk> language with features from both Western and Eastern dialect areas . Canger ( 1988 ) tentatively included dialects of La Huasteca in the Central group , while Lastra de Suárez ( 1986 ) places them in the Eastern Periphery , which was followed by Kaufman ( 2001 ) . 
 = = = Terminology = = = 
 The terminology used to describe varieties of spoken Nahuatl is inconsistently applied . Many terms are used with multiple <unk> , or a single dialect grouping goes under several names . Sometimes , older terms are substituted with newer ones or with the speakers ' own name for their specific variety . The word Nahuatl is itself a Nahuatl word , probably derived from the word <unk> [ <unk> ͡ <unk> ] ( " clear language " ) . The language was formerly called " Aztec " because it was spoken by the Central Mexican peoples known as Aztecs Nahuatl pronunciation : [ <unk> ] . During the period of th Aztec empire centered in Mexico @-@ Tenochtitlan the language came to be identified with the politically dominant <unk> [ <unk> ] ethnic group , and consequently the Nahuatl language was often described as <unk> [ <unk> ] ( literally " in the manner of <unk> " ) or <unk> " Mexica language " . Now , the term " Aztec " is rarely used for modern Nahuan languages , but linguists ' traditional name of " Aztecan " for the branch of Uto @-@ Aztecan that comprises Nahuatl , Pipil , and Pochutec is still in use ( although some linguists prefer " Nahuan " ) . Since 1978 , the term " General Aztec " has been adopted by linguists to refer to the languages of the Aztecan branch excluding the Pochutec language . 
 The speakers of Nahuatl themselves often refer to their language as either Mexicano or some word derived from <unk> , the Nahuatl word for " commoner " . One example of the latter is the case for Nahuatl spoken in Tetelcingo , whose speakers call their language <unk> . The Pipil people of El Salvador do not call their own language " Pipil " , as most linguists do , but rather <unk> . The Nahuas of Durango call their language Mexicanero . Speakers of Nahuatl of the Isthmus of Tehuantepec call their language mela <unk> ( " the straight language " ) . Some speech communities use " Nahuatl " as the name for their language although it seems to be a recent innovation . Linguists commonly identify localized dialects of Nahuatl by adding as a qualifier the name of the village or area where that variety is spoken . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ Columbian period = = = 
 On the issue of geographic origin , linguists during the 20th century agreed that the Uto @-@ Aztecan language family originated in the southwestern United States . Evidence from archaeology and ethnohistory supports a southward diffusion across the American continent thesis , specifically that speakers of early Nahuan languages migrated from <unk> into central Mexico in several waves . But recently , the traditional assessment has been challenged by Jane H. Hill , who proposes instead that the Uto @-@ Aztecan language family originated in central Mexico and spread northwards at a very early date . This hypothesis and the analyses of data that it rests upon have received serious criticism . 
 The proposed migration of speakers of the Proto @-@ Nahuan language into the Mesoamerican region has been placed at sometime around AD 500 , towards the end of the Early Classic period in Mesoamerican chronology . ; Before reaching the Mexican Plateau , pre @-@ Nahuan groups probably spent a period of time in contact with the <unk> languages Cora and Huichol of northwestern Mexico ( which are also Uto @-@ Aztecan ) . 
 The major political and cultural center of Mesoamerica in the Early Classic period was Teotihuacan . The identity of the language ( s ) spoken by Teotihuacan 's founders has long been debated , with the relationship of Nahuatl to Teotihuacan being prominent in that enquiry . While in the 19th and early 20th centuries it was presumed that Teotihuacan had been founded by speakers of Nahuatl , later linguistic and archaeological research tended to <unk> this view . Instead , the timing of the Nahuatl influx was seen to coincide more closely with Teotihuacan 's fall than its rise , and other candidates such as <unk> identified as more likely . But recently , evidence from Mayan epigraphy of possible Nahuatl loanwords in Mayan languages has been interpreted as demonstrating that other Mesoamerican languages may have been borrowing words from Proto @-@ Nahuan ( or its early descendants ) significantly earlier than previously thought , bolstering the possibility of a significant Nahuatl presence at Teotihuacan . 
 In Mesoamerica the Mayan , Oto @-@ <unk> and Mixe – Zoque languages had coexisted for millennia . This had given rise to the Mesoamerican language area ( " language area " refers to a set of language traits have become common among the area 's languages by diffusion and not by evolution within a set of languages belonging to a common genetic subgrouping ) . After the Nahuas migrated into the Mesoamerican cultural zone , their language too adopted some of the traits defining the Mesoamerican Linguistic Area . Examples of such adopted traits are the use of relational nouns , the appearance of calques , or loan translations , and a form of possessive construction typical of Mesoamerican languages . 
 A language which was the ancestor of Pochutec split from Proto @-@ Nahuan ( or Proto @-@ Aztecan ) possibly as early as AD 400 , arriving in Mesoamerica a few centuries earlier than the main bulk of speakers of Nahuan languages . Some Nahuan groups migrated south along the Central American isthmus , reaching as far as Nicaragua . The critically endangered Pipil language of El Salvador is the only living descendant of the variety of Nahuatl once spoken south of present @-@ day Mexico . 
 Beginning in the 7th century Nahuan speakers rose to power in central Mexico . The people of the Toltec culture of Tula , which was active in central Mexico around the 10th century , are thought to have been Nahuatl speakers . By the 11th century , Nahuatl speakers were dominant in the Valley of Mexico and far beyond , with settlements including <unk> , <unk> and Cholula rising to prominence . Nahua migrations into the region from the north continued into the Postclassic period . 
 One of the last of these migrations to arrive in the Valley of Mexico settled on an island in the Lake Texcoco and proceeded to subjugate the surrounding tribes . This group was the Mexica , who over the course of the next three centuries founded an empire named Tenochtitlan . Their political and linguistic influence came to extend into Central America and Nahuatl became a lingua franca among merchants and elites in Mesoamerica , e.g. , among the Maya K 'iche ' people . As Tenochtitlan grew to become the largest urban center in Central America , it attracted speakers of Nahuatl from diverse areas giving birth to an urban form of Nahuatl with traits from many dialects . This urbanized variety of Tenochtitlan is what came to be known as Classical Nahuatl as documented in colonial times . 
 = = = Colonial period = = = 
 With the arrival of the Spanish in 1519 , the tables were turned on the Nahuatl language : it was displaced as the dominant regional language , but remained important in Nahua communities under Spanish rule . There is extensive colonial @-@ era documentation in Nahuatl for Tlaxcala , Cuernavaca , <unk> , <unk> , Toluca and others in the Valley of Mexico and beyond . Since the 1970s , scholars working in a branch of Mesoamerican ethnohistory known as the New Philology have translated to English and analyzed a great number of this type of documentation . Since the Spanish made alliances with first the Nahuatl speakers from Tlaxcala and later with the conquered Mexica of Tenochtitlan or Aztecs , the Nahuatl language continued spreading throughout Mesoamerica in the decades after the conquest . Spanish expeditions with thousands of Nahua soldiers marched north and south to conquer new territories . Society of Jesus missions in northern Mexico and the Southwestern United States often included a barrio of Tlaxcaltec soldiers who remained to guard the mission . For example , some fourteen years after the northeastern city of Saltillo was founded in 1577 , a Tlaxcaltec community was resettled in a separate nearby village , San Esteban de Nueva Tlaxcala , to cultivate the land and aid colonization efforts that had stalled in the face of local hostility to the Spanish settlement . As for the conquest of modern @-@ day Central America , Pedro de Alvarado conquered Guatemala with the help of tens of thousands of Tlaxcaltec allies , who then settled outside of modern @-@ day Antigua Guatemala . 
 As a part of their missionary efforts , members of various religious orders ( principally Franciscan and Dominican friars and Jesuits ) introduced the Latin alphabet to the Nahuas . Within the first twenty years after the Spanish arrival , texts were being prepared in the Nahuatl language written in Latin characters . Simultaneously , schools were founded , such as the Colegio de Santa Cruz de <unk> in 1536 , which taught both indigenous and classical European languages to both Indians and priests . Missionary grammarians undertook the writing of grammars , also called artes , of indigenous languages for use by priests . The first Nahuatl grammar , written by Andrés de Olmos , was published in 1547 — three years before the first French grammar . By 1645 four more had been published , authored respectively by Alonso de Molina ( 1571 ) , Antonio del Rincón ( 1595 ) , Diego de <unk> Guzmán ( 1642 ) , and Horacio Carochi ( 1645 ) . Carochi 's is today considered the most important of the colonial era grammars of Nahuatl . Carochi has been particularly important for scholars working in the New Philology , such that there is a 2001 English translation of Carochi 's 1645 grammar by James Lockhart . Through contact with Spanish the Nahuatl language adopted many loan words , and as bilingualism intensified , even began changing the grammatical structure under influence by Spanish . 
 In 1570 King Philip II of Spain decreed that Nahuatl should become the official language of the colonies of New Spain in order to facilitate communication between the Spanish and natives of the colonies . This led to the Spanish missionaries teaching Nahuatl to Indians living as far south as Honduras and El Salvador . During the 16th and 17th centuries , Classical Nahuatl was used as a literary language , and a large corpus of texts from that period is in existence today . Texts from this period include histories , chronicles , poetry , theatrical works , Christian canonical works , ethnographic descriptions , and administrative documents . The Spanish permitted a great deal of autonomy in the local administration of indigenous towns during this period , and in many Nahuatl speaking towns Nahuatl was the de facto administrative language both in writing and speech . A large body of Nahuatl literature was composed during this period , including the Florentine Codex , a twelve @-@ volume compendium of Aztec culture compiled by Franciscan Bernardino de Sahagún ; Crónica <unk> , a chronicle of the royal lineage of Tenochtitlan by Fernando Alvarado <unk> ; <unk> Mexicanos , a collection of songs in Nahuatl ; a Nahuatl @-@ Spanish / Spanish @-@ Nahuatl dictionary compiled by Alonso de Molina ; and the Huei <unk> , a description in Nahuatl of the apparition of the Our Lady of Guadalupe . 
 <unk> and dictionaries of indigenous languages were composed throughout the colonial period , but their quality was highest in the initial period . The friars found that learning all the indigenous languages was impossible in practice , so they concentrated on Nahuatl . For a time , the linguistic situation in Mesoamerica remained relatively stable , but in 1696 , Charles II of Spain issued a decree banning the use of any language other than Spanish throughout the Spanish Empire . In 1770 another decree , calling for the elimination of the indigenous languages , did away with Classical Nahuatl as a literary language . Until Mexican Independence in 1821 , the Spanish courts admitted Nahuatl testimony and documentation as evidence in lawsuits , with court translators rendering it in Spanish . 
 = = = Modern period = = = 
