 = = = The Great Leap Forward = = = 
 In the autumn of 1957 Mao suggested a nationwide programme of mass collectivization , in which China 's farmers would be forcibly relocated to large agricultural communes and all private property would be eliminated . Mao 's theories on mass collectivization became the basis of the Great Leap Forward , a national economic plan that began in 1958 which caused a man @-@ made famine across the country that lasted for several years . By 1959 , tens of millions of people had starved to death . From October – December 1958 , the economic system in the countryside broke down as farmers refused to go to work in the fields , raided government granaries for food , and in Guangdong , Hubei , Hunan , Jiangxi , Sichuan , and Qinghai , rebelled . In December 1958 China 's leaders quietly decided to reverse the policies of the Great Leap . 
 Peng did not oppose Mao 's <unk> in the first phase of the Great Leap , from late 1957 – early 1958 , but he increasingly opposed it from spring @-@ winter 1958 , as the problems which Mao 's policies had caused became more evident . In February 1958 Peng gave a speech for the fortieth anniversary of the Soviet Red Army , in which he suggested increased military cooperation between China and the Soviet Union . Mao opposed this suggestion , and began grooming Lin Biao as a viable successor to Peng for the position of Defense Minister . As part of the Great Leap Forward , Mao ordered the formation of a national militia that was controlled by Party members and independent of the PLA , eventually training and arming tens of millions of civilians . 
 Peng made regular inspection tours of the Chinese provinces after becoming Defense Minister in 1953 . In a tour on Guangzhou in April 1958 , he openly criticized Mao , saying " The Chairman talks all the time about more , faster , better , and more economical results . That is annoying . What does he want with chanting these liturgies all the time ? " On an inspection tour through Gansu in October 1958 , Peng observed many of the problems associated with the Great Leap Forward . Mature crops were left to die in the field because all of the young men had been drafted to operate primitive backyard furnaces . When Peng asked an old peasant why no one was collecting the harvest , he received the answer : " unless the centre sends down a great comrade , one cannot stand up against this storm . " On the same tour Peng heard complaints that household utensils were being melted down for " steel " , and that houses and orchards were cut and torn down in order to provide fuel for the backyard furnaces . In a subsequent tour through his native province of Hunan , later in 1958 , Peng observed the same problems associated everywhere with the Great Leap Forward : serious food shortages ; hungry children and babies ; elders who expressed bitterness and anger ; and arrogant , boasting Party cadres who administered local economic reforms . During his inspection tours through China in the fall of 1958 , Peng composed a poem that summarized his attitude towards the Great Leap Forward : 
 Grain scattered on the ground , potato leaves withered ; 
 Strong young people have left to make steel ; 
 Only children and old women reap the crops ; 
 How can they pass the coming year ? 
 Allow me to raise my voice for the people ! 
 <unk> ， <unk> 
 <unk> 
 <unk> 
 <unk> 
 <unk> 
 At an enlarged Politburo meeting in Shanghai , held from March 25 – April 1 , Peng openly criticized Mao in the Chairman 's presence for the first time , accusing him of " taking personal command " of national politics and disregarding the collective leadership of the Chinese government and the Party . Mao responded with vague criticisms of Peng , which Peng said was " provocative " . From April 24 – June 15 Peng left on a goodwill military tour through Eastern Europe . Peng met with Khrushchev on May 24 , and was criticized during the Cultural Revolution for having criticized Mao 's leadership to the Soviet leader , but the evidence that Peng criticized Mao to Khrushchev is very circumstantial , and Mao did not mention this during his efforts to have Peng purged . Peng 's absence from China during the seven weeks that he was abroad allowed Mao to freely spread negative rumors discrediting Peng within the Party , and to develop consensus among other senior Party leaders to oppose Peng when he returned . 
 = = = The Lushan Conference = = = 
 The Eighth Plenum of the Eighth CCP Central Committee was held in the scenic resort town of Lushan , Jiangxi , on July 2 , 1959 , to discuss Party members ' positions on the Great Leap Forward . Mao opened the conference by encouraging Party members to " criticize and offer opinions " on the government 's " mistakes and shortcomings " , and he promised that he would not attack any member personally as a " rightist " or " counter @-@ revolutionary " for any opinions expressed at the conference . Peng had returned to China just previous to the conference after spending seven weeks abroad and was not planning on attending the conference , but Mao personally phoned Peng and invited him to attend . Peng obeyed Mao and travelled to Lushan to participate in the conference . 
 Peng participated in group meetings in the early portion of the conference , gaining consensus among his peers for criticizing the widespread practice of inaccurately reporting agricultural statistics , and emphasizing that " everybody had a share of responsibility , including Comrade Mao Zedong " . Peng bluntly criticized the hesitation of senior Party members to disagree with the Party leadership , implying that many Party leaders were cowardly for following orders that they knew were not in the best interests of the Chinese people . After gaining the consensus of several of his peers , Peng developed his opinions more systematically , but was hesitant to bring up the full range of his criticisms in public . Peng discussed his thoughts with several other senior Party leaders ( notably the CCP Secretary of Hunan , Zhou <unk> ( <unk> ) ) , and Peng 's colleagues encouraged Peng to visit Mao privately in order to win Mao 's support for a reversal of the policies of the Great Leap Forward . Peng visited Mao 's quarters on the night of July 13 , but found Mao asleep , and wrote Mao a " letter of opinion " articulating Peng 's ideas instead . Peng delivered the letter to Mao on the morning of July 14 , but Mao did not read the letter until July 17 . Later on July 17 Mao had Peng 's letter widely circulated among the other delegates at the conference . Peng did not intend his letter to be widely read and attempted to prevent its circulation , but was not successful . Most other senior leaders , including Liu Shaoqi , Zhou Enlai , and Deng Xiaoping , supported Peng 's position before Mao began to attack it , indicating that they shared Peng 's views and that they did not see Peng 's letter as an attack on the Chairman . 
 In Peng 's letter , Peng compared himself to the courageous but tactless Han dynasty general Zhang Fei . Because of Mao 's appreciation of Zhang 's enemy , Cao Cao , Mao interpreted this as implying a confrontational relationship . Peng criticized the poor allocation of labour across China , especially the inefficient , country @-@ wide practice of forcing farmers to work in backyard furnaces . He criticized the nationwide famine and severe shortage of cotton , and stated that the Chinese people were justified in demanding change from the present conditions . Peng blamed the problems of the Great Leap on what he called " problems in our way of thinking and style of work " , especially the tendency for Party administrators to submit exaggerated production reports , and for Party bureaucrats to accept these figures uncritically . Peng blamed the mistakes of the Party on a culture of " petty bourgeois fanaticism " , a tendency to believe in achieving change through blindly encouraging mass movements , and claimed that the acceptance of this culture had led to the Party leadership forgetting " the mass @-@ line and the style of seeking truth from facts " , which Peng believed had led to the Communist victories over the Japanese and Kuomintang . Peng criticized Mao 's policy of " putting politics in command " , substituting economic principles and productive work for political objectives . 
 Mao 's decision to have Peng 's letter widely circulated completely changed the direction of the conference . On July 21 , Zhang <unk> gave an independent , supplementary speech attacking Mao 's policies , and the same day a majority of delegates expressed their approval of Peng 's letter , making it an official conference document . Mao interpreted the letter as a personal attack , and began to defend himself on July 23 , attacking Peng and those who disagreed with his policies . Mao defended his commune system by claiming that " until now , not a single commune has collapsed " . He attacked Peng and those who shared his political opinions as " imperialists " " bourgeoisie " , and " rightists " , and associated their positions with other Communist leaders who had led failed oppositions to Mao 's leadership , including Li Lisan , Wang Ming , Gao Gang , and Rao Shushi . Mao brought up an ultimatum , stating that , if the delegates of the conference sided with Peng , Mao would split the Communist Party , retreating into the countryside and leading the peasants to " overthrow the government " . The other senior leaders of the Communist Party , including Zhou Enlai and Liu Shaoqi , were unwilling to risk splitting the Party , and sided with Mao in opposing Peng 's position . 
 From August 2 , the conference debated whether Peng should be disciplined , what punishment Peng should receive , and for what reasons . On August 16 the conference passed two resolutions . The first resolution condemned Peng as the leader of an " anti @-@ Party clique " , and called for Peng 's removal from the positions of Defense Minister and Vice @-@ Chairman of the Military Commission . The resolution did not eject Peng from the Communist Party , and it allowed Peng to retain his position in the Politburo , but he was excluded from Politburo meetings for years . The second resolution recognized Mao 's dominance within the Party and subtly called for an end to the policies of the Great Leap Forward . After Mao had rallied the rest of the Party against him , Peng 's options were limited to stubbornly standing his ground , engaging in a humiliating self @-@ criticism , or suicide . After private discussion with other senior leaders , Peng considered the prestige of Mao and the unity of the Party and agreed to make a self @-@ criticism , which was publicly reviewed at the conference , in which he admitted that he had made " severe mistakes " associated with his " rightist viewpoint " , that he had been a follower of Li Lisan and Wang Ming , and in which he openly implicated his supporters in his " mistakes " . After the conference , Peng said privately to Zhou Enlai regarding his self @-@ criticism : " For the first time in my life , I have spoken out against my very heart ! " Mao purged most of Peng 's supporters from important offices following the conference , almost completely isolating Peng politically for the rest of his life . Peng later reflected that he was confused that Mao could have interpreted his private letter as a political attack , and wondered why , after thirty years of working together , Mao could not have discussed the matter privately with him , if Peng had indeed made the mistakes Mao claimed he did . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In September 1959 Mao replaced Peng as Defense Minister with Lin Biao , effectively ending Peng 's military career . Peng was relocated to a suburb of Beijing , forfeiting his Marshal 's uniform and military decorations . Lin reversed Peng 's reforms , abolishing all signs and privileges of rank , purging officers considered sympathetic to the USSR , directing soldiers to work part @-@ time as industrial and agricultural labourers , and indoctrinating the armed forces in Mao Zedong Thought . Lin 's system of indoctrination made it clear that the Party was clearly in command of China 's armed forces , and Lin ensured that the army 's political commissars enjoyed great power and status in order to see that his directives were followed . Lin implemented these reforms in order to please Mao , but privately was concerned that they would weaken the PLA . Lin used his position as Minister of Defense to flatter Mao by using the army to promote Mao 's personality cult throughout China , devising and running a number of national Maoist propaganda campaigns based on the PLA . The most successful of Lin 's efforts to promote Mao 's personality cult was the " learn from Lei Feng " campaign , which Lin began in 1963 . 
 = = = Partial rehabilitation = = = 
 After his forced retirement , Peng lived alone , under constant surveillance from the Central Guard Unit of the PLA , accompanied by a secretary and a bodyguard . His wife remained in Beijing ; and , due to her work as the Party secretary of Beijing Normal University , was only able to visit infrequently . Peng 's guards prevented curious local farmers from visiting Peng , until Peng threatened to complain to Mao . Peng 's niece , Peng Meikui , visited frequently , and the two became close . Peng spent most of his free time renovating his home , gardening , and studying Marxist theory , agriculture , and economics . Peng was not completely purged : even though he could not participate in government meetings or decision @-@ making bodies , he still received and read all documents distributed to the members of the Politburo and State Council , which he was technically still a member of . In 1960 Peng attended the funeral of Lin <unk> . 
 In 1960 – 1961 , the effects of Mao 's economic policies continued to produce widespread economic collapse , improving Peng 's reputation among Party leaders who secretly believed that Mao 's policies were a mistake , and who desired to reverse them . Deng Xiaoping and Liu Shaoqi led Party efforts to revive the Chinese economy , and cultivated Peng 's friendship as part of a wider effort to gain widespread support for their activities . In November – December 1961 Peng received permission to leave his residence for the first time since 1959 in order to conduct an inspection tour of Hunan . Peng found the conditions there even worse than in 1959 ; and , in a January 1962 conference of 7 @,@ 000 Party leaders to determine Party economic policies , repeated most of the criticisms that he had made at Lushan . On June 16 , 1962 , Peng submitted a document , his " Letter of 80 @,@ 000 Words " , to Mao and the Politburo , in which he gave a full account of his life , admitted to several " mistakes " , defended himself against most of the accusations made against him at the Lushan Conference , requested to be readmitted to decision @-@ making government bodies , and sharply criticized the economic policies of the Great Leap Forward . In his letter Peng first wrote one of his most widely quoted sayings : " I want to be a Hai Rui ! " The efforts of Liu and Deng to rehabilitate Peng further were not initially successful . Peng was not allowed to attend the Tenth Plenum of the Eighth CCP Central Committee , held in September 1962 , and the efforts to reverse the verdict on Peng made at the Lushan Conference failed . From 1962 – 1965 , Peng continued to live in relative obscurity , though he was no longer under house arrest . 
 After Mao Zedong purged Peng in 1959 , Mao appointed Marshal He Long to the head of an office to investigate Peng 's past in order to find additional reasons to criticize Peng . He accepted the position but was sympathetic to Peng , and stalled for over a year before submitting his report . Mao 's prestige weakened when it became widely known that Mao 's Great Leap Forward had been a disaster , and He eventually presented a report that was positive , and which attempted to vindicate Peng . 
 In September 1965 Mao agreed to rehabilitate Peng by promoting him to a position managing the industrial development of Southwest China , a project known as the Third Front . Peng initially refused this position , so Mao called him personally , and convinced Peng to accept it by suggesting that the condemnation of Peng at the Lushan Conference may have been a mistake . Peng was then appointed " Deputy Commander of the Great Third Line of Construction in Southwest China " and " Third Secretary of the Control Commission of the CCP 's Southwest Bureau " . In practice , Peng 's responsibilities were to oversee the industrial development of Sichuan , Guizhou , Yunnan , and Tibet , with a focus on developing military industries and logistical networks . These positions were far below what Peng 's position had been before 1959 , but signaled his return to national politics . Peng worked energetically until August 1966 , when the beginning of the Cultural Revolution had him recalled to Chengdu and the first Red Guards began patrolling the streets , violently attacking their perceived enemies . Peng 's bodyguards warned him to avoid contact with the Red Guards , but Peng disregarded their advice , saying : " a CCP member does not have to be afraid of the masses . " Peng 's disregard for personal danger and his confidence in the Chinese Communist Party made him one of the Cultural Revolution 's first victims . 
 = = = Persecution during the Cultural Revolution = = = 
 Peng was one of the first public figures singled out for persecution in 1966 by the Cultural Revolution Group . The Party Secretariat attempted to shield Peng , but Mao 's wife , Jiang Qing , took a personal interest in Peng 's persecution and directed Red Guards in Sichuan to find Peng in Chengdu , arrest him , and deliver him to Beijing to be persecuted . Local Red Guards in Chengdu were not enthusiastic to follow these orders : they visited Peng 's house on December 22 , 1966 and attempted to intimidate Peng by informing him of the recent arrests of some of his friends and comrades , and of the imminent arrests of Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping . Because of local Red Guards ' lack of enthusiasm to carry out Jiang Qing 's orders , a more radical Red Guard leader , Wang Dabin , arrived in Chengdu on December 24 , and denounced his local comrades as " rightists " and " traitors " for delaying Peng 's arrest . The Red Guards then abducted Peng in the early morning of December 25 , put him in chains , and ransacked his house . Peng 's bodyguards arrived to save Peng at around 4 : 00 AM , but were already too late . 
 Prime Minister Zhou Enlai made an effort to save Peng by placing him under PLA surveillance . On December 25 , Zhou 's office ordered the Red Guards who had abducted Peng to accompany members of the PLA from Chengdu , to deliver Peng to Beijing by train ( instead of by plane , because the airports in Sichuan had been taken over by Red Guards ) , and then to deliver Peng to the Beijing PLA garrison . After the party arrived in Beijing , Wang Dabin successfully directed Red Guards under his command to delay the PLA unit scheduled to take possession of Peng , and succeeded in keeping Peng from being saved . 
 In January 1967 Peng was taken to his first " struggle session " , in which he was paraded in chains before several thousand jeering Red Guards , wearing a large paper dunce cap and with a wooden board hung from his neck , on which his " crimes " were written . In the fall Peng was held at a PLA military prison outside of Beijing , and was allowed to receive extra clothing . In July Mao and Lin Biao , cooperating with Jiang Qing 's faction , ordered the PLA to form an " investigation group " to determine Peng 's " crimes " , so that Peng could be more thoroughly humiliated in future struggle sessions . Peng 's jailers attempted to force Peng to confess that he was a " great warlord " , a " great <unk> " , and a " great conspirator " who had " crept into the Party and the Army " . Peng refused to confess to these accusations or to " surrender to the masses " , so his jailers strapped Peng to the floor of an unlit cell , and did not allow him to stand or sit up , drink water , rise to go to the toilet , or move in his sleep for several days . After Peng still refused to " confess " , his jailers began routinely beating him , breaking several ribs , injuring his back , and damaging his internal organs , especially his lungs . Peng 's violent " interrogations " lasted over ten hours a day , but his interrogators were replaced every two hours in order to keep them from developing any sympathy for Peng ( a practice pioneered by Stalinist secret police in the 1930s ) . Peng was " interrogated " in this way over 130 times . During interrogations he shouted denials to the Red Guards who beat him , and it is reputed that he pounded the table so hard that the cell walls shook . 
 In late July 1967 , following the failed Wuhan Uprising , Party leaders decided that Peng should be used as an example by publicly humiliating him by name at a national level . On July 31 , an article appeared that was distributed nationally , and which directed the nation to take part in vilifying him . In this article , Peng was called a " capitalist " , a " great <unk> and great conspirator " who had " always opposed Chairman Mao " , and who was " the representative of the greatest capitalist @-@ <unk> [ Liu Shaoqi ] in the army " . The article accused Peng of conspiring with foreign countries , allying with " imperialists , revisionists , and counter @-@ revolutionaries " , and waging " a wild attack against the Party " . The campaign of national vilification against Peng lasted several months , until late 1967 . On August 16 another article stated that Peng " was never a Marxist " , but that he had instead been a " capitalist great warlord " who had " crept into the Party and into the army ... we have to struggle against him until he falls , until he breaks down , until he stinks . " CCP propagandists made an effort to discredit Peng 's military career by portraying it as a long string of failures , except for those battles that were supposedly directed closely by Mao Zedong , and to convince the Chinese people that Peng was a subhuman villain who should be destroyed without compassion or mercy . 
 In August 1967 , Peng was taken to a " struggle meeting " , which was held in a stadium attended by 40 @,@ 000 PLA soldiers . At this meeting , Peng was led in chains to a stage , where he was forced to kneel for several hours while he listened to soldiers repeatedly denouncing him for his " crimes " . At the end of the meeting , Lin Biao personally appeared to the soldiers , where he addressed the assembled soldiers and Peng , who was still kneeling . Lin gave a speech in which he denounced Peng as a villainous element who must be purged , and that it was " in the interest of the whole Party , the whole army , and the whole people of the whole country " to persecute Peng so severely . Lin then addressed Peng directly , stating : " If you reform yourself , all right , if not , it is all right too . But of course we hope you reform yourself . " It is not known whether Peng eventually broke down and " confessed " at the rally . 
 Peng was imprisoned for the rest of his life . In 1969 the Party formed a " special investigation group " to reach a verdict in his case . Peng 's jailers then forced Peng to write a full biography of his life many times , but they did not believe that he ever fully confessed his " crimes " . Peng was then subjected to constant violent " interrogations " throughout most of 1970 , until a special military tribune sentenced Peng to life imprisonment . The sentence was immediately approved by Lin Biao 's General Chief of Staff , Huang <unk> . 
 After the 1971 Lin Biao incident , the military attempted to improve Peng 's living conditions , but the years of deprivation and torture from 1967 – 1970 had seriously weakened his physical health , and from late 1972 until his death Peng was seriously ill , probably with tuberculosis , thrombosis , or both . Peng was briefly hospitalized in 1973 before being returned to prison , the first time that he had been outside of prison since 1967 . Peng 's niece , Peng Meikui , visited Peng in the hospital and convinced his jailers to allow an operation , but the nature and results of this operation are unknown . Peng 's medical condition deteriorated further in 1974 ; but , because of direct orders from Mao not to treat him , he received no substantial medical aid . Peng died at 3 : 35 PM on November 29 , 1974 . His last wish was to see the sun and trees outside the windows of his hospital room ( the windows were covered with newspaper ) , but this request was denied . Peng Meikui was allowed to view Peng 's body for twenty minutes , but was then removed . Peng 's body was quickly cremated , and his ashes were sent to Chengdu , identified only by a note that read : " No. 327 – Wang Chuan , from Chengdu . " 
 = = Posthumous rehabilitation = = 
 The leadership of the CCP successfully concealed Peng 's death for several years , and successfully convinced the only civilian witness , Peng Meikui , not to tell anyone of Peng 's death . Peng 's former bodyguards did not learn of Peng 's death until 1976 . Peng 's wife , Pu <unk> , had also been arrested by Red Guards and " sentenced " to a " labour reform camp " , where she remained until 1975 , when she was released to settle as a farmer in North China . She did not find out about Peng 's death until she was allowed to return to Beijing , in 1978 , when the news was first publicly disclosed . 
 Mao died in 1976 ; and , following a brief power struggle , Peng 's former ally , Deng Xiaoping , emerged as the paramount leader of China . One of Deng 's first political goals was to rehabilitate Party members who had been condemned and persecuted during the Cultural Revolution . By 1978 , many people , led by General Huang Kecheng ( who had been a comrade of Peng 's since Peng rebelled against the Kuomintang in 1928 ) were agitating for Peng 's posthumous rehabilitation . The Chinese government formally reversed the " erroneous " verdict of Peng during the Third Plenum of the Eleventh CCP Central Committee , held from December 18 – 22 , 1978 . Deng gave a speech announcing Peng 's rehabilitation , stating : 
 He was courageous in battle , open and straightforward , incorruptible and impeccable , and strict towards himself . He cared about the masses , and was never concerned about his own advantage . He was never afraid of difficulties , neither of carrying heavy loads . In his revolutionary work , he was <unk> , honest , and he had an utmost sense of responsibility . 
 Deng 's speech also stated that Mao 's decision in 1959 , which vilified Peng as the leader of an " anti @-@ Party clique " , had been " entirely wrong " , and that it had " undermined intra @-@ Party democracy " . From January 1979 , the Party encouraged historians and those who had known Peng to produce many memoirs , historical stories , and articles praising and remembering Peng . In 1980 the Intermediate Court of Justice in Wuhan sentenced Wang Dabin , the Red Guard who had directed Peng 's arrest in 1966 , to nine years in prison for " the persecution and torture of Comrade Peng Dehuai " . In 1986 , an " autobiography " , Memoirs of a Chinese Marshal , was compiled from various documents that Peng had written about his life . Much of the material for Memoirs was drawn from the " confessions " that Peng had written during the Cultural Revolution , and the book focused on Peng 's early life , before the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War . In 1988 , China released a set of stamps to commemorate the ninetieth anniversary of Peng 's birth . In modern China , Peng is considered one of the greatest military leaders of the twentieth century . 
 = Walking on Air ( Katy Perry song ) = 
 " Walking on Air " is a song recorded by American singer Katy Perry for her fourth studio album , Prism ( 2013 ) , included as its fourth track . It was released to digital retailers on September 30 , 2013 , by Capitol Records , as the record 's second promotional single , following the release of " Dark Horse " . The song was part of a poll promoted by Pepsi , along with " Dark Horse " , where fans could vote for which song they wanted to become the first promotional single from Prism . Inspired by CeCe Peniston and Crystal Waters , " Walking on Air " is a deep house song influenced by 1990s Eurodance . 
 Upon its release , " Walking on Air " received generally favorable reviews from music critics , who highlighted its catchiness , but were ambivalent towards its musical composition . The track entered several charts with moderate digital downloads , including reaching number 34 on the US Billboard Hot 100 . Internationally , it charted in the top 20 in various countries , including Australia , Canada , and New Zealand . Perry promoted " Walking on Air " with several live performances , including at the 2013 iTunes Festival and Saturday Night Live . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " Walking on Air " was produced and programmed by Swedish record producers Klas Åhlund and Max Martin . It was recorded and engineered at Apmamman and MXM Studios , located in Stockholm , Sweden and Conway Recording Studios in Hollywood , California . It was engineered by Michael Illbert , Peter Carlsson , and Sam Holland , and assisted by Cory Bice . Serban Ghenea later mixed the song at MixStar Studios , in Virginia Beach , Virginia . Background vocals were provided by Sabina <unk> and the Tensta Gospel Choir . 
 In a press release on August 20 , 2013 , PepsiCo announced a partnership with Perry to promote her fourth studio album Prism : the company announced a social " tweet @-@ to @-@ unlock " voting program , where fans could unlock song titles and their respective lyrics , by tweeting the hashtag # <unk> . The chosen tracks for the campaign were " Walking on Air " and " Dark Horse " . Once tweets voting for each song reached a certain number , their respective samples were unlocked and fans could start to vote for which one they wanted to have an early release on digital retailers . The winner was " Dark Horse " , which was released on September 17 , 2013 on the iTunes Store . However , after the release of the aforementioned song , the iTunes release of " Walking on Air " was announced , slated for September 30 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Composed in the key of F ♯ minor , " Walking on Air " is a deep house song set in a 4 / 4 time signature at a moderately fast tempo of 128 beats per minute . The melody spans the tonal range of E3 to E5 , while the music follows the chord progression of F ♯ m – E – C ♯ m – D. Throughout the song , various elements of 90s Eurodance and disco music can be heard . The track opens with Perry singing in her lower register over <unk> synths until the song 's " propulsive " beat begins . The singer has cited CeCe Peniston 's " Finally " and Crystal Waters ' " 100 % Pure Love " as inspirations for the sound she was aiming for with this song . Perry 's vocals near the end of " Walking on Air " were also compared to those of Christina Aguilera . 
 Written by Perry , Klas Åhlund , Max Martin , Adam Baptiste , and <unk> <unk> , " Walking on Air " discusses a love " so strong that even heaven is jealous " . Gil Kaufman from MTV commented on the song 's composition : " Between her wailing diva vocals , a gospel choir that kicks in during the final minute and the driving beat , Perry has captured a unique sound that both recalls the classic 1970s disco era as well as the EDM thump of today 's clubs . " HitFix writer Melinda Newman opined that the song was " redolent of ' 90s dance thumpers and is light as cotton candy and just as enjoyable " , adding that it would " make you long for C + C Music Factory " . The song was also described as evoking the music of Swedish singer Robyn , an artist of whom Perry is a fan . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reaction = = = 
 Critical commentary of " Walking on Air " was mostly favorable : Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine was very positive of the song : he described it as " surprisingly soulful , throwback " to 1990s deep house , although he noted that Åhlund decided to give Perry a different sound from the Euro electro @-@ pop he had produced for Body Talk ( 2010 ) . Greg Kot from Chicago Tribune deemed the single a " catchy pop tune " , while Randall Roberts from the Los Angeles Times wrote that the song 's " euphoria " was " infectious " , and Rob Harvilla from Spin classified it as " delicious " . Also , Elysa Gardner from USA Today recommended readers to download " Walking on Air " . 
 Other reviews were mixed . Writing for The Guardian , Alexis Petridis criticized Prism for not having anything " sonically adventurous " , noting that the album mainly had 1990s pop @-@ house in its songs , giving the example of the " jangling piano riff " present on " Walking on Air " , but still found those melodies to be stronger than the ones found on Jessie J 's second studio album Alive ( 2013 ) . In a mixed to positive review of the song , Will Hermes from Rolling Stone described the song as " frothy " . Marah Eakin from The A.V. Club commented that " when Perry does stretch [ ..... ] she tends to falter " , and mentioned " Walking on Air " and " Dark Horse " as examples . Consequence of Sound 's Chris Bosman described the song as a " vanilla re @-@ interpretation of Hercules and Love Affair " . 
 Helen Brown from The Daily Telegraph classified " Walking on Air " as a " forgettable bit of Nineties rave nostalgia " , while James Reed from The Boston Globe deemed it " buoyant " , and ABC News music writer Mesfin Fekadu called it " irresistible " . Kyle Anderson from Entertainment Weekly described the track as a " David Guetta @-@ esque blast of dancefloor adrenaline " . Sam Lansky from website Idolator wrote that the song was " pleasurable " , while Trent Wolbe from The Verge said it was a " triumphant ode " to various artists from the 1990s . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 On the week ending October 7 , 2013 , " Walking on Air " debuted at number 12 on the New Zealand Singles Chart . In Australia , the song charted on the ARIA Digital Track Chart at number 18 . On the week ending October 19 , 2013 , " Walking on Air " debuted at number 34 on the Billboard Hot 100 and debuted at number eight on Billboard Hot Digital Songs with 113 @,@ 000 downloads . As of November 2013 , the song has sold a total of 150 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On September 30 , 2013 , Perry performed " Walking on Air " during her headlining set of the 2013 iTunes Festival at the Roundhouse . For the performance , she wore a black leather corset , a tartan miniskirt and fishnet tights , all part of a " racy " outfit . On October 12 , 2013 , the singer performed the song again on Saturday Night Live , where she was the musical guest of the episode . She wore a " ' 90s schoolgirl outfit " composed of a plaid skirt , knee socks and a white crop top . <unk> Shipley from MTV wrote that Perry " caught a case of retro fever for her performance of ' Walking On Air ' " . On her 29th birthday , October 25 , 2013 , Perry performed the song at Lakewood High School in Lakewood , Colorado . On May 25 , 2014 , she performed it in Glasgow at Radio 1 's Big Weekend . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording places 
 Recorded at Apmamman and MXM Studios ( Stockholm , Sweden ) ; Conway Recording Studios ( Hollywood , California ) 
 Mixed at MixStar Studios ( Virginia Beach , Virginia ) 
 Personnel 
 Songwriting – Katy Perry , Klas Åhlund , Max Martin , Adam Baptiste , <unk> <unk> 
 Production – Klas Åhlund , Max Martin 
 Engineering – Michael Illbert , Peter Carlsson , Sam Holland 
 Engineering assistant – Cory Bice 
 Mixing – Serban Ghenea 
 Mixing engineer – John Hanes 
 Lead vocals – Katy Perry 
 Background vocals – Sabina <unk> , Tensta Gospel Choir 
 Programming – Klas Åhlund , Max Martin 
 Credits adapted from Prism liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Misty Copeland = 
 Misty Danielle Copeland ( born September 10 , 1982 ) is an American ballet dancer for American Ballet Theatre ( ABT ) , one of the three leading classical ballet companies in the United States . On June 30 , 2015 , Copeland became the first African American woman to be promoted to principal dancer in ABT 's 75 @-@ year history . 
 Copeland was considered a prodigy who rose to stardom despite not starting ballet until the age of 13 . By age 15 , her mother and ballet teachers , who were serving as her custodial guardians , fought a custody battle over her . Meanwhile , Copeland , who was already an award @-@ winning dancer , was fielding professional offers . The 1998 legal issues involved filings for emancipation by Copeland and restraining orders by her mother . Both sides dropped legal proceedings , and Copeland moved home to begin studying under a new teacher who was a former ABT member . 
 In 1997 , Copeland won the Los Angeles Music Center Spotlight Award as the best dancer in Southern California . After two summer workshops with ABT , she became a member of ABT 's Studio Company in 2000 and its corps de ballet in 2001 , and became an ABT soloist in 2007 . As a soloist from 2007 to mid @-@ 2015 , she was described as having matured into a more contemporary and sophisticated dancer . 
 In addition to her dance career , Copeland has become a public speaker , celebrity spokesperson and stage performer . She has written two autobiographical books and narrated a documentary about her career challenges , A Ballerina 's Tale . In 2015 , she was named one of the 100 most influential people in the world by Time , appearing on its cover . She performed on Broadway in On the Town , toured as a featured dancer for Prince and appeared on the reality television shows A Day in the Life and So You Think You Can Dance . She has endorsed products and companies such as T @-@ Mobile , Dr Pepper , Seiko and Under Armour . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Copeland was born in Kansas City , Missouri , and raised in the San Pedro community of Los Angeles , California . Copeland 's father , Doug Copeland , is German American and African American , while her mother , Sylvia DelaCerna , is Italian American and African American and was adopted by African American parents . Misty Copeland is the youngest of four children from her mother 's second marriage and has two younger half @-@ siblings , one each from her mother 's third and fourth marriages . Copeland did not see her father between the ages of two and twenty @-@ two . Her mother , a former Kansas City Chiefs cheerleader , had studied dance . She is a trained medical assistant , but worked mostly in sales . 
 Between the ages of three and seven , Copeland lived in Bellflower , California , with her mother and her mother 's third husband , Harold Brown , a Santa Fe Railroad sales executive . The family moved to San Pedro , where Sylvia eventually married her fourth husband , radiologist Robert DelaCerna , and where Misty attended Point Fermin Elementary School . When she was seven , Copeland saw the film Nadia on television and its subject Nadia <unk> became her new role model . Copeland never studied ballet or gymnastics formally until her teenage years , but she enjoyed choreographing flips and dance moves to Mariah Carey songs in her youth . Following in the footsteps of her older sister Erica , who had starred on the Dana Middle School drill team that won statewide competitions , Copeland became captain of the Dana drill team . Her captaincy was only a part of her responsibilities . She was also the sixth grade class treasurer and a hall monitor that year . Copeland 's natural grace came to the attention of her classically trained Dana drill team coach , Elizabeth Cantine , in San Pedro . 
 By 1994 , Copeland 's mother had separated from Robert . After living with various friends and boyfriends , DelaCerna moved with all of her children into two small rooms at the Sunset Inn in Gardena , California . In early 1996 , Cantine convinced Copeland to attend a ballet class at her local Boys & Girls Club . Cynthia Bradley , a friend of Cantine 's , taught a free ballet class at the club once a week . Copeland attended several classes as a spectator before participating . DelaCerna allowed Copeland to go to the club after school until the workday ended . Bradley invited Copeland to attend class at her small local ballet school , San Pedro Dance Center . Copeland initially declined the offer , however , because her mother did not have a car , was working 12 – 14 hours a day , and her oldest sister Erica was working two jobs . Copeland began her ballet studies at the age of 13 at the San Pedro Dance Center when Cynthia Bradley began picking her up from school . After three months of study , Copeland was en pointe . 
 She told Copeland that she would have to give up ballet , but Bradley wanted Copeland to continue and offered to host her . DelaCerna agreed to this , and Copeland moved in with Bradley and her family . Eventually , Copeland and DelaCerna signed a management contract and a life @-@ story contract with Bradley . Copeland spent the weekdays with the Bradleys near the coast and the weekends at home with her mother , a two @-@ hour bus ride away . Copeland would spend most of her next three years with the Bradleys . By the age of fourteen , Copeland was the winner of a national ballet contest and won her first solo role . The Bradleys introduced Copeland to books and videos about ballet . When she saw Paloma Herrera , a principal ballerina with ABT , perform at the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion , Copeland began to idolize her as much as she did Mariah Carey . The media first noticed her when she drew 2 @,@ 000 patrons per show as she performed as Clara in the The Nutcracker at the San Pedro High School after only eight months of study . A larger role as <unk> in Don Quixote at the San Pedro Dance Center and a featured role in The Chocolate Nutcracker , an African American version of the tale , narrated by Debbie Allen , soon followed . The latter was presented at UCLA 's Royce Hall . Copeland 's role was modified especially for her , and included ethnic dances . 
 During this period , Copeland received far more personal attention from the Bradley family than her mother could give each of her six children , even attending a synagogue with Bradley 's parents and young son . In addition to Bradley 's intensive ballet training , her husband , a modern @-@ dance teacher , served as Copeland 's pas @-@ de @-@ deux instructor and partner . The summer before her fifteenth birthday , Bradley began to homeschool Copeland for 10th grade to free up more time for dance . At fifteen years old , Copeland won first place in the Los Angeles Music Center Spotlight Awards at the Chandler Pavilion in March 1998 . Copeland said it was the first time she ever battled nervousness . The winners received scholarships between $ 500 and $ 2500 . Copeland 's victory in the 10th annual contest among gifted high school students in Southern California secured her recognition by the Los Angeles Times as the best young dancer in the Greater Los Angeles Area . 
 Copeland attended the summer workshop at the San Francisco Ballet School in 1998 . She and Bradley selected the workshop over offers from the Joffrey Ballet , ABT and Dance Theater of Harlem , among others . Of the programs she auditioned for , only New York City Ballet declined to make her an offer . San Francisco Ballet , ABT and New York City Ballet are regarded as the three preeminent classical ballet companies in the US . During the six week workshop at San Francisco , Copeland was placed in the most advanced classes and was under a full tuition plus expenses scholarship . At the end of the workshop , she received one of the few offers to continue as a full @-@ time student at the school . She declined the offer because of the encouragement from her mother to return home , the prospect of continuing personal training from the Bradley family and dreams of a subsequent summer with ABT . 
 = = Custody battle = = 
 Copeland returned to her mother 's home and frequent arguments . Her mother resented the Bradleys ' influence and soon decided that Copeland would cease study with the Bradleys . Copeland was distraught with fear that she would not be able to dance . She had heard the term emancipation while in San Francisco ; the procedure was common among young performers to secure their financial and residential independence . The Bradleys introduced Copeland to Steven Bartell , a lawyer who explained the emancipation petition process . The Bradleys encouraged her to be absent from home when the emancipation petition was delivered to her mother . Copeland ran away from home for three days and stayed with a friend , while Bartell filed the emancipation papers . After her mother reported Copeland missing , she was told about the emancipation petition . Three days after running away , Copeland was returned to her mother by the police . DelaCerna engaged lawyer Gloria Allred and applied for a series of restraining orders , which included the Bradleys ' five @-@ year @-@ old son , who had been Copeland 's roommate , and Bartell . The order was partly intended to preclude contact between the Bradleys and Copeland , but it did not have proper legal basis , since there had been no stalking and no harassment . 
 The custody controversy was highly publicized in the press ( especially Los Angeles Times and Extra ) , starting in August and September 1998 . Parts of the press coverage spilled over into op @-@ ed articles . The case was heard in Torrance , in the Superior Court of Los Angeles County . DelaCerna claimed that the Bradleys had brainwashed Copeland into filing suit for emancipation from her mother , Allred claimed that the Bradleys had turned Copeland against her mother by belittling DelaCerna 's intelligence . The Bradleys noted that the management contract gave them authority over her career , but they stated that they would wait until Copeland became eighteen before seeking twenty percent of Copeland 's earnings . 
 After DelaCerna stated that she would always make sure Copeland could dance , both the emancipation papers and restraining orders were dropped . Copeland , who claimed she did not understand the term emancipation , withdrew the petition after informing the judge that such charges no longer represented her wishes . Still , DelaCerna wanted the Bradleys out of her daughter 's life . Copeland re @-@ enrolled at San Pedro High School for her junior year ( 1998 – 99 ) , on pace to graduate with her original class of 2000 . DelaCerna sought Cantine 's advice on finding a new ballet school . Copeland began ballet study at Lauridsen Ballet Centre with former ABT dancer Diane Lauridsen , although her dancing was now restricted to afternoons in deference to her schooling . Late in 1998 , all parties appeared on Leeza Gibbons ' talk show , Leeza , where Copeland sat silently as the adults " bickered shamelessly " . As a student , Copeland had a 3 @.@ 8 / 4 @.@ 0 GPA through her junior year of high school . In 2000 , DelaCerna stated that Copeland 's earnings from ballet were set aside in a savings account and only used as needed . 
 = = American Ballet Theatre = = 
 = = = Early ABT career = = = 
 Copeland auditioned for several dance programs in 1999 , and each made her an offer to enroll in its summer program . She performed with ABT as part of its 1999 and 2000 Summer Intensive programs . During the summer of 1999 , the topic of whether Copeland would stay if invited came up , and she responded affirmatively , although her mother insisted finishing high school was important . During that summer , she was told that she would likely be invited to stay after she graduated in 2000 , and by the end of the summer she was asked to skip her senior year and join the studio company . Copeland returned to California for her senior year , even though ABT arranged to pay for her performances , housing accommodations and academic arrangements . She studied at the Summer Intensive Program on full scholarship for both summers and was declared ABT 's National Coca @-@ Cola Scholar in 2000 . In the 2000 Summer Intensive Program , she danced the role of <unk> in Don Quixote . Copeland ' strongest memory from the summer is working with Tharp on what Copeland calls Tharp 's " seminal work " , Push Comes to Shove " . Of the 150 dancers in the 2000 Summer Intensive Program , she was one of six selected to join the junior dance troupe . 
 In September 2000 , she joined the ABT Studio Company , which is ABT 's second company , and became a member of its Corps de ballet in 2001 . As part of the Studio Company , she performed the Pas de Deux in Tchaikovsky 's The Sleeping Beauty . Eight months after joining the company , she was sidelined for nearly a year by a lumbar stress fracture . When Copeland joined the company , she weighed 108 pounds ( 49 @.@ 0 kg ) ( she is 5 feet 2 inches ( 1 @.@ 57 m ) tall ) . At age 19 , her puberty had been delayed , a situation common in ballet dancers . After the lumbar fracture , her doctor told her that inducing puberty would help to strengthen her bones , and he prescribed birth control pills . Copeland recalls that in one month she gained 10 pounds , and her small breasts swelled to double D @-@ cup size : " <unk> had to be altered for me ... to cover my cleavage , for instance . I hated this sign that I was different from the others . ... I became so self @-@ conscious that , for the first time in my life , I couldn ’ t dance strong . I was too busy trying to hide my breasts . " Management noticed and called her in to talk about her body . The professional pressure to conform to conventional ballet aesthetics resulted in body image struggles and a binge eating disorder . Copeland says that , over the next year , new friendships outside of ABT , including with Victoria Rowell and her boyfriend , Olu Evans , helped her to regain confidence in her body . She explained , " My curves became an integral part of who I am as a dancer , not something I needed to lose to become one . I started dancing with confidence and joy , and soon the staff at ABT began giving me positive feedback again . And I think I changed everyone ’ s mind about what a perfect dancer is supposed to look like . " During her years in the corps , as the only Black woman in the company , Copeland also felt the burden of her ethnicity in many ways and contemplated a variety of career choices . Recognizing that Copeland 's isolation and self @-@ doubt were standing in the way of her talent , ABT 's artistic director , Kevin McKenzie , asked writer and arts figure Susan Fales @-@ Hill , then vice @-@ chair of ABT 's Board of Directors , to mentor Copeland . Fales @-@ Hill introduced Copeland to Black women trailblazers who encouraged Copeland and helped her to gain perspective . 
 Early career reviews mentioned Copeland as more radiant than higher ranking dancers , and she was named to the 2003 class of Dance Magazine 's " 25 to Watch " . In 2003 , she was favorably reviewed for her roles as a member of the corps in La Bayadère and William Forsythe 's <unk> . Recognition continued in 2004 for roles in ballets such as <unk> , <unk> , Amazed in Burning Dreams , Sechs <unk> , Pillar of Fire , " Pretty Good Year " , " VIII " and " Sinfonietta , where she " stood out in the pas de trois – whether she was gliding across the floor or in a full lift , she created the illusion of smoothness " . She also danced the Hungarian Princess in Tchaikovsky 's Swan Lake . The 2004 season is regarded as her breakthrough season . She was included in the 2004 picture book by former ABT dancer Rosalie O 'Connor titled Getting Closer : A Dancer 's Perspective . Also in 2004 , she met her biological father for the first time and regretted that she had not done so sooner . 
 In 2005 , her most notable performance was in George Balanchine 's <unk> she also danced the Lead Polovtsian Girl in " Polovtsian Dances " from Prince Igor . In 2006 , she was acknowledged for her meticulous classical performance style in Giselle and created a role in Jorma Elo 's Glow – Stop . That year , she also returned to Southern California to perform at Orange County Performing Arts Center and danced one of the <unk> and reprised her role as the Hungarian Princess in Swan Lake in New York . In both 2006 and 2007 , Copeland danced the role of Blossom in James Kudelka 's Cinderella . Copeland 's " old @-@ style " performance continued to earn her praise in 2007 . In 2007 , she danced the Fairy of Valor in The Sleeping Beauty . Other roles that Copeland played before she was appointed a soloist by ABT included Twyla Tharp roles in In the Upper Room and Sinatra Suite as well as a role in Mark Morris 's Gong . 
 = = = Soloist = = = 
 Copeland was appointed a soloist at ABT in August 2007 , one of the youngest ABT dancers promoted to soloist . Although , she was described by early accounts as the first African American woman promoted to soloist for ABT , Anne Benna Sims and Nora Kimball were soloists with ABT in the 1980s . Male soloist Keith Lee also preceded her . As of 2008 , Copeland was the only African @-@ American woman in the dance company during her entire ABT career , and the only male African American in the company , Danny Tidwell , left in 2005 . In an international ballet community with a lack of diversity , she was so unusual as an African American ballerina , that she endured cultural isolation . She has been described in the press as the Jackie Robinson of classical ballet . Copeland feels that since the female dancer is the focus of ballet , her history as a trail @-@ blazing performer and role model has extra significance . 
 Copeland was a standout among her peers . In her first season as a soloist at New York City Center , in which avant @-@ garde ballets works were performed , she presented a Balanchine Ballo della Regina role , earning praise . Also in 2007 , she created a leading role in C. to C. ( Close to Chuck ) , choreographed by Jorma Elo to A Musical Portrait of Chuck Close , Études 2 , 9 & 10 , by Philip Glass . Her performances of Tharp 's works in the same season were recognized , and she was described as more sophisticated and contemporary as a soloist than she had been as a corps dancer . Her summer 2008 Metropolitan Opera House ( the Met ) season performances in Don Quixote and Sleeping Beauty were also well received . 
 During the 2008 – 09 season , Copeland received publicity for roles in Twyla Tharp 's Baker 's Dozen and Paul Taylor 's Company B. During the 2009 Spring ABT season at the Met , Copeland performed <unk> in Le Corsaire and leading roles in Taylor 's Airs and Balanchine 's Pas de Deux from Swan Lake . Her Annenberg Fellowship that year included training for the Pas de Deux . Late that year , she performed in ABT 's first trip to Beijing at the new National Center for the Performing Arts . In 2009 , Copeland created a role in <unk> Barton 's One of Three . 
 In 2010 , Copeland performed in Birthday Offering at the Met and at the Guggenheim Museum danced to David Lang 's music . She also created the Spanish Dance in ABT artist @-@ in @-@ residence Alexei Ratmansky 's new version of The Nutcracker , premiered at the Brooklyn Academy of Music . In early 2011 , she was well received at the Kennedy Center as the Milkmaid in Ratmansky 's The Bright Stream , a remake of a banned comic ballet . In Black History Month in 2011 , Copeland was selected by Essence as one of its 37 Boundary @-@ breaking black women in entertainment . That same month , she toured with Company B , performed at Sadler 's Wells Theatre in London . In May , she created a role in Ratmansky 's Dumbarton , danced to Stravinsky 's chamber concerto , Dumbarton Oaks . Alastair Macaulay of The New York Times found the piece too intimate for the cavernous Met , but he noted : " Misty Copeland gives sudden hints of need and emotional bleakness in a duet ... too much is going on to explain itself at one viewing ; but at once I know I ’ m emotionally and structurally gripped . " Her Summer 2011 ABT solos included the peasant pas de deux in Giselle and , in Ratmansky 's The Bright Stream at the Met in June , her reprise of the Milkmaid was called " luminous , teasingly sensual " . She reprised the role again in July at the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion in Los Angeles with a performance described as " sly " . As a flower girl , she was described as glittering in Don Quixote . In August , she performed at the Vail International Dance Festival in the Gerald Ford Amphitheater in Vail , Colorado . In November , she danced in Taylor 's Black Tuesday . 
 In 2012 , Copeland began achieving solo roles in full @-@ length standard repertory ballets rather than works that were mostly relatively modern pieces . She starred in The Firebird , with choreography by Ratmansky at the Segerstrom Center for the Arts in Costa Mesa , California . It premiered on March 29 , 2012 . The performance was hailed by Laura <unk> in the Los Angeles Times as one of the year 's best dance performances . That year , Copeland was recognized by The Council of Urban Professionals as their Breakthrough Leadership Award winner . She also danced the role of <unk> in La Bayadère at the Met to praise from Alastair Macaulay of The New York Times , who noted her " adult complexity and worldly allure " . The Firebird was again performed at the Met in June 2012 , with Copeland to alternate in the lead . It was Copeland 's first leading role at ABT . Backstage described it as her " most prestigious part " to date . After only one New York performance in the role , Copeland withdrew from the entire ABT season due to six stress fractures in her tibia . She was sidelined for seven months after her October surgery . Upon her return to the stage , she danced the Queen of the Dryads in Don Quixote in May 2013 . Nelson George began filming a documentary leverage the chance to present her comeback . 
 Copeland reprised her role as <unk> in June 2013 in the pirate @-@ themed Le Corsaire . She also played an Odalisque in the same ballet . Later in the year , she danced in Tharp 's choreography of Bach Partita for Violin No. 2 in D minor for solo violin , and as Columbine in ABT 's revival of Ratmansky 's Nutcracker at the Brooklyn Academy of Music . 
 In May 2014 , Copeland performed the lead role of <unk> in Coppélia at the Met . According to Los Angeles Times writer <unk> Phillips , she is the first African American woman to dance the role . The same month , she was praised in the dual role of Queen of the Dryads and Mercedes in Don Quixote by Brian Seibert of The New York Times , although Jerry Hochman of Critical Dance felt that she was not as impressive in the former role as in the latter . Later in May , the Met staged a program of one @-@ act ballets consisting of Theme and Variations , Duo <unk> and Gaîté Parisienne , featuring Copeland in all three . Siebert praised her work as the lead in Balanchine 's choreography of Igor Stravinsky 's Duo <unk> for violin and piano performed by Benjamin Bowman and Emily Wong . Of her Flower Girl in Gaîté Parisienne , Apollinaire Scherr of The Financial Times wrote that she " tips like a brimming watering can into the bouquets her <unk> hold out to her " . Copeland was a " flawless " demi @-@ soloist in Theme and Variations , according to Colleen <unk> of Critical Dance . 
 In June 2014 at the Met , she danced the Fairy Autumn in the Frederick Ashton Cinderella , cited for her energetic exuberance in the role by Hochman , who missed the " varied texture and nuance that made it significantly more interesting " in the hands of ABT 's Christine Shevchenko . That month , she played Lescaut 's Mistress in Manon in which role Marjorie Liebert of <unk> described her as " seductive and ingratiating " . Also in June , she performed the role of <unk> in La Bayadère . Copeland performed the Odette / Odile double role in Swan Lake in September when the company toured in Brisbane , Australia . Her ascension to more prominent roles occurred as three ABT principal dancers ( Paloma Herrera , Julie Kent and <unk> Reyes ) entered their final seasons before retirement . In early October , Copeland performed several pieces including a principal role in Tharp 's Bach Partita at Chicago 's Auditorium Theatre . In October , Copeland made her New York debut in one of the six principal roles in Tharp 's Bach Partita and created a role in Liam Scarlett 's With a Chance of Rain . That December , when ABT revived Ratmansky 's Nutcracker at the Brooklyn Academy of Music , Copeland played the role of Clara , the Princess . The same month , at the Kennedy Center Honors , she was described as " sublime " in Tchaikovsky 's Pas de Deux by the New York City CBS News affiliate . 
 In March 2015 , Copeland danced the role of Princess Florine in The Sleeping Beauty at the Segerstrom Center for the Arts in Costa Mesa , California . She made her American debut as Odette / Odile in Swan Lake with The Washington Ballet , opposite Brooklyn Mack as Prince Siegfried , in April at the Eisenhower Theater in the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts . The performance was the company 's first presentation of Swan Lake in its 70 @-@ year history . In May 2015 , she played Cowgirl in Rodeo , Bianca in Othello and Zulma in Giselle . She was selected for the 2015 Time 100 . As a result , Copeland appeared on the cover of Time , making her the first dancer on the cover since Bill T. Jones in 1994 . In June , Copeland created the small role of the Fairy Fleur de <unk> ( Wheat flower ) in Ratmansky 's The Sleeping Beauty . The same month , she made her debut in Romeo and Juliet on short notice a few days before her scheduled debut performance on June 20 . Later in June , Copeland made her New York debut in the Odette / Odile double role from Swan Lake that is described by Macauley as " the most epic role in world ballet " . Her performance at the Met was regarded as a success . Her performance in the role had been anticipated as a " a crowning achievement " in wide @-@ ranging media outlets and by a broad spectrum of fans and supporters . Wilkinson and Anderson were on hand to present her bouquets on stage . Some viewed this performance as a sign that her promotion to principal was forthcoming . 
 = = = Principal dancer = = = 
 On June 30 , 2015 , Copeland became the first African @-@ American woman to be promoted to principal ballerina in ABT 's 75 @-@ year history . Copeland 's achievement was groundbreaking , as there have been very few African @-@ American principal ballerinas at major companies . Lauren Anderson became a principal at Houston Ballet in 1990 , the first principal ballerina at any major American company . According to the 2015 documentary about Copeland , A Ballerina 's Tale , " there has never been a Black female principal dancer at a major international company " . 
 Copeland next accepted the role of Ivy Smith in the Broadway revival of On The Town , which she played for two weeks from August 25 to September 6 . Her debut on Broadway was favorably reviewed in The New York Times , The Washington Post , and other media . 
 In October in New York , Copeland performed in the revival of Tharp 's choreography of the Brahms @-@ Haydn Variations , in Frederick Ashton 's <unk> I , and " brought a seductive mix of <unk> and sex appeal to ' Rum and Coca @-@ Cola ' " in Paul Taylor 's Company B. The same month , she created the role of His Loss in <unk> by Marcelo Gomes , danced to Tchaikovsky 's Souvenir de Florence , at Lincoln Center . When ABT brought Ratmansky 's Nutcracker to Segerstrom Center for the Arts in December 2015 , Copeland reprised the role of Clara . 
 In January 2016 , Copeland reprised the role of Princess Florine in The Sleeping Beauty at the Kennedy Center , choreographed by Ratmansky . Her spring 2016 schedule also includes leads in ABT productions of The Firebird , La Fille Mal <unk> , Le Corsaire , The Golden Cockerel , Swan Lake and Romeo and Juliet . 
 = = Other appearances , modeling , writings and ventures = = 
 = = = Other stage , television and film appearances = = = 
 In March 2009 , Copeland filmed a music video with Prince for a cover of " Crimson and Clover " , the first single from his 2009 studio album <unk> . Prince asked her to dance along to the song in improvised ballet movements . She described his instructions as " Be you , feel the music , just move " , and upon request for further instruction , " Keep doing what you 're doing " . She also began taking acting lessons in 2009 . During the New York City and New Jersey portions of Prince 's Welcome 2 America tour , Copeland performed a pas de deux en pointe to his song " The Beautiful Ones " , the opening number at the Izod Center and Madison Square Garden . Prince had previously invited her onstage at a concert in Nice , France . In April 2011 , she performed alongside Prince on the Lopez Tonight show , dancing to " The Beautiful Ones . " 
 In 2011 , she was featured in the Season 1 , episode 5 of the Hulu web series A Day in the Life . Copeland was a guest judge for the 11th season of FOX 's So You Think You Can Dance . New Line Cinema has optioned her memoir , Life in Motion , for a screen adaptation , and the Oxygen network has expressed interest in producing a reality <unk> about Copeland mentoring a Master Class of aspiring young dancers . 
 A Ballerina 's Tale , a documentary film about Copeland , debuted at the Tribeca Film Festival in April 2015 . The film was released through video on demand in October 2015 the day before its limited release in theaters . It was first aired in February 2016 as part of PBS ' Independent Lens series . In May 2015 , she was featured on 60 Minutes in a segment with correspondent Bill Whitaker . In June , she served as a presenter at the 69th Tony Awards . She was included in the 2015 International Best Dressed List , published by Vanity <unk> in October 2015 , she performed on The Late Show with Stephen Colbert with musical accompaniment by Yo @-@ Yo Ma , who played " <unk> " from Bach 's Cello Suite No. 2 . She walked the runway at New York Fashion Week in February 2016 to support the American Heart Association 's " Go Red for Women " campaign to increase awareness of the dangers of heart disease for women . She appeared in the March issue of Harper 's Bazaar recreating Edgar Degas ballerina poses in a <unk> ahead of a Museum of Modern Art exhibition : " Edgar Degas : A Strange New Beauty " . The feature was praised by several media outlets . Sebastian Smee of The Boston Globe , however , argued that contemporary ballet performers take Degas ' ballet @-@ themed work too seriously . 
 In February 2016 , Copeland and President Barack Obama were interviewed together in the first of a three part video series with Time and Essence magazines on topics of race , gender , achievement and creating opportunity for young people . Copeland has been cast to dance the lead ballerina role in a forthcoming Disney film , The Nutcracker and the Four Realms , based on the 1816 story " The Nutcracker and the Mouse King " . 
 = = = Ventures and writing = = = 
 In 2011 , she unveiled a line of dancewear , called M by Misty , that she designed . She has also produced celebrity calendars . In 2014 , Copeland released a memoir , Life in Motion : An Unlikely Ballerina , co @-@ authored by Charisse Jones . Her 2014 children 's picture book , titled Firebird , with illustrator Christopher Myers , has a message of empowerment for young people of color . In November 2015 , she announced a third book , Ballerina Body , planned to be a health and fitness guide . 
 = = = Modelling and endorsements = = = 
 Copeland was featured in T @-@ Mobile 's ads for the BlackBerry in 2010 and an ad for Dr. Pepper in 2013 . In 2013 , she became a spokesperson for Project <unk> , a national initiative to broaden the pipeline of leadership within ballet . She also became a brand ambassador for Seiko in 2015 . In 2016 , Mattel created a Misty Copeland Barbie doll . 
 In 2014 , Copeland became a sponsored athlete for Under Armour , which paid her more than her ballet career . Her Under Armour women @-@ focused ad campaign was widely publicized , and resulted in her being named an ABC World News Person of the week . The ad campaign was recognized by Adweek as one of The 10 Best Ads of 2014 and as " The year 's best campaign targeting women " . Copeland ( along with Steph Curry and Jordan Spieth ) was credited with leading to a surge in demand for Under Armor products . 
 = = Honors = = 
 In 2008 , Copeland won the Leonore Annenberg Fellowship in the Arts , which funds study with master teachers and trainers outside of ABT . The two @-@ year fellowships are in recognition of " young artists of extraordinary talent with the goal of providing them with additional resources in order to fully realise their potential " . In 2013 , she was named National Youth of the Year Ambassador by the Boys & Girls Clubs of America . In 2014 , Copeland was named to the President 's Council on Fitness , Sports , and Nutrition and received an honorary doctorate from the University of Hartford for her contributions to classical ballet and helping to diversify the art form . Copeland was a Dance Magazine Awards 2014 honoree . After her promotion as principal dancer , Copeland was named one of Glamour 's Women of the Year for 2015 ; one of ESPN 's 2015 Impact 25 athletes and influencers who have made the greatest impact for women in sports ; and , by Barbara Walters , one of the 10 " most fascinating " people of 2015 . In 2016 , Copeland won a Shorty Award for Best in Dance in Social Media . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Copeland lives with her fiancé , attorney Olu Evans , on Manhattan 's Upper West Side . The couple were introduced to each other around 2004 by Evans ' cousin , Taye Diggs . Copeland announced her engagement to Evans in a 2015 cover story in Essence magazine . Copeland , when she has free time , enjoys cooking and relaxing , preferring not " to be around a lot of people " . 
 = = Published works = = 
 Copeland , Misty ( with Charisse Jones ) ( 2014 ) . Life in Motion : An Unlikely Ballerina . Simon & Schuster . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 4767 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Copeland , Misty ( 2014 ) . Firebird . G.P. Putnam 's Sons Books for Young Readers . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 399 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 = Tumbler Ridge = 
 Tumbler Ridge is a district municipality in the foothills of the Canadian Rockies in northeastern British Columbia , Canada , and a member municipality of the Peace River Regional District . The municipality of 1 @,@ 558 square kilometres ( 602 sq mi ) , with its population of 2 @,@ 710 people , incorporates a townsite and a large area of mostly Crown Land . The housing and municipal infrastructure , along with regional infrastructure connecting the new town to other municipalities , were built simultaneously in 1981 by the provincial government to service the coal industry as part of the British Columbia Resources Investment Corporation 's Northeast Coal Development . 
 In 1981 , a consortium of Japanese steel mills agreed to purchase 100 million tonnes of coal over 15 years for US $ 7 @.@ 5 billion from two mining companies , Denison Mines Inc. and the Teck Corporation , who were to operate the Quintette mine and the Bullmoose mine respectively . Declining global coal prices after 1981 , and weakening Asian markets in the late 1990s , made the town 's future uncertain and kept it from achieving its projected population of 10 @,@ 000 people . The uncertainty dissuaded investment and kept the economy from diversifying . When price reductions were forced onto the mines , the Quintette mine was closed in 2000 production and the town lost about half its population . Coal prices began to rise after the turn of the century , leading to the opening of the Peace River Coal Trend mine by Northern Energy & Mining Inc . ( now owned by Anglo American Met Coal ) and the Wolverine Mine , originally owned by Western Canadian Coal , which was purchased by Walter Energy in 2010 . 
 After dinosaur footprints , fossils , and bones were discovered in the municipality , along with fossils of Triassic fishes and cretaceous plants , the Peace Region Paleontology Research Centre opened in 2003 . The research centre and a dinosaur museum were funded in part by the federal Western Economic Diversification Canada to decrease economic dependence on the coal industry . 
 In 2014 , both operating coal mines were put into " care and maintenance mode " . This means the mines are effectively closed , but are still allowed to restart without needing to go through the process of getting a new mines act permit . 
 Economic diversification has also occurred with oil and gas exploration , forestry , and recreational tourism . Nearby recreational destinations include numerous trails , mountains , waterfalls , snowmobiling areas and provincial parks , such as Monkman Provincial Park , <unk> Lake Provincial Park , and Gwillim Lake Provincial Park . 
 = = History = = 
 Archaeological evidence show a human presence dating back 3 @,@ 000 years . The nomadic <unk> , followed by the <unk> and then the Cree , periodically lived in temporary settlements around the future municipality . Formal exploratory and surveying expeditions were conducted by S. Prescott Fay , with Robert Cross and Fred Brewster in 1914 , J.C. Gwillim in 1919 , Edmund <unk> in 1920 , and John Holzworth in 1923 . <unk> coined the name Tumbler Ridge , referring to the mountains northwest of the future town , by altering Gwillim 's map that named them Tumbler Range . Permanent settlers were squatters , five families by 1920 , who maintained trap lines . In the 1950s and 1960s , oil and natural gas exploration and logging was conducted through the area , and 15 significant coal deposits were discovered . Coal prices rose after the 1973 oil crisis leading to 40 government studies examining the viability of accessing the coal , given the 1 @,@ 130 km ( 700 mi ) to the nearest port and the mountainous barrier . 
 With these coal deposits in mind , a purchasing agreement was signed in 1981 by two Canadian mining companies , a consortium of Japanese steel mills , and the governments of British Columbia and Canada . As part of the deal , the provincial government committed , under the North East Coal Development plan , to build a new town near the deposits , two highways off Highway 97 , a power line from the W. A. C. Bennett Dam at Hudson 's Hope , and a branch rail line through the Rocky Mountains . An alternative of using work camps staffed by people from Dawson Creek and Chetwynd was also considered . Massive initial investments were required as planning for the new town began in 1976 with the objective of having a fully functioning town ready before residents arrived . Coordinated through the provincial Ministry of Municipal Affairs the town , regional infrastructure , and mining plants were all built simultaneously . When the municipality was incorporated in April 1981 the area was completely forested . During that year building sites and roadways were cleared and in the winter the water and sewerage system was built . In 1982 , houses and other buildings were constructed . Full production at the mines was reached the following year . 
 In early 1983 , the families of the managers at the Bullmoose <unk> , led by Dean <unk> appealed to the British Columbia government and were able to create a new settlement , called Bullmoose Settlement . This was done because Dean 's wife was expecting and he wanted his child to have something different to say about her birthplace . He wanted her to be able to say that a settlement had been created for her and that she was , and would always be the only one born at that place . At her birth , Alicia V. <unk> was also written into the Tumbler Ridge records as the first child born in the Quintette area . Bullmoose Settlement was closed down after the reduction in mine activities with just the one birth . 
 In 1984 , world coal prices were dropping and the Japanese consortium requested a reduction in the price of coal from the Tumbler Ridge mines . As price reduction requests continued , the concern over the viability of the mines led the BC Assessment Authority to lower the 1987 property assessments for the Quintette mine from CAD $ 156 million to $ 89 million and the Bullmoose mine $ 70 million to $ 43 million . This lowered their taxes as they tried to enforce the purchasing agreement at the Supreme Court of Canada . Their 1990 ruling required the Quintette Operations Company to reduce coal prices and reimburse the Japanese consortium $ 4 @.@ 6 million . The company responded by reducing production , cutting employment , and applying for court protection from creditors . This allowed Teck to acquire 50 % interest and take over management of the Quintette mine , but it was unable to stop further job losses . As most residents left town , apartment blocks were closed and the mine companies bought back all but 11 houses in the town . After 30 % of the workforce had been laid off , new contracts with the Japanese consortium were signed in 1997 , allowing re @-@ hirings to begin , but with lower export levels . The North East Coal Development was projected to create a net benefit of CAD $ 0 @.@ 9 billion ( 2000 ) , but incurred a net loss of $ 2 @.@ 8 billion and half the expected regional employment . 
 The population declined as many residents were unable to find other work in the town , even as a sawmill for specialty woods opened in 1999 . After Teck closed the Quintette mine in August 2000 and shifted production to the lower cost Bullmoose mine , the town council established the Tumbler Ridge Revitalization Task Force to investigate ways to boost and diversify the economy . The Task Force negotiated the return of the housing stock from the mines to the free market , grants from the province to become debt @-@ free , and stabilized funds from the province for healthcare and education . The discovery of dinosaur tracks in 2000 by two local boys while playing near a creek , led to major fossil and bone discoveries from the Cretaceous Period . To survey and study the finds , government funding was secured to found both the Tumbler Ridge Museum Foundation and Peace Region Palaeontology Research Centre . 
 After the Bullmoose mine exhausted its supply of coal in 2003 , world coal prices increased , making exploration and mining in Tumbler Ridge economically feasible again . Western Canadian Coal opened new open @-@ pit mining operations creating the Dillon mine using Bullmoose mining infrastructure , the Brule mine near Chetwynd using new infrastructure ( projected 11 @-@ year life span ) , and the Wolverine mine . These mines were purchased by Walter Energy in 2010 , but world coal prices began to drop again in 2011 , and in April 2014 , Walter put their Canadian operations into " care and maintenance mode " , laying off nearly 700 people . 
 The Peace River Coal Trend Mine was issued its mines act permit in 2005 , and was a partnership between <unk> Northern Energy and Mining Inc . , Anglo American , Hillsborough Resources and <unk> Anker International . In 2011 , Anglo American bought out the rest of the partners to become sole owner of the property . 
 Anglo American started working on the Roman Pit next to their existing Trend operation in 2014 , hoping to reduce the cost of production per tonne of coal . However , in late 2014 , they announced the mine would be going into care and maintenance mode as well . 
 As of Fall , 2015 , there are no coal mines operating in Tumbler Ridge . However , HD Mining is continuing work on the Murray River Coal Mine , a proposed Underground <unk> Mine near Tumbler Ridge . The company was issued its Environmental Assessment Certificate from the BC Government in October 2015 , though construction on the mine , if it were to go ahead , is not expected to begin until after a Mines Act Permit is issued , which is not expected until late 2016 . 
 On September 22 , 2014 , the area around Tumbler Ridge was designated North America 's second Geopark . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 Population projections in 1977 were for 3 @,@ 568 residents in 1981 , 7 @,@ 940 in 1985 , and 10 @,@ 584 in 1987 , after which the level was expected to stabilize . However , requests for lower coal prices shortly after the production began placed a persistent insecurity over the viability of the mines , and therefore the town , discouraging long term investments . Temporary work camps , where workers numbered between 200 and 2 @,@ 000 , were used during the construction of the town and mines . The planners of the town advised the mining companies to hire workers who were married , believing they would live in Tumbler Ridge longer and reduce employment turn @-@ over . The population rose slowly to 3 @,@ 833 people in 1984 , nearly half the projected level . The 1986 Canadian census , the first census to include Tumbler Ridge , recorded 4 @,@ 566 residents after which in @-@ migration ended and the population level began to fluctuate . The population peaked in 1991 at 4 @,@ 794 people but then declined to a low of 1 @,@ 932 people in 2001 . Since then , population growth has been led by new mining activities and increased exploration following higher world energy prices . The town 's population is currently in a state of flux as people dependent on the mines for work leave , while other people , attracted by the town 's low rent , arrive . 
 The Canada 2006 Census reported 2 @,@ 454 residents living in 1 @,@ 045 households and 765 families . This was 27 % more people than the previous census five years earlier when the town was at its lowest population level since opening . The median age increased from 38 @.@ 8 years in 2001 to 42 @.@ 2 in 2006 , as the proportion of the population aged over 65 rose from 5 % to 11 % . In 2006 , of those over 15 years of age , 62 % were married , higher than the 54 % provincial average . The town has few visible minorities as 94 % of Tumbler Ridge residents were Canadian @-@ born and 93 % had English as their first language . Though not included as a minority , 9 % of residents claimed to have an Aboriginal identity . Reflecting the nature of the industrial jobs available in town , in 2001 , only 12 % of residents between 20 and 64 years of age completed university , half of the provincial average , and 26 % did not complete high school , much higher than the 19 % provincial average . 
 In 2005 , the five officer Tumbler Ridge Royal Canadian Mounted Police municipal detachment reported 346 Criminal Code offences . This translated into a crime rate of 137 Criminal Code offences per 1 @,@ 000 people , higher than the provincial average of 119 offences . During that year , the RCMP reported lower crime rates in Tumbler Ridge , compared with the provincial averages , in all categories except bicycle thefts , property damage , impaired driving , and cannabis @-@ related offences . Until 2005 , the town had a lower crime rate than the province , except between 2001 and 2003 after the Quintette mine closure and a large out @-@ migration from the town . In 2004 the Tumbler Ridge RCMP reported no robbery or shoplifting offences , and only 4 @.@ 5 theft @-@ from @-@ motor @-@ vehicle offences per 1 @,@ 000 people compared with 20 provincially . 
 = = Geography and climate = = 
 The townsite is located on a series of southern @-@ facing gravel terraces on a ridge of Mount Bergeron , overlooking the confluence of the Murray and Wolverine Rivers . The site , above the floodplain of the Murray River , has well @-@ drained soils with easy access to aquifers with potable water . The rocks , mostly shale and mudstone but lacking quartzite , make the mountains less rugged than their neighbouring ranges . The terraces grow Lodgepole Pine , White Spruce , Trembling Aspen trees . Moose and elk are common . <unk> to the east and north could pose a snow avalanche threat but are kept forested for stability . In 2006 , the town was evacuated for several days as four forest fires approached the town . 
 Major coal deposits indicate the site was a swampy forest during the Cretaceous . Paleontologists have discovered tracks or fossils from <unk> , ornithopods ( including a Hadrosaurus ) , and theropods . Fossils of Cretaceous plants such as ferns , redwoods , cycads , and ginkgo , and Triassic fishes and reptiles such as coelacanth , <unk> , and ichthyosaur have been recovered . 
 The town experiences a continental climate . Arctic air masses move predominantly <unk> from the Mackenzie Valley towards the Rocky Mountains and through the mountains north of town . The town is in a rain shadow behind Mount Bergeron , though much of the precipitation is lost in the mountains beforehand . Town planners laid out the roads so that they run along wind breaks , and buildings and parks are located in wind shadows . 
 After examining other resource towns in Canada , the planners followed socio @-@ spatial guidelines and principles in physical planning . The coal mining facilities were well separated from the townsite to minimize the feeling of a company town . An attempt to mitigate potential lifestyle conflicts between families and childless households was made by separating the low @-@ density , single @-@ family dwellings from the low @-@ rise apartments . The apartment blocks were planned for areas with clusters of trees and excellent <unk> , but close to the town plaza . The low @-@ density residences that were more likely to have children living in them were oriented around elementary schools and parks . Cul @-@ de @-@ sacs were avoided in favour of better linkages and pedestrian access . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 Two highways diverge from Highway 97 and intersect in Tumbler Ridge : Highway 52 ( Heritage Highway ) which runs 98 km ( 61 mi ) south at Arras , and Highway 29 which runs 90 km ( 56 mi ) southeast from Chetwynd . At the intersection Highway 29 ends but Highway 52 continues south through Tumbler Ridge , then unpaved , it runs northeast to Highway 2 near the Alberta border . In town , the 28 km ( 17 mi ) of paved roads are laid out in a curvilinear pattern that use two arterial roads , MacKenzie Way and Monkman Way , to connect each section of town . Service roads from the townsite to the mines and forestry areas are maintained by the industries but are unpaved . 
 The unmanned Tumbler Ridge Airport , with its 1 @,@ 219 m ( 4 @,@ 000 ft ) asphalt runway , is used by chartered and local flights . The closest airports with regularly scheduled flights are in Dawson Creek , Fort St John and Grande Prairie . The rail line into town is a 132 km ( 82 mi ) formerly electrified branch line through the Rocky Mountains constructed by BC Rail to transport coal to the Ridley Terminal at the Port of Prince Rupert . The branch line includes two major tunnels : the 9 km ( 6 mi ) Table Tunnel and the 6 km ( 4 mi ) Wolverine Tunnel . 
 The town funds its own 21 @-@ member volunteer fire department , water treatment system , and sewage disposal system . Drinking water is drawn from two springs south of the townsite where it is stored in a 7 million litre reservoir before being chlorinated and pumped into town . The storm sewers empty into the Murray River , but the sanitary sewage is processed through a lagoon system and released into the Murray River north of town . Both the town and the province , through the Northern Health Authority , operate the Tumbler Ridge Community Health Centre . The closest hospitals with over @-@ night beds are in Chetwynd and Dawson Creek . The two public schools , Tumbler Ridge Elementary School and Tumbler Ridge Secondary School are run by the School District 59 Peace River South . Post @-@ secondary courses , programs , and industry training are offered by Northern Lights College at the secondary school and community centre . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Tumbler Ridge was built to provide a labour force for the coal mining industry , which has remained the dominant employer throughout the town 's history . The mining companies had a contract to sell 100 million tons of coal to a consortium of Japanese steel mills over 15 years for US $ 7 @.@ 5 billion ( 1981 ) . The Quintette Operating Corporation ( <unk> ) was formed by partnership between Denison Mines ( 50 % ) , Mitsui Mining ( 20 % ) , Tokyo <unk> ( 20 % ) , and other smaller firms , and began blasting at the Quintette mine in October 1982 . The Bullmoose Operating Corporation was formed by the Teck Corporation ( 51 % ) , <unk> ( 39 % ) , <unk> Iwai ( 10 % ) and worked the smaller Bullmoose mine . The economic viability of the mining companies were in question since the world coal prices began falling in the early 1980s and the Japanese consortium requested reduced prices . After the Supreme Court ruled that the coal prices must be reduced , the <unk> filed for court protection from its creditors allowing the Teck Corporation to take over management in 1992 . By 1996 , even as lay @-@ offs continued , over half the town 's labour force were employed at one of the two mines . New contracts with the Japanese consortium , signed 1997 , moved production to the lower cost Bullmoose mine but guaranteed production until 2003 when that mine was expected to be exhausted . The Quintette mine was closed altogether on August 31 , 2000 . 
 While there was an intent by the town 's planners to move to a more diversified economy , the few initiatives in this direction were not supported by the industries or local decision @-@ makers . Uncertainty about the town 's future had been a serious concern to residents since the 1984 price reduction demands , but it was not until the closure of the Quintette mine that the town seriously investigate a diversification . Since then employment has been generated in tourism ( attractions from dinosaur fossil discoveries , outdoor recreation , and nearby provincial parks ) , forestry , and oil and gas exploration . 
 A $ 1 @.@ 4 billion Murray River coal mine project near Tumbler Ridge , operated by HD Mining International , a company majority @-@ owned by <unk> Holdings Group , a private company from China uses long @-@ wall mining in which " coal is extracted along a wall in large blocks and then carried out on a conveyor belt . " <unk> Yan , CEO of HD Mining and its controlling shareholder , was a manager of the state @-@ owned China Shenhua Energy Co ( CSEC ) , China 's largest coal company , which had developed a highly advanced long @-@ wall mining technology . In 2013 HD mining brought in 52 workers from China through the federal Temporary Foreign Worker Program ( <unk> ) claiming a requirement of the job is an ability to speak Mandarin . The hiring was challenged in a Vancouver federal court by two labour unions in April 2013 , The unions claimed there were qualified Canadian job applicants , however the case was dismissed by Justice Russell Zinn who found there was nothing to support the unions claim . 
 = = Culture , recreation and media = = 
 After dinosaur trackways were discovered in 2000 , and bones in 2002 , the Tumbler Ridge Museum Foundation began excavations and opened the Peace Region Palaeontology Research Centre . Fossils and bones are displayed at both locations . Tours and educational programs related to dinosaur , the trackways , and the wilderness are offered . 
 Tumbler Ridge 's location among the Rocky Mountains has allowed for the development of numerous trail systems for motorized and non @-@ motorized recreation . The trails and open areas span numerous mountains . <unk> Falls along the Murray River in the Monkman Provincial Park is the most popular destination for visitors to Tumbler Ridge . Two other provincial parks are just outside the municipal boundaries : <unk> Lake Provincial Park and Gwillim Lake Provincial Park . 
 Annual events held in Tumbler Ridge include the <unk> Music Festival , Emperor 's Challenge – promoted as the most beautiful and most challenging half @-@ marathon in the world – and the Ridge Ramble Cross @-@ Country Ski Race . The <unk> Music Festival ( formerly Grizzly Valley Days ) is a two @-@ day concert held on the August long weekend , and includes a parade , dance , art show , and other community @-@ wide events . The Emperor 's Challenge , also in August , is a 21 km ( 13 mi ) marathon up Roman Mountain . 
 Tumbler Ridge has one newspaper published in the community , the locally owned and operated Tumbler Ridge News ( formerly Community Connections ) . The Tumbler Ridge Observer formerly covered the town and was published by the Peace River Block Daily News in Dawson Creek . The Ridge Blog was a short @-@ lived online news source . One newsletter , Coffee Talk , based out of Chetwynd , is circulated in the town . No radio station , or television station broadcasts from the town but there are local repeaters for stations from larger centres . 
 In Fall 2014 Tumbler Ridge was designated a full member of UNESCO 's Global Geopark Network being only the second Geopark in North America and the first in the West . The Tumbler Ridge Geopark Committee is dedicated to developing tourism and business in the area . 
 = = Government and politics = = 
 The District of Tumbler Ridge 's council @-@ manager form of municipal government is headed by a mayor ( who also represents Tumbler Ridge on the Peace River Regional District 's governing board ) and a six @-@ member council ; these positions are subject to at @-@ large elections every three years . Don McPherson was elected mayor on November 15 , 2014 , succeeding Darwin Wren . Sherry Berringer was elected as school trustee for a third term , sitting on the board of School District 59 . The city funds a volunteer fire department headed by full @-@ time fire chief Matt <unk> . 
 Tumbler Ridge is part of the Peace River South provincial electoral district , represented , since 2013 , by Mike Bernier in the Legislative Assembly of British Columbia . Prior to Bernier , the riding was represented by Blair Lekstrom who was elected in the 2001 provincial election , with 72 % support from the town 's polls and re @-@ elected in 2005 with 64 % and in 2009 with 70 % support . Before Lekstrom , Peace River South was represented by Jack Weisgerber as a member of the Social Credit Party of British Columbia ( 1986 – 1994 ) and Reform Party of British Columbia ( 1994 – 2001 ) . In 1996 , as leader of the Reform Party , Weisgerber won re @-@ election despite the Tumbler Ridge polls placing him second to the New Democratic Party candidate . 
 Federally , Tumbler Ridge is in the Prince George — Peace River riding , represented in the Canadian House of Commons by Conservative Party Member of Parliament Bob Zimmer . Before Zimmer , who was elected in May 2011 , the riding was represented by Jay Hill since 1993 . The riding was represented by Frank Oberle of the Progressive Conservative Party from 1972 to 1993 . Oberle served as Canada 's Minister of Science and Technology in 1985 and Minister of Forestry in 1989 . 
 = Surfer Rosa = 
 Surfer Rosa is the first full @-@ length album by the American alternative rock band Pixies , released in March 1988 on the British independent record label 4AD . The album 's unusual and offbeat subject matter includes references to mutilation and voyeurism ; this is augmented by experimental recording techniques and a distinctive drum sound . Surfer Rosa contains many of the elements present in Pixies ' earlier output , including Spanish lyrics and references to Puerto Rico . 
 Because of 4AD 's independent status , distribution in the United States was handled by British label Rough Trade Records ; however , it failed to chart in either the UK or the U.S. " Gigantic " was the only single taken from the release ( in a re @-@ recorded version ) , and only reached number 93 on the UK Singles Chart . Despite this , Surfer Rosa was re @-@ released in the U.S. by Elektra Records in 1992 , and in 2005 was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America . 
 Surfer Rosa is often cited as a favorite of music critics and is frequently included on professional lists of the all @-@ time best rock albums . Many alternative rock artists , including Billy Corgan and PJ Harvey , have cited the album as inspirational ; Nirvana 's Kurt Cobain frequently acknowledged that Surfer Rosa was a strong influence on Nevermind , and , in 1993 , Cobain hired the album 's recording engineer Steve Albini to record his band 's album In Utero . 
 = = Background = = 
 Before the release of Pixies ' debut mini @-@ album Come On Pilgrim in October 1987 , Ivo Watts @-@ Russell , head of 4AD , suggested they return to the studio to record a full @-@ length album . The original plan was to record new material at Fort Apache Studios , where the band had produced The Purple Tape and Come On Pilgrim . However , due to differences between the band 's manager Ken Goes and The Purple Tape producer Gary Smith , Pixies ended up looking for a new producer and recording studio . On the advice of a 4AD colleague , Watts @-@ Russell looked to hire Steve Albini , ex @-@ frontman of Big Black , as the record 's engineer and producer . Having sent a pre @-@ release tape of Come On Pilgrim to Albini , Pixies ' manager , Ken Goes , invited him to a Boston dinner party at drummer David Lovering 's house a few weeks after Come On Pilgrim 's release . 
 Albini met the band that evening , and they discussed how the next record should sound and be recorded . According to Albini , " [ the band and I ] were in the studio the next day . " Paul Kolderie , who had worked at Fort Apache Studios with Smith , recommended the Boston recording studio Q Division to Albini . This created tension between Smith and Kolderie , and Kolderie later remarked that " Gary almost killed me for the suggestion , he thought I was scheming to get the project . " 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Pixies entered Q Division in December 1987 , booking ten working days of studio time in which to record the album . 4AD allocated the band a budget of US $ 10 @,@ 000 . Albini 's producer 's fee was US $ 1 @,@ 500 , and he received no royalties ; Albini has a practice of refusing royalties from records he produces , viewing it as " an insult to the band . " Along with Albini in the studio , Q Division 's Jon Lupfer acted as studio assistant . The recording process took the entire booked period of ten working days to complete , with extra vocal mixes subsequently added in the studio . Albini planned to mix the record " somewhere else " , but according to Lupfer , " He was unhappy there with it . " 
 Albini used unusual recording techniques . For Kim Deal 's backing vocals in " Where Is My Mind ? " and her lead vocals on " Gigantic " , Albini moved the studio equipment and recorded in a studio bathroom to achieve real , rather than studio , echo ; according to John Murphy , Deal 's husband at the time , " Albini didn 't like the studio sound . " Albini later said that the record could have been completed in a week , but " we ended up trying more experimental stuff basically to kill time and see if anything good materialized . " An example was " Something Against You " , where Albini filtered Black Francis ' voice through a guitar amp for " a totally ragged , vicious texture . " 
 = = = Studio banter = = = 
 The recording of a conversation held between Francis and Albini can be heard at the end of " Oh My Golly ! " . According to Lupfer , " it was a concept he [ Albini ] was going for to get some studio banter . " As Deal was leaving the studio to smoke a cigarette , she exclaimed " If anybody touches my stuff , I 'll kill ya . " Francis replied with " I 'll kill you , you fucking die , if anybody touches my stuff " . The track begins at this point , with Francis explaining the conversation to Albini , whose voice is not heard on the track . Lupfer later admitted that Albini knew " perfectly well what was going on . " 
 " I 'm Amazed " begins with Deal recounting a story in which one of her former teachers who was " into field hockey players " was discreetly fired . Francis finishes Deal 's sentences , joking that her response to hearing of the teacher 's activities was to try to join the team . Albini later observed the use of studio banter on Surfer Rosa : " It 's on their record forever so I think now they are obliged to say that they 're ok with it , but I honestly don 't know that that idea would 've ever come up if I hadn 't done it . There are times when things like that are revealing and entertaining and I kind of felt it was a bit gimmicky on this record . " 
 = = Music = = 
 Like Come On Pilgrim , Surfer Rosa displays a mix of musical styles ; pop guitar songs such as " Broken Face " , " Break My Body " , and " Brick Is Red " are featured alongside slower , more melodic tracks exemplified by " Where Is My Mind ? " . The album includes heavier material , and prominently features the band 's trademark quiet @-@ loud dynamic . Frontman and principal songwriter Black Francis wrote the material , the only exception being " Gigantic , " which was co @-@ written with Kim Deal . " Gigantic " is one of only two Pixies album tracks on which Deal sang lead vocals . 
 Surfer Rosa 's lyrical content includes examinations of mutilation and incest in " Break My Body " and " Broken Face " , while references to superheroes appear on " Tony 's Theme " . Voyeurism appears in " Gigantic " , and surrealistic lyrics are featured on " Bone Machine " and " Where Is My Mind ? " . Puerto Rico references and Spanish lyrics are found on the tracks " Oh My Golly ! " and " Vamos . " The latter track was previously featured on Come On Pilgrim , and appears on Surfer Rosa as a rerecorded version of the original song . Many of the themes explored on previous recordings are revisited on Surfer Rosa ; however , unlike on the band 's later albums , the songs in Surfer Rosa are not preoccupied with one overarching topic . 
 Other unusual and offbeat subject matter is raised on the album . " Cactus " is narrated by a prison inmate who requests his girlfriend smear her dress with blood and mail it to him . " Gigantic " is an " unabashed praisesong to a well @-@ endowed black man , " and borrows from the 1986 film Crimes of the Heart , in which a married woman falls in love with a teenager . Francis was inspired to write " Where Is My Mind ? " after scuba diving in the Caribbean . He later said he had " this very small fish trying to chase me . I don 't know why — I don 't know too much about fish behavior . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Surfer Rosa was released in the UK by 4AD on March 21 , 1988 , entering the UK Indie Chart the following week . It spent 60 weeks in the chart , peaking at number 2 . Until August of that year it was only available in the U.S. as an import . Although the label held worldwide distribution rights to Pixies , they did not have access to a distributor outside the UK . When 4AD signed a distribution deal with Rough Trade 's U.S. branch , the album was released on vinyl and cassette as part of the Surfer Rosa / Come On Pilgrim release . While Surfer Rosa / Come On Pilgrim has remained in print on CD in the UK , subsequent U.S. releases have seen the two released on separate CDs . These separate releases first appeared in January 1992 , when Elektra Records first reissued the band 's first two albums . After 4AD reacquired rights to the band 's U.S. distribution , they released both as separate CDs . Surfer Rosa was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America in 2005 , 17 years after its original release . 
 " Gigantic " was the only single taken from Surfer Rosa . The track and its B @-@ side , " River Euphrates " , were rerecorded by Gil Norton at Blackwing Studios in London , early in May 1988 . The remixed single was well met by critics . The single failed to sell , and spent just one week at number 93 on the UK Singles Chart . Despite the poor commercial performance of both Surfer Rosa and " Gigantic " , Ivo Watts @-@ Russell has said that the response to the album was " times five " compared with Come On Pilgrim . 
 = = Packaging = = 
 Surfer Rosa 's cover artwork features a photograph of a topless " friend of a friend " of the band , posing as a flamenco dancer , pitched against a wall which displays a crucifix and a torn poster . Simon Larbalestier , who contributed pictures to all Pixies album sleeves , decided to build the set because " we couldn 't find the atmosphere we wanted naturally . " According to Larbalestier , Black Francis came up with the idea for the cover as he wrote songs in his father 's " topless Spanish bar " ; Larbalestier added the crucifix and torn poster , and they " sort of loaded that with all the Catholicism . " Commenting on the cover in 2005 , Francis said , " I just hope people find it tasteful . " The cover booklet expands on the theme , and features photographs of the flamenco dancer in several other poses ; there are no song lyrics or written content , apart from album credits , in the booklet . 
 Albini 's name does not appear on the original record sleeve . The booklet 's photographs were taken in one day at a pub opposite the 4AD offices , because , according to Larbalestier , " it was one of the few places that had a raised stage " . In an 1988 interview with Joy Press , Black Francis described the concept as referring to " a surfer girl , " who " walks along the Beach of <unk> , has a surfboard , very beautiful . " When questioned about the topless element , he replied , " For the first record , I told them I liked nudity . I like body lines — not necessarily something in bad taste , didn 't even have to be female , just body lines ... like that Obsession ad , you know ? " According to Melody Maker , the album was originally entitled " Gigantic " after Deal 's song , but the band feared misinterpretation of the cover and changed it to " Surfer Rosa . " The " name " of the cover woman , and the album title , comes from the " Oh My Golly ! " lyric , " <unk> <unk> con surfer rosa . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The UK music press reviews of Surfer Rosa were generally positive . Q 's Ian Cranna wrote that " what sets the Pixies apart are their sudden bursts of memorable pop melody , " and noted that " they could have a bright future ahead of them . " NME 's Mark Sinker , reviewing the album in March 1988 , said " they force the past to sound like them " , while Dave Henderson from Underground magazine found the songs " well crafted , well delivered sketches which embrace commercial ideals as well as bizarre left @-@ field out of control moments " . American music magazine Spin described it as " beautifully brutal " , and named Pixies their musicians of the year . In a less enthusiastic review for The Village Voice , Robert Christgau found the band 's guitar riffs recognizable and their strong rhythms unique but felt they had been overrated by critics who hailed them as " the Amerindie find of the year " . In retrospect , he wrote that while Francis ' fey and philosophically limited lyrics were somewhat annoying , Surfer Rosa now seems " audaciously funny and musically prophetic " . 
 At the end of 1988 , Surfer Rosa was named one of the year 's best albums on English critics ' year @-@ end lists . Independent music magazines Melody Maker and Sounds named Surfer Rosa as their album of the year ; NME and Record Mirror placed the album 10th and 14th , respectively . However , Surfer Rosa failed to appear on The Village Voice 's Pazz & Jop , an annual poll of American critics . It also did not appear on any end @-@ of @-@ year list in the United States . A number of music magazines have since positioned Surfer Rosa as one of the quintessential alternative rock records of the 1980s . The album has appeared on several all @-@ time best album lists , and is consistently placed as one of the best albums of the 1980s in any genre . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Both Surfer Rosa and Steve Albini 's production of the album have been influential on alternative rock , and on grunge in particular . Nirvana 's Kurt Cobain cited Surfer Rosa as the basis for Nevermind 's songwriting . When he first heard the album , Cobain discovered a template for the mix of heavy noise and pop he was aiming to achieve . He remarked in 1993 that he " heard songs off of Surfer Rosa that I 'd written but threw out because I was too afraid to play them for anybody . " Cobain hired Albini to produce Nirvana 's 1993 album In Utero , primarily due to his contribution to Surfer Rosa . The Smashing Pumpkins ' Billy Corgan described Surfer Rosa as " the one that made me go , ' holy shit ' . It was so fresh . It rocked without being lame . " Corgan was impressed by the album 's drum sound , and acknowledged that The Smashing Pumpkins used to study the record for its technical elements . Musician PJ Harvey said that Surfer Rosa " blew my mind , " and that she " immediately went to track down Steve Albini . " Cobain listed Surfer Rosa as number 2 of the top 50 albums he thought were most influential to Nirvana 's sound in his journal in 1993 . 
 People connected with the band were impressed by the record . Ivo Watts @-@ Russell recalled : " I remember when I first heard Surfer Rosa thinking , ' I didn 't know the Pixies could sound like The Fall . ' That was my immediate reaction , in other words , incredibly raw . " Gary Smith , who at the time was in a disagreement with the band , admitted he " was really happy that they had made such a forceful , aggressive , record . " Dinosaur Jr . ' s J Mascis , comparing the record to the later Pixies albums Bossanova and Trompe le Monde , said he thought that Steve Albini 's production " sounded way better than the other ones . " 
 In 1991 , as Pixies were recording Trompe le Monde , Albini described his impressions of Pixies during the recording of Surfer Rosa to the fan magazine Forced Exposure : " A patchwork pinch loaf from a band who at their top dollar best are blandly entertaining college rock . Their willingness to be ' guided ' by their manager , their record company and their producers is unparalleled . Never have I seen four cows more anxious to be led around by their nose rings . " Albini later apologized for his remarks , saying , " to this day I regret having done it . I don 't think that I regarded the band as significantly as I should have . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All tracks written by Black Francis , except where noted . 
 " Bone Machine " – 3 : 02 
 " Break My Body " – 2 : 05 
 " Something Against You " – 1 : 47 
 " Broken Face " – 1 : 30 
 " Gigantic " ( Francis / Kim Deal ) – 3 : 55 
 " River Euphrates " – 2 : 33 
 " Where Is My Mind ? " – 3 : 53 
 " Cactus " – 2 : 16 
 " Tony 's Theme " – 1 : 52 
 " Oh My Golly ! " – 1 : 48 
 " Vamos " – 4 : 18 
 " I 'm Amazed " – 1 : 42 
 " Brick Is Red " – 2 : 00 
 = = Personnel = = 
 All information taken from the CD release of Surfer Rosa . 
 Black Francis – vocals , rhythm guitar , acoustic guitar 
 Kim Deal – bass , backing vocals , vocals on " Gigantic " ( credited as Mrs. John Murphy ) 
 Joey Santiago – lead guitar 
 David Lovering – drums 
 Steve Albini – production , audio engineering 
 Simon Larbalestier , Vaughan Oliver – Cover image , album booklet imagery 
 Published by Rice ' n ' Beans Music BMI 
 = = Accolades = = 
 The information regarding accolades attributed to Surfer Rosa is adapted from <unk> 
 ( * ) designates unordered lists . 
 = Grolier Codex = 
 The Grolier Codex ( sometimes referred to as the Sáenz Codex ) is a Maya book of a pre @-@ Columbian type but of disputed authenticity . It first appeared in a private collection in the 20th century and was displayed at the Grolier Club in New York , hence its name . The codex consists of a fragment of a Maya book , containing almanacs of Venus represented in a simplistic fashion . The Grolier Codex would be only the fourth surviving pre @-@ Columbian Maya book if genuine . The codex is said to have been recovered from a cave in the Mexican state of Chiapas in the 1960s , together with a mosaic mask and some blank pages of pre @-@ Columbian fig @-@ bark paper . It was displayed at the Grolier Club from April 20 to June 5 , 1971 , and is now held in Mexico City . In 1973 , Michael D. Coe published the first half @-@ size recto @-@ side facsimile of the codex in The Maya Scribe and His World , produced by the Grolier Club . The codex contains a Venus almanac that , in structure , is closely related to the Venus almanac contained in the Dresden Codex . 
 The codex , although displaying Mixtec stylistic features , is judged to be Maya ( if genuine ) based upon the use of bark paper instead of the <unk> preferred for Mixtec codices and because of the presence of Maya day signs and numbering . 
 The codex is poorly preserved ; the surviving page fragments display a number of figures in central Mexican style , combined with Maya numbering and day glyphs . The document is currently held by the Museo Nacional de Antropología in Mexico city and is not on public display . The physics institute of the Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México subjected the codex to non @-@ destructive testing in an effort to determine its authenticity . The results were published in 2007 and were mixed ; the document apparently contains genuine pre @-@ Columbian materials but certain aspects , such as seemingly artificially induced wear and tear , are suspect . The researchers concluded that they were unable to prove or disprove the pre @-@ Columbian nature of the codex . 
 = = Physical characteristics = = 
 The Grolier Codex is a <unk> book fashioned from bark paper , coated with stucco on both sides and painted on one side . Eleven pages survive of a twenty @-@ page book . The lower portions of the pages are badly damaged by moisture , eroding and staining bottom of each page . The eleventh page is particularly badly damaged with only the central portion remaining , making it unclear whether this page belongs to the codex or not . The greatest height of any of the surviving page fragments is 18 centimetres ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) and the average page width is 12 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 4 @.@ 9 in ) . 
 Five single sheets of bark paper were found associated with the codex , they had no stucco coating and were brown and water stained . Two of these had adhered to the codex and the other three may have once been with the codex but had separated . One of these sheets had a painted line in the same red hematite pigment used in the codex itself . A smaller sheet of bark paper was attached to the lined sheet and this smaller piece was submitted for radiocarbon dating . This testing produced a date for the sheet of AD 1230 ± 130 . 
 = = Content = = 
 Each page of the codex has been painted on one side with a standing figure facing left . Each figure holds a weapon and most grip a rope leading to a restrained captive . Colours used on the codex include hematite red , black , blue @-@ green , a red wash and a brown wash , all upon a strong white background . The left @-@ hand side of each page is marked by a column of day signs ; where this column is complete these total thirteen in all . Each day sign is associated with a bar @-@ and @-@ dot numerical coefficient . Six pages depict a figure bearing weapons and accompanied by a captive ( pages 1 – 4 , 6 and 9 ) , two pages ( 5 and 8 ) both depict a figure hurling a dart at a temple . Page 7 of the codex shows a passive warrior standing in front of a tree . Page 11 depicts a death god with a javelin , pointing his weapon at a water vessel containing a snail . Page 10 is a badly damaged fragment with the subject largely obliterated . Based on the surviving portion , Michael Coe thought it depicted a standing figure wearing a waterbird headdress and bearing an atlatl . The figures represented on each page differ from those on the other Maya codices and are far more similar to the Mixtec codices and Toltec art styles of central Mexico . The heads of the death gods painted in the Grolier Codex are almost identical to those represented in the Laud Codex and <unk> @-@ Mayer Codex , including the red colouring of the portion of the teeth closest to the gums . 
 The pages of the Grolier Codex contain seven hieroglyphs representing days ; the style of these glyphs differs from that of the other three Maya codices but is most similar to the glyphs of the Dresden Codex . The glyphs are arranged in vertical columns incorporating day signs accompanied by a number ; each date corresponds to a manifestation of Venus . Whereas the Venus almanac in the Dresden Codex documents the planet after inferior conjunction as the morning star , the Grolier Codex documents all four of the stations of Venus : rising after inferior conjunction as morning star in the east , disappearance before superior conjunction , reappearance as evening star in the west and disappearance before inferior conjunction . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 The codex is said to have been found enclosed in a wooden box in a dry cave in the highlands of Chiapas near Tortuguero ; it was said to have been found with a turquoise mask that is now in the collection of Dumbarton Oaks . In 1965 Mexican collector Dr. Josué Sáenz was taken by two men on a light plane to a remote airstrip in the foothills of the Sierra Madre near Tortuguero in Tabasco state ; the compass of the plane was covered with a cloth but Sáenz recognized his approximate location . At the airstrip he was shown the codex along with some other looted Maya artifacts and was told that he could take the items back to Mexico City for authentication before purchasing them . The antiquities expert that Sáenz consulted declared that the artifacts were fakes but Sáenz later purchased the codex and permitted Michael Coe to display the codex at the Grolier Club in 1971 . In 1976 , the United States @-@ Mexico Artifacts Treaty of 1970 was invoked by the Attorney General of Mexico . This resulted in the seizure of the codex and its return to Mexico . Sáenz donated the codex to the Mexican government and it is currently kept in a vault in the Museo Nacional de Antropología in Mexico City and is not on public display . The claimed discovery of the Grolier Codex would make it the only pre @-@ Columbian codex discovered in the course of the 20th century , except for some codex fragments excavated by archaeologists . 
 = = Authenticity = = 
 English Mayanist J. Eric S. Thompson cast strong doubts upon the authenticity of the Grolier Codex in his 1975 article The Grolier Codex , published in volume 27 of the Contributions of the University of California . Thompson argued that the codex was a modern forgery and that the unusual mix of styles in the document was not due to the mixing of cultures but rather due to the hand of a forger . Thompson queried the illustration of all four stations of Venus in the codex , noting that other Mesoamerican codices only illustrated the more spectacular appearance of Venus as morning star . 
 Following Thompson 's attack upon the veracity of the codex , a number of scholars published their opinions that the document is genuine over the course of the 1980s and early 1990s , including John B. Carlson , Yuri Knorozov , Thomas A. Lee , Jr . , Jesús Ignacio Mora Echeverría , George E. Stuart , and Karl Taube . In 2000 , German epigrapher Nikolai Grube expressed his belief that the document is genuine , based upon the <unk> of the Venus almanac . However , in a later publication from 2012 , he clearly calls the codex a forgery . In 2002 , French archaeologist Claude @-@ François Baudez commented – like Thompson before – that the codex serves no divinatory purpose and was useless as an aid to a Maya priest ; he believes that the document is the product of a forger using pre @-@ Columbian materials but relatively ignorant of his subject . The codex is notable in its use of prominent illustrations of uniform size and the almost complete absence of hieroglyphic text ; the deities lack names and the cardinal directions are unmarked . In a paper published in 2003 , the authors ( including Mayanist Stephen D. Houston ) argue that the iconography and lack of hieroglyphic text are the result of a strong central Mexican stylistic influence . 
 The radiocarbon dating of an associated sheet of <unk> bark paper had been used to support a 13th @-@ century date for the Grolier Codex . Large quantities of pre @-@ Columbian bark paper have been found in dry caves , so a genuine piece of blank pre @-@ Columbian paper may have been used by a forger as a base for painting a falsified codex . The fact that the codex is painted on one side only while the three uncontested Maya codices are all painted on both sides has been used as an argument against its authenticity , although Michael Coe has argued that parts of non @-@ Maya Mesoamerican codices had sometimes been left blank for many years before being painted in a style distinct from the opposite side . Baudez , in his 2002 critique of the Grolier Codex , noted that the fact that the codex is only painted on one side is irrelevant in determining its authenticity , since there are many examples of Mesoamerican codices not being painted on both sides . Further doubts have been cast upon how Sáenz acquired the codex and the iconography of the document itself . Archaeologist Donna Yates considers that Coe 's account of Sáenz being contacted by an unnamed person and flown to a remote airstrip by unidentified persons to be " fantastical " . As of 2012 , the authenticity of the document was still disputed , although Carlson has published a further article reaffirming its legitimacy , citing 2002 radiocarbon testing of samples from the codex itself as well his own epigraphic and iconographic analyses . 
 = = = Iconography = = = 
 The artifact shows a number of idiosyncrasies that raise questions concerning its authenticity . The numbering systems used in the codex conflict . The Maya bar @-@ and @-@ dot system is used to mark units , but the central Mexican dot system is used to mark multiples of twenty ( for example by using 11 dots instead of 2 bars and a dot , as would be the case in the bar @-@ and @-@ dot system where a bar indicates 5 and a dot indicates 1 ) . Some bar @-@ and @-@ dot numbers are placed within a cartouche decorated with a knot at the top . The only other instance of such a cartouche being used with numbers is in the Dresden Codex , where the cartouche has a very specific function , indicating a negative date count from the zero year of the great cycle of the Mesoamerican Long Count calendar ( roughly equivalent to the function of BC in the Gregorian calendar ) . In the Grolier Codex , where the numbers mark intervals between stations of Venus , the use of this cartouche appears meaningless . 
 In the Grolier Codex captives are shown bound with cords leading to their necks , however the most common convention in Mesoamerican art is the depiction of captives bound by the arms or wrists . Some of the figures in the codex represent deities ( on pages 1 – 2 , 4 – 6 and 9 ) and some represent mortal warriors without supernatural attributes ( on pages 3 , 7 and 8 ) . Both the deities and the mortals are performing the same actions such as the capture of a prisoner , or conquest symbolised by a spear passing through a temple . Although the codex depicts the stations of Venus , none of the warlike figures is identified with attributes normally associated with the planet in Maya or central Mexican art . On page 9 , a bound captive is depicted from a high point of view with a sense of perspective that French <unk> and iconographer Claude @-@ François Baudez considers is alien to Mesoamerican art . God K ( K 'awiil ) is depicted twice in the codex but is incorrectly shown with human incisors instead of snake fangs . 
 = = = Materials = = = 
 The paper used for the Grolier Codex appears to be authentic pre @-@ Columbian bark paper and the contents of the document have not been copied directly from any of the generally accepted Maya codices , although they do resemble pages 46 to 50 of the Dresden Codex . A number of non @-@ destructive techniques have been applied to the codex in an effort to authenticate it , and the results were published in 2008 . The analysis revealed that only pre @-@ Columbian materials had been used in its creation ; no modern inorganic materials were detected . Some inconsistencies were revealed however ; cuts along the page edges seem to have been made with a sharp blade in order to give the appearance of natural wear and tear and the supposed water staining did not permeate the paper . The researchers commented that the staining appeared to be the result of drops of dye or ink being applied to the surface of the codex . In conclusion the researchers were unable to support or refute the pre @-@ Columbian nature of the codex . Unusually for a document that supposedly was stored in a cave for centuries , the paint of the codex still appears fresh . 
 = = = = Testing = = = = 
 The codex was tested in the Instituto de <unk> of the Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México in Mexico City using a 3 <unk> <unk> particle accelerator . Testing methods applied to the codex included ultraviolet imaging , infrared reflectography , optical microscopy , particle @-@ induced X @-@ ray emission and Rutherford <unk> spectrometry ( RBS ) . The specific aim of this non @-@ destructive testing was to compare the materials used in the codex with those used in other pre @-@ Columbian codices . 
 The testing showed that the base layer onto which the codex was painted is composed of gypsum , a material used as a base layer for paintings since antiquity . The black paint was analysed with RBS and found to be a carbon @-@ based pigment consistent with other pre @-@ Columbian Mexican codices . The red colour used in the codex is red ochre , an iron @-@ based pigment . There is not much blue colouration in the Grolier Codex and the presence of the distinctive Maya Blue pigment could not be confirmed . Analysis revealed the blue pigment used on the codex does not contain cobalt and does contain clay . The investigators concluded that the codex does contain some original pre @-@ Columbian materials but could not confirm that the document is authentic . 
 = Håkons Hall = 
 Håkons Hall , sometimes anglicized as Håkon Hall and <unk> Hall , is an arena located at Stampesletta in Lillehammer , Norway . With a spectator capacity of 11 @,@ 500 people , it is the largest handball and ice hockey venue in the country . Håkons Hall is regularly used for handball and ice hockey tournaments , concerts , exhibitions , conferences and banquets . The venue is owned by Lillehammer Municipality via the subsidiary Lillehammer Olympiapark , which owns all the Olympic venues in Lillehammer . The Norwegian Olympic Museum is located in the arena , which is located next to the smaller Kristins Hall . 
 The hall opened on 1 February 1993 having cost 238 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) . It was built to host the ice hockey tournament at the 1994 Winter Olympics , and has since hosted the opening and closing ceremonies of the 1994 Winter Paralympics , the 1999 IIHF World Championship in ice hockey , the World Women 's Handball Championship in 1993 and 1999 , the Junior Eurovision Song Contest 2004 , the 2008 European Men 's Handball Championship and the 2010 European Women 's Handball Championship . Lillehammer IK has occasionally played ice hockey matches at the arena . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Lillehammer received its first indoor ice rink in 1988 , with the opening of Kristins Hall . That same year , the town was awarded the 1994 Winter Olympics , which required the construction of a larger venue for the Olympic ice hockey matches . The naming of the arena was decided by the Lillehammer Municipal Council in October 1988 , as part of a broader branding policy , based on the history of the Birkebeiner . Håkons Hall is named for Haakon Haakonarson , a medieval king of Norway who as a child was transported across by mountains by skiers . Kristin and Håkon became the mascots for the Olympics , and the twin arenas at Stampesletta were named accordingly . Protests were made in Bergen , as local patriots felt it was not suitable that a sports venue had such a similar name to <unk> , a medieval hall in Bergen . 
 In June 1989 , the municipal council voted to locate most of the Lillehammer venues in the Stampesletta area , and to place Håkons Hall adjacent to Kristins Hall . This was controversial and many councilors voted for the original decentralized plan , with the venues spread out through the municipality . The application for the Olympics called for building up to five ice venues in Lillehammer . For post @-@ Olympic use , Kristins Hall was designated as the main ice rink for Lillehammer , while it was planned that Håkons Hall would be used for larger events . On 8 December 1989 , the International Olympic Committee rejected two demands from the International Ice Hockey Federation ( IIHF ) for the ability to host a minimum of 12 @,@ 000 spectators in the larger ice hockey venue and for a women 's ice hockey tournament . 
 The decision about the location of the ice hockey venues was made on 10 October 1990 . Håkons Hall would be the main venue , supplemented by Gjøvik Olympic Cavern Hall in Gjøvik . The proposal to have figure skating at Håkons Hall was rejected , and instead it was to be held at Hamar Olympic Amphitheatre in Hamar . In 1990 , the Norwegian Cycling Federation recommended Håkons Hall as one of several possible places to build a velodrome for the Union Cycliste Internationale 's 1993 UCI Track Cycling World Championships . The same year , Håkons Hall was proposed to supplement Oslo Spektrum as a venue for a proposed pan @-@ European professional ice hockey league . Construction was approved by the Parliament of Norway in April 1990 , including funding . Original design plans called for a simple hangar @-@ like design , and original cost estimates were for NOK 191 million . However , in March 1991 , the municipal council decided to increase spending on the venue to make it more aesthetic . The re @-@ design also included telescopic stands and better acoustics , to allow for more flexible use after the Olympics . 
 The main contractor was Veidekke and construction cost NOK 238 million . Grants were given from the Norwegian Water Resources and Energy Directorate and SINTEF for energy <unk> . The work on the hall was concluded on 1 February 1993 . It was the 27th indoor ice hockey rink in Norway . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The structure is dug out of the ground so it does not appear monumental in size from the outside . The roof consists of four sections held up by double trussed beams in glued laminated timber , with lengths up to 85 @.@ 4 meters ( 280 ft ) . The hall is 127 meters ( 417 ft ) long and has a total surface area of 23 @,@ 000 square meters ( 250 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . The main hall has a floor area of 3 @,@ 500 square meters ( 38 @,@ 000 sq ft ) , with an activity area of 76 by 44 meters ( 249 by 144 ft ) . The maximum ceiling height is 40 meters ( 130 ft ) , and there is a direct drive @-@ in entrance to the hall for exhibitions . The venue has a capacity for 11 @,@ 500 seated spectators . The stands are flexible and telescopic , allowing for flexibility in hall use and seating capacity . The arena can be configured with a 330 square meters ( 3 @,@ 600 sq ft ) stage . The hall can be set up to serve 2 @,@ 000 people at a banquet , or divided up to serve smaller groups . The venue also features a cafeteria which can seat 200 people . For trade fairs , the venue offers 3 @,@ 500 square meters ( 38 @,@ 000 sq ft ) , in addition to the VIP and lobby facilities . The same area can also be used for conferences , and the venue can be split up into section to create group rooms , theme rooms and banquet rooms . 
 Håkons Hall Sports Centre is part of the complex which supplements the main hall with a recreational training facility . It can make use of the main hall for two handball or football courts , or six volleyball or badminton courts . In addition , there is a permanent health club , a climbing wall , an aerobic room , a golf center with two golf simulators and a putting green , and two badminton courts , all served by 13 changing rooms . The venue also features a 370 meters ( 1 @,@ 210 ft ) long running track . The cooling and heating systems for Håkons Hall and Kristins Hall are connected , allowing them to function as energy reserves for each other . The Norwegian Olympic Museum is located at Håkons Hall . The museum opened on 27 November 1997 , and is the only museum in Northern Europe dedicated to the entirety of Olympic history . Since 2006 , the museum has been operated as part of Maihaugen . 
 = = Events = = 
 During the 1994 Winter Olympics , Håkons Hall hosted the ice hockey tournament along with Gjøvik Olympic Cavern Hall between 12 and 26 February . Håkons Hall hosted 21 games , including the final which saw Sweden beat Canada in a penalty shootout . In the 1994 Winter Paralympics , Håkons Hall was used for the opening and closing ceremonies . 
 The first major international tournament in the hall was some matches of the 1993 World Women 's Handball Championship . Lillehammer IK plays its home matches at Kristins Hall , but in 1995 the play @-@ off match between it and neighbor town rivals Storhamar Dragons was played at Håkons Hall . The match saw more than 5 @,@ 000 spectators , the record for Lillehammer IK . In 1995 , the award ceremony for <unk> , Norwegian music 's highest award , was held at Håkons Hall . 
 Norway hosted the 1999 IIHF Ice Hockey World Championship in Oslo , Lillehammer and Hamar . Håkons Hall featured Group D , consisting of Russia , Finland , Belarus and Kazakhstan , as well as the semi @-@ finals , the bronze final and the final . Tickets were sold as twins , with two games being staged with a one @-@ hour interlude on the same ticket . The same year , Håkons Hall was one of seven venues used for the 1999 World Women 's Handball Championship . In addition to group stage and play @-@ off matches , it was awarded the final . Oslo Spektrum was also considered to hold the final , but with only 8 @,@ 500 seats and a higher rent , Håkons Hall was preferred . 
 Håkons Hall hosted the Junior Eurovision Song Contest 2004 on 20 November 2004 , won by María Isabel with " Antes Muerta que <unk> " . Norway was the host of the 2008 European Men 's Handball Championship ; the group stage games were played in four other Norwegian cities , while the play @-@ off and final was played in Håkons Hall in January 2008 . The final saw Denmark beat Croatia in front of 9 @,@ 052 spectators . In 2010 , <unk> , a show to honor the past year 's Norwegian sports and athletes achievements , was hosted at Håkons Hall . Norway and Denmark co @-@ hosted the 2010 European Women 's Handball Championship in December 2010 , with the matches played in Norway being at Håkons Hall and Arena Larvik . Lillehammer featured Norway 's group in the first and second group stages , while the knockout stage was played in Denmark . 
 = Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind ( film ) = 
 Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind ( Japanese : 風の谷のナウシカ , Hepburn : Kaze no Tani no Naushika ) is a 1984 Japanese animated epic science fantasy adventure film written and directed by Hayao Miyazaki , based on his own 1982 manga of the same name . Isao Takahata produced the film for Tokuma Shoten and <unk> , with <unk> animating . Joe Hisaishi , in his first collaboration with Miyazaki , composed the film 's musical score . The film stars the voices of Sumi Shimamoto , Goro Naya , Yoji Matsuda , Yoshiko Sakakibara and Iemasa Kayumi . 
 Taking place in a post @-@ apocalyptic world in the far future , the film tells the story of Nausicaä ( Shimamoto ) , the young princess of the Valley of the Wind . She becomes embroiled in a struggle with <unk> , a kingdom that tries to use an ancient weapon to eradicate a jungle of mutant giant insects , and attempts to stop the Tolmekians from enraging these creatures . 
 The film was released in Japan on 11 March 1984 . While created before Studio Ghibli was founded , the film is considered to be the beginning of the studio and is often included as part of the Studio 's works , including the Studio Ghibli Collection DVDs and Blu @-@ rays . Widely acclaimed for its story , themes , characters and animation , Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind is frequently ranked as one of the greatest animated films of all time . 
 = = Plot = = 
 One thousand years have passed since the Seven Days of Fire , an apocalyptic war that destroyed civilization and created the vast Toxic Jungle , a poisonous forest swarming with giant mutant insects . In the kingdom of the Valley of the Wind , a prophecy predicts a saviour " clothed in blue robes , descending onto a golden field , to join bonds with the great Earth and guide the people to the pure lands at last " . Nausicaä , the princess of the Valley of the Wind , explores the jungle and communicates with its creatures , including the gigantic , armored trilobite @-@ like creatures called Ohm . She hopes to understand the jungle and find a way for it and humans to co @-@ exist . 
 One night , during a visit by the Valley 's <unk> Lord Yupa , a cargo aircraft from the kingdom of <unk> crashes in the Valley . Nausicaä tries to rescue a passenger , the wounded Princess Lastelle of Pejite , who pleads with Nausicaä to destroy the cargo before dying . The cargo is an embryo of a Giant Warrior , one of the lethal bioweapons that caused the Seven Days of Fire . The Tolmekians , a military state , seized the embryo and Lastelle from Pejite , but their plane was attacked by mutant insects and crashed . One of the insects emerges wounded from the wreckage and seems poised to attack the frightened villagers , but Nausicaä uses a small <unk> to calm it and guides it away from the Village on her jet @-@ powered glider . 
 The next morning , Tolmekian troops , led by Princess Kushana and Officer <unk> , kill Nausicaä 's father and take the Giant Warrior embryo . Kushana plans to mature the Giant Warrior and use it to burn the Toxic Jungle . Nausicaä kills several Tolmekian soldiers before Yupa intervenes . Kushana announces her decision to leave for Pejite with Nausicaä and five hostages from the Valley . Before they leave , Yupa discovers a secret garden of jungle plants reared by Nausicaä ; according to Nausicaä 's findings , plants that grow in clean soil and water are not toxic , but the jungle 's soil has been tainted by humankind . 
 An agile Pejite interceptor shoots down the Tolmekian ship carrying Kushana and her detachment . It crash @-@ lands in the jungle , disturbing several Ohm , which Nausicaä soothes . She leaves to rescue Asbel , the Pejite pilot and twin brother of Lastelle , but both are swallowed by quicksand and arrive in a non @-@ toxic area below the jungle . Nausicaä realizes that the jungle plants purify the polluted topsoil , producing clean water and soil underground . 
 Nausicaä and Asbel return to Pejite but find the capital ravaged by insects . A band of surviving <unk> reveal that they lured the creatures to eradicate the Tolmekians , and are doing the same in the Valley to recapture the Giant Warrior . They capture Nausicaä , but with the help of Asbel and his mother , Nausicaä escapes on a glider . While flying home , she finds a team of Pejite soldiers using a wounded baby Ohm to lead a furious herd of thousands of Ohm into the Valley . The Tolmekians deploy tanks and later the Giant Warrior against the herd , but their tanks ' firepower cannot harm the Ohm , and the Giant Warrior , hatched prematurely , disintegrates . 
 Nausicaä liberates the baby Ohm and gains its trust . Her dress stained by its blue blood , she and the baby Ohm stand before the raging herd and are both run over , killing Nausicaä . The herd calms , and the Ohm use their golden tentacles to revive her . She walks atop the hundreds of golden Ohm tentacles as through golden fields , revealing Nausicaä to be the saviour from the prophecy . The Ohm and Tolmekians leave the Valley and the <unk> remain with the Valley people , helping them to rebuild . Meanwhile , deep underneath the Toxic Jungle , a new non @-@ toxic tree sprouts next to Nausicaä 's lost aviation goggles . 
 = = Voice cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 Hayao Miyazaki made his credited directorial debut in 1979 with The Castle of Cagliostro , a film which was a distinct departure from the antics of the Lupin III franchise , but still went on to receive the Ofuji Noburo Award at the 1979 Mainichi Film Concours . Although Cagliostro was not a box office success , Toshio Suzuki , editor of the magazine Animage , was impressed by the film and encouraged Miyazaki to produce works for Animage 's publisher , Tokuma Shoten . Miyazaki 's film ideas were rejected , and Tokuma asked him to do a manga : this led to the creation of Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind . Miyazaki began writing and drawing the manga in 1982 , and it quickly became Animage 's most popular feature . Hideo Ogata and <unk> Tokuma , the founders of Animage and Tokuma Shoten respectively , encouraged Miyazaki to work on a film adaptation . Miyazaki initially refused , but agreed on the condition that he could direct . 
 In the early stages , Isao Takahata , credited as executive producer , reluctantly joined the project even before the animation studio was chosen . An outside studio to produce the film was needed because Tokuma Shoten did not own an animation studio : Miyazaki and Takahata chose the minor studio <unk> . The production studio 's work was known to both Miyazaki and Takahata and was chosen because its artistic talent could transpose the sophisticated atmosphere of the manga to the film . On 31 May 1983 , work began on the pre @-@ production of the film . Miyazaki encountered difficulties in creating the screenplay , with only sixteen chapters of the manga to work with . Miyazaki would take elements of the story and refocus the narrative and characters to the Tolmekian invasion of Nausicaä 's homeland . Takahata would enlist the experimental and minimalist composer Joe Hisaishi to do the score for the film . 
 In August , the animation work began on the film and was produced by animators hired for the one film and paid per frame . One notable animator was Hideaki Anno , who later wrote and directed Neon Genesis Evangelion . Anno was assigned to draw the challenging God Warrior 's attack sequence , which according to Toshio Suzuki is a " high point in the film " . The film was released in March 1984 , with a production schedule of only nine months and with a budget equivalent to $ 1 million . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Miyazaki 's work on Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind was inspired by a range of works including Ursula K. Le Guin 's Earthsea , Brian Aldiss 's Hothouse , Isaac Asimov 's Nightfall , and J.R.R Tolkien 's Lord of the Rings . Dani Cavallaro also suggests inspiration from The Princess Who Loved Insects folktale , and the works of William Golding . Nausicaä , the character , was inspired in name and personality , by Homer 's <unk> princess in the Odyssey . While a connection to Frank Herbert 's Dune is often made there is no confirmation apart from the name " Ohmu " being a syllabic rendition of the English " worm " . Miyazaki 's imagination was sparked by the mercury poisoning of Minamata Bay and how nature responded and thrived in a poisoned environment , using it to create the polluted world of Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind . Ian <unk> @-@ Boyd agrees , " Her commitment to love and understanding — even to the point of death — transforms the very nature of the conflict around her and begins to dispel the distorting visions that have brought it about . " 
 The most prominent themes are the anti @-@ war and environmental focus of the film . Nausicaä , the heroine , believes in the value of life regardless of its form and through her actions stops a war . Loy and Goodhew state there is no evil portrayed in the film , but the Buddhist roots of evil : greed , ill will and delusion . Fear is what drives the conflicts , the fear of the poisoned forest results in the greed and resentment . Nausicaä , in addition to being a transformative force , leads people to understand and respect nature which is portrayed as welcoming , spiritual , and restorative for those who enter it peacefully . 
 The film was released , in 1984 , with a recommendation from the World Wide Fund for Nature ( WWF ) . On 30 July 1995 , a subtitled version of the film was screened at the Institute of Contemporary Arts , in London , as part of the " Building Bridges " film festival , marking the fiftieth anniversary of the Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . In her 25 March 2013 presentation at Colorado College , on " Tapestries of Apocalypse : From Angers to ' Nausicaa ' and Beyond " , Dr. Susan J. Napier places the film and in particular the tapestry , depicted underneath the opening credits , within the tradition of artistic representation of apocalypses and apocalyptic visions . She explores the role such expressions play in understanding apocalyptic events and post @-@ event recovery . 
 = = Releases = = 
 The film was released by Toei Company on 11 March 1984 . The film would gross about 1 @.@ 48 billion yen at the box office , sell 914 @,@ 767 tickets and make an additional 742 million yen in distribution income . Home releases include the original April 1984 Laserdisc release and as part of <unk> ga Ippai <unk> <unk> LD <unk> ( Ghibli Complete Collection : Studio Ghibli Complete LD Collection ) from August 1996 , the original March 1984 VHS version by Animage and re @-@ release by Buena Vista on 19 September 1997 . Three DVD sets were released in Japan with a regular DVD and figure set released on 19 November 2003 and a collectors set following on 7 December 2003 . 
 = = = Warriors of the Wind = = = 
 New World Pictures produced a 95 @-@ minute English @-@ dubbed adaptation of the film , titled Warriors of the Wind , and it was released theatrically in the United States in June 1985 , with the VHS video release in December 1985 . In the late 1980s , Vestron Video would release the film and First Independent Video would re @-@ release it in 1993 with another minute cut from the film . The voice actors and actresses were not informed of the film 's plotline and the film was heavily edited to market it as a children 's action @-@ adventure film . Consequently , part of the film 's narrative meaning was lost : some of the environmentalist themes were diluted as was the main subplot of the Ohmu , altered to turn them into aggressive enemies . Most of the characters ' names were changed , including the titular character who became Princess Zandra . The United States cover for the VHS release featured a cadre of male characters who are not in the film , riding the resurrected God Warrior — including a still @-@ living Warrior shown briefly in a flashback . Approximately 22 minutes of the original film 's running time were edited for the release of Warriors of the Wind . Scenes deleted from that version include the opening and ending title sequences , most of Nausicaä 's interactions with the shed Ohm shell , Yupa 's discovery of her secret garden , flashbacks to Nausicaä 's childhood , most of the scene involving her and Asbel in the Toxic Jungle 's non @-@ toxic underground , and several scenes leading up to the Ohm stampede and the awakening of the Giant Warrior . 
 Dissatisfied with Warriors of the Wind , Miyazaki adopted a strict " no @-@ edits " clause for further foreign releases of Studio Ghibli 's films . On hearing Miramax co @-@ chairman Harvey Weinstein would attempt to edit Princess Mononoke to make it more marketable , one of Studio Ghibli 's production staff members sent an authentic katana with a simple message : " No cuts " . Warriors of the Wind also prompted Miyazaki to allow translator Toren Smith of Studio Proteus to create an official , faithful translation of the Nausicaä manga for Viz Media . 
 = = = 2005 English re @-@ release = = = 
 On October 18 , 2003 , Cindy and Donald Hewitt , the scriptwriters of Disney 's English dubs of Spirited Away and Porco Rosso , revealed that an uncut and redubbed version of Nausicaä was in pre @-@ production , and that Patrick Stewart and Uma Thurman had been cast . Natalie Portman was originally intended to voice Nausicaä , but Alison Lohman was eventually assigned the role . 
 Nausicaä was released on DVD by Buena Vista Home Entertainment on 22 February 2005 for Region 1 . This DVD includes both English dub and the Japanese audio track with English subtitles . Optimum Home Entertainment released the film in Region 2 and the Region 4 DVD is distributed by Madman Entertainment . A remastered Blu @-@ ray sourced from a <unk> <unk> was released on 14 July 2010 in Japan . It includes an uncompressed Japanese LPCM stereo track , an English dub and English subtitles . On 18 October 2010 a Blu @-@ ray version was released in Region B by Optimum Home Entertainment . The film was released on Blu @-@ ray in the United States and Canada on 8 March 2011 by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment . 
 = = = Other language releases = = = 
 Spain first released two versions of the cut film , both called Guerreros del Viento ( " Warriors of the Wind " ) with the first in 1987 and again 1991 , and then a version of the original uncut film under the Nausicaä del Valle del Viento title in 2010 . France has had both versions of the movie appear with two cut versions named La Princesse des Etoiles ( " The Princess of the Stars " ) and Le vaisseau <unk> ( " The Ghost Ship " ) : the uncut film had a regular and collector 's DVD set released on 18 April 2007 . In Germany UFA released the 86 minute long cut version on VHS as <unk> ( literally " Star Warriors " ) in 1986 and Universum Anime released the uncut DVD release on 5 September 2005 . The 2007 Hungarian release , titled <unk> - A <unk> <unk> ( " Nausicaä - The Warriors of the Wind " ) is uncut despite the title 's reference . The Korean DVD release of the uncut film was on 3 March 2004 . China has had three releases of Nausicaä : the first on Video CD and two DVD releases . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind received largely positive reviews from film critics . The film is frequently ranked among the best animated films in Japan , and is seen by critics as a seminal influence on the development of anime , as the film 's success led to the foundation of Studio Ghibli and several other anime studios . Theron Martin of Anime News Network praised the film for its character designs , as well as Hayao Miyazaki 's direction and Joe Hisaishi 's score . He also said that the film " deserves a place on any short list of all @-@ time classic anime movies . " Common Sense Media , which serves to inform parents about media for children , rated the film positively and cited its good role models and positive messages , but also cautioned parents about its dramatic setting and violent scenes . As of August 2015 , review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 87 % of critics gave the film positive reviews , based on 15 reviews with an average rating of 8 / 10 . 
 Final Fantasy creator Hironobu Sakaguchi has cited the manga and film as an influence on his series . As such , the <unk> in the film were used as an inspiration for the Chocobos in the games . Numerous games have used Ohmu @-@ like creatures , assumed to be reference to the film including Metal Slug 3 Cyber Core and Viewpoint . The game <unk> , known in Japan as God Slayer : Haruka Tenkū no Sonata ( ゴッド ・ <unk> <unk> ) , shares common elements with the film , including an insect that resembles an Ohmu . Helen McCarthy in 500 Essential Anime Movies praised the animation techniques of Miyazaki , stating that " the real strength of this film is the script , packed with incident , excitement and passion , and the soundtrack " of Joe Hisaishi . 
 Disney 's English dub was well received by audiences and critics , especially in comparison to Warriors of the Wind , with the leading voice actors frequently being praised for their performances . However , in conducting a comparative analysis of the Japanese @-@ language anime with their English translations , Eriko <unk> @-@ Schuck believes that although Disney 's dub eschewed the dualistic , good versus evil worldview of Warriors of the Wind , it also “ <unk> [ ed ] Miyazaki 's animism ” . According to her , the translators of the film were working a language suffused with Judeo @-@ Christian idioms not found in Japanese , which they introduce to the text , such as the nature of man 's relationship with the environment and animals as seen in Judeo @-@ Christian narratives and cultural practices . Examples of these changes include when Nausicaä describes an insect as a " good boy " , a term often used in describing domesticated animals ( instead of a " good child " , as in the Japanese version ) , and when Nausicaä converses with the wounded baby Ohm - in Japanese , she does not consider forgiveness from the baby a possibility , while the English version has her asking for it , albeit admitting the difficulty for the Ohm to do so . As a result of these changes , Nausicaä 's death and subsequent resurrection by the Ohm herd present her as a Christ figure whose self @-@ sacrifices are for mankind , rather than for nature . <unk> @-@ Schuck believes that Disney erased animistic motifs almost entirely from the film , even more so than Warriors of the Wind , in order to make it more accessible for American audiences due the film 's non @-@ specific setting , since animism was retained in their versions of My Neighbour Totoro , Princess Mononoke , Spirited Away and Ponyo , as well as their own production Pocahontas . 
 = = Gliders = = 
 Various gliders are seen in the film and the protagonist , Nausicaä , uses a jet @-@ assisted one @-@ person glider @-@ shaped machine with folding wings . According to the accompanying film book released in Japan , the glider is called Möwe ( <unk> , <unk> , or " <unk> " in the English manga ) , the German word meaning gull . An official scale model lists it as having an approximate wingspan of 5 @.@ 8 meters ( 1 / 20 model measured to be 29 cm ) , while the design notes indicate it has a mass of only 12 kg . In 2004 , the Japanese @-@ led <unk> Aircraft Project began attempts to build a real @-@ life , working personal jet glider based on the glider from the film . Two full @-@ size gliders with no power source carrying the code name M01 and <unk> , with a half @-@ sized jet @-@ powered remote controlled mock up called <unk> 1 / 2 was built . The designer and tester of the project refused the official endorsement of the project by Studio Ghibli and Hayao Miyazaki , noting that he did not want to cause trouble for them if an accident occurred . A jet powered version ( registration number <unk> ) was finally able to take off under its own power for the first time on 3 September 2013 . 
 = = Soundtracks = = 
 The film 's score was composed by Joe Hisaishi , while the vocal theme song " Kaze no Tani no Naushika " was produced by <unk> <unk> ( Yellow Magic Orchestra and Happy End member ) and sung by Narumi Yasuda . Numerous soundtracks and albums relating to the film have been released . 
 Nausicaä of the Valley of Wind : Image Album < Bird Person > ( 風の谷のナウシカ <unk> <unk> ) released 25 November 1983 
 Nausicaä of the Valley of Wind : Symphony < The Legend of Wind > ( 風の谷のナウシカ <unk> <unk> ) released 25 February 1984 
 Nausicaä of the Valley of Wind : Soundtrack < Toward the Far Away Land > ( 風の谷のナウシカ サウンドトラック <unk> ) released 25 March 1984 
 Nausicaä of the Valley of Wind : Drama Version < God of Wind > ( 風の谷のナウシカ ・ <unk> ) released 25 April 1984 
 Nausicaä of the Valley of Wind : Best Collection ( 風の谷のナウシカ BEST ) released 25 November 1986 
 Nausicaä of the Valley of Wind : Hi @-@ tech Series ( 風の谷のナウシカ ・ <unk> ) released 25 October 1989 
 Nausicaä of the Valley of Wind : Piano Solo Album < For the Easy Use with Beyer > released 15 March 1992 
 = = Other media = = 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 Miyazaki 's manga version of Nausicaä was written over a period of 12 years , with breaks taken to work on Studio Ghibli films . <unk> in Tokuma Shoten 's Animage magazine , the first chapter was published in February 1982 and the last chapter in March 1994 . Miyazaki adapted and altered the work for the film because only sixteen chapters of the manga were written at the time of the film 's production . The manga would continue to be produced until the seventh and final book was released on 15 January 1995 . The English localization was initially done by Toren Smith and Dana Lewis of Studio Proteus . After Miyazaki resumed production of the manga , Viz Media chose a new team and continued to release the rest of manga . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 Three video games were released based on the manga and the film . All three of the titles were developed by Technopolis Soft and published by Technopolis Soft and Tokuma Shoten . Nausicaä in the Nick of Time also known as Nausicaä 's Close Call ( Naushika Kiki <unk> or Nausicaä Kiki <unk> ) is a Japanese shoot ' em up video game developed and published by Technopolis Soft for the NEC PC @-@ 6001 computer system in 1984 . The game marketed as Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind and known by its title screen as Kaze no Tani no Nausicaä ( 風の谷のナウシカ , Nausicaä Adventure Game ) , is an adventure game developed by Technopolis Soft for the NEC PC @-@ 8801 : it was released in the 1980s , most likely 1984 . The third game , Wasure ji no Nausicaä Game ( <unk> ・ <unk> , Nausicaä 's Forgotten Game ) for the MSX is the most well @-@ known of the releases and has been frequently and erroneously referred to as a game where the player kills the Ohmu . These games signaled the end of video game adaptations for Hayao <unk> 's films . The only other games based on Miyazaki films were the LaserDisc arcade game Cliff Hanger and the MSX2 platform @-@ adventure game Lupin III : The Castle of Cagliostro , both of which were based on The Castle of Cagliostro . Luke Plunkett describes these " two awful adaptations " as the reason Miyazaki does not allow further video game adaptations of his films . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 An art book titled , The Art of Nausicaä ( <unk> ・ <unk> ・ オブ 風の谷のナウシカ , Ji <unk> Obu kaze no <unk> no <unk> ) was released by Tokuma Shoten on 20 June 1984 . It contains artwork during the early stages of production of the film and commentary of assistant director Kazuyoshi Katayama . Kaze no <unk> no Naushika Miyazaki Hayao <unk> @-@ shū ( 風の谷のナウシカ <unk> , literally " Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind : Hayao <unk> Watercolor Art book " ) was released by Tokuma Shoten on 5 September 1995 . The art book contains artwork of the manga in watercolor , examples of storyboards for the film , autographed pictures by Hayao Miyazaki and interviews on the birth of Nausicaä . The book has been translated in English and French . Two <unk> volumes containing the story boards were released , on 31 March 1984 . In 2001 , the Nausicaä storyboards were re @-@ released , bundled into a single , larger , volume as part 1 of the Studio Ghibli Story boards collection . A selection of layout designs for the film was also incorporated in the Studio Ghibli Layout Designs exhibition tour , which started in the Museum of Contemporary Art Tokyo ( 28 July 2008 to 28 September 2008 ) and subsequently travelled to different museums around Japan and Asia , concluding in the Fukuoka Asian Art Museum ( 12 October 2013 to 26 January 2014 ) . The exhibition catalogues contain annotated reproductions of the displayed artwork . Tokuma Shoten released a film comic , in four volumes , one each week from 20 November 1990 to 20 December 1990 . A two @-@ volume children 's version was released on 31 March 1998 . 
 = Porsche RS Spyder = 
 The RS Spyder ( Type <unk> ) is a racing car designed by Porsche in conjunction with Penske to compete in Le Mans Prototype Class 2 ( LMP2 ) racing . The car takes its name from the legendary 550 Spyder of the 1950s ( combined with Porsche 's common " <unk> " ( lit . : racing sports ) designation ) . The car marked Porsche 's first return to the top level of sports prototype racing since the firm abandoned its Porsche LMP in 1999 . 
 The RS Spyder made its debut in the final event of the 2005 American Le Mans Series ( ALMS ) at Laguna Seca winning its class . Since then the RS Spyder has won the ALMS LMP2 Championship in 2006 , 2007 and 2008 and took class honours at Le Mans in 2008 and 2009 . The outright victory at the 2008 12 Hours of Sebring was the first major victory for Porsche in endurance racing for five years and it was also the first time in 24 years that the non @-@ premier class won the 12 Hours of Sebring overall . Regulation changes for the 2011 season rendered the RS Spyder obsolete but the car has left a legacy in the Porsche 918 , which uses a development of the Spyder 's engine and the 919 which carried Porsche 's racing program on into the LMP 1 category starting in 2014 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The RS Spyder was designed completely in @-@ house by Porsche engineers . The chassis is a rigid carbon fibre monocoque with both the engine and transmission being integral stressed members . The 3 @.@ 4 litre 90 @-@ degree V8 racing engine was designed from scratch as was the six @-@ speed electro @-@ pneumatic sequential gearbox . Braking is via six @-@ piston caliper carbon @-@ fibre brake mounted on suspension controlled by four @-@ way , spring / damper units activated by <unk> with adjustable torsion @-@ bar springs . The car has a dry weight of 825 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 819 lb ) in 2010 specification but was initially 750 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 650 lb ) . 
 Since its introduction in 2005 the engine , which initially produced 478 horsepower ( 356 kW ) has been developed and modified to meet the changing regulations of both the ALMS and the ACO . For 2008 the engine developed 503 horsepower ( 375 kW ) using direct fuel injection and 440 horsepower ( 330 kW ) in 2009 @-@ spec with air restrictor limitations . 
 = = Race results = = 
 = = = 2005 = = = 
 The RS Spyder made its race debut at the final round of the 2005 American Le Mans Series , the Monterey Sports Car Championship at Mazda Raceway Laguna Seca , entered by Penske Racing and driven by Lucas <unk> and Sascha Maassen from the Porsche <unk> factory team . The sole RS Spyder finished first in class and fifth overall . 
 = = = 2006 = = = 
 During 2006 , Penske entered two RS <unk> in the ALMS and won seven class victories including outright victory at the Mid @-@ Ohio race . This was the first LMP2 victory in a race since 2003 and the first major result for Porsche since the 1998 24 Hours of Le Mans . The results ensure victory for Penske in the LMP2 Championship and also for Sascha Maassen in the drivers ' standings . 
 = = = 2007 = = = 
 For 2007 , Porsche unveiled the 2007 @-@ spec RS Spyder ( known as the RS Spyder Evo ) , which included an increase in power to 503 horsepower ( 375 kW ) . Dyson Racing joined Penske in the ALMS . 2007 would be the most successful year for the RS Spyder with Penske repeating their outright victory in the ALMS series a further eight times and also securing an additional three class victories . Penske again won the LMP2 class in ALMS and Romain Dumas won the LMP2 Drivers Championship . During the season the RS Spyder won eight races while the Audi R10 TDI from the largest P1 class won only four . 
 = = = 2008 = = = 
 Rule changes increased the RS Spyder 's weight to 825 kg and Porsche introduce a new direct injection engine developing 503 horsepower ( 375 kW ) . A Penske car driven by Timo Bernhard , Romain Dumas , and Emmanuel Collard , secured the overall victory at the 2008 12 Hours of Sebring , winning it on the 20th anniversary of Porsche 's last overall win at the race . Penske had another outright victory at the Utah Grand Prix and also recorded an additional three class wins . At Petit Le Mans a 3rd RS Spyder was entered by Penske in an attempt to lock out the manufacturers ' championship against Acura . Penske won both the LMP2 Team and drivers ' championship for Timo Bernhard and Romain Dumas . Porsche won the manufacturers ' championship by 1 point ahead of Acura . 
 Danish Team Essex together with Van Merksteijn Motorsport of The Netherlands and <unk> Racing of Switzerland participate in the Le Mans Series ( LMS ) all with 2008 @-@ spec RS Spyder . Team Essex and Van Merksteijn also entered the 24 Hours of Le Mans , marking the debut for the RS Spyder at the event . A RS Spyder from Van Merksteijn Motorsport driven by Jeroen <unk> , Peter van Merksteijn and Jos Verstappen , came first in class and 10th overall with the Essex team coming second in class ( 12th overall ) . A RS Spyder won its class in every LMS race giving it a 1 @-@ 2 @-@ 3 in the LMP2 standing and securing the drivers championship for Jos Verstappen and the Team championship for Van Merksteijn Motorsport . 
 = = = 2009 = = = 
 New restrictor rules brought the RS Spyder 's power down to approximately 440 horsepower ( 330 kW ) , and the wingspan was limited by the rules , effectively decreasing downforce . 
 Penske did not compete in the ALMS in 2009 but Team CytoSport , who had previously competed in LMP1 in 2007 , purchased an ex @-@ Dyson Racing RS Spyder and took part in four races with a best result of second in class at Road America . 
 In LMS , Team Essex only competed in the 1000 km race at Spa taking the class victory and also securing the class victory at Le Mans , finishing 10th overall with Casper <unk> , Kristian Poulsen and Emmanuel Collard at the wheel . Team Goh also took part in the race with an ex @-@ Van Merksteijn Motorsport car . 
 = = = 2010 = = = 
 CytoSport announced in February 2010 that it would contest the full ALMS in a RS Spyder . It was also announced that Sascha Maassen would join the regular drivers Klaus Graf and Greg Pickett at the longer races at Sebring , Laguna Seca and Road Atlanta . <unk> used a full @-@ width rear wing for the entire season , unlike arch @-@ rivals <unk> HPD . The CytoSport RS Spyder won the LMP2 class at the 12 Hours of Sebring and took their first outright victory at Northeast Grand Prix at Lime Rock . CytoSport continued their winning success by taking outright victory at a shortened race at <unk> . They also finished the season second behind Patrón <unk> Racing in the championship and Klaus Graf finished second in the drivers ' standings . 
 No RS <unk> were entered in the 2010 24 Hours of Le Mans . The 2011 LMP2 regulations rendered the RS Spyder obsolete due to the costs exceeding the LMP2 budget limit . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = = Race victories = = 
 * Bold indicates pole position * Italic indicates fastest lap 
 = Wujing Zongyao = 
 The Wujing Zongyao , known in English as the Complete Essentials for the Military Classics , is a Chinese military compendium written from around 1040 to 1044 . It contains the earliest known written formulas for gunpowder , made from saltpeter , sulphur , and charcoal , along with many added ingredients . 
 The book was compiled during the Northern Song dynasty by scholars such as Zeng Gongliang , Ding Du ( <unk> ) and Yang Weide ( <unk> ) , whose writing influenced many later Chinese military writers . The compendium was published under the auspices of Emperor Renzong , who also authored the book 's preface . The book covers a wide range of subjects , everything from naval warships to different types of catapults . In addition to formulas for gunpowder , the compendium contains details on various gunpowder weapons such as incendiary bombs , fire arrows , incendiary projectiles , grenades , and smoke bombs . It also describes an early form of the compass ( using thermoremanence ) , and has the oldest illustration of a Chinese Greek fire flamethrower with a double @-@ acting two @-@ piston cylinder @-@ pump capable of shooting a continuous blast of flame . 
 = = History = = 
 The Wujing Zongyao was compiled under the imperial sponsorship of Emperor Renzong of Song ( r . 1022 – 1063 AD ) , partially as a response to the Song dynasty 's war with the Tanguts of Western Xia . A team of Chinese scholars compiled the treatise of the Wujing Zongyao from 1040 to 1044 , in order to improve the knowledge of all the known martial techniques used in warfare . Its chief editor was Zeng Gongliang , while he was assisted by the prominent astronomer Yang Weide and the scholar Ding Du . After five years , the book was published with a preface authored by Emperor Renzong . Historian Peter Lorge theorizes that the purpose of the compendium was to disseminate military knowledge to a wider government audience . Emperor Renzong was concerned that many officials were unfamiliar with the military classics . Lorge remarks that Zeng Gongliang , the chief editor , was a government official rather than a military general . The book was likely written to be read by other government officials . 
 Parts of the Wujing Zongyao were copied form older sources ; historian Ralph D. Sawyer calls it " essentially a cut @-@ and @-@ paste job . " The book contains many passages from earlier classical military writings whose original authors are left unidentified , a common practice at the time . During the Song dynasty , the Wujing Zongyao was appended to two other books : the <unk> <unk> and the <unk> <unk> , which were written by anonymous authors . 
 The Wujing Zongyao was one of 347 military treatises listed in the biographical chapters of the Song Shi ( 1345 AD ) , the historical work that embodied part of the Twenty @-@ Four Histories . Of these 347 different military treatises from the Song dynasty period , only the Wujing Zongyao , the <unk> ( Tiger Seal Manual ) of Xu Dong in 1004 AD , and fragments of similar works found in the later <unk> <unk> have survived . The original text of the Wujing Zongyao was kept in the Imperial Library , while a number of hand @-@ written copies were distributed elsewhere , including a copy given to Wang Shao by Emperor Shenzong of Song in 1069 AD . 
 However , with the sacking of the capital Kaifeng in the Jin – Song wars by the invading Jurchens in 1126 AD , the enormous amount of prized literature found in the Imperial Library was lost , including the original copy of the Wujing Zongyao . After the original was lost , there was only a scarce number of surviving copies rewritten by hand . There was a scarcity because the book was meant to be kept a secret amongst a few trustees of the government , as publishing and printing many copies using woodblock printing would have allowed the possibility of it falling into enemy hands . Nevertheless , from a remaining copy of the Wujing Zongyao , it was remade into a newly published edition in 1231 AD during the Southern Song dynasty era . Then , during the Ming Dynasty ( 1368 – 1644 AD ) , a book published in 1439 AD featured fragments of the original Wujing Zongyao edition of 1231 while omitting some material and combining it with two other books , the preface of this book written by Li Jin . Then there was a reprinted edition of the entire Wujing Zongyao in 1510 AD , this complete version being the oldest extant copy available . Furthermore , the historian Joseph Needham asserts that this edition of 1510 AD is the most reliable in its faithfulness to the original version , since it was printed from blocks that were re @-@ carved directly from tracings of the edition made in 1231 AD . 
 After the edition of 1510 was printed , other Ming Dynasty copies were made . This included the Jiajing edition ( 1522 – 1566 AD ) , the Wanli edition ( 1573 – 1619 AD ) of Quanzhou , and the Wanli edition ( 1573 – 1619 ) of <unk> by Tang <unk> ( preserved by <unk> ) . During the Qing Dynasty ( 1644 – 1911 AD ) it was also reprinted in two different editions during the 18th century , and again in 1934 with the Shanghai edition . 
 The Xu Wujing Zongyao ( <unk> ; literally " Continuation of Wujing Zongyao " ) is a sequel or " continuation " of the Wujing Zongyao written in the late Ming dynasty . The book primarily discusses army formations and military deployments . It was written by Fan <unk> ( 1587 – 1644 ) , who was then the Vice President of the Board of War ( <unk> ; <unk> <unk> ) . Fan wrote the book because he felt that reprints of the Wujing Zongyao circulating at that time were out of date and did not take into account the technological and strategic changes that had occurred since the Song dynasty . The only surviving copy of the Xu Wujing Zongyao is held by Fudan University Library . 
 = = Compass and navigation = = 
 In the 3rd century , the Chinese engineer Ma Jun invented the south @-@ pointing chariot . This was a wheeled vehicle that employed differential gearing in order to lock a figurine of an immortal in place on the end of a long wooden staff , the figure having its arm stretched out and always pointing to the southern cardinal direction . Although the authors of the Wujing Zongyao were mistaken in believing that the design of the south @-@ pointing chariot was not handed down ( as it was reinvented during the Song period and combined with an odometer ) , they described a new device which allowed one to navigate . This was the ' south pointing fish ' ( a thermoremanence compass ) , essentially a heated iron ( or preferably steel ) object cut in the shape of a fish and suspended in a bowl of water . The Wujing Zongyao part 1 volume 15 text stated : 
 When troops encountered gloomy weather or dark nights , and the directions of space could not be distinguished , they let an old horse go on before to lead them , or else they made use of the south @-@ pointing carriage , or the south @-@ pointing fish to identify the directions . Now the carriage method has not been handed down , but in the fish method a thin leaf of iron is cut into the shape of a fish two inches long and half an inch broad , having a pointed head and tail . This is then heated in a charcoal fire , and when it has become thoroughly red @-@ hot , it is taken out by the head with iron tongs and placed so that its tail points due north . In this position it is quenched with water in a basin , so that its tail is submerged for several tenths of an inch . It is then kept in a tightly closed box . To use it , a small bowl filled with water is set up in a windless place , and the fish is laid as flat as possible upon the water @-@ surface so that it floats , whereupon its head will point south . 
 It was during the Song dynasty that the compass became associated with maritime navigation . Several decades after the Wujing Zongyao was written , the scientist and statesman Shen Kuo ( 1031 – 1095 AD ) wrote of the first truly magnetized compass needle in his book Dream Pool Essays ( 1088 AD ) . With a more efficient compass magnetized by lodestone , the thermoremanence compass fell out of use . The later maritime author Zhu Yu soon wrote of the magnetic needle compass as a means to navigate at sea , in his book Pingzhou Table Talks of 1119 AD . 
 = = Gunpowder = = 
 = = = Gunpowder weapons = = = 
 The Wujing Zongyao records detailed descriptions of different gunpowder weapons such as incendiary projectiles , smoke bombs , fire arrows , and grenades . It documents incendiary projectiles containing low @-@ nitrate gunpowder , which were launched from catapults or lowered down from city walls at besiegers . Examples of these incendiaries include the " swallow @-@ tail " incendiary ( <unk> ; <unk> ) and the flying incendiary ( <unk> ; <unk> ) . The swallow @-@ tail incendiary was made of straw that had been tied together and dipped in fat or oil . Chinese soldiers defending a city under siege would light the incendiary and lower it onto any wooden structure of the invading army to engulf it in fire . The flying incendiary visually resembled the swallow @-@ tail incendiary , but was lowered using an iron chain from a <unk> lever installed within the walls of the city . The book also describes an ' igniter ball ' used in warfare and for finding the firing range . The Wujing Zongyao stated the following : 
 The ' igniter ball ' ( yin huo <unk> ) is made of paper round like a ball , inside which is put between three and five pounds of powdered bricks . Melt yellow wax and let it stand until clear , then add powdered charcoal and make it into a paste permeating the ball ; bind it up with hempen string . When you want to find the range of anything , shoot off this fire @-@ ball first , then other incendiary balls can follow . 
 Gunpowder was attached to fire arrows ( <unk> ) , an incendiary arrow that functioned like a rocket . The Wujing Zongyao records that fire arrows were launched from bows or crossbows . The gunpowder used for fire arrows was likely a low @-@ nitrate powder , and the quantity of gunpowder varied according to the type of bow . In the book , the force of gunpowder is said to be enough to launch an arrow , but only when the elasticity of the crossbow is sufficient . 
 The Wujing Zongyao discusses various types of incendiary bombs and grenades . They used a low @-@ nitrate gunpowder that , while not powerful enough to cause an explosion , was effective for incendiary weapons . The huoqiu ( <unk> ; literally " fire ball " ) was filled with gunpowder and launched using a trebuchet . Upon impact , the huoqiu would start a fire among an invading army . Chinese bombs such as the thunder clap bomb or pili pao used a greater percentage of gunpowder than that of the huoqiu . The gunpowder mixture for a bomb was placed within a rigid container that held in the expanding gas , allowing for more powerful explosions . The thunder clap bomb was constructed with a container made from bamboo . 
 In the Wujing Zongyao and other military texts , the distinction between a bomb and a grenade is ambiguous . At the time , the Chinese usually did not categorize gunpowder weapons according to their delivery method . One of the few exceptions is the <unk> , or hand bomb , which is analogous to the hand grenade . 
 = = = Formulas = = = 
 Gunpowder was invented in the 9th century by Chinese alchemists . The earliest reference to gunpowder comes from the Daoist book <unk> <unk> <unk> , written circa 850 . The use of gunpowder in warfare began in China during the early 10th century , with the advent of the black @-@ powder @-@ impregnated fuse that was used to light the burst of the Chinese two @-@ piston flamethrower . It was not until the Wujing Zongyao that the exact formulas for early Chinese black powder was revealed . In the Wujing Zongyao there are three formulas for black powder provided , including one for an explosive bomb launched from a trebuchet catapult , another for a similar bomb with hooks attached so that it could latch on to any wooden structure and set it on fire , and another formula specified for a poison @-@ smoke bomb used for chemical warfare . 
 The Wujing Zongyao 's first recorded black @-@ powder formula used in these bombs held a potassium nitrate level of 55 @.@ 4 % to 55 @.@ 5 % , sulfur content of 19 @.@ 4 % to 26 @.@ 5 % , and carbonaceous content of 23 % to 25 @.@ 2 % . The first step for making gunpowder is to powder and mix together sulphur , saltpetre , charcoal , pitch , and dried lacquer . Tung oil , dried plants , and wax are mixed next to create a paste . The paste and powder are combined and carefully stirred . Then the mixture is placed inside a paper container , wrapped up , and tied using hemp twine . Several precautions are taken to prevent the gunpowder from becoming damp . 
 For the second labeled formula , the inner ball alone had a nitrate percentage of 61 @.@ 5 % to 50 @.@ 2 % , a sulfur content of 30 @.@ 8 % to 25 @.@ 1 % , and if all carbonaceous matter was taken , 24 @.@ 7 % , if just taking the charcoal content alone , the carbon level was 7 @.@ 7 % . If the outer coating and inner ball are both included with the second black @-@ powder formula , that would yield a nitrate level of 34 @.@ 7 % to 54 @.@ 8 % , a sulfur content of 17 @.@ 4 % to 27 @.@ 4 % , and if all carbonaceous material is used , 47 @.@ 9 % carbon , if only charcoal is used , 17 @.@ 8 % . If the inner ball of the third black @-@ powder formula is only considered , it held nitrate levels of 39 @.@ 6 % if all carbonaceous matter was taken , 49 @.@ 4 % nitrate if excluding the poisons , and 60 % if charcoal is specified alone . The sulfur content was 19 @.@ 8 % if all carbonaceous matter was considered , 24 @.@ 7 % if this excluded poisons , and 30 % if charcoal is specified alone . The carbon content was 40 @.@ 5 % if all carbonaceous matter was considered , 25 @.@ 9 % if this excluded poisons , and 10 % if charcoal alone was specified . If both the inner ball and outer coating are considered for the third formula , that would yield a nitrate level of 27 % if all carbonaceous matter was taken , 31 @.@ 2 % if this excluded poisons , and 51 @.@ 7 % if charcoal alone was used . The sulfur content would be 13 @.@ 5 % if all carbonaceous matter was taken , 15 @.@ 6 % if this excluded the poisons , and 25 @.@ 9 % if only charcoal alone was specified . The carbon content was 59 @.@ 5 % if all carbonaceous matter was taken into account , 53 @.@ 2 % if this excluded poisons , and 22 @.@ 4 % if charcoal alone was specified . 
 The first black @-@ powder concoction was simply labeled as the " method for making the fire @-@ chemical " , with its ingredients and measured weight ( in ounces ) of each ingredient listed in the section below with the others listed in similar fashion . 
 1st formula 
 Total weight 
 = 82 @.@ 2 oz . 
 2nd formula 
 Total weight = 
 116 @.@ 3 oz . 
 3rd formula 
 Total weight = 114 @.@ 3 oz . 
 = = Naval technology = = 
 The Wujing Zongyao 's illustrated descriptions of warships had a significant influence on later naval handbooks and encyclopedias such as the naval section of the Wubei Zhi from circa 1628 . These works would incorporate illustrations of ships originally from the Wujing Zongyao . The use of pictures from the Wujing Zongyao would continue to appear in Japanese naval texts up until the 18th century . The illustrations were used by both Nishikawa <unk> 's Ka @-@ i <unk> @-@ <unk> ( Studies on the Intercourse and Trade with Chinese and Barbarians ) in 1708 and Kanazawa <unk> 's <unk> <unk> ( Collected Studies on the Ships used by the Chinese and Japanese ) in 1766 . 
 Wujing Zongyao divides Chinese warships into six categories : Tower ships ( <unk> chuan ) , combat or war junks ( dou xian or <unk> xian ) , covered <unk> ( meng chong ) , flying barques ( <unk> ge ) , patrol boats ( you ting ) , and sea hawk ships ( hai hu ) . The Wujing Zongyao 's typology for classifying Chinese warships would reappear in later naval texts for many centuries . 
 = = Double @-@ acting piston flamethrower = = 
 The Wujing Zongyao describes a flamethrower with a double @-@ acting two @-@ piston cylinder @-@ pump capable of shooting a continuous blast of flame . The first Chinese battle to use the double @-@ piston pump flamethrower was the Battle of Langshan Jiang in 919 AD . In the Battle of Langshan Jiang ( Wolf Mountain River , <unk> ) , the naval fleet of the Wenmu King of Wuyue defeated the fleet of the Kingdom of Wu because he had used ' fire oil ' ( huo <unk> , <unk> ) to burn his fleet ; this signified the first Chinese use of gunpowder in warfare , since a slow @-@ burning match fuse was required to ignite the flames . Greek fire is likely based on distilled petroleum and is a weapon of Byzantine origin . The Chinese author Lin Yu explained in his book of 919 AD that Greek fire was acquired from their Arab maritime trade contacts in the Indian Ocean . Furthermore , the Chinese had been using the piston syringe since the Han Dynasty ( 202 BC – 220 AD ) . However , it was the later Wujing Zongyao that would provide the first illustrated drawing and greater textual explanation for how this flamethrower operated . In describing the drawn illustration of the flamethrower in the book , the Wujing Zongyao states : 
 On the right is the petrol flamethrower ( lit. fierce fire oil @-@ shooter ) . The tank is made of brass , and supported on four legs . From its upper surface arise four ( vertical ) tubes attached to a horizontal cylinder above ; they are all connected with the tank . The head and the tail of the cylinder are large ( the middle ) is of narrow ( diameter ) . In the tail end there is a small opening as big as a millet grain . The head end has ( two ) round openings 1 ½ inches in diameter . At the side of the tank there is a hole with a ( little ) tube which is used for filling , and this is fitted with a cover . Inside the cylinder there is a ( <unk> ) rod packed with silk floss , the head of which is wound round with hemp waste about ½ inches thick . Before and behind , the two communicating tubes are ( alternately ) occluded ( lit. controlled ) , and ( the mechanism ) thus determined . The tail has a horizontal handle ( the pump handle ) , in front of which there is a round cover . When ( the handle is pushed ) in ( the pistons ) close the mouth of the tubes ( in turn ) . 
 Before use the tank is filled with rather more than three catties of the oil with a spoon through a filter ; at the same time gunpowder ( composition ) is placed in the ignition chamber at the head . When the fire is to be started one applies a heated branding iron ( to the ignition chamber ) , and the piston @-@ rod is forced fully into the cylinder — then the man at the back is ordered to draw the piston rod fully backwards and work it ( back and forth ) as vigorously as possible . Whereupon the oil ( the petrol ) comes out through the ignition chamber and is shot forth as blazing flame . 
 Then the text goes on to provide further instructions about equipment , maintenance , and repair of flamethrowers : 
 When filling , use the bowl , the spoon and filter ; for igniting there is the branding iron ; for maintaining ( or renewing ) the fire there is the container . The branding iron is made sharp like an awl so that it may be used ot unblock the tubes if they get stopped up . There are tongs with which to pick up the glowing fire , and there is a soldering iron for stopping up leaks . If the tanks or the tubes get cracked and leak they may be mended by using green wax . Altogether there are 12 items of equipment , all of brass except the tongs , the branding iron , and the soldering iron . Another method is to fix a brass gourd @-@ shaped container inside a large tube ; below it has two feet , and inside there are two small feet communicating with them ( comm : all made of brass ) and there is also the piston . The method of shooting is as described above . If the enemy comes to attack a city , these weapons are placed on the great ramparts , or else in outworks , so that large numbers of assailants cannot get through . 
 = = Illustrations from the Wujing Zongyao = = 
 = Brazilian monitor Ceará = 
 The Brazilian monitor Ceará was the fifth ship of the Pará @-@ class river monitors built for the Brazilian Navy during the Paraguayan War in the late 1860s . Ceará arrived in Paraguay in mid @-@ 1868 and provided fire support for the army for the rest of the war . The ship was assigned to the Mato Grosso Flotilla after the war . Ceará was scrapped in 1884 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Pará @-@ class monitors were designed to meet the need of the Brazilian Navy for small , shallow @-@ draft armoured ships capable of withstanding heavy fire . The monitor configuration was chosen as a turreted design did not have the same problems engaging enemy ships and fortifications as did the central battery ironclads already in Brazilian service . The oblong gun turret sat on a circular platform that had a central pivot . It was rotated by four men via a system of gears ; 2 @.@ 25 minutes were required for a full 360 ° rotation . A bronze ram was fitted to these ships as well . The hull was sheathed with Muntz metal to reduce biofouling . 
 The ships measured 39 meters ( 127 ft 11 in ) long overall , with a beam of 8 @.@ 54 meters ( 28 ft 0 in ) . They had a draft between of 1 @.@ 51 – 1 @.@ 54 meters ( 4 ft 11 in – 5 ft 1 in ) and displaced 500 metric tons ( 490 long tons ) . With only 0 @.@ 3 meters ( 1 ft 0 in ) of freeboard they had to be towed between Rio de Janeiro and their area of operations . Their crew numbered 43 officers and men . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The Pará @-@ class ships had two direct @-@ acting steam engines , each driving a single 1 @.@ 3 @-@ meter ( 4 ft 3 in ) propeller . Their engines were powered by two tubular boilers at a working pressure of 59 psi ( 407 kPa ; 4 kgf / cm2 ) . The engines produced a total of 180 indicated horsepower ( 130 kW ) which gave the monitors a maximum speed of 8 knots ( 15 km / h ; 9 @.@ 2 mph ) in calm waters . The ships carried enough coal for one day 's steaming . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Ceará had a single 120 @-@ pounder Whitworth rifled muzzle loader ( RML ) in her gun turret . The gun had a maximum range of about 5 @,@ 540 meters ( 6 @,@ 060 yd ) . The 7 @-@ inch ( 178 mm ) shell of the 120 @-@ pounder gun weighed 151 pounds ( 68 @.@ 5 kg ) while the gun itself weighed 16 @,@ 660 pounds ( 7 @,@ 556 @.@ 8 kg ) . Most unusually the guns ' Brazilian @-@ designed iron carriage was designed to pivot vertically at the muzzle ; this was done to minimize the size of the gunport through which splinters and shells could enter . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The hull of the Pará @-@ class ships was made from three layers of wood that alternated in orientation . It was 457 millimeters ( 18 @.@ 0 in ) thick and was capped with a 102 @-@ millimeter ( 4 in ) layer of peroba hardwood . The ships had a complete wrought iron waterline belt , 0 @.@ 91 meters ( 3 @.@ 0 ft ) high . It had a maximum thickness of 102 millimetres amidships , decreasing to 76 millimeters ( 3 in ) and 51 millimeters ( 2 in ) at the ship 's ends . The curved deck was armored with 12 @.@ 7 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) of wrought iron . 
 The gun turret was shaped like a rectangle with rounded corners . It was built much like the hull , but the front of the turret was protected by 152 millimeters ( 6 in ) of armor , the sides by 102 millimetres and the rear by 76 millimetres . Its roof and the exposed portions of the platform it rested upon were protected by 12 @.@ 7 millimetres of armor . The armored pilothouse was positioned ahead of the turret . 
 = = Service = = 
 Ceará was laid down at the Arsenal de Marinha da Côrte in Rio de Janeiro on 8 December 1866 , during the Paraguayan War , which saw Argentina and Brazil allied against Paraguay . She was launched on 22 March 1868 and commissioned the following month . The monitor arrived in Paraguay in May 1868 . On 31 August she bombarded enemy positions on the Tebicuary River to provide cover for advancing troops . The ship destroyed Paraguayan defenses on the Manduvirá River on 18 April 1869 . Ceará , together with her sister ships Piauí and Santa Catharina , broke through the Paraguayan defenses at Guaraio on 29 April and drove off the defenders . After the war she was assigned to the Mato Grosso Flotilla and was scrapped in 1884 . 
 = Anytime You Need a Friend = 
 " Anytime You Need a Friend " is a song by American singer @-@ songwriter Mariah Carey . The song was written and produced by Carey and Walter Afanasieff , for her third studio album , Music Box ( 1993 ) . It was released on May 31 , 1994 through Columbia Records , as the fourth and final single from the album . The song is influenced by pop , R & B and gospel music genres . While the album focused heavily on pop oriented and radio friendly material , " Anytime You Need a Friend " deviated from the formula , finishing as the only gospel @-@ infused song on Music Box . Lyrically , the song 's protagonist tells her love interest that anytime he may need a friend , she will be there unconditionally for him . Throughout the song 's bridge and climax , critics noted the lyrics altering from those of a friend , to those of a lover . 
 The song was well received by contemporary music critics , many of which praised Carey 's large spanning vocal range , as well as its gospel influence that they felt was missing on most of Music Box . Aside from its critical acceptance , the song achieved strong worldwide chart positions and peaked at number twelve on the US Billboard Hot 100 , but became her first single to miss out the top @-@ ten . Additionally , it peaked at number five in Canada and topped the singles charts in Finland and the Netherlands . The song attained a top @-@ twenty peak position in Australia , France , Ireland , New Zealand , Switzerland and the United Kingdom . 
 Carey performed " Anytime You Need a Friend " live on several televised talk and award shows around the world , including the Late Show with David Letterman , the British music chart program Top of the Pops and German entertainment show Wetten , dass .. ? . Additionally , the song served as a closing number on Carey 's Music Box and Daydream World Tours , and was featured on her compilation albums , Greatest Hits ( 2001 ) and The Ballads ( 2008 ) . Although several remixes were commissioned for the song , the C + C remix became the most notable , being produced by C + C Music Factory 's David Cole and Robert Clivillés , and the first of Carey 's remixes to feature her on production credits . 
 The song 's music video was filmed by Danielle Federici , in New York during the summer of 1994 . The video was filmed in black @-@ and @-@ white fashion , and features Carey 's first image makeover , where she appears with a straightened hairstyle for the first time in her career . Additionally , the music video showcases scenes of Carey singing by a large church choir in a foyer , as well as several people , ranging from a small child to an elderly man , who are alone and depressed . As the video progresses , the child and man are befriended after brief interludes and prayers to God . The song 's C + C remix also features its own music video , displaying behind the scenes footage of Carey and her staff enjoying themselves during the original video 's filming . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 For her third studio effort , Columbia Records decided to market Carey in a similar fashion to that of her debut , only having her produce a more commercial and radio @-@ friendly album . Their plans were to tone down Carey 's vocals , and soften the album 's production , leaving a more contemporary pop record . Agreeing to the change , Carey and Afanasieff began writing and recording material for her third studio effort , Music Box ( 1993 ) . On the album 's first track " Dreamlover " , Carey worked with Dave Hall throughout the song 's entire production . In order to help with some of the song 's arrangements , Mottola enrolled the help of Walter Afanasieff , who took on the completed track and transformed it into a more commercial hit . Music Box received mixed critical response from contemporary critics , who suggested that in lowering Carey 's vocal bombast , her energy level decreased and felt the album had an " absence of passion . " The only song that was not subject to the common criticism was " Anytime You Need a Friend , " which some called the album 's only real glimpse of Carey 's upper vocal registers , and one of the only passionate and gospel moments on Music Box . In an interview , Carey described that although the album 's main goal was to be more commercial and radio @-@ friendly than her previous release , she felt the need to include at least one song that featured a church choir and traces of the music that influenced her growing up as a child . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Anytime You Need a Friend " is a mid @-@ tempo song which draws influence from pop , R & B and gospel musical genres . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by EMI Music Publishing , the song is written in the key of C major , while the beat is set in the signature of common time , which moves at a moderate pace of 83 beats per minute . It has a sequence of Am / C – Bm7 ( <unk> ) – E7 / G ♯ – Am as its chord progression . Carey 's vocals in the song span over three octaves , from the low note of an E3 to the high note of a B ♭ 6 . The song was written by Carey and Afanasieff , with production helmed by the pair as well . After the song 's bridge , a church choir is introduced and featured throughout its final chorus and climax . Carey 's vocals are layered over the background gospel @-@ styled vocals on the final chorus , after which she uses the whistle register to close the song . The song 's lyrics describe a relationship the protagonist has with another individual , telling them that anytime they need a friend , she will be there unconditionally . 
 Throughout the song , the lyrics seemingly show the evolving relationship between the couple . Carey sings Anytime you need a friend / I will be here / You 'll never be alone again / So don 't you fear / Even if you 're miles away / I 'm by your side / So don 't you ever be lonely / Love will make it alright , which hints at a current friendship where more still uncovered emotions are present . Author Chris Nickson explains on the song 's switch in relationship , as the lyrics change to If you just believe in me / I will love you endlessly / Take my hand / Take me into your heart / I 'll be there forever baby / I won 't let go / I 'll never let go . The protagonist is willing to accept the relationship as only a friend , but tells her partner that no matter his feelings for her , she loves him and still wishes to be loved by him , something she will never forget or " let go . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Anytime You Need a Friend " was generally well received by contemporary music critics , many of whom praised the song 's gospel influence as well as Carey 's vocal range . Following the mixed reception to the song 's parent album , Music Box , " Anytime You Need a Friend " was deemed a strong contrast to the album 's pop influence . Critics agreed that through lowering Carey 's vocal bombast , the album suffered due to lowered passion and energy levels . The song however , was considered the only standout from the album , altering heavily from the pop oriented formula of Music Box . J.D. Considine from The Baltimore Sun wrote " Where another singer might have been tempted to turn " Anytime You Need a Friend " into a full @-@ blown sanctified sing @-@ out , Carey and producer Walter Afanasieff use the gospel harmonies on the chorus as contrast for Carey 's pop soul vocal . " A writer from Portland Press Herald called the song one of Carey 's " original classics " , and felt it earned a place on her compilation album # 1 's , even though it did not top the Billboard Hot 100 . In an article from the Fort Worth Star @-@ Telegram , a writer commented that Carey 's vocal range in the song sounds as if it 's from a " glass @-@ shattering dimension " and complimented her incorporation of the gospel genre and church choir into the song 's climax . Christopher John Farley from Time described the song as " gospel flavored " and wrote " ' Anytime You Need a Friend ' demonstrates Carey 's vocal power , although too fleetingly . " While calling it " undeniably strong " , David Browne from Entertainment Weekly gave the song a mixed review , writing " ' Anytime You Need a Friend ' feature gospel @-@ inflected choirs seemingly intended to demonstrate that Carey has soul — which she doesn 't — but they 're beautifully arranged , and they serve as a nice counterpoint to Carey 's own lapses into show @-@ offy vocal gymnastics . " <unk> <unk> from The Straits Times described Carey 's voice as husky , and felt it " exploited her vocal range to the fullest . " In 2003 , The Daily Record named " Anytime You Need a Friend " one of the " World 's Greatest First Dance Songs . " USA Today critic John T. Jones called the song " inspirational " , while a writer from The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution branded it " the center of the album . " " Anytime You Need A Friend " won a BMI Pop Award and an ASCAP Pop Music Award for the Songwriter Award in 1995 . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Anytime You Need a Friend " became the first of Carey 's singles to not reach the top @-@ ten on the US Billboard Hot 100 . The song debuted at number 45 on the chart and eventually peaked at number 12 , remaining in the top @-@ 40 for 18 weeks and on the chart for 21 . Despite this , it was popular on US radio and was ranked number thirty @-@ seven on the 1994 Year @-@ End Charts , giving Carey three singles in the top half of the chart . On the Year @-@ End Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks , " Anytime You Need a Friend " finished at number 21 and number 39 on the Hot Dance Music Club Play Singles Year @-@ End Chart . In Canada , the song debuted at number 82 on the Canadian RPM Singles Chart during the week of May 23 , 1994 . Seven weeks later , the song reached its peak of number five on the singles chart , spending three consecutive weeks at the position and a total of 20 weeks on the chart . On the RPM Year @-@ End Charts , " Dreamlover " finished at number 39 . On the week dated June 19 , 1994 on the Australian Singles Chart , the song entered at number 48 . Weeks later , it ascended to its peak position of number 12 , where it stayed for one week , and a total of 17 weeks fluctuating inside the singles chart . " Anytime You Need a Friend " was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting shipments of over 35 @,@ 000 units . On the Dutch Top 40 chart , " Anytime You Need a Friend " reached the number one position on the singles chart . 
 In France , the single entered the chart at number 43 during the week of October 29 , 1994 . After spending one week at its peak position of number 12 , the song fluctuated inside the singles chart for a total of 16 weeks . In Germany and Ireland , " Anytime You Need a Friend " reached numbers 31 and 16 on their respective singles charts . On the New Zealand Singles Chart dated June 26 , 1994 , the song entered the chart at number nine . After spending two weeks at its peak position of number five , and a total of 14 weeks in the singles chart , the song was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) , denoting shipments of over 7 @,@ 500 units . In Switzerland , " Anytime You Need a Friend " peaked at number 15 , however spending 17 weeks fluctuating in the Swiss Singles Chart . On the UK Singles Chart week dated June 18 , 1994 , the song debuted at number nine . The following week , it reached its peak position of number eight , spending a total of ten weeks in the singles chart . Following a live performance of the song by Eoghan Quigg on the fifth series of the British talent show The X Factor , " Anytime You Need a Friend " re @-@ surged onto the singles chart at number 96 on November 22 , 2008 . As of 2010 , MTV estimates sales of the song in the United Kingdom to be at 100 @,@ 000 units . 
 = = Remixes = = 
 " Anytime You Need a Friend " was remixed by David Cole and Robert Clivillés of C + C Music Factory . Although over fifteen various edits and extended mixes were created , for the most part they are based on the " C + C Club Mix . " Other variations , extended mixes , and edits include but are not limited to the " All That and More Mix , " " Dave 's Empty Pass , " and the " <unk> Tribe Mix " . Cory Rooney and Mark Morales created a " Soul Convention Mix " and a <unk> for the song . Because of the large number of remixes , two maxi singles were released in the US Carey was given co @-@ producing credit for both the C & C mixes and the Soul Convention / <unk> , the first time that she had been given producing credit on remixes of her songs . Gregg Shapiro from the Windy City Times complimented the remix , writing " the presence of each improves on the original . They have something new to say ; even with the songs that began as dance tracks . " Jose F. Promis gave the C + C remix two and a half out of five stars , writing how the remix found Carey " getting quite gritty and earthy . " He concluded his review with " It made for a <unk> dancefloor number , and stands as an excellent example of early- to mid- ' 90s dance music , not to mention being one of the singer 's most compelling , underrated , and forgotten efforts . " 
 = = Music videos = = 
 The music video , directed by Danielle Federici , was filmed during the early summer of 1994 . It was filmed in black @-@ and @-@ white , and features Carey walking along the streets of New York , watching several different people , ranging from a small child to an elderly man , lonely and in need of a friend . Additionally , aside from several scenes of Carey and a large church choir in a large antechamber , the video is known as the first video in which Carey appears with straightened hair . Throughout her career up until that point , Carey had famously sported long , auburn curls . However , the video presented Carey 's first image makeover , where she appears with bangs and a long straightened hairstyle . The video begins with scenes of Carey walking down a long New York street , with the addition of close ups of Carey 's face . As she stares down the road , she witnesses a small girl , sitting alone in an alley corner , glaring into the sky . As the first chorus begins , Carey enters a large foyer , with a choir dressed in black singing perched atop a large staircase . During the second verse , she similarly witnesses an older man , who is sitting on a withered stoop . 
 <unk> , during the song 's bridge , Carey watches as the small child 's mother carries her to a nearby playground where her friends are frolicking and playing . Similarly , the elderly man is met with some other elderly citizens , who accompany him to another building nearby . During the song 's climax , Carey joins the choir , flailing her hands wildly towards the sky , and smiling and gazing into the cloudy morning . Renee Graham from The Boston Globe gave the video two out of four stars . She complimented on the fact that the video captured the song 's lyrical essence and how it managed to portray it in a clear and concise way . Although calling it " simple , " Graham commented that " Videos have never really been Mariah Carey 's thing , and frankly , they 've never had to be . Carey has a killer voice , so the last thing she 'd want to do is overshadow her singing with a lot of choreography , complicated story lines or explosions . " Author Chris Nickson compared several parts of the video to religion and belief in God . During such scenes when Carey appears with the choir , he felt it seemed as though they were both channeling a common entity through music ; God . Additionally , he claimed it was more evident with each passing scene of the video , as each of the lonely people in the video gaze up into the skies , possibly praying or searching for an answer to their loneliness . A video was commissioned for the C + C club mix of the song . Known as the C + C video edit , it was also directed by Danielle Federici and serves as a behind the scenes addendum to the main music video . It is also filmed in black and white , and is composed of clips of Carey and her friends during filming of the video , where they chat , laugh and enjoy time with each other . Carey 's husband at the time Tommy Mottola made a cameo appearance in the video , appearing alongside Carey during the second verse . The remix video was later included on the 1995 home video release , Fantasy : Mariah Carey at Madison Square Garden . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Carey promoted " Anytime You Need a Friend " on several live televised performances throughout the United States , Europe and Asia . Carey 's performance of the song at an intimate concert at Proctor 's Theatre on July 15 , 1993 was filmed and released as the VHS Here Is Mariah Carey . Carey performed the song during a live appearance on the Late Show with David Letterman , which was followed by an interview regarding the album . During the performance , a live band and several male and female background vocalists were featured . Promotion through Europe included a visit and performance on the British music chart program Top of the Pops , German entertainment show Wetten , dass .. ? , Hey Hey It 's Saturday in Australia , and the 1993 Japanese Music Fair . Aside from the several televised appearances , Carey performed the song throughout her Music Box Tour ( 1993 ) and Daydream World Tour ( 1996 ) . During the shows in 1993 , Carey featured the song as the fifteenth song on the set @-@ list , and was performed in a similar fashion as on her televised appearances . 
 Prior to beginning the song , Carey urged the crowd to " never be lonely " and " always try and find that special person in your life . " Following the show in Chicago , Chicago Tribune critic Greg Kot felt that her performance of the song truly " demonstrated that her multi @-@ octave voice is no studio fabrication . " During her shows at the Tokyo Dome during 1996 , Carey sported a long and wavy hairstyle , while wearing a long black gown . She sang the original version of the song , up until half way through the last chorus , until merging into the C + C remix . Several background vocalists were once again featured on stage , all donning black garbs . However , once the remix began , six male dancers made their way to the right and left sides of the stage , performing heavy dance routines as Carey walked around the stage . Once the remix began , the lighting was altered . Aside from the usual fluorescent lighting that was used throughout the show , additional pink and purple lighting was added for the number , as it served for the shows closing and final song . During her succeeding shows in Europe , Carey 's outfits altered as well as her hairstyle . She wore a long , white strapless gown and sported her hair in a straightened ponytail style . Since 1996 , Carey has not performed the song live on television or on her tours . 
 = = Other versions = = 
 In a review done by Digital Spy for Leona Lewis ' debut album , Spirit , Nick Levine felt the song " Footprints in the Sand " borrowed heavily from Carey 's track , writing " ' Footprints In The Sand ' seems hellbent on revisiting Mariah Carey 's schlock @-@ pop masterwork ' Anytime You Need A Friend . ' " " Anytime You Need a Friend " was covered on several different occasions on a variety of reality and talent competitions . Some became heavily popularized by the media due to the nature of the performance or performer . On the fifth season of the British talent program The X Factor , contestant Eoghan Quigg performed a live cover of the song during a " Mariah Carey " themed week . The song was chosen by Simon Cowell , who felt it would fit his younger vocals . Following the performance , he received acclaim from all three judges . Following the show 's end , Quigg embarked on a live tour throughout 2009 alongside the other finalists , performing the song at each show alongside fellow contestant , Diana Vickers . Similarly , on the fourth season of the reality talent show America 's Got Talent , a trio of children named Michael , Avery and Nadia , together forming " The Voices of Glory , " performed a live rendition of the song . Their performance was well received by the judges , with David Hasselhoff exclaiming " Wonderful , wonderful , wonderful job . " 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 These credits were adapted from the Music Box liner notes . 
 " Anytime You Need a Friend " was recorded at Right Track Studios , New York , and mixed at Sony Music Studios , New York . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Turban Head eagle = 
 The Turban Head eagle , also known as the Capped Bust eagle , was a ten @-@ dollar gold piece , or eagle , struck by the United States Mint from 1795 to 1804 . The piece was designed by Robert Scot , and was the first in the eagle series , which continued until the Mint ceased striking gold coins for circulation in 1933 . The common name is a misnomer ; Liberty does not wear a turban but a cap , believed by some to be a pileus or Phrygian cap ( Liberty cap ) : her hair twisting around the headgear makes it resemble a turban . 
 The eagle was the largest denomination authorized by the Mint Act of 1792 , which established the Bureau of the Mint . It was not struck until 1795 , as the Mint at first struck copper and silver coins . The number of stars on the obverse was initially intended to be equal to the number of states in the Union , but with the number at 16 , that idea was abandoned in favor of using 13 stars in honor of the original states . The initial reverse , featuring an eagle with a wreath in its mouth , proved unpopular and was replaced by a heraldic eagle . 
 Increases in the price of gold made it profitable for the coins to be melted for their precious metal content , and in 1804 , President Thomas Jefferson ended coinage of eagles ; the denomination was not struck again for circulation for more than thirty years . Four 1804 @-@ dated eagles were struck in 1834 for inclusion in sets of US coins to be given to foreign potentates . These 1804 " Plain 4 " coins differ from the eagles actually struck in 1804 in the way the " 4 " in the date is styled , and are among the most valuable US coins . 
 = = Inception = = 
 In 1791 , Congress passed a resolution authorizing President George Washington to establish a mint . Feeling that the resolution was inadequate , President Washington asked legislators to pass a comprehensive law which would govern the new facility . The result was the Mint Act of 1792 , which prescribed the specifications of the new US coins , the highest denomination being the eagle , or ten @-@ dollar piece . 
 The passage of the Mint Act was followed by the establishment in Philadelphia of the Mint , which by 1793 was striking cents and half cents . Coinage of precious metal pieces was delayed ; Congress had required that the assayer and chief coiner each post a security bond of $ 10 @,@ 000 , a huge sum in those days . In 1794 , Congress lowered the chief coiner 's bond to $ 5 @,@ 000 and the assayer 's to $ 1 @,@ 000 , and President Washington 's appointees to those positions were able to qualify and take office . Silver coinage began that year . 
 The first deposit of gold to be struck into coins was made at the Mint in February 1795 , by Moses Brown of Boston . Around May 1795 , the first Mint director , David Rittenhouse , set engraver Robert Scot the task of preparing dies for an issue of gold coins . Rittenhouse resigned in June , before the work came to fruition , and was replaced by Henry <unk> . The new director took office on July 9 , 1795 , and pressed to have the gold coin project completed with great speed . DeSaussure also publicized that the Mint would be striking gold pieces , the new nation 's first ; the first half eagles ( five @-@ dollar pieces ) were struck 22 days later . Dies for the eagle coinage were prepared , most likely by Scot and by long @-@ time Mint employee Adam Eckfeldt . 
 = = Design = = 
 The three designs for the Turban Head eagle — the obverse and the two reverses — are all by Scot . They are identical to designs used on other silver and gold coins of the period — the Mint did not yet put denominations on gold pieces . The origin of Scot 's obverse is uncertain . Art historian Cornelius Vermeule suggests a similarity between Scot 's portrayal of Liberty on the eagle and the portrait on the 1792 half disme ( deemed by some the first Federal coinage ) , and speculates that the ultimate inspiration may have been Martha Washington , the President 's wife . He also contends that a bust should have drapery only if intended as part of a statue : " Greco @-@ Roman classicism has been misunderstood here " . Numismatic historian Walter Breen believes that Scot probably " copied some unlocated contemporaneous engraving of a Roman copy of a Hellenistic goddess , altering the hair , adding drapery and an oversize soft cap " . Breen disputes Vermeule 's contention that the cap is a pileus , the hat given to emancipated slaves as a symbol of their freedom . In support of his argument , he reproduces an 1825 letter from then Mint Director Samuel Moore , stating that the cap on the gold coins was " not the Liberty cap in form , but probably conforming to the fashionable dress of the day " . Numismatic author David Lange contends the headgear is a mob cap , much in fashion at the time . 
 The reverse that appeared on the eagle from 1795 to mid @-@ 1797 depicts an eagle clutching a victory wreath , perched on a branch and surrounded by the nation 's name . Vermeule contends that the appearance of the bird is " difficult to describe " but that it has " a healthy individuality and an almost @-@ rustic charm " . Breen suggests that the branch is from a palm tree , and that this is in tribute to <unk> , a South Carolinian . The reverse coined from 1797 featured a heraldic eagle based on the Great Seal of the United States . Breen points to what he deems a blunder on Scot 's part : the bird holds arrows and an olive branch , but carries the arrows in the dexter , or dominant right claw , symbolizing a preference for war over peace . 
 = = Production = = 
 Coinage of eagles followed shortly after production of half eagles began , although the exact date is uncertain . The first group produced is believed to have been struck in August and September 1795 ; 1 @,@ 097 eagles were made available for circulation on September 22 . Four hundred of these were immediately paid out to the Bank of Pennsylvania , which had deposited gold at the Mint for striking into eagles . One piece was put aside for the Mint 's coin collection by Eckfeldt . 
 Numismatic author Dean Albanese considers the legend that Washington provided the gold for the first 400 eagles to be improbable ; holding $ 4 @,@ 000 in coin would have tied up much of Washington 's capital in unproductive cash . Albanese suggests that as many surviving 1795 eagles are found with little wear , Washington may have had the government purchase pieces to give to dignitaries . By some reports , one eagle was presented to Washington , though whether it was from this first coinage is uncertain . 
 In the 1790s , the production of coin dies was difficult , expensive , and time @-@ consuming . Mechanical reproduction of such dies was not yet possible ; accordingly , coins of the same year struck from different dies can be distinguished from each other . Dies still in use at the end of the year often saw continued use , sometimes with the date re @-@ engraved . These different dies are reflected in significant varieties today : some 1795 eagles have 13 leaves on the palm branch , others only nine . 
 Minting of eagles was interrupted in late 1795 because of the death of the Assayer to the United States Mint , Albion Cox . At that time , the Mint used unpowered screw presses to strike coins : striking such large coins using muscle power was difficult , and few Turban Head eagles show the entire design strongly . At the end of 1795 , the Mint had 176 eagles on hand ; coinage resumed ( with 1795 @-@ dated dies ) in late March 1796 , after most of the stock on hand had been paid out . 
 As the half eagle approximated the size of a number of foreign gold coins , such as the British guinea and the French louis d 'or , it was accepted readily in international commerce and was of a suitable value for many business transactions . DeSaussure is believed to have struck half eagles first for that reason , after consultation with bank officials . The eagle lacked such equivalents , was too high in value for many transactions , and rapidly became unpopular . 
 The eagles originally had 15 stars on the obverse , representing the fifteen states as of 1795 . With the admission of Tennessee as a state in 1796 , a sixteenth star was added to the obverse . The first 1796 eagles were delivered by the Mint on June 2 , the day after Tennessee 's admission . Breen notes that as Tennessee 's statehood had been uncertain owing to opposition in Congress until shortly before the actual admission , the 16 @-@ star eagles most likely were not prepared until just before it became a state on June 1 . Other 1796 coins , with smaller denominations , are known to have been struck on polished blanks for presentation in connection with the statehood celebrations ; it is likely eagles were struck in this way as well . With the possibility of additional states being added to the Union in years to come , Mint officials decided to have the obverse feature only 13 stars , representing the original states of the Union . The Mint 's coinage was decreased due to yellow fever epidemics in Philadelphia in 1796 , 1797 , 1801 , and 1803 ; it struck fewer eagles in those four years , giving priority to more popular coins . 
 The public disliked Scot 's original reverse design , deeming the depicted eagle scrawny and unworthy of a great nation such as the United States aspired to be . The new Mint director , Elias Boudinot , asked Scot to redesign the reverse . The so @-@ called Heraldic Eagle design was struck on quarter eagles as early as 1796 , but did not appear on the eagle until the following year , with the other gold denomination , the half eagle , following in 1798 . The initial design ( dubbed by some the " Plain Eagle " ) had been struck in relatively small numbers , 13 @,@ 344 over the design 's three @-@ year life . Some 1797 dies were re @-@ engraved with an 8 over the final 7 ( catalogued as 1798 / 7 ) , to allow them to bear the year of issue ; coins struck from them are the only 1798 @-@ dated eagles . Nevertheless , unaltered 1797 dies were used even after the 1798 / 7 pieces ; this can be shown because the same reverse die was used for both issues , and on the 1797 @-@ dated pieces , the reverse die displays greater wear . All 1798 and later eagles have only 13 stars on the obverse , however some 1798 / 7 eagles have nine stars on the left and four on the right , while others have seven on the left and six on the right . Only 2 @,@ 000 pieces were struck in 1798 , but the following year demand for the eagle surged , and over 37 @,@ 000 were struck . 
 The precious metal composition of US coins was calculated such that gold would be fifteen times as valuable per ounce as silver . By the turn of the 19th century , the price of gold in terms of silver had risen to approximately 15 @.@ 75 to one . This made it profitable for merchants to buy gold coins at face value using silver coins , and export the gold to Europe . Gold vanished from circulation in the United States by 1800 . By 1801 , almost no bullion was being deposited at the Mint , causing the Jefferson administration to consider its closure . The eagle was especially desired by exporters , as the larger size and value made it more convenient to handle . Although the Mint remained open , on December 31 , 1804 , President Thomas Jefferson ordered that eagles and silver dollars no longer be struck , ending the Turban Head eagle series . Coin dealer and author Q. David Bowers suggests that while a majority of eagles remained in the United States , enough were exported to make continuing their mintage an exercise in futility . 
 Coinage of eagles did not resume until 1838 ( after Congress decreased the gold content of American coins , eliminating the incentive to export them ) , when a new design , by Christian Gobrecht , was struck . 
 = = 1804 issues = = 
 Although the Mint coined 1803 @-@ dated eagles in 1804 , a total of 3 @,@ 757 eagles dated 1804 were struck in that year . These pieces , dubbed the " Crosslet 4 " variety ( Plain 4 eagles have a short projection of the cross @-@ stroke of the 4 extending to the right of the upright , Crosslet 4 have short vertical extensions of the cross @-@ stroke at the end of the projection ) , were extensively melted at the time , and the few known today are very collectible . R.S. Yeoman , in his " Red Book " valuing US coins published during 2012 , values the Crosslet 4 at $ 125 @,@ 000 in MS @-@ 63 ranging down to $ 55 @,@ 000 in more circulated , Almost Uncirculated @-@ 50 condition . Many surviving Turban Head eagles were sold by exchange agents to coin dealers or collectors in the 1850s and afterwards as the hobby became more popular and the pieces acquired a modest premium over their melt value . 
 In 1834 , the United States Government intended to present a set of then @-@ current US coins to four Asian rulers the US had either made agreements with or else hoped to treat with . Neither the silver dollar nor the eagle had been struck since 1804 , but they were still considered current coins . Putting the date of striking on the pieces would make them appear to be in violation of Jefferson 's prohibition which remained in force . Mint Director Moore decided to strike 1804 @-@ dated dollars and eagles for the sets , and four 1804 eagles were struck . They differ from the pieces struck thirty years earlier , lacking a <unk> on the right side of the crossbar of the 4 . Two were presented , to the Sultan of Muscat and the King of Siam , before the diplomat in charge of the expedition , Edmund Roberts , died of disease in Macao , and his mission was abandoned . The remaining two sets were returned to the United States . 
 The existence of the Plain 4 pieces was revealed in 1869 , when one was reproduced in the American Journal of Numismatics . The significance and history of the pieces was at first unrecognized , and the revelation prompted no particular excitement . How the pieces returned to US authorities came to be dispersed is unknown . The set given to the King of Siam was sold at auction by descendants of Anna Leonowens , who served as schoolteacher to the children of King Mongkut of Siam in the 1860s , although how it came into her possession is uncertain . Today , three of the pieces are in private collections , the fourth is in the Harry W. Bass , Jr . Collection , displayed in the Money Museum of the American Numismatic Association in Colorado Springs , Colorado . The Siam set sold most recently for $ 8 @.@ 5 million . From his experience of many years as a coin dealer , Albanese believes that the eagle in that set is not the original , but another of the four 1804 Plain 4 eagles , purchased to replace one sold to a collector . 
 = Mellon Collie and the Infinite Sadness = 
 Mellon Collie and the Infinite Sadness is the third studio album by the American alternative rock band The Smashing Pumpkins , released on October 24 , 1995 on Virgin Records . Produced by frontman Billy Corgan with Flood and Alan Moulder , the 28 @-@ track album was released as a two @-@ disc CD and triple LP . The album features a wide array of styles , as well as greater musical input from bassist D 'arcy Wretzky and second guitarist James Iha . 
 Led by the single " Bullet with Butterfly Wings " , the record debuted at number one on the Billboard charts , the only such occurrence for the group with first week sales of 246 @,@ 500 units . The album spawned five more singles — " 1979 " , " Zero " , " Tonight , Tonight " , the promotional " Muzzle " , and " Thirty @-@ Three " — over the course of 1996 , and was certified diamond by the RIAA , equivalent to over 10 million units sold . Praised by critics for its ambition and scope , Mellon Collie and the Infinite Sadness earned the band seven Grammy Award nominations in 1997 , including Album of the Year and Record of the Year ( " 1979 " ) , as well as 9 MTV Music Video Awards nominations , 8 of which were for " Tonight , Tonight " , including " Video of the Year " . Not only did they all become hits on both mainstream rock and modern rock stations , but " Bullet with Butterfly Wings " , " 1979 " , " Tonight , Tonight " , and " Thirty @-@ Three " also became the band 's first Top 40 hits , crossing over to pop radio stations . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 After the 13 @-@ month tour in support of The Smashing Pumpkins ' second album Siamese Dream ( 1993 ) , Billy Corgan immediately began writing songs for the band 's next record . From the outset , the band intended the new record to be a double album , partly inspired by The Beatles ' eponymous album . Corgan said , " We almost had enough material to make Siamese Dream a double album . With this new album , I really liked the notion that we would create a wider scope in which to put other kinds of material we were writing . " Corgan felt that the band 's musical approach was running its course , and wanted the band to approach the album as if it were its last . Corgan described the album at the time to the music press as " The Wall for Generation X " , a comparison with Pink Floyd 's 1979 album , one of the highest selling and best known concept albums of all time . 
 The band decided to forgo working with Butch Vig , who had produced the group 's previous albums , and selected Flood and Alan Moulder as co @-@ producers . Corgan explained , " To be completely honest , I think it was a situation where we 'd become so close to Butch that it started to work to our disadvantage ... I just felt we had to force the situation , sonically , and take ourselves out of normal Pumpkin recording mode . I didn 't want to repeat past Pumpkin work . " 
 Flood immediately pushed the band to change its recording practices . Corgan later said , " Flood felt like the band he would see live wasn 't really captured on record " . In April 1995 , the band began recording in a rehearsal space , instead of entering the studio straight away . At these sessions , the band recorded rough rhythm tracks with Flood . Originally designed to create a rough draft for the record , the rehearsal space sessions ended up yielding much of the new album 's rhythm section parts . Flood also insisted the band set aside time each day devoted to jamming or songwriting , practices the band had never engaged in before during recording sessions . Corgan said , " Working like that kept the whole process very interesting — kept it from becoming a grind . " 
 Corgan sought to eliminate the tension that permeated the Siamese Dream recording sessions . Corgan said regarding the problems with recording Siamese Dream , " [ T ] o me , the biggest offender was the insidious amounts of time that everyone spends waiting for guitar parts to be overdubbed . There were literally weeks where no one had anything to do but sit and wait . " The band decided to counter idleness by using two recording rooms at the same time . This tactic allowed Corgan to work on vocals and song arrangements while recording was done in the other . During these sessions , Flood and Corgan would work in one room as Moulder , guitarist James Iha , and bassist D 'arcy Wretzky worked in a second . Iha and Wretzky had a much greater role in the recording of the album , unlike the prior albums where Corgan was rumored to have recorded all the bass and guitar parts himself . James Iha commented about the recording sessions , 
 The big change is that Billy is not being the big ' I do this — I do that ' . It 's much better . The band arranged a lot of songs for this record , and the song writing process was organic . The circumstances of the last record and the way that we worked was really bad . 
 Following the rehearsal space sessions , the band recorded overdubs at the Chicago Recording Company . Pro Tools was used for recording guitar overdubs as well as for post @-@ production electronic looping and sampling . Wretzky also recorded numerous backup vocal parts , but all were cut except the one recorded for " Beautiful " . When the recording sessions concluded , the band had 57 completed songs which were up for contention to be included on Mellon Collie . The album was originally going to have 32 songs , but this was cut back to 28 songs . Corgan jokingly stated in a 1995 interview with MTV News that the tracks were narrowed down through playing <unk> . 
 = = Music = = 
 The songs of Mellon Collie and the Infinite Sadness are intended to hang together conceptually , with the two halves of the album representing day and night . Despite this , Corgan has rejected the term concept album to describe it , and it was at the time described as more " loose " and " vague " than the band 's previous records . However , Billy Corgan has also said that the album is based on " the human condition of mortal sorrow " . Corgan aimed the album 's message at people aged 14 to 24 years , hoping " to sum up all the things I felt as a youth but was never able to voice articulately . " He summed up by stating , " I 'm waving goodbye to me in the rear view mirror , tying a knot around my youth and putting it under the bed . " 
 The sprawling nature of the album means that it utilizes several different diverse styles amongst the songs , contrasting what some critics felt was the " one dimensional flavor " of the previous two albums . A much wider variety of instrumentation is used , such as piano ( " Mellon Collie and the Infinite Sadness " ) , synthesizers and drum loops ( " 1979 " ) , a live orchestra ( " Tonight , Tonight " ) , and even salt shakers and scissors ( " Cupid de Locke " ) . 
 All guitars on the album were tuned down a half @-@ step in order to " make the music a little lower " , according to Corgan . On some songs , like " <unk> " , the first string was tuned down an additional whole step to C ♯ ( referred to by Corgan as " the ' grunge tuning ' " ) . There was a greater variety to the number of guitar overdubs utilized than on previous albums . Iha said , " [ I ] n the past , everything had to be overdubbed and layered — guitar overkill . That wasn 't really the train of thought this time , although we did that too . " " To Forgive " consists of only one live guitar take , while " Thru the Eyes of Ruby " contains approximately 70 guitar tracks . The various sections of " <unk> of the Vast Oceans " were recorded at various times , with different instruments and recording setups , and were digitally composited in Pro Tools . Corgan and Iha shared soloing duties ; Iha estimated that the guitar solo duties were divided " half and half " on the record . 
 Corgan has said that " For the solo in ' Fuck You ( An Ode to No One ) , ' I played until my fingers saw blood , You can 't play a weak guitar solo in such a propulsive song . It 's got to be attack @-@ style . " He explains this method by saying " ... I put on the headphones and stand one foot away from the amp . I turn the amp up so loud that I literally have to play harder than the feedback , because if I stop playing even for an instant , the whole thing explodes . " 
 All but two songs on the album were written by Corgan . The closing track from the first disc , " Take Me Down " , was written and sung by Iha , while the album 's final track , " Farewell and Goodnight " , features lead vocals by all four band members and , according to the BMI database , was written solely by Iha , despite being credited on the album liner notes as being written by both Iha and Corgan . Iha wrote additional songs during the making of the album , but they did not make the final cut . Corgan said in a 1995 Rolling Stone interview , " [ T ] here are some B sides that James did that are really good . They just don 't fit in the context of the album . And part of me feels bad . But over the seven years we 've been together , the least uptight part of the band has been the music . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Mellon Collie and the Infinite Sadness was released on October 24 , 1995 . The night before , the band played a release party show at the Riviera Theater in Chicago and took part in a live FM broadcast across the United States The following week , Mellon Collie and the Infinite Sadness debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 , an unusual feat for a double @-@ disc album that cost over US $ 20 . The album was certified diamond by the Recording Industry Association of America . Originally 5 @,@ 000 vinyl triple LP ( <unk> ) copies were pressed . The vinyl edition has two additional tracks ( " Tonite Reprise " & " Infinite Sadness " ) which are not included in CD and cassette releases . Later re @-@ pressing led up to 23 @,@ 000 pressed but unnumbered copies . In 2012 , a remastered <unk> vinyl edition was repressed . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The album received critical acclaim . Christopher John Farley of Time called the album " the group 's most ambitious and accomplished work yet " . Farley wrote , " One gets the feeling that the band [ ... ] charged ahead on gut instincts ; the sheer scope of the album ( 28 songs ) didn 't allow for second @-@ guessing or contrivance . " Time selected Mellon Collie and the Infinite Sadness as the best album of the year in its year @-@ end " Best of 1995 " list . Entertainment Weekly gave the album an A rating ; reviewer David Browne praised the group 's ambition and wrote , " Mellon Collie and the Infinite Sadness is more than just the work of a tortured , finicky pop obsessive . Corgan presents himself as one of the last true believers : someone for whom spewing out this much music results in some sort of high art for the ages . He doesn 't seem concerned with persistent alterna @-@ rock questions of ' selling out ' , and good for him : He 's aiming for something bigger and all @-@ conquering . " IGN gave the album a score of 9 @.@ 5 out of 10 and said , " As the band 's magnum opus it single @-@ handedly changed the face of Alternative Rock . That said , it 's not just music , but a work of art . " The Music Box gave it all five stars and said , " Indeed , for all its melodramatic self @-@ indulgence , Mellon Collie and the Infinite Sadness is one of the best double albums of new material to be released by anyone in a long time . " 
 Rolling Stone gave the album three out of five stars . Reviewer Jim DeRogatis praised the album as " one of the rare epic rock releases whose bulk is justified in the grooves " . The writer stated that the album 's main flaw was Corgan 's lyrics , describing the songwriter as " wallowing in his own misery and <unk> about everyone and everything not meeting his expectations . " DeRogatis contended that while Mellon Collie and the Infinite Sadness " may even match The Wall in its sonic accomplishments " , Corgan 's lyrics lacked in comparison . Mojo reviewer Ben Edmunds also praised the music while criticizing Corgan 's lyrics . Edmunds wrote , " [ Corgan 's ] lyrics appear to be the repository for the worst aspects of his most treasured influences . He writes with a heavy metal aptitude for wordplay and an inflated prog @-@ rock conviction of its worth , a deadening combination . But there 's a sliver of distance in his rage @-@ mongering now that comments as well as expresses . " In his Consumer Guide , Robert Christgau picked out one song from the album , " 1979 " , as a " choice cut " ( ) . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 The album spawned five singles . While Corgan considered issuing " <unk> " as the album 's first single , he told Chart it was passed over in favor of " Bullet with Butterfly Wings " because " ' Bullet 's one of those songs where , you know , it 's easy to sing along to and [ he affects a drawl ] ya gotta sell them records . " " Bullet with Butterfly Wings " was The Smashing Pumpkins ' first single to reach the Top 40 on the Billboard Hot 100 , peaking at number 22 . " 1979 " , the album 's second single , charted at number 12 , becoming the band 's highest @-@ charting American hit . The " Zero " single was released as an EP with six b @-@ sides . All three of these singles were certified gold by the RIAA . " Tonight , Tonight " and " Thirty @-@ Three " , the album 's final singles , reached number 36 and number 39 on the Billboard charts , respectively . While it was not commercially released as a single , the song " Muzzle " reached number eight on the Modern Rock Tracks chart and number ten on the Mainstream Rock Tracks chart . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Mellon Collie and the Infinite Sadness earned The Smashing Pumpkins nominations in seven categories at the 1997 Grammy Awards , the second @-@ highest number of nominations that year . The group was nominated for Album of the Year , Record of the Year ( " 1979 " ) , Best Alternative Music Performance , Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal ( " 1979 " ) , Best Hard Rock Performance with Vocal ( " Bullet with Butterfly Wings " ) , Best Pop Instrumental Performance ( " Mellon Collie and the Infinite Sadness " ) , and Best Music Video , Short Form ( " Tonight , Tonight " ) at the 1997 Grammy Awards . The band won a single award , for Best Hard Rock Performance with Vocal for " Bullet with Butterfly Wings " ; it was the group 's first . Mellon Collie and the Infinite Sadness also ranked at number 14 on the 1995 Village Voice Pazz & Jop critics ' poll , and 487 on Rolling Stone 's list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Mellon Collie and the Infinite Sadness was intended as a two @-@ record set . The CD and cassette versions of the album are divided into two discs , entitled Dawn to Dusk and Twilight to Starlight . The vinyl version , however , is divided into three records with six sides , entitled Dawn / Tea Time , Dusk / Twilight , and Midnight / Starlight . The vinyl release also features two bonus songs ( " Tonite Reprise " and " Infinite Sadness " ) , and a completely rearranged track order . In 2012 the album was remastered and re @-@ released as a 6 disc edition , with 3 bonus discs of music and a DVD and also on 4 Vinyl LPs which contained the regular CD track order instead of the original LP order . 
 All songs written by Billy Corgan , except where noted . 
 = = = Compact disc / cassette version / 2012 vinyl reissue = = = 
 = = = Original vinyl version = = = 
 = = = 2012 CD / DVD reissue = = = 
 As part of EMI Music 's extensive reissue campaign , a special edition of the album was released on December 4 , 2012 . The 5 @-@ CD disc set consists of 64 bonus tracks of previously unreleased material , demos and alternate versions of Mellon Collie era songs — including full versions of tracks notably featured as parts of the " <unk> Medley " from the Zero EP — as well as six new mixes of original album songs . 
 The package also includes a DVD consisting of footage from two live shows : Tracks 1 – 11 taken from the group 's concert of May 15 , 1996 at the Brixton Academy in London , England , originally filmed by MTV Europe , and tracks 12 – 15 from their show of April 7 , 1996 at the <unk> in Düsseldorf , Germany that was filmed by the German TV show Rockpalast . The bonus content and special features were curated from the band 's archives by Corgan , and have been remastered from the original master tapes by Bob Ludwig . 
 = = Chart positions and sales certifications = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The Smashing Pumpkins 
 Jimmy Chamberlin – drums , vocals on " Farewell and Goodnight " 
 Billy Corgan – lead vocals , lead and rhythm guitar , piano , mellotron , production , mixing , string arrangement on " Tonight , Tonight " , art direction and design 
 James Iha – lead and rhythm guitar ; backing vocals , mixing , and additional production on " Take Me Down " and " Farewell and Goodnight " 
 D 'arcy Wretzky – bass guitar , vocals on " Beautiful " and " Farewell and Goodnight " 
 Additional musicians 
 Chicago Symphony Orchestra – orchestra in " Tonight , Tonight " 
 Greg Leisz – pedal and lap steel guitar on " Take Me Down " 
 Technical staff 
 Roger Carpenter – technical assistance 
 John Craig – illustration 
 Flood – production , mixer 
 Andrea <unk> – photograph 
 Barry Goldberg – additional vocal recording , mixing assistance 
 Adam Green – technical assistance 
 Dave <unk> – string recording assistance 
 Tim " Gooch " <unk> – technical assistance 
 Guitar Dave <unk> – technical assistance 
 Jeff <unk> – technical assistance 
 Alan Moulder – production , mixer 
 Frank Olinsky – art direction and design 
 Claudine <unk> – recording assistance 
 Audrey Riley – string arrangement on " Tonight , Tonight " 
 Chris Shepard – recording 
 Russ Spice – technical assistance 
 Howie Weinberg – mastering 
 Bob Ludwig – mastering ( 2012 remaster ) 
 = <unk> defects in diamond = 
 Imperfections in the crystal lattice of diamond are common . Such crystallographic defects in diamond may be the result of lattice irregularities or extrinsic substitutional or interstitial impurities , introduced during or after the diamond growth . The defects affect the material properties of diamond and determine to which type a diamond is assigned ; the most dramatic effects are on the diamond color and electrical conductivity , as explained by the band theory . 
 The defects can be detected by different types of spectroscopy , including electron paramagnetic resonance ( EPR ) , luminescence induced by light ( photoluminescence , PL ) or electron beam ( <unk> , CL ) , and absorption of light in the infrared ( IR ) , visible and UV parts of the spectrum . Absorption spectrum is used not only to identify the defects , but also to estimate their concentration ; it can also distinguish natural from synthetic or enhanced diamonds . 
 = = Labeling of diamond centers = = 
 There is a tradition in diamond spectroscopy to label a defect @-@ induced spectrum by a numbered acronym ( e.g. GR1 ) . This tradition has been followed in general with some notable deviations , such as A , B and C centers . Many acronyms are confusing though : 
 Some symbols are too similar ( e.g. , 3H and H3 ) . 
 Accidentally , same labels were given to different centers detected by EPR and optical techniques ( e.g. , N3 EPR center and N3 optical center have no relation ) . 
 Whereas some acronyms are logical , such as N3 ( N for natural , i.e. observed in natural diamond ) or H3 ( H for heated , i.e. observed after irradiation and heating ) , many are not . In particular , there is no clear distinction between the meaning of labels GR ( general radiation ) , R ( radiation ) and TR ( type @-@ II radiation ) . 
 = = <unk> symmetry = = 
 The symmetry of defects in crystals is described by the point groups . They differ from the space groups describing the symmetry of crystals by absence of translations , and thus are much fewer in number . In diamond , only defects of the following symmetries have been observed thus far : tetrahedral ( <unk> ) , tetragonal ( <unk> ) , trigonal ( <unk> , <unk> ) , rhombic ( <unk> ) , monoclinic ( <unk> , <unk> , C2 ) and <unk> ( C1 or CS ) . 
 The defect symmetry allows predicting many optical properties . For example , one @-@ phonon ( infrared ) absorption in pure diamond lattice is forbidden because the lattice has an inversion center . However , introducing any defect ( even " very symmetrical " , such as N @-@ N substitutional pair ) breaks the crystal symmetry resulting in defect @-@ induced infrared absorption , which is the most common tool to measure the defect concentrations in diamond . 
 In synthetic diamond grown by the high @-@ pressure high @-@ temperature synthesis or chemical vapor deposition , defects with symmetry lower than tetrahedral align to the direction of the growth . Such alignment has been also been observed in gallium arsenide and thus is not unique to diamond . 
 = = Extrinsic defects = = 
 Various elemental analyses of diamond reveal a wide range of impurities . They mostly originate , however , from inclusions of foreign materials in diamond , which could be nanometer @-@ small and invisible in an optical microscope . Also , virtually any element can be hammered into diamond by ion implantation . More essential are elements which can be introduced into the diamond lattice as isolated atoms ( or small atomic clusters ) during the diamond growth . By 2008 , those elements are nitrogen , boron , hydrogen , silicon , phosphorus , nickel , cobalt and perhaps sulfur . Manganese and tungsten have been unambiguously detected in diamond , but they might originate from foreign inclusions . Detection of isolated iron in diamond has later been re @-@ interpreted in terms of micro @-@ particles of ruby produced during the diamond synthesis . Oxygen is believed to be a major impurity in diamond , but it has not been spectroscopically identified in diamond yet . Two electron paramagnetic resonance centers ( <unk> and N3 ) have been assigned to nitrogen – oxygen complexes . However , the assignment is indirect and the corresponding concentrations are rather low ( few parts per million ) . 
 = = = Nitrogen = = = 
 The most common impurity in diamond is nitrogen , which can comprise up to 1 % of a diamond by mass . Previously , all lattice defects in diamond were thought to be the result of structural anomalies ; later research revealed nitrogen to be present in most diamonds and in many different configurations . Most nitrogen enters the diamond lattice as a single atom ( i.e. nitrogen @-@ containing molecules dissociate before incorporation ) , however , molecular nitrogen incorporates into diamond as well . 
 Absorption of light and other material properties of diamond are highly dependent upon nitrogen content and aggregation state . Although all aggregate configurations cause absorption in the infrared , diamonds containing aggregated nitrogen are usually colorless , i.e. have little absorption in the visible spectrum . The four main nitrogen forms are as follows : 
 = = = = C @-@ nitrogen center = = = = 
 The C center corresponds to electrically neutral single substitutional nitrogen atoms in the diamond lattice . These are easily seen in electron paramagnetic resonance spectra ( in which they are confusingly called P1 centers ) . C centers impart a deep yellow to brown color ; these diamonds are classed as type Ib and are commonly known as " canary diamonds " , which are rare in gem form . Most synthetic diamonds produced by high @-@ pressure high @-@ temperature ( HPHT ) technique contain a high level of nitrogen in the C form ; nitrogen impurity originates from the atmosphere or from the graphite source . One nitrogen atom per 100 @,@ 000 carbon atoms will produce yellow color . Because the nitrogen atoms have five available electrons ( one more than the carbon atoms they replace ) , they act as " deep donors " ; that is , each substituting nitrogen has an extra electron to donate and forms a donor energy level within the band gap . Light with energy above ~ 2 @.@ 2 eV can excite the donor electrons into the conduction band , resulting in the yellow color . 
 The C center produces a characteristic infrared absorption spectrum with a sharp peak at 1344 cm − 1 and a broader feature at 1130 cm − 1 . Absorption at those peaks is routinely used to measure the concentration of single nitrogen . Another proposed way , using the UV absorption at ~ 260 nm , has later been discarded as unreliable . 
 <unk> defects in diamond ionize the fifth nitrogen electron in the C center converting it into C + center . The latter has a characteristic IR absorption spectrum with a sharp peak at 1332 cm − 1 and broader and weaker peaks at 1115 , 1046 and 950 cm − 1 . 
 = = = = A @-@ nitrogen center = = = = 
 The A center is probably the most common defect in natural diamonds . It consists of a neutral nearest @-@ neighbor pair of nitrogen atoms substituting for the carbon atoms . The A center produces UV absorption threshold at ~ 4 eV ( 310 nm , i.e. invisible to eye ) and thus causes no coloration . Diamond containing nitrogen predominantly in the A form as classed as type <unk> . 
 The A center is diamagnetic , but if ionized by UV light or deep acceptors , it produces an electron paramagnetic resonance spectrum <unk> , whose analysis unambiguously proves the N = N structure . 
 The A center shows an IR absorption spectrum with no sharp features , which is distinctly different from that of the C or B centers . Its strongest peak at 1282 cm − 1 is routinely used to estimate the nitrogen concentration in the A form . 
 = = = = B @-@ nitrogen center = = = = 
 There is a general consensus that B center ( sometimes called B1 ) consists of a carbon vacancy surrounded by four nitrogen atoms substituting for carbon atoms . This model is consistent with other experimental results , but there is no direct spectroscopic data corroborating it . Diamonds where most nitrogen forms B centers are rare and are classed as type <unk> ; most gem diamonds contain a mixture of A and B centers , together with N3 centers . 
 Similar to the A centers , B centers do not induce color , and no UV or visible absorption can be attributed to the B centers . Early assignment of the N9 absorption system to the B center have been disproven later . The B center has a characteristic IR absorption spectrum ( see the infrared absorption picture above ) with a sharp peak at 1332 cm − 1 and a broader feature at 1280 cm − 1 . The latter is routinely used to estimate the nitrogen concentration in the B form . 
 Note that many optical peaks in diamond accidentally have similar spectral positions , which causes much confusion among gemologists . <unk> use for defect identification the whole spectrum rather than one peak , and consider the history of the growth and processing of individual diamond . 
 = = = = N3 nitrogen center = = = = 
 The N3 center consists of three nitrogen atoms surrounding a vacancy . Its concentration is always just a fraction of the A and B centers . The N3 center is paramagnetic , so its structure is well justified from the analysis of the EPR spectrum P2 . This defect produces a characteristic absorption and luminescence line at 415 nm and thus does not induce color on its own . However , the N3 center is always accompanied by the N2 center , having an absorption line at 478 nm ( and no luminescence ) . As a result , diamonds rich in N3 / N2 centers are yellow in color . 
 = = = Boron = = = 
 Diamonds containing boron as a substitutional impurity are termed type IIb . Only one percent of natural diamonds are of this type , and most are blue to grey . Boron is an acceptor in diamond : boron atoms have one less available electron than the carbon atoms ; therefore , each boron atom substituting for a carbon atom creates an electron hole in the band gap that can accept an electron from the valence band . This allows red light absorption , and due to the small energy ( 0 @.@ 37 eV ) needed for the electron to leave the valence band , holes can be thermally released from the boron atoms to the valence band even at room temperatures . These holes can move in an electric field and render the diamond electrically conductive ( i.e. , a p @-@ type semiconductor ) . Very few boron atoms are required for this to happen — a typical ratio is one boron atom per 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 carbon atoms . 
 Boron @-@ doped diamonds transmit light down to ~ 250 nm and absorb some red and infrared light ( hence the blue color ) ; they may phosphoresce blue after exposure to shortwave ultraviolet light . Apart from optical absorption , boron acceptors have been detected by electron paramagnetic resonance . 
 = = = Phosphorus = = = 
 Phosphorus could be intentionally introduced into diamond grown by chemical vapor deposition ( CVD ) at concentrations up to ~ 0 @.@ 01 % . Phosphorus substitutes carbon in the diamond lattice . Similar to nitrogen , phosphorus has one more electron than carbon and thus acts as a donor ; however , the ionization energy of phosphorus ( 0 @.@ 6 eV ) is much smaller than that of nitrogen ( 1 @.@ 7 eV ) and is small enough for room @-@ temperature thermal ionization . This important property of phosphorus in diamond favors electronic applications , such as UV light emitting diodes ( LEDs , at 235 nm ) . 
 = = = Hydrogen = = = 
 Hydrogen is one of the most technological important impurities in semiconductors , including diamond . Hydrogen @-@ related defects are very different in natural diamond and in synthetic diamond films . Those films are produced by various chemical vapor deposition ( CVD ) techniques in an atmosphere rich in hydrogen ( typical hydrogen / carbon ratio > 100 ) , under strong bombardment of growing diamond by the plasma ions . As a result , CVD diamond is always rich in hydrogen and lattice vacancies . In polycrystalline films , much of the hydrogen may be located at the boundaries between diamond ' grains ' , or in non @-@ diamond carbon inclusions . Within the diamond lattice itself , hydrogen @-@ vacancy and hydrogen @-@ nitrogen @-@ vacancy complexes have been identified in negative charge states by electron paramagnetic resonance . In addition , numerous hydrogen @-@ related IR absorption peaks are documented . 
 It is experimentally demonstrated that hydrogen <unk> electrically active boron and phosphorus impurities . As a result of such passivation , shallow donor centers are presumably produced . 
 In natural diamonds , several hydrogen @-@ related IR absorption peaks are commonly observed ; the strongest ones are located at 1405 , <unk> and <unk> cm − 1 ( see IR absorption figure above ) . The microscopic structure of the corresponding defects is yet unknown and it is not even certain whether or not those defects originate in diamond or in foreign inclusions . Gray color in some diamonds from the Argyle mine in Australia is often associated with those hydrogen defects , but again , this assignment is yet unproven . 
 = = = Nickel and cobalt = = = 
 When diamonds are grown by the high @-@ pressure high @-@ temperature technique , nickel , cobalt or some other metals are usually added into the growth medium to facilitate catalytically the conversion of graphite into diamond . As a result , metallic inclusions are formed . Besides , isolated nickel and cobalt atoms incorporate into diamond lattice , as demonstrated through characteristic hyperfine structure in electron paramagnetic resonance , optical absorption and photoluminescence spectra , and the concentration of isolated nickel can reach 0 @.@ 01 % . This fact is by all means unusual considering the large difference in size between carbon and transition metal atoms and the superior rigidity of the diamond lattice . 
 Numerous Ni @-@ related defects have been detected by electron paramagnetic resonance , optical absorption and photoluminescence , both in synthetic and natural diamonds . Three major structures can be distinguished : substitutional Ni , nickel @-@ vacancy and nickel @-@ vacancy complex decorated by one or more substitutional nitrogen atoms . The " nickel @-@ vacancy " structure , also called " semi @-@ divacancy " is specific for most large impurities in diamond and silicon ( e.g. , tin in silicon ) . Its production mechanism is generally accepted as follows : large nickel atom incorporates <unk> , then expels a nearby carbon ( creating a neighboring vacancy ) , and shifts in @-@ between the two sites . 
 Although the physical and chemical properties of cobalt and nickel are rather similar , the concentrations of isolated cobalt in diamond are much smaller than those of nickel ( parts per billion range ) . Several defects related to isolated cobalt have been detected by electron paramagnetic resonance and photoluminescence , but their structure is yet unknown . 
 = = = Silicon = = = 
 Silicon is a common impurity in diamond films grown by chemical vapor deposition and it originates either from silicon substrate or from silica windows or walls of the CVD reactor . It was also observed in natural diamonds in dispersed form . Isolated silicon defects have been detected in diamond lattice through the sharp optical absorption peak at 738 nm and electron paramagnetic resonance . Similar to other large impurities , the major form of silicon in diamond has been identified with a Si @-@ vacancy complex ( semi @-@ divacancy site ) . This center is a deep donor having an ionization energy of 2 eV , and thus again is unsuitable for electronic applications . 
 Si @-@ vacancies constitute minor fraction of total silicon . It is believed ( though no proof exists ) that much silicon substitutes for carbon thus becoming invisible to most spectroscopic techniques because silicon and carbon atoms have the same configuration of the outer electronic shells . 
 = = = Germanium = = = 
 Germanium is normally absent in diamond , but it can be introduced during the growth or by subsequent ion implantation . Germanium in diamond can be detected optically via the germanium @-@ vacancy center , which has similar properties to those of the Si @-@ vacancy center . 
 = = = Sulfur = = = 
 Around the year 2000 , there was a wave of attempts to dope synthetic CVD diamond films by sulfur aiming at n @-@ type conductivity with low activation energy . Successful reports have been published , but then dismissed as the conductivity was rendered p @-@ type instead of n @-@ type and associated not with sulfur , but with residual boron , which is a highly efficient p @-@ type dopant in diamond . 
 So far ( 2009 ) , there is only one reliable evidence ( through hyperfine interaction structure in electron paramagnetic resonance ) for isolated sulfur defects in diamond . The corresponding center called W31 has been observed in natural type @-@ Ib diamonds in small concentrations ( parts per million ) . It was assigned to a sulfur @-@ vacancy complex – again , as in case of nickel and silicon , a semi @-@ divacancy site . 
 = = Intrinsic defects = = 
 The easiest way to produce intrinsic defects in diamond is by displacing carbon atoms through irradiation with high @-@ energy particles , such as alpha ( helium ) , beta ( electrons ) or gamma particles , protons , neutrons , ions , etc . The irradiation can occur in the laboratory or in the nature ( see Diamond enhancement – Irradiation ) ; it produces primary defects named <unk> defects ( carbon atoms knocked off their normal lattice sites to interstitial sites ) and remaining lattice vacancies . An important difference between the vacancies and interstitials in diamond is that whereas interstitials are mobile during the irradiation , even at liquid nitrogen temperatures , however vacancies start migrating only at temperatures ~ 700 ° C. 
 Vacancies and interstitials can also be produced in diamond by plastic deformation , though in much smaller concentrations . 
 = = = Isolated carbon interstitial = = = 
 Isolated interstitial has never been observed in diamond and is considered unstable . Its interaction with a regular carbon lattice atom produces a " split @-@ interstitial " , a defect where two carbon atoms share a lattice site and are covalently bonded with the carbon neighbors . This defect has been thoroughly characterized by electron paramagnetic resonance ( R2 center ) and optical absorption , and unlike most other defects in diamond , it does not produce photoluminescence . 
 = = = Interstitial complexes = = = 
 The isolated split @-@ interstitial moves through the diamond crystal during irradiation . When it meets other interstitials it aggregates into larger complexes of two and three split @-@ interstitials , identified by electron paramagnetic resonance ( R1 and O3 centers ) , optical absorption and photoluminescence . 
 = = = Vacancy @-@ interstitial complexes = = = 
 Most high @-@ energy particles , beside displacing carbon atom from the lattice site , also pass it enough surplus energy for a rapid migration through the lattice . However , when relatively gentle gamma irradiation is used , this extra energy is minimal . Thus the interstitials remain near the original vacancies and form vacancy @-@ interstitials pairs identified through optical absorption . 
 Vacancy @-@ di @-@ interstitial pairs have been also produced , though by electron irradiation and through a different mechanism : Individual interstitials migrate during the irradiation and aggregate to form di @-@ interstitials ; this process occurs preferentially near the lattice vacancies . 
 = = = Isolated vacancy = = = 
 Isolated vacancy is the most studied defect in diamond , both experimentally and theoretically . Its most important practical property is optical absorption , like in the color centers , which gives diamond green , or sometimes even green – blue color ( in pure diamond ) . The characteristic feature of this absorption is a series of sharp lines called GR1 @-@ 8 , where GR1 line at 741 nm is the most prominent and important . 
 The vacancy behaves as a deep electron donor / acceptor , whose electronic properties depend on the charge state . The energy level for the + / 0 states is at 0 @.@ 6 eV and for the 0 / - states is at 2 @.@ 5 eV above the valence band . 
 = = = <unk> complexes = = = 
 Upon annealing of pure diamond at ~ 700 ° C , vacancies migrate and form <unk> , characterized by optical absorption and electron paramagnetic resonance . Similar to single interstitials , <unk> do not produce photoluminescence . <unk> , in turn , anneal out at ~ 900 ° C creating <unk> chains detected by EPR and presumably <unk> rings . The latter should be invisible to most <unk> , and indeed , they have not been detected thus far . Annealing of vacancies changes diamond color from green to yellow @-@ brown . Similar mechanism ( vacancy aggregation ) is also believed to cause brown color of plastically deformed natural diamonds . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 <unk> are the most common structural defect in natural diamond . The two major types of dislocations are the glide set , in which bonds break between layers of atoms with different indices ( those not lying directly above each other ) and the shuffle set , in which the breaks occur between atoms of the same index . The dislocations produce dangling bonds which introduce energy levels into the band gap , enabling the absorption of light . Broadband blue photoluminescence has been reliably identified with dislocations by direct observation in an electron microscope , however , it was noted that not all dislocations are luminescent , and there is no correlation between the dislocation type and the parameters of the emission . 
 = = = Platelets = = = 
 Most natural diamonds contain extended planar defects in the < 100 > lattice planes , which are called platelets . Their size ranges from nanometers to many micrometers , and large ones are easily observed in an optical microscope via their luminescence . For a long time , platelets were tentatively associated with large nitrogen complexes — nitrogen sinks produced as a result of nitrogen aggregation at high temperatures of the diamond synthesis . However , direct measurement of nitrogen in the platelets by <unk> ( an analytical technique of electron microscopy ) revealed very little nitrogen . The currently accepted model of platelets is a large regular array of carbon interstitials . 
 Platelets produce sharp absorption peaks at 1359 – 1375 and 330 cm − 1 in IR absorption spectra ; remarkably , the position of the first peak depends on the platelet size . As with dislocations , a broad photoluminescence centered at ~ 1000 nm was associated with platelets by direct observation in an electron microscope . By studying this luminescence , it was deduced that platelets have a " bandgap " of ~ 1 @.@ 7 eV . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 <unk> are octahedral nanometer @-@ sized clusters present in many natural diamonds , as revealed by electron microscopy . Laboratory experiments demonstrated that annealing of type @-@ <unk> diamond at high temperatures and pressures ( > 2600 ° C ) results in break @-@ up of the platelets and formation of dislocation loops and voidites , i.e. that voidites are a result of thermal degradation of platelets . Contrary to platelets , voidites do contain much nitrogen , in the molecular form . 
 = = Interaction between intrinsic and extrinsic defects = = 
 Extrinsic and intrinsic defects can interact producing new defect complexes . Such interaction usually occurs if a diamond containing extrinsic defects ( impurities ) is either plastically deformed or is irradiated and annealed . 
 Most important is the interaction of vacancies and interstitials with nitrogen . Carbon interstitials react with substitutional nitrogen producing a bond @-@ centered nitrogen interstitial showing strong IR absorption at 1450 cm − 1 . Vacancies are efficiently trapped by the A , B and C nitrogen centers . The trapping rate is the highest for the C centers , 8 times lower for the A centers and 30 times lower for the B centers . The C center ( single nitrogen ) by trapping a vacancy forms the famous nitrogen @-@ vacancy center , which can be neutral or negatively charged ; the negatively charged state has potential applications in quantum computing . A and B centers upon trapping a vacancy create corresponding 2N @-@ V ( H3 and H2 centers , where H2 is simply a negatively charged H3 center ) and the neutral 4N @-@ <unk> ( H4 center ) . The H2 , H3 and H4 centers are important because they are present in many natural diamonds and their optical absorption can be strong enough to alter the diamond color ( H3 or H4 – yellow , H2 – green ) . 
 Boron interacts with carbon interstitials forming a neutral boron – interstitial complex with a sharp optical absorption at 0 @.@ 552 eV ( 2250 nm ) . No evidence is known so far ( 2009 ) for complexes of boron and vacancy . 
 In contrast , silicon does react with vacancies , creating the described above optical absorption at 738 nm . The assumed mechanism is trapping of migrating vacancy by substitutional silicon resulting in the Si @-@ V ( semi @-@ divacancy ) configuration . 
 A similar mechanism is expected for nickel , for which both substitutional and semi @-@ divacancy configurations are reliably identified ( see subsection " nickel and cobalt " above ) . In an unpublished study , diamonds rich in substitutional nickel were electron irradiated and annealed , with following careful optical measurements performed after each annealing step , but no evidence for creation or enhancement of Ni @-@ vacancy centers was obtained . 
 = 1894 – 95 Small Heath F.C. season = 
 The 1894 – 95 season was the 14th season of competitive association football and third season in the Football League played by Small Heath F.C. , an English football club based in Birmingham . In 1893 – 94 , Small Heath finished in second place in the divisional championship and gained promotion by defeating Darwen 3 – 1 in a test match . The club had struggled financially during the season , and there were suggestions that it might have disbanded had promotion not been secured . In their first season in the First Division , they finished in 12th place in the 16 @-@ team division , thus avoiding the possibility of relegation via the test matches . 
 Small Heath entered the 1894 – 95 FA Cup at the first round proper , and for the second consecutive year lost in that round to the eventual losing finalists , who this season were West Bromwich Albion . In local competitions , they were eliminated in the semi @-@ final of the Birmingham Senior Cup , also by West Bromwich Albion , and lost to Aston Villa in the final of the Mayor of Birmingham 's Charity Cup . The committee opted not to compete in the United Counties League , a supplementary competition . 
 Twenty @-@ one different players represented the club in nationally organised competitive matches during the season and there were nine different goalscorers . Two players , Bill Purves and – for the third consecutive season – Billy Ollis , appeared in every League match , and none of the first @-@ choice eleven missed more than four League matches . The top scorer , for the second year running , was inside @-@ forward Frank Mobley with 13 goals . The match against Sunderland attracted a crowd estimated at 15 @,@ 000 , around double the highest attendance from previous years . 
 = = Background = = 
 Having won the inaugural Second Division title in 1892 – 93 but missed out on promotion via the test match system , in 1893 – 94 they finished second in the division and were promoted to the First Division by defeating Darwen 3 – 1 in the test match . The club had been in financial difficulty during the season , and the Birmingham Daily Post speculated that failure in the test match " would in all probability have meant the disbanding of the club " . The accounts showed income of £ 1 @,@ 816 and expenditure of £ 2 @,@ 039 , a deficit of £ 222 on the year . Nevertheless , in preparation for the new season , the club began work on a grandstand and relaid the pitch . 
 All the regular first @-@ choice players signed on again for the new campaign , apart from goalkeeper George Hollis . Of the less regular team members , Bernard Pumfrey left for Midland League club Gainsborough Trinity , William Reynolds and Gilbert Smith were released to join Birmingham & District League club Berwick Rangers , and Chris Charsley retired from League football to concentrate on his police career . Small Heath signed the former Sunderland full back Jack Oliver , whom they had failed to recruit earlier in the season , and forward Charlie Letherbarrow from Walsall , but those were the only major signings . The squad was boosted by players from local football , who included Alec Leake , Bill Lewis and a young Billy Pratt . Alfred Jones continued as secretary @-@ manager , and Caesar Jenkyns retained the captaincy . There were no changes to the team 's kit of light blue shirts with navy collar trim , cuffs and pocket , white knickerbockers and navy socks . 
 = = Review = = 
 = = = September – October = = = 
 Small Heath 's First Division campaign began on Saturday 1 September with a visit to local rivals and League champions Aston Villa , which turned out rather closer than predicted . Jack Hallam opened the scoring from a Tommy Hands cross with the first League goal of the season , " for the match was started punctually , and it would have been a sheer impossibility to score faster than the Small Heath player did . " Villa equalised some 20 minutes later , took the lead immediately afterwards , and retained that lead to the end . The Birmingham Daily Post picked out Hallam and Caesar Jenkyns for praise , was disappointed by Fred Wheldon , " usually the bright particular star of the front rank " , and suggested that Jack Oliver would be a success " when he has lost a little superfluous flesh " . 
 On the Sunday , Jenkyns was involved in an incident after he and an acquaintance staked a quart of beer on a bicycle race . Solihull Police Court later heard how , after Jenkyns lost the race , he knocked his opponent off his bicycle , hit another man , and returned to the public house where he struck a third man in the face . He was convicted on three counts of assault , and fined 20s plus costs on each count . In the following day 's visit to Everton , Small Heath had Oliver and Charles Partridge to thank for the score being restricted to 5 – 0 . 
 The new grandstand was open for the first home match of the season , against Bolton Wanderers , and those spectators not distracted by the visit to the city of the Duke and Duchess of York ( the future George V and Queen Mary ) saw a much improved performance from the forwards that produced a 2 – 1 win with goals from Frank Mobley and Wheldon . The visit to Wolverhampton Wanderers ended in defeat by the same score . Oliver conceded a penalty kick for a foul on Charlie Reynolds , Wheldon equalised before half @-@ time , and Wolverhampton regained the lead straight after the interval . 
 " The surprise of Saturday 's football " came when a late goal from Hands was enough to beat Preston North End , though there was a suggestion in the press that the team would do well to moderate their tactics , which " were not of the gentlest " . For Preston 's visit to Coventry Road the following weekend , the club applied for a licence to sell alcohol within the ground , as it was the only First Division club without such a licence . The application was refused , the licensing magistrate " remarking that if the public wanted drink they could go outside to get it . " 
 The Leicester Chronicle suspected that " it will be a long time , perhaps , before we have another match so keenly contested " . The visitors scored early on , but Small Heath 's shoot @-@ on @-@ sight policy produced goals for Hands , after a clash with Mobley left Preston goalkeeper James Trainer on the floor , and for Wheldon , before Edward <unk> , deputising in goal for the injured Partridge , let in a soft goal just before half @-@ time . The second half brought " more finesse and less vigour " from the home side , but Preston grew stronger , took the lead , and Small Heath " appeared to be done with " . Then Trainer could only turn Mobley 's lob in off the post , the same player gave his side the lead , but " before the Small Heath contingent had finished congratulating one another " , " North End charging down the field finely from the centre kick scored again before the whistle sounded " to make the final score 4 – 4 . Match receipts totalled nearly £ 250 , a ground record . 
 After Wolverhampton Wanderers took a three @-@ goal lead at Coventry Road , the Daily Post suggested that Caesar Jenkyns must have spent the interval " exhorting his men to make a famous effort " , for " they responded nobly to his appeal " . Adopting a strategy of all @-@ out attack , running the ball upfield at full speed before crossing to as many of the forwards as could converge on goal , they scored four times in 25 minutes to demoralise the opposition and win the match . The quality of Hands ' movement and crosses was singled out for particular praise . Small Heath then played West Bromwich Albion in a benefit match for Fred Wheldon , who had first played for the club on trial in 1890 , and since signing , before the 1890 – 91 season , had not missed a game in League or FA Cup . Hands and triallist goalkeeper Charlie Williams of Swindon Town were injured during the game , and unfortunately for the beneficiary , only 2 @,@ 000 spectators turned up . 
 A creditable performance in a losing cause at Burnley , marred only by the forwards ' lack of composure in front of goal , was followed by the visit of Aston Villa . Bob Gordon scored early , but thereafter was marked out of the game by Jenkyns . Villa had the better of the first half but Wheldon tied the scores from a penalty kick just before half @-@ time ; just after , the home side took the lead with " a determined and characteristic rush " , but Dennis Hodgetts equalised , again from a penalty . The defences , Partridge and Jenkyns for Small Heath and the Villa backs in particular , had the best of the remaining time , and the match was drawn . After only four games , gate receipts , including the £ 450 paid by that day 's 14 @,@ 600 spectators , already amounted to half that of the preceding season . Small Heath finished October with a 2 – 2 draw on a waterlogged pitch at Stoke which left them in ninth place in the League . 
 = = = November – December = = = 
 Three goals behind in the first 20 minutes , Small Heath had fought back to level terms when a powerful shot from Everton 's Alex Latta was given as a goal , despite having gone well wide , the referee believing it had passed through a hole in the net . William McGregor , former president of the League , suggested that it " was the worst decision he had seen since the establishment of the goal @-@ nets " , and Latta himself agreed that the ball had gone wide . The crowd were unimpressed – " ironical shouts of ' Goal ' were the reception of any shots by Everton , of good or bad quality , that followed " – until with ten minutes left , Jenkyns tied the scores with a header from a free kick . While confirming that the result had to stand , the League appointed a committee to look into the circumstances of the phantom goal , and issued an instruction to referees to " inspect and observe the condition " of <unk> before each match in the future . 
 In contrast , Small Heath put on " a very indifferent display " in losing 4 – 1 at West Bromwich Albion . They scored twice , very much against the run of play , to come back from 2 – 0 down to beat Stoke 4 – 2 , and their good fortune continued at Bolton Wanderers . The home goalscorer , Alex Paton , left the field injured before half @-@ time , goalkeeper John Willie Sutcliffe was insistent that Jack Hallam 's equaliser had been punched into the goal – Hallam was equally insistent that it had not – and after Wheldon scored Small Heath 's winner , the referee ended the game a few minutes early . Bolton applied to the League for the match to be replayed because of the short time – the referee admitted to having ended the game 2 ½ minutes early , though not the 5 alleged by Bolton – but the result stood . 
 Unusually , Small Heath led at half @-@ time at home to Sheffield United . Charlie Letherbarrow , in only his second appearance for the club , scored after ten minutes and again approaching the interval to regain the lead . Between the two legitimate scores , he hit a swerving shot which looped up off the chest of goalkeeper William Foulke and into the net , but the referee judged that the ball had been played in from behind the goal @-@ line . In the second half , Wheldon converted a penalty kick when Foulke pushed Hallam out of the way as he attempted to reach a cross from Tommy Hands , and Letherbarrow completed his hat @-@ trick as Small Heath won 4 – 1 . Jack Oliver received a good reception when he returned to his former club – Small Heath were introduced as " Oliver 's team " – but Sunderland took no pity , winning 7 – 1 . At Liverpool , an exciting game produced a 3 – 1 defeat . The three home forwards worked as one , putting extra pressure on the centre of the visiting midfield , and the defence was unable to hold them out . The game was rough at times , Liverpool 's Joe McQue attracting particular attention because of an incident in the corresponding match the previous season when Caesar Jenkyns was sent off for his violent reaction to McQue kicking Frank Mobley in the abdomen . 
 Playing a close @-@ passing game that made them better able to cope with the high winds and blizzards that had caused the postponement of several League matches , Nottingham Forest earned themselves a Christmas bonus of 10s a man for inflicting Small Heath 's first home defeat of the season . Boxing Day produced a 2 – 0 defeat to a Sheffield Wednesday team playing a better all @-@ round game , and the next day , Small Heath beat a touring Scottish Borderers side 11 – 1 . Injury deprived Small Heath of four regular first @-@ team players for the last game of the year , at home to Liverpool , and both Tilson Pritchard and Ernie Moore made their debuts at full @-@ back . Jenkyns moved back to play behind the other half @-@ backs to protect the understandably nervous reserves , and once the nerves wore off , Pritchard in particular " could scarcely be improved upon . " Mobley opened the scoring in the first half , and with the wind behind them in the second half , Small Heath won 3 – 0 to go into the new year in 10th place in the League . 
 = = = January – February = = = 
 On a hard pitch in very cold weather , Small Heath had already conceded twice at Blackburn Rovers before Billy Ollis was injured midway through the first half and played no further part . The visitors put up a fight , but the numerical <unk> was too much for them and the final score of 9 – 1 remains the club 's joint @-@ record defeat . With no competitive fixture scheduled for the next two weeks , the club undertook a tour . Their opening match , in Plymouth , was the first visit of a professional club to the south @-@ west of England . The Home Park club had ambitions to bring professional league football to the region , and in front of a crowd of 4 @,@ 000 their team performed well before conceding three second @-@ half goals . Small Heath 's tour ended with a 2 – 1 defeat at Manchester City , and they returned to a celebratory dinner in honour of the club 's promotion to the First Division . The chairman presented medals to the players , congratulated them on their showing thus far , and proposed a toast to their health , in the hope that a full @-@ strength team might be available by the next League match in ten days time . 
 In a " remarkable encounter " , Burton Swifts led 3 – 2 at half @-@ time in the Birmingham Senior Cup first round . Their second goal was something of a freak , as an errant clearance by Purves was met on the volley and returned into the net by Davie <unk> . Swifts took a two @-@ goal lead for a third time before Small Heath drew level , after which they " pressed hotly , but were kept out until twenty seconds from the finish , and when extra time seemed inevitable , Walton headed the ball through amidst great cheering " and the referee blew the final whistle . 
 A visit to the Brine Baths at Droitwich Spa failed to help the players adjust to Nottingham Forest 's pitch , which had been flooded when the River Trent burst its banks a few days before . They conceded two early goals , but " kept up a strong pressure " thereafter , and the Birmingham Daily Post suggested that " the forwards played magnificently , and had the half @-@ backs supported them a little more efficiently they might have broken down even the stalwart defence " of the home club . The Nottinghamshire Guardian had predicted that Forest " should have but little difficulty in disposing of Small Heath " , but later admitted that the latter " gave the Forest a far better game than had generally been anticipated . " 
 February opened with the FA Cup tie at home to West Bromwich Albion . Albion scored first , charging both ball and goalkeeper into the net , and doubled their lead after a misunderstanding between Oliver and Jenkyns . Half an hour into the game , Wheldon made a " characteristic " dribble , his shot was parried and Walton scored from the rebound . The pitch was very muddy , but the Small Heath forwards persisted with a close @-@ passing game when " a kick and a rush would have served better " , and although " the Birmingham enthusiasts nearly shouted themselves hoarse in encouraging the Heathens " , there were no more goals . A collection was taken at the match for the families of the 77 miners killed in flooding at the <unk> Colliery , at Audley , Staffordshire . 
 Joe Fountain made his debut against Sunderland as a late replacement for Wheldon , whose sister had died on the morning of the match . On a slippery pitch " thickly strewn with chaff and <unk> " , Small Heath fell a goal behind in a first half dominated by the defences of both teams . The special training undertaken by the home side in preparation for the match took effect , as " in the closing stages they looked winners all over " , and Sunderland had goalkeeper Ned Doig to thank for restricting the scoring to just Tommy Hands ' equaliser . The attendance of 15 @,@ 000 was nearly double the highest recorded in previous seasons . 
 Both clubs having been eliminated from the FA Cup , Small Heath arranged a friendly with Notts County , refereed by the Test cricketer and former England international footballer Billy Gunn , which gave them an opportunity to try out reserve players Jack Jones and Alec Leake . On a hard , snow @-@ covered pitch , Billy Walton scored all three goals in a 3 – 3 draw , but the attendance of under a thousand , though understandable because of the weather conditions , was disappointing . Jones made his competitive debut , standing in for the injured Hallam , as Small Heath again struggled in muddy conditions and , for the fourth time this season , lost to West Bromwich Albion . 
 Reserve Tom Watson replaced Partridge in goal and Hallam returned to the forward line for the second round of the Birmingham Cup , at home to Wolverhampton Wanderers . Wheldon scored with two minutes left to take the lead , but the Wanderers still had time to tie the scores at 3 – 3 . After consulting both captains , the referee ordered half @-@ an @-@ hour 's extra time , but Wanderers , whose players had already returned to the dressing @-@ rooms , refused to play , so Jenkyns claimed the game for Small Heath . 
 = = = March – April = = = 
 After seven defeats in the last nine League matches , Small Heath did little in the draw with Blackburn Rovers to allay the prospect of the relegation test matches . Numerous chances were wasted . According to the Birmingham Daily Post , " not one of the forwards seemed capable of administering a sharp kick " , and " have themselves to blame for not securing a victory " . With five matches remaining , they were in 11th position in the League , but only two points clear of the test match zone . 
 On a lighter note , the annual theatrical sports , hosted in conjunction with the Prince of Wales Theatre , featured a fancy @-@ dress procession from the city centre to the Coventry Road ground for athletic events including sprint and 440 @-@ yard ( 400 m ) races for the footballers ( won by Caesar Jenkyns and Teddy Jolly respectively ) , a skipping race for the ladies of the theatre , sack race ( won by Harry Lupino ) and egg @-@ and @-@ spoon race open to all , and a handicap race for the members of the orchestra – the handicap being that they had to carry their instruments . The entertainment finished with a football match between Small Heath F.C. and a theatre XI , refereed by music hall artiste Vesta Tilley . Despite the cold wind and intermittent snow , the event attracted 8 @,@ 000 spectators and raised £ 100 for each of three local hospitals . 
 Small Heath withdrew their claim to the Birmingham Cup match , and the Birmingham Association ordered a replay , again at Coventry Road . This time round , Small Heath held on to their 3 – 2 lead . The League match at home to Sheffield Wednesday was one of several victims of the weather . The referee had initially passed the ground fit for play , but continued heavy rain turned the pitch into a quagmire and forced a late postponement . Derby County took what the local newspaper described as " the last chance the County had of escaping the test matches " , scoring three times in the first 15 minutes as they beat Small Heath by five goals to three . 
 Caesar Jenkyns , who " has been playing so well with Small Heath this season that his selection as centre half was a foregone conclusion " , " proved himself clever in tackling the English forwards and often getting the ball from them " , as Wales drew with England at Queen 's Club . In the semi @-@ final of the Birmingham Cup , a weakened Small Heath team lost to West Bromwich Albion in a rough game . Albion 's Tom Hutchinson was accompanied off the field by a policeman when sent off for injuring Charles Partridge , and during extra time , Charlie Perry was carried off with a leg injury . 
 The players went to Malvern for special training before the home game with Burnley . Joe Fountain was an " excellent " stand @-@ in for the injured Tommy Hands at outside left and Jenkyns was " a tower of strength " as Wheldon scored the only goal of a scrappy game to bring Small Heath 's points total to 22 with three matches left . The Daily Post predicted that 24 would be enough to avoid the test matches . On Easter Monday , Hands returned to the team for the last home League match of the season , a goalless draw with Sheffield Wednesday in which both teams had numerous chances to score . 
 At Derby , County took the lead after 17 minutes when an attempted clearance by Jenkyns was turned into his own net , and increased it to 4 – 0 in the second half before Frank Mobley broke away to score a late consolation . As the players were leaving the field , they were verbally abused by a section of the crowd , who believed the play had been unnecessarily rough . Jenkyns , who appeared to be singled out for particular abuse , grabbed one of the spectators by the throat . Other players separated the pair , and the police became involved . After an investigation , the club committee decided to suspend Jenkyns for the rest of the season , and release him thereafter . The Dart suggested that " the supporters of this club praise the executive for their maintenance of discipline and decorum " . Jack Oliver took over the captaincy and Teddy Jolly played at centre @-@ half for the Birmingham Charity Cup semi @-@ final , in which Small Heath finally beat West Bromwich Albion at the sixth attempt . 
 In their last game of the League season , away to Sheffield United , Small Heath scored first when Foulkes ' attempted clearance rebounded off his teammate Walter Hill into the net , and Mobley extended the lead after a break down the left by Hands . Although United came close to scoring from a second @-@ half scrimmage when the ball appeared to cross the line , Small Heath held on to ensure their First Division survival with an unexpected victory . 
 After overturning a two @-@ goal deficit to beat Woolwich Arsenal 4 – 3 in a friendly at Plumstead , Small Heath took on Aston Villa in their last match of the season , the final of the Birmingham Charity Cup . Unfortunately for the charities , the weather was poor and the attendance low , but those spectators present saw an exciting game . Wheldon scored first with a fierce shot that entered the net off the goalkeeper and the underside of the bar , then Bob <unk> equalised from a free kick and Charlie <unk> outpaced Oliver and his parried shot was forced over the line . Mobley tied the scores with a long shot , but in the second half with the wind behind them , Villa scored three times to Jack Hallam 's one to take the match 5 – 3 . 
 = = Summary and aftermath = = 
 Small Heath conceded more goals than any other team in the division , but finished 12th of 16 , thus avoiding the risk of relegation via the test matches . Despite the misgivings of the Daily Post that " it cannot be expected that eleven or twelve men will stand the strain of a season 's work amongst the first division clubs " , no member of the first @-@ choice team missed more than four League matches . Bill Purves and Billy Ollis were ever @-@ present , Ollis for the third season running , and Fred Wheldon missed a match for the first time in five years . Ten other men appeared at least once . Frank Mobley was leading scorer , with 13 goals , followed by Wheldon with 11 ; no other player reached double figures . 
 Apart from Caesar Jenkyns , who signed for Woolwich Arsenal where he was appointed captain , all the regular first @-@ team players remained with the club . Goalkeeper Joe Fall signed from Newton Heath for a fee reported as £ 20 , and defender Harry Haynes joined from Wolverhampton Wanderers . The Dart thought that Jenkyns would be missed " a great deal more than some of [ the ] supporters imagine " , and that apart from Fall , who was expected to be " a big improvement " on Partridge , the 1895 – 96 team would be noticeably weaker than that of the season just ended . 
 = = Squad statistics = = 
