 This table includes appearances and goals in nationally organised competitions – the Football League and FA Cup – only . For a description of the playing positions , see Formation ( association football ) # 2 – 3 – 5 ( Pyramid ) . 
 = = Match details = = 
 For consistency , attendances and goalscorers ' names in the League and FA Cup match details tables are sourced from Matthews ' Complete Record . Information in contemporary newspaper reports could , and often did , differ . League positions are sourced from Statto . 
 = = = Football League First Division = = = 
 = = = FA Cup = = = 
 = = = Birmingham Senior Cup = = = 
 = = = Mayor of Birmingham 's Charity Cup = = = 
 = = = Other matches = = = 
 = Richard Garnons Williams = 
 Not to be confused with the rugby union and rugby league footballer of the 1940s and ' 50s Dickie Williams 
 Not to be confused with the Australian rugby league footballer Richard Williams ( rugby league ) 
 Colonel Richard Davies Garnons Williams ( 15 June 1856 – 27 September 1915 ) was a British Army officer and Welsh rugby union player who represented Wales , Brecon and Newport . He played in the first Wales international rugby union match in 1881 . 
 Garnons Williams became an officer in the British Army in 1876 , and retired from regular service in 1892 , though he continued to serve in a voluntary capacity until 1906 . Already aged 58 at the outbreak of the First World War , he rejoined the army and was killed in action in 1915 . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Richard Garnons Williams was born on 15 June 1856 in <unk> , Radnorshire , the second child of the Reverend Garnons Williams of <unk> , Powys , and his wife Catherine Frances , the daughter of Fenton Hort , of Leopardstown , Dublin , and sister of Fenton John Anthony Hort . Garnons Williams was educated at Magdalen College School , Oxford before being prepared for University by private tuition in Wimbledon , Surrey . He then went to Trinity College , Cambridge , in October 1874 . 
 His siblings were Reverend Arthur , Richard Davies , Captain Aylmer Herbert , Gerald , Katharine Frances Helena , Annabella Mary , Hugh , who died an infant , Mark Penry Fenton , and Mary Elizabeth . Aylmer Herbert joined the Royal Navy in 1871 and , after receiving his commission in 1880 , served until his retirement in 1902 , having reached the rank of captain . He then took command of the training ship HMS Cornwall until 1904 when he was appointed to command the Lancashire Navy League Sea Training Home at <unk> . He died on 8 February 1916 aged 58 . Gerald was married in April 1892 to Minnie Lilian Court , the youngest daughter of Major Henry Court of <unk> , Buckinghamshire . Mark Penry was Fleet Surgeon aboard HMS Hampshire and died when his vessel was wrecked in 1916 . 
 Richard Garnons Williams married Alice Jessie Bircham on 8 January 1885 . They had a daughter , Barbara , who married Captain Hume Buckley Roderick of the Welsh Guards on 9 November 1916 . Her husband was killed in action on the Western Front in 1917 . She was herself serving in France at the time . 
 = = Rugby = = 
 After going up to Trinity College , Garnons Williams represented Cambridge at rugby , but did not win a Blue . He played three matches for Newport RFC in 1880 , after he had joined the army : against Manchester Rangers ( 2 October ) , Gloucester ( 4 December ) , and Cardiff ( 18 December ) . In 1881 he was selected to represent Wales in its first ever match , against England on 19 February at Blackheath . The challenge to England came from Richard Mullock of Newport , who was not an official of the South Wales Football Union , but wanted to bring Wales up to the same level as the other home nations , rather than settle for playing against English and Irish provincial teams . England , for its part , had recently beaten Ireland by two tries and two goals to none , and the previous season had become the first winners of the Calcutta Cup by beating Scotland by three tries and two goals to one goal . The date offered to Mullock by the English Rugby Football Union ( RFU ) , 19 February , coincided with a match for the South Wales Cup between Llanelli and cup holders Swansea , thereby limiting Mullock 's selection options . England won by eight goals to nil . It was Garnons Williams ' only appearance for Wales . 
 International appearance 
 = = Military career = = 
 Deciding to follow a military career Garnons Williams was accepted into the Royal Military College Sandhurst , and is also recorded as representing the Sandhurst rugby team . He completed his officer training in 1876 , and was commissioned as a sub @-@ lieutenant on 26 February . He was posted to the 38th Regiment of Foot , promoted lieutenant on 17 January 1877 , and with his army rank ( but not regimental seniority ) backdated to his original commission as sub @-@ lieutenant , and a month later , on 17 February 1877 , transferred to the 7th Regiment of Foot . 
 By February 1885 he had been promoted to captain , and his unit had been renamed the Royal Fusiliers ( City of London Regiment ) . On 10 January 1887 he was appointed adjutant of the 4th Battalion of the regiment , the Militia unit of the regiment . A regular officer was normally given this post in Militia units to organise training and generally maintain standards . His posting lasted the usual 5 years . He then retired from the regular army on 4 May 1892 . On 8 August 1894 he was commissioned major in the 1st ( Brecknockshire ) Volunteer Battalion , South Wales Borderers , and on 1 November 1895 was appointed Brigade Major for the South Wales Brigade of the Volunteer Force . On 12 July 1899 he was granted the honorary rank of lieutenant colonel . He resigned his Volunteer commission on 26 May 1906 , retaining his rank and with permission to continue wearing his uniform . 
 = = = First World War = = = 
 He rejoined the British Army shortly after the outbreak of World War I and was posted to his original regiment , joining the 12th ( Service ) Battalion of the Royal Fusiliers as a major on 26 September 1914 . He was promoted temporary lieutenant colonel on 3 October 1914 , and transferred back to the South Wales Borderers to command the Brecknockshire Battalion . He was later posted back to 12th Royal Fusiliers , and , according to official sources , was killed on 25 September 1915 while leading his battalion at the Battle of Loos . He is commemorated on the Loos Memorial to the Missing . At 59 years of age , he was the eldest of the 13 Wales international players to be killed during the war . 
 A soldier under the command of Colonel Garnons Williams wrote an account of his commanding officer 's death , which puts the date of his death as 27 September . Col Garnons Williams was in temporary command of the 12th Royal Fusiliers when on 25 September he led his battalion in an attack on German trenches . However , the flanks were exposed and on 27 September , Garnons Williams gave the order to retreat . He was at that moment shot in the head from a house nearby . The soldier who gave the account said : " I was very sorry for him , as we could not have had a better , braver officer . He was with us all the time in the front trench , and looked after us as well as he could ; no man could have done better . Nobody could get back to him . " The following evening , the battalion was relieved , Garnons Williams being declared officially wounded and missing in action , unofficially reported killed . 
 = Helen Mayo = 
 Helen Mary Mayo , OBE ( 1 October 1878 – 13 November 1967 ) was an Australian medical doctor and medical educator , born and raised in Adelaide . In 1896 , she enrolled at the University of Adelaide , where she studied medicine . After graduating , Mayo spent two years working in infant health in England , Ireland and India . She returned to Adelaide in 1906 , starting a private practice and taking up positions at the Adelaide Children 's Hospital and Adelaide Hospital . In 1909 , she co @-@ founded the School for Mothers , where mothers could receive advice on infant health . This organisation , which became the Mothers ' and Babies ' Health Association in 1927 , eventually established branches across South Australia and incorporated a training school for maternal nurses . In 1914 , after unsuccessfully campaigning for the Children 's Hospital to treat infants , Mayo co @-@ founded the Mareeba Hospital for infants . 
 In addition to her medical achievements , Mayo participated in a number of other organisations . She was heavily involved in the University of Adelaide , serving on the university council from 1914 to 1960 ( the first woman in Australia to be elected to such a position ) and establishing a women 's club and boarding college there . She was also the founder of the Adelaide Lyceum Club , an organisation for professional women . Mayo died on 13 November 1967 , with the Medical Journal of Australia attributing the success of South Australia 's infant welfare system to her efforts . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Helen Mary Mayo was born in Adelaide , Australia on 1 October 1878 . She was the eldest of the seven children of George Gibbes Mayo , a civil engineer , and Henrietta Mary Mayo , née Donaldson , and granddaughter of George Mayo , a prominent Adelaide doctor . Her formal education commenced at the age of 10 , when she began receiving regular lessons with a tutor . At the age of 16 , she was enrolled in the Advanced School for Girls on Grote Street ( the forerunner of the Adelaide High School ) , from which she matriculated after one year , at the end of 1895 . 
 Despite never having heard of female doctors , from an early age Mayo had been set on pursuing a career in medicine . However , Edward Rennie , then a professor at the University of Adelaide advised Helen 's father that she was too young to commence study in Medicine , so in 1896 , Mayo enrolled in the Faculty of Arts at the University of Adelaide . The death of her younger sister Olive at the end of her first year of study meant that Mayo was unable to sit her final exams for that year , and when she repeated her first year in 1897 , she failed two of her five subjects ( Latin and Greek ) . Having gained her father 's permission , Mayo enrolled in medicine in 1898 . She was a distinguished medicine student , coming top of her class and winning the Davis Thomas scholarship and the Everard Scholarship in her fourth and fifth years of study , respectively . 
 = = Medical career = = 
 Upon her graduation in at the end of 1902 , Mayo took up a position as a resident medical officer at the Adelaide Hospital . In February 1904 , she left for England to gain practical experience . There she worked as a clinical clerk at Hospital for Sick Children in Great Ormond Street , London . To gain experience in midwifery , she went to Coombe Women 's Hospital in Dublin , and after returning to London to complete a course in tropical medicine , she travelled to India where she worked for a year as a midwife in a Cambridge Mission hospital for women and children . In 1906 , Mayo returned to Adelaide and started a private practice in premises owned by her father on Morphett Street , next to the family home . With spare time on her hands , she began laboratory work at the Adelaide Hospital and took up an appointment as honorary anaesthetist at the Adelaide Children 's Hospital . 
 = = = The Mothers and Babies ' Health Association = = = 
 In May 1909 , Mayo presented a paper to an interstate conference on the subject of infant mortality . In it , she addressed the high infant mortality rate in South Australia , and claimed that more needed to be done to educate women for motherhood . Later that year , after hearing a talk about the success of a school for mothers in London , she and Harriet Stirling ( the daughter of Edward Stirling ) founded the School for Mothers in Adelaide . The Kindergarten Union made a room in its offices available for one afternoon a week , where a nurse would weigh babies and Mayo and Stirling would give advice . At the first annual meeting of the School a prominent medical doctor criticised the organisation for thinking that spinsters could teach mothers , who were guided by the " mother instinct " ( both Mayo and Stirling were childless ) . In spite of this , the organisation flourished , and in 1911 a cottage in Wright Street was purchased and became the headquarters of the School . In 1927 , the organisation became the Mothers ' and Babies ' Health Association , and by 1932 , it had branches throughout South Australia . Mayo served as the honorary medical officer of the association until her death in 1967 , by which time the organisation gained a training school for maternal nurses and a hospital . In her honour , the Association inaugurated the annual Helen Mayo lecture . Eventually , in 1981 , the Mothers and Babies ' Association was incorporated into the Department of Health of the South Australian Government . 
 After visiting Melbourne to learn how to make vaccines , in 1911 Mayo was appointed clinical bacteriologist at the Adelaide hospital , a position she would hold for 22 years . 
 = = = The Mareeba Hospital = = = 
 In the early part of the 1910s , there was an urgent need for medical facilities to treat infants in South Australia since , due to the risks of cross @-@ infection , the Adelaide Children 's Hospital would not treat those under the age of two . In 1913 , Mayo and Stirling called a meeting of medical practitioners to discuss the prospect of a hospital for these children . After doubts about the practicality of such a plan were expressed , the group raised some funds and presented to the board of the Adelaide Children 's Hospital a plan to use the funds to build a separate ward on the grounds of the hospital . The board rejected the proposal , so Mayo and her group rented a two @-@ story house in St. Peter 's and opened a hospital for infants in 1914 . Financial difficulties for the hospital eventually became overwhelming and the state government took over the hospital , moving it to Woodville and renaming it the Mareeba Hospital . 
 Mayo played a central role in establishing Mareeba Hospital and forming its policy , serving as honourable physician at Mareeba , and as honorary responsible officer from 1921 to 1946 . To combat the risks of cross @-@ infection , she instituted a policy of strict isolation of babies from other patients . Each child had their own locker , where their own equipment would be kept , gowns used by nurses to tend to one child would only be used for that child , and blankets , bottles and floors were all sterilised . Mareeba eventually became a 70 @-@ bed hospital , complete with a surgical unit and a ward for premature babies . 
 = = = Later medical career = = = 
 In 1919 , The Adelaide Children 's Hospital advertised for honorary physicians . Believing that her gender would prevent her being given the position , Mayo initially declined to apply . However , following a recommendation by Adelaide surgeon Henry Simpson Newland , Mayo applied for the post , and that year was appointed honorary Assistant Physician in charge of outpatients . With positions at the Royal Adelaide Hospital , the Children 's Hospital and the Mareeba Hospital , as well as commitments at her private practice , Mayo commenced her Doctor of Medicine degree in 1925 . She used her experiences as a clinical bacteriologist at the Adelaide Hospital as the basis for her thesis , which she was forced to write on the weekends , such was the volume of her workload . The following year , she became the first woman to receive an MD from the University of Adelaide . She was subsequently appointed honorary physician to inpatients at the Children 's Hospital , and a clinical lecturer at the University of Adelaide . In May 1935 Mayo was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) " for services in connection with maternal and child welfare in the state of South Australia . " 
 She retired in 1938 and became an honorary consulting physician at the Children 's Hospital , but when the Second World War broke out , she returned to the hospital as senior paediatric adviser , at the same time organising the Red Cross donor transfusion service . Dr. Elma Linton Sandford @-@ Morgan ( 22 February 1890 – ) , author of ABC of <unk> , was appointed medical officer for <unk> in 1937 . She was a daughter of industrialist and politician A. Wallace Sandford . 
 = = Other activities = = 
 Mayo became the first woman in Australia to be elected to a university council when , in 1914 , she was elected to the Council of the University of Adelaide , a position she held for 46 years . She founded , in 1922 , the Adelaide Lyceum Club , and was its inaugural president . The club provided a place for women who were leaders in their respective fields to meet , and aimed to " advance the status of women in the world of arts and letters " . 
 Mayo was also heavily involved in the life of female students and graduates of the University of Adelaide . She spearheaded the foundation of the Women Student 's Club ( eventually the Women 's Union ) in 1909 , and in 1921 initiated efforts to unify the various student bodies at that University into what would eventually become the Adelaide University Union . The construction of the Lady Simon Building for the Women 's Union was due in large part to her efforts , as was the founding of St. Ann 's College , where she served as chairperson from 1939 to 1959 . 
 Mayo died 13 November 1967 , aged 89 . In its obituary , the Medical Journal of Australia described her as " the doyen of medical women in South Australia ( and most probably Australia ) " , and credited her with the efficiency of South Australia 's infant health welfare system . The Federal Division of Mayo is named for her . 
 = New Amerykah Part One ( 4th World War ) = 
 New Amerykah Part One ( 4th World War ) is the fourth studio album by American neo soul singer Erykah Badu . After a hiatus from recording music due to writer 's block , Badu communicated with several hip hop producers over the Internet and worked on new music using the GarageBand software program on her laptop . Once the songs were composed , she went on to record most of the album at Electric Lady Studios in New York City . 
 New Amerykah Part One is an esoteric concept album titled as a pun on Badu 's first name and a reflection of the record 's political leanings . It features social commentary and themes related to the plight of the African @-@ American community , including poverty , urban violence , complacency , and cultural identity . The record 's densely produced music incorporates funk , R & B , hip hop , soul , jazz , and electronica styles . 
 When New Amerykah Part One was released by Universal Motown on February 26 , 2008 , it received widespread critical acclaim and debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 albums chart . At the end of the year , it was named by many critics as one of 2008 's best records , and by December 2009 , it had sold 359 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . Badu promoted the album with a supporting tour , The Vortex World Tour , during May to July 2008 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Dealing with writer 's block and conflicted about her mainstream success , Erykah Badu embarked on her Frustrated Artist Tour in 2003 . Her increasing popularity brought upon some backlash towards her public image and expectations of her as " queen of neo soul " , an honorific nickname that she found limiting . Her third studio album , Worldwide Underground ( 2003 ) , was released to mostly positive reviews and was certified gold , although it was underpromoted and sold less than her previous albums . Badu herself was not satisfied with the album and felt she had nothing substantial to express with her music at the time . She took time off from her recording career to deal with her creative block and focus on caring for her children , although she continued to tour in the period between albums . 
 In 2004 , Badu gave birth to a daughter , Puma Rose , with her former boyfriend , rapper The D.O.C .. Later that year , she received her first computer as a Christmas gift from drummer and producer Ahmir " Questlove " Thompson , and began communicating with and receiving music from him and other producers such as Q @-@ Tip and J Dilla . Beginning in 2005 , Badu worked from her home in Dallas and used the software application GarageBand as a digital audio workstation , which she was introduced to by her son , Seven . He taught her how to use her laptop as a mini recording studio , and she used it to construct various backing tracks for songs . Using GarageBand , she recorded demos of her vocals by singing into the computer 's microphone . 
 Badu composed more than 75 songs within the year and intended on splitting them among her planned series of New Amerykah albums . She said of her productivity with her laptop , " I could be here , in my own space , with headphones on , and the kids could be doing what they doing , and I ’ m cooking dinner still , I ’ m making juices still , and it ’ s so easy just to sing . You got an idea — boom ! Idea , boom ! " Badu 's iChat contacts , including hip hop producers Questlove , Madlib , 9th Wonder , and J Dilla , instant messaged her to get back into the studio and sent her tracks . Such exchanges inspired a creative spark for Badu , which she explained in an interview for the Dallas Observer , " I started to accept that maybe it 's OK for me to put out music , and it doesn 't have to be something dynamic or world @-@ changing . But just as I was accepting that , here comes this burst of light and energy and creativity . And that 's the process , I guess , of life — the detachment and the release of something gives you even more room to grow or be creative . " 
 With the album , Badu sought to augment her music 's production , expose the work of underground hip hop producers , and exceed listeners ' expectations of contemporary music . She discussed her creative intentions in an interview for Billboard , stating " In taking on a project like this , I 'm taking the responsibility to talk for my race and my planet . " In an interview for the New York Post , she explained the album to be about " the war against self ... against your inner being " , and said of her hiatus , " I 've always taken my time between albums . I 'm a performing artist - recording is secondary to me . My performances are what drive me . It 's like my therapy . I like to write a lot while I 'm on the road before I even think about recording . " Badu also said that she now had a relevant message to express for listeners and was no longer struggling with a creative block . 
 = = Recording = = 
 For New Amerykah Part One , Badu collaborated principally with Questlove , Madlib , 9th Wonder , Karriem Riggins , James Poyser , audio engineer Mike " <unk> " Chavarria , and the members of musical group Sa @-@ Ra , who made production and lyrical contributions to most of the tracks . She later explained choosing which producers to work with , saying " All of these people have a reputation for being visionaries and knowing them well , I felt ' Okay , now it 's time to put together a project that not only takes us to another place , another dimension , but highlights these sights . ' And that 's what I had in mind for this project " . 
 Badu began recording New Amerykah Part One at Luminous Sound Recording in Dallas , where she was assisted by Chavarria in recording vocals and basic tracks to 2 @-@ tracks . Her vocal harmonies were recorded to a Studer <unk> ½ -inch , an Analog Playback Tape machine , using RMG magnetic tape . Poyser , who was heavily involved as musician and producer in all of Badu 's previous work , had his role on the album reduced amicably to accommodate her minimalist , beat @-@ driven approach in production . He discussed Badu 's direction for the album in an interview for Shook , stating " she wanted a dirtier , more organic underground hip hop sound . So she dealt with cats that brought that sound to the table . " 
 Additional recording sessions and programming took place at Sa @-@ Ra 's Cosmic Dust Studio . Sa @-@ Ra member Om 'mas Keith remarked on Badu 's role at their studio , " Sometimes she ’ d come through and pick a skeletal and other times the beats would get made right then and there . " Keith played instruments such as the Fender Rhodes , Roland Juno @-@ 106 , and Roland SH @-@ 101 . Of all her collaborators , Badu only let Husayn write lyrics for her on the album . Husayn said that because Badu had not allowed anyone to do this before , " she had to go through some personal things to come to the point where she 'd let somebody write for her in the manner that we did . It was spontaneous but at the same time there was structure to it . It might not have the right expression , or the right enunciation . Writing is so personal . That was a big thing . " 
 = = = Electric Lady sessions = = = 
 Badu subsequently held recording sessions at Electric Lady Studios in New York City , where the album was completed . In her interview for Remix , she elaborated on the recording process , stating " Everything that the producers e @-@ mailed me I put into GarageBand . Then we would try to duplicate it at Electric Lady . I did vocals on my laptop , babies crying and everything . I also EQ 'd the tracks using effects like GarageBand 's Vocal Reflection . " Badu worked with audio engineers Chris Bell , Tom Soares , and Chavarria , who had spent numerous hours with Badu listening to her previous albums , including her 1997 debut Baduizm and its 2000 follow @-@ up Mama 's Gun , and older albums such as The Dark Side of the Moon ( 1973 ) by progressive rock band Pink Floyd and Innervisions ( 1973 ) by Stevie Wonder . They worked with the producers ' emailed music and embellished their own 2 @-@ tracks by using Pro Tools to incorporate live instrumentation such as bass , guitar , flutes , percussion , and keyboards . Contributing musicians included vocalist Georgia Anne Muldrow , trumpeter Roy Hargrove , vibraphonist Roy Ayers , guitarist Omar Rodríguez @-@ López , and vocalist Bilal . 
 Inspired by Badu 's creativity and their time listening to music , Chavarria added special effects and delays to the tracks by using and manipulating a variety of plug @-@ ins and guitar pedals , subsequently reworking effects frequency and modulation parameters . Chavarria said they were able to expand on the producers ' tracks rather than change them , because " Erykah made this record to display to the world that there is this whole group of producers out there who are outside of the mainstream making great music . " Badu said of the approach , " I work in layers . The first layer is the track . The second layer is the songs . The third would be the musicians who add a certain nuance . And when they play , they play like they are a sample . Or we take a piece of what they played , and we sample and loop it . " 
 Along with a talking drum , Badu used tuning forks when recording New Amerykah Part One to evoke a certain feeling through its frequency , a practice she had done on her previous albums : " Each tuning fork has a certain vibrational energy that is conducive to a feeling or a color or a smell . They 're related to different chakras in the body , too . Some may make you feel good or sexy or conscious of what you 're saying . " The album was mastered at Electric Lady Studios in February 2008 . Before it was edited down to 11 tracks , New Amerykah Part One was originally intended as a double album , with 18 songs over two discs . 
 = = = Vocal production = = = 
 At Electric Lady , Badu applied a multifaceted approach to recording her vocals and opted against editing them in post @-@ production . Using her voice <unk> , her vocals were characterized by high scales , varied frequencies , wide intervals , and time @-@ stretched harmonies . Chavarria , who engineered the vocals with Badu , remarked on her singing , " Her voice has so many frequencies , from a subharmonic of her tonic to a thin raspiness , and she wants to hear all of that . " Badu used a Shure SM57 dynamic microphone , finding it to have enough bottom for her voice type , and cut vocal takes while situated between two speakers in the studio 's control room with the monitor mix playing . She explained this setting to be more comfortable , noting the ability to hear herself sing and hold the microphone when moving around . Badu preferred to sing in one take rather than edit different takes together : " When I do vocals , I am singing with a certain volume in my voice . I am singing the double and triple harmonies at different volumes . You don 't have to adjust it ; I have already done it . We mix as we go , so by the time we put the vocals to ½ -inch tape , I know it . If you touch a damn thing , I will know it . " 
 To adjust to potential audio feedback and leakage and obtain a usable take , Chavarria tried having Badu sit in an overstuffed chair six feet behind the mixing console and use alternate microphones such as a Neumann M 269 or AEA R44 ribbon microphone with Sony MDR @-@ <unk> headphones into a Furman headphone mixer . However , Badu felt she could not perceive all of her voice 's frequencies with the headphones and often discarded them to move towards the studio monitors . He also considered situating her in an equilateral triangle with the two speakers , one of which would be placed out of phase in order to have the leakage cancel itself . However , according to him , the mic has to be stationary , while Badu " likes to hold the mic like an MC . She is at home as a live performer . " He said of working around audio spills and adapting to Badu 's methods , " We worked to make her vocals fit into the track , phase @-@ wise ... What did work was to keep the monitors fairly low and turn the microphone out of phase , and we would move her around the room until she found a spot where the leakage was reasonable and where she felt comfortable and could hear herself . But just as often she would just sit in that chair behind the board in the A Room . " 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 The album 's music is a dense , stylistic amalgam that primarily incorporates funk , soul , and hip hop genres , as well as jazz and electronica . The New Yorker called it " a politically charged neo @-@ soul suite with cutting @-@ edge production " , while Nelson George described the record as " a complicated mesh of soul , electro sounds and references , simple and obscure ... a musically challenging album that owes much to Radiohead and Curtis Mayfield " . Expanding of the loose , jam @-@ oriented style of Worldwide Underground , it features groove @-@ based instrumentation , murky tones , hip hop musical phrasing , eccentric interludes , and various beats , digital glitches , and samples . Sputnikmusic 's Nick Butler said the album " moved beyond the ideas and conventions that have defined neo @-@ soul over the past decade . " Greg Kot wrote that , " Like her peers D 'Angelo ( with Voodoo in 2000 ) , Common ( Electric Circus in 2002 ) and the Roots ( Phrenology in 2002 ) , Badu has made a record that defies efforts to categorize it . " He remarked that its " <unk> , funkier vibe " draws on the " hypnotic funk " of early 1970s albums such as Miles Davis 's On the Corner ( 1972 ) , Herbie Hancock 's Sextant ( 1973 ) , and Sly & the Family Stone 's There 's a Riot Goin ' On ( 1971 ) . 
 Similar to Voodoo and On the Corner , New Amerykah Part One emphasizes sound and mood over choruses and verses . The album is unified by a musical theme , with songs sequenced together and typified by ominous musical elements , minor @-@ key melodies , and atmospheric beats . Songs on the album also incorporate experimental hip hop backing tracks and other hip hop elements in a surrealistic manner . The majority of the beats are dark , blunted , and hazy , and have been noted by music writers as conveying an urban soundscape and feeling of paranoia . Lauren Carter of the Boston Herald said the songs often have " the feel of a seance " . Most of them were either produced or co @-@ written by members of Sa @-@ Ra , who were known for their sonically dissonant music , characterized by eccentric chord placements and off @-@ time beats . Sasha Frere @-@ Jones believed the record " isn 't so much hip @-@ hop as it is a reorganization of the historical flotsam and <unk> that were recycled and turned into hip @-@ hop . " 
 Lyrically , New Amerykah Part One is an esoteric concept album with sociopolitical themes and mostly downbeat subject matter . It features more impersonal topics and social commentary than on Badu 's previous work . Its subject matter deals with social concerns and struggles within the African @-@ American community , exploring topics such as institutional racism , religion , poverty , urban violence , the abuse of power , complacency , drug addiction , and nihilism . Badu said she wrote about " poor families , the undermining of the working class , the so @-@ called minority . " According to New York critic Nitsuh Abebe , the record 's main theme was the struggle for African Americans to determine their cultural identity in light of the " Civil Rights and post @-@ Civil Rights " era . In Ratliff 's opinion , the album 's subject matter has been explored before by Mayfield , Marvin Gaye , and Funkadelic , which " suggests that little has changed in nearly 40 years , and perhaps ... that 's her point . " Quentin B. Huff from PopMatters believed that like Suzanne Vega 's 2007 album Beauty & Crime , New Amerykah Part One also incorporated " a post @-@ 9 / 11 worldview , plus a few shots of community spirit , individual growth , pleas for social activism and spiritual enlightenment , and ... the realities of death . " He felt that like the " clash in musical styles " , some songs " seem committed to having America honor " the promise of the American Dream for African @-@ Americans , while other songs " seem to reject the promise , or at least the idea that the promise can be fulfilled without considerable effort " . 
 Badu 's songwriting was characterized by pointillism , stream of consciousness , and scenic narrative . Her lyrics are alternately overtly political and deeply personal , interlaced with Five Percenter notions and references to the Nation of Islam . Badu expresses a motherly perspective and feelings of dismay and empathy for the subjects in the songs . Charles Aaron commented that " a sense of history and maternal compassion ... grounds even her most oblique forays . " Abebe wrote similarly , " her keen writing about people " gives songs " much of their shape " and views that her candor helps communicate the album 's " social concerns , which could otherwise sound like a laundry list of black @-@ community struggles " . 
 = = = Songs = = = 
 The opening track " Amerykahn Promise " samples the 1977 song " The American Promise " by American band <unk> as its backing track . The original song was co @-@ written and produced by Roy Ayers , who gave Badu the original master tape for her to rework on her album . Ayers and Edwin Birdsong were inspired to write the song by President Lyndon B. Johnson 's 1965 speech " The American Promise " , which called for justice and equal rights in the United States . " Amerykahn Promise " features explicit political satire , with themes of disfranchisement and the hindrance of the American Dream . Its tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek subject matter portrays America as a land of broken promises . The song opens with a blaxploitation trailer blurb , saying " more action , more excitement , more everything " , and features an improvisatory funk vamp , <unk> vocalists Sibel Thrasher and Sharon Matthews , and an authoritative male voice , performed by Keith . The authoritative character is portrayed as a circus @-@ barker whose smoke and mirrors presentation of the American Dream leads to contentious dialogue with Badu . A female voice at the end of the song asks , " Has anyone seen my 42 laws ? " , an arcane allusion to the 42 divine laws of ancient Egyptian goddess Maat . 
 Produced by Madlib , " The Healer " is an ode to hip hop culture and a proclamation of its scope . It opens with a brief snippet from a song by Malcolm McLaren featuring the World 's Famous Supreme Team . Frere @-@ Jones notes " bells , unidentifiable knocks , a lonesome instrument that might be a sitar , or a guitar , and lots of empty space " in the musical backdrop , adding that " the music flirts with total stasis , though it still has an audible beat . " Badu 's lyrics , delivered in an incantation style , make reference to various names of God , including Allah , Jehovah , Yahweh , Jah , and Rastafari , while asserting hip hop to be " bigger than " social institutions such as religion and government . She explained the lyrics and religious references , saying " to me , hip @-@ hop is felt in all religions - it has a healing power . I 've recently been to Palestine , Jerusalem , Africa and a bunch of other places , and everyone is listening to hip @-@ hop . There 's something about that kicking snare sound that all kinds of people find meaning in . " The autobiographical song " Me " discusses Badu 's thoughts and feelings about her life , including the struggle of growing as a public figure . She mocks others ' perception of her , which she has explained as " everything you can see of Erykah Badu — the <unk> , the powers , the 5 Percenters , the mysteries , it ’ s all true . The lies ; it ’ s all true . Had two babies with different daddies . Thirty @-@ six years old and addicted to a variety of spending . " The song 's jazz conclusion has Badu singing about her mother 's life and resilience in unison with a muted trumpet . 
 " Soldier " was written by Badu immediately after receiving Riggins ' beat for the song . He said Badu wanted it to have a sound similar to J Dilla and his Detroit hip hop scene , which Riggins was inspired by : " A lot of producers from Detroit have a certain sound , and I think it just comes from being in the city . " Its sociopolitical lyrics have Badu expressing sympathy and solidarity for those facing oppression , with references to police corruption , black @-@ on @-@ black crime , and Hurricane Katrina . " The Cell " was produced by Husayn and features a lively , choral style and hard bop feel . Titled as a metaphor for both heredity and confinement , the song is a tableau of crime , drugs , and desperation in urban decay , streamlined by a stark story about Brenda , a character who falls victim to her environment . Cited by Chavarria as the album 's most effects @-@ heavy track , " Twinkle " features a futuristic sound , a convoluted beat , and abstract aural elements such as white noise bursts , high @-@ pitched voices , abrasive instruments , and layers of twinkling keyboard bass . The lyrics lament the plight of the Black community and the cyclical effects on African Americans by the various failures of American social institutions such as the health care , education , and prison systems . Badu raps in the song 's verse , " Children of the matrix be <unk> ’ them car switches / Seen some virgin <unk> hanging out with Venus bitches " , followed by her singing , " They don ’ t know their language , they don ’ t know their God " . Over humming keyboards , the closing minutes of the song feature a speech in the ancient African language of <unk> <unk> , followed by a speaker 's rant inspired by actor Peter Finch 's own rant in the 1976 film Network . The speaker angrily laments the state of the world and the complacency of people . Philadelphia Weekly 's Craig D. Linsey likened " Twinkle " to a denser version of Marvin Gaye 's 1971 song " Inner City Blues ( Make Me Wanna Holler ) " . 
 " Master Teacher " was conceived by Georgia Anne Muldrow on her Rhodes piano at Sa @-@ Ra 's Cosmic Dust Studio with Badu present and was originally intended for one of their albums . Its idyllic music blends mellow soul and glitchy hip hop , featuring a chopped sample of Curtis Mayfield 's 1972 song " Freddie 's Dead " . The song 's lyrics envision a higher degree of African @-@ American identity . Its vocalists ask in refrain , " What if there was no niggas , only master teachers ? " , and answering " I stay woke " , with Badu responding " I 'm in the search of something new / Search inside me , searching inside you " . Midway through the song , Poyser 's keyboards lower the music 's tempo , with a fluid , jazzy sound . " That Hump " concerns the topic of drug dependency . The closing track " Telephone " is a tribute to J Dilla , who died in 2006 from complications with blood disorder , and has themes of sorrow and hope . It serves as a departure from the preceding songs ' edgier musical direction , featuring soft melodies and an acoustic feel similar to Badu 's live sound . The song opens with the sound of ominous sirens , referencing J Dilla 's 2006 album Donuts . The song 's lyrics are based on a story told to Badu by J Dilla 's mother on the day of his death . Poyser explained in an interview , " Dilla 's mom told Erykah about one day when he was telling her about this dream he had where Ol <unk> was telling him to get on a different color bus and giving him directions home " . According to Poyser , the song 's music was inspired by Dilla 's passing : 
 We were in the studio right after Dilla ’ s funeral and we were working on stuff for the Edith <unk> album . The focus there was more emotional than sonic . It was just feeling Dilla . It was something that wasn ’ t thought out , it just naturally took place . We were sitting there and we just started jamming and the song just happened instantly . 
 The hidden track " Honey " is a percussive , lighthearted love song that contains a sample of singer Nancy Wilson 's 1978 song " I 'm in Love " . The track opens with a reprise of " Amerykahn Promise " , with an announcer saying , " We hope you enjoyed your journey and now we ’ re putting control of you back to you " , and a countdown leading to " Honey " . According to Badu , the song is about " a lover , a fictitious character named Slim , who I 'm chasing . " Allmusic 's Andy Kellman commented that the song is included as an unlisted track as " it doesn 't fit into the album 's fabric , what with its drifting , deeply sweetened , synth @-@ <unk> @-@ and @-@ string @-@ drift groove . " 
 = = Title and packaging = = 
 Before New Amerykah 's release , the album was tentatively called <unk> , which Badu derived from her name , as a reference to Islam and <unk> . The title of the album series , New Amerykah , is a pun of Badu 's name . She has explained one meaning of it as " a statement that simply says , ' This is the beginning of the new world ' <unk> both the slaves and the slave masters . In other words , everybody has to wake up and see . This new world moves much faster . We don 't even realize how fast we 're moving . " Part One 's subtitle , 4th World War , reflects the content 's objective , political leanings , which Badu explained to be " outside of me ... What ’ s going on outside is the left brain " . Badu further explained New Amerykah 's title in an interview for Remix : 
 In 1997 , a 25 @-@ year @-@ old Erykah Badu came out as an artist , pregnant , a mother @-@ to @-@ be . We used to bring cassettes home as our listening from the studio . No one had a cell phone , only a couple people with these great big contraptions . The Internet was not our form of communication ; we still had the library . We were creating from sand and scrap . So quickly it 's turned into this technological society . I can send the album to millions of fans from Antarctica to Mexico City with one push of the button . The way our children think and the things they see ? It 's new , and it 's happened so quick . And I am in the middle of that . Me on the platform with a microphone — that is how I envision New Amerykah . 
 The album 's cover and interior artwork were designed by Badu and graphic artist <unk> . The cover features an abstract portrayal of Badu , who dons vintage nameplate knuckle rings bearing the album title and an Afro decorated in a bric @-@ a @-@ brac manner with various emblems . Badu and <unk> sought to reflect the former 's perspective on various topics , including music , religion , governments , and economics , and incorporate emblems to depict American culture and modern society . Images featured in the Afro include those of flowers , spray cans , dollar signs , power plants , musical notes , toilets , raised fists , needles , laptops , turntables , handcuffs , broken chains , bar codes , drugs , and guns . The album 's interior artwork features ominous , psychedelic , futuristic , and apocalyptic imagery . The artwork includes illustrations of a red @-@ eyed Uncle Sam pointing a gun , robotic creatures tattooing each other , a bar code bearing the alphanumeric message " <unk> <unk> " , and a suited skeleton with a dollar sign on its skull lecturing to a headless audience from a podium that bears the pyramid image from the reverse of the Great Seal of the United States . The illustration of a soft melting fork , hypodermic needle , and spoon is an adaptation of Salvador Dalí 's 1931 painting The Persistence of Memory . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 The album 's lead single , " Honey " , was released on December 11 , 2007 . It reached number 88 on the US Billboard Hot 100 , on which it spent three weeks . On the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , it charted for 17 weeks and peaked at number 22 . A music video for the song was directed by Badu and Chris Robinson , and released on January 28 , 2008 . Badu wanted to pay homage to classic records with the video , which is set in a small business record store and follows a customer as she looks through vintage R & B , hip hop , and rock LPs , whose album covers are depicted as moving images with Badu cast in them . In January 2008 , Badu also previewed songs from the album as a headlining act at the Barbados Jazz Festival . On April 23 , she released " Soldier " as the album 's second single and announced The Vortex World Tour , a supporting tour to promote the album . The tour 's 42 concert dates included shows in the United States , Canada , and Aruba , spanned from May to June , and featured hip hop band The Roots as Badu 's opening act . She later toured in Europe during June and July . 
 New Amerykah Part One was released by Universal Motown Records in the United States on February 26 , Badu 's 37th birthday . That same day , a release party took place at the House of Blues in Dallas , and Badu performed songs from the album on VH1 Soul 's <unk> . The record was released in several European countries on February 29 , the United Kingdom on March 3 , and Japan on March 12 . The Japanese and UK editions feature the bonus track " Real Thang " . The album 's digital release to the iTunes Store featured the song 's " Tumbling Dice Remix " as a bonus track . It was also released as a double vinyl LP on March 11 , and on USB stick format . In an interview for the Chicago Tribune , Badu discussed the album 's accompanying USB stick , stating " I might as well give a digital world what they need and what they want . And that 's to just cut out the middle man , which is the CD , which will be extinct , I would say , in about seven to eight years — right along with the record labels . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 In the United States , New Amerykah debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 chart , selling 125 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . It was Badu 's best opening week since her debut album Baduizm in 1997 . It also entered at number two on the Billboard Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums . In its second week , the album sold 41 @,@ 466 copies , and 35 @,@ 000 in its third week . It spent 15 weeks on the Billboard 200 and 29 weeks on the Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums . By December 2009 , New Amerykah Part One had sold 359 @,@ 000 copies , according to Nielsen SoundScan . In the United Kingdom , the album charted at number 55 on the UK Albums Chart , on which it spent one week . In France , it debuted at number 49 and spent 11 weeks on the French Albums Chart . In Switzerland , it debuted at number 10 and spent six weeks on the Swiss Albums Top 100 . In the Netherlands , the album entered at number 25 and spent seven weeks on the Mega Album Top 100 . In Poland , it reached number nine and spent eight weeks on the Polish Albums Chart . The album 's highest international charting was number five in Sweden , where it charted for seven weeks . 
 New Amerykah Part One received widespread acclaim from critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications , the album received an average score of 83 , based on 25 reviews . Slant Magazine 's Eric Henderson said it is a powerful listen that stands as Badu 's most musically ambitious work . Sasha Frere @-@ Jones from The New Yorker described the album as " a brilliant resurgence of black avant @-@ garde vocal pop " and " the work of a restless polymath ignoring the world around her and opting for an idiosyncratic , murky feeling that reflects her impulses . " In the Chicago Tribune , Kot wrote that " art this deeply personal " is rarely an easy listen , while Alex Macpherson of The Guardian deemed it a rewarding listen that " demands to be explored . " Rolling Stone magazine 's Christian Hoard was more critical , finding Badu 's socially conscious lyrics unexceptional and too ambiguous , and some songs " absent @-@ minded doodles " . In MSN Music , Robert Christgau deemed it an enjoyable effort , citing " Amerykahn Promise " and " The Cell " as highlights , but said some of the themes seemed dated in comparison to the music : " When your funk is this futuristic , not to say abstract , astrology and Farrakhan sound old , not to say ignorant " . According to Pitchfork Media 's Nitsuh Abebe : 
 A lot of the critical love for New Amerykah seems rooted in a love for the music of ... a time in which popular black artists made records filled not only with visionary , avant @-@ garde sounds , but with a social expansiveness , a fire and ambition to say something important to and for a community ... This album doesn 't just have the personal and social ambitions of those old records — plenty of charmless " nu @-@ soul " records aspire to that — but some of the sonic ones , too . Big tracks aside , it 's an awfully static record , which gives it the kind of high @-@ art " difficulty " that we critics have been known to like . 
 At the end of 2008 , New Amerykah Part One was ranked on several critics ' lists of the year 's best records , including the Associated Press ( number 1 ) , The Austin Chronicle ( number 9 ) , Entertainment Weekly ( number 5 ) , New York ( number 8 ) , The New York Times ( number 4 ) , The A.V. Club ( number 8 ) , PopMatters ( number 4 ) , Slant Magazine ( number 8 ) , and The Guardian ( number 9 ) . Spin ranked the album number 12 on its year @-@ end list , calling it " laptop R & B that uses hip @-@ hop as its muse " . Pitchfork Media later ranked it at number 133 on their list of top 200 albums of the 2000s decade , while Rhapsody named it the decade 's best R & B record . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 • ( add . ) Additional production • ( co . ) Co @-@ producer 
 Sample credits 
 " The Healer " contains a sample of " Kono <unk> " ( 1971 ) by The <unk> Singers . 
 " My People " contains a sample of " My People ... Hold On " ( 1972 ) by Eddie Kendricks . 
 " Soldier " contains samples of " Theme " ( 1973 ) by Solution and " Upon This Rock " by Joe Farrell . 
 " Master Teacher " contains a sample of " Freddie 's Dead " ( 1972 ) by Curtis Mayfield . 
 " That Hump " contains a sample of " There 'll Never Be " ( 1978 ) by Switch . 
 " Telephone " contains a sample of " King of the Beats " ( 1988 ) by Mantronix . 
 " Honey " contains a sample of " I 'm in Love " ( 1978 ) by Nancy Wilson . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Here I Stand ( Usher song ) = 
 " Here I Stand " is a song by American recording artist Usher . It was sent to urban adult contemporary radio on August 18 , 2008 by LaFace Records and RCA Records as the fifth single from Usher 's fifth studio album , Here I Stand ( Usher album ) . Penned by the singer with Polow da Don , Adam Blackstone , <unk> Gaddis , and Dre & Vidal , and produced by Dre & Vidal , " Here I Stand " is a slow soul ballad and contains similarities to Stevie Wonder 's music . The record received critical acclaim , and was nominated for the Best Male R & B Vocal Performance award at the 51st Grammy Awards . " Here I Stand " maintained a position on the United States Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs for several weeks in 2008 and 2009 , reaching the top twenty . It also appeared on the US Radio Songs and Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles charts , peaking at numbers seventy @-@ two and six , respectively . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Here I Stand " was written by Usher , Polow da Don , Adam Blackstone and <unk> Gaddis , as well as Dre & Vidal , who also produced the track . The song was recorded by Vincent Dilorenzo , with assistance from Geoff Rice , at Sony Music Studios , New York City and Zac Recording , Atlanta . Dilorenzo also mixed the record , with assistance from Matt <unk> , at Studio 609 , Philadelphia . According to Josh Eells of Blender , " Here I Stand " was written for Tameka Foster , whom Usher married in August 2007 . Composed before their engagement , " Here I Stand " was played at Usher and Foster 's wedding , on Foster 's request . The tune is an assurance of sexual fidelity and commitment . In an interview with MTV News , Usher stated , " If you listen to the words [ of ' Here I Stand ' ] , it is very heartfelt , simplistic , yet very soulful . ... It 's a man 's words to his woman : a vow to say that you are the one , and I 'll be there for you . " A slow jam soul ballad , " Here I Stand " has been compared to the work of Stevie Wonder by critics . It was included on Usher 's fifth studio album of the same name , released on May 13 , 2008 by LaFace Records . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 The song was released to urban adult contemporary radio by LaFace and RCA Records on August 18 , 2008 , serving as the fifth single from Here I Stand . Usher sang " Here I Stand " along with " Trading Places " and " What 's Your Name " at the warmup concert for the 2008 National Football League Kickoff game on September 4 . Usher performed " Here I Stand " at Sony 's keynote address at the 2009 Consumer Electronics Show . The song was performed on his One Night Stand : Ladies Only Tour , with a slower tempo . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly called " Here I Stand " a throwback to Stevie Wonder , and was disappointed that it was placed near the end of the parent album . USA Today 's Steve Jones noted the track as a highlight of the album . Joshua Alston from The A.V. Club wrote that the song " lyrically and musically sounds more passionate and more adult than Usher ever has , " and called it a " syrupy ballad " . However , Blender 's Josh Eells called the " chivalrous " number " sweet but taxing , like looking at photos from someone else ’ s wedding , " while Jim Farber of the Daily News wrote that " the [ song 's ] melody fails [ Usher ] . " The song ranked at number one on AOL Radio 's list of top Usher songs . At the 51st Grammy Awards , " Here I Stand " was nominated for the Best Male R & B Vocal Performance award , but lost to Ne @-@ Yo 's " Miss Independent " from his 2008 album , Year of the Gentleman . 
 Following its radio release , " Here I Stand " debuted on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs at number seventy @-@ five on the issue dated September 20 , 2008 , and peaked at number eighteen on March 14 , 2009 . On July 18 , 2009 it fell off the chart , having spent forty @-@ three weeks on the chart . " Here I Stand " entered the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles at number fourteen on the chart of December 17 , 2008 . It peaked at number six on January 3 , 2009 , before it slipped off the chart the following week , having lasted four weeks there . On February 7 , 2009 , the song appeared on the Hot 100 Airplay ( Radio Songs ) at number seventy @-@ three , but failed to reappear on the chart the next week . It re @-@ entered one place higher , at number seventy @-@ two , on March 14 , 2009 , but again did not gain any traction , with no place achieved on the following chart . 
 = = Credits = = 
 Source : 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Half of Me ( Rihanna song ) = 
 " Half of Me " is a song recorded by Barbadian recording artist Rihanna for her seventh studio album Unapologetic ( 2012 ) . It was written by Emeli Sandé , Naughty Boy and Stargate , with production done by the latter two . It is a chamber pop song that sees Rihanna deliver vocals in an " experimental " fashion . Its lyrics have been described as a " personal essay " , with lyrics that discuss Rihanna 's unrepentant attitude in letting people into her life . She references Oprah Winfrey in the line " You saw me on the television " . The song garnered positive reviews from music critics , some of whom felt that it is " heartfelt " and " psychedelic " . Upon the release of Unapologetic , the song charted in Canada , France , Ireland , Switzerland and the United Kingdom . It debuted at number 10 on the UK R & B Chart . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 " Half of Me " was co @-@ written by Scottish recording artist Emeli Sandé together with Shahid Khan , Mikkel S. Eriksen and Tor Erik Hermansen . Production of the song was helmed by Khan under his production name Naughty Boy as well as Eriksen and Hermansen under their production name StarGate . It was recorded by Eriksen and Miles Walker at Roc the Mic Studios located in New York City . Rihanna 's vocals were recorded by Marcus Tovar and Kuk Harrell at R Studios in Los Angeles , California , while it was mixed by Manny Marroquin at Larrabee Studios in Burbank , California . Harrell also handled production of Rihanna 's vocals . All instrumentation and programming was carried out by Eriksen , Hermansen , Khan and Sandé . 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " Half of Me " is a chamber pop song which lasts for a duration of three minutes and twelve seconds . The line " You saw me on the television " is a possible reference to her interview with Oprah Winfrey after her boyfriend , Chris Brown assaulted her . Christina Lee for Idolator thought that this is because of how Rihanna 's popularity and personal life combined with her " paparazzi @-@ documented interactions " with Brown has generated headlines and news stories around the world . " Half of Me " can be interpreted as a " personal essay " rather than just a song . Stacy @-@ Ann Ellis for Vibe noted that the singer appears to have improved her vocals with regard to " experimentation " , which she cites as being evident on " Half of Me " , as well as " Diamonds " and " Stay " . Ellis also noted that co @-@ writer Emeli Sandé 's " candid and immediate charm " is present on the song , and described it as the " perfect " ending to the album . Concluding her opinion of the song , Ellis wrote that " Half of Me " is delivered in a " firm and steady voice " which is filled with irony , as she feels that Rihanna is saying no one truly knows who she is and that is half the fun of working her out , but is in no way " remorseful " about letting people in completely : 
 You know me / I 'm the life of the party 
 Beautiful people surround me / Everybody falling in love 
 Oh , you know me / Everybody knows that I ’ m crazy 
 Sticks and stones , they never break me 
 And I 'm the type that don 't give a fuck 
 And that 's just the half of it . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Jim Farber for New York Daily News wrote that Unapologetic contains more ballads than what Rihanna 's previous albums have featured , and further noted that " Half of Me " " proves the star can be as evocative as she is provocative " . Christina Lee of website Idolator wrote that there are two songs on the album which show " how ubiquitous she ’ s [ Rihanna ] become " , " Love Without Tragedy / Mother Mary " and " Half of Me " . A reviewer for Billboard was surprised at how many " heartfelt ballads " are included on the album , and listed " Half of Me " as one of the examples . Michael Gallucci for PopCrush wrote that " Half of Me " , along with " Pour It Up " , are songs for the " haters " . He further wrote that the singer pushes the track as she has an " agenda " , but criticised the use of " fuck " , which he points out as being used in the majority of Unapologetic 's tracks . Upon the release of Unapologetic , " Half of Me " charted in several territories due to strong digital downloads . It debuted on the Irish Singles Chart at number 84 on November 22 , 2012 . On November 25 , 2012 , the song entered the UK Singles Chart at number 75 , and the UK R & B Chart at number ten . In Switzerland , the song debuted at number 46 . It also debuted at number 96 on the Canadian Hot 100 chart . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Roc the Mic Studios , New York City . 
 Vocals recorded at R Studios , Los Angeles , CA . 
 Mixed at Larrabee Studios , Burbank , CA . 
 Personnel 
 Songwriting – Emeli Sandé , Shahid Khan , Mikkel S. Eriksen , Tor Erik Hermansen 
 Production – StarGate , Naughty Boy 
 Recording – Mikkel S. Eriksen , Miles Walker 
 Vocal recording – Marcus Tovar , Kuk Harrell 
 Vocal production – Kuk Harrell 
 All instrumentation and programming – Mikkel S. Eriksen , Tor Erik Hermansen , Shahid Khan , Emeli Sandé 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Unapologetic , Def Jam Recordings , SRP Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Downloaded ( Battlestar Galactica ) = 
 " Downloaded " is the eighteenth episode of the second season of the reimagined Battlestar Galactica television series . It aired originally on the Sci Fi Channel on February 24 , 2006 . 
 The episode takes place alongside the rest of the re @-@ imagined series , with 49 @,@ 579 human survivors left in the Fleet . The episode primarily details the lives of two specific Cylon models after their apparent destruction who were declared Cylon heroes . One model is " Caprica @-@ Six " , the copy of Number Six who was responsible for disabling the Colonial defense system prior to the events of the miniseries . The other model is Sharon " Boomer " Valerii , a sleeper agent who was a member of the crew of Galactica . 
 The concept of a Cylon @-@ centric episode was proposed long before the episode aired , in an episode which would have seen the Cylons discuss their equivalent of the " Final Solution " . " Downloaded " instead focuses on showing the personality of the Cylon race , in particular , Caprica @-@ Six and Boomer . The episode was universally well @-@ received despite its unconventional format . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode primarily takes place on Cylon @-@ occupied Caprica . After the Fall of the Twelve Colonies , the copy of Number Six ( Tricia Helfer ) that was responsible for disabling the Colonial defense system ( affectionately known as " Caprica @-@ Six " ) and Sharon " Boomer " Valerii ( Grace Park ) were both " downloaded " : a standard Cylon practice of rebirth which takes place if a model is to perish , and have both been hailed as Cylon heroes due to their efforts in infiltrating human society . 
 Both are having difficulties in adjusting to life on Caprica . In particular , Caprica @-@ Six is having visions of Gaius Baltar ( James Callis ) that only she can see , much like Baltar 's visions of Caprica @-@ Six , and Boomer is having problems accepting her Cylon nature to the point of the denial , even in danger of being " boxed " , which means storing a Cylon 's memories without consciousness out of its body . Number Three ( Lucy Lawless ) asks Caprica @-@ Six to help Boomer in this regard . However , when Caprica @-@ Six starts to associate more with Boomer , they both realize that the holocaust the Cylons effected was a sin . 
 Caprica @-@ Six and Boomer are next shown conversing with Number Three . While the three move up a stairwell , explosives set by the resistance led by Samuel T. Anders ( Michael Trucco ) detonate , trapping Anders , Three , Boomer , and Caprica @-@ Six in a parking garage . While Anders is originally shielded and hidden by the blast , Caprica @-@ Six is injured , so much so that Number Three tries to euthanize her before finding Anders , whom she tries to kill instead . Number Three goads the other survivors so much that Caprica @-@ Six kills her and forms a pact with Boomer to attempt to change Cylon opinion of humans . 
 The episode 's secondary plot takes place on Galactica . The copy of Number Eight that defected from the Cylons gives birth by <unk> section to a baby who she and Karl Agathon ( <unk> <unk> ) call " Hera " . However , President Laura Roslin , and her secretary , Tory Foster , and Dr. Cottle conspire to fake Hera 's death fearing what would happen if the Cylons knew the child lived . President Roslin also did not want Hera to be raised by her Cylon mother , Sharon , whom she still does not trust . At the end of the episode , the child is given to a woman who believes the child was born on Pegasus , while Helo and Chief Tyrol ( Aaron Douglas ) scatter the ashes they believe to be Hera 's into space . 
 = = Production = = 
 The concept of a Cylon @-@ perspective episode was originally proposed for an episode called " The Raid " , which would have consisted on a Cylon meeting not unlike the Wannsee Conference , but was dropped as the equivalent " final solution " had already happened during the miniseries . Nevertheless , Sci @-@ Fi liked the concept , and commissioned this episode . 
 A major theme of the episode is the humanization of " Caprica @-@ Six " – while Caprica @-@ Six shows her manipulative streak in parts of the episode , in particular during her conversation in the beach @-@ side house with Boomer , the destruction of the Twelve Colonies and her love of Baltar have somewhat changed her psychology . Conversely , Boomer shows resistance to her Cylon nature . Series creator Ronald D. Moore found the scene that took place in Boomer 's apartment interesting as it showed a major amount of her backstory . It also serves the purpose of Boomer 's denial that her memories were manufactured , and that the Cylons are more passive than humans . Another major subplot is the " Virtual Baltar " only visible by Caprica @-@ Six , which Moore commented was a " delicious symmetry " to Baltar 's " Virtual Six " . Both were intended to show how the couple had been changed through experience , in particular , the events of the miniseries . 
 Several scenes were cut from the episode . Of these , the most notable is an entire subplot centering on Gina and D 'Anna kidnapping Hera Agathon , which was excised as Moore felt there would be " too many Cylons " . 
 The production team also had significant problems with the scenes in the parking garage , and how to avoid the <unk> of contemporary cars being found on Caprica . In order to avoid this , the production team used cars mostly found in Eastern Europe , for the purpose that the audience would not immediately recognise the types of cars , but still to keep a sense of realism . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Ronald D. Moore stated that " Downloaded " is his favorite episode of the series , and especially admired the acting of Park , Helfer , and Callis , the latter especially for his change in role . Jacob Clifton of Television Without Pity gave the episode an " A + " rating . Keith McDuffee of TV Squad commented that the episode was " perfect " , and made up for any issues he had about the show before the episode . He found the storyline concerning the birth of Hera Agathon , the hybrid baby , a " clever twist " , and appreciated the episode 's general Cylon perspective . The Chicago Tribune appreciated Park , Helfer , and Lawless ' acting and the appearance of Dr. Cottle , and concluded by saying that it was well @-@ crafted and added to the " deftly drawn moral confusion " over whether the Cylons were good or evil . The episode was nominated by the World Science Fiction Society for the 2007 Best Dramatic Presentation , Short Form , an award that was won by the Doctor Who episode " The Girl in the Fireplace " . 
 = Wind = 
 Wind is the flow of gases on a large scale . On the surface of the Earth , wind consists of the bulk movement of air . In outer space , solar wind is the movement of gases or charged particles from the Sun through space , while planetary wind is the outgassing of light chemical elements from a planet 's atmosphere into space . Winds are commonly classified by their spatial scale , their speed , the types of forces that cause them , the regions in which they occur , and their effect . The strongest observed winds on a planet in the Solar System occur on Neptune and Saturn . Winds have various aspects , an important one being its velocity ; another the density of the gas involved ; another its energy content or wind energy . 
 In meteorology , winds are often referred to according to their strength , and the direction from which the wind is blowing . Short bursts of high speed wind are termed gusts . Strong winds of intermediate duration ( around one minute ) are termed squalls . Long @-@ duration winds have various names associated with their average strength , such as breeze , gale , storm , and hurricane . Wind occurs on a range of scales , from thunderstorm flows lasting tens of minutes , to local breezes generated by heating of land surfaces and lasting a few hours , to global winds resulting from the difference in absorption of solar energy between the climate zones on Earth . The two main causes of large @-@ scale atmospheric circulation are the differential heating between the equator and the poles , and the rotation of the planet ( Coriolis effect ) . Within the tropics , thermal low circulations over terrain and high plateaus can drive monsoon circulations . In coastal areas the sea breeze / land breeze cycle can define local winds ; in areas that have variable terrain , mountain and valley breezes can dominate local winds . 
 In human civilization , wind has inspired mythology , influenced the events of history , expanded the range of transport and warfare , and provided a power source for mechanical work , electricity and recreation . Wind powers the voyages of sailing ships across Earth 's oceans . Hot air balloons use the wind to take short trips , and powered flight uses it to increase lift and reduce fuel consumption . Areas of wind shear caused by various weather phenomena can lead to dangerous situations for aircraft . When winds become strong , trees and man @-@ made structures are damaged or destroyed . 
 Winds can shape landforms , via a variety of aeolian processes such as the formation of fertile soils , such as loess , and by erosion . Dust from large deserts can be moved great distances from its source region by the prevailing winds ; winds that are accelerated by rough topography and associated with dust outbreaks have been assigned regional names in various parts of the world because of their significant effects on those regions . Wind also affects the spread of wildfires . Winds can disperse seeds from various plants , enabling the survival and dispersal of those plant species , as well as flying insect populations . When combined with cold temperatures , wind has a negative impact on livestock . Wind affects animals ' food stores , as well as their hunting and defensive strategies . 
 = = Causes of wind = = 
 Wind is caused by differences in the atmospheric pressure . When a difference in atmospheric pressure exists , air moves from the higher to the lower pressure area , resulting in winds of various speeds . On a rotating planet , air will also be deflected by the Coriolis effect , except exactly on the equator . Globally , the two major driving factors of large @-@ scale wind patterns ( the atmospheric circulation ) are the differential heating between the equator and the poles ( difference in absorption of solar energy leading to buoyancy forces ) and the rotation of the planet . Outside the tropics and aloft from frictional effects of the surface , the large @-@ scale winds tend to approach geostrophic balance . Near the Earth 's surface , friction causes the wind to be slower than it would be otherwise . Surface friction also causes winds to blow more inward into low pressure areas . A new , controversial theory suggests atmospheric gradients are caused by forest induced water condensation resulting in a positive feedback cycle of forests drawing moist air from the coastline . 
 Winds defined by an equilibrium of physical forces are used in the decomposition and analysis of wind profiles . They are useful for simplifying the atmospheric equations of motion and for making qualitative arguments about the horizontal and vertical distribution of winds . The geostrophic wind component is the result of the balance between Coriolis force and pressure gradient force . It flows parallel to isobars and approximates the flow above the atmospheric boundary layer in the midlatitudes . The thermal wind is the difference in the geostrophic wind between two levels in the atmosphere . It exists only in an atmosphere with horizontal temperature gradients . The <unk> wind component is the difference between actual and geostrophic wind , which is responsible for air " filling up " cyclones over time . The gradient wind is similar to the geostrophic wind but also includes centrifugal force ( or centripetal acceleration ) . 
 = = Measurement = = 
 Wind direction is usually expressed in terms of the direction from which it originates . For example , a northerly wind blows from the north to the south . Weather vanes pivot to indicate the direction of the wind . At airports , <unk> indicate wind direction , and can also be used to estimate wind speed by the angle of hang . Wind speed is measured by anemometers , most commonly using rotating cups or propellers . When a high measurement frequency is needed ( such as in research applications ) , wind can be measured by the propagation speed of ultrasound signals or by the effect of ventilation on the resistance of a heated wire . Another type of anemometer uses pitot tubes that take advantage of the pressure differential between an inner tube and an outer tube that is exposed to the wind to determine the dynamic pressure , which is then used to compute the wind speed . 
 Sustained wind speeds are reported globally at a 10 meters ( 33 ft ) height and are averaged over a 10 ‑ minute time frame . The United States reports winds over a 1 ‑ minute average for tropical cyclones , and a 2 ‑ minute average within weather observations . India typically reports winds over a 3 ‑ minute average . Knowing the wind sampling average is important , as the value of a one @-@ minute sustained wind is typically 14 % greater than a ten @-@ minute sustained wind . A short burst of high speed wind is termed a wind gust , one technical definition of a wind gust is : the maxima that exceed the lowest wind speed measured during a ten @-@ minute time interval by 10 knots ( 19 km / h ) . A squall is a doubling of the wind speed above a certain threshold , which lasts for a minute or more . 
 To determine winds aloft , <unk> determine wind speed by GPS , radio navigation , or radar tracking of the probe . Alternatively , movement of the parent weather balloon position can be tracked from the ground visually using <unk> . Remote sensing techniques for wind include <unk> , Doppler <unk> and radars , which can measure the Doppler shift of electromagnetic radiation scattered or reflected off suspended aerosols or molecules , and radiometers and radars can be used to measure the surface roughness of the ocean from space or airplanes . Ocean roughness can be used to estimate wind velocity close to the sea surface over oceans . Geostationary satellite imagery can be used to estimate the winds throughout the atmosphere based upon how far clouds move from one image to the next . Wind engineering describes the study of the effects of the wind on the built environment , including buildings , bridges and other man @-@ made objects . 
 = = Wind force scale = = 
 Historically , the Beaufort wind force scale ( Created by Beaufort ) provides an empirical description of wind speed based on observed sea conditions . Originally it was a 13 @-@ level scale , but during the 1940s , the scale was expanded to 17 levels . There are general terms that differentiate winds of different average speeds such as a breeze , a gale , a storm , tornado , or a hurricane . Within the Beaufort scale , gale @-@ force winds lie between 28 knots ( 52 km / h ) and 55 knots ( 102 km / h ) with preceding adjectives such as moderate , fresh , strong , and whole used to differentiate the wind 's strength within the gale category . A storm has winds of 56 knots ( 104 km / h ) to 63 knots ( 117 km / h ) . The terminology for tropical cyclones differs from one region to another globally . Most ocean basins use the average wind speed to determine the tropical cyclone 's category . Below is a summary of the classifications used by Regional Specialized Meteorological Centers worldwide : 
 = = = Enhanced Fujita scale = = = 
 The Enhanced Fujita Scale ( EF Scale ) rates the strength of tornadoes in the United States based on the damage they cause . Below is that scale . 
 = = = Station model = = = 
 The station model plotted on surface weather maps uses a wind barb to show both wind direction and speed . The wind barb shows the speed using " flags " on the end . 
 Each half of a flag depicts 5 knots ( 9 @.@ 3 km / h ) of wind . 
 Each full flag depicts 10 knots ( 19 km / h ) of wind . 
 Each pennant ( filled triangle ) depicts 50 knots ( 93 km / h ) of wind . 
 Winds are depicted as blowing from the direction the barb is facing . Therefore , a northeast wind will be depicted with a line extending from the cloud circle to the northeast , with flags indicating wind speed on the northeast end of this line . Once plotted on a map , an analysis of isotachs ( lines of equal wind speeds ) can be accomplished . Isotachs are particularly useful in diagnosing the location of the jet stream on upper level constant pressure charts , and are usually located at or above the 300 hPa level . 
 = = Wind power = = 
 Wind energy is the kinetic energy of the air in motion . The kinetic energy of a packet of air of mass m with velocity v is given by ½ m v2 . To find the mass of the packet passing through an area A perpendicular its velocity ( which could be the rotor area of a turbine ) , we multiply its volume after time t has passed with the air density ρ , which gives us m = A v t ρ . So , we find that the total wind energy is : 
 <formula> 
 Differentiating with respect to time to find the rate of increase of energy , we find that the total wind power is : 
 <formula> 
 Wind power is thus proportional to the third power of the wind velocity . 
 = = = Theoretical power captured by a wind turbine = = = 
 Total wind power could be captured only if the wind velocity is reduced to zero . In a realistic wind turbine this is impossible , as the captured air must also leave the turbine . A relation between the input and output wind velocity must be considered . Using the concept of stream tube , the maximal achievable extraction of wind power by a wind turbine is 59 % of the total theoretical wind power ( see : Betz ' law ) . 
 = = = Practical wind turbine power = = = 
 Further insufficiencies , such as rotor blade friction and drag , gearbox losses , generator and converter losses , reduce the power delivered by a wind turbine . The basic relation that the turbine power is ( approximately ) proportional to the third power of velocity remains . 
 = = Global climatology = = 
 Easterly winds , on average , dominate the flow pattern across the poles , westerly winds blow across the mid @-@ latitudes of the earth , polewards of the subtropical ridge , while easterlies again dominate the tropics . 
 Directly under the subtropical ridge are the doldrums , or horse latitudes , where winds are lighter . Many of the Earth 's deserts lie near the average latitude of the subtropical ridge , where descent reduces the relative humidity of the air mass . The strongest winds are in the mid @-@ latitudes where cold polar air meets warm air from the tropics . 
 = = = Tropics = = = 
 The trade winds ( also called trades ) are the prevailing pattern of easterly surface winds found in the tropics towards the Earth 's equator . The trade winds blow predominantly from the northeast in the Northern Hemisphere and from the southeast in the Southern Hemisphere . The trade winds act as the steering flow for tropical cyclones that form over the world 's oceans . Trade winds also steer African dust westward across the Atlantic Ocean into the Caribbean Sea , as well as portions of southeast North America . 
 A monsoon is a seasonal prevailing wind that lasts for several months within tropical regions . The term was first used in English in India , Bangladesh , Pakistan , and neighboring countries to refer to the big seasonal winds blowing from the Indian Ocean and Arabian Sea in the southwest bringing heavy rainfall to the area . Its poleward progression is accelerated by the development off a heat low over the Asian , African , and North American continents during May through July , and over Australia in December . 
 = = = Westerlies and their impact = = = 
 The Westerlies or the Prevailing Westerlies are the prevailing winds in the middle latitudes between 35 and 65 degrees latitude . These prevailing winds blow from the west to the east , and steer extratropical cyclones in this general manner . The winds are predominantly from the southwest in the Northern Hemisphere and from the northwest in the Southern Hemisphere . They are strongest in the winter when the pressure is lower over the poles , and weakest during the summer and when pressures are higher over the poles . 
 Together with the trade winds , the westerlies enabled a round @-@ trip trade route for sailing ships crossing the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans , as the westerlies lead to the development of strong ocean currents on the western sides of oceans in both hemispheres through the process of western intensification . These western ocean currents transport warm , sub tropical water polewards toward the polar regions . The westerlies can be particularly strong , especially in the southern hemisphere , where there is less land in the middle latitudes to cause the flow pattern to amplify , which slows the winds down . The strongest westerly winds in the middle latitudes are within a band known as the Roaring Forties , between 40 and 50 degrees latitude south of the equator . The Westerlies play an important role in carrying the warm , equatorial waters and winds to the western coasts of continents , especially in the southern hemisphere because of its vast oceanic expanse . 
 = = = Polar easterlies = = = 
 The polar easterlies , also known as Polar Hadley cells , are dry , cold prevailing winds that blow from the high @-@ pressure areas of the polar highs at the north and south poles towards the low @-@ pressure areas within the Westerlies at high latitudes . Unlike the Westerlies , these prevailing winds blow from the east to the west , and are often weak and irregular . Because of the low sun angle , cold air builds up and subsides at the pole creating surface high @-@ pressure areas , forcing an equatorward outflow of air ; that outflow is deflected westward by the Coriolis effect . 
 = = Local considerations = = 
 = = = Sea and land breezes = = = 
 In coastal regions , sea breezes and land breezes can be important factors in a location 's prevailing winds . The sea is warmed by the sun more slowly because of water 's greater specific heat compared to land . As the temperature of the surface of the land rises , the land heats the air above it by conduction . The warm air is less dense than the surrounding environment and so it rises . This causes a pressure gradient of about 2 millibars from the ocean to the land . The cooler air above the sea , now with higher sea level pressure , flows inland into the lower pressure , creating a cooler breeze near the coast . When large @-@ scale winds are calm , the strength of the sea breeze is directly proportional to the temperature difference between the land mass and the sea . If an offshore wind of 8 knots ( 15 km / h ) exists , the sea breeze is not likely to develop . 
 At night , the land cools off more quickly than the ocean because of differences in their specific heat values . This temperature change causes the daytime sea breeze to dissipate . When the temperature onshore cools below the temperature offshore , the pressure over the water will be lower than that of the land , establishing a land breeze , as long as an onshore wind is not strong enough to oppose it . 
 = = = Near mountains = = = 
 Over elevated surfaces , heating of the ground exceeds the heating of the surrounding air at the same altitude above sea level , creating an associated thermal low over the terrain and enhancing any thermal lows that would have otherwise existed , and changing the wind circulation of the region . In areas where there is rugged topography that significantly interrupts the environmental wind flow , the wind circulation between mountains and valleys is the most important contributor to the prevailing winds . Hills and valleys substantially distort the airflow by increasing friction between the atmosphere and landmass by acting as a physical block to the flow , deflecting the wind parallel to the range just upstream of the topography , which is known as a barrier jet . This barrier jet can increase the low level wind by 45 % . Wind direction also changes because of the contour of the land . 
 If there is a pass in the mountain range , winds will rush through the pass with considerable speed because of the Bernoulli principle that describes an inverse relationship between speed and pressure . The airflow can remain turbulent and erratic for some distance downwind into the flatter countryside . These conditions are dangerous to ascending and descending airplanes . Cool winds accelerating through mountain gaps have been given regional names . In Central America , examples include the Papagayo wind , the Panama wind , and the <unk> wind . In Europe , similar winds are known as the Bora , <unk> , and Mistral . When these winds blow over open waters , they increase mixing of the upper layers of the ocean that elevates cool , nutrient rich waters to the surface , which leads to increased marine life . 
 In mountainous areas , local distortion of the airflow becomes severe . Jagged terrain combines to produce unpredictable flow patterns and turbulence , such as rotors , which can be topped by lenticular clouds . Strong updrafts , downdrafts and eddies develop as the air flows over hills and down valleys . Orographic precipitation occurs on the windward side of mountains and is caused by the rising air motion of a large @-@ scale flow of moist air across the mountain ridge , also known as upslope flow , resulting in adiabatic cooling and condensation . In mountainous parts of the world subjected to relatively consistent winds ( for example , the trade winds ) , a more moist climate usually prevails on the windward side of a mountain than on the leeward or downwind side . Moisture is removed by orographic lift , leaving drier air on the descending and generally warming , leeward side where a rain shadow is observed . Winds that flow over mountains down into lower elevations are known as downslope winds . These winds are warm and dry . In Europe downwind of the Alps , they are known as foehn . In Poland , an example is the <unk> <unk> . In Argentina , the local name for downsloped winds is <unk> . In Java , the local name for such winds is <unk> . In New Zealand , they are known as the Nor <unk> arch , and are accompanied by the cloud formation they are named after that has inspired artwork over the years . In the Great Plains of the United States , the winds are known as a chinook . In California , downsloped winds are funneled through mountain passes , which intensify their effect , and examples into Santa Ana and <unk> winds . Wind speeds during downslope wind effect can exceed 160 kilometers per hour ( 99 mph ) . 
 = = Average wind speeds = = 
 As described earlier , prevailing and local winds are not spread evenly across the earth , which means that wind speeds also differ by region . In addition , the wind speed also increases with the altitude . 
 = = = Wind power density = = = 
 Nowadays , a yardstick used to determine the best locations for wind energy development is referred to as wind power density ( WPD ) . It is a calculation relating to the effective force of the wind at a particular location , frequently expressed in terms of the elevation above ground level over a period of time . It takes into account wind velocity and mass . Color coded maps are prepared for a particular area are described as , for example , " mean annual power density at 50 meters . " The results of the above calculation are included in an index developed by the National Renewable Energy Lab and referred to as " NREL CLASS . " The larger the WPD calculation , the higher it is rated by class . At the end of 2008 , worldwide nameplate capacity of wind @-@ powered generators was 120 @.@ 8 gigawatts . Although wind produced only about 1 @.@ 5 % of worldwide electricity use in 2009 , it is growing rapidly , having doubled in the three years between 2005 and 2008 . In several countries it has achieved relatively high levels of penetration , accounting for approximately 19 % of electricity production in Denmark , 10 % in Spain and Portugal , and 7 % in Germany and the Republic of Ireland in 2008 . One study indicates that an entirely renewable energy supply based on 70 % wind is attainable at today 's power prices by linking wind farms with an HVDC <unk> power has expanded quickly , its share of worldwide electricity usage at the end of 2014 was 3 @.@ 1 % . 
 = = Shear = = 
 Wind shear , sometimes referred to as windshear or wind gradient , is a difference in wind speed and direction over a relatively short distance in the Earth 's atmosphere . Wind shear can be broken down into vertical and horizontal components , with horizontal wind shear seen across weather fronts and near the coast , and vertical shear typically near the surface , though also at higher levels in the atmosphere near upper level jets and frontal zones aloft . 
 Wind shear itself is a microscale meteorological phenomenon occurring over a very small distance , but it can be associated with mesoscale or synoptic scale weather features such as squall lines and cold fronts . It is commonly observed near microbursts and downbursts caused by thunderstorms , weather fronts , areas of locally higher low level winds referred to as low level jets , near mountains , radiation inversions that occur because of clear skies and calm winds , buildings , wind turbines , and sailboats . Wind shear has a significant effect during take @-@ off and landing of aircraft because of their effects on control of the aircraft , and was a significant cause of aircraft accidents involving large loss of life within the United States . 
 Sound movement through the atmosphere is affected by wind shear , which can bend the wave front , causing sounds to be heard where they normally would not , or vice versa . Strong vertical wind shear within the troposphere also inhibits tropical cyclone development , but helps to organize individual thunderstorms into living longer life cycles that can then produce severe weather . The thermal wind concept explains how differences in wind speed with height are dependent on horizontal temperature differences , and explains the existence of the jet stream . 
 = = Usage of wind = = 
 = = = History = = = 
 As a natural force , the wind was often personified as one or more wind gods or as an expression of the supernatural in many cultures . Vayu is the Hindu God of Wind . The Greek wind gods include Boreas , <unk> , <unk> , and Zephyrus . Aeolus , in varying interpretations the ruler or keeper of the four winds , has also been described as Astraeus , the god of dusk who fathered the four winds with Eos , goddess of dawn . The Ancient Greeks also observed the seasonal change of the winds , as evidenced by the Tower of the Winds in Athens . Venti are the Roman gods of the winds . Fūjin is the Japanese wind god and is one of the eldest Shinto gods . According to legend , he was present at the creation of the world and first let the winds out of his bag to clear the world of mist . In Norse mythology , Njörðr is the god of the wind . There are also four <unk> ( Norse dwarves ) , named <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , and probably the four stags of Yggdrasil , personify the four winds , and parallel the four Greek wind gods . <unk> is the name of the Slavic god of winds , sky and air . He is said to be the ancestor ( grandfather ) of the winds of the eight directions . 
 Kamikaze ( <unk> ) is a Japanese word , usually translated as divine wind , believed to be a gift from the gods . The term is first known to have been used as the name of a pair or series of typhoons that are said to have saved Japan from two Mongol fleets under Kublai Khan that attacked Japan in 1274 and again in 1281 . Protestant Wind is a name for the storm that deterred the Spanish Armada from an invasion of England in 1588 where the wind played a pivotal role , or the favorable winds that enabled William of Orange to invade England in 1688 . During Napoleon 's Egyptian Campaign , the French soldiers had a hard time with the khamsin wind : when the storm appeared " as a blood @-@ stint in the distant sky " , the natives went to take cover , while the French " did not react until it was too late , then choked and fainted in the blinding , suffocating walls of dust . " During the North African Campaign of the World War II , " allied and German troops were several times forced to halt in mid @-@ battle because of sandstorms caused by khamsin ... Grains of sand whirled by the wind blinded the soldiers and created electrical disturbances that rendered compasses useless . " 
 = = = Transportation = = = 
 There are many different forms of sailing ships , but they all have certain basic things in common . Except for rotor ships using the Magnus effect , every sailing ship has a hull , rigging and at least one mast to hold up the sails that use the wind to power the ship . Ocean journeys by sailing ship can take many months , and a common hazard is becoming becalmed because of lack of wind , or being blown off course by severe storms or winds that do not allow progress in the desired direction . A severe storm could lead to shipwreck , and the loss of all hands . Sailing ships can only carry a certain quantity of supplies in their hold , so they have to plan long voyages carefully to include appropriate provisions , including fresh water . 
 For aerodynamic aircraft which operate relative to the air , winds affect <unk> , and in the case of lighter @-@ than @-@ air vehicles , wind may play a significant or solitary role in their movement and ground track . The velocity of surface wind is generally the primary factor governing the direction of flight operations at an airport , and airfield runways are aligned to account for the common wind direction ( s ) of the local area . While taking off with a tailwind may be necessary under certain circumstances , a headwind is generally desirable . A tailwind increases takeoff distance required and decreases the climb gradient . 
 = = = Power source = = = 
 Historically , the ancient Sinhalese of Anuradhapura and in other cities around Sri Lanka used the monsoon winds to power furnaces as early as 300 BCE . The furnaces were constructed on the path of the monsoon winds to exploit the wind power , to bring the temperatures inside up to 1 @,@ 200 ° C ( 2 @,@ 190 ° F ) . An early historical reference to a rudimentary windmill was used to power an organ in the first century CE . The first practical windmills were later built in Sistan , Afghanistan , from the 7th century CE . These were vertical @-@ axle windmills , which had long vertical <unk> with rectangle shaped blades . Made of six to twelve sails covered in reed matting or cloth material , these windmills were used to grind corn and draw up water , and were used in the <unk> and sugarcane industries . Horizontal @-@ axle windmills were later used extensively in Northwestern Europe to grind flour beginning in the 1180s , and many Dutch windmills still exist . High altitude wind power is the focus of over 30 companies worldwide using tethered technology rather than ground @-@ hugging compressive @-@ towers . Oil is being saved by using wind for powering cargo ships by use of the mechanical energy converted from the wind 's kinetic energy using very large kites . 
 = = = Recreation = = = 
 Wind figures prominently in several popular sports , including recreational hang gliding , hot air ballooning , kite flying , <unk> , kite <unk> , kite surfing , paragliding , sailing , and windsurfing . In gliding , wind gradients just above the surface affect the takeoff and landing phases of flight of a glider . Wind gradient can have a noticeable effect on ground launches , also known as winch launches or wire launches . If the wind gradient is significant or sudden , or both , and the pilot maintains the same pitch attitude , the indicated airspeed will increase , possibly exceeding the maximum ground launch tow speed . The pilot must adjust the airspeed to deal with the effect of the gradient . When landing , wind shear is also a hazard , particularly when the winds are strong . As the glider descends through the wind gradient on final approach to landing , airspeed decreases while sink rate increases , and there is insufficient time to accelerate prior to ground contact . The pilot must anticipate the wind gradient and use a higher approach speed to compensate for it . 
 = = Role in the natural world = = 
 In arid climates , the main source of erosion is wind . The general wind circulation moves small particulates such as dust across wide oceans thousands of kilometers downwind of their point of origin , which is known as deflation . Westerly winds in the mid @-@ latitudes of the planet drive the movement of ocean currents from west to east across the world 's oceans . Wind has a very important role in aiding plants and other immobile organisms in dispersal of seeds , spores , pollen , etc . Although wind is not the primary form of seed dispersal in plants , it provides dispersal for a large percentage of the biomass of land plants . 
 = = = Erosion = = = 
 Erosion can be the result of material movement by the wind . There are two main effects . First , wind causes small particles to be lifted and therefore moved to another region . This is called deflation . Second , these suspended particles may impact on solid objects causing erosion by abrasion ( ecological succession ) . Wind erosion generally occurs in areas with little or no vegetation , often in areas where there is insufficient rainfall to support vegetation . An example is the formation of sand dunes , on a beach or in a desert . Loess is a homogeneous , typically <unk> , porous , friable , slightly coherent , often calcareous , fine @-@ grained , silty , pale yellow or buff , windblown ( Aeolian ) sediment . It generally occurs as a widespread blanket deposit that covers areas of hundreds of square kilometers and tens of meters thick . Loess often stands in either steep or vertical faces . Loess tends to develop into highly rich soils . Under appropriate climatic conditions , areas with loess are among the most agriculturally productive in the world . Loess deposits are geologically unstable by nature , and will erode very readily . Therefore , windbreaks ( such as big trees and bushes ) are often planted by farmers to reduce the wind erosion of loess . 
 = = = Desert dust migration = = = 
 During mid @-@ summer ( July in the northern hemisphere ) , the westward @-@ moving trade winds south of the northward @-@ moving subtropical ridge expand northwestward from the Caribbean Sea into southeastern North America . When dust from the Sahara moving around the southern periphery of the ridge within the belt of trade winds moves over land , rainfall is suppressed and the sky changes from a blue to a white appearance , which leads to an increase in red sunsets . Its presence negatively impacts air quality by adding to the count of airborne particulates . Over 50 % of the African dust that reaches the United States affects Florida . Since 1970 , dust outbreaks have worsened because of periods of drought in Africa . There is a large variability in the dust transport to the Caribbean and Florida from year to year . Dust events have been linked to a decline in the health of coral reefs across the Caribbean and Florida , primarily since the 1970s . Similar dust plumes originate in the Gobi Desert , which combined with pollutants , spread large distances downwind , or eastward , into North America . 
 There are local names for winds associated with sand and dust storms . The Calima carries dust on southeast winds into the Canary islands . The Harmattan carries dust during the winter into the Gulf of Guinea . The Sirocco brings dust from north Africa into southern Europe because of the movement of extratropical cyclones through the Mediterranean Sea . Spring storm systems moving across the eastern Mediterranean Sea cause dust to carry across Egypt and the Arabian peninsula , which are locally known as Khamsin . The Shamal is caused by cold fronts lifting dust into the atmosphere for days at a time across the Persian Gulf states . 
 = = = Effect on plants = = = 
 Wind dispersal of seeds , or <unk> , is one of the more primitive means of dispersal . Wind dispersal can take on one of two primary forms : seeds can float on the breeze or alternatively , they can flutter to the ground . The classic examples of these dispersal mechanisms include dandelions ( Taraxacum spp . , Asteraceae ) , which have a feathery pappus attached to their seeds and can be dispersed long distances , and maples ( Acer ( genus ) spp . , <unk> ) , which have winged seeds and flutter to the ground . An important constraint on wind dispersal is the need for abundant seed production to maximize the likelihood of a seed landing in a site suitable for germination . There are also strong evolutionary constraints on this dispersal mechanism . For instance , species in the Asteraceae on islands tended to have reduced dispersal capabilities ( i.e. , larger seed mass and smaller pappus ) relative to the same species on the mainland . Reliance upon wind dispersal is common among many weedy or ruderal species . Unusual mechanisms of wind dispersal include <unk> . A related process to <unk> is <unk> , which is the process where pollen is distributed by wind . Large families of plants are pollinated in this manner , which is favored when individuals of the dominant plant species are spaced closely together . 
 Wind also limits tree growth . On coasts and isolated mountains , the tree line is often much lower than in corresponding altitudes inland and in larger , more complex mountain systems , because strong winds reduce tree growth . High winds scour away thin soils through erosion , as well as damage limbs and twigs . When high winds knock down or uproot trees , the process is known as <unk> . This is most likely on windward slopes of mountains , with severe cases generally occurring to tree stands that are 75 years or older . Plant varieties near the coast , such as the Sitka spruce and sea grape , are pruned back by wind and salt spray near the coastline . 
 Wind can also cause plants damage through sand abrasion . Strong winds will pick up loose sand and topsoil and hurl it through the air at speeds ranging from 25 miles per hour ( 40 km / h ) to 40 miles per hour ( 64 km / h ) . Such windblown sand causes extensive damage to plant seedlings because it ruptures plant cells , making them vulnerable to evaporation and drought . Using a mechanical sandblaster in a laboratory setting , scientists affiliated with the Agricultural Research Service studied the effects of windblown sand abrasion on cotton seedlings . The study showed that the seedlings responded to the damage created by the windblown sand abrasion by shifting energy from stem and root growth to the growth and repair of the damaged stems . After a period of four weeks the growth of the seedling once again became uniform throughout the plant , as it was before the windblown sand abrasion occurred . 
 = = = Effect on animals = = = 
 Cattle and sheep are prone to wind chill caused by a combination of wind and cold temperatures , when winds exceed 40 kilometers per hour ( 25 mph ) , rendering their hair and wool coverings ineffective . Although penguins use both a layer of fat and feathers to help guard against coldness in both water and air , their flippers and feet are less immune to the cold . In the coldest climates such as Antarctica , emperor penguins use huddling behavior to survive the wind and cold , continuously alternating the members on the outside of the assembled group , which reduces heat loss by 50 % . Flying insects , a subset of arthropods , are swept along by the prevailing winds , while birds follow their own course taking advantage of wind conditions , in order to either fly or glide . As such , fine line patterns within weather radar imagery , associated with converging winds , are dominated by insect returns . Bird migration , which tends to occur overnight within the lowest 7 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 100 m ) of the Earth 's atmosphere , contaminates wind profiles gathered by weather radar , particularly the WSR @-@ 88D , by increasing the environmental wind returns by 15 knots ( 28 km / h ) to 30 knots ( 56 km / h ) . 
 <unk> use a wall of pebbles to store dry plants and grasses for the winter in order to protect the food from being blown away . Cockroaches use slight winds that precede the attacks of potential predators , such as toads , to survive their encounters . Their cerci are very sensitive to the wind , and help them survive half of their attacks . Elk have a keen sense of smell that can detect potential upwind predators at a distance of 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 800 m ) . Increases in wind above 15 kilometers per hour ( 9 @.@ 3 mph ) signals glaucous gulls to increase their foraging and aerial attacks on thick @-@ billed murres . 
 = = = Sound generation = = = 
 Wind causes the generation of sound . The movement of air causes movements of parts of natural objects , such as leaves or grass . These objects will produce sound if they touch each other . Even a soft wind will cause a low level of environmental noise . If the wind is blowing harder , it may produce howling sounds of varying frequencies . This may be caused by the wind blowing over cavities , or by vortices created in the air downstream of an object . Especially on high buildings , many structural parts may be a cause of annoying noise at certain wind conditions . Examples of these parts are balconies , ventilation openings , roof openings or cables . 
 = = Related damage = = 
 High winds are known to cause damage , depending upon their strength . Infrequent wind gusts can cause poorly designed suspension bridges to sway . When wind gusts are at a similar frequency to the swaying of the bridge , the bridge can be destroyed more easily , such as what occurred with the Tacoma Narrows Bridge in 1940 . Wind speeds as low as 23 knots ( 43 km / h ) can lead to power outages due to tree branches disrupting the flow of energy through power lines . While no species of tree is guaranteed to stand up to hurricane @-@ force winds , those with shallow roots are more prone to uproot , and brittle trees such as eucalyptus , sea hibiscus , and avocado are more prone to damage . Hurricane @-@ force winds cause substantial damage to mobile homes , and begin to structurally damage homes with foundations . Winds of this strength due to downsloped winds off terrain have been known to shatter windows and sandblast paint from cars . Once winds exceed 135 knots ( 250 km / h ) , homes completely collapse , and significant damage is done to larger buildings . Total destruction to man @-@ made structures occurs when winds reach 175 knots ( 324 km / h ) . The Saffir @-@ Simpson scale and Enhanced Fujita scale were designed to help estimate wind speed from the damage caused by high winds related to tropical cyclones and tornadoes , and vice versa . 
 Australia 's Barrow Island holds the record for the strongest wind gust , reaching 408 km / h ( 253 mph ) during tropical cyclone Olivia on 10 April 1996 , surpassing the previous record of 372 km / h ( 231 mph ) set on Mount Washington ( New Hampshire ) on the afternoon of 12 April 1934 . The most powerful gusts of wind on Earth were created by nuclear detonations . The blast wave is similar to a strong wind gust over the ground . The largest nuclear explosion ( 50 – 58 megatons at an altitude of about 13 @,@ 000 feet ( 4 @,@ 000 m ) ) generated a 20 bar blast pressure at ground zero , which is similar to a wind gust of 3 @,@ 100 miles per hour ( 5 @,@ 000 km / h ) . 
 Wildfire intensity increases during daytime hours . For example , burn rates of smoldering logs are up to five times greater during the day because of lower humidity , increased temperatures , and increased wind speeds . Sunlight warms the ground during the day and causes air currents to travel uphill , and downhill during the night as the land cools . Wildfires are fanned by these winds and often follow the air currents over hills and through valleys . United States wildfire operations revolve around a 24 @-@ hour fire day that begins at 10 : 00 a.m. because of the predictable increase in intensity resulting from the daytime warmth . 
 = = In outer space = = 
 The solar wind is quite different from a terrestrial wind , in that its origin is the sun , and it is composed of charged particles that have escaped the sun 's atmosphere . Similar to the solar wind , the planetary wind is composed of light gases that escape planetary atmospheres . Over long periods of time , the planetary wind can radically change the composition of planetary atmospheres . 
 The fastest wind ever recorded is coming from the accretion disc of the <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> black hole . Its speed is 20 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 miles per hour ( 32 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 km / h ) , which is 3 % of the speed of light . 
 = = = Planetary wind = = = 
 The hydrodynamic wind within the upper portion of a planet 's atmosphere allows light chemical elements such as hydrogen to move up to the <unk> , the lower limit of the exosphere , where the gases can then reach escape velocity , entering outer space without impacting other particles of gas . This type of gas loss from a planet into space is known as planetary wind . Such a process over geologic time causes water @-@ rich planets such as the Earth to evolve into planets like Venus . Additionally , planets with hotter lower atmospheres could accelerate the loss rate of hydrogen . 
 = = = Solar wind = = = 
 Rather than air , the solar wind is a stream of charged particles — a plasma — ejected from the upper atmosphere of the sun at a rate of 400 kilometers per second ( 890 @,@ 000 mph ) . It consists mostly of electrons and protons with energies of about 1 keV . The stream of particles varies in temperature and speed with the passage of time . These particles are able to escape the sun 's gravity , in part because of the high temperature of the corona , but also because of high kinetic energy that particles gain through a process that is not well @-@ understood . The solar wind creates the Heliosphere , a vast bubble in the interstellar medium surrounding the Solar System . Planets require large magnetic fields in order to reduce the ionization of their upper atmosphere by the solar wind . Other phenomena caused by the solar wind include geomagnetic storms that can knock out power grids on Earth , the aurorae such as the Northern Lights , and the plasma tails of comets that always point away from the sun . 
 = = On other planets = = 
 Strong 300 kilometers per hour ( 190 mph ) winds at Venus 's cloud tops circle the planet every four to five earth days . When the poles of Mars are exposed to sunlight after their winter , the frozen CO2 sublimates , creating significant winds that sweep off the poles as fast as 400 kilometers per hour ( 250 mph ) , which subsequently transports large amounts of dust and water vapor over its landscape . Other Martian winds have resulted in cleaning events and dust devils . On Jupiter , wind speeds of 100 meters per second ( 220 mph ) are common in zonal jet streams . Saturn 's winds are among the Solar System 's fastest . Cassini – Huygens data indicated peak easterly winds of 375 meters per second ( 840 mph ) . On Uranus , northern hemisphere wind speeds reach as high as 240 meters per second ( 540 mph ) near 50 degrees north latitude . At the cloud tops of Neptune , prevailing winds range in speed from 400 meters per second ( 890 mph ) along the equator to 250 meters per second ( 560 mph ) at the poles . At 70 ° S latitude on Neptune , a high @-@ speed jet stream travels at a speed of 300 meters per second ( 670 mph ) . 
 = Reculver = 
 Reculver is a village and coastal resort about 3 miles ( 5 km ) east of Herne Bay in south @-@ east England , in a ward of the same name , in the City of Canterbury district of Kent . It once occupied a strategic location at the north @-@ western end of the Wantsum Channel , a sea lane that separated the Isle of Thanet and the Kent mainland until the late Middle Ages . This led the Romans to build a small fort there at the time of their conquest of Britain in 43 AD , and , starting late in the 2nd century , they built a larger fort , or castrum , called Regulbium , which later became one of the chain of Saxon Shore forts . The military connection resumed in the Second World War , when the sea off Reculver was used for testing Barnes Wallis 's bouncing bombs . 
 By the 7th century Reculver had become a landed estate of the Anglo @-@ Saxon kings of Kent . The site of the Roman fort was given over for the establishment of a monastery dedicated to St Mary in 669 AD , and King Eadberht II of Kent was buried there in the 760s . During the Middle Ages Reculver was a thriving township with a weekly market and a yearly fair , and it was a member of the Cinque Port of Sandwich . The settlement declined as the Wantsum Channel silted up , and coastal erosion claimed many buildings constructed on the soft sandy cliffs . The village was largely abandoned in the late 18th century , and most of the church was demolished in the early 19th century . Protecting the ruins and the rest of Reculver from erosion is an ongoing challenge . 
 The 20th century saw a revival as local tourism developed and there are now two caravan parks . The census of 2001 recorded 135 people in the Reculver area , nearly a quarter of whom were in caravans at the time . The Reculver coastline is within a Site of Special Scientific Interest , a Special Protection Area and a Ramsar site , including most of Reculver Country Park , which itself includes much of Bishopstone Cliffs local nature reserve . While nationally scarce plants and insects are found there , the location is also important for migrating birds and is of significant geological interest . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Toponymy = = = 
 The earliest recorded form of the name , Regulbium , dates from the early 5th century or before and is Celtic in origin , meaning " at the promontory " or " great headland " ; in Old English this became corrupted to <unk> , sometimes given as <unk> , giving rise to the modern " Reculver " . The form " <unk> " includes the Old English place @-@ name element " ceaster " , which frequently relates to " a [ Roman ] city or walled town " . 
 = = = Prehistoric and Roman = = = 
 Stone Age flint tools have been washed out from the cliffs to the west of Reculver , and a Mesolithic <unk> axe was found near the centre of the Roman fort in 1960 . This was probably an accidental loss , rather than suggesting a human settlement , evidence for which begins with late Bronze Age and Iron Age ditches . These indicate an extensive settlement , where a Bronze Age palstave and Iron Age gold coins have been found . This was followed by a " fortlet " built by the Romans during their conquest of Britain , which began in 43 AD , and the existence of a Roman road leading to Canterbury , about 8 @.@ 5 miles ( 13 @.@ 7 km ) to the south @-@ west , indicates a Roman presence at Reculver from then onwards . A full @-@ size fort , or castrum , was started late in the 2nd century . This date is derived in part from a reconstruction of a uniquely detailed plaque , fragments of which were found by archaeologists in the 1960s . The plaque effectively records the establishment of the fort , since it commemorates the construction of two of its principal features , the basilica and the <unk> , or shrine , both being parts of the headquarters building , or principia : 
 this [ was ] the first time the inscribed phrase <unk> <unk> [ could ] be ... identified with the official shrine of [ a Roman military ] headquarters building , hitherto unmentioned in any inscription ... [ It was ] also the first certain ... application of the name basilica to [ this element of the building ] . 
 These structures were found by archaeologists , together with probable officers ' quarters , barracks and a bath house . A Roman oven found 200 feet ( 61 m ) south @-@ east of the fort was probably used for drying food such as corn and fish ; its main chamber measured about 16 feet ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) by 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 8 m ) overall . 
 The fort was located on a low hill at what was then the north @-@ eastern extremity of mainland Kent , overlooking the sea lane later known as the Wantsum Channel , which lay between it and the Isle of Thanet : the fort 's location thus allowed observation from the fort on all sides , including the sea . It was probably built by soldiers of the Cohors I <unk> , originally from Lower Germany , who had previously served at the Roman fort of Alauna at <unk> in Cumbria at least until the early 180s , since tiles recovered from the fort are stamped " <unk> " . The Notitia Dignitatum , a Roman administrative document from the early 5th century , also records the presence of the Cohors I <unk> at Reculver , then known as Regulbium . There must also have been a harbour nearby in Roman times , and , though this has not yet been found , it was probably near to the fort 's southern or eastern side . 
 The walls of the fort originally stood about 14 @.@ 8 feet ( 4 @.@ 5 m ) high and were 10 feet ( 3 m ) thick at their base , reducing to 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) at the top ; they were reinforced internally by an earthen bank . The entrance to the fort 's headquarters building faced north , indicating that the main gate was on the north side , facing the eponymous promontory and the sea . The north wall has been lost to the sea , along with the adjoining part of the east wall and most of the west wall ; the east wall is most complete and includes the remains of the eastern gateway and guard post . Parts of the surviving walls are all that remains of the fort above ground , and all have suffered from stone @-@ robbing , especially near the south @-@ western corner . The walls were originally faced with ragstone , but very little of this remains : otherwise only the cores of the walls are visible , consisting mostly of flint and concrete and standing only 8 @.@ 6 feet ( 2 @.@ 6 m ) high at their highest . 
 Roman forts were normally accompanied by a civilian settlement , or vicus : at Reculver this lay outside the north and west sides of the fort , much of it in areas now lost to the sea , and was extensive , perhaps covering " some ten hectares [ 25 acres ] in all . " In 1936 R.F. Jessup noted that " a Roman building with a hypocaust and tesselated [ floor once ] stood considerably to the northward of the fort " : this structure had been observed by the 17th- to 18th @-@ century antiquarian John <unk> , and was probably " an external bath house ... relating to [ an early phase of ] the fort . " In the same area <unk> described " several cisterns " between 10 and 12 feet ( 3 – 3 @.@ 7 m ) square , lined with oak planks and sealed at the bottom with puddled clay . He believed that these were for storing rainwater , and noted that a Roman strigil , which would have been used in a bath house , had been found in a similar cistern at Reculver ; he also observed that " such a multitude [ of cisterns ] has been discovered , almost in our memory , as proves that the ancient inhabitants of the place were very numerous . " In the 20th century twelve wells of the Roman period were identified to the west of the fort , ten of which were square ; all were cut into the hard layer of sandstone below the soft sandstone of the Thanet Beds , thus tapping into the water table . These and other 20th @-@ century finds from the Roman period extend to 1 @,@ 120 feet ( 341 @.@ 4 m ) west of the fort , and date to a period between 170 and 360 , roughly coinciding with the period of occupation at the fort itself . 
 At least 10 infant burials were found within the fort , all of babies , of which six were associated with Roman buildings : five sets of infant remains were found within the foundations and walls of buildings , as were coins dating from 270 – 300 AD . It was suspected that more such burials might be found in the walls of a building in the south @-@ western area of the fort if it were excavated further . A baby 's feeding bottle was also found in an excavated floor within 10 feet ( 3 m ) of one of the infant skeletons , though it may have been unconnected with the burials . The babies were probably buried in the buildings as ritual sacrifices , but it is unknown whether they were selected for burial because they were already dead , perhaps stillborn , or if they were buried alive or killed for the purpose . A local tale subsequently developed that the grounds of the fort were haunted by the sound of a crying baby . 
 Towards the end of the 3rd century a Roman naval commander named Carausius , who later declared himself emperor in Britain , was given the task of clearing pirates from the sea between Britain and the European mainland . In so doing he established a new chain of command , the British part of which was later to pass under the control of a Count of the Saxon Shore . The Notitia Dignitatum shows that the fort at Reculver became part of this arrangement , and its location meant that it lay at the " main point of contact in the system [ of Saxon Shore forts ] " . Archaeological evidence indicates that it was abandoned in the 370s . 
 = = = Medieval = = = 
 Reculver was part of a landed estate of the Anglo @-@ Saxon kings of Kent by the 7th century , possibly with a royal toll @-@ station or a " significant coastal trading settlement , " given the types and quantity of coins found there . Other early Anglo @-@ Saxon finds include a fragment of a gilt bronze brooch , or fibula , which was originally circular and set with coloured stones or glass , a claw beaker and pottery . Antiquarians such as the 18th @-@ century clergyman John Duncombe believed that King Æthelberht of Kent moved his royal court there from Canterbury in about 597 , and built a palace on the site of the Roman ruins . However , archaeological excavation has shown no evidence of this ; Æthelberht 's household would have been peripatetic , and the story has been described as probably a " pious legend " . A church was built on the site of the Roman fort in about 669 , when King Ecgberht of Kent granted land for the foundation of a monastery , which was dedicated to St Mary . 
 The monastery developed as the centre of a " large estate , a manor and a parish " , and , by the early 9th century , it had become " extremely wealthy " , but it then fell under the control of the archbishops of Canterbury . In 811 Archbishop Wulfred is recorded as having deprived the monastery of some of its land , and soon after it featured in a " monumental showdown " between Wulfred and King Coenwulf of Mercia over the control of monasteries . In 838 control of all monasteries under Canterbury 's authority was passed to the kings of Wessex , by the agreement of Archbishop Ceolnoth in exchange for protection from Viking attacks . By the 10th century the monastery at Reculver and its estate were both royal property : they were given back to the archbishops of Canterbury in 949 by King Eadred of England , at which time the estate included Hoath and Herne , and land at Chilmington , about 23 @.@ 5 miles ( 37 @.@ 8 km ) to the south @-@ west , and in the west of the Isle of Thanet . 
 By 1066 the monastery had become a parish church . However , in 1086 Reculver was named in Domesday Book as a hundred , and the manor was valued at £ <unk> ( £ 42 @.@ 35 ) . Included in the Domesday account for the manor , as well as the church , farmland , a mill , salt pans and a fishery , are 90 villeins and 25 bordars : these numbers can be multiplied four or five times to account for dependents , as they only represent " adult male heads of households " . In the 13th century Reculver was a parish of " exceptional wealth " , and the considerable enlargement of the church building during the Middle Ages indicates that the settlement had become a " thriving township " , with " dozens of houses " . The parish was broken up in 1310 when chapelries at Herne and , on the Isle of Thanet , St Nicholas @-@ at @-@ Wade and All Saints were converted into parishes , though Hoath was still a perpetual curacy belonging to Reculver parish in the 20th century . Records for the poll tax of 1377 show that there were then 364 individuals of 14 years and above , not including " honest beggars " , in the reduced parish , who paid a total of £ <unk> ( £ 6 @.@ 07 ) towards the tax . 
 = = = Decline and loss to the sea = = = 
 The thriving medieval township depended partly on its position on a maritime trade route through the Wantsum Channel , already present in Anglo @-@ Saxon times and exemplified by Reculver 's membership of the Cinque Port of Sandwich later in the Middle Ages . The importance of the Wantsum Channel was such that , when the River Thames froze in 1269 , trade between Sandwich and London had to be carried out overland . Historical records for the channel are sparse after 1269 , perhaps " because the route was so well known as to be taken for granted [ in the Middle Ages ] , the whole waterway from London to Sandwich being occasionally spoken of as the ' Thames ' " . But silting and inning had closed the channel to trading vessels sailing along it by about 1460 or soon after , and the first bridge was built over it at Sarre in 1485 , since ferries could no longer operate across it . 
 Reculver was also diminished by coastal erosion . By 1540 , when John Leland recorded a visit there , the coastline to the north had receded to within little more than a quarter of a mile ( 400 m ) of the " Towne [ which ] at this tyme [ was ] but Village lyke " . Soon afterwards , in 1576 , William Lambarde described Reculver as " poore and simple " . In 1588 there were 165 communicants – people taking part in services of holy communion at the church – and in 1640 there were 169 , but a map of about 1630 shows that the church then stood only about 500 feet ( 152 m ) from the shore . In January 1658 the local justices of the peace were petitioned concerning " encroachments of the sea ... [ which had ] since Michaelmas last [ 29 September 1657 ] encroached on the land near six rods [ 99 feet ( 30 m ) ] , and will doubtless do more harm " . The village 's failure to support two " beer shops " in the 1660s points clearly to a declining population , and the village was mostly abandoned around the end of the 18th century , its residents moving to Hillborough , about 1 @.@ 25 miles ( 2 km ) south @-@ west of Reculver but within the same parish . 
 Concern about erosion of the cliff on which the church stood , and the possible inundation of the village , had led the commissioners of sewers to install costly sea defences consisting of planking and piling before 1783 , when it was reported that the commissioners had adopted a scheme proposed by Sir Thomas Page to protect the church : the sea defences had proven counter @-@ productive , since sea water collected behind them and continued to undermine the cliff . Before this , according to John Duncombe , " the commissioners of sewers , and the occupiers who pay scots , [ had ] no view nor interest but to secure the level [ ground ] , which must be overflowed when the hill is washed away . " By 1787 Reculver had " dwindled into an insignificant village , thinly decked with the cottages of fishermen and smugglers . " 
 [ At about this time , ] from the present shore as far as a place called the Black Rock , seen at <unk> mark , where tradition says , a parish church once stood , there [ were ] found quantities of tiles , bricks , fragments of walls , tesselated pavements , and other marks of a ruinated town , and the household furniture , dress , and equipment of the horses belonging to the inhabitants of it , [ were ] continually found among the sands ... 
 In September 1804 a high tide and strong winds led to the destruction of five houses , one of which was " an ancient building , immediately opposite the public house , and had the appearance of having been part of some monastic erection " . The following year , according to a set of notes written by the parish clerk John Brett , " Reculver Church and <unk> stood in safety " , but in 1806 the sea began to encroach on the village , and in 1807 the local farmers dismantled the sea defences , after which " the village became a total [ wreck ] to the mercy of the sea . " 
 A further scheme to protect the cliff and church was proposed by John Rennie , but a decision was taken on 12 January 1808 to demolish the church . By March 1809 , erosion of the cliff had brought it to within 12 feet ( 4 m ) of the church , and demolition was begun in September that year . Trinity House intervened to ensure that the towers were preserved as a navigational aid , and in 1810 it bought what was left of the structure for £ 100 and built the first groynes , designed to protect the cliff on which the ruined church stands . The vicarage was abandoned at the same time as the church , or a little later , and a replacement parish church was built at Hillborough , opening in 1813 . 
 After the sea undermined the foundations of the Hoy and Anchor Inn at Reculver in January 1808 , the building was taken down and the redundant vicarage was used as a temporary replacement under the same name . Although it was reported in 1800 that there were then only five or six houses left in the village , a new Hoy and Anchor Inn was built by 1809 , and this was renamed as the King Ethelbert Inn by 1838 . Further construction work is indicated by a stone over the doorway to the inn bearing a date of 1843 , and it was later extended into the form in which it stands today , " probably ... in 1883 " . 
 Today the site of the church is managed by English Heritage , and the village has all but disappeared . The present appearance of the cliff below the church , a grassy slope above a large stone groyne , was in place by April 1867 , and the sea defences there continue to be maintained by Trinity House . In 2000 the surviving fragments of an early medieval cross that once stood inside the old church were used to design a Millennium Cross to commemorate two thousand years of Christianity . This stands at the entrance to the car park and was commissioned by Canterbury City Council . 
 = = = Bouncing bombs = = = 
 During the Second World War , the coastline east of the village was used to test prototypes of Barnes Wallis 's bouncing bomb . This area was chosen for its seclusion , while the clear landmark of the church towers and the ease of recovering prototypes from the shallow water were probably also factors . Different , inert versions of the bomb were tested at Reculver , leading to the development of the operational version known as " Upkeep " . This bomb was used by the RAF 's 617 Squadron in Operation Chastise , otherwise known as the Dambuster raids , in which dams in the Ruhr district of Germany were attacked on the night of 16 – 17 May 1943 by formations of Lancaster bombers . On 17 May 2003 , a Lancaster bomber overflew the Reculver testing site to commemorate the 60th anniversary of the exploit . 
 Two prototype bouncing bombs , about 6 feet ( 2 m ) long and 3 feet ( 1 m ) wide , lay in marshland behind the sea wall until about 1977 , when they were removed by the Army . Other prototypes were recovered from the shoreline in 1997 , one of which is in Herne Bay Museum and Gallery , a little over 3 miles ( 5 km ) west of Reculver . Others are on display in Dover Castle and in the Spitfire & Hurricane Memorial Museum at the former RAF Manston , on the Isle of Thanet . 
 = = Governance = = 
 In the 10th @-@ century charter by which King Eadred gave Reculver to the archbishops of Canterbury , the boundary of the mainland part of the estate was about the same as those for the adjoining parishes of Reculver , Hoath and Herne in the 20th century , and the estate included part of the Isle of Thanet . In 1086 , Domesday Book named Reculver as a hundred , meaning that it was probably the meeting @-@ place for the local hundred court . The hundred included Hoath and Herne , and it may also have included the neighbouring area of Thanet . In 1274 – 75 the local hundred was much larger : it was then named after Bleangate , in a detached part of Chislet parish , and was divided into northern and southern halves ; it also included part of Thanet . By 1540 Bleangate hundred no longer included land on Thanet , its members being listed then as Sturry , Chislet , Reculver and Herne for the archaic taxes known as " fifteenths and tenths " , and in 1659 they were listed as Chislet , Herne , Hoath , Reculver , <unk> , Sturry and <unk> . In 1808 the members of the northern half @-@ hundred , or " Bleangate Upper " , were listed as Herne , Reculver , <unk> and Hoath . The constable for the northern half @-@ hundred was chosen at the court <unk> of the manor of Reculver , which by 1800 was usually held at Herne . 
 The parish was represented by two tithings – known in Kent as " borghs " – in the Hundred Rolls of 1274 – 75 and , 400 years later , for the purposes of the Hearth Tax , levied between 1662 and 1689 . In 1274 – 75 these borghs appear as Reculver borgh and Brookgate borgh ; in 1663 they appear as Reculver Street borgh and Brookgate borgh , which were recorded under a parish heading for Reculver , together with Hoath borgh ; and in 1673 Reculver borgh and Brookgate borgh were recorded under a heading for Herne parish , while Hoath was recorded under its own parish heading . However , borghs in Kent , and tithings generally , were related to the manorial and <unk> administration of the county , rather than to the parishes in which they lay . 
 The parishes of Herne and , on the Isle of Thanet , St Nicholas @-@ at @-@ Wade were created from parts of Reculver parish in 1310 , although they continued to have a subordinate relationship with their original parish into the 19th century , while Hoath remained a perpetual curacy into the 20th . Thereafter Reculver 's parish boundary , enclosing an area of about 2 square miles ( 5 km2 ) , remained the same for both ecclesiastical and civil purposes until 1934 , and included the settlements of Hillborough , Bishopstone and Brook , now Brook Farm . The parish extended west almost to Beltinge , in Herne parish , and to Broomfield in the south @-@ west , where the boundary with Herne parish ran along the centre of the main thoroughfare , now Margate Road ; it was bounded in open country on the south @-@ east and east by the parish of Chislet . In 1934 the civil functions of the parish were merged into the civil parish of Herne Bay . Conversely , Reculver is now in an electoral ward of the same name , in the local government district of Canterbury , which includes Beltinge , Bishopstone , Brook Farm and Hillborough , and extends into the eastern part of the town of Herne Bay . This ward has three seats on Canterbury City Council , and , in the local elections of 2011 , they were won by the existing councillors Jennie Edwards , Gillian <unk> and Ann Taylor , all Conservative . 
 At the national level Reculver is in the English parliamentary constituency of North Thanet , for which Roger Gale ( Conservative ) has been MP since 1983 . In the general election of 2015 , Gale won 23 @,@ 045 votes ( 49 @.@ 0 % ) , giving him a majority of 10 @,@ 948 ; the United Kingdom Independence Party won 12 @,@ 097 votes ( 25 @.@ 7 ) and the Labour Party won 8 @,@ 411 votes ( 17 @.@ 9 % ) ; while the Green Party and the Liberal Democrats each won fewer than 2 @,@ 000 votes , the Green Party performed slightly better of the two . For European elections Reculver is in the South East England constituency . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The ruins of the Roman fort and medieval church at Reculver stand on the remnant of a promontory , a low hill with a maximum height of 50 feet ( 15 m ) , which is the " last seaward extension of the Blean Hills . " Sediments laid down around 55 million years ago are particularly well displayed in the cliffs to the west . Nearby Herne Bay is the type location for the Thanet Sand Formation , or Thanet Beds , consisting of a fine @-@ grained sand that can be clayey and glauconitic and is of <unk> ( late Paleocene ) age . It rests unconformably on the Chalk Group , and forms the base of the cliffs in the Reculver and Herne Bay area . Above the Thanet Sand are the Upnor Formation , a medium sandstone , and the sandy clays of the Harwich Formation at the Paleocene / Eocene boundary . The highest cliffs , rising to a maximum height of about 115 feet ( 35 m ) to the west of Reculver , have a cap of London Clay , a fine silty clay of Eocene age . The surface consists mainly of flint gravel with some areas of brickearth , both of which are glacial deposits . 
 Rocks such as these are easily washed away by the sea . It has been estimated that the Roman fort was originally about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from the sea to the north , but the cliffs are eroding at a rate of approximately 3 @.@ 3 feet ( 1 m ) per year . Coastal erosion had washed away most of Reculver village by 1800 , leading residents to re @-@ locate to Hillborough , within Reculver parish . A plan is in place to manage this erosion whereby some parts of the coastline such as the country park will be allowed to continue eroding , and others – including the site of the Roman fort and the medieval church – will be protected from further erosion . New sea defences were built in the 1990s , including covering the beaches around the church with boulders . 
 The warmest time of year in Kent is in July and August , with average maximum temperatures of around 21 ° C ( 70 ° F ) , and the coolest is in January and February , with average minimum temperatures of around 1 ° C ( 34 ° F ) . Average maximum and minimum temperatures are about 0 @.@ 5 ° C ( 0 @.@ 3 ° F ) higher than they are nationally . Locations on the north coast of Kent , like Reculver , are sometimes warmer than areas further inland , owing to the influence of the North Downs to the south . Average annual rainfall in Kent is about 728 millimetres ( 28 @.@ 7 in ) , with the highest rainfall from October to January . This is lower than the national average annual rainfall of 838 millimetres ( 33 in ) . Occasional drought conditions can lead to the imposition of Temporary Use Bans to conserve water supplies , and it was announced in 2013 that a water desalination plant was to be built at Reculver to increase supplies . 
 = = Demography = = 
 In the census of 1801 the number of people present in the parish of Reculver , enclosing an area of about 2 square miles ( 5 km2 ) and including the settlements of Hillborough , Bishopstone and part of Broomfield , was given as 252 , and this figure remained roughly stable until the 20th century when a dramatic increase was recorded : in the census of 1931 , the number was given as 829 . But this included holidaymakers , and in 2005 the number of people at Reculver was estimated to increase to " over 1 @,@ 000 at the height of the [ summer ] holiday season " . 
 In the 2001 census the relevant census area covered 2 @.@ 79 square miles ( 7 km2 ) and included only Reculver and outlying farms and houses , in which 135 people were found , almost a quarter of whom were in caravans . All were born in the United Kingdom except for three individuals from the Republic of Ireland and three from South Africa . Gender was given as 69 female and 66 male , and the age distribution was 12 individuals aged 0 – 5 years ( 8 @.@ 8 % ) , 16 aged 6 – 16 years ( 14 % ) , 30 aged 17 – 35 years ( 22 @.@ 2 % ) , 14 aged 36 – 45 years ( 10 @.@ 3 % ) , 44 aged 46 – 64 years ( 32 @.@ 5 % ) and 21 aged 65 years and over ( 15 @.@ 5 % ) . Half ( 67 ) of all the individuals recorded were described as economically active , with 58 of these having employers and nine being self @-@ employed ; none were recorded as full @-@ time students or unemployed . Twenty @-@ four people ( 17 @.@ 7 % ) were described as retired . Of those aged 16 – 74 years , 14 ( 12 @.@ 8 % ) were placed at the highest level for education or qualification . Christianity was the only religion represented , by 99 individuals , with 22 recorded as having no religion and 14 whose religion was not stated . From April 2001 to March 2002 the average gross weekly income of households in the electoral ward of Reculver was estimated by the Office for National Statistics as £ 560 , or £ 29 @,@ 120 per year ; this was below the average for the south @-@ east of England , excluding London , which was £ 660 , or £ 34 @,@ 320 . 
 In the 2011 census the relevant census area was identical to the electoral ward , an area of 3 @.@ 55 square miles ( 9 km2 ) , and produced information for the area as a whole . Therefore , while the total resident population of the ward at the 2011 census numbered 8 @,@ 845 , detailed information comparable to that of the 2001 census is unavailable . 
 = = Economy = = 
 In the Middle Ages , probably beginning in the 11th century , Reculver was one of several members , or " limbs " , of the Cinque Port of Sandwich . Like other limbs at Fordwich , Deal , Sarre and <unk> , it was then involved in maritime trade , and it shared in the Cinque Ports ' duty to supply ships and men for the king 's use , in return for concessions such as tax exemption . In 1220 King Henry III granted the archbishop of Canterbury a market to be held weekly at Reculver on Thursdays , and an annual fair was held there on Saint Giles 's Day , 1 September . 
 Oysters from the " <unk> shore " – the shoreline around Richborough , a little over 8 miles ( 13 km ) to the south @-@ east – were noted as a delicacy by the 1st – 2nd @-@ century Roman poet Juvenal , and in 1576 oysters from Reculver itself were " reputed as farre to passe those of <unk> , as <unk> doe surmount the rest of this <unk> [ of Kent ] in <unk> <unk> . " An enclosed area of salt water known as the Dene was leased for the breeding of oysters and lobsters in 1867 ; as of 2014 there is a hatchery for oysters in saltwater ponds on the eastern side of Reculver belonging to a seafood company which is based there . Young oysters are transplanted from the hatchery to the sea bed at Whitstable . In May 1914 , Anglo @-@ Westphalian Kent Coalfield Ltd drilled a borehole at Reculver in search of coal , since it had found a seam of coal 48 feet ( 14 @.@ 6 m ) thick at nearby Chislet and was developing a colliery there ; possible samples of coal were retrieved from the borehole at a depth of 1 @,@ 129 feet ( 344 @.@ 1 m ) , but it was abandoned , no workable seam having been found . 
 Today Reculver is dominated by static caravan parks , the first of which appeared after the Second World War . Also present are a country park , the King Ethelbert public house , which is a free house , and a nearby shop and cafe . Reculver was defined as a " key heritage area " in 2008 , and there are plans for its development as a destination for green tourism . Canterbury City Council 's Reculver Masterplan , adopted in 2009 , envisaged the creation of 100 touring pitches in its caravan park , south @-@ east of the Roman fort , which was then leased to the Camping and <unk> Club . That caravan park was closed by 2015 , when Canterbury City Council undertook a consultation on its incorporation into the country park . 
 = = = Community facilities = = = 
 Reculver Church of England Primary School is adjacent to the church at Hillborough . The school 's site also hosts Beltinge Day Nursery and Reculver Breakfast and Afterschool Club . The nearest school for older children is Herne Bay High School . 
 The nearest post office is in Beltinge , about 1 @.@ 9 miles ( 3 @.@ 1 km ) to the west @-@ southwest . The nearest general practitioner ( GP ) surgery is about 1 @.@ 4 miles ( 2 @.@ 3 km ) to the south @-@ west , between Bishopstone and Hillborough , with others in Beltinge , Herne Bay , Broomfield and St Nicholas @-@ at @-@ Wade . While the nearest general hospital is the Queen Victoria Memorial Hospital , about 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 km ) to the west in Herne Bay , the closest hospital with an Accident and Emergency ( A & E ) department is the Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother Hospital , about 8 @.@ 2 miles ( 13 @.@ 2 km ) to the east in Margate . The nearest community centre is Reculver and Beltinge Memorial Hall , about 1 @.@ 9 miles ( 3 @.@ 1 km ) to the west @-@ southwest . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 = = = Ruined church of St Mary = = = 
 The medieval towers of the ruined church of St Mary are Reculver 's " most dominant features " . They were added in the late 12th century to a church founded in 669 , when King Ecgberht of Kent granted land to Bassa the priest for the foundation of a monastery . The church was sited near the centre of the Roman fort , and was built " almost completely from demolished Roman structures " . In 692 the monastery 's abbot Berhtwald was elected archbishop of Canterbury , and King Eadberht II of Kent was buried inside the church in the 760s . The church building was considerably enlarged over time , the last additions being made in the 15th century . But it retained many prominent Anglo @-@ Saxon features , including a triple chancel arch and a stone high cross , though this had been removed by 1784 . 
 The church was demolished in 1809 , in what has been described as " an act of vandalism for which there can be few parallels even in the blackest records of the nineteenth century " . Archaeological excavations in the 19th and 20th centuries established the building sequence of the church , and areas of missing wall are marked on the ground by concrete edged with flint . The ruins are now in the care of English Heritage , and the sea defences protecting them have been maintained by Trinity House since 1810 . Fragments of the cross , and two stone columns that had been part of the church 's triple chancel arch , are on display in Canterbury Cathedral . 
 A byname for the towers is the " Twin Sisters " , and an account of how this first arose was current about a hundred years after its supposed happening in the late 15th century , but in its usual form , for example in a 19th @-@ century travel guide , it is mostly an invention created around " pseudo @-@ historical detail " . The Ingoldsby Legends includes a re @-@ invention of the story in which two brothers , Robert and Richard de Birchington , are substituted for the two sisters . 
 = = = Country park = = = 
 Reculver Country Park is a nature reserve managed by Canterbury City Council and the Kent Wildlife Trust . It covers 64 acres ( 26 ha ) and comprises a narrow strip of protected , cliff @-@ top land about 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 km ) long , running from the remaining enclosure of the Roman fort west to Bishopstone Glen . Most of the cliff @-@ top and all of the foreshore in this area are included in the Thanet Coast SSSI , the Thanet Coast and Sandwich Bay SPA and the similarly named Ramsar site ; most of the Country Park is also part of the Bishopstone Cliffs local nature reserve , which covers 166 @.@ 5 acres ( 67 @.@ 4 ha ) of the coastline between Beltinge and Reculver . In winter brent geese and wading birds such as <unk> and turnstones may be seen ; during the summer months the largest colony of sand martins in Kent nests in the soft cliffs , on top of which fulmars were also reported to have begun nesting in 2013 , and wading curlews may be seen at any time . The grasslands on the cliff top are among the few remaining cliff @-@ top wildflower meadows left in Kent , and are home to butterflies and skylarks . Also present are the nationally scarce hog 's fennel and two species of digger wasp , <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> . The coastline here forms part of the " key on @-@ land Palaeocene site in the London Basin " , and is the only location in the Woolwich Beds to contain wood . The foreshore displays a " rich invertebrate and vertebrate fossil fauna ... and the section has been extensively studied over many years . " The park first won a Green Flag Award in 2005 , and it is estimated that over 200 @,@ 000 people visit it each year , including up to 3 @,@ 500 students for educational trips . Canterbury City Council 's Reculver Masterplan envisages purchasing farmland to the south of the country park to replace land lost to the sea through coastal erosion . 
 In 2011 it was found that the shoreline in the Herne Bay area , including Reculver , had come under threat from an invasive species , the carpet sea squirt ( Didemnum vexillum ) , also known as " marine vomit " . First recorded in UK waters in 2008 , the carpet sea squirt is indigenous to the sea around Japan , but it has been carried to other parts of the world , including New Zealand and the USA , on boat hulls , fishing equipment and floating seaweed . Carpet sea squirt can overgrow other , sessile species , " potentially smothering species living in gravel and affecting fisheries . " 
 = = = Centre for renewable energy = = = 
 A visitor centre in Reculver Country Park re @-@ opened in 2009 as the Reculver Renewable Energy and Interpretation Centre , " marking 200 years of the moving of Reculver village " . The centre features a log burner fuelled by logs from the Blean woodland , solar and photovoltaic panels provide electrical power , and there are displays describing the history , geography and wildlife of the area . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Reculver is at the end of an unclassified road , Reculver Lane , and is about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) by road from the nearest major junction of the A299 , or Thanet Way . From Roman times there was a connection to Canterbury by road , the presence of which is reflected in parish boundaries for much of its length . An estate map of 1685 shows the Reculver end of this road as " The King 's highe Way " , which may have been in use until 1875 , when it was reported that a public road had been diverted because of a cliff fall near Love Street Farm . Remains of a Roman road leading to the east gate of the fort have also been found , which were " substantial ... consisting of a sandstone platform [ 10 – 13 feet ( 3 – 4 m ) ] wide and at least [ 11 inches ( 30 cm ) ] deep . " 
 In 1817 the nearest coaching route was that running between London , Canterbury and the Isle of Thanet , which passed through <unk> , about 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) south of Reculver , before entering Thanet . In 1839 coaches and vans ran daily from Herne Bay to Canterbury and on to destinations on the southern and eastern coasts of Kent , with access to the English Channel , at Deal , Dover , Sandgate and Hythe . In 1865 transport from Herne Bay was available by " fly " – a type of one @-@ horse hackney carriage . 
 As of 2014 a bus service , route 7 / 7A , connects Reculver directly with Herne Bay and Canterbury daily except Sundays and bank holidays . Other destinations on this route include Reculver Church of England Primary School at Hillborough , Broomfield , Chislet , Hoath and the railway station at Sturry , on the Ashford to Ramsgate line . Route 36 connects Reculver with Herne Bay and Margate daily except Sundays . Other destinations on this route include Reculver Church of England Primary School at Hillborough , Beltinge , Birchington @-@ on @-@ Sea and Westgate @-@ on @-@ Sea . The bus stop at Reculver is adjacent to the King Ethelbert Inn . 
 The nearest railway stations are at Herne Bay , about 3 @.@ 8 miles ( 6 @.@ 1 km ) to the west , and Birchington @-@ on @-@ Sea , about 4 @.@ 5 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) to the east . Both stations are on the Chatham Main Line , running between London 's Victoria station and Ramsgate , on the south @-@ eastern coast of the Isle of Thanet . The railway first reached Herne Bay from the west in 1861 and was extended to Ramsgate Harbour railway station by 1863 , but no provision was made for public access from Reculver , although purchase of land for a station there had been envisaged and a short @-@ lived goods station was opened in 1864 . In the same year a passenger station was proposed for Reculver , primarily to serve tourists , but it was not built . In 1884 the South Eastern Railway proposed building a branch line from its station at Grove Ferry on the Ashford to Ramsgate line to join the London , Chatham and Dover Railway 's Chatham Main Line at Reculver , thereby linking Canterbury and Herne Bay . The Canterbury and Kent Coast Railway Bill was presented to a select committee of MPs in January 1885 : the London , Chatham and Dover Railway objected to it , particularly the junction with their main line at Reculver , so the Bill was rejected and the line was not built . Rudimentary houses were erected by the East Kent Railway company on nearby marshland in 1858 for the navvies who constructed the line through the area ; these had been taken over by <unk> of the South Eastern and Chatham Railway by October 1904 , when they were replaced by cottages . 
 There is no provision for access to Reculver from the sea , but there were maritime connections from at least the 1st century , when the Roman fort of Regulbium had a supporting harbour . The quantity and variety of coins found at Reculver dating from the 7th century to the 8th are almost certainly related to its location on a major trade route through the Wantsum Channel ; there was probably still a harbour in Anglo @-@ Saxon times , and the monastery may well have operated a " fleet of ships and its own boatyard . " Details in the 10th @-@ century charter in which King Eadred gave Reculver to the archbishops of Canterbury suggest that there was then an island immediately to the north , creating a " mini @-@ Wantsum [ Channel that ] could have provided a sheltered channel for beaching and berthing ships " ; the present day Black Rock beyond the shoreline may be a remnant of this island . 
 In the 17th century an inlet to the north @-@ west was described as " anciently for a <unk> of ships , called now The Old Pen " . In the 18th century there was a place for landing passengers and goods at the village , and the former name of the King Ethelbert Inn , the " Hoy and Anchor " , makes reference to hoys , a local type of merchant sailing vessel . These continued to serve the coastline of northern Kent in the mid @-@ 19th century . In 1810 a canal was proposed to run from the coast between Reculver and St Nicholas @-@ at @-@ Wade to Canterbury , with a harbour for sea @-@ going vessels at the northern end , which would be accessible from Reculver by a new road beginning at the inn , but none of this was built . Passenger steamships called at Herne Bay pier on their route between London and destinations along the north coast of Kent from 1832 , but this service ceased in the first half of the 20th century . A travel guide of 1865 advised that 
 [ the ] best way to visit Reculver from Margate is by means of a sailing or rowing boat ... [ although ] Herne Bay is by far the most convenient place to get to Reculver from , as you can be rowed to the foot of the twin towers in little more than half an hour ... [ after which ] we run the boat on the beach , and plant our foot on the famous " <unk> shore , " sung by Juvenal ... 
 Coastguards were stationed at Reculver from the mid @-@ 19th century until they were withdrawn in the mid @-@ 20th century , but the towers of the ruined church remain a landmark for mariners , both practically and through their use to mark the division between areas covered by Thames Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre ( MRCC ) and Dover MRCC . 
 = = Religion = = 
 A new Anglican parish church was built at Hillborough , about 1 @.@ 25 miles ( 2 km ) south @-@ west of Reculver , as a replacement for the old church of St Mary . The new church was given the same dedication to St Mary and , standing on a plot of land bought for £ 30 , it was consecrated on 13 April 1813 . A " miserable little [ church ] ... built in a rough and poverty @-@ stricken style " , it had a leaking roof and was already decaying by 1874 , and was replaced by the present structure , begun in 1876 and consecrated on 12 June 1878 . 
 The church begun in 1876 was designed in the Gothic Revival style by the architect Joseph Clarke , who was surveyor for the diocese of Canterbury at the time . It has seating for about 100 people , and is a " simple and relatively plain building " , though it incorporates stonework from the old church at Reculver . The medieval baptismal font in the church is probably from the former chapel of All Saints , Shuart , on the Isle of Thanet , which was demolished in the 15th century . A war memorial stands at the edge of the churchyard , facing into the adjacent Reculver Lane , and records the names of 27 parishioners who died fighting in the First World War and the Second World War . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 King Eadberht II of Kent was buried in the church at Reculver in the 760s . His tomb was in the south porticus of the church , adjacent to the chancel , though this later became part of the church 's south aisle . This was traditionally believed to be the tomb of King Æthelberht I of Kent , and was " of an antique form , mounted with two spires " . Simon of Faversham , a 14th @-@ century philosopher and theologian , was appointed as rector but was forced to defend his appointment to the Pope , and died in France , either on his way to the papal curia in Avignon or after his arrival , some time before 19 July 1306 . 
 The first recorded owner of Brook , about 0 @.@ 8 miles ( 1 km ) south @-@ southwest of Reculver , was Nicholas <unk> , physician to King Edward I and rector of Reculver until 1310 , when he became its first recorded vicar . He was regarded as the " best doctor for the king 's health " , and there are more records of his medical practice than there are for " most physicians of his time . " Brook subsequently passed to James de la Pine , sheriff of Kent in the early 1350s . His grandson sold it to an ancestor of Henry Cheyne , who was elected knight of the shire for Kent in 1563 , and was created " Lord Cheyney " in 1572 . He had sold all of his possessions in Kent by 1574 to " finance his extravagance " , and Brook subsequently became the property of Sir <unk> Maycote , who was a leading courtier to Elizabeth I and James I. He had a " handsome monument [ on the south wall of the chancel in the church at Reculver ] representing Sir <unk> and Lady Maycote , with their eight children , all in alabaster figures , kneeling " . Brook is now Brook Farm , where there is a remnant of Maycote 's home in the form of a gateway , which is a " very rustic Elizabethan affair " , all of brick , with mouldings . 
 Thomas Broke , alderman and MP for Calais in the mid @-@ 16th century , may have been a son of Thomas Brooke of Reculver , as well as being a " religious radical " . Ralph Brooke , officer of arms as Rouge Croix Pursuivant and York Herald under Elizabeth I and James I , died in 1625 and was buried inside the church , where he was commemorated by a black marble tablet on the south wall of the chancel , showing him dressed in his herald 's coat . 
 Robert Hunt , vicar of Reculver from 1595 to 1602 , became minister of religion to the English colonial settlement at Jamestown , Virginia , sailing there in the ship Susan Constant in 1606 , and celebrated probably " the first known service of holy communion in what is today the United States of America on 21 June 1607 . " Barnabas Knell was vicar from 1602 to 1646 : during the English Civil War his son Paul Knell , born in about 1615 , was chaplain to a regiment of Royalist cuirassiers , to whom he preached a sermon , " The convoy of a Christian " , at the siege of Gloucester in August 1643 . An estate map of 1685 shows that much of the land around Reculver then belonged to James Oxenden , who spent much of his life as an MP for Kent constituencies between 1679 and 1702 . 
 = Troilus = 
 Troilus ( English pronunciation : / <unk> / or / <unk> / ; Ancient Greek : <unk> <unk> ; Latin : Troilus ) is a legendary character associated with the story of the Trojan War . The first surviving reference to him is in Homer 's Iliad , which scholars believe was composed by bards and sung in the late 9th or 8th century BC . 
 In Greek mythology , Troilus is a young Trojan prince , one of the sons of King Priam ( or sometimes Apollo ) and Hecuba . Prophecies link Troilus ' fate to that of Troy and so he is ambushed and murdered by Achilles . Sophocles was one of the writers to tell this tale . It was also a popular theme among artists of the time . Ancient writers treated Troilus as the epitome of a dead child mourned by his parents . He was also regarded as a paragon of youthful male beauty . 
 In Western European medieval and Renaissance versions of the legend , Troilus is the youngest of Priam 's five legitimate sons by Hecuba . Despite his youth he is one of the main Trojan war leaders . He dies in battle at Achilles ' hands . In a popular addition to the story , originating in the 12th century , Troilus falls in love with Cressida , whose father has defected to the Greeks . Cressida pledges her love to Troilus but she soon switches her affections to the Greek hero Diomedes when sent to her father in a hostage exchange . Chaucer and Shakespeare are among the authors who wrote works telling the story of Troilus and Cressida . Within the medieval tradition , Troilus was regarded as a paragon of the faithful courtly lover and also of the virtuous pagan knight . Once the custom of courtly love had faded , his fate was regarded less sympathetically . 
 Little attention was paid to the character during the 18th and 19th centuries . However , Troilus has reappeared in 20th and 21st century retellings of the Trojan War by authors who have chosen elements from both the classical and medieval versions of his story . 
 = = The story in the ancient world = = 
 For the ancient Greeks , the tale of the Trojan War and the surrounding events appeared in its most definitive form in the Epic Cycle of eight narrative poems from the archaic period in Greece ( 750 BC – 480 BC ) . The story of Troilus is one of a number of incidents that helped provide structure to a narrative that extended over several decades and 77 books from the beginning of the Cypria to the end of the <unk> . The character 's death early in the war and the prophecies surrounding him demonstrated that all Trojan efforts to defend their home would be in vain . His symbolic significance is evidenced by linguistic analysis of his Greek name " Troilos " . It can be interpreted as an elision of the names of Tros and <unk> , the legendary founders of Troy , as a diminutive or pet name " little Tros " or as an elision of <unk> ( Troy ) and <unk> ( to destroy ) . These multiple possibilities emphasise the link between the fates of Troilus and of the city where he lived . On another level , Troilus ' fate can also be seen as foreshadowing the subsequent deaths of his murderer Achilles , and of his nephew Astyanax and sister Polyxena , who , like Troilus , die at the altar in at least some versions of their stories . 
 Given this , it is unfortunate that the Cypria — the part of the Epic Cycle that covers the period of the Trojan War of Troilus ' death — does not survive . Indeed , no complete narrative of his story remains from archaic times or the subsequent classical period ( 479 – 323 BC ) . Most of the literary sources from before the Hellenistic age ( 323 – 30 BC ) that even referred to the character are lost or survive only in fragments or summary . The surviving ancient and medieval sources , whether literary or scholarly , contradict each other , and many do not tally with the form of the myth that scholars now believe to have existed in the archaic and classical periods . 
 Partially compensating for the missing texts are the physical artifacts that remain from the archaic and classical periods . The story of the circumstances around Troilus ' death was a popular theme among pottery painters . ( The Beazley Archive website lists 108 items of Attic pottery alone from the 6th to 4th centuries BC containing images of the character . ) Troilus also features on other works of art and decorated objects from those times . It is a common practice for those writing about the story of Troilus as it existed in ancient times to use both literary sources and artifacts to build up an understanding of what seems to have been the most standard form of the myth and its variants . The brutality of this standard form of the myth is highlighted by commentators such as Alan Sommerstein , an expert on ancient Greek drama , who describes it as " horrific " and " [ p ] erhaps the most vicious of all the actions traditionally attributed to Achilles . " 
 = = = The standard myth : the beautiful youth murdered = = = 
 Troilus is an adolescent boy or ephebe , the son of Hecuba , queen of Troy . As he is so beautiful , Troilus is taken to be the son of the god Apollo . However , Hecuba 's husband , King Priam , treats him as his own much @-@ loved child . 
 A prophecy says that Troy will not fall if Troilus lives into adulthood . So the goddess Athena encourages the Greek warrior Achilles to seek him out early in the Trojan War . The youth is known to take great delight in his horses . Achilles ambushes him and his sister Polyxena when he has ridden with her for water from a well in the Thymbra – an area outside Troy where there is a temple of Apollo . 
 The Greek is struck by the beauty of both Trojans and is filled with lust . It is the fleeing Troilus whom swift @-@ footed Achilles catches , dragging him by the hair from his horse . The young prince refuses to yield to Achilles ' sexual attentions and somehow escapes , taking refuge in the nearby temple . But the warrior follows him in , and beheads him at the altar before help can arrive . The murderer then mutilates the boy 's body . The mourning of the Trojans at Troilus ' death is great . 
 This sacrilege leads to Achilles ’ own death , when Apollo avenges himself by helping Paris strike Achilles with the arrow that pierces his heel . 
 = = = Ancient literary sources supporting the standard myth = = = 
 = = = = Homer and the missing texts of the archaic and classical periods = = = = 
 The earliest surviving literary reference to Troilus is in Homer 's Iliad , which formed one part of the Epic Cycle . It is believed that Troilus ' name was not invented by Homer and that a version of his story was already in existence . Late in the poem , Priam berates his surviving sons , and compares them unfavourably to their dead brothers including <unk> hippiocharmên . The interpretation of hippiocharmên is controversial but the root <unk> implies a connection with horses . For the purpose of the version of the myth given above , the word has been taken as meaning " delighting in horses " . Sommerstein believes that Homer wishes to imply in this reference that Troilus was killed in battle , but argues that Priam 's later description of Achilles as <unk> <unk> ( " boy @-@ slaying man " ) indicates that Homer was aware of the story of Troilus as a murdered child ; Sommerstein believes that Homer is playing here on the ambiguity of the root <unk> meaning boy in both the sense of a young male and of a son . 
 Troilus ' death was also described in the Cypria , one of the parts of the Epic Cycle that is no longer extant . The poem covered the events preceding the Trojan War and the first part of the war itself up to the events of the Iliad . Although the Cypria does not survive , most of an ancient summary of the contents , thought to be by <unk> Proclus , remains . Fragment 1 mentions that Achilles killed Troilus , but provides no more detail . However , Sommerstein takes the verb used to describe the killing ( <unk> ) as meaning that Achilles murders Troilus . 
 In Athens , the early tragedians Phrynicus and Sophocles both wrote plays called Troilos and the comic playwright <unk> wrote a parody of the same name . Of the esteemed Nine lyric poets of the archaic and classical periods , <unk> may have referred to Troilus ' story in his <unk> and Ibycus may have written in detail about the character . With the exception of these authors , no other pre @-@ Hellenistic written source is known to have considered Troilus at any length . 
 Unfortunately , all that remains of these texts are the smallest fragments or summaries and references to them by other authors . What does survive can be in the form of papyrus fragments , plot summaries by later authors or quotations by other authors . In many cases these are just odd words in lexicons or grammar books with an attribution to the original author . Reconstructions of the texts are necessarily speculative and should be viewed with " wary but sympathetic scepticism " . In Ibycus ' case all that remains is a parchment fragment containing a mere six or seven words of verse accompanied with a few lines of scholia . Troilus is described in the poem as godlike and is killed outside Troy . From the scholia , he is clearly a boy . The scholia also refer to a sister , someone " watching out " and a murder in the sanctuary of Thymbrian Apollo . While acknowledging that these details may have been reports of other later sources , Sommerstein thinks it probable that Ibycus told the full ambush story and is thus the earliest identifiable source for it . Of Phrynicus , one fragment remains considered to refer to Troilus . This speaks of " the light of love glowing on his reddening cheeks " . 
 Of all these fragmentary pre @-@ Hellenistic sources , the most is known of Sophocles Troilos . Even so , only 54 words have been identified as coming from the play . Fragment 619 refers to Troilus as an andropais , a man @-@ boy . Fragment 621 indicates that Troilus was going to a spring with a companion to fetch water or to water his horses . A scholion to the Iliad states that Sophocles has Troilus ambushed by Achilles while exercising his horses in the Thymbra . Fragment 623 indicates that Achilles mutilated Troilus ' corpse by a method known as <unk> . This involved preventing the ghost of a murder victim from returning to haunt their killer by cutting off the corpse 's extremities and stringing them under its armpits . Sophocles is thought to have also referred to the <unk> of Troilus in a fragment taken to be from an earlier play <unk> . 
 Sommerstein attempts a reconstruction of the plot of the Troilos , in which the title character is incestuously in love with Polyxena and tries to discourage the interest in marrying her shown by both Achilles and Sarpedon , a Trojan ally and son of Zeus . Sommerstein argues that Troilus is accompanied on his fateful journey to his death , not by Polyxena , but by his tutor , a eunuch Greek slave . Certainly there is a speaking role for a eunuch who reports being castrated by Hecuba and someone reports the loss of their adolescent master . The incestuous love is deduced by Sommerstein from a fragment of <unk> ' parody , assumed to partially quote Sophocles , and from his understanding that the Sophocles play intends to contrast barbarian customs , including incest , with Greek ones . Sommerstein also sees this as solving what he considers the need for an explanation of Achilles ' treatment of Troilus ' corpse , the latter being assumed to have insulted Achilles in the process of warning him off Polyxena . Italian professor of English and expert on Troilus , Piero Boitani , on the other hand , considers Troilus ' rejection of Achilles ' sexual advances towards him as sufficient motive for the mutilation . 
 = = = = The Alexandra = = = = 
 The first surviving text with more than the briefest mention of Troilus is a Hellenistic poem dating from no earlier than the 3rd century BC : the Alexandra by the tragedian <unk> or a namesake of his . The poem consists of the obscure prophetic ravings of Cassandra : 
 This passage is explained in the Byzantine writer John Tzetzes ' scholia as a reference to Troilus seeking to avoid the unwanted sexual advances of Achilles by taking refuge in his father Apollo 's temple . When he refuses to come out , Achilles goes in and kills him on the altar . <unk> 's scholiast also says that Apollo started to plan Achilles ' death after the murder . This begins to build up the elements of the version of Troilus ' story given above : he is young , much loved and beautiful ; he has divine ancestry , is beheaded by his rejected Greek lover and , we know from Homer , had something to do with horses . The reference to Troilus as a " lion whelp " hints at his having the potential to be a great hero , but there is no explicit reference to a prophecy linking the possibility of Troilus reaching adulthood and Troy then surviving . 
 = = = = Other written sources = = = = 
 No other extended passage about Troilus exists from before the Augustan Age by which time other versions of the character 's story have emerged . The remaining sources compatible with the standard myth are considered below by theme . 
 Parentage 
 The Apollodorus responsible for the Library lists Troilus last of Priam and Hecuba 's sons – a detail adopted in the later tradition – but then adds that it is said that the boy was fathered by Apollo . On the other hand , Hyginus includes Troilus in the middle of a list of Priam 's sons without further comment . In the early Christian writings the Clementine Homilies , it is suggested that Apollo was Troilus ' lover rather than his father . 
 <unk> 
 Horace emphasises Troilus ' youth by calling him <unk> ( " <unk> " , i.e. pre @-@ pubescent or , figuratively , not old enough to bear arms ) . Dio Chrysostom derides Achilles in his Trojan discourse , complaining that all that the supposed hero achieved before Homer was the capture of Troilus who was still a boy . 
 Prophecies 
 The First Vatican Mythographer reports a prophecy that Troy will not fall if Troilus reaches the age of twenty and gives that as a reason for Achilles ' ambush . In Plautus , Troilus ' death is given as one of three conditions that must be met before Troy would fall . 
 Beauty 
 Ibycus , in seeking to praise his patron , compares him to Troilus , the most beautiful of the Greeks and the Trojans . Dio Chrysostom refers to Troilus as one of many examples of different kinds of beauty . Statius compares a beautiful dead slave missed by his master to Troilus . 
 Object of pederastic love 
 Servius , in his scholia to the passage from Virgil discussed below , says that Achilles lures Troilus to him with a gift of doves . Troilus then dies in the Greek 's embrace . Robert Graves interprets this as evidence of the vigour of Achilles ' love @-@ making but Timothy Gantz considers that the " how or why " of Servius ' version of Troilus ' death is unclear . Sommerstein favours Graves 's interpretation saying that murder was not a part of ancient pederastic relations and that nothing in Servius suggests an intentional killing . 
 Location of ambush and death 
 A number of reports have come down of Troilus ' death variously mentioning water , exercising horses and the Thymbra , though they do not necessarily build into a coherent whole : the First Vatican Mythographer reports that Troilus was exercising outside Troy when Achilles attacked him ; a commentator on Ibycus says that Troilus was slain by Achilles in the Thymbrian precinct outside Troy ; Eustathius of Thessalonica 's commentary on the Iliad says that Troilus was exercising his horses there ; Apollodorus says that Achilles ambushed Troilus inside the temple of Thymbrian Apollo ; finally , Statius reports that Troilus was speared to death as he fled around Apollo 's walls . Gantz struggles to make sense of what he sees as contradictory material , feeling that Achilles ' running down of Troilus ' horse makes no sense if Troilus was just fleeing to the nearby temple building . He speculates that the ambush at the well and the sacrifice in the temple could be two different versions of the story or , alternatively , that Achilles takes Troilus to the temple to sacrifice him as an insult to Apollo . 
 Mourning 
 Trojan and , especially , Troilus ' own family 's mourning at his death seems to have epitomised grief at the loss of a child in classical civilization . Horace , Callimachus and Cicero all refer to Troilus in this way . 
 = = = Ancient art and artifact sources = = = 
 Ancient Greek art , as found in pottery and other remains , frequently depicts scenes associated with Troilus ' death : the ambush , the pursuit , the murder itself and the fight over his body . Depictions of Troilus in other contexts are unusual . One such exception , a red @-@ figure vase painting from Apulia <unk> , shows Troilus as a child with Priam . 
 In the ambush , Troilus and Polyxena approach a fountain where Achilles lies in wait . This scene was familiar enough in the ancient world for a parody to exist from <unk> showing a dumpy Troilus leading a mule to the fountain . In most serious depictions of the scene , Troilus rides a horse , normally with a second next to him . He is usually , but not always , portrayed as a beardless youth . He is often shown naked ; otherwise he wears a cloak or tunic . Achilles is always armed and armoured . Occasionally , as on the vase picture at [ 40 ] , or the fresco from the Tomb of the Bulls shown at the head of this article , either Troilus or Polyxena is absent , indicating how the ambush is linked to each of their stories . In the earliest definitely identified version of this scene , ( a Corinthian vase <unk> ) , Troilus is bearded and Priam is also present . Both these features are unusual . More common is a bird sitting on the fountain ; normally a raven , symbol of Apollo and his prophetic powers and thus a final warning to Troilus of his doom ; sometimes a cock , a common love gift suggesting that Achilles attempted to seduce Troilus . In some versions , for example an Attic amphora in the Museum of Fine Arts , Boston dating from <unk> ( seen here [ 41 ] ) Troilus has a dog running with him . On one Etruscan vase from the 6th century BC , doves are flying from Achilles to Troilus , suggestive of the love gift in Servius . The fountain itself is conventionally decorated with a lion motif . 
 The earliest identified version of the pursuit or chase is from the third quarter of the 7th century BC . Next chronologically is the best known version on the François Vase by <unk> . The number of characters shown on pottery scenes varies with the size and shape of the space available . The François Vase is decorated with several scenes in long narrow strips . This means that the Troilus frieze is heavily populated . In the centre , ( which can be seen at the Perseus Project at [ 42 ] , ) is the fleeing Troilus , riding one horse with the reins of the other in his hand . Below them is the vase — which Polyxena ( partially missing ) , who is ahead of him , has dropped . Achilles is largely missing but it is clear that he is armoured . They are running towards Troy [ 43 ] where Antenor gestures towards Priam . Hector and <unk> , brothers of Troilus , emerge from the city walls in the hope of saving Troilus . Behind Achilles [ 44 ] are a number of deities , Athena , Thetis , ( Achilles ' mother , ) Hermes , and Apollo ( just arriving ) . Two Trojans are also present , the woman gesturing to draw the attention of a youth filling his vase . As the deities appear only in pictorial versions of the scene , their role is subject to interpretation . Boitani , sees Athena as urging Achilles on and Thetis as worried by the arrival of Apollo who , as Troilus ' protector , represents a future threat to Achilles . He does not indicate what he thinks Hermes may be talking to Thetis about . The classicist and art historian Professor Thomas H. Carpenter sees Hermes as a neutral observer , Athena and Thetis as urging Achilles on and the arrival of Apollo as the artist 's indication of the god 's future role in Achilles ' death . As Athena is not traditionally a patron of Achilles , Sommerstein sees her presence in this and other portrayals of Troilus ' death as evidence of the early standing of the prophetic link between Troilus ' death and the fall of Troy , Athena being driven , above all , by her desire for the city 's destruction . 
 The standard elements in the pursuit scene are Troilus , Achilles , Polyxena , the two horses and the fallen vase . On two tripods , an amphora and a cup , Achilles already has Troilus by the hair . A famous vase in the British Museum , which gave the Troilos Painter the name by which he is now known , shows the two Trojans looking back in fear , as the beautiful youth whips his horse on . This vase can be seen at the Perseus Project site [ 45 ] . The water spilling from the shattered vase below Troilus ' horse , symbolises the blood he is about to shed . 
 The iconography of the eight legs and hooves of the horses can be used to identify Troilus on pottery where his name does not appear ; for example , on a Corinthian vase where Troilus is shooting at his pursuers and on a peaceful scene on a Chalcidian krater where the couples Paris and Helen , Hector and Andromache are labelled , but the youth riding one of a pair of horses is not . 
 A later Southern Italian interpretation of the story is on vases held respectively at the Boston Museum of Fine Arts and the Hermitage Museum in St Petersburg . On the krater from <unk> @-@ <unk> at [ 46 ] Troilus can be seen with just one horse trying to defend himself with a throwing spear ; on the <unk> from <unk> @-@ <unk> at [ 47 ] , Achilles is pulling down the youth 's horse . 
 The earliest known depictions of the death or murder of Troilus are on shield bands from the turn of the 7th into the 6th century BC found at Olympia . On these , a warrior with a sword is about to stab a naked youth at an altar . On one , Troilus clings to a tree ( which Boitani takes for the laurel sacred to Apollo ) . A crater contemporary with this shows Achilles at the altar holding the naked Troilus upside down while Hector , Aeneas and an otherwise unknown Trojan <unk> arrive in the hope of saving the youth . In some depictions Troilus is begging for mercy . On an amphora , Achilles has the struggling Troilus slung over his shoulder as he goes to the altar . Boitani , in his survey of the story of Troilus through the ages , considers it of significance that two artifacts ( a vase and a sarcophagus ) from different periods link Troilus ' and Priam 's death by showing them on the two sides of the same item , as if they were the beginning and end of the story of the fall of Troy . Achilles is the father of Neoptolemus , who slays Priam at the altar during the sack of Troy . Thus the war opens with a father killing a son and closes with a son killing a father . 
 Some pottery shows Achilles , already having killed Troilus , using his victim 's severed head as a weapon as Hector and his companions arrive too late to save him ; some includes the watching Athena , occasionally with Hermes . At [ 48 ] is one such picture showing Achilles fighting Hector over the altar . Troilus ' body is slumped and the boy 's head is either flying through the air , or stuck to the end of Achilles ' spear . Athena and Hermes look on . Aeneas and <unk> are behind Hector . 
 Sometimes details of the closely similar deaths of Troilus and Astyanax are exchanged . [ 49 ] shows one such image where it is unclear which murder is portrayed . The age of the victim is often an indicator of which story is being told and the relative small size here might point towards the death of Astyanax , but it is common to show even Troilus as much smaller than his murderer , ( as is the case with the <unk> pictured to the above right ) . Other factors in this case are the presence of Priam ( suggesting Astyanax ) , that of Athena ( suggesting Troilus ) and the fact that the scene is set outside the walls of Troy ( again suggesting Troilus ) . 
 = = = A variant myth : the boy @-@ soldier overwhelmed = = = 
 A different version of Troilus ' death appears on a red @-@ figure cup by <unk> . Troilus is on his knees , still in the process of drawing his sword when Achilles ' spear has already stabbed him and Aeneas comes too late to save him . Troilus wears a helmet , but it is pushed up to reveal a beautiful young face . This is the only such depiction of Troilus ' death in early figurative art . However , this version of Troilus as a youth defeated in battle appears also in written sources . 
 = = = = Virgil and other Latin sources = = = = 
 This version of the story appears in Virgil 's Aeneid , in a passage describing a series of paintings decorating the walls of a temple of Juno . The painting immediately next to the one depicting Troilus shows the death of Rhesus , another character killed because of prophecies linked to the fall of Troy . Other pictures are similarly calamitous . 
 In a description whose pathos is heightened by the fact that it is seen through a compatriot 's eyes , Troilus is <unk> puer ( " unhappy boy " ) who has met Achilles in " unequal " combat . Troilus ' horses flee while he , still holding their reins , hangs from the chariot , his head and hair trailing behind while the backward @-@ pointing spear scribbles in the dust . ( The First Vatican Mythographer elaborates on this story , explaining that Troilus 's body is dragged right to the walls of Troy . ) 
 In his commentary on the Aeneid , Servius considers this story as a deliberate departure from the " true " story , bowdlerized to make it more suitable for an epic poem . He interprets it as showing Troilus overpowered in a straight fight . Gantz , however , argues that this might be a variation of the ambush story . For him , Troilus is unarmed because he went out not expecting combat and the backward pointing spear was what Troilus was using as a goad in a manner similar to characters elsewhere in the Aeneid . Sommerstein , on the other hand believes that the spear is Achilles ' that has struck Troilus in the back . The youth is alive but mortally wounded as he is being dragged towards Troy . 
 An issue here is the ambiguity of the word <unk> ( " met " ) . It often refers to meeting in a conventional combat but can have reference to other types of meetings too . A similar ambiguity appears in Seneca and in Ausonius ' 19th epitaph , narrated by Troilus himself . The dead prince tells how he has been dragged by his horses after falling in unequal battle with Achilles . A reference in the epitaph comparing Troilus ' death to Hector 's suggests that Troilus dies later than in the traditional narrative , something that , according to Boitani , also happens in Virgil . 
 = = = = Greek writers in the boy @-@ soldier tradition = = = = 
 Quintus of Smyrna , in a passage whose atmosphere Boitani describes as sad and elegiac , retains what for Boitani are the two important issues of the ancient story , that Troilus is doomed by Fate and that his failure to continue his line symbolises Troy 's fall . In this case , there is no doubt that Troilus entered battle knowingly , for in the <unk> Troilus 's armour is one of the funerary gifts after Achilles ' own death . Quintus repeatedly emphasises Troilus 's youth : he is beardless , virgin of a bride , childlike , beautiful , the most godlike of all Hecuba 's children . Yet he was lured by Fate to war when he knew no fear and was struck down by Achilles ' spear just as a flower or corn that has borne no seed is killed by the gardener . 
 In the <unk> belli Trojani ( Journal of the Trojan War ) , supposedly written by Dictys the Cretan during the Trojan War itself , Troilus is again a defeated warrior , but this time captured with his brother Lycaon . Achilles vindictively orders that their throats be slit in public , because he is angry that Priam has failed to advance talks over a possible marriage to Polyxena . Dictys ' narrative is free from gods and prophecy but he preserves Troilus ' loss as something to be greatly mourned : 
 = = The story in the medieval and Renaissance eras = = 
 In the sources considered so far , Troilus ' only narrative function is his death . The treatment of the character changes in two ways in the literature of the medieval and renaissance periods . First , he becomes an important and active protagonist in the pursuit of the Trojan War itself . Second , he becomes an active heterosexual lover , rather than the passive victim of Achilles ' pederasty . By the time of John Dryden 's neo @-@ classical adaptation of Shakespeare 's Troilus and Cressida it is the ultimate failure of his love affair that defines the character . 
 For medieval writers , the two most influential ancient sources on the Trojan War were the purported eye @-@ witness accounts of Dares the Phrygian , and Dictys the Cretan , which both survive in Latin versions . In Western Europe the Trojan side of the war was favoured and therefore Dares was preferred over Dictys . Although Dictys ' account positions Troilus ' death later in the war than was traditional , it conforms to antiquity 's view of him as a minor warrior if one at all . Dares ' De <unk> <unk> historia ( History of the Fall of Troy ) introduces the character as a hero who takes part in events beyond the story of his death . 
 Authors of the 12th and 13th centuries such as Joseph of Exeter and Albert of Stade continued to tell the legend of the Trojan War in Latin in a form that follows Dares ' tale with Troilus remaining one of the most important warriors on the Trojan side . However , it was two of their contemporaries , Benoît de Sainte @-@ Maure in his French verse romance and Guido delle Colonne in his Latin prose history , both also admirers of Dares , who were to define the tale of Troy for the remainder of the medieval period . The details of their narrative of the war were copied , for example , in the Troy Books of Laud and Lydgate and also Raoul Lefevre 's <unk> of the <unk> of Troye . Lefevre , through Caxton 's 1474 printed translation , was in turn to become the best known retelling of the Troy story in Renaissance England and influenced Shakespeare among others . The story of Troilus as a lover , invented by Benoît and retold by Guido , generated a second line of influence . It was taken up as a tale that could be told in its own right by Boccaccio and then by Chaucer who established a tradition of retelling and elaborating the story in English @-@ language literature , which was to be followed by Henryson and Shakespeare . 
 = = = The second Hector , wall of Troy = = = 
 As indicated above , it was through the writings of Dares the Phrygian that the portrayal of Troilus as an important warrior was transmitted to medieval times . However , some authors have argued that the tradition of Troilus as a warrior may be older . The passage from the Iliad described above is read by Boitani as implying that Priam put Troilus on a par with the very best of his warrior sons . The description of him in that passage as hippiocharmên is rendered by some authorities as meaning a warrior charioteer rather than merely someone who delights in horses . The many missing and partial literary sources might include such a hero . Yet only the one ancient vase shows Troilus as a warrior falling in a conventional battle . 
 = = = = Dares = = = = 
 In Dares , Troilus is the youngest of Priam 's royal sons , bellicose when peace or truces are suggested and the equal of Hector in bravery , " large and most beautiful ... brave and strong for his age , and eager for glory . " He slaughters many Greeks , wounds Achilles and Menelaus , routs the Myrmidons more than once before his horse falls and traps him and Achilles takes the opportunity to put an end to his life . Memnon rescues the body , something that didn 't happen in many later versions of the tale . Troilus ' death comes near the end of the war not at its beginning . He now outlives Hector and succeeds him as the Trojans ' great leader in battle . Now it is in reaction to Troilus 's death that Hecuba plots Achilles ' murder . 
 As the tradition of Troilus the warrior advances through time , the weaponry and the form of combat change . Already in Dares he is a mounted warrior , not a charioteer or foot warrior , something anachronistic to epic narrative . In later versions he is a knight with armour appropriate to the time of writing who fights against other knights and dukes . His expected conduct , including his romance , conforms to courtly or other values contemporary to the writing . 
 = = = = Description in medieval texts = = = = 
 The medieval texts follow Dares ' structuring of the narrative in describing Troilus after his parents and four royal brothers Hector , Paris , Deiphobus and Helenus . 
 Joseph of Exeter , in his <unk> <unk> Ilias De bello <unk> ( The Iliad of Dares the Phrygian on the Trojan War ) , describes the character as follows : 
 Benoît de Sainte @-@ Maure 's description in Le Roman de Troie ( The Romance of Troy ) is too long to quote in full , but influenced the descriptions that follow . Benoît goes into details of character and facial appearance avoided by other writers . He tells that Troilus was " the fairest of the youths of Troy " with : 
 Guido delle Colonne 's Historia <unk> <unk> ( History of the Destruction of Troy ) says : 
 The Laud Troy Book : 
 The boy who in the ancient texts was never Achilles ' match has now become a young knight , a worthy opponent to the Greeks . 
 = = = = Knight and war leader = = = = 
 In the medieval and renaissance tradition , Troilus is one of those who argue most for war against the Greeks in Priam 's council . In several texts , for example the Laud Troy Book , he says that those who disagree with him are better suited to be priests . Guido , and writers who follow him , have Hector , knowing how headstrong his brother can be , counsel Troilus not to be reckless before the first battle . 
 In the medieval texts , Troilus is a doughty knight throughout the war , taking over , as in Dares , after Hector 's death as the main warrior on the Trojan side . Indeed he is named as a second Hector by Chaucer and Lydgate . These two poets follow Boccaccio in reporting that Troilus kills thousands of Greeks . However , the comparison with Hector can be seen as acknowledging Troilus ' inferiority to his brother through the very need to <unk> him . 
 In Joseph , Troilus is greater than Alexander , Hector , <unk> , Bellona and even Mars , and kills seven Greeks with one blow of his club . He does not strike at opponents ' legs because that would demean his victory . He only fights knights and nobles , and disdains facing the common warriors . 
 Albert of Stade saw Troilus as so important that he is the title character of his version of the Trojan War . He is " the wall of his homeland , Troy 's protection , the rose of the military .... " 
 The list of Greek leaders Troilus wounds expands in the various re @-@ tellings of the war from the two in Dares to also include Agamemnon , Diomedes and Menelaus . Guido , in keeping his promise to tell of all Troilus ' valorous deeds , describes many incidents . Troilus is usually victorious but is captured in an early battle by <unk> before his friends rescue him . This incident reappears in the imitators of Guido , such as Lefevre and the Laud and Lydgate Troy Books . 
 = = = = Death = = = = 
 Within the medieval Trojan tradition , Achilles withdraws from fighting in the war because he is to marry Polyxena . Eventually , so many of his followers are killed that he decides to rejoin the battle leading to Troilus ' death and , in turn , to Hecuba , Polyxena and Paris plotting Achilles ' murder . 
 Albert and Joseph follow Dares in having Achilles behead Troilus as he tries to rise after his horse falls . In Guido and authors he influenced , Achilles specifically seeks out Troilus to avenge a previous encounter where Troilus has wounded him . He therefore instructs the Myrmidons to find Troilus , surround him and cut him off from rescue . 
 In the Laud Troy Book , this is because Achilles almost killed Troilus in the previous fight but the Trojan was rescued . Achilles wants to make sure that this does not happen again . This second combat is fought as a straight duel between the two with Achilles , the greater warrior , winning . 
 In Guido , Lefevre and Lydgate Troilus ' killer 's behaviour is very different , shorn of any honour . Achilles waits until his men have killed Troilus ' horse and cut loose his armour . Only then 
 does Achilles attack and behead him . 
 In an echo of the Iliad , Achilles drags the corpse behind his horse . Thus , the comparison with the Homeric Hector is heightened and , at the same time , aspects of the classical Troilus 's fate are echoed . 
 = = = The lover = = = 
 The last aspect of the character of Troilus to develop in the tradition has become the one for which he is best known . Chaucer 's Troilus and Criseyde and Shakespeare 's Troilus and Cressida both focus on Troilus in his role as a lover . This theme is first introduced by Benoît de Sainte @-@ Maure in the Roman de Troie and developed by Guido delle Colonne . Boccaccio 's Il Filostrato is the first book to take the love @-@ story as its main theme . Robert Henryson and John Dryden are other authors who dedicate works to it . 
 The story of Troilus ' romance developed within the context of the male @-@ centred conventions of courtly love and thus the focus of sympathy was to be Troilus and not his beloved . As different authors recreated the romance , they would interpret it in ways affected both by the perspectives of their own times and their individual preoccupations . The story as it would later develop through the works of Boccaccio , Chaucer and Shakespeare is summarised below . 
 = = = = The story of Troilus and Cressida = = = = 
 Troilus used to mock the foolishness of other young men 's love affairs . But one day he sees Cressida in the temple of Athena and falls in love with her . She is a young widow and daughter of the priest Calchas who has defected to the Greek camp . 
 Embarrassed at having become exactly the sort of person he used to ridicule , Troilus tries to keep his love secret . However , he pines for Cressida and becomes so withdrawn that his friend Pandarus asks why he is unhappy and eventually persuades Troilus to reveal his love . 
 Pandarus offers to act as a go @-@ between , even though he is Cressida 's relative and should be guarding her honour . Pandarus convinces Cressida to admit that she returns Troilus ' love and , with Pandarus 's help , the two are able to consummate their feelings for each other . 
 Their happiness together is brought to an end when Calchas persuades Agamemnon to arrange Cressida 's return to him as part of a hostage exchange in which the captive Trojan Antenor is freed . The two lovers are distraught and even think of eloping together but they finally cooperate with the exchange . Despite Cressida 's initial intention to remain faithful to Troilus , the Greek warrior Diomedes wins her heart . When Troilus learns of this , he seeks revenge on Diomedes and the Greeks and dies in battle . Just as Cressida betrayed Troilus , Antenor was later to betray Troy . 
 = = = = Benoît and Guido = = = = 
 In the Roman de Troie , the daughter of Calchas whom Troilus loves is called Briseis . Their relationship is first mentioned once the hostage exchange has been agreed : 
 In Guido , Troilus ' and Diomedes ' love is now called Briseida . His version ( a history ) is more moralistic and less touching , removing the psychological complexity of Benoît 's ( a romance ) and the focus in his retelling of the love triangle is firmly shifted to the betrayal of Troilus by Briseida . Although Briseida and Diomedes are most negatively caricatured by Guido 's moralising , even Troilus is subject to criticism as a " fatuous youth " prone , as in the following , to youthful faults . 
 Briseis , at least for now , is equally affected by the possibility of separation from her lover . Troilus goes to her room and they spend the night together , trying to comfort each other . Troilus is part of the escort to hand her over the next day . Once she is with the Greeks , Diomedes is immediately struck by her beauty . Although she is not hostile , she cannot accept him as her lover . Meanwhile Calchas tells her to accept for herself that the gods have decreed Troy 's fall and that she is safer now she is with the Greeks . 
 A battle soon takes place and Diomedes <unk> Troilus from his horse . The Greek sends it as a gift to Briseis / Briseida with an explanation that it had belonged to her old lover . In Benoît , Briseis complains at Diomedes ' seeking to woo her by humbling Troilus , but in Guido all that remains of her long speech in Benoît is that she " cannot hold him in hatred who loves me with such purity of heart . " 
 Diomedes soon does win her heart . In Benoît , it is through his display of love and she gives him her glove as a token . Troilus seeks him out in battle and utterly defeats him . He saves Diomedes ' life , only so that he can bring her a message of Troilus ' contempt . In Guido , Briseida 's change of heart comes after Troilus wounds Diomedes seriously . Briseida tends Diomedes and then decides to take him as her lover , because she does not know if she will ever meet Troilus again . 
 In later medieval tellings of the war , the episode of Troilus and Briseida / Cressida is acknowledged and often given as a reason for Diomedes and Troilus to seek each other out in battle . The love story also becomes one that is told separately . 
 = = = = Boccaccio = = = = 
 The first major work to take the story of Troilus ' failed love as its central theme is Giovanni Boccaccio 's Il Filostrato . The title means " the one struck down by love " . There is an overt purpose to the text . In the proem , Boccaccio himself is Filostrato and addresses his own love who has rejected him . 
 Boccaccio introduces a number of features of the story that were to be taken up by Chaucer . Most obvious is that Troilus ' love is now called <unk> or Cressida . An innovation in the narrative is the introduction of the go @-@ between Pandarus . Troilus is characterised as a young man who expresses whatever moods he has strongly , weeping when his love is unsuccessful , generous when it is . 
 Boccaccio fills in the history before the hostage exchange as follows . Troilus mocks the lovelorn glances of other men who put their trust in women before falling victim to love himself when he sees Cressida , here a young widow , in the Palladium , the temple of Athena . Troilus keeps his love secret and is made miserable by it . Pandarus , Troilus ' best friend and Cressida 's cousin in this version of the story , acts as go @-@ between after persuading Troilus to explain his distress . In accordance with the conventions of courtly love , Troilus ' love remains secret from all except Pandarus , until Cassandra eventually divines the reason for Troilus ' subsequent distress . 
 After the hostage exchange is agreed , Troilus suggests elopement , but Cressida argues that he should not abandon Troy and that she should protect her honour . Instead , she promises to meet him within ten days . Troilus spends much of the intervening time on the city walls , sighing in the direction where Cressida has gone . No horses or sleeves , as used by Guido or Benoît , are involved in Troilus ' learning of Cressida 's change of heart . Instead a dream hints at what has happened , and then the truth is confirmed when a brooch – previously a gift from Troilus to Cressida – is found on Diomedes ' looted clothing . In the mean time , Cressida has kept up the pretence in their correspondence that she still loves Troilus . After Cressida 's betrayal is confirmed , Troilus becomes ever fiercer in battle . 
 = = = = Chaucer and his successors = = = = 
 Geoffrey Chaucer 's Troilus and Criseyde reflects a more humorous world @-@ view than Boccaccio 's poem . Chaucer does not have his own wounded love to display and therefore allows himself an ironic detachment from events and Criseyde is more sympathetically portrayed . In contrast to Boccaccio 's final canto , which returns to the poet 's own situation , Chaucer 's <unk> has Troilus looking down laughing from heaven , finally aware of the meaninglessness of earthly emotions . About a third of the lines of the Troilus are adapted from the much shorter Il Filostrato , leaving room for a more detailed and characterised narrative . 
 Chaucer 's Criseyde is swayed by Diomedes playing on her fear . Pandarus is now her uncle , more worldly @-@ wise and more active in what happens and so Troilus is more passive . This passivity is given comic treatment when Troilus passes out in Criseyde 's bedroom and is lifted into her bed by Pandarus . Troilus ' repeated emotional paralysis is comparable to that of Hamlet who may have been based on him . It can be seen as driven by loyalty both to Criseyde and to his homeland , but has also been interpreted less kindly . 
 Another difference in Troilus ' characterisation from the Filostrato is that he is no longer misogynistic in the beginning . Instead of mocking lovers because of their putting trust in women , he mocks them because of how love affects them . Troilus ' vision of love is stark : total commitment offers total fulfilment ; any form of failure means total rejection . He is unable to comprehend the subtleties and complexities that underlie Criseyde 's <unk> and Pandarus ' manoeuvrings . 
 In his storytelling Chaucer links the fates of Troy and Troilus , the mutual downturn in fortune following the exchange of Criseyde for the treacherous Antenor being the most significant parallel . Little has changed in the general sweep of the plot from Boccaccio . Things are just more detailed , with Pandarus , for example , involving Priam 's middle son Deiphobus during his attempts to unite Troilus and Cressida . Another scene that Chaucer adds was to be reworked by Shakespeare . In it , Pandarus seeks to persuade Cressida of Troilus ' virtues over those of Hector , before uncle and niece witness Troilus returning from battle to public acclaim with much damage to his helmet . Chaucer also includes details from the earlier narratives . So , reference is made not just to Boccaccio 's brooch , but to the glove , the captured horse and the battles of the two lovers in Benoît and Guido . 
 Because of the great success of the Troilus , the love story was popular as a free standing tale to be retold by English @-@ language writers throughout the 15th and 16th centuries and into the 17th century . The theme was treated either seriously or in burlesque . For many authors , true Troilus , false Cresseid and pandering Pandarus became ideal types eventually to be referred to together as such in Shakespeare . 
 During the same period , English retellings of the broader theme of the Trojan War tended to avoid Boccaccio 's and Chaucer 's additions to the story , though their authors , including Caxton , commonly acknowledged Chaucer as a respected predecessor . John Lydgate 's Troy Book is an exception . Pandarus is one of the elements from Chaucer 's poem that Lydgate incorporates , but Guido provides his overall narrative framework . As with other authors , Lydgate 's treatment contrasts Troilus ' steadfastness in all things with Cressida 's fickleness . The events of the war and the love story are interwoven . Troilus ' prowess in battle markedly increases once he becomes aware that Diomedes is beginning to win Cressida 's heart , but it is not long after Diomedes final victory in love when Achilles and his Myrmidon 's treacherously attack and kill Troilus and <unk> his corpse , concluding Lydgate 's treatment of the character as an epic hero , who is the purest of all those who appear in the Troy Book . 
 Of all the treatments of the story of Troilus and , especially , Cressida in the period between Chaucer and Shakespeare , it is Robert Henryson 's that receives the most attention from modern critics . His poem The Testament of Cresseid is described by the Middle English expert C. David Benson as the " only fifteenth century poem written in Great Britain that begins to rival the moral and artistic complexity of Chaucer 's Troilus " . In the Testament the title @-@ character is abandoned by Diomedes and then afflicted with leprosy so that she becomes unrecognizable to Troilus . He pities the lepers she is with and is generous to her because she reminds him of the idol of her in his mind , but he remains the virtuous pagan knight and does not achieve the redemption that she does . Even so , following Henryson Troilus was seen as a representation of generosity . 
 = = = = Shakespeare and Dryden = = = = 
 Another approach to Troilus ' love story in the centuries following Chaucer is to treat Troilus as a fool , something Shakespeare does in allusions to him in plays leading up to Troilus and Cressida . In Shakespeare 's " problem play " there are elements of Troilus the fool . However , this can be excused by his age . He is an almost beardless youth , unable to fully understand the workings of his own emotions , in the middle of an adolescent infatuation , more in love with love and his image of Cressida than the real woman herself . He displays a mixture of idealism about eternally faithful lovers and of realism , condemning Hector 's " vice of mercy " . His concept of love involves both a desire for immediate sexual gratification and a belief in eternal faithfulness . He also displays a mixture of constancy , ( in love and supporting the continuation of war ) and inconsistency ( changing his mind twice in the first scene on whether to go to battle or not ) . More a Hamlet than a Romeo , by the end of the play his illusions of love shattered and Hector dead , Troilus might show signs of maturing , recognising the nature of the world , rejecting Pandarus and focusing on revenge for his brother 's death rather than for a broken heart or a stolen horse . The novelist and academic Joyce Carol Oates , on the other hand , sees Troilus as beginning and ending the play in frenzies – of love and then hatred . For her , Troilus is unable to achieve the equilibrium of a tragic hero despite his learning experiences , because he remains a human @-@ being who belongs to a banal world where love is compared to food and cooking and sublimity cannot be achieved . 
 Troilus and Cressida 's sources include Chaucer , Lydgate , Caxton and Homer , but there are creations of Shakespeare 's own too and his tone is very different . Shakespeare wrote at a time when the traditions of courtly love were dead and when England was undergoing political and social change . Shakespeare 's treatment of the theme of Troilus ' love is much more cynical than Chaucer 's , and the character of Pandarus is now grotesque . Indeed , all the heroes of the Trojan War are degraded and mocked . Troilus ' actions are subject to the gaze and commentary of both the venal Pandarus and of the cynical Thersites who tells us : 
 The action is compressed and truncated , beginning in medias res with Pandarus already working for Troilus and praising his virtues to Cressida over those of the other knights they see returning from battle , but comically mistaking him for Deiphobus . The Trojan lovers are together only one night before the hostage exchange takes place . They exchange a glove and a sleeve as love tokens , but the next night Ulysses takes Troilus to Calchas ' tent , significantly near Menelaus ' tent . There they witness Diomedes successfully seducing Cressida after taking Troilus ' sleeve from her . The young Trojan struggles with what his eyes and ears tell him , wishing not to believe it . Having previously considered abandoning the senselessness of war in favour of his role of lover and having then sought to reconcile love and knightly conduct , he is now left with war as his only role . 
 Both the fights between Troilus and Diomedes from the traditional narrative of Benoît and Guido take place the next day in Shakespeare 's retelling . Diomedes captures Troilus ' horse in the first fight and sends it to Cressida . Then the Trojan triumphs in the second , though Diomedes escapes . But in a deviation from this narrative it is Hector , not Troilus , whom the Myrmidons surround in the climatic battle of the play and whose body is dragged behind Achilles ' horse . Troilus himself is left alive vowing revenge for Hector 's death and rejecting Pandarus . Troilus ' story ends , as it began , in medias res with him and the remaining characters in his love @-@ triangle remaining alive . 
 Some seventy years after Shakespeare 's Troilus was first presented , John Dryden re @-@ worked it as a tragedy , in his view strengthening Troilus ' character and indeed the whole play , by removing many of the unresolved threads in the plot and ambiguities in Shakespeare 's portrayal of the protagonist as a believable youth rather than a clear @-@ cut and thoroughly sympathetic hero . Dryden described this as " <unk> [ ing ] that heap of Rubbish , under which many excellent thoughts lay bury 'd . " His Troilus is less passive on stage about the hostage exchange , arguing with Hector over the handing over of Cressida , who remains faithful . Her scene with Diomedes that Troilus witnesses is her attempt " to deceive deceivers " . She throws herself at her warring lovers ' feet to protect Troilus and commits suicide to prove her loyalty . Unable to leave a still living Troilus on the stage , as Shakespeare did , Dryden restores his death at the hands of Achilles and the Myrmidons but only after Troilus has killed Diomedes . According to P. Boitani , Dryden goes to " the opposite extreme of Shakespeare 's ... solv [ ing ] all problems and therefore kill [ ing ] the tragedy " . 
 = = Modern versions = = 
 After Dryden 's Shakespeare , Troilus is almost invisible in literature until the 20th century . Keats does refer to Troilus and Cressida in the context of the " sovereign power of love " and Wordsworth translated some of Chaucer but , as a rule , love was portrayed in ways far different from how it is in the Troilus and Cressida story . Boitani sees the two World Wars and the 20th century 's engagement " in the recovery of all sorts of past myths " as contributing to a rekindling of interest in Troilus as a human being destroyed by events beyond his control . Similarly Foakes sees the aftermath of one World War and the threat of a second as key elements for the successful revival of Shakespeare 's Troilus in two productions in the first half of the 20th century , and one of the authors discussed below names Barbara Tuchman 's The March of Folly : From Troy to Vietnam as the trigger for his wish to retell the Trojan war . 
 Boitani discusses the modern use of the character of Troilus in a chapter entitled Eros and Thanatos . Love and death , the latter either as a tragedy in itself or as an epic symbol of Troy 's own destruction , therefore , are the two core elements of the Troilus myth for the editor of the first book @-@ length survey of it from ancient to modern times . He sees the character as incapable of transformation on a heroic scale in the manner of Ulysses and also blocked from the possibility of development as an archetypal figure of troubled youth by Hamlet . Troilus ' appeal for the 20th and 21st century is his very humanity . 
 Belief in the medieval tradition of the Trojan War that followed Dictys and Dares survived the Revival of Learning in the Renaissance and the advent of the first English translation of the Iliad in the form of Chapman 's Homer . ( Shakespeare used both Homer and Lefevre as sources for his Troilus . ) However the two supposedly eye @-@ witness accounts were finally discredited by Jacob <unk> in the early years of the 18th century . With the chief source for his portrayal as one of the most active warriors of the Trojan War undermined , Troilus has become an optional character in modern Trojan fiction , except for those that retell the love story itself . Lindsay Clarke and Phillip <unk> , for example , omit Troilus altogether . Hilary Bailey includes a character of that name in Cassandra : Princess of Troy but little remains of the classical or medieval versions except that he fights Diomedes . However , some of the over sixty re @-@ tellings of the Trojan War since 1916 do feature the character . 
 = = = Once more a man @-@ boy = = = 
 One consequence of the reassessment of sources is the reappearance of Troilus in his ancient form of andropais . Troilus takes this form in <unk> 's The Trojan War Will Not Take Place , his first successful reappearance in the 20th century . Troilus is a fifteen @-@ year @-@ old boy whom Helen has noticed following her around . After turning down the opportunity to kiss her when she offers and when confronted by Paris , he eventually accepts the kiss at the end of the play just as Troy has committed to war . He is thus a symbol of the whole city 's fatal fascination with Helen . 
 Troilus , in one of his ancient manifestations as a boy @-@ soldier overwhelmed , reappears both in works Boitani discusses and those he does not . Christa Wolf in her Kassandra features a seventeen @-@ year @-@ old Troilus , first to die of all the sons of Priam . The novel 's treatment of the character 's death has features of both medieval and ancient versions . Troilus has just gained his first love , once more called Briseis . It is only after his death that she is to betray him . On the first day of the war , Achilles seeks Troilus out and forces him into battle with the help of the Myrmidons . Troilus tries to fight in the way he has been taught princes should do , but Achilles strikes the boy down and leaps on top of him , before attempting to throttle him . Troilus escapes and runs to the sanctuary of the temple of Apollo where he is helped to take his armour off . Then , in " some of the most powerful and hair @-@ raising " words ever written on Troilus ' death , Wolf describes how Achilles enters the temple , caresses then half @-@ throttles the terrified boy , who lies on the altar , before finally beheading him like a sacrificial victim . After his death , the Trojan council propose that Troilus be officially declared to have been twenty in the hope of avoiding the prophecy about him but Priam , in his grief , refuses as this would insult his dead son further . In " exploring the violent underside of sexuality and the sexual underside of violence " , Wolf revives a theme suggested by the ancient vases where an " erotic aura seems to pervade representations of a fully armed Achilles pursuing or butchering a naked , boyish Troilus " . 
 Colleen McCullough is another author who incorporates both the medieval Achilles ' seeking Troilus out in battle and the ancient butchery at the altar . Her The Song of Troy includes two characters , Troilos and <unk> , who are Priam 's youngest children – both with prophecies attached and both specifically named for the city 's founders . They are eight and seven respectively when Paris leaves for Greece and somewhere in their late teens when killed . Troilos is made Priam 's heir after Hector 's death , against the boy 's will . Odysseus 's spies learn of the prophecy that Troy will not fall if Troilos comes of age . Achilles therefore seeks him out in the next battle and kills him with a spear @-@ cast to his throat . In a reference to the medieval concept of Troilus as the second Hector , Automedon observes that " with a few more years added , he might have made another Hektor . " <unk> is the last son of Priam to die , killed at the altar in front of his parents by <unk> . 
 Marion Zimmer Bradley 's The Firebrand features an even younger Troilus , just twelve when he becomes Hector 's charioteer . ( His brother wants to keep a protective eye on him now he is ready for war . ) Troilus helps kill Patroclus . Although he manages to escape the immediate aftermath of Hector 's death , he is wounded . After the Trojans witness Achilles ' treatment of Hector 's body , Troilus insists on rejoining the battle despite his wounds and Hecuba 's attempts to stop him . Achilles kills him with an arrow . The mourning Hecuba comments that he did not want to live because he blamed himself for Hector 's death . 
 = = = Reinventing the love story = = = 
 A feature already present in the treatments of the love story by Chaucer , Henryson , Shakespeare and Dryden is the repeated reinvention of its conclusion . Boitani sees this as a continuing struggle by authors to find a satisfying resolution to the love triangle . The major difficulty is the emotional dissatisfaction resulting from how the tale , as originally invented by Benoît , is embedded into the pre @-@ existing narrative of the Trojan War with its demands for the characters to meet their traditional fates . This narrative has Troilus , the sympathetic protagonist of the love story , killed by Achilles , a character totally disconnected from the love triangle , Diomedes survive to return to Greece victorious , and Cressida disappear from consideration as soon as it is known that she has fallen for the Greek . Modern authors continue to invent their own resolutions . 
 William Walton 's Troilus and Cressida is the best known and most successful of a clutch of 20th @-@ century operas on the subject after the composers of previous eras had ignored the possibility of setting the story . Christopher Hassall 's libretto blends elements of Chaucer and Shakespeare with inventions of its own arising from a wish to tighten and compress the plot , the desire to portray Cressida more sympathetically and the search for a satisfactory ending . Antenor is , as usual , exchanged for Cressida but , in this version of the tale , his capture has taken place while he was on a mission for Troilus . Cressida agrees to marry Diomedes after she has not heard from Troilus . His apparent silence , however , is because his letters to her have been intercepted . Troilus arrives at the Greek camp just before the planned wedding . When faced with her two lovers , Cressida chooses Troilus . He is then killed by Calchas with a knife in the back . Diomedes sends his body back to Priam with Calchas in chains . It is now the Greeks who condemn " false Cressida " and seek to keep her but she commits suicide . 
 Before Cressida kills herself she sings to Troilus to 
 This is one of three references in 20th century literature to Troilus on the banks of the River Styx that Boitani has identified . Louis MacNeice 's long poem The Stygian Banks explicitly takes its name from Shakespeare who has Troilus compare himself to " a strange soul upon the Stygian banks " and call upon Pandarus to transport him " to those fields where I may wallow in the lily beds " . In MacNeice 's poem the flowers have become children , a paradoxical use of the traditionally sterile Troilus who 
 The third reference to the Styx is in Christopher Morley 's The Trojan Horse . A return to the romantic comedy of Chaucer is the solution that Boitani sees to the problem of how the love story can survive Shakespeare 's handling of it . Morley gives us such a treatment in a book that revels in its anachronism . Young Lieutenant ( soon to be Captain ) Troilus lives his life in 1185 BC where he has carefully timetabled everything from praying , to fighting , to examining his own mistakes . He falls for Cressida after seeing her , as ever , in the Temple of Athena where she wears black , as if mourning the defection of her father , the economist Dr Calchas . The flow of the plot follows the traditional story , but the ending is changed once again . Troilus ' discovery of Cressida 's change of heart happens just before Troy falls . ( Morley uses Boccaccio 's version of the story of a brooch , or in this case a pin , attached to a piece of Diomedes ' armour as the evidence that convinces the Trojan . ) Troilus kills Diomedes as he exits the Trojan Horse , stabbing him in the throat where the captured piece of armour should have been . Then Achilles kills Troilus . The book ends with an epilogue . The Trojan and Greek officers exercise together by the River Styx , all enmities forgotten . A new arrival ( Cressida ) sees Troilus and Diomedes and wonders why they seem familiar to her . What Boitani calls " a rather dull , if pleasant , <unk> eternity " replaces Chaucer 's Christian version of the afterlife . 
 In Eric Shanower 's graphic novel Age of Bronze , currently still being serialised , Troilus is youthful but not the youngest son of Priam and Hecuba . In the first two collected volumes of this version of the Trojan War , Shanower provides a total of six pages of sources covering the story elements of his work alone . These include most of the fictional works discussed above from Guido and Boccaccio down to Morley and Walton . Shanower begins Troilus ' love story with the youth making fun of Polyxena 's love for Hector and in the process accidentally knocking aside Cressida 's veil . He follows the latter into the temple of Athena to <unk> at her . Pandarus is the widow Cressida 's uncle encouraging him . Cressida rejects Troilus ' initial advances not because of wanting to act in a <unk> manner , as in Chaucer or Shakespeare , but because she thinks of him as just a boy . However , her uncle persuades her to encourage his affection , in the hope that being close to a son of Priam will protect against the hostility of the Trojans to the family of the traitor Calchas . Troilus ' unrequited love is used as comic relief in an otherwise serious retelling of the Trojan War cycle . The character is portrayed as often indecisive and ineffectual as on the second page of this episode sample at the official site [ 50 ] . It remains to be seen how Shanower will further develop the story . 
 Troilus is rewarded a rare happy ending in the early Doctor Who story The Myth Makers . The script was written by Donald Cotton who had previously adapted Greek tales for the BBC Third Programme . The general tone is one of high comedy combined with a " genuine atmosphere of doom , danger and chaos " with the BBC website listing A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum as an inspiration together with Chaucer , Shakespeare , Homer and Virgil . Troilus is again an andropais " seventeen next birthday " described as " looking too young for the military garb " . Both " Cressida " and " Diomede " are the assumed names of the Doctor 's companions . Thus Troilus ' jealousy of Diomede , whom he believes also loves Cressida , is down to confusion about the real situation . In the end " Cressida " decides to leave the Doctor for Troilus and saves the latter from the fall of Troy by finding an excuse to get him away from the city . In a reversal of the usual story , he is able to avenge Hector by killing Achilles when they meet outside Troy . ( The story was originally intended to end more conventionally , with " Cressida " , despite her love for him , apparently abandoning him for " Diomede " , but the producers declined to renew co @-@ star Maureen O 'Brien 's contract , requiring that her character Vicki be written out . ) 
 = = Annotated bibliography = = 
 Andrew , M. ( 1989 ) " The Fall of Troy in Sir Gawain and the Green Knight and Troilus and Criseyde " , in : Boitani ( 1989 : pp. 75 – 93 ) . Focuses on a comparison between how the Gawain poet and Chaucer handle their themes . 
 Antonelli , R. ( 1989 ) " The Birth of Criseyde : an exemplary triangle ; ' Classical ' Troilus and the question of love at the Anglo @-@ Norman court " , in : Boitani ( 1989 : pp. 21 – 48 ) . Examination of Benoît 's and Guido 's treatment of the love triangle . 
 Benson , C. D. ( 1980 ) The History of Troy in Middle English Literature , Woodbridge : D. S. Brewer . A study examining Guido 's influence on writers on Troy up to Lydgate and Henryson . Troilus is discussed throughout . 
 Benson , C. D. ( 1989 ) " True Troilus and False Cresseid : the descent from tragedy " in Boitani ( 1989 : pp. 153 – 170 ) . Examination of the Troilus and Cressida story in the minor authors between Chaucer and Shakespeare . 
 Boitani , P. ( ed . ) ( 1989 ) The European Tragedy of Troilus , Oxford , Clarendon Press ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. This was the first full book to examine the development of Troilus through the ages . The outer chapters are by Boitani reviewing the history of Troilus as a character from ancient to modern times . The middle chapters , looking at the tale through the medieval and renaissance periods , are by other authors with several examining Chaucer and Shakespeare . 
 Burgess , J. S. ( 2001 ) The Tradition of the Trojan War in Homer and the Epic Cycle , Baltimore , Johns Hopkins University Press ISBN 0 @-@ 8018 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. Examination of the Trojan War in archaic literary and artifact sources . Troilus mentioned in passing . 
 Carpenter , T. H. ( 1991 ) Art and Myth in Ancient Greece , London , Thames and Hudson . Contains roughly four pages ( 17 – 21 ) of text and , separately , fourteen illustrations ( figs . 20 – 22 , 25 – 35 ) on Troilos in ancient art . ISBN 0 @-@ 500 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Coghill , N. ( ed . ) ( 1971 : pp. xi – <unk> ) " Introduction " in : Geoffrey Chaucer , Troilus and Criseyde , London : Penguin ISBN 0 @-@ 14 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . Discusses Chaucer , his sources and key themes in the Troilus . The main body of the book is a translation into modern English by Coghill . 
 Foakes , R. A. ( ed . ) ( 1987 ) Troilus and Cressida ( The New Penguin Shakespeare . ) London : Penguin ISBN 0 @-@ 14 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . Annotated edition with introduction . 
 Frazer , R. M. ( trans . ) ( 1966 ) The Trojan War : the Chronicles of Dictys of Crete and Dares the Phrygian . Bloomington : Indiana University Press . English translation of Dictys ' <unk> belli Trojani ( pp. 17 – 130 ) and Dares ' De <unk> <unk> historia ( pp. 131 – 68 ) with Introduction ( pp. 3 – 15 ) covering the theme of Troy in medieval literature and endnotes . 
 Gantz , T. ( 1993 ) Early Greek Myth . Baltimore : Johns <unk> U. P. A standard sourcebook on Greek myths . Multiple versions available . There are approximately six pages ( 597 – 603 ) plus notes discussing Troilos in Volume 2 of the two volume edition . Page references are to the two volume 1996 Johns Hopkins Paperbacks edition ( ISBN 0 @-@ 8018 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 ) . 
 Gordon , R. K. ( 1934 ) The Story of Troilus . London : J. M. Dent . ( Dutton Paperback ed . New York : E. P. Dutton , 1964 . ) This book has been reprinted by various publishers . It contains a translated selection from Le Roman de Troie , a full translation of Il <unk> and the <unk> texts of Troilus and Criseyde and The Testament of Cresseid . Page references are to the 1995 printing by University of Toronto Press and the Medieval Academy of America ( ISBN 0 @-@ 8020 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 ) . 
 Graves , R. ( 1955 ) The Greek Myths . Another standard sourcebook available in many editions . Troilus is discussed in Volume 2 of the two volume version . Page references are to the 1990 Penguin printing of the 1960 revision ( ISBN 0 @-@ 14 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 ) . 
 Lewis , C. S. ( 1936 ) The Allegory of Love . Oxford : Clarendon Press . Influential work on the literature of courtly love , including Chaucer 's Troilus . 
 Lombardo , A. ( 1989 ) " Fragments and Scraps : Shakespeare 's Troilus and Cressida " in Boitani ( 1989 : pp. 199 – 217 ) . Sets the cynical tone of Troilus in the context of changes both in the world and the theatre . 
 <unk> , T. D. ( 2010 ) " Chaucer 's second Hector : the triumphs of Diomede and the possibility of epic in Troilus and Criseyde . ( Critical essay ) " , Medium <unk> , March 22 , 2010 , Accessed through <unk> , August 30 , 2012 ( subscription required ) . 
 March , J. ( 1998 ) Dictionary of Classical Mythology . London : Cassell . ISBN 0 @-@ 304 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 Illustrated dictionary with Troilus covered in one page . Page references are to 1998 hardback edition . 
 Natali , G. ( 1989 ) " A Lyrical Version : Boccaccio 's Filostrato " , in : Boitani ( 1989 : pp. 49 – 73 ) . An examination of the Filostrato in context . 
 Novak , M. E ( ed . ) ( 1984 ) The Works of John Dryden : Volume XIII Plays : All for Love ; Oedipus ; Troilus and Cressida . Berkeley : University of California Press ISBN 0 @-@ 520 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . Volume in complete edition with annotated texts and commentaries . 
 Oates , J. O. ( 1966 / 7 ) " The Tragedy of Existence : Shakespeare 's Troilus and Cressida " by Joyce Carol Oates . Originally published as two separate essays , in Philological Quarterly , Spring 1967 , and Shakespeare Quarterly , Spring 1966 . Available online at [ 51 ] ( Checked 17 August 2007 ) . 
 Palmer , K. ( ed . ) ( 1982 ) Troilus and Cressida . ( The Arden Shakespeare . ) London : Methuen . Edition of the play as part of respected series , with extensive notes , appendices and 93 page introduction . References are to 1997 printing by Thomas Nelson & Sons , London ( ISBN 0 @-@ 17 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 ) . 
 <unk> , S. ( 1989 ) " ' To Make that Maxim Good ' : Dryden 's Shakespeare " , in : Boitani ( 1989 : pp. 243 – 80 ) . Discussion of Dryden 's remodeling of Troilus . 
 Sommer , H. O. ( ed . ) ( 1894 ) The <unk> of the <unk> of Troye : written in French by Raoul Lefèvre ; translated and printed by William Caxton ( about A.D. 1474 ) ; the first English printed book , now faithfully reproduced , with a critical introduction , index and glossary and eight pages in photographic facsimile . London : David Nutt . Edition of Caxton translation of Lefevre with introduction of 157 pages . Page references are to AMS Press 1973 reprinting ( ISBN 0 @-@ 404 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 ) . 
 Sommerstein , A. H. , Fitzpatrick , D. & <unk> , T. ( 2007 ) Sophocles : Selected Fragmentary Plays . Oxford : Aris and Phillips ( ISBN 0 @-@ 85668 @-@ 766 @-@ 9 ) . This is a product of the University of Nottingham 's project on Sophocles ' fragmentary plays . The book contains a 52 @-@ page chapter ( pp. 196 – 247 ) on the Troilos , including the Greek text with translation and commentary of the few words and phrases known to come from the play . The introduction to this chapter includes approximately seven pages on the literary and artistic background on Troilus plus discussion and a putative reconstruction of the plot of the play itself . This , the chapter on the <unk> , where Troilus is also discussed , and the general introduction to the book are all solely by Sommerstein and therefore he alone is referenced above . 
 <unk> , A. ( 1989 ) " From ' History ' to ' Tragedy ' : The Story of Troilus and Criseyde in Lydgate 's Troy Book and Henryson 's Testament of Cresseid " , in : Boitani ( 1989 : pp. 171 – 97 ) . Examination of the two most important authors considering the love story between Chaucer and Shakespeare . 
 <unk> , B. ( 1989 ) " Classical and Medieval Elements in Chaucer 's Troilus " , in : Boitani ( 1989 : p . 111 – 131 ) 
 Woodford , S. ( 1993 ) The Trojan War in Ancient Art . Ithaca : Cornell University Press ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . Contains approximately four illustrated pages ( 55 – 59 ) on Troilos in ancient art . 
 = M @-@ 199 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 199 is a state trunkline highway near Albion in the US state of Michigan . The western terminus of the 4 @.@ 030 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 6 @.@ 486 km ) road is in Sheridan Township at exit 119 off Interstate 94 ( I @-@ 94 ) . The eastern terminus is a junction with Business Loop I @-@ 94 ( BL I @-@ 94 ) downtown Albion . The entire road is within Calhoun County and runs through rural farm fields outside of Albion ; in town it is a residential street . The M @-@ 199 designation had previously been applied to a highway in the Upper Peninsula in the 1930s . The current highway was previously part of other highways in the first half of the 20th century before it was transferred to local control around 1960 . It was later transferred back to state control in 1998 and remains unchanged since . 
 = = Route description = = 
 As a two @-@ lane roadway , M @-@ 199 starts at exit 119 along I @-@ 94 northwest of Albion in Sheridan Township . The highway runs southward through farm fields along 26 Mile Road before curving to the southwest on Star Commonwealth Road near the campus of the Montcalm School for Boys and Girls , a private boarding school . At the end of this curves , the highway follows 25 ½ Mile Road southward to the intersection with Michigan Avenue . There M @-@ 199 turns easterly along Michigan Avenue and passes south of Montcalm Lake . The trunkline runs parallel to a line of the Norfolk Southern Railway until about the intersection with 26 ½ Mile Road . At the intersection with 27 Mile Road , M @-@ 199 enters the city of Albion , and the street name changes to Austin Avenue . In town , the highway follows a four @-@ lane street through residential neighborhoods . The trunkline passes the northern edge of McAuliffe Park and runs parallel to the Kalamazoo River . At the intersection with Eaton Street , the highway meets BL I @-@ 94 , where M @-@ 199 ends while the business loop continues southeasterly on Austin Avenue at this corner . 
 M @-@ 199 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) like other state highways in Michigan . As a part of these maintenance responsibilities , the department tracks the volume of traffic that uses the roadways under its jurisdiction . These volumes are expressed using a metric called annual average daily traffic , which is a statistical calculation of the average daily number of vehicles on a segment of roadway . MDOT 's surveys in 2010 showed that 1 @,@ 185 vehicles per day used the roadway between I @-@ 94 and Michigan Avenue and between 3 @,@ 174 and 4 @,@ 042 vehicles used section along the combined Michigan and Austin avenues . No sections of M @-@ 199 have been listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 In the middle of 1933 , an earlier designation of M @-@ 199 was used for a short spur route from US Highway 41 ( US 41 ) into Daggett in Menominee County . This highway was decommissioned in 1939 . 
 The current M @-@ 199 was once part of M @-@ 17 starting around July 1 , 1919 . When the US Highway System was created on November 11 , 1926 , the highway was incorporated into US 12 . The Albion area was bypassed by a freeway ( now I @-@ 94 ) at the end of the 1950s , and Michigan Avenue was turned over to local control . The current highway routing was transferred to state control on October 1 , 1998 , and the M @-@ 199 designation was subsequently assigned to the trunkline . The highway has remained unchanged since designation . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Calhoun County . 
 = Rutland Barrington = 
 Rutland Barrington ( 15 January 1853 – 31 May 1922 ) was an English singer , actor , comedian , and Edwardian musical comedy star . Best remembered for originating the lyric baritone roles in the Gilbert and Sullivan operas from 1877 to 1896 , his performing career spanned more than four decades . He also wrote at least a dozen works for the stage . 
 After two years with a comic touring company , Barrington joined Richard D 'Oyly Carte 's opera company and , over the next two decades , created a number of memorable comic opera roles , including Captain Corcoran in H.M.S. Pinafore ( 1878 ) , the Sergeant of Police in The Pirates of Penzance ( 1880 ) , and Pooh Bah in The Mikado ( 1885 ) , among many others . Failing in an 1888 attempt to become a theatrical manager , Barrington refocused his energies on acting and occasional playwriting . 
 Beginning in 1896 and continuing for ten years , Barrington played in a series of very successful musical comedies under the management of George Edwardes at Daly 's Theatre , specialising in comic portrayals of pompous rulers or other persons of authority . One of the most popular features of his performances was his insertion of topical songs , or verses of songs , into these musical comedies . After leaving Daly 's he continued to appear in musical comedy roles and performed in music hall . He also essayed a few Shakespeare and other dramatic roles and appeared in a few silent films . His career ended in 1918 , after which he suffered a stroke and lived the last few years of his life in poverty . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 Barrington was born George Rutland Fleet at Penge , England , the fourth son of John George Fleet ( 1818 – 1902 ) , a wholesale sugar dealer in London . His mother was the former Esther Faithfull ( 1823 – 1908 ) of Headley , Surrey , England . He was educated at Headley rectory and then at the Merchant Taylors ' School in London . His six brothers included Indologist John Faithfull Fleet ( 1847 – 1917 ) , Vice @-@ Admiral Henry Louis Fleet ( 1850 – 1923 ) , The Reverend Ferdinand Francis Fleet ( 1857 – 1940 ) and actor Duncan James Fleet ( 1860 – 1909 ) . He also had two sisters , one named Esther ( one boy and one girl died in infancy ) . Barrington was employed in a bank for eighteen months as a young man , but had no enthusiasm for such work , as he had ambitions to be an actor . Barrington 's father did not want his son to go on the stage and forbade him to do so until he came of age . His aunt , activist and dramatic reader Emily Faithfull , helped him to make his first connections in the theatre . Barrington was a keen football player in the mid @-@ 1870s . 
 In 1880 , Barrington married Ellen Louisa " Louie " Jane Stainer ( 1851 – 1922 ) , from Woolwich in Kent , the daughter of William Stainer and the former Lucy Mary Wheeler . Barrington and his wife had no children . 
 = = = Early career ; joining D 'Oyly Carte 's company = = = 
 Barrington adopted his stage name by 1874 and made his professional debut with Henry Neville 's company at the Olympic Theatre that year , playing the role of Sir George Barclay in Tom Taylor 's Lady <unk> , and then in The Ticket @-@ of @-@ Leave Man ( by Taylor ) and as LaFleur in The Two Orphans , among others . In July 1875 , Barrington was playing Jules Frantz in Lessons in Harmony at St. George 's Hall , London . A review in The Era reviewed the young actor 's performance : " A good figure and expressive face were known to be among his advantages , but it was , perhaps , not suspected that he was a capital vocalist , a skilled musician , and an actor of remarkable ease and animation . " Later that year , he was hired to appear in the touring company of Mr and Mrs Howard Paul . The company played a hectic schedule of entertainments . 
 In 1877 , producer Richard D 'Oyly Carte approached Mrs Paul to play the part of Lady <unk> in the new Gilbert and Sullivan opera that Carte was producing , The Sorcerer . She conditioned her acceptance on her 24 @-@ year @-@ old protege , Barrington , being given a part , and so Barrington was cast in the role of Dr Daly , the vicar . When Barrington auditioned before W. S. Gilbert , the young actor questioned his own suitability for comic opera , but Gilbert , who required that his actors play their sometimes @-@ absurd lines in all earnestness , explained the casting choice : " He 's a staid , solid swine , and that 's what I want . " 
 In his 1908 autobiography , Barrington repeats a line from a first night review of his performance as Dr Daly in The Sorcerer : " Mr Barrington is wonderful . He always manages to sing one @-@ sixteenth of a tone flat ; it 's so like a vicar . " Barrington went on to say that producer Richard D 'Oyly Carte later came to see him , saying , " ... what 's the matter ? ... some one has just come out of the stalls to tell me you are singing in tune . It will never do . " Barrington said that " This pleased me so much that I have never sung flat since , except , of course , when I wished .... " Several contemporaries did find Barrington 's singing occasionally flat , including Francois Cellier . Many years later , in her memoir , Ellaline Terriss wrote : " ... dear old Rutland scarcely ever did sing in tune – but how grand he was .... He had a beautifully clear diction and a marvellous sense of timing – and was one of the finest singers of the then popular topical songs that our stage ever knew . " Percy Hetherington Fitzgerald wrote of Barrington in his 1899 book , The Savoy Opera , " His peculiar tranquil or impassive style has always exactly suited the characters allotted to him , and it would now be difficult to imagine a Savoy opera without him . However , Barrington 's performance as Dr Daly impressed the critics and audiences , and he won a permanent place in D 'Oyly Carte 's company . 
 = = = Pinafore to Ruddigore = = = 
 From 1877 to 1894 , except for a foray into the business of theatrical management in 1888 – 89 , Barrington remained with the D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company , creating comic lyric baritone roles in all of Gilbert and Sullivan 's new operas with the exception of The Yeomen of the Guard ( 1888 ) . In 1878 , he created the role of Lord Chamberlain in Albery 's and Cellier 's curtain raiser , The Spectre Knight , played the Counsel for the Plaintiff in the revival of Trial by Jury , and created the role of Captain Corcoran in Gilbert and Sullivan 's first smash hit , H.M.S. Pinafore . Barrington was a big man , which led to one of Gilbert 's famous quips in a rehearsal for Pinafore . Gilbert asked Barrington to sit " pensively " on one of the ship 's skylights . Barrington lowered himself into position , and the hastily sewn set piece collapsed under his weight . Gilbert remarked , " No , that 's ex @-@ pensively . " 
 Barrington also created the role of <unk> in Desprez and Cellier 's curtain raiser , After All ! ( 1878 ) . Barrington played Mr. Cox in Carte 's revival of Cox and Box ( 1879 ) and created the role of the Sergeant of Police in The Pirates of Penzance in London ( 1880 ) . Barrington was proud that the Sergeant 's song generally received two encores . Eventually , he asked Gilbert to write an " encore verse " for the song . Gilbert replied that " encore " means " sing it again . " Also around this time , Barrington 's short play entitled Quid Pro Quo , written with Cunningham Bridgeman and composed by Wilfred Bendall , was first produced . 
 The next role that Barrington created was Archibald Grosvenor in Patience ( 1881 ) . Casting the large Barrington as the " perfect " and " infallible " incarnation of manly beauty mirrored a joke in Gilbert 's earlier A Sensation Novel , in which he cast the large , ungainly Corney Grain , in a similar role . This was followed by the role of Earl <unk> in Iolanthe ( 1882 ; he also appeared in Margate , Kent in an 1882 Christmas pantomime of Robin Hood written by George Thorne ) , and King Hildebrand in Princess Ida ( 1884 ) . This role was Barrington 's least favourite of the series , and he attributed Ida 's relatively short run , at least in part , to the lack of prominence of this role in the opera . During the run of Princess Ida , a comedy written by Barrington and called <unk> Towers was first presented at a matinee . 
 After Princess Ida closed , Barrington reprised his role of Dr Daly and also played the Learned Judge in the revival of The Sorcerer and Trial ( 1884 — over the years , Barrington frequently played the Judge in D 'Oyly Carte 's and various " benefit " performances of Trial ) . He also played Dr <unk> in Sydney Grundy 's The Silver Shield ( 1885 ) . In 1885 , he created his most famous role , that of Pooh @-@ Bah in The Mikado . The Theatre 's review was typical of the critics ' unanimous praise : " The Pooh @-@ Bah of Mr. Barrington is a masterpiece of pompous stolidity – nothing could possibly be better of its kind – and this popular comedian provided his many admirers with an agreeable surprise by singing every note of the music allotted to him in perfect tune . " In June 1885 , he played together with Eric Lewis ( Grossmith 's understudy ) in an afternoon " musical dialogue , " Mad to Act , with words by Barrington and music by Wilfred Bendall , at the Japanese Village in Knightsbridge . 
 Next , Barrington created the role of Sir Despard Murgatroyd in Ruddigore and then reprised his original roles in revivals of Pinafore , Pirates and The Mikado in ( 1887 – 88 ) . During rehearsals for Ruddigore , and after discussions with other cast members on the subject , Barrington complained to Gilbert about the guests that Gilbert frequently invited to rehearsals , saying that he didn 't wish to be taught the stage business " before a row of ... strangers . " Gilbert forgave Barrington for the outburst and even discontinued the invitations . However , if anyone sat in the stalls during later rehearsals awaiting their cue , Gilbert would <unk> , " You mustn 't sit here ; Barrington won 't like it . " 
 The Times said of Barrington 's performances , " His strength lay in his quietness of voice and movement ... in perfect contrast to the restlessness of George Grossmith . No one could be so ridiculously pompous ... he moved with effect . There was a native drollery in his lightly rolling dance , a comic dignity in his rotund and placid , yet <unk> intelligent face . He always gave the impression of thoroughly enjoying whatever he did .... " In its review of Ruddigore , The Theatre wrote , " Better comic acting than his , or more highly finished , I have never seen and never wish to see . " 
 = = = Theatrical management experiment and later Savoy roles = = = 
 In 1888 , Barrington left the D 'Oyly Carte organisation and the Savoy Theatre , missing the chance to create the role of Wilfred in Yeomen , to try his hand at theatrical management , leasing the St. James 's Theatre . The Illustrated Sporting and Dramatic News lamented Barrington 's departure , suggesting that he was irreplaceable in the Savoy Operas : " He is the typical embodiment ... of that British <unk> , the <unk> hide of which Mr. Gilbert has so long striven to penetrate by the process of holding up its own image before it . " In March 1888 , Barrington played Chrysos in a benefit performance of Gilbert 's Pygmalion and Galatea , a role that he would reprise at a number of " benefit " performances over the years . Later in the year , at the St. James 's , Barrington produced The Dean 's Daughter by Grundy and F. C. Phillips , also playing the Very Reverend Augustus St. Aubyn , Dean of Southwark . Though the piece was unsuccessful , Barrington 's performance was praised , and it launched several theatrical careers , including Olga Nethersole 's . Gilbert 's <unk> Hall ( an abject failure ) , starred Barrington as Mr. Thursby , as well as his younger brother , Duncan Fleet , Julia Neilson and Lewis Waller ( the latter two in their professional stage debuts ) . Its companion piece was A Patron Saint . This experiment in management proved to be a financial disaster for Barrington , and he was bankrupt after only five months . 
 After <unk> Hall closed , he again played Chrysos in a revival of Pygmalion and Galatea at the Lyceum Theatre and played Mr Barnes in his own play , To the Death , at the Olympic Theatre . He then appeared at the Comedy Theatre under Charles Hawtrey in Pickwick ( 1889 ) , a successful one @-@ act musical play by F. C. Burnand and Edward Solomon based on an episode in The Pickwick Papers , which Barrington ended up directing and in which he alternated in the roles of Pickwick and Baker . He then created the role of Lt. Col. Cadbury in a Grundy farce called Merry Margate and next played <unk> in a comic opera by Solomon and George P. Hawtrey called Penelope , in which he co @-@ starred with Dan Leno . He also played a number of other roles in other theatres throughout 1889 until he rejoined D 'Oyly Carte to create the role of Giuseppe in The Gondoliers in December 1889 , remaining for the long run of that last Gilbert and Sullivan hit . 
 After The Gondoliers closed in 1891 , Gilbert and Sullivan were estranged for a time . Barrington appeared in a few more roles at other theatres , including as Robert <unk> in his own piece , A <unk> <unk> , a <unk> with music by Solomon . He then returned to the Savoy to star as <unk> , the Rajah of <unk> , in Dance , Desprez , and Solomon 's The Nautch Girl . In August 1891 , Barrington and Jessie Bond took a leave of absence from that show to tour a series of " musical <unk> " ( written by Barrington and composed by Edward Solomon ) throughout Britain , returning to the Savoy in November . In 1892 , Barrington played the title role of the Reverend William Barlow , in Grundy and Solomon 's The Vicar of Bray and then toured with that show . In September 1892 , he created the role of Rupert Vernon in Grundy and Sullivan 's Haddon Hall , making a critical splash . For example , The Figaro wrote : " Barrington ... kept the audience in shouts of laughter the whole time [ he was ] on the stage . " In 1893 , he created the role of the Proctor in J. M. Barrie , Arthur Conan Doyle , and Ernest Ford 's Jane Annie , which was unsuccessful at the Savoy but ran more successfully on tour . Barrington , a lifelong golf enthusiast , speculated that one reason for the failure of Jane Annie in London was that the game of golf was not yet popular there . Despite the failure of the piece , Barrington was singled out for critical praise . Barrington next created the role of King Paramount I in Gilbert and Sullivan 's Utopia , Limited , opening in October of that year . Barrington 's comedy , <unk> Towers , was also produced at a matinee at the Savoy in 1893 , with Barrington playing Sir James Hanbury . 
 Barrington left the company again when Utopia closed , taking over the role of Dr Montague <unk> in the Hall , Greenbank and Jones musical , A Gaiety Girl ( in 1894 ) produced at Daly 's Theatre by George Edwardes and on tour . Next , he appeared in Gilbert and Carr 's His Excellency ( 1894 – 95 ) creating the role of the Regent . The stage was dominated by a heroic @-@ size statue of him in the role . Barrington also wrote and directed a one @-@ act operetta , A Knight Errant , with music by Alfred Caldicott , which played as a companion piece with His Excellency at the Lyric Theatre . At Toole 's Theatre , he played John <unk> in Thoroughbred , by Ralph R. Lumley , in early 1895 . J. L. Toole had originated the role but took ill and was forced to retire . Barrington also played in some German Reed Entertainments , including a revival of Happy Arcadia at St. George 's Hall in 1895 , starring Fanny Holland , and toured with the German Reeds . 
 In November 1895 , Barrington returned to the Savoy as Pooh @-@ Bah in another revival of The Mikado . In March 1896 he created the role of Ludwig in Gilbert and Sullivan 's last opera , The Grand Duke . In his 1908 memoir , Barrington wrote of some difficulty in getting along with his co @-@ star , Ilka <unk> , who was cast in the role of Julia . As usual , the critics were pleased with Barrington , " on whom ... falls the chief burden of the piece , is intensely funny as Ludwig , more especially in the absurd costume of the second act .... " After another revival of The Mikado , Barrington again left the Savoy . 
 = = = Musical comedy and music hall = = = 
 Beginning in 1896 , Barrington spent ten very successful years under the management of George Edwardes at Daly 's Theatre , first taking over the role of the Marquis <unk> in The Geisha ( 1896 ) , and then creating roles in a number of other Edwardian musical comedy hits , including Marcus Pomponius in A Greek Slave ( 1898 ) , Yen How in San Toy ( 1899 ) , The Rajah of <unk> in A Country Girl ( 1902 ) , and <unk> in The <unk> ( 1904 ) , among others . 
 In these roles , he had more freedom to add " gags " than Gilbert had given him at the Savoy , and he often wrote topical verses to Adrian Ross 's songs . However , Barrington complained that , in these musical comedies , the plot was nearly eliminated during rehearsals . During this time , Barrington often reprised his role as the Judge at benefit matinees . Also during this period , several of Barrington 's stage works were produced by Arthur Bourchier at the Garrick Theatre , including Barrington 's popular children 's " fairy play " called Water Babies , based on Charles Kingsley 's 1863 book , with music by Frederick Rosse , Albert Fox and Alfred Cellier ( 1902 ) . Barrington directed Water Babies . Another Barrington play , Little Black Sambo and Little White Barbara , with music by Wilfred Bendall , enjoyed 31 matinees at the Garrick in 1904 . 
 Barrington appeared between 1905 and 1907 in several musical comedies , including The White Chrysanthemum ( 1905 ) , as Admiral Sir Horatio Armitage , <unk> ( with Isabel Jay , Louie Pounds and Henry Lytton ) . He also played Barnabas <unk> in a revival of the farce The Candidate by Justin Huntly McCarthy at Wyndham 's Theatre with Charles Wyndham . He then briefly played his old role in a revival of The Geisha in 1906 , after which he created the role of the Pharaoh of Egypt in the successful comic opera <unk> ( 1906 ) , by Philip Michael Faraday and Frederick Fenn , both in London ( where it ran for over 200 performances ) and on extended tours . 
 During this period , Barrington performed his own solo music hall sketches at the Coliseum and produced various tours , performing standard topical songs of the day , including the only song that he recorded , " The Moody Mariner " ( 1905 ) . This was based on a story in Many Cargoes by Jacobs , with lyrics by Barrington and music by Walter Slaughter . Other such sketches and songs included " Man the Lifeboat " ( 1907 ) , written by Leedham Bantock ( starring also William Terriss ) " Across the Silent Way " and " The Tramp " by Barrington and Slaughter , and <unk> ( 1907 ) , which he had written in 1903 with Wilfrid Bendall ( Sullivan 's former secretary ) based on his play of the same name that had been produced some years earlier at Penley 's Theatre . He also wrote a Rip van Winkle sketch for Courtice Pounds and a one @-@ act musical drama , No. 442 , His Escape ( 1907 ) , with music by H. M. Higgs . Barrington became known for writing topical verses on short notice . In his 1908 memoir , he tells the following story : 
 Barrington returned to the D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company in 1908 for the second of the London repertory seasons , playing Pooh @-@ Bah , Captain Corcoran , <unk> , and the Sergeant of Police once again , and adding the roles of Wilfred Shadbolt in Yeomen ( finally completing his cycle of the extant Gilbert and Sullivan operas ) , and Don Alhambra in The Gondoliers to his Savoy repertoire . He then played in more music hall sketches and toured in musicals , including in A Member of Tattersall 's , an adaptation by Adrian Ross of Leo Fall 's Die <unk> Frau ( 1909 , repeated in London in 1911 ) ; as the Marquis of <unk> in The Walls of Jericho ( 1909 ) ; and as Judge Tucker in The <unk> ( 1910 ) . In 1910 , he created the role of Lucas van Tromp in The Girl in the Train at the Vaudeville Theatre . 
 = = = Last years = = = 
 Barrington also established himself on the legitimate stage , playing Falstaff in The Merry Wives of Windsor at His Majesty 's Theatre in 1911 ; in several other roles from 1911 to 1913 ; on tour in Other People 's Babies , by Lechmere Worrall , in 1913 ; as Lord Leonard <unk> in the highly successful The Great Adventure by Arnold Bennett ( 1913 – 14 ; based on Bennett 's 1908 novel , Buried Alive ) ; as Max <unk> in The Joy @-@ Ride Lady , by Arthur Anderson and Hartley Carrick at the New Theatre ( 1914 ) ; and Polonius in Hamlet and Christopher Sly in The Taming of the Shrew at His Majesty 's in 1916 , among other roles . He continued to perform in London and in the provinces until 1918 , from 1916 under the management of John Martin @-@ Harvey . One of his later successes was a reprise of his 1909 role as the kindly bookmaker Peter Perks in A Member of Tattersall 's . His last role was Claus in The Burgomaster of <unk> , by Count Maurice Maeterlinck , at the Lyceum Theatre , Edinburgh , beginning in October 1918 . 
 Barrington wrote horse racing columns for Punch magazine under the pseudonym Lady Gay and also wrote two volumes of reminiscences , in 1908 and 1911 . He also appeared in four silent films : " San Toy " ( 1900 ) ; as Mr. Texel in " The Great Adventure " ( 1915 ) ; as Septimus Beaumont in " The Girl Who Loves a Soldier " ( 1916 ) ; and as Mr. Potter in Still Waters Run Deep ( 1916 ) . In addition to his avid interest in several sports , which he describes at length in his memoirs , Barrington was a skilled artist in <unk> and pen and ink . 
 After Barrington suffered a paralytic stroke in early 1919 , he was unable to perform . He spent the rest of his life in poverty , although his fellow actors held benefits and made other efforts to help him , and his brothers and his neighbors in East <unk> , Berkshire , helped him as he became increasingly disabled and eventually unable even to speak . He died in 1922 while living at the St. James 's Infirmary , Balham , in South London , at the age of 69 and is buried in Lower Morden Lane at the Morden Cemetery , also known as Battersea New Cemetery , in Surrey . On the 75th anniversary of Barrington 's death , a granite monument with a <unk> of Barrington as Pooh @-@ Bah was dedicated to him at the Morden Cemetery , by members of the Gilbert and Sullivan Society , the Sir Arthur Sullivan Society and others . 
 = Wendover Air Force Base = 
 Wendover Air Force Base is a former United States Air Force base in Utah now known as Wendover Airport . During World War II , it was a training base for B @-@ 17 and B @-@ 24 bomber crews . It was the training site of the 509th Composite Group , the B @-@ 29 unit that carried out the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . 
 After the war , Wendover was used for training exercises , gunnery range and as a research facility . It was closed by the Air Force in 1969 , and the base was given to Wendover City in 1977 . Tooele County , Utah , assumed ownership of the airport and base buildings in 1998 , and the County continues to operate the airfield as a public airport . A portion of the original bombing range is now the Utah Test and Training Range ( <unk> ) which is used extensively by the Air Force with live fire targets on the range . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Wendover Air Force Base 's history began in 1940 , when the United States Army began looking for additional bombing ranges . The area near the town of Wendover was well @-@ suited to these needs ; the land was virtually uninhabited , had generally excellent flying weather , and the nearest large city ( Salt Lake City ) was 100 miles ( 160 km ) away ( Wendover had around 100 citizens at the time ) . Though isolated , the area was served by the Western Pacific Railroad , and many of its citizens were employed by the railroad . 
 Construction of the base began on 20 September 1940 and on the range on 4 November 1940 . Wendover Air Base became a <unk> of Fort Douglas in Salt Lake City on 29 July 1941 . By that time a total of 1 @,@ 822 @,@ 000 acres ( 737 @,@ 000 ha ) had been acquired for the base and associated gunnery / bombing range 86 miles ( 138 km ) long and 18 to 36 miles ( 29 to 58 km ) wide . Ranchers protested the loss of their grazing land , which they claimed would wipe them out and cost the state of Utah $ 1 @.@ 5 million annually . They took their complaints to Governor Henry Hooper Blood , but the War Department pressed on with the development of the bombing range . The first military contingent arrived on 12 August 1941 , to construct targets on the bombing range . To provide water , a pipeline was run from a spring on Pilot Peak to the base . 
 = = World War II = = 
 With the entrance of the United States into World War II , Wendover Field took on greater importance . It was the Army Air Force 's largest bombing and gunnery range . On March 1942 the Army Air Force activated Wendover Army Air Field and also assigned the research and development of guided missiles , pilotless aircraft , and remotely controlled bombs to the site . The new base was supplied and serviced by the Ogden Air Depot at Hill Field . In April 1942 , the Wendover Sub @-@ Depot was activated and assumed technical and administrative control of the field , under the Ogden Air Depot . The Wendover Sub @-@ Depot was tasked to requisition , store , and issue all Army Air Forces property for organizations stationed at Wendover Field for training . 
 By late 1943 there were some 2 @,@ 000 civilian employees and 17 @,@ 500 military personnel at Wendover . Construction at the base continued for most of the war , including three 8 @,@ 100 @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 500 m ) paved runways , taxiways , a 300 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 28 @,@ 000 m2 ) ramp , and seven hangars . By May 1945 the base consisted of 668 buildings , including a 300 @-@ bed hospital , gymnasium , swimming pool , library , chapel , cafeteria , bowling alley , two movie theatres , and 361 housing units for married officers and civilians . 
 = = = Heavy Bombardment Group training = = = 
 Wendover 's mission was to train heavy bomb groups . The training of Boeing B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress and Consolidated B @-@ 24 Liberator groups began in April 1942 , with the arrival of the 306th Bomb Group flying B @-@ 17s . From March 1942 through April 1944 , Wendover AAF hosted twenty newly formed B @-@ 17 and B @-@ 24 groups during one phase of their group training . The Second Air Force organized bombardment training into three phases . In the first , training focused on the individual crew members . In the second , training involved the whole crew , who would conduct training together . The third and final phase saw the group 's crews training together , with formation flying and practice combat missions . Until the end of 1943 , each phase of training was conducted at a different base . 
 Heavy Bomb Groups Trained at Wendover Army Air Base 
 = = = Fighter training = = = 
 In April 1944 , the role of Wendover Army Air Base changed with the arrival from Louisiana of P @-@ 47 fighters of the 72nd Fighter Wing . The program ended in September after three groups , totalling 180 men , had been trained . 
 = = = 509th Composite Group = = = 
 In June 1943 , preparations began for the operational use of atomic bombs . Although not as suitable for the atomic mission as the British Avro Lancaster with its cavernous 33 @-@ foot ( 10 m ) bomb bay , Major General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , the director of the Manhattan Project , and General Henry H. Arnold , the Chief of United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) , wanted to use an American plane , if this was at all possible , so the Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortress was chosen , even though it required substantial modification . The modification project was codenamed Silverplate , but this codename eventually came to identify the training and operational aspects of the program as well . 
 Arnold selected Lieutenant Colonel Paul Tibbets , an officer with a distinguished combat record in Europe and North Africa , who had expert knowledge of the B @-@ 29 as one of its test pilots , to form and train a group to deliver atomic bombs . Tibbets chose the Wendover over Great Bend , Kansas , and Mountain Home , Idaho , as the location for his training program . It was remote , which was good for secrecy and security , but within reasonable distance by air from the Manhattan Project 's Site Y , at Los Alamos , New Mexico , and the Salton Sea Naval Auxiliary Air Station , where bombing tables for the mission would be prepared . The base was given the code name " Kingman " , and became the Manhattan Project 's Site K. The activity to assemble , modify and flight test prototype bombs was named " Project W @-@ 47 " . 
 On 14 September 1944 , the 393d Bomb Squadron arrived at Wendover from its former base at Fairmont Army Air Base , Nebraska , where it had been an operational training unit ( OTU ) with the 504th Bombardment Group since 12 March . When its parent group deployed to the Marianas in early November 1944 , the squadron was assigned directly to the Second Air Force until creation of the 509th Composite Group on 17 December 1944 . As part of the formation of the 509th , about 800 people stationed at the field , were transferred to the new group . To make the 509th Composite Group as self @-@ contained as possible , other units were assigned , including the 390th Air Service Group , with the <unk> Air Engineering and <unk> Materiel Squadrons ; the 320th Troop Carrier Squadron , known as the " Green Hornet Airlines " ; the <unk> Military Police Company , and later the 1st Ordnance Squadron . A Manhattan Project unit , the 1st Technical Detachment , was attached to the group . 
 The 216th Army Air Forces Base Unit ( Special ) constructed prototype atomic weapons ( without nuclear material ) and drop tested them . Little was known about the flight characteristics of the prototype atom bomb designs and how the fusing mechanism would work . In February 1945 , a Flight Test Section was created within the 216th Army Air Forces Base Unit to carry out testing with prototype bombs in the shape of the Little Boy and Fat Man bombs . It was originally equipped with five Silverplate B @-@ 29s , three flight crews and five maintenance crews . To help out with an increasingly demanding schedule , four crews from the 393d Bombardment Squadron were made available . The Flight Test Section carried out 24 drop tests in June and 30 in July . About two thirds of the June tests were with Fat Man shapes and the rest with Little Boy ones . In July , all but four of the tests were with Fat Man shapes , some with explosive @-@ filled Pumpkin bombs . Test drops were carried out at Wendover , at the Naval Ordnance Test Station at Inyokern , and at the Salton Sea Naval Auxiliary Air Station . Testing continued up to the last minute , with the Fat Man firing unit , known as the X @-@ unit , only being successfully tested at Wendover on 4 August , and a final test of the X @-@ unit was carried out six days later . 
 The aircrews trained continuously until May . Each bombardier completed at least 50 practice drops of inert pumpkin bombs before Tibbets declared his group combat @-@ ready . The ground support echelon of the 509th Composite Group received movement orders and moved by rail on 26 April 1945 to its port of embarkation at Seattle , Washington . On 6 May the support elements sailed on the SS Cape Victory for the Marianas , while group materiel was shipped on the SS Emile Berliner . An advance party of the air echelon flew by C @-@ 54 to North Field , Tinian , between 15 and 22 May . It was joined by the ground echelon on 29 May 1945 , marking the group 's official change of station . It was from Tinian that it carried out the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . 
 The 216th Army Air Forces Base Unit moved to Oxnard Field in September 1945 , where it was transferred to the Manhattan District 's <unk> Technical Services Unit on 17 December 1945 . Oxnard was later designated Sandia Base . The Special Ordnance Detachment took with it its special tools and equipment , and even some of its buildings . The test program resumed at Sandia in January 1946 . 
 = = = JB @-@ 2 Testing = = = 
 In early September 1944 , a detachment of the Special Weapons Branch , Wright Field , Ohio , arrived at Wendover with thirteen Republic @-@ Ford JB @-@ 2 flying bombs . The JB @-@ 2 was a United States copy of the Nazi V @-@ 1 flying bomb , which was reverse @-@ engineered from malfunctioning wrecks of V @-@ 1s recovered in England . The United States JB @-@ 2 was different from the German V @-@ 1 in only the smallest of dimensions . At Wendover , a launch ramp was constructed for the JB @-@ 2 , engineered from plans developed from aerial photographs of ramps used by the Germans in the Low Countries . In addition to the ground launch ramp , a B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress was modified to be able to carry the jet bomb underneath a wing and air launch it . Numerous tests were conducted and an initial production order was 1 @,@ 000 units was made by the Army , with subsequent planned production of 1 @,@ 000 per month . The fortunes of war in Europe in the spring of 1945 led to the decision to use the JB @-@ 2 in the Pacific Theater , to be used as part of Operation Downfall , the planned invasion of Japan . The sudden end of the war in September 1945 led to the curtailment of the JB @-@ 2 program and the weapon was never used in combat . 
 = = Postwar use = = 
 The training of B @-@ 29 aircrews and the testing of prototype atom bombs was the last major contribution of Wendover Field during World War II . After war 's end , some crew training continued , but at a reduced level . For a while , B @-@ 29s which had returned from the Marianas were flown to Wendover for storage . In the summer of 1946 , the Ogden Air Technical Service Command at Hill Army Air Field north of Salt Lake City assumed jurisdiction over all operations at Wendover Field except engineering and technical projects . 
 Wendover played a key role in the postwar weapons development industry with three areas being developed . The first was further testing of the JB @-@ 2 Loon flying bomb . In the case of the second area , the B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress , obsolete as a combat aircraft , was being tested to fly remotely . Gliding bombs , based on captured technology from the wartime Henschel Hs 293 German radio @-@ controlled glide bomb were being developed that could be controlled by radar or radio . The third consisted of bombs that could be controlled by the launching plane . The historic GAPA ( ground to air pilotless aircraft ) Boeing project resulted in the first supersonic flight of an American Air Force vehicle on 6 August 1946 . In March 1947 , the Air Proving Ground Command research programs were moved to Alamogordo Army Airfield , New Mexico . As a result , 1 @,@ 200 personnel from Wendover Field were moved to New Mexico from Utah and were relocated to Alamogordo to conduct guided missile research projects . Three ongoing projects were transferred : Ground @-@ to @-@ Air <unk> Aircraft ( GAPA ) , JB @-@ 2 Loon flight testing , and ASM @-@ A @-@ 1 Tarzon gliding bomb . 
 Transferred to the Strategic Air Command ' Fifteenth Air Force in March 1947 . With the establishment of the U.S. Air Force as an independent service later that year , the installation was renamed Wendover Air Force Base in 1947 , but while bombardment groups deploying on maneuvers used the bombing range , the rest of the base remained unused . It was inactivated in 1948 and declared surplus , although retained in a caretaker status . The Air Materiel Command assumed responsibility for the base in July 1950 , placing it under the jurisdiction of Ogden Air Material Area at Hill Air Force Base . Between 1950 and 1954 , the base was manned by a skeleton crew of thirteen . The buildings deteriorated . Some were removed , some demolished , and some burned down . 
 Tactical Air Command ( TAC ) reactivated the base under the Ninth Air Force on 1 October 1954 , and tactical units deployed there for exercises , utilizing the base for the next four years . TAC invested several million dollars renovating the base facilities , and constructed new targets on the range . But only 331 personnel were assigned to the base in 1956 . The base was deactivated again in December 1957 . It transferred back to Ogden on 1 January 1958 and renamed Wendover Air Force Auxiliary Field , while the range was renamed Hill Air Force Range in 1960 , and inactivated in August 1961 . 
 The base was reactivated on 15 July 1961 , but the only personnel based there were a fifteen @-@ man firefighting detachment . By 1962 , when the base was again deactivated , only 128 of the original 668 buildings remained . The General Services Administration ( GSA ) wanted to sell the base to the town of Wendover , leaving only the bombing ranges and radar site with the Air Force . The base was renamed Decker Field , and again declared surplus in 1972 . The base continued to be used occasionally for training by Air National Guard units , and the firefighting detachment remained until 1977 . 
 Wendover was officially listed on the National Register of Historic Places on 1 July 1975 . The entire facility was declared surplus in 1976 , and on 9 July 1976 , the water system and its annexes were transferred to the city of Wendover , Utah . The GSA deeded most of the base , including runways , taxiways , hangars , hospital complex , and several warehouses to Wendover for a civil airport on 15 August 1977 . The Air Force retained about 86 acres ( 35 ha ) of the cantonment area and 164 acres ( 66 ha ) of the radar site . 
 Beginning in 1980 the <unk> Tactical Fighter Training Group began holding regular exercises known as Red Flag from Nellis AFB , Nevada . These exercises used Wendover , with over 9 @,@ 000 men and women deployed to Decker Field , Utah . About 5 @,@ 200 sorties were flown , representing over 9 @,@ 500 flying hours . Red Flag exercises at Wendover were discontinued after 1986 . The U.S. Air Force relinquished the remainder of Decker Field to the town of Wendover in 1992 . 
 = = Current uses = = 
 As of 2015 , this former Air Force Base is used as a civil airport , with an unusually long runway for such a facility ( there are two 8 @,@ 000 ' long runways ) . Wendover is one of the most intact World War II training airfields . It is also one of the most historic . The airfield is very isolated in northwest Utah , sitting in the middle of a vast wasteland miles away from any major population center . It is probably for this reason , and the dry hot climate , that much of the airfield remains today . Still @-@ extant facilities include the vast runway system , numerous ramps , taxiways , dispersal pads , and most of the original hangars ( including the Enola Gay B @-@ 29 hangar ) . Most of the hospital complex and many barracks remain , as does a chow hall , chapel , swimming pool and many other World War II @-@ era buildings . In 2009 , a hangar at the base dubbed The Manhattan Project 's Enola Gay Hangar was listed as one of the most endangered historic sites in the United States . A local group , " Historic Wendover Airfield " , is attempting to preserve the former base . 
 Numerous films and television shows have been filmed using Wendover Field , including The Philadelphia Experiment ( 1984 ) , Con Air ( 1995 ) , Mulholland Falls ( 1996 ) , Independence Day ( 1996 ) , Hulk ( 2003 ) and The Core ( 2003 ) . 
 = Whaam ! = 
 Whaam ! is a 1963 diptych painting by the American artist Roy Lichtenstein . It is one of the best @-@ known works of pop art , and among Lichtenstein 's most important paintings . Whaam ! was first exhibited at the Leo Castelli Gallery in New York City in 1963 , and purchased by the Tate Gallery , London , in 1966 . It has been on permanent display at Tate Modern since 2006 . 
 The left @-@ hand panel shows a fighter plane firing a rocket that , in the right @-@ hand panel , hits a second plane which explodes in flames . Lichtenstein conceived the image from several comic @-@ book panels . He transformed his primary source , a panel from a 1962 war comic book , by presenting it as a diptych while altering the relationship of the graphical and narrative elements . Whaam ! is regarded for the temporal , spatial and psychological integration of its two panels . The painting 's title is integral to the action and impact of the painting , and displayed in large onomatopoeia in the right panel . 
 Lichtenstein studied as an artist before and after serving in the United States Army during World War II . He practiced anti @-@ aircraft drills during basic training , and he was sent for pilot training but the program was canceled before it started . Among the topics he tackled after the war were romance and war . He depicted aerial combat in several works . Whaam ! is part of a series on war that he worked on between 1962 and 1964 , and along with As I Opened Fire ( 1964 ) is one of his two large war @-@ themed paintings . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1943 Lichtenstein left his study of painting and drawing at The Ohio State University to serve in the U.S. Army , where he remained until January 1946 . After entering training programs for languages , engineering , and piloting , all of which were canceled , he served as an orderly , draftsman and artist in noncombat roles . One of his duties at Camp Shelby was enlarging Bill Mauldin 's Stars and Stripes cartoons . He was sent to Europe with an engineer battalion , but did not see active combat . As a painter , he eventually settled on an abstract @-@ expressionist style with parodist elements . Around 1958 he began to incorporate hidden images of cartoon characters such as Mickey Mouse and Bugs Bunny into his abstract works . 
 By the late 1950s and early 1960s , the American art world had grown accustomed to and tired of the subjective angst and " hot " look of abstract expressionism . A new generation of artists emerged with a more objective , " cool " approach characterized by the art movements known today as minimalism , hard @-@ edge painting , color field painting , the neo @-@ Dada movement , Fluxus , and pop art , all of which re @-@ defined the avant @-@ garde contemporary art of the time . Pop art and neo @-@ Dada re @-@ introduced and changed the use of imagery by appropriating subject matter from commercial art , consumer goods , art history and mainstream culture . Lichtenstein achieved international recognition during the 1960s as one of the initiators of the pop art movement in America . Regarding his use of imagery MoMA curator Bernice Rose observed that Lichtenstein was interested in " challenging the notion of originality as it prevailed at that time . " 
 Lichtenstein 's early comics @-@ based works such as Look Mickey focused on popular animated characters . By 1963 he had progressed to more serious , dramatic subject matter , typically focusing on romantic situations or war scenes . Comic books as a genre were held in low esteem at the time . Public antipathy led in 1954 to examination of alleged connections between comic books and youth crime during Senate investigations into juvenile delinquency ; by the end of that decade , comic books were regarded as material of " the lowest commercial and intellectual kind " , according to Mark <unk> of the Modern Art Museum of Fort Worth . Lichtenstein was not a comic @-@ book enthusiast as a youth , but was enticed as an artist by the challenge of creating art based on a subject remote from the typical " artistic image " . Lichtenstein admitted he was " very excited about , and very interested in , the highly emotional content yet detached impersonal handling of love , hate , war , etc . , in these cartoon images . " 
 Lichtenstein 's romance and war comic @-@ based works took heroic subjects from small source panels and <unk> them . Whaam ! is comparable in size to the generally large canvases painted at that time by the abstract expressionists . It is one of Lichtenstein 's many works with an aeronautical theme . He said that " the heroes depicted in comic books are fascist types , but I don 't take them seriously in these paintings — maybe there is a point in not taking them seriously , a political point . I use them for purely formal reasons . " 
 = = History = = 
 Whaam ! adapts a panel by Irv Novick from the " Star Jockey " story from issue No. 89 of DC Comics ' All @-@ American Men of War ( Feb. 1962 ) . The original forms part of a dream sequence in which fictional World War II P @-@ 51 Mustang pilot Johnny Flying Cloud , " the Navajo ace " , foresees himself flying a jet fighter while shooting down other jet planes . In Lichtenstein 's painting , both the attacking and target planes are replaced by different types of aircraft . Paul Gravett suggests that Lichtenstein substituted the attacking plane with an aircraft from " <unk> of Doom " illustrated by Jerry <unk> in the subsequent issue ( # 90 , April 1962 ) , and that the target plane was borrowed from a Russ Heath drawing in the third panel of page 3 of the " Aces Wild " story in the same issue No. 89 . The painting also omits the speech bubble from the source in which the pilot exclaims " The enemy has become a flaming star ! " 
 A smaller , single @-@ panel oil painting by Lichtenstein around the same time , Tex ! , has a similar composition , with a plane at the lower left shooting an air @-@ to @-@ air missile at a second plane that is exploding in the upper right , with a word bubble . The same issue of All @-@ American Men of War was the inspiration for at least three other Lichtenstein paintings , Okay Hot @-@ Shot , Okay ! , Brattata and Blam , in addition to Whaam ! and Tex ! The graphite pencil sketch , Jet Pilot was also from that issue . Several of Lichtenstein 's other comics @-@ based works are inspired by stories about Johnny Flying Cloud written by Robert Kanigher and illustrated by Novick , including Okay Hot @-@ Shot , Okay ! , Jet Pilot and Von Karp . 
 Lichtenstein repeatedly depicted aerial combat between the United States and the Soviet Union . In the early and mid @-@ 1960s , he produced " explosion " sculptures , taking subjects such as the " catastrophic release of energy " from paintings such as Whaam ! and depicting them in freestanding and relief forms . In 1963 , he was parodying a variety of artworks , from advertising and comics and to " high art " modern masterpieces by Cézanne , Mondrian , Picasso and others . At the time , Lichtenstein noted that " the things that I have apparently parodied I actually admire . " 
 Lichtenstein 's first solo exhibition was held at the Leo Castelli Gallery in New York City , from 10 February to 3 March 1962 . It sold out before its opening . The exhibition included Look Mickey , Engagement Ring , Blam and The Refrigerator . According to the Lichtenstein Foundation website , Whaam ! was part of Lichtenstein 's second solo exhibition at the Leo Castelli Gallery from 28 September to 24 October 1963 , that also included Drowning Girl , Baseball Manager , In the Car , Conversation , and Torpedo ... Los ! Marketing materials for the show included the lithograph artwork , Crak ! 
 The Lichtenstein Foundation website says that Lichtenstein began using his opaque projector technique in 1962 @.@ in 1967 he described his process for producing comics @-@ based art as follows : 
 I do them as directly as possible . If I am working from a cartoon , photograph or whatever , I draw a small picture — the size that will fit into my opaque projector ... I don 't draw a picture in order to reproduce it — I do it in order to recompose it ... I go all the way from having my drawing almost like the original to making it up altogether . 
 Whaam ! was purchased by the Tate Gallery in 1966 . In 1969 , Lichtenstein donated his initial graphite @-@ on @-@ paper drawing Drawing for ' Whaam ! ' , describing it as a " pencil scribble " . According to the Tate , Lichtenstein claimed that this drawing represented his " first visualization of Whaam ! and that it was executed just before he started the painting . " Although he had conceived of a unified work of art on a single canvas , he made the sketch on two sheets of paper of equal size — measuring 14 @.@ 9 cm × 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in × 12 @.@ 0 in ) . The painting has been displayed at Tate Modern since 2006 . In 2012 – 13 , both works were included in the largest Lichtenstein retrospective that visited the Art Institute of Chicago , the National Gallery of Art in Washington , D.C. , the Tate Modern in London and the Centre Pompidou . 
 = = Description = = 
 Whaam ! depicts a fighter aircraft in the left panel firing a rocket into an enemy plane in the right panel , which disintegrates in a vivid red @-@ and @-@ yellow explosion . The cartoon style is emphasized by the use of the onomatopoeic lettering " WHAAM ! " in the right panel , and a yellow @-@ boxed caption with black lettering at the top of the left panel . The textual exclamation " WHAAM ! " can be considered the graphic equivalent of a sound effect . This was to become a characteristic of his work — like others of his onomatopoeic paintings that contain exclamations such as Bratatat ! and <unk> ! 
 Whaam ! is one of Lichtenstein 's series of war images , typically combining vibrant colors with an expressive narrative . Whaam ! is very large , measuring 1 @.@ 7 m × 4 @.@ 0 m ( 5 ft 7 in × 13 ft 4 in ) . It is less abstract than As I Opened Fire , another of his war scenes . Lichtenstein employs his usual comic @-@ book style : stereotyped imagery in bright primary colors with black outlines , coupled with imitations of mechanical printer 's Ben @-@ Day dots . The use of these dots , which were invented by Benjamin Day to simulate color variations and shading , are considered Lichtenstein 's " signature method " . Whaam ! departs from Lichtenstein 's earlier diptychs such as Step @-@ on @-@ Can with Leg and Like New , in that the panels are not two variations of the same image . 
 Although Lichtenstein strove to remain faithful to the source images , he constructed his paintings in a traditional manner , starting with a sketch which he adjusted to improve the composition and then projected on to a canvas to make the finished painting . In the case of Whaam ! , the sketch is on two pieces of paper , and the finished work is painted with Magna acrylic and oil paint on canvas . Although the transformation from a single @-@ panel conception into a diptych painting occurred during the initial sketch , the final work varies from the sketch in several ways . The sketch suggests that the " WHAAM ! " motif would be colored white , although it is yellow in the finished work . Lichtenstein enlarged the main graphical subject of each panel ( the plane on the left and the flames on the right ) , bringing them closer together as a result . 
 Lichtenstein built up the image with multiple layers of paint . The paint was applied using a scrub brush and handmade metal screen to produce Ben @-@ Day dots via a process that left physical evidence behind . The Ben @-@ Day dots technique enabled Lichtenstein to give his works a mechanically reproduced feel . Lichtenstein said that the work is " supposed to look like a fake , and it achieves that , I think " . 
 Lichtenstein split the composition into two panels to separate the action from its consequence . The left panel features the attacking plane — placed at a diagonal to create a sense of depth — below the text balloon , which Lichtenstein has relegated to the margin above the plane . In the right panel , the exploding plane — depicted head @-@ on — is outlined by the flames , accompanied by the bold exclamation " WHAAM ! " . Although separate , with one panel containing the missile launch and the other its explosion , representing two distinct events , the two panels are clearly linked spatially and temporally , not least by the horizontal smoke trail of the missile . Lichtenstein commented on this piece in a 10 July 1967 , letter : " I remember being concerned with the idea of doing two almost separate paintings having little hint of compositional connection , and each having slightly separate stylistic character . Of course there is the humorous connection of one panel shooting the other . " 
 Lichtenstein altered the composition to make the image more compelling , by making the exploding plane more prominent compared to the attacking plane than in the original . The smoke trail of the missile becomes a horizontal line . The flames of the explosion dominate the right panel , but the pilot and the airplane in the left panel are the narrative focus . They exemplify Lichtenstein 's painstaking detailing of physical features such as the aircraft 's cockpit . The other element of the narrative content is a text balloon that contains the following text : " I pressed the fire control ... and ahead of me rockets blazed through the sky ... " This is among the text believed to have been written by All @-@ American Men of War editor Robert Kanigher . The yellow word " WHAAM ! " , altered from the red in the original comic @-@ book panel and white in the pencil sketch , links the yellow of the explosion below it with the <unk> to the left and the flames of the missile below the attacking plane . 
 Lichtenstein 's borrowings from comics mimicked their style while adapting their subject matter . He explained that " Signs and comic strips are interesting as subject matter . There are certain things that are usable , forceful and vital about commercial art . " Rebecca Bengal at PBS wrote that Whaam ! ' s graphic clarity exemplifies the ligne claire style associated with Hergé , a cartoonist whose influence Lichtenstein acknowledged . Lichtenstein was attracted to using a cool , formal style to depict emotive subjects , leaving the viewer to interpret the artist 's intention . He adopted a simplified color scheme and commercial printing @-@ like techniques . The borrowed technique was " representing tonal variations with patterns of colored circles that imitated the half @-@ tone screens of Ben Day dots used in newspaper printing , and surrounding these with black outlines similar to those used to conceal imperfections in cheap newsprint . " Lichtenstein once said of his technique : " I take a cliche and try to organize its forms to make it monumental . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 The painting was , for the most part , well received by art critics when first exhibited . A November 1963 Art Magazine review by Donald Judd described Whaam ! as one of the " broad and powerful paintings " of the 1963 exhibition at Castelli 's Gallery . In his review of the exhibition , The New York Times art critic Brian O 'Doherty described Lichtenstein 's technique as " typewriter pointillism ... that laboriously hammers out such moments as a jet shooting down another jet with a big <unk> " . According to O 'Doherty , the result was " certainly not art , [ but ] time may make it so " , depending on whether it could be " rationalized ... and placed in line for the future to assimilate as history , which it shows every sign of doing . " The Tate Gallery in London acquired the work in 1966 , leading to heated argument amongst their trustees and some vocal members of the public . The purchase was made from art dealer Ileana <unk> , whose asking price of £ 4 @,@ 665 ( £ 78 @,@ 369 in 2016 currency ) was reduced by negotiation to £ 3 @,@ 940 ( £ 66 @,@ 189 in 2016 currency ) . Some Tate trustees opposed the acquisition , among them sculptor Barbara Hepworth , painter Andrew Forge and the poet and critic Herbert Read . Defending the acquisition , art historian Richard <unk> , then an assistant keeper at the Tate , suggested that the painting addresses several issues and painterly styles at the same time : " history painting , Baroque extravagance , and the quotidian phenomenon of mass @-@ circulation comic strips . " The Times in 1967 described the acquisition as a " very large and spectacular painting " . The Tate 's director , Norman Reid , later said that the work aroused more public interest than any of its acquisitions since World War II . 
 In 1968 , Whaam ! was included in the Tate 's first solo exhibition of Lichtenstein 's work . The showing attracted 52 @,@ 000 visitors , and was organized with the Stedelijk Museum in Amsterdam , which later hosted the exhibition from 4 November to 17 December 1967 , before it traveled to three other museums . 
 = = Analysis and interpretation = = 
 For José Pierre , Whaam ! represents Lichtenstein 's 1963 expansion " into the ' epic ' vein " . Keith Roberts , in a 1968 Burlington Magazine article , described the explosion as combining " art nouveau elegance with a nervous energy reminiscent of Abstract Expressionism " . Wendy Steiner believes the work is Lichtenstein 's most successful and harmonious comic @-@ based composition . She sees the narrative and graphic elements as complementary : the action and spatial alignment lead the viewer 's eye from left to right so as to emphasize the relationship between the action and its explosive consequence . The ellipses of the text balloon present a progression which culminates with a " WHAAM ! " . The " coincidence of pictorial and verbal order " are clear for the Western viewer with the explanatory text beginning in the upper left and action vector moving from the left foreground to the right background , culminating in a graphical explosion in tandem with a narrative exclamation . Steiner says the striking incongruity of the two panels — the left panel appearing to be " truncated " , while the right depicts a centralized explosion — enhances the work 's narrative power . 
 Lichtenstein 's technique has been characterized by Ernst A. Busche as " the enlargement and unification of his source material ... on the basis of strict artistic principles " . Extracted from a larger narrative , the resulting stylized image became in some cases a " virtual abstraction " . By recreating their minimalistic graphic techniques , Lichtenstein reinforced the artificial nature of comic strips and advertisements . Lichtenstein 's magnification of his source material made his impersonally drawn motifs seem all the more empty . Busche also says that although a critique of modern industrial America may be read into these images , Lichtenstein " would appear to accept the environment as revealed by his reference material as part of American capitalist industrial culture " . 
 David McCarthy contrasted Lichtenstein 's " dispassionate , detached and oddly disembodied " presentation of aerial combat with the work of H.C. Westermann , for whom the experience of military service in World War II instilled a need to horrify and shock . In contrast , Lichtenstein registers his " comment on American civilization " by scaling up inches @-@ high comic book images to the oversized dimensions of history painting . Laura Brandon saw an attempt to convey " the trivialization of culture endemic in contemporary American life " by depicting a shocking scene of combat as a banal Cold War act . 
 Carol Strickland and John Boswell say that by magnifying the comic book panels to an enormous size with dots , " Lichtenstein slapped the viewer in the face with their triviality . " H. H. Arnason noted that Whaam ! presents " limited , flat colors and hard , precise drawing , " which produce " a hard @-@ edge subject painting that documents while it gently parodies the familiar hero images of modern America . " The flat and highly finished style of planned brushstrokes can be seen as pop art 's reaction against the looseness of abstract expressionism . Alastair Sooke says that the work can be interpreted as a symbolic self @-@ portrait in which the pilot in the left panel represents Lichtenstein " vanquishing his competitors in a dramatic art @-@ world dogfight " by firing a missile at the colorful " parody of abstract painting " in the right panel . 
 According to Ernesto Priego , while the work adapts a comic @-@ book source , the painting is neither a comic nor a comics panel , and " its meaning is solely referential and post hoc . " It directs the attention of its audience to features such as genre and printing methods . Visually and narratively , the original panel was the climactic element of a dynamic page composition . Lichtenstein emphasizes the onomatopoeia while playing down articulated speech by removing the speech balloon . According to Priego , " by stripping the comics panel from its narrative context , Whaam ! is representative in the realm of fine art of the preference of the image @-@ icon over image @-@ narrative " . 
 Whaam ! is sometimes said to belong to the same anti @-@ war genre as Picasso 's Guernica , a suggestion dismissed by Bradford R. Collins . Instead , Collins views the painting as a revenge fantasy against Lichtenstein 's first wife Isabel , conceived as it was during their bitter divorce battle ( the couple separated in 1961 and divorced in 1965 ) . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Marla F. Prather observed that Whaam ! ' s grand scale and dramatic depiction contributed to its position as a historic work of pop art . With As I Opened Fire , Lichtenstein 's other monumental war painting , Whaam ! is regarded as the culmination of Lichtenstein 's dramatic war @-@ comics works , according to Diane Waldman . It is widely described as either Lichtenstein 's most famous work , or , along with Drowning Girl , as one of his two most famous works . Andrew Edgar and Peter Sedgwick describe it , along with Warhol 's Marilyn Monroe prints , as one of the most famous works of pop art . Gianni Versace once linked the two iconic pop art images via his gown designs . According to Douglas Coupland , the World Book Encyclopedia used pictures of Warhol 's Monroes and Whaam ! to illustrate its Pop art entry . 
 Comic books were in turn affected by the cultural impact of pop art . By the mid @-@ 1960s , some comic books were displaying a new emphasis on garish colors , emphatic sound effects and stilted dialogue — the elements of comic book style that had come to be regarded as camp — in an attempt to appeal to older , college @-@ age readers who appreciated pop art . Gravett observed that the " simplicity and <unk> [ of comic books ] were ripe for being mocked " . 
 Whaam ! was one of the key works exhibited in a major Lichtenstein retrospective in 2012 – 2013 that was designed , according to Li @-@ mei Hoang , to demonstrate " the importance of Lichtenstein 's influence , his engagement with art history and his enduring legacy as an artist " . In his review of the Lichtenstein Retrospective at the Tate Modern , Adrian Searle of The Guardian — who was generally unenthusiastic about Lichtenstein 's work — credited the work 's title with accurately describing its graphic content : " Whaam ! goes the painting , as the rocket hits , and the enemy fighter explodes in a livid , comic @-@ book roar . " Daily Telegraph critic Alastair Smart wrote a disparaging review in which he acknowledged Lichtenstein 's reputation as a leading figure in " Pop Art 's cheeky assault on the swaggering , self @-@ important Abstract Expressionists " , whose works Smart said Whaam ! mimicked by its huge scale . Smart said the work was neither a positive commentary on the fighting American spirit nor a critique , but was notable for marking " Lichtenstein 's incendiary impact on the US art scene " . 
 Detractors have raised concerns over Lichtenstein 's appropriation , in that he directly references imagery from other sources in Whaam ! and other works of the period . Some have denigrated it as mere copying , to which others have countered that Lichtenstein altered his sources in significant , creative ways . In response to claims of plagiarism , the Roy Lichtenstein Foundation has noted that publishers have never sued for copyright infringement , and that they never raised the issue when Lichtenstein 's comics @-@ derived work first gained attention in the 1960s . Other criticism centers on Lichtenstein 's failure to credit the original artists of his sources ; Ernesto Priego implicates National Periodicals in the case of Whaam ! , as the artists were never credited in the original comic books . 
 In Alastair Sooke 's 2013 BBC Four documentary that took place in front of Whaam ! at the Tate Modern , British comic book artist Dave Gibbons disputed Sooke 's assertion that Lichtenstein 's painting improved upon Novick 's panel , saying : " This to me looks flat and abstracted , to the point of view that to my eyes it 's confusing . Whereas the original has got a three @-@ dimensional quality to it , it 's got a spontaneity to it , it 's got an excitement to it , and a way of involving the viewer that this one lacks . " Gibbons has parodied Lichtenstein 's derivation of the Novick work . 
 = Roger Waters = 
 George Roger Waters ( born 6 September 1943 ) is an English singer , songwriter , multi @-@ instrumentalist , and composer . In 1965 , he co @-@ founded the progressive rock band Pink Floyd with drummer Nick Mason , keyboardist Rick Wright and guitarist , singer , and songwriter Syd Barrett . Waters initially served as the group 's bassist , but following the departure of Barrett in 1968 , he also became their lyricist , conceptual leader and co @-@ lead vocalist . Waters had the 9th widest vocal range on a list of over 150 contemporary Rock & Pop singers , with a total range of B1 @-@ C7 , with the magazine commenting " He 's not a tenor , he 's a mutation . " 
 Pink Floyd subsequently achieved international success with the concept albums The Dark Side of the Moon , Wish You Were Here , Animals , and The Wall . By the early 1980s , they had become one of the most critically acclaimed and best @-@ selling acts in the history of popular music ; as of 2013 , they have sold more than 250 million albums worldwide , including 75 million units sold in the United States . Amid creative differences within the group , Waters left in 1985 and began a legal dispute with the remaining members over their intended use of the band 's name and material . They settled out of court in 1987 , and nearly eighteen years passed before he performed with them again . 
 Waters ' solo career has included three studio albums : The Pros and Cons of Hitch Hiking , Radio K.A.O.S. and Amused to Death . In 1990 , he staged one of the largest and most extravagant rock concerts in history , The Wall – Live in Berlin , with an official attendance of 200 @,@ 000 . As a member of Pink Floyd , he was inducted into the U.S. Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1996 and the UK Music Hall of Fame in 2005 . That same year he released Ça Ira , an opera in three acts translated from Étienne and Nadine Roda @-@ Gils ' libretto about the French Revolution . Later that year , he reunited with Pink Floyd bandmates Mason , Wright and David Gilmour for the Live 8 global awareness event ; it was the group 's first appearance with Waters since 1981 . He has toured extensively as a solo act since 1999 and played The Dark Side of the Moon in its entirety for his world tour of 2006 – 2008 . In 2010 , he began The Wall Live and in 2011 Gilmour and Mason appeared with him during a performance of the double @-@ album in London . As of 2013 , the tour is the highest @-@ grossing of all time by a solo artist . 
 = = 1943 – 1964 : Early years = = 
 George Roger Waters was born on 6 September 1943 , the younger of two boys , to Mary ( née Whyte ; 1913 – 2009 ) and Eric Fletcher Waters ( 1914 – 1944 ) , in Great Bookham , Surrey . His father , the son of a coal miner and Labour Party activist , was a schoolteacher , a devout Christian , and a Communist Party member . In the early years of the Second World War , his father was a conscientious objector who drove an ambulance during the Blitz . He later changed his stance on pacifism and joined the British Army , and as a <unk> of the 8th Royal Fusiliers died at Aprilia , between Anzio and Rome in Italy , on 18 February 1944 , when Roger was five months old . On 19 February 2014 , Waters unveiled a monument to his father and other war casualties there , and was made an honorary citizen of Anzio . Following her husband 's death , Mary Waters , also a teacher , moved with her two sons to Cambridge and raised them there . Roger Waters ' earliest memory is of the VJ Day celebrations . Mary Waters died in 2009 , aged 96 . 
 Waters attended Morley Memorial Junior School in Cambridge and then the Cambridgeshire High School for Boys ( now Hills Road Sixth Form College ) with Syd Barrett , while his future musical partner , David Gilmour , lived nearby on the city 's Mill Road , and attended the <unk> School . At 15 , Waters was chairman of the Cambridge Youth Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament ( <unk> ) , having designed its publicity poster and participated in its organisation . Though he was a keen sportsman and a highly regarded member of the high school 's cricket and rugby teams , he disliked his educational experience ; according to Waters , " I hated every second of it , apart from games . The regime at school was a very oppressive one ... the same kids who are susceptible to bullying by other kids are also susceptible to bullying by the teachers . " Whereas Waters knew Barrett and Gilmour from his childhood in Cambridge , he met future Pink Floyd founder members Nick Mason and Richard Wright in London at the Regent Street Polytechnic ( later the University of Westminster ) school of architecture . Waters enrolled there in 1962 , after a series of aptitude tests indicated he was well @-@ suited to that field . He had initially considered a career in mechanical engineering . 
 = = 1965 – 1985 : Pink Floyd = = 
 = = = Formation and Barrett @-@ led period = = = 
 By September 1963 , Waters and Mason had lost interest in their studies ; they had moved into the lower flat of Stanhope Gardens , owned by Mike Leonard , a part @-@ time tutor at the Regent Street Polytechnic . Waters , Mason and Wright first played music together in late 1963 , in a band formed by vocalist Keith Noble and bassist Clive Metcalfe . They usually called themselves Sigma 6 , but also used the name the Meggadeaths . Waters played rhythm guitar and Mason played drums , Wright played on any keyboard he could arrange to use , and Noble 's sister <unk> provided an occasional vocal accompaniment . In the early years the band performed during private functions and rehearsed in a tearoom in the basement of Regent Street Polytechnic . 
 When Metcalfe and Noble left to form their own group in September 1963 , the remaining members asked Barrett and guitarist Bob Klose to join . Waters switched to the bass and by January 1964 , the group became known as the Abdabs , or the Screaming Abdabs . During late 1964 , the band used the names Leonard 's Lodgers , Spectrum Five , and eventually , the Tea Set . Sometime during late 1965 , the Tea Set began calling itself the Pink Floyd Sound , later the Pink Floyd Blues Band and by early 1966 , Pink Floyd . 
 By early 1966 Barrett was Pink Floyd 's front @-@ man , guitarist , and songwriter . He wrote or co @-@ wrote all but one track of their debut LP The Piper at the Gates of Dawn , released in August 1967 . Waters contributed the song " Take Up Thy Stethoscope and Walk " ( his first sole writing credit ) to the album . By late 1967 , Barrett 's deteriorating mental health and increasingly erratic behaviour , rendered him " unable or unwilling " to continue in his capacity as Pink Floyd 's singer @-@ songwriter and lead guitarist . In early March 1968 Pink Floyd met with managers Peter Jenner and Andrew King of Blackhill Enterprises to discuss the band 's future . Barrett agreed to leave Pink Floyd , and the band " agreed to Blackhill 's entitlement in perpetuity " regarding " past activities " . The band 's new manager Steve O 'Rourke made a formal announcement about the departure of Barrett and the arrival of David Gilmour in April 1968 . 
 = = = Waters @-@ led period = = = 
 Filling the void left by Barrett 's departure in March 1968 , Waters began to chart Pink Floyd 's artistic direction . He became the principal songwriter , lyricist and co @-@ lead vocalist ( along with Gilmour , and at times , Wright ) , and would remain the band 's dominant creative figure until his departure in 1985 . He wrote the lyrics to the five Pink Floyd albums preceding his own departure , starting with The Dark Side of the Moon ( 1973 ) and ending with The Final Cut ( 1983 ) , while exerting progressively more creative control over the band and its music . Every Waters studio album since The Dark Side of the Moon has been a concept album . With lyrics written entirely by Waters , The Dark Side of the Moon was one of the most commercially successful rock albums ever . It spent 736 straight weeks on the Billboard 200 chart — until July 1988 — and sold over 40 million copies worldwide . It was continuing to sell over 8 @,@ 000 units every week as of 2005 . According to Pink Floyd biographer Glen Povey , Dark Side is the world 's second best @-@ selling album , and the United States ' 21st best @-@ selling album of all time . 
 Waters produced thematic ideas that became the impetus for the Pink Floyd concept albums The Dark Side of the Moon ( 1973 ) , Wish You Were Here ( 1975 ) , Animals ( 1977 ) and The Wall ( 1979 ) — written largely by Waters — and The Final Cut ( 1983 ) — written entirely by Waters . He referred or alluded to the cost of war and the loss of his father throughout his work , from " Corporal Clegg " ( A Saucerful of Secrets , 1968 ) and " Free Four " ( Obscured by Clouds , 1972 ) to " Us and Them " from The Dark Side of the Moon , " When the Tigers Broke Free " , first used in the feature film , The Wall ( 1982 ) , later included with " The Fletcher Memorial Home " on The Final Cut , an album dedicated to his father . The theme and composition of The Wall was influenced by his upbringing in an English society depleted of men after the Second World War . 
 The double album The Wall was written almost entirely by Waters and is largely based on his life story , and having sold over 23 million RIAA certified units in the US as of 2013 , is one of the top three best @-@ selling albums of all time in America , according to RIAA . Pink Floyd hired Bob Ezrin to co @-@ produce the album , and cartoonist Gerald Scarfe to illustrate the album 's sleeve art . The band embarked on The Wall Tour of Los Angeles , New York , London , and Dortmund . The last band performance of The Wall was on 16 June 1981 , at Earls Court London , and this was Pink Floyd 's last appearance with Waters until the band 's brief reunion at 2 July 2005 Live 8 concert in London 's Hyde Park , 24 years later . 
 In March 1983 , the last Waters – Gilmour – Mason collaboration , The Final Cut , was released . The album was subtitled : " A requiem for the post @-@ war dream by Roger Waters , performed by Pink Floyd " . Waters wrote all the album 's lyrics as well as the music . His lyrics were critical of the Conservative Party government of the day and mention Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher by name . At the time Gilmour did not have any new material , so he asked Waters to delay the recording until he could write some songs , but Waters refused . According to Mason , after power struggles within the band and creative arguments about the album , Gilmour 's name " disappeared " from the production credits , though he retained his pay . Rolling Stone magazine gave the album five stars , with Kurt Loder describing it as " a superlative achievement " and " art rock 's crowning masterpiece " . Loder viewed the work as " essentially a Roger Waters solo album " . 
 Amidst creative differences within the group , Waters left Pink Floyd in 1985 , and began a legal battle with the remaining band members regarding their continued use of the name and material . In December 1985 , Waters " issued a statement to EMI and CBS invoking the ' Leaving Member ' clause " on his contract . In October 1986 , he initiated High Court proceedings to formally dissolve the Pink Floyd partnership . In his submission to the High Court he called Pink Floyd a " spent force creatively " . Gilmour and Mason opposed the application and announced their intention to continue as Pink Floyd . Waters claims to have been forced to resign much like Wright some years earlier , and he decided to leave Pink Floyd based on legal considerations , stating " ... because , if I hadn 't , the financial repercussions would have wiped me out completely . " In December 1987 , an agreement between Waters and Pink Floyd was reached . According to Mason : 
 We eventually formalised a settlement with Roger . On Christmas Eve , 1987 , ... David and Roger convened for a summit meeting on the houseboat [ the Astoria ] with Jerome Walton , David 's accountant . Jerome painstakingly typed out the bones of a settlement . Essentially — although there was far more complex detail — the arrangement allowed Roger to be freed from his arrangement with Steve [ O 'Rourke ] , and David and me to continue working under the name Pink Floyd . In the end the court accepted Jerome 's version as the final and binding document and duly stamped it . 
 Waters was released from his contractual obligation with O 'Rourke , and he retained the copyrights to The Wall concept and the inflatable Animals pig . Pink Floyd released three studio albums without Waters : A Momentary Lapse of Reason ( 1987 ) , The Division Bell ( 1994 ) and The Endless River ( 2014 ) . By 2013 , Pink Floyd had sold over 250 million albums worldwide , including 74 @.@ 5 million RIAA certified units in the US . 
 = = 1984 – present : solo career = = 
 = = = 1984 – 1996 = = = 
 Following the release of The Final Cut , Waters embarked on a solo career that produced three concept albums and a movie soundtrack . In 1984 , he released his first solo album , The Pros and Cons of Hitch Hiking , a project about a man 's dreams across one night that dealt with Waters ' feelings about monogamy and family life versus " the call of the wild " . In the end the character , Reg , chooses love and matrimony over promiscuity . The album featured guitarist Eric Clapton , jazz saxophonist David Sanborn , and artwork by Gerald Scarfe . Kurt Loder described The Pros And Cons of Hitch Hiking as a " strangely static , faintly hideous record " . Rolling Stone rated the album a " rock bottom " one star . " Years later , Mike DeGagne of AllMusic praised the album for its , " ingenious symbolism " and " brilliant use of stream of consciousness within a subconscious realm " , rating it four out of five stars . Waters began touring in support of the new album , aided by Clapton , a new band , new material , and a selection of Pink Floyd favourites . Waters débuted his tour in Stockholm on 16 June 1984 . Poor ticket sales plagued the tour , and some of the larger venues had to be cancelled . By his own estimate , he lost £ 400 @,@ 000 on the tour . In March 1985 , Waters went to North America to play smaller venues with the Pros and Cons Plus Some Old Pink Floyd Stuff — North America Tour 1985 . The Pros and Cons of Hitch Hiking has been certified Gold by the RIAA . 
 In 1986 , Waters contributed songs and a score to the soundtrack of the animated movie When the Wind Blows , based on the Raymond Briggs book of the same name . His backing band featuring Paul Carrack was credited as The Bleeding Heart Band . In 1987 , Waters released Radio K.A.O.S. , a concept album based on a mute man named Billy from an impoverished Welsh mining town who has the ability to physically tune into radio waves in his head . Billy first learns to communicate with a radio DJ , and eventually to control the world 's computers . Angry at the state of the world in which he lives , he simulates a nuclear attack . Waters followed the release with a supporting tour also in 1987 . 
 In November 1989 , the Berlin Wall fell , and in July 1990 Waters staged one of the largest and most elaborate rock concerts in history , The Wall – Live in Berlin , on the vacant terrain between Potsdamer Platz and the Brandenburg Gate . The show reported an official attendance of 200 @,@ 000 , though some estimates are as much as twice that , with approximately one billion television viewers . Leonard Cheshire asked him to do the concert to raise funds for charity . Waters ' group of musicians included Joni Mitchell , Van Morrison , Cyndi Lauper , Bryan Adams , Scorpions , and Sinéad O 'Connor . Waters also used an East German symphony orchestra and choir , a Soviet marching band , and a pair of helicopters from the US 7th Airborne Command and Control Squadron . Designed by Mark Fisher , the Wall was 25 metres tall and 170 metres long and was built across the set . Scarfe 's inflatable puppets were recreated on an enlarged scale , and although many rock icons received invitations to the show , Gilmour , Mason , and Wright , did not . Waters released a concert double album of the performance which has been certified platinum by the RIAA . 
 In 1990 , Waters hired manager Mark Fenwick and left EMI for a worldwide deal with Columbia . He released his third studio album , Amused to Death , in 1992 . The record is heavily influenced by the events of the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 and the Gulf War , and a critique of the notion of war becoming the subject of entertainment , particularly on television . The title was derived from the book Amusing Ourselves to Death by Neil Postman . Patrick Leonard , who worked on A Momentary Lapse of Reason , co @-@ produced the album . Jeff Beck played lead guitar on many of the album 's tracks , which were recorded with an impressive cast of musicians at ten different recording studios . It is Waters ' most critically acclaimed solo recording , garnering some comparison to his previous work with Pink Floyd . Waters described the record as , a " stunning piece of work " , ranking the album with Dark Side of the Moon and The Wall as one of the best of his career . The album had one hit , the song " What God Wants , Pt . 1 " , which reached number 35 in the UK in September 1992 and number 5 on Billboard 's Mainstream Rock Tracks chart in the US . Amused to Death was certified Silver by the British Phonographic Industry . Sales of Amused to Death topped out at around one million and there was no tour in support of the album . Waters would first perform material from it seven years later during his In the Flesh tour . In 1996 , Waters was inducted into the US and UK Rock and Roll Halls of Fame as a member of Pink Floyd . 
 = = = 1999 – 2004 = = = 
 In 1999 , after a 12 @-@ year hiatus from touring , and a seven @-@ year absence from the music industry , Waters embarked on the In the Flesh tour , performing both solo and Pink Floyd material . The tour was a financial success in the US and though Waters had booked mostly smaller venues , tickets sold so well that many of the concerts were upgraded to larger ones . The tour eventually stretched across the world and would span three years . A concert film was released on CD and DVD , named In the Flesh – Live . During the tour , he played two new songs " Flickering Flame " and " Each Small Candle " as the final encore to many of the shows . In June 2002 , he completed the tour with a performance in front of 70 @,@ 000 people at the Glastonbury Festival of Performing Arts , playing 15 Pink Floyd songs and five songs from his solo catalogue . 
 Miramax announced in mid @-@ 2004 that a production of The Wall was to appear on Broadway with Waters playing a prominent role in the creative direction . Reports stated that the musical contained not only the original tracks from The Wall , but also songs from Dark Side of the Moon , Wish You Were Here and other Pink Floyd albums , as well as new material . On the night of 1 May 2004 , recorded extracts from the opera , including its overture , were played on the occasion of the Welcome Europe celebrations in the accession country of Malta . Gert Hof mixed recorded excerpts from the opera into a continuous piece of music which was played as an accompaniment to a large light and fireworks display over Grand Harbour in Valletta . In July 2004 , Waters released two new tracks on the Internet : " To Kill the Child " , inspired by the 2003 invasion of Iraq , and " Leaving Beirut " , an anti @-@ war song " inspired by his travels in the Middle East as a teenager " . 
 = = = 2005 – present = = = 
 In July 2005 , Waters reunited with Mason , Wright , and Gilmour for what would be their final performance together at the 2005 Live 8 concert in London 's Hyde Park , Pink Floyd 's only appearance with Waters since their final performance of The Wall at Earls Court London 24 years earlier . They played a 23 @-@ minute set consisting of " Speak to Me / Breathe " / " Breathe ( Reprise ) " , " Money " , " Wish You Were Here " , and " Comfortably Numb " . Waters told the Associated Press that while the experience of playing with Pink Floyd again was positive , the chances of a bona fide reunion would be " slight " considering his and Gilmour 's continuing musical and ideological differences . Though Waters had differing ideas about which songs they should play , he " agreed to roll over for one night only " , Gilmour told the Associated Press , " The rehearsals convinced me it wasn 't something I wanted to be doing a lot of . There have been all sorts of farewell moments in people 's lives and careers which they have then rescinded , but I think I can fairly categorically say that there won 't be a tour or an album again that I take part in . It isn 't to do with animosity or anything like that . It 's just that ... I 've been there , I 've done it . " In November 2005 , Pink Floyd were inducted into the UK Music Hall of Fame by Pete Townshend of the Who . 
 In September 2005 , Waters released Ça Ira ( pronounced [ sa <unk> ] , French for " it will be fine " ; Waters added the subtitle , " There is Hope " ) , an opera in three acts translated from the late Étienne Roda @-@ Gil 's French libretto based on the historical subject of the French Revolution . Ça Ira was released as a double CD album , featuring baritone Bryn Terfel , soprano Ying Huang and tenor Paul Groves . Set during the early French Revolution , the original libretto was co @-@ written in French by Roda @-@ Gil and his wife Nadine Delahaye . Waters had begun rewriting the libretto in English in 1989 , and said about the composition : " I 've always been a big fan of Beethoven 's choral music , Berlioz and Borodin ... This is unashamedly romantic and resides in that early 19th @-@ century tradition , because that 's where my tastes lie in classical and choral music . " Waters appeared on television to discuss the opera , but the interviews often focused instead on his relationship with Pink Floyd , something Waters would " take in stride " , a sign Pink Floyd biographer Mark Blake believes to be , " a testament to his mellower old age or twenty years of dedicated psychotherapy " . Ça Ira reached number 5 on the Billboard Classical Music Chart in the United States . 
