 In June 2006 , Waters commenced The Dark Side of the Moon Live tour , a two @-@ year , world @-@ spanning effort that began in Europe in June and North America in September . The first half of the show featured both Pink Floyd songs and Waters ' solo material , while the second half included a complete live performance of the 1973 Pink Floyd album The Dark Side of the Moon , the first time in over three decades that Waters had performed the album . The shows ended with an encore from the third side of The Wall . He utilised elaborate staging by concert lighting designer Marc Brickman complete with laser lights , fog machines , pyrotechnics , psychedelic projections , and inflatable floating puppets ( Spaceman and Pig ) controlled by a " handler " dressed as a butcher , and a full 360 @-@ degree quadraphonic sound system was used . Nick Mason joined Waters for The Dark Side of the Moon set and the encores on select 2006 tour dates . Waters continued touring in January 2007 in Australia and New Zealand , then Asia , Europe , South America , and back to North America in June . 
 In March 2007 , the Waters song , " Hello ( I Love You ) " was featured in the science fiction film The Last <unk> . The song plays over the film 's end credits . He released it as a single , on CD and via download , and described it as , " a song that captures the themes of the movie , the clash between humanity 's best and worst instincts , and how a child 's innocence can win the day " . He performed at California 's Coachella Festival in April 2008 and was to be among the headlining artists performing at Live Earth 2008 in Mumbai , India in December 2008 , but that concert was cancelled in light of the 26 November terrorist attacks in Mumbai . 
 Waters confirmed the possibility of an upcoming solo album which " might be called " Heartland , and has said he has numerous songs written ( some already recorded ) that he intends to release when they are a complete album . In June 2010 , Waters released a cover of " We Shall Overcome " , a protest song rewritten and arranged by Guy <unk> and Pete Seeger . He performed with David Gilmour at the Hoping Foundation Benefit Evening in July 2010 . The four @-@ song set included : " To Know Him Is to Love Him " , which was played in early Pink Floyd sound checks , followed by " Wish You Were Here " , " Comfortably Numb " , and " Another Brick in the Wall ( Part Two ) " . 
 In September 2010 , Waters commenced The Wall Live tour , an updated version of the original Pink Floyd shows , featuring a complete performance of The Wall . Waters told the Associated Press that The Wall Tour will likely be his last , stating : " I 'm not as young as I used to be . I 'm not like B.B. King , or Muddy Waters . I 'm not a great vocalist or a great instrumentalist or whatever , but I still have the fire in my belly , and I have something to say . I have a swan song in me and I think this will probably be it . " At The O2 Arena in London on 12 May 2011 , Gilmour and Mason once again appeared with Waters and Gilmour performing " Comfortably Numb " , and Gilmour and Mason joining Waters for " Outside the Wall " . For the first half of 2012 , Waters ' tour topped worldwide concert ticket sales having sold more than 1 @.@ 4 million tickets globally . As of 2013 , The Wall Live is the highest @-@ grossing tour of all time by a solo artist . Waters performed at the Concert for Sandy Relief at Madison Square Garden on 12 December 2012 . On 24 July 2015 , Waters headlined the Newport Folk Festival in Newport , Rhode Island . Waters was accompanied by the band My Morning Jacket and two singers from the group Lucius . On 3 May 2016 , Waters was announced as one of the performers at the Desert Trip music festival , due to take place from October 7th through the 9th . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1969 , Waters married his childhood sweetheart Judy Trim , a successful potter ; she was featured on the gatefold sleeve of the original release of Ummagumma , but excised from subsequent CD reissues . They had no children together and divorced in 1975 . Trim died in 2001 . 
 In 1976 , Waters married Lady Carolyne Christie , the niece of the 3rd Marquess of Zetland . His marriage to Christie produced a son , Harry Waters , a musician who has played keyboards with his father 's touring band since 2006 , and a daughter , India Waters , who has worked as a model . Christie and Waters divorced in 1992 . 
 In 1993 , he married Priscilla Phillips ; they had one son together , Jack Fletcher . Their marriage ended in 2001 . 
 In 2004 , Waters became engaged to actress and filmmaker Laurie Durning ( born 1963 ) ; the two married on 14 January 2012 and filed for divorce in September 2015 . 
 Waters is an atheist . 
 = = Activism = = 
 After the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and subsequent tsunami disaster , Waters performed " Wish You Were Here " with Eric Clapton during a benefit concert on the American network NBC . He was outspoken against the Hunting Act of 2004 , and performed a concert for , and attended marches supporting , the Countryside Alliance . Waters explained that whether he supported hunting or not , it was important to defend it as a right . He left the UK soon afterwards . He clarified in October 2005 that he had not left the country in protest against the hunting legislation but for family reasons , and that he often returned to the UK . 
 After leaving Britain , he moved to Long Island in New York with his fiancé Laurie Durning . In June 2007 , Waters became a spokesman for Millennium Promise , a non @-@ profit organisation that helps fight extreme poverty and malaria . He wrote an opinion piece for CNN in support of the topic . In July , he participated in the American leg of the Live Earth concert , an international multi @-@ venue concert aimed at raising awareness about global climate change , featuring the Trenton Youth Choir and his trademarked inflatable pig . Waters told David Fricke why he thinks The Wall is still relevant today : 
 The loss of a father is the central prop on which [ The Wall ] stands . As the years go by , children lose their fathers again and again , for nothing . You see it now with all these fathers , good men and true , who lost their lives and limbs in Iraq for no reason at all . I 've done " Bring The Boys Back Home " in my encore on recent tours . It feels more relevant and poignant to be singing that song now than it did in 1979 . 
 In 2012 , Waters led a benefit for United States military veterans called Stand Up for Heroes . He invited a music group of combat wounded veterans called <unk> to perform with him . In June 2013 , Waters and numerous other celebrities appeared in a video showing support for Chelsea Manning . 
 In June 2009 he spoke against the Israeli West Bank barrier and later that year , pledged his support to the Gaza Freedom March . In 2011 he announced that he had joined the Boycott , Divestment and Sanctions ( BDS ) movement against Israel . He has said he is disillusioned with UK foreign policy towards Israel . In October 2010 , after an animated B @-@ 52 bomber had been shown dropping symbols including the Star of David and dollar signs as part of The Wall Live tour , the Anti @-@ Defamation League ( ADL ) criticised the imagery and claimed it was anti @-@ Semitic . In response , Waters changed the video and wrote an open letter to The Independent where he denied he was anti @-@ Semitic and distinguished criticism of Israel from anti @-@ Jewishness . In March 2013 , during an interview with Electronic Intifada , Waters criticised American media for their coverage of Israel . For many years , Pink Floyd concerts and Waters concerts have used a pig @-@ shaped balloon painted with political and religious symbols flown overhead during shows while he performs in fascist uniform . In July 2013 , the Israeli media complained about the symbolism . 
 The ADL 's National Director Abraham H. Foxman has accused him of anti @-@ Semitism as has Rabbi Abraham Cooper , associate dean of the Simon Wiesenthal Center . Waters stated that Cooper 's accusation was bigoted . On 2 October 2015 , Waters published an open letter in Salon criticising the band Bon Jovi for performing in Tel Aviv , which led Howard Stern to criticise Waters on his radio show . 
 = = Equipment and instruments = = 
 Waters ' primary instrument in Pink Floyd was the electric bass guitar . He briefly played a Höfner bass but replaced it with a Rickenbacker RM @-@ 1999 / 4001S , until 1970 when it was stolen along with the rest of the band 's equipment in New Orleans . He began using Fender Precision Basses in 1968 , originally alongside the Rickenbacker 4001 , and then exclusively after the Rickenbacker was lost in 1970 . First seen at a concert in Hyde Park , London in July 1970 , the black P @-@ Bass was rarely used until April 1972 when it became his main stage guitar and as of 2 October 2010 , the basis for a Fender Artist Signature model . Waters endorses <unk> Jazz Bass 77 flat @-@ wound strings . Throughout his career he has used Selmer , <unk> , Hiwatt and Ashdown amplifiers but has used Ampeg for the last few tours , also employing delay , tremolo , chorus , stereo panning and phaser effects in his bass playing . 
 Waters experimented with the EMS Synthi A and VCS 3 synthesisers on Pink Floyd pieces such as " On the Run " , " Welcome to the Machine " , and " In the Flesh ? " He played electric and acoustic guitar on Pink Floyd tracks using Fender , Martin , Ovation and Washburn guitars . He played electric guitar on the Pink Floyd song " Sheep " , from Animals , and acoustic guitar on several Pink Floyd recordings , such as " Pigs on the Wing 1 & 2 " , also from Animals , " Southampton Dock " from The Final Cut , and on " Mother " from The Wall . A Binson Echorec 2 echo effect was used on his bass @-@ guitar lead track " One of These Days " . Waters plays trumpet during concert performances of " Outside the Wall " . 
 = = Discography = = 
 The Pros and Cons of Hitch Hiking ( 1984 ) 
 Radio K.A.O.S. ( 1987 ) 
 Amused to Death ( 1992 ) 
 Ça Ira ( 2005 ) 
 = Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria = 
 The assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria , heir presumptive to the Austro @-@ Hungarian throne , and his wife Sophie , Duchess of <unk> , occurred on 28 June 1914 in Sarajevo when they were shot dead by Gavrilo Princip . Princip was one of a group of six assassins ( five Serbs and one Bosniak ) coordinated by Danilo Ilić , a Bosnian Serb and a member of the Black Hand secret society . The political objective of the assassination was to break off Austria @-@ Hungary 's South Slav provinces so they could be combined into a Yugoslavia . The assassins ' motives were consistent with the movement that later became known as Young Bosnia . The assassination led directly to the First World War when Austria @-@ Hungary subsequently issued an ultimatum to the Kingdom of Serbia , which was partially rejected . Austria @-@ Hungary then declared war . 
 In charge of these Serbian military conspirators was Chief of Serbian Military Intelligence Dragutin Dimitrijević , his right @-@ hand man Major Vojislav Tankosić , and the spy Rade Malobabić . Tankosić armed the assassins with bombs and pistols and trained them . The assassins were given access to the same clandestine network of safe @-@ houses and agents that Malobabić used for the infiltration of weapons and operatives into Austria @-@ Hungary . 
 The assassins , the key members of the clandestine network , and the key Serbian military conspirators who were still alive were arrested , tried , convicted and punished . Those who were arrested in Bosnia were tried in Sarajevo in October 1914 . The other conspirators were arrested and tried before a Serbian court on the French @-@ controlled Salonika Front in 1916 – 1917 on unrelated false charges ; Serbia executed three of the top military conspirators . Much of what is known about the assassinations comes from these two trials and related records . 
 = = Background = = 
 Under the 1878 Treaty of Berlin , Austria @-@ Hungary received the mandate to occupy and administer the Ottoman Vilayet of Bosnia while the Ottoman Empire retained official sovereignty . Under this same treaty , the Great Powers ( Austria @-@ Hungary , Britain , France , Germany , Italy , the Ottoman Empire , and Russian Empire ) gave official recognition to the Principality of Serbia as a fully sovereign state , which four years later transformed into a kingdom under Prince Milan IV Obrenović who thus became King Milan I of Serbia . Serbia 's monarchs , at the time from the royal House of Obrenović that maintained close relations with Austria @-@ Hungary , were content to reign within the borders set by the treaty . 
 This changed in May 1903 , when Serbian military officers led by Dragutin Dimitrijević stormed the Serbian Royal Palace . After a fierce battle in the dark , the attackers captured General <unk> Petrović , head of the Palace Guard , and forced him to reveal the hiding place of King Alexander I Obrenović and his wife Queen Draga . The King and Queen opened the door from their hiding place . The King was shot thirty times ; the Queen eighteen . MacKenzie writes that " the royal corpses were then stripped and brutally <unk> . " The attackers threw the corpses of King Alexander and Queen Draga out of a palace window , ending any threat that loyalists would mount a counterattack . " General Petrović was then killed too ( Vojislav Tankosić organized the murders of Queen Draga 's brothers ; Dimitrijević and Tankosić in 1913 – 1914 figure prominently in the plot to assassinate Franz Ferdinand ) . The conspirators installed Peter I of the House of Karađorđević as the new king . 
 The new dynasty was more nationalist , friendlier to Russia and less friendly to Austria @-@ Hungary . Over the next decade , disputes between Serbia and its neighbors erupted , as Serbia moved to build its power and gradually reclaim its 14th century empire . These conflicts included a customs dispute with Austria @-@ Hungary beginning in 1906 ( commonly referred to as the " Pig War " ) ; the Bosnian crisis of 1908 – 1909 , in which Serbia assumed an attitude of protest over Austria @-@ Hungary 's annexation of Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina ( ending in Serbian acquiescence without compensation in March 1909 ) ; and finally the two Balkan Wars of 1912 – 1913 , in which Serbia conquered Macedonia and Kosovo from the Ottoman Empire and drove out Bulgaria . 
 Serbia 's military successes and Serbian outrage over the Austro @-@ Hungarian annexation of Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina emboldened Serbian nationalists in Serbia and Serbs in Austria @-@ Hungary who chafed under Austro @-@ Hungarian rule and whose nationalist sentiments were stirred by Serb " cultural " organizations . In the five years leading up to 1914 , lone assassins – mostly Serb citizens of Austria @-@ Hungary – made a series of unsuccessful assassination attempts in Croatia and Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina against Austro @-@ Hungarian officials . The assassins received sporadic support from Serbia . 
 On 15 June 1910 , Bogdan Žerajić attempted to kill the iron @-@ fisted Governor of Bosnia and Herzegovina , General Marijan <unk> . Žerajić was a 22 @-@ year @-@ old Orthodox Serb from Nevesinje , Herzegovina , who was a student at the Faculty of Law at the University of Zagreb and made frequent trips to Belgrade . ( General <unk> went on to crush the last Bosnian peasant uprising in the second half of 1910 . ) The five bullets Žerajić fired at <unk> and the fatal bullet he put in his own brain made Žerajić an inspiration to future assassins , including Princip and Princip 's accomplice Čabrinović . Princip said that Žerajić " was my first model . When I was seventeen I passed whole nights at his grave , reflecting on our wretched condition and thinking of him . It is there that I made up my mind sooner or later to perpetrate an outrage . " 
 In 1913 , Emperor Franz Joseph commanded Archduke Franz Ferdinand to observe the military maneuvers in Bosnia scheduled for June 1914 . Following the maneuvers , Ferdinand and his wife planned to visit Sarajevo to open the state museum in its new premises there . Duchess Sophie , according to their oldest son , Duke Maximilian , accompanied her husband out of fear for his safety . 
 As a " Czech countess [ she ] was treated as a commoner at the Austrian court " . Emperor Franz Joseph had only consented to their marriage on the condition that their descendants would never ascend the throne . The 14th anniversary of their morganatic marriage fell on 28 June . As historian A. J. P. Taylor observes : 
 [ Sophie ] could never share [ Franz Ferdinand 's ] rank ... could never share his splendours , could never even sit by his side on any public occasion . There was one loophole ... his wife could enjoy the recognition of his rank when he was acting in a military capacity . Hence , he decided , in 1914 , to inspect the army in Bosnia . There , at its capital Sarajevo , the Archduke and his wife could ride in an open carriage side by side ... Thus , for love , did the Archduke go to his death . 
 Franz Ferdinand was an advocate of increased federalism and widely believed to favor <unk> , under which Austria @-@ Hungary would be reorganized by combining the Slavic lands within the Austro @-@ Hungarian empire into a third crown . A Slavic kingdom could have been a bulwark against Serb irredentism , and Franz Ferdinand was therefore perceived as a threat by those same <unk> . Princip later stated to the court that preventing Franz Ferdinand 's planned reforms was one of his motivations . 
 The day of the assassination , June 28 ( June 15 in the Julian calendar ) , is the feast of St. Vitus . In Serbia , it is called Vidovdan and commemorates the 1389 Battle of Kosovo against the Ottomans , at which the Sultan was assassinated in his tent by a Serb . 
 = = Preliminaries = = 
 = = = Planning direct action = = = 
 Danilo Ilić was a Bosnian Orthodox Serb . He had worked as a school teacher and as a bank worker but in 1913 and 1914 he lived with , and outwardly off , his mother , who operated a small boarding house in Sarajevo . Secretly , Ilić was leader of the Serbian @-@ irredentist Black Hand cell in Sarajevo . In late 1913 , Danilo Ilić came to the Serbian listening post at Užice to speak to the officer in charge , Serbian Colonel C. A. Popović , who was a captain at the time and a member of the Black Hand . Ilić recommended an end to the period of revolutionary organization building and a move to direct action against Austria @-@ Hungary . Popović passed Danilo Ilić on to Belgrade to discuss this matter with Chief of Serbian Military Intelligence Colonel Dragutin Dimitrijević , known more commonly as Apis . By 1913 , Apis and his fellow military conspirators ( drawn heavily from the ranks of the May 1903 coup ) had come to dominate what was left of the Black Hand . 
 There are no reports as to what took place between Ilić and Apis , but soon after their meeting , Apis 's righthand man and fellow Black <unk> , Serbian Major Vojislav Tankosić , who by this time was in charge of guerrilla training , called a Serbian irredentist planning meeting in Toulouse , France . Amongst those summoned to the Toulouse meeting was Muhamed Mehmedbašić , a carpenter by trade and son of an impoverished Muslim noble from Herzegovina . He too was a member of the Black Hand , having been sworn into the organization by Black Hand Provincial Director for Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina Vladimir <unk> and Danilo Ilić . Mehmedbašić was ( here quoting Albertini paraphrasing Mehmedbašić ) " eager to carry out an act of terrorism to revive the revolutionary spirit of Bosnia . " During this January 1914 meeting , various possible Austro @-@ Hungarian targets for assassination were discussed , including Franz Ferdinand . However , the participants decided only to dispatch Mehmed Mehmedbašić to Sarajevo , to kill the Governor of Bosnia , Oskar Potiorek . 
 While Mehmedbašić was travelling to Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina from France , police searched his train for a thief . Thinking the police might be after him , he threw his weapons ( a dagger and a bottle of poison ) out the train window . Once he arrived in Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina he had to set about looking for replacement weapons . 
 = = = Franz Ferdinand chosen = = = 
 The search for new weapons delayed Mehmedbašić 's attempt on Potiorek . Before Mehmedbašić was ready to act , Ilić summoned him to Mostar . On 26 March 1914 , Ilić informed Mehmedbašić that Belgrade had scrapped the mission to kill the governor . The plan now was to murder Franz Ferdinand , and Mehmedbašić should stand by for the new operation . ( Apis confessed to the Serbian Court that he ordered the assassination of Franz Ferdinand in his position as head of the Intelligence Department . ) The assassination was planned with the knowledge and approval of the Russian ambassador in Belgrade Nikolai Hartwig and the Russian military attache in Belgrade Viktor Artamonov . 
 Ilić recruited the Serbian youths Vaso Čubrilović and <unk> Popović shortly after Easter ( Orthodox Easter as given by Dedijer : 19 April 1914 ) , for the assassination , as evidenced by the testimony of Ilić , Čubrilović , and Popović at the Sarajevo trial . Three youths – Gavrilo Princip , Trifko Grabež , and <unk> Čabrinović – Bosnian Serb subjects of Austria @-@ Hungary , living in Belgrade , testified at the Sarajevo trial that at about the same time ( a little after Easter ) , they were eager to carry out an assassination and approached a fellow Bosnian Serb and former guerrilla fighter known to be well connected and with access to arms , Milan Ciganović , and through him Major Tankosić and reached an agreement to transport arms to Sarajevo and participate in the assassination . 
 Agreement in principle was quickly reached , but delivery of the weapons was delayed for more than a month . The assassins would meet with Ciganović and he would put them off . At one point , Ciganović told Grabež : " Nothing doing , the old Emperor is ill and the Heir Apparent will not go to Bosnia . " When Emperor Franz Joseph 's health recovered the operation was a " go " again . Tankosić gave the assassins one FN Model 1910 pistol . They practiced shooting a few rounds of scarce and expensive .380 ACP pistol ammunition in a park near Belgrade . 
 The rest of the weapons were finally delivered on 26 May . The three assassins from Belgrade testified that Major Tankosić , directly and through Ciganović , not only provided six hand grenades and four new Browning FN Model 1910 automatic pistols with .380 ACP ammunition , but also money , suicide pills , training , a special map with the location of gendarmes marked , knowledge of contacts on a clandestine tunnel used to infiltrate agents and arms into Austria @-@ Hungary , and a small card authorizing the use of that tunnel . Major Tankosić confirmed to the journalist and historian Luciano <unk> that he provided the bombs and pistols and was responsible for training Princip , Grabež , and Čabrinović and that he ( Tankosić ) initiated the idea of the suicide pills . 
 = = = Tunnel = = = 
 Princip , Grabež , and Čabrinović left Belgrade by boat on 28 May and traveled along the Sava River to Šabac where they handed the small card to Captain Popović of the Serbian Border Guard . Popović , in turn , provided them with a letter to Serbian Captain Prvanović , and filled out a form with the names of three customs officials whose identities they could assume and thereby receive discounted train tickets for the ride to Loznica , a small border town . 
 When Princip , Grabež , and Čabrinović reached Loznica on 29 May , Captain Prvanović summoned three of his revenue sergeants to discuss the best way to cross the border undetected . While waiting for the sergeants to arrive , Princip and Grabež had a falling out with Čabrinović over Čabrinović 's repeated violations of operational security . Čabrinović handed over the weapons he was carrying to Princip and Grabež . Princip told Čabrinović to go alone to Zvornik , make an official crossing there using Grabež 's ID card and then go on to Tuzla and link back up . 
 On the morning of 30 May Prvanović 's revenue sergeants assembled and Sergeant <unk> <unk> accepted the task and led Princip and Grabež by foot to <unk> 's Island , a small island in the middle of the Drina River that separated Serbia from Bosnia . They and their weapons reached the island on 31 May . <unk> passed the terrorists and their weapons to the agents of the Serbian Narodna Odbrana for transport into Austro @-@ Hungarian territory and from safe @-@ house to safe @-@ house . Princip and Grabež crossed into Austria @-@ Hungary on the evening of 1 June . Princip and Grabež and the weapons were passed from agent to agent until on 3 June they arrived in Tuzla . They left the weapons in the hands of the Narodna Odbrana agent <unk> Jovanović and rejoined Čabrinović . 
 The Narodna Odbrana agents reported their activities to the Narodna Odbrana President , Boža Janković , who in turn reported to the then Serbian Caretaker Prime Minister Nikola Pašić . The report to Pašić added the name of a new military conspirator , Serbian Major Kosta Todorović , Boundary Commissioner and Director of Serbian Military Intelligence Services for the frontier line from Rada to Ljubovija . Pašić 's handwritten notes from the briefing ( estimated by Dedijer to have taken place on 5 June ) included the nickname of one of the assassins ( " Trifko " Grabež ) and also the name of Major Tankosić . The Austrians later captured the report , Pašić 's handwritten notes , and additional corroborating documents . 
 Čabrinović 's father was a Sarajevo police official . In Tuzla , Čabrinović bumped into one of his father 's friends , Sarajevo Police Detective Ivan Vila , and struck up a conversation . By coincidence , Princip , Grabež and Čabrinović boarded the same train for Sarajevo as Detective Vila . Čabrinović inquired of the detective the date of Franz Ferdinand 's visit to Sarajevo . The next morning , Čabrinović passed on the news to his fellow assassins that the assassination would be on 28 June . 
 On arriving in Sarajevo on 4 June , Princip , Grabež , and Čabrinović went their separate ways . Princip checked in with Ilić , visited his family in <unk> and returned to Sarajevo on 6 June taking up residence at Ilić 's mother 's house with Ilić . Grabež joined his family in Pale . Čabrinović moved back into his father 's house in Sarajevo . 
 On 14 June , Ilić went to Tuzla to bring the weapons to Sarajevo . <unk> Jovanović hid the weapons in a large box of sugar . On 15 June , the two went separately by train to Doboj where Jovanović handed off the box to Ilić . Later that day , Ilić returned to Sarajevo by train , being careful to transfer to a local train outside Sarajevo and then quickly transfer to a tram to avoid police detection . Once at his mother 's house , Ilić hid the weapons in a suitcase under a sofa . Then , on approximately 17 June , Ilić traveled to Brod ( Dedijer puts it on 16 June , but trial records put it on 18 June ) . Questioned at trial , Ilić gave a confused explanation of the reason for his trip , first saying he had gone to Brod to prevent the assassination and then saying he had returned to Sarajevo from Brod to prevent the assassination . Dedijer puts forward the thesis ( citing <unk> ) that Ilić went to Brod to meet an emissary of Apis , <unk> <unk> , who had instructions to cancel the assassination and then later Rade Malobabić was dispatched from Serbia to Sarajevo to reauthorize the assassination . 
 = = = Eve of the attacks = = = 
 Ilić began handing out the weapons on 27 June . Until 27 June Ilić had kept the identities of the assassins from Belgrade secret from those he had recruited locally and vice versa . Then , that night , as Mehmedbašić told Albertini : " On the eve of the outrage Ilić introduced me to Princip in a Sarajevo café with the words ' Mehmedbašić who to @-@ morrow is to be with us . ' " The three sent a postcard to Black Hand Provincial Director for Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina Vladimir <unk> in France . 
 The following morning , on 28 June 1914 , Ilić positioned the six assassins along the motorcade route . Ilić walked the street , exhorting the assassins to bravery . 
 = = Assassination = = 
 = = = Motorcade = = = 
 On the morning of 28 June 1914 , Franz Ferdinand and his party proceeded by train from Ilidža Spa to Sarajevo . Governor Oskar Potiorek met the party at Sarajevo station . Six automobiles were waiting . By mistake , three local police officers got into the first car with the chief officer of special security ; the special security officers who were supposed to accompany their chief got left behind . The second car carried the Mayor and the Chief of Police of Sarajevo . The third car in the motorcade was a <unk> & Stift 28 / 32 PS open sports car with its top folded down . Franz Ferdinand , Sophie , Governor Potiorek , and Lieutenant Colonel Count Franz von Harrach rode in this third car . The motorcade 's first stop on the <unk> program was for a brief inspection of a military barracks . According to the program , at 10 : 00 a.m. , the motorcade was to leave the barracks for the town hall by way of the Appel Quay . 
 Security arrangements within Sarajevo were limited . The local military commander , General Michael von Appel , proposed that troops line the intended route but was told that this would offend the loyal citizenry . Protection for the visiting party was accordingly left to the Sarajevo police , of whom only 60 were on duty on the day of the visit . 
 = = = Bombing = = = 
 The motorcade passed the first assassin , Mehmedbašić . Danilo Ilić had placed him in front of the garden of the Mostar Cafe and armed him with a bomb . Mehmedbašić failed to act . Ilić placed Vaso Čubrilović next to Mehmedbašić , arming him with a pistol and a bomb . He too failed to act . Further along the route , Ilić placed <unk> Čabrinović on the opposite side of the street near the Miljacka River arming him with a bomb . 
 At 10 : 10 am , Franz Ferdinand 's car approached and Čabrinović threw his bomb . The bomb bounced off the folded back convertible cover into the street . The bomb 's timed detonator caused it to explode under the next car , putting that car out of action , leaving a 1 @-@ foot @-@ diameter ( 0 @.@ 30 m ) , 6 @.@ 5 @-@ inch @-@ deep ( 170 mm ) crater , and wounding 16 – 20 people . 
 Čabrinović swallowed his cyanide pill and jumped into the Miljacka river . Čabrinović 's suicide attempt failed , as the cyanide only induced vomiting , and the Miljacka was only 13 cm deep due to the hot , dry summer . Police dragged Čabrinović out of the river , and he was severely beaten by the crowd before being taken into custody . 
 The procession sped away towards the Town Hall leaving the disabled car behind . <unk> Popović , Gavrilo Princip , and <unk> Grabež failed to act as the motorcade passed them at high speed . 
 = = = Town Hall reception = = = 
 Arriving at the Town Hall for a scheduled reception , Franz Ferdinand showed understandable signs of stress , interrupting a prepared speech of welcome by Mayor <unk> <unk> to protest : " Mr. Mayor , I came here on a visit and I am greeted with bombs . It is outrageous . " Duchess Sophie then whispered into Franz Ferdinand 's ear , and after a pause , Franz Ferdinand said to the mayor : " Now you may speak . " He then became calm and the mayor gave his speech . Franz Ferdinand had to wait as his own speech , still wet with blood from being in the damaged car , was brought to him . To the prepared text he added a few remarks about the day 's events thanking the people of Sarajevo for their ovations " as I see in them an expression of their joy at the failure of the attempt at assassination . " 
 Officials and members of the Archduke 's party discussed what to do next . The archduke 's chamberlain , Baron <unk> , proposed that the couple remain at the Town Hall until troops could be brought into the city to line the streets . Governor @-@ General Oskar Potiorek vetoed this suggestion on the grounds that soldiers coming straight from maneuvers would not have the dress uniforms appropriate for such duties . " Do you think that Sarajevo is full of assassins ? " he concluded . 
 Franz Ferdinand and Sophie gave up their planned program in favor of visiting the wounded from the bombing , at the hospital . Count Harrach took up a protective position on the left @-@ hand running board of Franz Ferdinand ’ s car . This is confirmed by photographs of the scene outside the Town Hall . At 10 : 45 a.m. , Franz Ferdinand and Sophie got back into the motorcade , once again in the third car . In order to avoid the city center , General Oskar Potiorek decided that the royal car should travel straight along the Appel Quay to the Sarajevo Hospital . However , the driver , Leopold Lojka , took a right turn into Franz Josef Street . The reason for this is that Potiorek 's aide Eric ( h ) von <unk> was in the hospital , and was therefore unable to give Lojka the information about the change in plans and the driving route . The Sarajevo Chief of Police Edmund Gerde ( who had earlier repeatedly protested about the lack of security precautions for the visit ) was asked to tell the drivers of the new route but in the confusion and tensions of the moment neglected to do so . 
 = = = Fatal shooting = = = 
 After learning that the first assassination attempt had been unsuccessful , Princip thought about a position to assassinate the Archduke on his return journey , and decided to move to a position in front of a nearby food shop ( Schiller 's delicatessen ) , near the Latin Bridge . At this point the Archdukes ' motorcade turned off the Appel Quay , mistakenly following the original route which would have taken them to the National Museum . Governor Potiorek , who was sharing the second vehicle with the Imperial couple , called out to the driver to reverse and take the Quay to the hospital . Driver Lojka stopped the car close to where Princip was standing , prior to backing up . The latter stepped forward and fired two shots from a distance of about one and a half metres ( 5 feet ) using a Belgian @-@ made 9 × <unk> ( .380 ACP ) Fabrique Nationale model 1910 semi @-@ automatic pistol . Pistol serial numbers <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> were supplied to the assassins ; Princip used # <unk> . According to Albertini , " the first bullet wounded the Archduke in the jugular vein , the second inflicted an abdominal wound on the Duchess . " Princip was immediately arrested . At his sentencing , Princip stated that his intention had been to kill Governor Potiorek , rather than Sophie . 
 Both victims remained seated upright , but died while being driven to the Governor 's residence for medical treatment . As reported by Count Harrach , Franz Ferdinand 's last words were " Sophie , Sophie ! Don 't die ! Live for our children ! " followed by six or seven utterances of " It is nothing . " in response to Harrach 's inquiry as to Franz Ferdinand 's injury . These utterances were followed by a long death rattle . Sophie was dead on arrival at the Governor 's residence . Franz Ferdinand died 10 minutes later . 
 = = = Funeral = = = 
 The bodies were transported to Trieste by the battleship SMS Viribus Unitis and then to Vienna by special train . Even though most foreign royalty had planned to attend , they were pointedly <unk> and the funeral was just the immediate imperial family , with the dead couple 's three children excluded from the few public ceremonies . The officer corps was forbidden to salute the funeral train , and this led to a minor revolt led by Archduke Karl , the new heir to the throne . The public viewing of the coffins was curtailed severely and even more scandalously , <unk> tried unsuccessfully to make the children foot the bill . The Archduke and Duchess were interred at <unk> Castle because his wife could not be buried at the Imperial Crypt . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 All of the assassins were eventually caught . Those in Austro @-@ Hungarian custody were tried together with members of the infiltration route who had helped deliver them and their weapons to Sarajevo . Mehmedbašić was arrested in Montenegro , but was allowed to " escape " to Serbia where he joined Major Tankosić 's auxiliaries , but in 1916 Serbia imprisoned him on other false charges ( see criminal penalty section below ) . 
 Anti @-@ Serb rioting broke out in Sarajevo and various other places within Austria @-@ Hungary in the hours following the assassination until order was restored by the military . On the night of the assassination , country @-@ wide anti @-@ Serb pogroms and demonstrations were also organized in other parts of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Empire , particularly on the territory of modern @-@ day Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia . They were organized and stimulated by Oskar Potiorek , the Austro @-@ Hungarian governor of Bosnia and Herzegovina . The first anti @-@ Serb demonstrations , led by the followers of Josip Frank , were organized in early evening of 28 June in Zagreb . The following day , anti @-@ Serb demonstrations in Sarajevo became more violent and could be characterized as a pogrom . The police and local authorities in the city did nothing to prevent anti @-@ Serb violence . Writer Ivo Andrić referred to the violence in Sarajevo as the " Sarajevo frenzy of hate . " Two Serbs were killed on the first day of pogrom in Sarajevo , many were attacked , while around 1 @,@ 000 houses , shops , schools and institutions ( such as banks , hotels , printing houses ) owned by Serbs were razed or pillaged . 
 = = Trials and punishment = = 
 = = = Sarajevo trial ( October 1914 ) = = = 
 Austro @-@ Hungarian authorities arrested and prosecuted the Sarajevo assassins ( except for Mehmedbašić who had escaped to Montenegro and was released from police custody there to Serbia ) together with the agents and peasants who had assisted them on their way . The top count in the indictments was conspiracy to commit high treason involving official circles in the Kingdom of Serbia . Conspiracy to commit high treason carried a maximum sentence of death which conspiracy to commit simple murder did not . The trial was held from 12 October to 23 October with the verdict and sentences announced on 28 October 1914 . 
 The adult defendants , facing the death penalty , portrayed themselves at trial as unwilling participants in the conspiracy . The examination of defendant Veljko Cubrilović ( who helped coordinate the transport of the weapons and was a Narodna Odbrana agent ) is illustrative of this effort . Cubrilović stated to the court : " Princip glared at me and very forcefully said ' If you want to know , it is for that reason and we are going to carry out an assassination of the Heir and if you know about it , you have to be quiet . If you betray it , you and your family will be destroyed . ' " Under questioning by defense counsel Cubrilović described in more detail the basis of the fears that he said had compelled him to cooperate with Princip and Grabež . " Cubrilović explained that he was afraid a revolutionary organization capable of committing great atrocities stood behind Princip and that he therefore feared his house would be destroyed and his family killed if he did not comply and explained that he knew such an organization existed in Serbia , at least at one time . When pressed for why he risked the punishment of the law , and did not take the protection of the law against these threats he responded : " I was more afraid of terror than the law . " 
 In order to refute the charge , the conspirators from Belgrade , who because of their youth did not face the death penalty , focused during the trial on putting blame on themselves and deflecting it from official Serbia and modified their court testimony from their prior depositions accordingly . Princip stated under cross examination : " I am a Yugoslav nationalist and I believe in unification of all South Slavs in whatever form of state and that it be free of Austria . " Princip was then asked how he intended to realize his goal and responded : " By means of terror . " <unk> , though , testified that the political views that motivated him to kill Franz Ferdinand were views held in the circles he traveled in within Serbia . The court did not believe the defendants ' stories claiming to hold official Serbia blameless . The verdict ran : " The court regards it as proved by the evidence that both the Narodna Odbrana and military circles in the Kingdom of Serbia in charge of the espionage service , collaborated in the outrage . " 
 Prison terms , death sentences and acquittals were as follows : 
 At trial Čabrinović had expressed his regrets for the murders . Following sentencing , Čabrinović received a letter of complete forgiveness from the three young children the assassins had orphaned . Čabrinović and Princip died of tuberculosis in prison . Those under the age of 20 years at the time of the crime could receive a maximum sentence of 20 years under Austrian @-@ Hungarian law . The court heard arguments regarding Princip 's age , as there was some doubt as to his true date of birth but concluded that Princip was under 20 at the time of the assassination . Because Bosnia and Herzegovina had not yet been assigned to Austria or to Hungary , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Finance Minister administered Bosnia and Herzegovina and had responsibility for recommending clemency to the Kaiser . 
 = = = Salonika trial ( spring 1917 ) = = = 
 In late 1916 and early 1917 , secret peace talks took place between Austria @-@ Hungary and France . There is circumstantial evidence that parallel discussions were held between Austria @-@ Hungary and Serbia with Prime Minister Pašić dispatching his righthand man Stojan <unk> and Regent Alexander dispatching his confidant Colonel Petar Živković to Geneva on secret business . Charles I of Austria laid out Austria @-@ Hungary 's key demand for returning Serbia to the control of the Serbian Government in exile : that Serbia should provide guarantees that there be no further political agitation emanating from Serbia against Austria @-@ Hungary . 
 For some time , Regent Alexander and officers loyal to him had planned to get rid of the military clique headed by Apis as Apis represented a political threat to Alexander 's power . The Austro @-@ Hungarian peace demand gave added impetus to this plan . On 15 March 1917 Apis and the officers loyal to him were indicted , on various false charges unrelated to Sarajevo ( the case was retried before the Supreme Court of Serbia in 1953 and all defendants were exonerated ) , by Serbian Court Martial on the French @-@ controlled Salonika front . On 23 May Apis and eight of his associates were sentenced to death ; two others were sentenced to 15 years in prison . One defendant died during the trial and the charges against him were dropped . The Serbian High Court reduced the number of death sentences to seven . Regent Alexander commuted four of the remaining death sentences , leaving just three death sentences in place . Amongst those tried , four of the defendants had confessed their roles in Sarajevo and their final sentences were as follows : 
 In justifying the executions , Prime Minister Pašić wrote to his envoy in London : " ... Dimitrijević ( Apis ) besides everything else admitted he had ordered Franz Ferdinand to be killed . And now who could reprieve them ? " 
 As the three condemned men were driven to their execution , Apis remarked to the driver " Now it is clear to me and clear to you too , that I am to be killed today by Serbian rifles solely because I organized the Sarajevo outrage . 
 Vojislav Tankosić died in battle in late 1915 and so was not put on trial . 
 = = Controversy about responsibility = = 
 = = = Serbia 's " warning " to Austria @-@ Hungary = = = 
 Following the assassinations , Serbian Ambassador to France Milenko <unk> and Serbian Ambassador to Russia <unk> put out statements claiming that Serbia had warned Austria @-@ Hungary of the impending assassination . Serbia soon thereafter denied making warnings and denied knowledge of the plot . Prime Minister Pašić himself made these denials to Az Est on 7 July and to the Paris Edition of the New York Herald on 20 July . Other voices eventually spoke out on the “ warning ” . As Serbian Education Minister Ljuba Jovanović wrote in <unk> <unk> , in late May or early June , Prime Minister Pašić reviewed the plot of the impending assassination with members of his cabinet . On 18 June , a telegram , lacking in specifics , ordered Serbia 's Ambassador to Vienna , Jovan Jovanović , to warn Austria @-@ Hungary that Serbia had reason to believe there was a conspiracy to assassinate Franz Ferdinand in Bosnia . On 21 June , Ambassador Jovanović met with Austro @-@ Hungarian Finance Minister Bilinski . According to Serbian Military Attaché to Vienna , Colonel Lesanin , Ambassador Jovanović , spoke to Bilinski and " ... stressed in general terms the risks the Archduke heir apparent might run from the inflamed public opinion in Bosnia and Serbia . Some serious personal misadventure might befall him . His journey might give rise to incidents and demonstrations that Serbia would deprecate but that would have fatal repercussions on Austro @-@ Serbian relations . " Jovanović came back from the meeting with Bilinski and told Lesanin that " ... Bilinski showed no sign of attaching great importance to the total message and dismissed it limiting himself to remarking when saying goodbye and thanking him : ' Let us hope nothing does happen . ' " The Austro @-@ Hungarian Finance Minister took no action based on Jovanović 's remarks . 
 In 1924 J. Jovanović went public stating that his warning had been made on his own initiative , and what he said was that " Among the Serb youths ( in the army ) there may be one who will put a ball @-@ cartridge in his rifle or revolver in place of a blank cartridge and he may fire it , the bullet might strike the man giving provocation ( Franz Ferdinand ) . " J. Jovanović 's account changed back and forth over the years and never adequately addressed Colonel Lesanin 's statement . Bilinski did not speak openly on the subject , but his press department chief confirmed that a meeting had taken place including a vague warning , but there was no mention of an ethnic Serb Austro @-@ Hungarian soldier shooting Franz Ferdinand . 
 In the days leading up to the assassination , Pašić was caretaker prime minister because during this period the Serbian Government briefly fell to a political alliance led by the Serbian Military . The military favored promoting Jovan Jovanović to Foreign Minister , and Jovanović 's loyalties one might expect to have been divided and his orders therefore carried out poorly . By choosing a military loyalist to convey the message , and by not including any of the specifics such as the conspirators ' names and weapons , Pašić , a survivor , hedged his bets against the various possible outcomes and consequences of the impending assassination . 
 = = = Rade Malobabić = = = 
 In 1914 , Rade Malobabić was Serbian Military Intelligence 's chief undercover operative against Austria @-@ Hungary . His name appeared in Serbian documents captured by Austria @-@ Hungary during the war . These documents describe the running of arms , munitions , and agents from Serbia into Austria @-@ Hungary under Malobabić 's direction . 
 Owing to the suppression by Serbia of Apis 's confession and of the Salonika trial transcripts historians did not initially link Malobabić closely to the Sarajevo attack . Apis 's confession , however , states that " I engaged Malobabić to organize the assassination on the occasion of the announced arrival of Franz Ferdinand to Sarajevo . " At the Salonika trial , Colonel Ljubomir <unk> ( head of the Serbian Frontiers Service ) testified : ' In 1914 on occasion of my official trip from Loznica to Belgrade , I received a letter at the General Staff [ signed by Marshal Putnik , Serbia 's top military officer ] noting that agents of Malobabić would come and a teacher whose name I don 't recall ( Danilo Ilić was a teacher but it is unclear if the teacher in question was Ilić as Ilić can be placed in Brod but not Loznica ) so I could sent [ sic ] them into Bosnia . ' Because of that ' I went to Loznica and either that day or very soon afterwards sent Rade and that teacher into Bosnia . ' Soon thereafter occurred the Sarajevo assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand . " On the eve of his execution , Malobabić told a priest : " They ordered me to go to Sarajevo when that assassination was to take place , and when everything was over , they ordered me to come back and fulfill other missions , and then there was the outbreak of the war . " Vladimir Dedijer in The Road to Sarajevo presented additional testimonial evidence that Malobabić arrived in Sarajevo on the eve of the Sarajevo attack and gave the final go ahead for the operation to Danilo Ilić . This meshes with Dedijer 's theory that <unk> <unk> had given instructions to Ilić on 16 June cancelling the assassination . Soon after their confessions , Serbia executed Malobabić , <unk> , and Apis on false charges . Serbia published no clarifications of their confessions with regards to the Sarajevo attack . 
 = = = " Black Hand " or Serbian military intelligence ? = = = 
 An alternative theory to the Sarajevo attack being a Serbian Military Intelligence Operation was that it was a " Black Hand " operation . The " Black Hand " was a shadowy organization formed in Serbia as a counterweight to the Bulgaria @-@ sponsored Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization ( IMRO ) . 
 After Serbia 's victory over Bulgaria in Macedonia in the Balkan Wars , the " Black Hand " became moribund because of the death of its president and the failure to replace him , an inactive secretary , casualties , broken links between its three @-@ man cells , and a drying up of funding . By 1914 the " Black Hand " was no longer operating under its constitution but rather as a creature of the Chief of Serbian Military Intelligence , Apis , and its active ranks were composed mostly of Serbian officers loyal to Apis . Apis 's confession to ordering the operation that begins with the phrase " As the Chief of the Intelligence Department of the General Staff " , the fact that the military chain of command was invoked , the moribund nature of the " Black Hand " and the fact that under the " Black Hand " constitution Article 16 , such an assassination could only be ordered by a vote of the Supreme Council Directorate , the President or the Secretary and no such order was made , are factors in favor of assigning responsibility to Serbian Military Intelligence . The fact that Milan Ciganović was involved , that the key officers involved were " Black Hand " members , that " Black Hand " Provincial Director for Bosnia and Herzegovina Vladimir <unk> was consulted and that there was no official budget for the operation favors assigning responsibility to the " Black Hand " . 
 = = = The newspaper clipping = = = 
 At trial , it was noted that the three assassins from Belgrade tried to take all blame on themselves . Čabrinović claimed the idea of killing Franz Ferdinand came from a newspaper clipping he received in the mail at the end of March announcing Franz Ferdinand 's planned visit to Sarajevo . He then showed the newspaper clipping to Princip and the next day they agreed they would kill Franz Ferdinand . Princip explained to the court he had already read about Franz Ferdinand 's upcoming visit in German papers . Princip went on to testify that , at about the time of Easter ( 19 April ) , he wrote an allegorical letter to Ilić informing him of the plan to kill Franz Ferdinand . Grabež testified that he and Princip , also at about the time of Easter , agreed between them to make an assassination of either Governor Potiorek or Franz Ferdinand and a little later settled on Franz Ferdinand . The defendants refused or were unable to provide details under examination . 
 On 26 March Ilić and Mehmedbašić had already agreed to kill Franz Ferdinand based on instructions from Belgrade predating the newspaper clipping and the discussions amongst the three assassins in Belgrade . 
 = = = Narodna Odbrana = = = 
 Serbian Military Intelligence – through remnants of the " Black Hand " – penetrated the Narodna Odbrana , using its clandestine tunnel to smuggle the assassins and their weapons from Belgrade to Sarajevo . In the 5 June 1914 report by the President of the Narodna Odbrana Boža Milanović to Prime Minister Pašić one can sense the frustration of the President over the hijacking of his organization in the final sentence dealing with Sarajevo : " Boža has informed all the agents that they should not receive anyone unless he produces the password given by Boža . " 
 = = = Milan Ciganović = = = 
 Prime Minister Pašić received early information of the assassination plan . The information was received by Pašić early enough , according to Education Minister Ljuba Jovanović , for the government to order the border guards to prevent the assassins from crossing . This places the cabinet minister discussions in late May and the information release to some time before that . Albertini concluded that the source of the information was most likely Milan Ciganović . <unk> made a more forceful case . 
 The circumstantial evidence against Ciganović includes his sinecure government job , his protection by the Chief of Police and Serbia 's failure to arrest him ( Austria @-@ Hungary demanded Serbia arrest Major Vojislav Tankosić and Ciganović , but Serbia arrested only Tankosić and lied saying that Ciganović could not be found ) , Serbia 's protection of Ciganović during the war , and the government 's provision for Ciganović after it . In 1917 , all of the Sarajevo conspirators within Serbia 's control were tried at Salonika on false charges , except Ciganović , who even gave evidence against his comrades at the trial . 
 = = = Russian military attaché 's office = = = 
 Apis 's confession to ordering the assassination of Franz Ferdinand states that Russian Military Attaché Artamonov promised Russia 's protection from Austria @-@ Hungary if Serbia 's intelligence operations became exposed and that Russia had funded the assassination . Artamonov denied the involvement of his office in an interview with Albertini . Artamonov stated that he went on vacation to Italy leaving Assistant Military Attaché Alexander <unk> in charge and though he was in daily contact with Apis he did not learn of Apis 's role until after the war had ended . Albertini writes that he " remained unconvinced by the behavior of this officer . " <unk> admitted the involvement of his office and then fell silent on the subject . 
 There is evidence that Russia was at least aware of the plot before 14 June . De <unk> writes : 
 On 1 June 1914 ( 14 June new calendar ) , Emperor Nicholas had an interview with King Charles I of Roumania , at Constanza . I was there at the time ... yet as far as I could judge from my conversation with members of his ( Russian Foreign Minister <unk> 's ) entourage , he ( <unk> ) was convinced that if the Archduke ( Franz Ferdinand ) were out of the way , the peace of Europe would not be endangered . 
 = = Consequences = = 
 The murder of the heir to the Austro @-@ Hungarian Empire and his wife produced widespread shock across Europe , and there was initially much sympathy for the Austrian position . Within two days of the assassination , Austria @-@ Hungary and Germany advised Serbia that it should open an investigation , but Secretary General to the Serbian Ministry of Foreign Affairs Slavko <unk> , replied " Nothing had been done so far and the matter did not concern the Serbian Government . " An angry exchange followed between the Austrian Chargé d 'Affaires at Belgrade and <unk> . 
 After conducting a criminal investigation , verifying that Germany would honor its military alliance , and persuading the skeptical Hungarian Count Tisza , Austria @-@ Hungary issued a formal letter to the government of Serbia . The letter reminded Serbia of its commitment to respect the Great Powers ' decision regarding Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina , and to maintain good neighborly relations with Austria @-@ Hungary . The letter contained specific demands aimed at preventing the publication of propaganda advocating the violent destruction of Austria @-@ Hungary , removing the people behind this propaganda from the Serbian Military , arresting the people on Serbian soil who were involved in the assassination plot and preventing the clandestine shipment of arms and explosives from Serbia to Austria @-@ Hungary . 
 This letter became known as the July Ultimatum , and Austria @-@ Hungary stated that if Serbia did not accept all of the demands in total within 48 hours , it would recall its ambassador from Serbia . After receiving a telegram of support from Russia , Serbia mobilized its army and responded to the letter by completely accepting point # 8 demanding an end to the smuggling of weapons and punishment of the frontier officers who had assisted the assassins and completely accepting point # 10 which demanded Serbia report the execution of the required measures as they were completed . Serbia partially accepted , finessed , disingenuously answered or politely rejected elements of the preamble and enumerated demands # 1 – 7 and # 9 . The shortcomings of Serbia 's response were published by Austria @-@ Hungary . Austria @-@ Hungary responded by breaking diplomatic relations . 
 The next day , Serbian reservists being transported on tramp steamers on the Danube crossed onto the Austro @-@ Hungarian side of the river at Temes @-@ Kubin and Austro @-@ Hungarian soldiers fired into the air to warn them off . The report of this incident was initially sketchy and reported to Emperor Franz @-@ Joseph as " a considerable skirmish " . Austria @-@ Hungary then declared war and mobilized the portion of its army that would face the ( already mobilized ) Serbian Army on 28 July 1914 . Under the Secret Treaty of 1892 Russia and France were obliged to mobilize their armies if any of the Triple Alliance mobilized . Russia 's mobilization set off full Austro @-@ Hungarian and German mobilizations . Soon all the Great Powers except Italy had chosen sides and gone to war . 
 Princip 's weapon , along with the car in which the Archduke was riding , his bloodstained uniform and the chaise longue on which he died , are on permanent display in the <unk> Museum in Vienna , Austria . The bullet fired by Gavrilo Princip , sometimes referred to as " the bullet that started World War I " , is a museum exhibit in the <unk> Castle near the town of <unk> in the Czech Republic . 
 = Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998 = 
 The Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998 ( c.23 ) is an Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom that protects whistleblowers from detrimental treatment by their employer . Influenced by various financial scandals and accidents , along with the report of the Committee on Standards in Public Life , the bill was introduced to Parliament by Richard Shepherd and given government support , on the condition that it become an amendment to the Employment Rights Act 1996 . After receiving the Royal Assent on 2 July 1998 , the Act came into force on 2 July 1999 . It protects employees who make disclosures of certain types of information , including evidence of illegal activity or damage to the environment , from retribution from their employers , such as dismissal or being passed over for promotion . In cases where such retribution takes place the employee may bring a case before an employment tribunal , which can award compensation . 
 As a result of the Act , many more employers have instituted internal whistleblowing procedures , although only 38 percent of individuals surveyed worked for a company with such procedures in place . The Act has been criticised for failing to force employers to institute such a policy , containing no provisions preventing the " blacklisting " of employees who make such disclosures , and failing to protect the employee from libel proceedings should his allegation turn out to be false . 
 = = Background = = 
 Prior to the 1998 Act , whistleblowers in the United Kingdom had no protection against being dismissed by their employer . Although they could avoid being sued for breach of confidence thanks to a public interest defence , this did not prevent subtle or open victimisation in the workplace , including disciplinary action , dismissal , failure to gain promotion or a pay rise . During the early to mid @-@ 1990s , interest in whistleblower protection grew , partially because of a series of financial scandals and health and safety accidents , which investigations into showed could have been prevented if employees had been permitted to voice their concerns , and partially because of the work of the Committee on Standards in Public Life . In 1995 and 1996 , two private member 's bills dealing with whistleblowers were introduced to Parliament , by Tony Wright and Don <unk> respectively , but both efforts fell through . When Richard Shepherd proposed a similar bill , however , he got government support for it on the condition that it be an amendment to the Employment Rights Act 1996 rather than a new area of law in its own right . Public Concern at Work , a UK @-@ based whistleblowers charity , was involved in the drafting and consultation stages of the bill . The case of Graham Pink added to the pressure to introduce whistleblower protection legislation . 
 The Public Interest Disclosure Bill was introduced to the House of Commons by Shepherd in 1997 , and given its second reading on 12 December before being sent to a committee . After being passed by the Commons it moved to the House of Lords on 27 April 1998 , and was passed on 29 June , receiving the Royal Assent on 2 July and becoming the Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998 . Originally scheduled to come into force on 1 January 1999 , the Act instead became applicable law on 2 July . 
 = = Contents of the Act = = 
 Section 1 of the Act inserts sections 43A to L into the Employment Rights Act 1996 , titled " Protected Disclosures " . It provides that a disclosure which the whistleblower makes to their employer , a " prescribed person " , in the course of seeking legal advice , Ministers of the Crown , individuals appointed by the Secretary of State for this purpose , or , in limited circumstances , " any other person " , is protected . In addition , the disclosure must be one which the whistleblower " reasonably believes " shows a criminal offence , a failure to comply with legal obligations , a miscarriage of justice , danger to the health and safety of employees , damage to the environment , or the hiding of information which would show any of the above actions . These disclosures do not have to be of confidential information , and this section does not abolish the public interest defence ; in addition , it can be the disclosure of information about actions which have already occurred , are occurring , or could occur in the future . In <unk> v Stolt Offshore Ltd , the Employment Appeal Tribunal confirmed that the disclosure does not have to have been made after the Act came into force ; it is sufficient for the dismissal or other persecution by the employer to have happened after that time . 
 The list of " prescribed persons " is found in the Public Interest Disclosure ( Prescribed Persons ) Order 1999 , and includes only official bodies ; the Health and Safety Executive , the Data Protection Registrar , the Certification Officer , the Environment Agency and the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry . An employee will be protected if he " makes a disclosure in good faith " to one of these people , and " reasonably believes that the relevant failure ... is a matter in respect of which the person is prescribed and the information is substantially true " . Other prescribed persons include the Scottish Environment Protection Agency , in relation to " acts or omissions which have an actual or potential effect on the environment ... including those relating to pollution " . 
 If an employee does make such a disclosure , Section 2 inserts a new Section 47B , providing that the employee shall suffer no detriment in their employment as a result . This includes both negative actions and the absence of action , and as such covers discipline , dismissal , or failing to gain a pay rise or access to facilities which would otherwise have been provided . If an employee does suffer a detriment , he is permitted to make a complaint before an employment tribunal under Section 3 . In front of an employment tribunal , the law is amended in Sections 4 and 5 to provide compensation , and to reverse the burden of proof ; if an employee has been dismissed for making a protected disclosure , this dismissal is automatically considered unfair . Similarly , under Section 6 , an employee cannot be given priority when discussing redundancies simply because he made such a disclosure . These sections take into account Section 7 , which notes that there is no requirement of age or length of employment before they come into effect . 
 Under Section 8 , the Secretary of State could pass a statutory instrument setting out the rules and limits surrounding compensation for the employee 's dismissal after making a protected disclosure ; until this is done , Section 9 provided interim remedies , which were the same as in other cases of unfair dismissal . The Secretary of State did pass such an instrument , the Public Interest Disclosure ( Compensation ) Regulations 1999 , but Section 8 has now been repealed under Section 44 of the Employment Relations Act 1999 . Under Section 10 , the Act applies to crown servants , excepting under Section 11 , those who are employees of MI5 , MI6 or GCHQ . The Act does exclude , in Sections 12 and 13 , serving police officers and those employed outside the United Kingdom . 
 = = Assessment and Impact = = 
 Terry Corbin , writing in the Criminal Law and Justice Weekly , notes that the result of the Act has been that many more employers have developed internal processes for reporting issues ; partially due to their desire to fix problems before they become publicly reported , and partially because if an employee chooses to not use these processes and instead act under the 1998 Act , there is a greater chance the employer can depict his behaviour as " unreasonable " . However , a survey done by Public Concern At Work showed that in 2010 , only 38 percent of those surveyed worked for companies with whistleblowing policies in place , and only 23 percent knew that legal protection for whistleblowers existed . The number of cases brought by whistleblowers to employment tribunals has increased more than tenfold , from 157 in 1999 / 2000 to 1 @,@ 761 in 2008 / 9 . 
 David Lewis , writing in the Industrial Law Journal , highlights what he perceives as weaknesses in the legislation . Firstly , it does not force employers to make a policy relating to disclosures . Secondly , it does not prevent employers from " blacklisting " and refusing to hire those who are known within the industry to have made disclosures in previous jobs . The complexity of the law was also criticised , as was the fact that , if such a disclosure turns out to be incorrect , the employee may be sued for libel by his employer . Volunteers and self @-@ employed people are not covered , nor are those who , in disclosing the information , commit a criminal offence . At the same time , the law does not make any provision for psychological harm caused by whistleblowing , which research shows is an increasing likelihood . 
 = Stephen , King of England = 
 Stephen ( c . 1092 / 6 – 25 October 1154 ) , often referred to as Stephen of Blois , was a grandson of William the Conqueror . He was King of England from 1135 to his death , and also the Count of Boulogne in right of his wife . Stephen 's reign was marked by the Anarchy , a civil war with his cousin and rival , the Empress Matilda . He was succeeded by Matilda 's son , Henry II , the first of the Angevin kings . 
 Stephen was born in the County of Blois in middle France ; his father , Count Stephen @-@ Henry , died while Stephen was still young , and he was brought up by his mother , Adela . Placed into the court of his uncle , Henry I , Stephen rose in prominence and was granted extensive lands . Stephen married Matilda of Boulogne , inheriting additional estates in Kent and Boulogne that made the couple one of the wealthiest in England . Stephen narrowly escaped drowning with Henry I 's son , William Adelin , in the sinking of the White Ship in 1120 ; William 's death left the succession of the English throne open to challenge . When Henry I died in 1135 , Stephen quickly crossed the English Channel and with the help of his brother Henry of Blois , a powerful ecclesiastic , took the throne , arguing that the preservation of order across the kingdom took priority over his earlier oaths to support the claim of Henry I 's daughter , the Empress Matilda . 
 The early years of Stephen 's reign were largely successful , despite a series of attacks on his possessions in England and Normandy by David I of Scotland , Welsh rebels , and the Empress Matilda 's husband , Geoffrey of Anjou . In 1138 the Empress 's half @-@ brother Robert of Gloucester rebelled against Stephen , threatening civil war . Together with his close advisor , Waleran de Beaumont , Stephen took firm steps to defend his rule , including arresting a powerful family of bishops . When the Empress and Robert invaded in 1139 , however , Stephen was unable to crush the revolt rapidly , and it took hold in the south @-@ west of England . Captured at the battle of Lincoln in 1141 , Stephen was abandoned by many of his followers and lost control of Normandy . Stephen was freed only after his wife and William of Ypres , one of his military commanders , captured Robert at the Rout of Winchester , but the war dragged on for many years with neither side able to win an advantage . 
 Stephen became increasingly concerned with ensuring that his son Eustace would inherit his throne . The King tried to convince the Church to agree to crown Eustace to reinforce his claim ; Pope Eugene III refused , and Stephen found himself in a sequence of increasingly bitter arguments with his senior clergy . In 1153 the Empress 's son , Henry FitzEmpress , invaded England and built an alliance of powerful regional barons to support his claim for the throne . The two armies met at Wallingford , but neither side 's barons were keen to fight another pitched battle . Stephen began to examine a negotiated peace , a process hastened by the sudden death of Eustace . Later in the year Stephen and Henry agreed to the Treaty of Winchester , in which Stephen recognised Henry as his heir in exchange for peace , passing over William , Stephen 's second son . Stephen died the following year . Modern historians have extensively debated the extent to which Stephen 's personality , external events , or the weaknesses in the Norman state contributed to this prolonged period of civil war . 
 = = Early life ( 1096 – 1135 ) = = 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 Stephen was born in Blois in France , in either 1092 or 1096 . His father was Stephen @-@ Henry , Count of Blois and Chartres , an important French nobleman , and an active crusader , who played only a brief part in Stephen 's early life . During the First Crusade Stephen @-@ Henry had acquired a reputation for cowardice , and he returned to the Levant again in 1101 to rebuild his reputation ; there he was killed at the battle of Ramlah . Stephen 's mother , Adela , was the daughter of William the Conqueror and Matilda of Flanders , famous amongst her contemporaries for her piety , wealth and political talent . She had a strong matriarchal influence on Stephen during his early years . 
 France in the 12th century was a loose collection of counties and smaller polities , under the minimal control of the king of France . The king 's power was linked to his control of the rich province of Île @-@ de @-@ France , just to the east of Stephen 's home county of Blois . In the west lay the three counties of Maine , Anjou and Touraine , and to the north of Blois was the Duchy of Normandy , from which William the Conqueror had conquered England in 1066 . William 's children were still fighting over the collective Anglo @-@ Norman inheritance . The rulers across this region spoke a similar language , albeit with regional dialects , followed the same religion , and were closely interrelated ; they were also highly competitive and frequently in conflict with one another for valuable territory and the castles that controlled them . 
 Stephen had at least four brothers and one sister , along with two probable half @-@ sisters . Stephen 's eldest brother was William , who under normal circumstances would have ruled the county . William was probably intellectually disabled , and Adela instead had the title passed over him to her second son , Theobald , who went on later to acquire the county of Champagne as well as Blois and Chartres . Stephen 's remaining older brother , Odo , died young , probably in his early teens . His younger brother , Henry of Blois , was probably born four years after him . The brothers formed a close @-@ knit family group , and Adela encouraged Stephen to take up the role of a feudal knight , whilst steering Henry towards a career in the church , possibly so that their personal career interests would not overlap . Unusually , Stephen was raised in his mother 's household rather than being sent to a close relative ; he was taught Latin and riding , and was educated in recent history and Biblical stories by his tutor , William the Norman . 
 = = = Relationship with Henry I = = = 
 Stephen 's early life was heavily influenced by his relationship with his uncle Henry I. Henry seized power in England following the death of his elder brother William Rufus . In 1106 he invaded and captured the Duchy of Normandy , controlled by his eldest brother , Robert Curthose , defeating Robert 's army at the battle of Tinchebray . Henry then found himself in conflict with Louis VI of France , who took the opportunity to declare Robert 's son William Clito the Duke of Normandy . Henry responded by forming a network of alliances with the western counties of France against Louis , resulting in a regional conflict that would last throughout Stephen 's early life . Adela and Theobald allied themselves with Henry , and Stephen 's mother decided to place him in Henry 's court . Henry fought his next military campaign in Normandy , from 1111 onwards , where rebels led by Robert of Bellême were opposing his rule . Stephen was probably with Henry during the military campaign of 1112 , when he was knighted by the King , and was definitely present at court during the King 's visit to the Abbey of Saint @-@ Evroul in 1113 . Stephen probably first visited England in either 1113 or 1115 , almost certainly as part of Henry 's court . 
 Henry became a powerful patron of Stephen 's ; Henry probably chose to support him because Stephen was part of his extended family and a regional ally , yet not sufficiently wealthy or powerful in his own right to represent a threat to either the King or his heir , William Adelin . As a third surviving son , even of an influential regional family , Stephen still needed the support of a powerful patron such as the King to progress in life . With Henry 's support , Stephen rapidly began to accumulate lands and possessions . Following the battle of Tinchebray in 1106 , Henry confiscated the County of Mortain from William , the Count of Mortain , and the Honour of Eye , a large lordship previously owned by Robert Malet . In 1113 , Stephen was granted both the title and the honour , although without the lands previously held by William in England . The gift of the Honour of Lancaster also followed after it was confiscated by Henry from Roger the Poitevin . Stephen was also given lands in Alençon in southern Normandy by Henry , but the local Normans rebelled , seeking assistance from Fulk , the Count of Anjou . Stephen and his older brother Theobald were comprehensively beaten in the subsequent campaign , which culminated in the battle of Alençon , and the territories were not recovered . 
 Finally , the King arranged for Stephen to marry Matilda in 1125 , the daughter and only heiress of the Count of Boulogne , who owned both the important continental port of Boulogne and vast estates in the north @-@ west and south @-@ east of England . In 1127 , William Clito , a potential claimant to the English throne , seemed likely to become the Count of Flanders ; Stephen was sent by the King on a mission to prevent this , and in the aftermath of his successful election , William Clito attacked Stephen 's lands in neighbouring Boulogne in retaliation . Eventually a truce was declared , and William Clito died the following year . 
 = = = The White Ship and succession = = = 
 In 1120 , the English political landscape changed dramatically . Three hundred passengers embarked on the White Ship to travel from Barfleur in Normandy to England , including the heir to the throne , William Adelin , and many other senior nobles . Stephen had intended to sail on the same ship but changed his mind at the last moment and got off to await another vessel , either out of concern for overcrowding on board the ship , or because he was suffering from diarrhoea . The ship foundered en route , and all but two of the passengers died , including William Adelin . 
 With Adelin dead , the inheritance to the English throne was thrown into doubt . Rules of succession in western Europe at the time were uncertain ; in some parts of France , male primogeniture , in which the eldest son would inherit a title , was becoming more popular . It was also traditional for the King of France to crown his successor whilst he himself was still alive , making the intended line of succession relatively clear , but this was not the case in England . In other parts of Europe , including Normandy and England , the tradition was for lands to be divided up , with the eldest son taking patrimonial lands — usually considered to be the most valuable — and younger sons being given smaller , or more recently acquired , partitions or estates . The problem was further complicated by the sequence of unstable Anglo @-@ Norman successions over the previous sixty years — William the Conqueror had gained England by force , William Rufus and Robert Curthose had fought a war between them to establish their inheritance , and Henry had only acquired control of Normandy by force . There had been no peaceful , uncontested successions . 
 With William Adelin dead , Henry had only one other legitimate child , Matilda , but as a woman she was at a substantial political disadvantage . Despite Henry taking a second wife , Adeliza of Louvain , it became increasingly unlikely that he would have another legitimate son , and he instead looked to Matilda as his intended heir . Matilda claimed the title of Holy Roman Empress through her marriage to Emperor Henry V , but her husband died in 1125 , and she was remarried in 1128 to Geoffrey , the Count of Anjou , whose lands bordered the Duchy of Normandy . Geoffrey was unpopular with the Anglo @-@ Norman elite : as an Angevin ruler , he was a traditional enemy of the Normans . At the same time , tensions continued to grow as a result of Henry 's domestic policies , in particular the high level of revenue he was raising to pay for his various wars . Conflict was curtailed , however , by the power of the King 's personality and reputation . 
 Henry attempted to build up a base of political support for Matilda in both England and Normandy , demanding that his court take oaths first in 1127 , and then again in 1128 and 1131 , to recognise Matilda as his immediate successor and recognise her descendants as the rightful rulers after her . Stephen was amongst those who took this oath in 1127 . Nonetheless , relations between Henry , Matilda , and Geoffrey became increasingly strained towards the end of the King 's life . Matilda and Geoffrey suspected that they lacked genuine support in England , and proposed to Henry in 1135 that the King should hand over the royal castles in Normandy to Matilda whilst he was still alive and insist on the Norman nobility swearing immediate allegiance to her , thereby giving the couple a much more powerful position after Henry 's death . Henry angrily declined to do so , probably out of a concern that Geoffrey would try to seize power in Normandy somewhat earlier than intended . A fresh rebellion broke out in southern Normandy , and Geoffrey and Matilda intervened militarily on behalf of the rebels . In the middle of this confrontation , Henry unexpectedly fell ill and died near Lyons @-@ la @-@ Forêt . 
 = = Succession ( 1135 ) = = 
 Stephen was a well established figure in Anglo @-@ Norman society by 1135 . He was extremely wealthy , well @-@ mannered and liked by his peers ; he was also considered a man capable of firm action . Chroniclers recorded that despite his wealth and power he was a modest and easy @-@ going leader , happy to sit with his men and servants , casually laughing and eating with them . He was very pious , both in terms of his observance of religious rituals and his personal generosity to the church . Stephen also had a personal Augustinian confessor appointed to him by the Archbishop of Canterbury , who implemented a penitential regime for him , and Stephen encouraged the new order of Cistercians to form abbeys on his estates , winning him additional allies within the church . Rumours of his father 's cowardice during the First Crusade , however , continued to circulate , and a desire to avoid the same reputation may have influenced some of Stephen 's <unk> military actions . His wife , Matilda , played a major role in running their vast English estates , which contributed to the couple being the second @-@ richest lay household in the country after the King . The landless Flemish nobleman William of Ypres had joined Stephen 's household in 1133 , alongside <unk> of Boulogne , a Flemish relative and friend of Matilda 's . 
 Meanwhile , Stephen 's younger brother Henry of Blois had also risen to power under Henry I. Henry of Blois had become a Cluniac monk and followed Stephen to England , where the King made him Abbot of Glastonbury , the richest abbey in England . The King then appointed him Bishop of Winchester , one of the richest bishoprics , allowing him to retain Glastonbury as well . The combined revenues of the two positions made Henry of Winchester the second @-@ richest man in England after the King . Henry of Winchester was keen to reverse what he perceived as encroachment by the Norman kings on the rights of the church . The Norman kings had traditionally exercised a great deal of power and autonomy over the church within their territories . From the 1040s onwards , however , successive popes had put forward a reforming message that emphasised the importance of the church being " governed more coherently and more hierarchically from the centre " and established " its own sphere of authority and jurisdiction , separate from and independent of that of the lay ruler " , in the words of historian Richard Huscroft . 
 When news began to spread of Henry I 's death , many of the potential claimants to the throne were not well placed to respond . Geoffrey and Matilda were in Anjou , rather awkwardly supporting the rebels in their campaign against the royal army , which included a number of Matilda 's supporters such as Robert of Gloucester . Many of these barons had taken an oath to stay in Normandy until the late king was properly buried , which prevented them from returning to England . Stephen 's elder brother Theobald was further south still , in Blois . Stephen , however , was in <unk> , and when news reached him of Henry 's death he left for England , accompanied by his military household . Robert of Gloucester had garrisoned the ports of Dover and Canterbury and some accounts suggest that they refused Stephen access when he first arrived . Nonetheless Stephen probably reached his own estate on the edge of London by 8 December and over the next week he began to seize power in England . 
 The crowds in London traditionally claimed a right to elect the king of England , and they proclaimed Stephen the new monarch , believing that he would grant the city new rights and privileges in return . Henry of Blois delivered the support of the church to Stephen : Stephen was able to advance to Winchester , where Roger , who was both the Bishop of Salisbury and the Lord Chancellor , instructed the royal treasury to be handed over to Stephen . On 15 December , Henry delivered an agreement under which Stephen would grant extensive freedoms and liberties to the church , in exchange for the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Papal Legate supporting his succession to the throne . There was the slight problem of the religious oath that Stephen had taken to support the Empress Matilda , but Henry convincingly argued that the late King had been wrong to insist that his court take the oath . Furthermore , the late King had only insisted on that oath to protect the stability of the kingdom , and in light of the chaos that might now ensue , Stephen would be justified in ignoring it . Henry was also able to persuade Hugh Bigod , the late King 's royal steward , to swear that the King had changed his mind about the succession on his deathbed , nominating Stephen instead . Stephen 's coronation was held a week later at Westminster Abbey on 22 December . 
 Meanwhile , the Norman nobility gathered at Le Neubourg to discuss declaring Theobald king , probably following the news that Stephen was gathering support in England . The Normans argued that the count , as the eldest grandson of William the Conqueror , had the most valid claim over the kingdom and the duchy , and was certainly preferable to Matilda . Theobald met with the Norman barons and Robert of Gloucester at Lisieux on 21 December , but their discussions were interrupted by the sudden news from England that Stephen 's coronation was to occur the next day . Theobald then agreed to the Normans ' proposal that he be made king , only to find that his former support immediately ebbed away : the barons were not prepared to support the division of England and Normandy by opposing Stephen . Stephen subsequently financially compensated Theobald , who in return remained in Blois and supported his brother 's succession . 
 = = Early reign ( 1136 – 39 ) = = 
 = = = Initial years ( 1136 – 37 ) = = = 
 Stephen 's new Anglo @-@ Norman kingdom had been shaped by the Norman conquest of England in 1066 , followed by the Norman expansion into south Wales over the coming years . Both the kingdom and duchy were dominated by a small number of major barons who owned lands on both sides of the English Channel , with the lesser barons beneath them usually having more localised holdings . The extent to which lands and positions should be passed down through hereditary right or by the gift of the king was still uncertain , and tensions concerning this issue had grown during the reign of Henry I. Certainly lands in Normandy , passed by hereditary right , were usually considered more important to major barons than those in England , where their possession was less certain . Henry had increased the authority and capabilities of the central royal administration , often bringing in " new men " to fulfil key positions rather than using the established nobility . In the process he had been able to maximise revenues and contain expenditures , resulting in a healthy surplus and a famously large treasury , but also increasing political tensions . 
 Stephen had to intervene in the north of England immediately after his coronation . David I of Scotland invaded the north on the news of Henry 's death , taking Carlisle , Newcastle and other key strongholds . Northern England was a disputed territory at this time , with the Scottish kings laying a traditional claim to Cumberland , and David also claiming Northumbria by virtue of his marriage to the daughter of the former Anglo @-@ Saxon earl Waltheof . Stephen rapidly marched north with an army and met David at Durham . An agreement was made under which David would return most of the territory he had taken , with the exception of Carlisle . In return , Stephen confirmed David 's son Prince Henry 's possessions in England , including the Earldom of Huntingdon . 
 Returning south , Stephen held his first royal court at Easter 1136 . A wide range of nobles gathered at Westminster for the event , including many of the Anglo @-@ Norman barons and most of the higher officials of the church . Stephen issued a new royal charter , confirming the promises he had made to the church , promising to reverse Henry 's policies on the royal forests and to reform any abuses of the royal legal system . Stephen portrayed himself as the natural successor to Henry I 's policies , and reconfirmed the existing seven earldoms in the kingdom on their existing holders . The Easter court was a lavish event , and a large amount of money was spent on the event itself , clothes and gifts . Stephen gave out grants of land and favours to those present and endowed numerous church foundations with land and privileges . Stephen 's accession to the throne still needed to be ratified by the Pope , however , and Henry of Blois appears to have been responsible for ensuring that testimonials of support were sent both from Stephen 's elder brother Theobald and from the French king Louis VI , to whom Stephen represented a useful balance to Angevin power in the north of France . Pope Innocent II confirmed Stephen as king by letter later that year , and Stephen 's advisers circulated copies widely around England to demonstrate Stephen 's legitimacy . 
 Troubles continued across Stephen 's kingdom . After the Welsh victory at the battle of <unk> in January 1136 and the successful ambush of Richard Fitz Gilbert de Clare in April , south Wales rose in rebellion , starting in east Glamorgan and rapidly spreading across the rest of south Wales during 1137 . Owain Gwynedd and Gruffydd ap Rhys successfully captured considerable territories , including Carmarthen Castle . Stephen responded by sending Richard 's brother Baldwin and the Marcher Lord Robert Fitz Harold of Ewyas into Wales to pacify the region . Neither mission was particularly successful , and by the end of 1137 the King appears to have abandoned attempts to put down the rebellion . Historian David Crouch suggests that Stephen effectively " bowed out of Wales " around this time to concentrate on his other problems . Meanwhile , Stephen had put down two revolts in the south @-@ west led by Baldwin de Redvers and Robert of Bampton ; Baldwin was released after his capture and travelled to Normandy , where he became an increasingly vocal critic of the King . 
 The security of Normandy was also a concern . Geoffrey of Anjou invaded in early 1136 and , after a temporary truce , invaded later the same year , raiding and burning estates rather than trying to hold the territory . Events in England meant that Stephen was unable to travel to Normandy himself , so Waleran de Beaumont , appointed by Stephen as the lieutenant of Normandy , and Theobald led the efforts to defend the duchy . Stephen himself only returned to the duchy in 1137 , where he met with Louis VI and Theobald to agree to an informal regional alliance , probably brokered by Henry , to counter the growing Angevin power in the region . As part of this deal , Louis recognised Stephen 's son Eustace as Duke of Normandy in exchange for Eustace giving fealty to the French king . Stephen was less successful , however , in regaining the Argentan province along the Normandy and Anjou border , which Geoffrey had taken at the end of 1135 . Stephen formed an army to retake it , but the frictions between his Flemish mercenary forces led by William of Ypres and the local Norman barons resulted in a battle between the two halves of his army . The Norman forces then deserted the King , forcing Stephen to give up his campaign . Stephen agreed to another truce with Geoffrey , promising to pay him 2 @,@ 000 marks a year in exchange for peace along the Norman borders . 
 In the years following his succession , Stephen 's relationship with the church became gradually more complex . The royal charter of 1136 had promised to review the ownership of all the lands that had been taken by the crown from the church since 1087 , but these estates were now typically owned by nobles . Henry of Blois 's claims , in his role as Abbot of Glastonbury , to extensive lands in Devon resulted in considerable local unrest . In 1136 , Archbishop of Canterbury William de Corbeil died . Stephen responded by seizing his personal wealth , which caused some discontent amongst the senior clergy . Stephen 's brother Henry wanted to succeed to the post , but Stephen instead supported Theobald of Bec , who was eventually appointed , while the papacy named Henry papal legate , possibly as consolation for not receiving Canterbury . 
 Stephen 's first few years as king can be interpreted in different ways . From a positive perspective , he stabilised the northern border with Scotland , contained Geoffrey 's attacks on Normandy , was at peace with Louis VI , enjoyed good relations with the church and had the broad support of his barons . There were significant underlying problems , nonetheless . The north of England was now controlled by David and Prince Henry , Stephen had abandoned Wales , the fighting in Normandy had considerably destabilised the duchy , and an increasing number of barons felt that Stephen had given them neither the lands nor the titles they felt they deserved or were owed . Stephen was also rapidly running out of money : Henry 's considerable treasury had been emptied by 1138 due to the costs of running Stephen 's more lavish court and the need to raise and maintain his mercenary armies fighting in England and Normandy . 
 = = = Defending the kingdom ( 1138 – 39 ) = = = 
 Stephen was attacked on several fronts during 1138 . First , Robert of Gloucester rebelled against the King , starting the descent into civil war in England . An illegitimate son of Henry I and the half @-@ brother of the Empress Matilda , Robert was one of the most powerful Anglo @-@ Norman barons , controlling estates in Normandy as well as the Earldom of Gloucester . He was known for his qualities as a statesman , his military experience , and leadership ability . Robert had tried to convince Theobald to take the throne in 1135 ; he did not attend Stephen 's first court in 1136 and it took several summonses to convince him to attend court at Oxford later that year . In 1138 , Robert renounced his fealty to Stephen and declared his support for Matilda , triggering a major regional rebellion in Kent and across the south @-@ west of England , although Robert himself remained in Normandy . In France , Geoffrey of Anjou took advantage of the situation by re @-@ invading Normandy . David of Scotland also invaded the north of England once again , announcing that he was supporting the claim of his niece the Empress Matilda to the throne , pushing south into Yorkshire . 
 Anglo @-@ Norman warfare during the reign of Stephen was characterised by attritional military campaigns , in which commanders tried to seize key enemy castles in order to allow them to take control of their adversaries ' territory and ultimately win a slow , strategic victory . The armies of the period centred on bodies of mounted , armoured knights , supported by infantry and crossbowmen . These forces were either feudal levies , drawn up by local nobles for a limited period of service during a campaign , or , increasingly , mercenaries , who were expensive but more flexible and often more skilled . These armies , however , were ill @-@ suited to besieging castles , whether the older motte @-@ and @-@ bailey designs or the newer , stone @-@ built keeps . Existing siege engines were significantly less powerful than the later trebuchet designs , giving defenders a substantial advantage over attackers . As a result , slow sieges to starve defenders out , or mining operations to undermine walls , tended to be preferred by commanders over direct assaults . Occasionally pitched battles were fought between armies but these were considered highly risky endeavours and were usually avoided by prudent commanders . The cost of warfare had risen considerably in the first part of the 12th century , and adequate supplies of ready cash were increasingly proving important in the success of campaigns . 
 Stephen 's personal qualities as a military leader focused on his skill in personal combat , his capabilities in siege warfare and a remarkable ability to move military forces quickly over relatively long distances . In response to the revolts and invasions , Stephen rapidly undertook several military campaigns , focusing primarily on England rather than Normandy . His wife Matilda was sent to Kent with ships and resources from Boulogne , with the task of retaking the key port of Dover , under Robert 's control . A small number of Stephen 's household knights were sent north to help the fight against the Scots , where David 's forces were defeated later that year at the battle of the Standard in August by the forces of Thurstan , the Archbishop of York . Despite this victory , however , David still occupied most of the north . Stephen himself went west in an attempt to regain control of Gloucestershire , first striking north into the Welsh Marches , taking Hereford and Shrewsbury , before heading south to Bath . The town of Bristol itself proved too strong for him , and Stephen contented himself with raiding and pillaging the surrounding area . The rebels appear to have expected Robert to intervene with support that year , but he remained in Normandy throughout , trying to persuade the Empress Matilda to invade England herself . Dover finally surrendered to the queen 's forces later in the year . 
 Stephen 's military campaign in England had progressed well , and historian David Crouch describes it as " a military achievement of the first rank " . The King took the opportunity of his military advantage to forge a peace agreement with Scotland . Stephen 's wife Matilda was sent to negotiate another agreement between Stephen and David , called the treaty of Durham ; Northumbria and Cumbria would effectively be granted to David and his son Prince Henry , in exchange for their fealty and future peace along the border . Unfortunately , the powerful Ranulf , Earl of Chester , considered himself to hold the traditional rights to Carlisle and Cumberland and was extremely displeased to see them being given to the Scots . Nonetheless , Stephen could now focus his attention on the anticipated invasion of England by Robert and Matilda 's forces . 
 = = = Road to civil war ( 1139 ) = = = 
 Stephen prepared for the Angevin invasion by creating a number of additional earldoms . Only a handful of earldoms had existed under Henry I and these had been largely symbolic in nature . Stephen created many more , filling them with men he considered to be loyal , capable military commanders , and in the more vulnerable parts of the country assigning them new lands and additional executive powers . Stephen appears to have had several objectives in mind , including both ensuring the loyalty of his key supporters by granting them these honours , and improving his defences in key parts of the kingdom . Stephen was heavily influenced by his principal advisor , Waleran de Beaumont , the twin brother of Robert of Leicester . The Beaumont twins and their younger brother and cousins received the majority of these new earldoms . From 1138 onwards , Stephen gave them the earldoms of Worcester , Leicester , Hereford , Warwick and Pembroke , which — especially when combined with the possessions of Stephen 's new ally , Prince Henry , in Cumberland and Northumbria — created a wide block of territory to act as a buffer zone between the troubled south @-@ west , Chester , and the rest of the kingdom . With their new lands , the power of the <unk> grew to the point where David Crouch suggests that it became " dangerous to be anything other than a friend of Waleran " at Stephen 's court . 
 Stephen took steps to remove a group of bishops he regarded as a threat to his rule . The royal administration under Henry I had been headed by Roger , the Bishop of Salisbury , supported by Roger 's nephews , Alexander and Nigel , the Bishops of Lincoln and Ely respectively , and Roger 's son , Roger le Poer , who was the Lord Chancellor . These bishops were powerful landowners as well as ecclesiastical rulers , and they had begun to build new castles and increase the size of their military forces , leading Stephen to suspect that they were about to defect to the Empress Matilda . Roger and his family were also enemies of Waleran , who disliked their control of the royal administration . In June 1139 , Stephen held his court in Oxford , where a fight between Alan of Brittany and Roger 's men broke out , an incident probably deliberately created by Stephen . Stephen responded by demanding that Roger and the other bishops surrender all of their castles in England . This threat was backed up by the arrest of the bishops , with the exception of Nigel who had taken refuge in Devizes Castle ; the bishop only surrendered after Stephen besieged the castle and threatened to execute Roger le Poer . The remaining castles were then surrendered to the King . 
 Stephen 's brother , Henry of Blois , was alarmed by this , both as a matter of principle , since Stephen had previously agreed in 1135 to respect the freedoms of the church , and more pragmatically because he himself had recently built six castles and had no desire to be treated in the same way . As the papal legate , he summoned the King to appear before an ecclesiastical council to answer for the arrests and seizure of property . Henry asserted the Church ’ s right to investigate and judge all charges against members of the clergy . Stephen sent Aubrey de Vere as his spokesman to the council , who argued that Roger of Salisbury had been arrested not as a bishop , but rather in his role as a baron who had been preparing to change his support to the Empress Matilda . The King was supported by Hugh , Archbishop of Rouen , who challenged the bishops to show how canon law entitled them to build or hold castles . Aubrey threatened that Stephen would complain to the pope that he was being harassed by the English church , and the council let the matter rest following an unsuccessful appeal to Rome . The incident successfully removed any military threat from the bishops , but it may have damaged Stephen 's relationship with the senior clergy , and in particular with his brother Henry . 
 = = Civil war ( 1139 – 54 ) = = 
 = = = Initial phase of the war ( 1139 – 40 ) = = = 
 The Angevin invasion finally arrived in 1139 . Baldwin de Redvers crossed over from Normandy to Wareham in August in an initial attempt to capture a port to receive the Empress Matilda 's invading army , but Stephen 's forces forced him to retreat into the south @-@ west . The following month , however , the Empress was invited by the Dowager Queen Adeliza to land at Arundel instead , and on 30 September Robert of Gloucester and the Empress arrived in England with 140 knights . The Empress stayed at Arundel Castle , whilst Robert marched north @-@ west to Wallingford and Bristol , hoping to raise support for the rebellion and to link up with Miles of Gloucester , a capable military leader who took the opportunity to renounce his fealty to the King . Stephen promptly moved south , besieging Arundel and trapping Matilda inside the castle . 
 Stephen then agreed to a truce proposed by his brother , Henry of Blois ; the full details of the truce are not known , but the results were that Stephen first released Matilda from the siege and then allowed her and her household of knights to be escorted to the south @-@ west , where they were reunited with Robert of Gloucester . The reasoning behind Stephen 's decision to release his rival remains unclear . Contemporary chroniclers suggested that Henry argued that it would be in Stephen 's own best interests to release the Empress and concentrate instead on attacking Robert , and Stephen may have seen Robert , not the Empress , as his main opponent at this point in the conflict . Stephen also faced a military dilemma at Arundel — the castle was considered almost impregnable , and he may have been worried that he was tying down his army in the south whilst Robert roamed freely in the west . Another theory is that Stephen released Matilda out of a sense of chivalry ; Stephen was certainly known for having a generous , courteous personality and women were not normally expected to be targeted in Anglo @-@ Norman warfare . 
 Having released the Empress , Stephen focused on pacifying the south @-@ west of England . Although there had been few new defections to the Empress , his enemies now controlled a compact block of territory stretching out from Gloucester and Bristol south @-@ west into Devon and Cornwall , west into the Welsh Marches and east as far as Oxford and Wallingford , threatening London . Stephen started by attacking Wallingford Castle , held by the Empress 's childhood friend Brien FitzCount , only to find it too well defended . Stephen left behind some forces to blockade the castle and continued west into Wiltshire to attack Trowbridge , taking the castles of South Cerney and Malmesbury en route . Meanwhile , Miles of Gloucester marched east , attacking Stephen 's rearguard forces at Wallingford and threatening an advance on London . Stephen was forced to give up his western campaign , returning east to stabilise the situation and protect his capital . 
 At the start of 1140 , Nigel , the Bishop of Ely , whose castles Stephen had confiscated the previous year , rebelled against Stephen as well . Nigel hoped to seize East Anglia and established his base of operations in the Isle of Ely , then surrounded by protective fenland . Stephen responded quickly , taking an army into the fens and using boats lashed together to form a causeway that allowed him to make a surprise attack on the isle . Nigel escaped to Gloucester , but his men and castle were captured , and order was temporarily restored in the east . Robert of Gloucester 's men retook some of the territory that Stephen had taken in his 1139 campaign . In an effort to negotiate a truce , Henry of Blois held a peace conference at Bath , to which Stephen sent his wife . The conference collapsed over the insistence by Henry and the clergy that they should set the terms of any peace deal , which Stephen found unacceptable . 
 Ranulf of Chester remained upset over Stephen 's gift of the north of England to Prince Henry . Ranulf devised a plan for dealing with the problem by ambushing Henry whilst the prince was travelling back from Stephen 's court to Scotland after Christmas . Stephen responded to rumours of this plan by escorting Henry himself north , but this gesture proved the final straw for Ranulf . Ranulf had previously claimed that he had the rights to Lincoln Castle , held by Stephen , and under the guise of a social visit , Ranulf seized the fortification in a surprise attack . Stephen marched north to Lincoln and agreed to a truce with Ranulf , probably to keep him from joining the Empress 's faction , under which Ranulf would be allowed to keep the castle . Stephen returned to London but received news that Ranulf , his brother and their family were relaxing in Lincoln Castle with a minimal guard force , a ripe target for a surprise attack of his own . Abandoning the deal he had just made , Stephen gathered his army again and sped north , but not quite fast enough — Ranulf escaped Lincoln and declared his support for the Empress , and Stephen was forced to place the castle under siege . 
 = = = Second phase of the war ( 1141 – 42 ) = = = 
 While Stephen and his army besieged Lincoln Castle at the start of 1141 , Robert of Gloucester and Ranulf of Chester advanced on the King 's position with a somewhat larger force . When the news reached Stephen , he held a council to decide whether to give battle or to withdraw and gather additional soldiers : Stephen decided to fight , resulting in the battle of Lincoln on 2 February 1141 . The King commanded the centre of his army , with Alan of Brittany on his right and William of Aumale on his left . Robert and Ranulf 's forces had superiority in cavalry and Stephen dismounted many of his own knights to form a solid infantry block ; he joined them himself , fighting on foot in the battle . Stephen was not a gifted public speaker , and delegated the pre @-@ battle speech to Baldwin of Clare , who delivered a rousing declaration . After an initial success in which William 's forces destroyed the Angevins ' Welsh infantry , the battle went badly for Stephen . Robert and Ranulf 's cavalry encircled Stephen 's centre , and the king found himself surrounded by the enemy army . Many of Stephen 's supporters , including Waleran de Beaumont and William of Ypres , fled from the field at this point but Stephen fought on , defending himself first with his sword and then , when that broke , with a borrowed battle axe . Finally , he was overwhelmed by Robert 's men and taken away from the field in custody . 
 Robert took Stephen back to Gloucester , where the King met with the Empress Matilda , and was then moved to Bristol Castle , traditionally used for holding high @-@ status prisoners . He was initially left confined in relatively good conditions , but his security was later tightened and he was kept in chains . The Empress now began to take the necessary steps to have herself crowned queen in his place , which would require the agreement of the church and her coronation at Westminster . Stephen 's brother Henry summoned a council at Winchester before Easter in his capacity as papal legate to consider the clergy 's view . He had made a private deal with the Empress Matilda that he would deliver the support of the church , if she agreed to give him control over church business in England . Henry handed over the royal treasury , rather depleted except for Stephen 's crown , to the Empress , and excommunicated many of Stephen 's supporters who refused to switch sides . Archbishop Theobald of Canterbury was unwilling to declare Matilda queen so rapidly , however , and a delegation of clergy and nobles , headed by Theobald , travelled to see Stephen in Bristol and consult about their moral dilemma : should they abandon their oaths of fealty to the King ? Stephen agreed that , given the situation , he was prepared to release his subjects from their oath of fealty to him , and the clergy gathered again in Winchester after Easter to declare the Empress " Lady of England and Normandy " as a precursor to her coronation . When Matilda advanced to London in an effort to stage her coronation in June , though , she faced an uprising by the local citizens in support of Stephen that forced her to flee to Oxford , uncrowned . 
 Once news of Stephen 's capture reached him , Geoffrey of Anjou invaded Normandy again and , in the absence of Waleran of Beaumont , who was still fighting in England , Geoffrey took all the duchy south of the river Seine and east of the river Risle . No help was forthcoming from Stephen 's brother Theobald this time either , who appears to have been preoccupied with his own problems with France — the new French king , Louis VII , had rejected his father 's regional alliance , improving relations with Anjou and taking a more bellicose line with Theobald , which would result in war the following year . Geoffrey 's success in Normandy and Stephen 's weakness in England began to influence the loyalty of many Anglo @-@ Norman barons , who feared losing their lands in England to Robert and the Empress , and their possessions in Normandy to Geoffrey . Many started to leave Stephen 's faction . His friend and advisor Waleran was one of those who decided to defect in mid @-@ 1141 , crossing into Normandy to secure his ancestral possessions by allying himself with the Angevins , and bringing Worcestershire into the Empress 's camp . Waleran 's twin brother , Robert of Leicester , effectively withdrew from fighting in the conflict at the same time . Other supporters of the Empress were restored in their former strongholds , such as Bishop Nigel of Ely , and others still received new earldoms in the west of England . The royal control over the minting of coins broke down , leading to coins being struck by local barons and bishops across the country . 
 Stephen 's wife Matilda played a critical part in keeping the King 's cause alive during his captivity . Queen Matilda gathered Stephen 's remaining lieutenants around her and the royal family in the south @-@ east , advancing into London when the population rejected the Empress . Stephen 's long @-@ standing commander William of Ypres remained with the queen in London ; William Martel , the royal steward , commanded operations from Sherborne in Dorset , and <unk> of Boulogne ran the royal household . The queen appears to have generated genuine sympathy and support from Stephen 's more loyal followers . Henry 's alliance with the Empress proved short @-@ lived , as they soon fell out over political patronage and ecclesiastical policy ; the bishop met Stephen 's wife Queen Matilda at Guildford and transferred his support to her . 
 The King 's eventual release resulted from the Angevin defeat at the rout of Winchester . Robert of Gloucester and the Empress besieged Henry in the city of Winchester in July . Queen Matilda and William of Ypres then encircled the Angevin forces with their own army , reinforced with fresh troops from London . In the subsequent battle the Empress 's forces were defeated and Robert of Gloucester himself was taken prisoner . Further negotiations attempted to deliver a general peace agreement but Queen Matilda was unwilling to offer any compromise to the Empress , and Robert refused to accept any offer to encourage him to change sides to Stephen . Instead , in November the two sides simply exchanged Robert and the King , and Stephen began re @-@ establishing his authority . Henry held another church council , which this time reaffirmed Stephen 's legitimacy to rule , and a fresh coronation of Stephen and Matilda occurred at Christmas 1141 . 
 At the beginning of 1142 Stephen fell ill , and by Easter rumours had begun to circulate that he had died . Possibly this illness was the result of his imprisonment the previous year , but he finally recovered and travelled north to raise new forces and to successfully convince Ranulf of Chester to change sides once again . Stephen then spent the summer attacking some of the new Angevin castles built the previous year , including Cirencester , Bampton and Wareham . In September , he spotted an opportunity to seize the Empress Matilda herself in Oxford . Oxford was a secure town , protected by walls and the river Isis , but Stephen led a sudden attack across the river , leading the charge and swimming part of the way . Once on the other side , the King and his men stormed into the town , trapping the Empress in the castle . Oxford Castle , however , was a powerful fortress and , rather than storming it , Stephen had to settle down for a long siege , albeit secure in the knowledge that Matilda was now surrounded . Just before Christmas , the Empress left the castle unobserved , crossed the icy river on foot and made her escape to Wallingford . The garrison surrendered shortly afterwards , but Stephen had lost an opportunity to capture his principal opponent . 
 = = = Stalemate ( 1143 – 46 ) = = = 
 The war between the two sides in England reached a stalemate in the mid @-@ 1140s , while Geoffrey of Anjou consolidated his hold on power in Normandy . 1143 started precariously for Stephen when he was besieged by Robert of Gloucester at Wilton Castle , an assembly point for royal forces in Herefordshire . Stephen attempted to break out and escape , resulting in the battle of Wilton . Once again , the Angevin cavalry proved too strong , and for a moment it appeared that Stephen might be captured for a second time . On this occasion , however , William Martel , Stephen 's steward , made a fierce rear guard effort , allowing Stephen to escape from the battlefield . Stephen valued William 's loyalty sufficiently to agree to exchange Sherborne Castle for his safe release — this was one of the few instances where Stephen was prepared to give up a castle to ransom one of his men . 
 In late 1143 , Stephen faced a new threat in the east , when Geoffrey de Mandeville , the Earl of Essex , rose up in rebellion against the King in East Anglia . Stephen had disliked the baron for several years , and provoked the conflict by summoning Geoffrey to court , where the King arrested him . Stephen threatened to execute Geoffrey unless the baron handed over his various castles , including the Tower of London , Saffron Walden and Pleshey , all important fortifications because they were in , or close to , London . Geoffrey gave in , but once free he headed north @-@ east into the Fens to the Isle of Ely , from where he began a military campaign against Cambridge , with the intention of progressing south towards London . With all of his other problems and with Hugh Bigod still in open revolt in Norfolk , Stephen lacked the resources to track Geoffrey down in the Fens and made do with building a screen of castles between Ely and London , including Burwell Castle . 
 For a period , the situation continued to worsen . Ranulf of Chester revolted once again in the summer of 1144 , splitting up Stephen 's Honour of Lancaster between himself and Prince Henry . In the west , Robert of Gloucester and his followers continued to raid the surrounding royalist territories , and Wallingford Castle remained a secure Angevin stronghold , too close to London for comfort . Meanwhile , Geoffrey of Anjou finished securing his hold on southern Normandy and in January 1144 he advanced into Rouen , the capital of the duchy , concluding his campaign . Louis VII recognised him as Duke of Normandy shortly after . By this point in the war , Stephen was depending increasingly on his immediate royal household , such as William of Ypres and others , and lacked the support of the major barons who might have been able to provide him with significant additional forces ; after the events of 1141 , Stephen made little use of his network of earls . 
 After 1143 the war ground on , but progressing slightly better for Stephen . Miles of Gloucester , one of the most talented Angevin commanders , had died whilst hunting over the previous Christmas , relieving some of the pressure in the west . Geoffrey de Mandeville 's rebellion continued until September 1144 , when he died during an attack on Burwell . The war in the west progressed better in 1145 , with the King recapturing Faringdon Castle in Oxfordshire . In the north , Stephen came to a fresh agreement with Ranulf of Chester , but then in 1146 repeated the ruse he had played on Geoffrey de Mandeville in 1143 , first inviting Ranulf to court , before arresting him and threatening to execute him unless he handed over a number of castles , including Lincoln and Coventry . As with Geoffrey , the moment Ranulf was released he immediately rebelled , but the situation was a stalemate : Stephen had few forces in the north with which to prosecute a fresh campaign , whilst Ranulf lacked the castles to support an attack on Stephen . By this point , however , Stephen 's practice of inviting barons to court and arresting them had brought him into some disrepute and increasing distrust . 
 = = = Final phases of the war ( 1147 – 52 ) = = = 
 England had suffered extensively from the war by 1147 , leading later Victorian historians to call the period of conflict " the Anarchy " . The contemporary Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle recorded how " there was nothing but disturbance and wickedness and robbery " . Certainly in many parts of the country , such as Wiltshire , Berkshire , the Thames Valley and East Anglia , the fighting and raiding had caused serious devastation . Numerous " adulterine " , or unauthorised , castles had been built as bases for local lords — the chronicler Robert of Torigny complained that as many as 1 @,@ 115 such castles had been built during the conflict , although this was probably an exaggeration as elsewhere he suggested an alternative figure of 126 . The previously centralised royal coinage system was fragmented , with Stephen , the Empress and local lords all minting their own coins . The royal forest law had collapsed in large parts of the country . Some parts of the country , though , were barely touched by the conflict — for example , Stephen 's lands in the south @-@ east and the Angevin heartlands around Gloucester and Bristol were largely unaffected , and David I ruled his territories in the north of England effectively . The King 's overall income from his estates , however , declined seriously during the conflict , particularly after 1141 , and royal control over the minting of new coins remained limited outside of the south @-@ east and East Anglia . With Stephen often based in the south @-@ east , increasingly Westminster , rather than the older site of Winchester , was used as the centre of royal government . 
 The character of the conflict in England gradually began to shift ; as historian Frank Barlow suggests , by the late 1140s " the civil war was over " , barring the occasional outbreak of fighting . In 1147 Robert of Gloucester died peacefully , and the next year the Empress Matilda left south @-@ west England for Normandy , both of which contributed to reducing the tempo of the war . The Second Crusade was announced , and many Angevin supporters , including Waleran of Beaumont , joined it , leaving the region for several years . Many of the barons were making individual peace agreements with each other to secure their lands and war gains . Geoffrey and Matilda 's son , the future King Henry II , mounted a small mercenary invasion of England in 1147 but the expedition failed , not least because Henry lacked the funds to pay his men . Surprisingly , Stephen himself ended up paying their costs , allowing Henry to return home safely ; his reasons for doing so are unclear . One potential explanation is his general courtesy to a member of his extended family ; another is that he was starting to consider how to end the war peacefully , and saw this as a way of building a relationship with Henry . 
 The young Henry FitzEmpress returned to England again in 1149 , this time planning to form a northern alliance with Ranulf of Chester . The Angevin plan involved Ranulf agreeing to give up his claim to Carlisle , held by the Scots , in return for being given the rights to the whole of the Honour of Lancaster ; Ranulf would give homage to both David and Henry <unk> , with Henry having seniority . Following this peace agreement , Henry and Ranulf agreed to attack York , probably with help from the Scots . Stephen marched rapidly north to York and the planned attack disintegrated , leaving Henry to return to Normandy , where he was declared duke by his father . 
 Although still young , Henry was increasingly gaining a reputation as an energetic and capable leader . His prestige and power increased further when he unexpectedly married Eleanor of Aquitaine in 1152 ; Eleanor was the attractive Duchess of Aquitaine and the recently divorced wife of Louis VII of France , and the marriage made Henry the future ruler of a huge swathe of territory across France . 
 In the final years of the war , Stephen began to focus on the issue of his family and the succession . Stephen 's eldest son was Eustace and the King wanted to confirm him as his successor , although chroniclers recorded that Eustace was infamous for levying heavy taxes and extorting money from those on his lands . Stephen 's second son , William , was married to the extremely wealthy heiress Isabel de Warenne . In 1148 , Stephen built the Cluniac Faversham Abbey as a resting place for his family . Both Stephen 's wife , Queen Matilda , and his older brother Theobald died in 1152 . 
 = = = Argument with the church ( 1145 – 52 ) = = = 
 Stephen 's relationship with the church deteriorated badly towards the end of his reign . The reforming movement within the church , which advocated greater autonomy from royal authority for the clergy , had continued to grow , while new voices such as the Cistercians had gained additional prestige within the monastic orders , eclipsing older orders such as the Cluniacs . Stephen 's dispute with the church had its origins in 1140 , when Archbishop Thurstan of York died . An argument then broke out between a group of reformers based in York and backed by Bernard of Clairvaux , the head of the Cistercian order , who preferred William of Rievaulx as the new archbishop , and Stephen and his brother Henry of Blois , who preferred various Blois family relatives . The row between Henry and Bernard grew increasingly personal , and Henry used his authority as legate to appoint his nephew William of York to the post in 1144 only to find that , when Pope Innocent II died in 1145 , Bernard was able to get the appointment rejected by Rome . Bernard then convinced Pope Eugene III to overturn Henry 's decision altogether in 1147 , deposing William , and appointing Henry Murdac as archbishop instead . 
 Stephen was furious over what he saw as potentially precedent @-@ setting papal interference in his royal authority , and initially refused to allow Murdac into England . When Theobald , the Archbishop of Canterbury , went to consult with the Pope on the matter against Stephen 's wishes , the King refused to allow him back into England either , and seized his estates . Stephen also cut his links to the Cistercian order , and turned instead to the Cluniacs , of which Henry was a member . 
 Nonetheless , the pressure on Stephen to get Eustace confirmed as his legitimate heir continued to grow . The King gave Eustace the County of Boulogne in 1147 , but it remained unclear whether Eustace would inherit England . Stephen 's preferred option was to have Eustace crowned while he himself was still alive , as was the custom in France , but this was not the normal practice in England , and Celestine II , during his brief tenure as pope between 1143 and 1144 , had banned any change to this practice . Since the only person who could crown Eustace was Archbishop Theobald , who refused to do so without agreement from the current pope , Eugene III , the matter reached an impasse . At the end of 1148 , Stephen and Theobald came to a temporary compromise that allowed Theobald to return to England . Theobald was appointed a papal legate in 1151 , adding to his authority . Stephen then made a fresh attempt to have Eustace crowned at Easter 1152 , gathering his nobles to swear fealty to Eustace , and then insisting that Theobald and his bishops anoint him king . When Theobald refused yet again , Stephen and Eustace imprisoned both him and the bishops and refused to release them unless they agreed to crown Eustace . Theobald escaped again into temporary exile in Flanders , pursued to the coast by Stephen 's knights , marking a low point in Stephen 's relationship with the church . 
 = = = Treaties and peace ( 1153 – 54 ) = = = 
 Henry FitzEmpress returned to England again at the start of 1153 with a small army , supported in the north and east of England by Ranulf of Chester and Hugh Bigod . Stephen 's castle at Malmesbury was besieged by Henry 's forces , and the King responded by marching west with an army to relieve it . Stephen unsuccessfully attempted to force Henry 's smaller army to fight a decisive battle along the river Avon . In the face of the increasingly wintry weather , Stephen agreed to a temporary truce and returned to London , leaving Henry to travel north through the Midlands where the powerful Robert de Beaumont , Earl of Leicester , announced his support for the Angevin cause . Despite only modest military successes , Henry and his allies now controlled the south @-@ west , the Midlands and much of the north of England . 
 Over the summer , Stephen intensified the long @-@ running siege of Wallingford Castle in a final attempt to take this major Angevin stronghold . The fall of Wallingford appeared imminent and Henry marched south in an attempt to relieve the siege , arriving with a small army and placing Stephen 's besieging forces under siege themselves . Upon news of this , Stephen gathered up a large force and marched from Oxford , and the two sides confronted each other across the River Thames at Wallingford in July . By this point in the war , the barons on both sides seem to have been eager to avoid an open battle . As a result , instead of a battle ensuing , members of the church brokered a truce , to the annoyance of both Stephen and Henry . 
 In the aftermath of Wallingford , Stephen and Henry spoke together privately about a potential end to the war ; Stephen 's son Eustace , however , was furious about the peaceful outcome at Wallingford . He left his father and returned home to Cambridge to gather more funds for a fresh campaign , where he fell ill and died the next month . Eustace 's death removed an obvious claimant to the throne and was politically convenient for those seeking a permanent peace in England . It is possible , however , that Stephen had already begun to consider passing over Eustace 's claim ; historian Edmund King observes that Eustace 's claim to the throne was not mentioned in the discussions at Wallingford , for example , and this may have added to Stephen 's son 's anger . 
 Fighting continued after Wallingford , but in a rather half @-@ hearted fashion . Stephen lost the towns of Oxford and Stamford to Henry while the King was diverted fighting Hugh Bigod in the east of England , but Nottingham Castle survived an Angevin attempt to capture it . Meanwhile , Stephen 's brother Henry of Blois and Archbishop Theobald of Canterbury were for once unified in an effort to broker a permanent peace between the two sides , putting pressure on Stephen to accept a deal . The armies of Stephen and Henry FitzEmpress met again at Winchester , where the two leaders would ratify the terms of a permanent peace in November . Stephen announced the Treaty of Winchester in Winchester Cathedral : he recognised Henry FitzEmpress as his adopted son and successor , in return for Henry doing homage to him ; Stephen promised to listen to Henry 's advice , but retained all his royal powers ; Stephen 's remaining son , William , would do homage to Henry and renounce his claim to the throne , in exchange for promises of the security of his lands ; key royal castles would be held on Henry 's behalf by guarantors , whilst Stephen would have access to Henry 's castles ; and the numerous foreign mercenaries would be demobilised and sent home . Stephen and Henry sealed the treaty with a kiss of peace in the cathedral . 
 = = Death = = 
 Stephen 's decision to recognise Henry as his heir was , at the time , not necessarily a final solution to the civil war . Despite the issuing of new currency and administrative reforms , Stephen might potentially have lived for many more years , whilst Henry 's position on the continent was far from secure . Although Stephen 's son William was young and unprepared to challenge Henry for the throne in 1153 , the situation could well have shifted in subsequent years — there were widespread rumours during 1154 that William planned to assassinate Henry , for example . Historian Graham White describes the treaty of Winchester as a " precarious peace " , capturing the judgement of most modern historians that the situation in late 1153 was still uncertain and unpredictable . 
 Certainly many problems remained to be resolved , including re @-@ establishing royal authority over the provinces and resolving the complex issue of which barons should control the contested lands and estates after the long civil war . Stephen burst into activity in early 1154 , travelling around the kingdom extensively . He began issuing royal writs for the south @-@ west of England once again and travelled to York where he held a major court in an attempt to impress upon the northern barons that royal authority was being reasserted . After a busy summer in 1154 , however , Stephen travelled to Dover to meet the Count of Flanders ; some historians believe that the King was already ill and preparing to settle his family affairs . Stephen fell ill with a stomach disorder and died on 25 October at the local priory , being buried at Faversham Abbey with his wife Matilda and son Eustace . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 After Stephen 's death , Henry II succeeded to the throne of England . Henry vigorously re @-@ established royal authority in the aftermath of the civil war , dismantling castles and increasing revenues , although several of these trends had begun under Stephen . The destruction of castles under Henry was not as dramatic as once thought , and although he restored royal revenues , the economy of England remained broadly unchanged under both rulers . Stephen 's remaining son William I of Blois was confirmed as the Earl of Surrey by Henry , and prospered under the new regime , with the occasional point of tension with Henry . Stephen 's daughter Marie I of Boulogne also survived her father ; she had been placed in a convent by Stephen , but after his death left and married . Stephen 's middle son , Baldwin , and second daughter , Matilda , had died before 1147 and were buried at Holy Trinity Priory , Aldgate . Stephen probably had three illegitimate sons , Gervase , Ralph and Americ , by his mistress <unk> ; Gervase became Abbot of Westminster in 1138 , but after his father 's death Gervase was removed by Henry in 1157 and died shortly afterwards . 
 = = = Historiography = = = 
 Much of the modern history of Stephen 's reign is based on accounts of chroniclers who lived in , or close to , the middle of the 12th century , forming a relatively rich account of the period . All of the main chronicler accounts carry significant regional biases in how they portray the disparate events . Several of the key chronicles were written in the south @-@ west of England , including the Gesta Stephani , or " Acts of Stephen " , and William of Malmesbury 's Historia Novella , or " New History " . In Normandy , Orderic Vitalis wrote his Ecclesiastical History , covering Stephen 's reign until 1141 , and Robert of Torigni wrote a later history of the rest of the period . Henry of Huntingdon , who lived in the east of England , produced the Historia Anglorum that provides a regional account of the reign . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle was past its prime by the time of Stephen , but is remembered for its striking account of conditions during " the Anarchy " . Most of the chronicles carry some bias for or against Stephen , Robert of Gloucester or other key figures in the conflict . Those writing for the church after the events of Stephen 's later reign , such as John of Salisbury for example , paint the King as a tyrant due to his argument with the Archbishop of Canterbury ; by contrast , clerics in Durham regarded Stephen as a saviour , due to his contribution to the defeat of the Scots at the battle of the Standard . Later chronicles written during the reign of Henry II were generally more negative : Walter Map , for example , described Stephen as " a fine knight , but in other respects almost a fool . " A number of charters were issued during Stephen 's reign , often giving details of current events or daily routine , and these have become widely used as sources by modern historians . 
 Historians in the " Whiggish " tradition that emerged during the Victorian period traced a progressive and universalist course of political and economic development in England over the medieval period . William Stubbs focused on these constitutional aspects of Stephen 's reign in his 1874 volume the Constitutional History of England , beginning an enduring interest in Stephen and his reign . Stubbs ' analysis , focusing on the disorder of the period , influenced his student John Round to coin the term " the Anarchy " to describe the period , a label that , whilst sometimes critiqued , continues to be used today . The late @-@ Victorian scholar Frederic William Maitland also introduced the possibility that Stephen 's reign marked a turning point in English legal history — the so @-@ called " <unk> crisis " . 
 Stephen remains a popular subject for historical study : David Crouch suggests that after King John he is " arguably the most written @-@ about medieval king of England " . Modern historians vary in their assessments of Stephen as a king . Historian R. H. Davis 's influential biography paints a picture of a weak king : a capable military leader in the field , full of activity and pleasant , but " beneath the surface ... mistrustful and sly " , with poor strategic judgement that ultimately undermined his reign . Stephen 's lack of sound policy judgement and his mishandling of international affairs , leading to the loss of Normandy and his consequent inability to win the civil war in England , is also highlighted by another of his biographers , David Crouch . Historian and biographer Edmund King , whilst painting a slightly more positive picture than Davis , also concludes that Stephen , while a stoic , pious and genial leader , was also rarely , if ever , his own man , usually relying upon stronger characters such as his brother or wife . Historian Keith Stringer provides a more positive portrayal of Stephen , arguing that his ultimate failure as king was the result of external pressures on the Norman state , rather than the result of personal failings . 
 = = = Popular representations = = = 
 Stephen and his reign have been occasionally used in historical fiction . Stephen and his supporters appear in Ellis Peters ' historical detective series Brother Cadfael , set between 1137 and 1145 . Peters ' depiction of Stephen 's reign is an essentially local narrative , focused on the town of Shrewsbury and its environs . Peters paints Stephen as a tolerant man and a reasonable ruler , despite his execution of the Shrewsbury defenders after the taking of the city in 1138 . In contrast , Stephen is depicted unsympathetically in both Ken Follett 's historical novel The Pillars of the Earth and the TV mini @-@ series adapted from it . 
 = = Issue = = 
 Stephen of Blois married Matilda of Boulogne in 1125 . They had the following issue : 
 Eustace ( c . 1130 – 1153 ) , who succeeded his parents as Count Eustace IV of Boulogne 
 Matilda ( died before 1141 ) , married Waleran de Beaumont , 1st Earl of Worcester 
 Marie ( 1133 – 1182 ) , who succeeded as Countess Marie I of Boulogne 
 Baldwin ( died before 1135 ) 
 Adela ( died before 1146 ) 
 William ( c . 1137 – 1159 ) , who succeeded as Count William I of Boulogne 
 King Stephen 's illegitimate children by a certain <unk> were : 
 Gervase , Abbot of Westminster 
 Ralph 
 Americ 
 = = Ancestors = = 
 = I Will Possess Your Heart = 
 " I Will Possess Your Heart " is an alternative rock song recorded by the American band Death Cab for Cutie . The song depicts a one @-@ sided obsessive relationship , which led Paste to name it one of the 25 creepiest songs about love . It is notable for its five @-@ minute instrumental introduction as well as its music video which required location shooting across four continents . The song was the lead single from their sixth studio album , Narrow Stairs ( 2008 ) . 
 The music is dominated by a repetitive bass guitar riff interspersed with piano chords and Ben Gibbard 's vocals . It was released on March 18 , 2008 in two versions : a full eight @-@ minute album version , and a four @-@ minute radio edit that omitted most of the instrumental introduction . The song was critically acclaimed and nominated for the 2009 Grammy Award for Best Rock Song . 
 The music video , released on April 11 , 2008 , features scenes of a young woman traveling alone to various places around the world , interspersed with the band performing in an industrial freezer room . The shoot involved the actress , director , and a crew of two traveling 27 @,@ 977 miles in 13 days , and was shot on consumer @-@ grade camcorders to achieve a sense of total realism and so that the film crew would blend in as tourists . The video won the 2008 MTV Video Music Award for Best Editing and was nominated for the Best Cinematography award . 
 = = Writing and composition = = 
 The song 's lyrics depict a one @-@ sided obsessive relationship from the point of view of the pursuer , who implores the object of his affection that she needs to " spend some time " with him so that he might " possess [ her ] heart . " Songwriter and lead vocalist Ben Gibbard noted that , although fictional , the song was inspired by the experiences of some of his friends . He added : 
 The song is basically about a stalker . It ’ s about this nice guy who wants this girl he can ’ t have , and he believes they ’ ll be together once she realizes how great he is — he just has to wait it out . That ’ s the part that makes the song really creepy , the delusion of thinking that they were meant to be together . It ’ s a really dark song . A lot of the material is about the inevitable disappointment people feel as they move through life , and things don ’ t feel the way they expect . No experience will ever match up to the idealized version in your mind . 
 The song is written in the key of F major with a moderate tempo of 134 beats per minute . The music is dominated by a distinctive 4 @-@ bar bass guitar riff that is repeated through nearly all of the song . This is interspersed with piano chords that generally follow a D @-@ D / C @-@ F @-@ G progression . The lead vocals have a range of D3 – G4 . The instrumentation also includes multiple guitar parts , drums , and backup vocals . Gibbard characterized the song as " five minutes of build and then a three @-@ minute song " , referring to the lengthy instrumental introduction that takes up more than half the song . Like the other songs on Narrow Stairs , it was recorded with all band members playing together in the studio , directly to tape without any overdubs . 
 Gibbard credited Nick Harmer 's bass line with being integral to the song , noting inspiration from bassists Eric Avery and Simon Gallup . Harmer said of the bass line , " I immediately gravitated to the creepy , stalker @-@ ish theme that Ben created with the lyrics and the piano chords .... I liked the idea that once a stalker gets obsessed with an idea , it just keeps repeating in his head , so I wanted the bass line to have a repetitive , incessant theme . " 
 The song was released on March 18 , 2008 , initially as a " surprise stream " on the band 's website , and soon after was picked up by radio stations . It was released in two versions : the album version of the song is over eight minutes long , while the radio edit largely removes the instrumental introduction , shortening the song to four minutes . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The song received acclaim from critics . James Montgomery of MTV News said of the song , " there are moments on Stairs that stop you dead in your tracks , send shivers up your spine and make you go ' Whoa ' ... like the first four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half minutes of ' I Will Possess Your Heart , ' a propulsive whirl of stalking bass line , spindly guitars and stabbing piano . " Will Hermes noted in Rolling Stone that the sense of menace in the song was " playing against type for a guy with one of rock 's purest voices — a vibrato @-@ less , bell @-@ clear high tenor whose choirboy quality only throws the darkness here into relief . " Blender 's Jonah Weiner concurred , stating " it 's a pleasant surprise to hear Gibbard inhabit such a self @-@ consciously creepy role , rather than play the occasionally errant , essentially good @-@ hearted boyfriend who soft @-@ shoes through so many of his tales . " In 2011 , Tyler Kane of Paste included the song in a list of " the 25 creepiest songs about love " . 
 " I Will Possess Your Heart " was named the iTunes UK song of the year 2008 and was ranked # 36 on the Triple J Hottest 100 of 2008 in Australia . The song was nominated for the 2009 Grammy Award for Best Rock Song , but lost to " Girls in Their Summer Clothes " by Bruce Springsteen . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The music video features scenes of a young woman traveling alone to various places around the world , interspersed with the band performing in an industrial freezer room . Throughout her journey , the woman keeps a neutral expression and barely reacts to the sights around her . The video was shot in New York City , London , Paris , Frankfurt , Tokyo , Hokkaido , Tunis , Carthage , Bangkok , Siem Reap , and Phnom Penh . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Aaron Stewart @-@ Ahn was selected to direct the video based on his previous work directing the video for Death Cab For Cutie 's " Stable Song " , as well as work documenting the band 's live performances . Stewart @-@ Ahn said that the theme of travel had been inspired by Death Cab for Cutie 's earlier song " Transatlanticism " , as well as his own extensive experience traveling solo , adding that " I ’ ve always felt that travel is a defining human experience that changes you forever , and hope that this depiction of wanderlust , obsessiveness , repetition , and loneliness conveys some of that . ” He also said " The idea is that the band is performing in an incredibly cold environment while this woman is traveling around the world , moving toward progressively warmer climes . The farther she gets from the song 's obsessive protagonist , the more her world opens up , and the less reliable his memories of her become . " 
 The shoot involved the actress , director , and a crew of two traveling 27 @,@ 977 miles in 13 days . The young woman was portrayed by Lindsay <unk> , who would years later become known for lead roles in several independent films such as A Teacher and The Sideways Light . On his directing , Stewart @-@ Ahn said " The goal was absolute realism ; nothing was staged . " Much of the film was shot on camcorder , including a Panasonic AG @-@ <unk> and a consumer @-@ grade Canon <unk> , so as to blend in by looking like tourists . He noted that the trip to Hokkaido was taken on a whim , and during the trip the team realized that daylight would be gone by the time they would reach their intended destination , so they exited the train at Asari and took what would become the final shot of the video there . 
 Stewart @-@ Ahn selected Shawn Kim to direct the shots of the band , and although they never met in person they established visual motifs to unite their respective parts of the video . The scenes of the band were shot in a food storage facility in Los Angeles at temperatures below 12 ° F. Unlike Stewart @-@ Ahn 's section of the video , Kim used a professional Arriflex 435 camera and Panavision E @-@ Series lenses , which he felt added to the coldness of the image . The two sets used were at different temperatures , and since bringing the large anamorphic lenses from a colder to a warmer temperature would result in condensation , a separate set of lenses needed to be used for each set . 
 = = = Release and reception = = = 
 The music video for " I Will Possess Your Heart " was released on MTV.com and VH1.com on April 11 , 2008 , and immediately added to those channels ' rotations . Two versions of the video were released , a full length version running 8 : 31 which features the album version of the song , and a shorter 4 : 22 version which features the radio edit , omitting most of the instrumental introduction . The video won the 2008 MTV Video Music Award for Best Editing for editors Aaron Stewart @-@ Ahn and Jeff Buchanan . It was also nominated for the Best Cinematography award , but lost to Wyatt Troll for The White Stripes ’ " Conquest " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 US CD : 
 " I Will Possess Your Heart " ( 7 " edit ) 
 " I Will Possess Your Heart " ( 10 " edit ) 
 " I Will Possess Your Heart " ( album version ) 
 US 7 " vinyl : 
 " I Will Possess Your Heart " ( radio edit ) 
 " The Ice Is Getting Thinner " ( demo ) 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Words by Benjamin Gibbard 
 Song by Benjamin Gibbard , Nicholas Harmer , Jason McGerr , and Christopher Walla 
 Produced by Christopher Walla 
 Recorded by Christopher Walla and Will Markwell at Two Sticks Audio , Seattle , Washington 
 Mixed by Christopher Walla at The Alberta Court , Portland , Oregon 
 Mastered by Roger <unk> at SAE Mastering , Phoenix , Arizona 
 Artwork and layout by EE Storey 
 = = Charts = = 
 = You Are the Apple of My Eye = 
 You Are the Apple of My Eye ( Chinese : <unk> ， <unk> , literally " Those Years , The Girl We Went After Together " ) is a 2011 Taiwanese Romance film . It is based on the semi @-@ autobiographical novel of the same name by Taiwanese author Giddens Ko , who also made his directorial debut with the film . The film stars Ko Chen @-@ tung as Ko Ching @-@ teng , a prankster and a mischievous student who eventually becomes a writer . Michelle Chen stars as Shen Chia @-@ yi , an honor student who is very popular amongst the boys in her class . 
 You Are the Apple of My Eye was filmed almost entirely on location in Changhua County , including at the high school which Giddens attended . The lyrics of " Those Years " , the film 's main theme , were written by Giddens . The song , which was well received by the public , was nominated for Best Original Film Song at the 48th Golden Horse Awards . 
 The film 's world premiere was at the 13th Taipei Film Festival on 25 June 2011 , and it was subsequently released in Taiwanese cinemas on 19 August . Well received by film critics , the movie set box @-@ office records in Taiwan , Hong Kong , and Singapore . Ko Chen @-@ tung won the Best Newcomer award at the Golden Horse Awards for his role in the film . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story begins in 1994 . An outstanding student , Shen Chia @-@ yi is popular among her teachers and classmates . Ko Ching @-@ teng , mischievous and a poor student , claims that he has no interest in her , despite being her classmate since junior high school . One day , Ching @-@ teng is caught masturbating during class , and the principal <unk> him , placing him in front of Chia @-@ yi . 
 One day , Chia @-@ yi forgets her English textbook . Ching @-@ teng slips her his own book and tells their teacher he forgot his own textbook ; he then endures a long lecture and is punished . Chia @-@ yi , touched by Ching @-@ teng 's generosity , prepares a practice exam for him in return , to encourage him to study . She also convinces him to stay after school to study with her . Their relationship grows , and Ching @-@ teng 's grades gradually improve . 
 On graduation , Ching @-@ teng enrolls at the National Chiao Tung University . Chia @-@ Yi , who did not do well on the admission exam because she was ill on that day , only manages to enter the National Taipei University of Education with her mediocre test results . Depressed and upset , she is consoled by Ching @-@ teng , who calls her long @-@ distance almost every night from university . During the winter holiday season that year , the two go on their first " date " , during which Ching @-@ teng asks Chia @-@ yi if she loves him . However , fearing she would say no , he decides that he would rather not hear her answer ( it is revealed later that her reply would have been " yes " ) . Ching @-@ teng later organizes a fight night and invites Chia @-@ yi to watch , hoping to impress her with his " strength " . On the contrary , Chia @-@ yi finds it childish for Ching @-@ teng to injure himself for no reason . This upsets Ching @-@ teng , sparking a quarrel that causes the two to break up . 
 During the two years after their breakup , Ching @-@ teng has no contact with Chia @-@ yi . He qualifies for a graduate research course at <unk> University , where he begins writing stories online . Ching @-@ teng only regains contact with Chia @-@ yi after the 921 earthquake , when he calls to see if she is okay . During their long conversation with each other , they both lament the fact that they were not fated to become a couple . 
 Years later , in 2005 , Chia @-@ yi suddenly calls Ching @-@ teng to tell him that she is getting married . All of her old friends gather at the wedding , making jokes and trying to embarrass her somewhat @-@ older husband . They are surprised that their past emotions have transformed into deep friendship and serenity . Ching @-@ teng begins to work on a web novel about his experiences with Chia @-@ yi . 
 Later , when they gather to congratulate the bride and groom , the friends joke that they should be able to kiss the bride . The husband says that anybody who wants to kiss the bride has to kiss him like that first . Ching @-@ teng grabs the groom and pushes him onto the table , kissing him like he would kiss Chia @-@ yi . During their kiss , he remembers how he regrets their fight from years ago , and what could have happened had he apologized for being childish . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Ko Chen @-@ tung as Ko Ching @-@ teng ( nicknamed " Ko @-@ teng " ) , a mischievous schoolboy who later becomes a writer ( Ko Ching @-@ teng is the real name of the director , Giddens ) . 
 Michelle Chen as Shen Chia @-@ yi , an outgoing student who consistently scores well in tests . Although she disdains boys less intelligent than herself , she decides to help Ching @-@ teng improve his grades . In the process , she falls in love with him . 
 <unk> as Tsao Kuo @-@ sheng ( nicknamed " Lao Tsao " ) , one of Ching @-@ teng 's friends . He had a crush on Chia @-@ yi , and once asked Ching @-@ teng to deliver a love letter he had written for her . 
 Steven Hao as Hsieh Ming @-@ ho ( nicknamed " A @-@ he " ) , one of Ching @-@ teng 's friends . He loves to eat , and is the butt of his friends ' jokes due to this . He is the only person in the group who has dated Chia @-@ yi . 
 Tsai Chang @-@ hsien as Liao Ying @-@ hung , one of Ching @-@ teng 's best friends . He likes to crack jokes and perform magic tricks , and later becomes a librarian . 
 Yen Sheng @-@ yu as Hsu Bo @-@ chun ( nicknamed " Boner " ) , one of Ching @-@ teng 's friends 
 Wan Wan as Hu Chia @-@ wei , Chia @-@ yi 's best friend . She likes to draw pictures , and after graduating from school becomes a manga artist known as " The Queen of Blogs " ( <unk> ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 You Are the Apple of My Eye is based on Giddens ' semi @-@ autobiographical novel of the same name . He changed some details of the story to make the film more dramatic ; for example , Ching @-@ teng and Chia @-@ yi 's fight actually took place over the phone , not in the rain as depicted . Giddens said , " although some of the reasons for the events in the film were changed , the main storyline remained unchanged " . Asked if he was pressured by the recent success of Taiwanese films at the box office , he replied " No , I am more pressured by whether the film is nice to watch , whether it will succeed in the box office , and whether it will become an embarrassment for me . Also , if the film is not nice , it will be a letdown to Chen @-@ tung and Michelle , who have been working so hard " . 
 At first , the film was on a tight budget ; Giddens used his entire savings and mortgaged his house to raise money , saying that he did it to impress ex @-@ girlfriend , who provided the inspiration for this film 's female protagonist , Shen Chia @-@ yi . Executive producer Angie Chai also played a key role in raising money for the film . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Michelle Chen was the first cast member confirmed by the director . <unk> reported that Giddens was attracted to her during their first meeting , saying that she resembled the real Shen Chia @-@ yi . Chen had previously starred in Taiwanese television drama series such as Why Why Love and Miss No Good , although she was better known for her 2009 film Hear Me . Chen went on a diet to lose weight for the role , saying she wished to " not disappoint the director " . Giddens later used her as a basis to select the other cast members . The selection process for the male lead was the longest , and a series of auditions attracted several celebrities . Giddens chose first @-@ time actor Ko Chen @-@ tung because he felt he showed great improvement in his acting skills in each successive audition . Giddens liked his attitude , having seen Ko Chen @-@ tung hiding in a corner , frantically studying the script just before his audition . 
 The director chose Ao @-@ chuan , Yen Sheng @-@ yu , Hao Shao @-@ wen , and Tsai Chang @-@ hsien to play the roles of his high school friends . He described Hao Shao @-@ wen as being a persuasive speaker , Tsai Chang @-@ hsien as being a very good prankster , and Ao @-@ chuan as self @-@ confident . Hu Chia @-@ wei played herself as a teenager . Giddens describes the two of them as " the Jay Chou and Jolin Tsai of the [ Chinese ] publishing world " . 
 Giddens ' mother told him that she would like either Lotus Wang or Phoebe Huang to play her in the film . In the end , Giddens settled on Lotus Wang , because she did not have any other work commitments at that time . Ko Chen @-@ tung 's real father plays the father in the film . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 You Are the Apple of My Eye was primarily filmed at Ching Cheng High School ( <unk> ) , the school Giddens and Shen Chia @-@ yi attended . The director said he chose the school because " he wanted so badly to see Ko Chen @-@ tung and Michelle Chen in the school uniform that he remembered vividly " . The filming of the school scenes could only be done during the Taiwanese school holidays . Because the main location was at the school , it was decided to film the remainder of the film on location throughout Changhua County . The filming had a reported budget of NT $ 50 million ( approx . US $ <unk> in January 2012 ) . 
 = = = Theme song = = = 
 " Childish " ( <unk> ) , a song from the film , was written and sung by Michelle Chen . Giddens was so touched by the song that he shed tears " on the spot " after first hearing it ; in particular , he liked the song 's lyrics . He also praised Michelle 's dedication to her role , saying " I believe that the reason that she managed to get inspiration to write this song is because she likes her role [ in this film ] " . 
 Giddens was also involved in some of this film 's theme songs , including " Those Years " ( <unk> ) . At first Giddens could not decide on the closing theme for this film ; however , after hearing one of Japanese composer Mitsutoshi Kimura 's new compositions he chose it and added lyrics . " The Lonely Caffeine " ( <unk> ) had been composed by Giddens for Shen Chia @-@ Yi when the two were in a relationship . He asked the male lead actor to sing the song in the film , because he felt this would convey the song 's original meaning . 
 " Those Years " was an instant hit . The music video on YouTube logged its ten millionth viewer on 11 November 2011 , leading Giddens to note that the song " broke every notable viewership record set by a Chinese @-@ language video on Youtube " . In the Taiwanese <unk> singles daily charts , " Those Years " remained at the top for 64 consecutive days , from 22 August to 22 October 2011 , breaking the previous record of 45 consecutive days . The song was nominated for the Best Original Film Soundtrack award at the 48th Golden Horse Awards . 
 = = = Editing = = = 
 You Are the Apple of My Eye was edited over for its various releases due to its controversial content . In Taiwan , the film was initially given a " Restricted " film classification . Giddens was extremely upset by this , and even personally went to Government Information Office to appeal . The film had to be edited 4 times in order to lower its classification . In the end , the film received a " Guidance " classification , meaning that children above 12 are able to watch it . In Malaysia , the scene where the students masturbated in the classroom was deleted . In Singapore , the film remained unedited , but it received a NC @-@ 16 rating , thus restricting the film to viewers above 16 . 
 The film was heavily edited for its Mainland China release . The scene where a flag @-@ raising ceremony was taking place was edited away , as were the scenes involving masturbation . In total , six scenes involving " negative sexual and pro @-@ Taiwan content " were either edited away or changed . The director also had to add new scenes in order to make the story flow more smoothly after editing . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The original soundtrack album for You Are the Apple of My Eye was released by Sony Music Entertainment Taiwan on 5 August 2011 . It contains six songs with vocals and nine instrumental pieces that were used in this film . 
 = = Release = = 
 You Are the Apple of My Eye made its debut in competition at the 13th Taipei Film Festival on 25 June 2011 . The film made its international debut as the opening film for the sixth Summer International Film Festival in Hong Kong . It then had its general release in Taiwan on 19 August 2011 . 
 The film was screened at the 24th Tokyo International Film Festival on 24 October 2011 , where the director and cast were present . It was well @-@ received , with audiences reportedly squeezing into the cinema to the extent that people had to sit in the aisles . Internationally , the film was released in Hong Kong and Macau on 20 October and in Singapore and Malaysia on 10 November 2011 . 
 On 21 December , Giddens announced on his blog that the film passed the censorship board in China and would debut in that country on 6 January 2012 . Giddens had previously expressed a wish for the film to be screened in China so Shen Chia @-@ Yi , for whom he had made the film , could see it and comment . Giddens was unhappy when Chinese censors cut much of the film 's " negative sexual and pro @-@ Taiwan content " . He apologized to viewers in China for being unable to deliver on his promise to show the full story , saying that he " blamed only himself " . He added that he " did not think that the China 's version was better [ than the other overseas versions ] . " 
 Giddens revealed that negotiations were ongoing for the film 's release in Europe and the United States . The film subsequently made its North American debut at the New York Asian Film Festival on 2 July 2012 . It was later screened at the 2012 Fantasia Film Festival in Montreal . Giddens also announced that a sequel will be produced ; it will begin production in 2013 , and is expected to be released in cinemas in 2014 . 
 You Are the Apple of My Eye was first aired on television on 24 March 2012 on the STAR Chinese Movies network . It became the most @-@ watched film on television in Taiwan , having attracted an audience of almost 3 million people . In the 15 to 44 years old audience , it had an average rating of 7 @.@ 14 , with the rating peaking at 9 @.@ 27 during the screening . It was also the most @-@ watched television program on both cable and free @-@ to @-@ air networks in Taiwan . STAR Chinese Movies reportedly purchased the rights to this film at a hefty price of NT $ 2 million ( approx . US $ 69 @,@ 000 ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critics = = = 
 Maggie Lee of The Hollywood Reporter described the film as a " <unk> retro coming @-@ of @-@ age confection " . She praised the film , saying that it " injects a fresh , tart edge to the genre with a constantly self @-@ mocking boys ' angle " , which she described as an " alternative to Asian teen movies that tend to be syrupy " . She said that " the youthful cast has a limited register but offer enough self @-@ conscious blasé posing . " She described the film 's texture as " slightly over @-@ bright " . Russell Edwards , reviewing for Variety , criticized the second part of this film , which he says is " unable to maintain the outlandish phallocentric humor of its first hour " . He further criticized the last quarter of the film , which Edwards says " sees Giddens overestimating the charm of his own story " . Edwards praised the film 's cast which , he said , were the film 's " greatest asset " . He also praised the film as " a much more robust production than many similar youth @-@ skewing Taiwanese romancers over the past decade " . 
 Serene Lim , a reviewer for Today , labelled the film a " gentle tale of a teenage romance " . She said that " Ko 's talents as a novelist are evident " , although his " attention to detail can get indulgently long @-@ winded at times " . Lim singled out Ko Chen @-@ tung for praise , saying that " [ he ] thoroughly deserves his Golden Horse nomination for Best Newcomer , given his turn as the impetuous rebel made good " ; overall , she gave the film a rating of 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 . Yong Shu Hoong , writing for Singapore @-@ based <unk> , said that the " flashback sequences can reek of <unk> " , although the reviewer added that " the thrills , rivalries and heartbreak associated with high school romance are well depicted with nostalgia and humour " and gave it a rating of 3 out of 5 . The film was rated by <unk> Movies as the " 2nd Best Chinese Film of 2011 " . 
 Film Business Asia gave the film a rating of 7 / 10 , with Derek Elley describing it as " a confident feature " and " slickly packaged in every department " , the latter making it " easy to miss the fact there 's nothing at all original here " . He praised the cast as " well @-@ chosen individually and relaxed as an ensemble " . He added , " apart from a slightly draggy second half , the material sustains itself at almost two hours , with generally trim editing by co @-@ executive director Liao . " He concluded by summarizing the film 's plot as a " simple teenage rom @-@ com , a will @-@ they / won 't @-@ they between two opposites , but capped by a neat finale that does deliver some real emotion " . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 You Are the Apple of My Eye grossed more than NT $ $ 20 million at the Taiwanese box office during its soft launch . This makes it the first Taiwanese film to gross over NT $ $ 20 million before its official release date . The film crossed the NT $ 200 million mark ten days after its official opening . In total , the film earned over NT $ 420 million at the Taiwanese box office , making it the third @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of 2011 in Taiwan . 
 In Hong Kong , You Are the Apple of My Eye grossed a total of HK $ 1 @,@ 397 @,@ 571 during its premiere ( representing 50 @.@ 6 percent of Hong Kong box @-@ office earnings ) on 20 October 2011 . Four days after its release the film had earned a total of HK $ 11 @,@ 525 @,@ 621 , breaking the record for the highest @-@ grossing film debuting in the month of October . It also set a record for the highest @-@ grossing opening weekend for a Taiwanese film at the Hong Kong box office , previously held by Lust , Caution in 2007 with a gross of $ 11 @,@ 441 @,@ 946 . The film recorded the highest Hong Kong opening @-@ four @-@ day attendance in 2011 with 211 @,@ 163 attending , breaking 3D Sex and Zen : Extreme Ecstasy 's previous record of 143 @,@ 222 . The film also has the highest four @-@ day gross of a 2D film in 2011 , and remained the highest @-@ grossing film in Hong Kong cinemas for four consecutive weekends . During the final hours of 2011 , it was announced that You Are the Apple of My Eye had grossed over HK $ 61 @.@ 28 million , making it the all @-@ time highest @-@ grossing Taiwanese film at the Hong Kong box office . At the Macau box office , You Are the Apple of My Eye earned more than HK $ 100 @,@ 000 in its opening weekend , with nearly 100 @-@ percent attendance . 
 In Singapore You Are the Apple of My Eye earned a total of SGD $ 675 @,@ 000 , making it the second @-@ highest @-@ grossing film in Singapore that weekend despite the film 's NC @-@ 16 rating ( which meant that only viewers over age 16 were admitted ) ; this surprised the film 's distributor , 20th Century Fox . The film broke the record for highest opening weekend for a Taiwanese film in Singapore , previously held by the 2007 film Secret . It surpassed the performance of other Taiwanese films such as Monga , Cape No. 7 and Lust , Caution . You Are the Apple of My Eye was the highest @-@ grossing Asian film of 2011 at the Singapore box office , with earnings of SGD $ 2 @.@ 93 million . 
 At China box office , You Are the Apple of My Eye became the most popular Taiwanese film , surpassing the previous record set by Cape No. 7 in 2008 . It was the third @-@ highest @-@ earning film on its debut weekend , grossing about 27 million yuan . The film subsequently crossed the 50 @-@ million @-@ yuan @-@ gross mark on 13 January 2012 . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = Battle of Narva ( 1944 ) = 
 The Battle of Narva was a military campaign between the German Army Detachment " Narwa " and the Soviet Leningrad Front fought for possession of the strategically important Narva Isthmus on 2 February – 10 August 1944 during World War II . 
 The campaign took place in the northern section of the Eastern Front and consisted of two major phases : the Battle for Narva Bridgehead ( February to July 1944 ) and the Battle of Tannenberg Line ( July – August 1944 ) . The Soviet Kingisepp – Gdov Offensive and Narva Offensives ( 15 – 28 February , 1 – 4 March and 18 – 24 March ) were part of the Red Army Winter Spring Campaign of 1944 . Following Joseph Stalin 's " Broad Front " strategy , these battles coincided with the Dnieper – Carpathian Offensive ( December 1943 – April 1944 ) and the Lvov – Sandomierz Offensive ( July – August 1944 ) . A number of foreign volunteers and local Estonian conscripts participated in the battle as part of the German forces . By giving its support to the illegal German conscription call , the underground National Committee of the Republic of Estonia had hoped to recreate a national army and restore the independence of the country . 
 As a continuation of the Leningrad – Novgorod Offensive of January 1944 , the Soviet Estonian operation pushed the front westward to the Narva River , aiming to destroy " Narwa " and to thrust deep into Estonia . The Soviet units established a number of bridgeheads on the western bank of the river in February while the Germans maintained a bridgehead on the eastern bank . Subsequent attempts failed to expand their toehold . German counterattacks annihilated the bridgeheads to the north of Narva and reduced the bridgehead south of the town , stabilizing the front until July 1944 . The Soviet Narva Offensive ( July 1944 ) led to the capture of the city forcing the German troops to retreat to their prepared Tannenberg Defence Line in the <unk> Hills 16 kilometres from Narva . In the ensuing Battle of Tannenberg Line , the German army group held its ground . Stalin 's main strategic goal — a quick recovery of Estonia as a base for air and seaborne attacks against Finland and an invasion of East Prussia — was not achieved . As a result of the tough defence of the German forces the Soviet war effort in the Baltic Sea region was hampered for seven and a half months . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Terrain = = = 
 Terrain played a significant role in operations around Narva . The elevation above sea level rarely rises above 100 meters in the area and the land is cut by numerous waterways , including the Narva and <unk> Rivers . The bulk of the land in the region is forested and large swamps inundate areas of low elevation . The effect of the terrain on operations was one of channelization ; because of the swamps , only certain areas were suitable for large @-@ scale troop movement . 
 On a strategic scale , a natural choke point was present between the northern shore of Lake Peipus and the Gulf of Finland . The 45 kilometre wide strip of land was entirely bisected by the Narva River and had large areas of wilderness . The primary transportation routes , the Narva – Tallinn highway and railway , ran on an east @-@ west axis near and parallel to the coastline . There were no other east @-@ west transportation routes capable of sustaining troop movement on a large scale in the region . 
 = = = Preceding actions = = = 
 On 14 January 1944 , the Leningrad Front launched the <unk> Selo – Ropsha Offensive , aimed at forcing the German 18th Army back from its positions near <unk> . On the third day of the offensive , the Soviets broke through German lines and pushed westward . The Army Group North evacuated the civilian population of Narva . 
 = = = Soviet aims = = = 
 By 1944 it was fairly routine practice for Stavka to assign its operating fronts new and more ambitious missions while the Soviet Armed Forces were conducting major offensive operations . The rationale was that relentless pressure might trigger a German collapse . For the 1943 / 1944 winter campaign , Stalin ordered the Red Army to conduct major offensives along the entire Soviet @-@ German front in a continuation of the ' Broad Front ' strategy he had pursued since the beginning of the war . This was applied in consonance with his long @-@ standing rationale that , if the Red Army applied pressure along the entire front , German defences were likely to break in at least one section . The Soviet winter campaign included major assaults across the entire expanse the front in the Ukraine , Belorussia and against the German Panther Line in the region of the Baltic Sea . 
 Breaking through the Narva Isthmus situated between the Gulf of Finland and Lake Peipus was of major strategic importance to the Soviet Armed Forces . The success of the Estonian operation would have provided an unobstructed lane to advance along the coast to Tallinn , forcing the German Army Group North to escape from Estonia for fear of getting cornered . For the Baltic Fleet trapped in an eastern bay of the Gulf of Finland , Tallinn was the closest exit to the Baltic Sea . The ejection of the Army Group North from Estonia would have made Finland subject to air and amphibious attacks originating from Estonian bases . The prospect of an invasion of East Prussia through Estonia appealed even more to Stavka , as it could bring German resistance to a standstill . With the participation of Leonid Govorov , commander of the Leningrad Front , and Vladimir <unk> , commander of the Baltic Fleet , a scheme was prepared to destroy the Army Group North . Stalin ordered the capture of Narva at all costs no later than 17 February : 
 " It is mandatory that our forces seize Narva no later than 17 February 1944 . This is required both for military as well as political reasons . It is the most important thing right now . I demand that you undertake all necessary measures to liberate Narva no later than the period indicated . ( signed ) I. Stalin " 
 After the failure of the Leningrad Front , Stalin gave a new order on 22 February : to break through the " Narwa " defence , give a shock at Pärnu , eliminate the German forces in Estonia , direct two armies at Southeast Estonia , keep going through Latvia and open the road to East Prussia and Central Europe . On the same day , the Soviet Union presented Finland with peace conditions . While Finland regarded the terms as unacceptable , the war waging around them appeared dangerous enough to keep negotiating . To influence Finland , Stalin needed to take Estonia . His wish was an order to the commanders of the Leningrad Front , with their heads at stake . After reinforcements , the Narva front acquired the highest concentration of forces at any point on the Eastern Front in March 1944 . By July 1944 , a detailed plan was prepared for the Soviet advance to Tallinn . 
 = = = Soviet deployments = = = 
 Three Soviet armies were deployed at the maximum concentration of forces in March 1944 . The 2nd Shock Army was placed north of Narva , the 59th Army was positioned south of Narva and the 8th Army south of the 59th Army along the 50 km long Narva River stretching down to Lake Peipus . Detailed information on the size of the Soviet forces at the Narva front during the Winter @-@ Spring campaign has not been published by any sources . It is impossible to give an overview on the Soviet strength until the Red Army archival information is made available to non @-@ Russian investigators or published . Estonian historian Hannes Walter has estimated the number of Soviet troops in the Battle of Narva at 205 @,@ 000 , which is in accordance with the number of divisions multiplied by the assumed sizes of the divisions presented by the Estonian historian Mart Laar . The order of battle of the Leningrad Front as of 1 March 1944 : 
 2nd Shock Army – Lieutenant General Ivan <unk> 
 43rd Rifle Corps – Major General Anatoli Andreyev 
 109th Rifle Corps – Major General Ivan <unk> 
 124th Rifle Corps – Major General <unk> <unk> 
 8th Army – Lieutenant General Filip Starikov 
 6th Rifle Corps – Major General Semyon Mikulski 
 112th Rifle Corps – Major General Filip <unk> 
 59th Army – Lieutenant General Ivan <unk> 
 117th Rifle Corps – Major General Vasili <unk> 
 122nd Rifle Corps – Major General Panteleimon Zaitsev 
 Separate detachments : 
 8th Estonian Rifle Corps – Lieutenant General Lembit <unk> 
 14th Rifle Corps – Major General Pavel <unk> 
 124th Rifle Division – Colonel Mikhail <unk> 
 30th Guards Rifle Corps – Lieutenant General Nikolai <unk> 
 46th , 260th and 261st Separate Guards Heavy Tank and <unk> Separate Self @-@ propelled Artillery regiments 
 3rd Breakthrough Artillery Corps – Major General N. N. Zhdanov 
 3rd Guards Tank Corps – Major General I. A. <unk> 
 At the start of the Narva Offensive ( July 1944 ) , the Leningrad Front deployed 136 @,@ 830 troops , 150 tanks , 2 @,@ 500 assault guns and 800 + aircraft . 
 = = = German and Finnish aims = = = 
 The Oberkommando des Heeres believed it was crucial to stabilize the front on the Narva River . A Soviet breakthrough here would have meant the loss of the northern coast of Estonia and with it loss of control of the Gulf of Finland , giving the Soviet Baltic Fleet access to the Baltic Sea . A breakthrough by the fleet would have threatened German control of the entire Baltic Sea and the shipment of iron ore imports from Sweden . The loss of Narva would have meant fuel derived from the adjacent Kohtla @-@ Järve oil shale deposits ( 32 kilometers west of Narva on the coast ) would be denied to the German war machine . As Colonel General Georg Lindemann said in his daily order to the 11th Infantry Division : 
 We are standing on the border of our native land . Every step backwards will carry the war through the air and water to Germany . 
 As Finland was negotiating with the Soviet Union for peace , the Oberkommando des Heeres paid attention to the Narva front , using every means to convince the Finnish Defence Command that their defence was going to hold . The German command informed their Finnish colleagues in detail about the events on the Narva front while a delegation of the Finnish Defence Command visited Narva in spring 1944 . Besides being a narrow corridor well suited for defence , the terrain in the area of Narva was dominated by forests and swamps . Directly behind the Narva River lay the city itself , ideally positioned as a bastion from which defending forces could influence combat to both the north and south of the city along the river valley . 
 This position was the northern segment of the German Panther Line and it was where Generalfeldmarschall Georg von Küchler in charge of the Army Group wanted to set up his defence . Hitler initially refused and replaced von Küchler with Generalfeldmarschall Walter Model as the commander of the Army Group North . Model agreed with von Küchler , and as one of Hitler 's favourites he also was allowed more freedom . Using this freedom to his advantage , Model managed to fall back and begin establishing a line along the Narva River with a strong bridgehead on the eastern bank in Ivangorod . This appeased Hitler and followed the German standard operating procedure for defending a river line . On 1 February 1944 , the High Command of Army Group North tasked the Sponheimer Group ( renamed Army Detachment " Narwa " on 23 February ) to defend the segment of the Panther Line at the isthmus between the Gulf of Finland and Lake Peipus at all costs . Stalin presented Finland with his peace terms on 8 February 1944 , after the initial Soviet success . With the tactical victories of " Narwa " from mid @-@ February to April , Finland terminated the negotiations on 18 April 1944 . 
 = = = Aims of the Estonian resistance movement = = = 
 During the course of the occupation of Estonia by Nazi Germany , Estonian expectations of regaining their independence began to diminish . Pursuant to the Constitution of Estonia , formally still in force , Estonian politicians formed an underground National Committee of the Republic of Estonia which convened on 14 February 1944 . As President Konstantin <unk> was currently imprisoned by the Soviet authorities , the acting head of state according to the Constitution was the former Prime Minister Jüri Uluots . The German @-@ appointed Estonian Self @-@ Administration had previously attempted several unsuccessful general mobilisation calls , which were illegal under the Hague Conventions ( 1899 and 1907 ) and opposed by Uluots . In February 1944 when the Leningrad Front reached the vicinity of Narva and the Soviet return became a real threat , Uluots switched his stand on the German draft . In a radio speech on 7 February , Uluots reasoned that armed Estonians could become useful against both Germans and Soviets . He also hinted that Estonian troops on Estonian soil would have : " ... a significance much wider than what I could and would be able to disclose here . " Along with other Estonian politicians , Uluots saw resistance against the Soviet Armed Forces as a means of preventing the restoration of Soviet power and restoring Estonia ’ s independence once the war was over . The conscription call was received with popular support and the mobilisation brought together 38 @,@ 000 men who were formed into seven border guard regiments and the fictitiously named 20th Estonian SS @-@ Volunteer Division , commonly referred to among the German Armed Forces as the Estonian Division . Combined with the Finnish Infantry Regiment 200 ( voluntary Estonians in the Finnish army ) and the conscripts within the Waffen SS , a total of 70 @,@ 000 Estonian troops were under Nazi German arms in 1944 . 
 = = = Formation of Army Detachment " Narwa " = = = 
 In February 1944 , the L and <unk> Army Corps along with the III ( Germanic ) SS Panzer Corps were on the left flank of the 18th Army as they retreated to Narva . On 4 February , the Sponheimer Group was released from the 18th Army and subordinated directly to the Army Group North . In support of the forces already in place , Hitler ordered reinforcements . The Panzer Corps Feldherrnhalle , with over 10 @,@ 000 troops and their equipment , was airlifted from Belorussia into Estonia via the airfield at Tartu on 1 February . A week later , the 5th Battalion of the Panzergrenadier Großdeutschland Division arrived at the front . The Grenadier Regiment <unk> ( an ad hoc regiment formed from replacement army units in Poland ) was sent from Germany and arrived on 11 February . Three days later , the 214th Infantry Division was transferred from Norway . Over the next two weeks various units were added to the group , including the 11th SS Volunteer Panzergrenadier Division " Nordland " , several divisions of the Wehrmacht , the Estonian Division and local Estonian border guard and Estonian Auxiliary Police battalions . Infantry General Otto Sponheimer was replaced by General Johannes <unk> and the Sponheimer Group was renamed Army Detachment " Narwa " on 23 February . The Army Group North ordered the deployment of " Narwa " on 22 February in the following positions : III SS Panzer Corps deployed to Narva , Ivangorod Bridgehead on the east bank of the river and north of Narva ; the XXXXIII Army Corps against the Krivasoo Bridgehead south of the city ; and the XXVI Army Corps to the sector between the Krivasoo Bridgehead and Lake Peipus . As of 1 March 1944 , there were a total of 123 @,@ 541 personnel subordinated to the Army Group in the following order of battle : 
 III SS ( Germanic ) Panzer Corps – SS @-@ Obergruppenführer Felix Steiner 
 11th SS Panzergrenadier Division " Nordland " 
 4th SS Panzergrenadier Brigade " Nederland " 
 20th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS ( 1st Estonian ) 
 XXVI Army Corps – General Anton Grasser 
 11th Infantry Division 
 58th Infantry Division 
 214th Infantry Division 
 225th Infantry Division ( Wehrmacht ) 
 3rd Estonian Border Guard Regiment ( as of 15 April ) 
 XXXXIII Army Corps – General der Infanterie Karl von Oven 
 61st Infantry Division 
 170th Infantry Division 
 227th Infantry Division 
 Feldherrnhalle Panzergrenadier Division 
 <unk> Grenadier Regiment 
 Separate units : 
 Eastern sector , coastal defence ( the staff of the 2nd Anti @-@ Aircraft Division as the HQ ) – Lieutenant General Alfons <unk> 
 Estonian Regiment " Reval " 
 3 Estonian police battalions 
 2 Estonian eastern battalions 
 Other military units : 
 Artillery Command No. 113 
 High Pioneer Command No. 32 
 502nd Heavy Tank Battalion 
 <unk> Anti @-@ Tank Battalion 
 <unk> Special Infantry ( Training ) Battalion 
 In the summer of 1944 , the Panzergrenadier Division Feldherrnhalle and seven infantry divisions were removed from the Narva Front , leaving 22 @,@ 250 troops at the location . 
 = = Combat activity = = 
 = = = Formation of bridgeheads = = = 
 Launching the Kingisepp – Gdov Offensive on 1 February , the Soviet 2nd Shock Army 's 109th Rifle Corps captured the town of Kingisepp on the first day . The German 18th Army was forced into new positions on the eastern bank of the Narva River . Forward units of the 2nd Shock Army crossed the river and established several bridgeheads on the west bank to the north and south of the city of Narva on 2 February . The 2nd Shock Army expanded the bridgehead in the Krivasoo Swamp south of Narva five days later , temporarily cutting the Narva – Tallinn Railway behind the III SS Panzer Corps . Govorov was unable to encircle the smaller German Army Group , which called in reinforcements . These came mostly from the newly mobilised Estonians , motivated to resist the looming Soviet return . At the same time , the Soviet 108th Rifle Corps landed units across Lake Peipus 120 kilometres south of Narva and established a bridgehead around the village of <unk> . By a coincidence , the I.Battalion , SS Volunteer Grenadier Regiment 45 ( 1st Estonian ) , which was headed for Narva , reached the same area . A battalion of the 44th Infantry Regiment ( consisting of personnel from East Prussia ) , the I.Battalion , 1st Estonian and an air squadron destroyed the Soviet bridgehead on 15 – 16 February . The <unk> Landing Operation was conducted as the 517 @-@ strong 260th Independent Naval Infantry Brigade landed at the coastal borough of <unk> behind the Sponheimer Group lines . However , the unit was almost completely destroyed . 
 = = = Narva Offensives , 15 – 28 February and 1 – 4 March = = = 
 The Soviet 30th Guards Rifle Corps and the 124th Rifle Corps launched a new Narva Offensive on 15 February . The resistance by units of the Sponheimer Group exhausted the Soviet army , which halted its offensive . Both sides used the pause for bringing in additional forces . The fresh SS Volunteer Grenadier Regiments 45 and 46 ( 1st and 2nd Estonian ) accompanied by units of the " Nordland " Division destroyed the Soviet bridgeheads north of Narva by 6 March . The newly arrived 59th Army attacked westwards from the Krivasoo Swamp and encircled the strong points of the 214th Infantry Division and Estonian <unk> and <unk> Eastern Battalions . The resistance of the encircled units gave the German command time to move in all available forces and to stop the 59th Army units ' advance . 
 = = = 6 – 24 March = = = 
 The Soviet air force conducted an air raid , leveling the historic town of Narva on 6 March . An air and artillery shock of 100 @,@ 000 shells and grenades at the " Nordland " and " Nederland " detachments in Ivangorod prepared the way for the 30th Guards Rifle Division 's attack on 8 March . Simultaneous pitched battles took place north of the town , where the 14th Rifle Corps supported by the artillery of the 8th Estonian Rifle Corps attempted to re @-@ establish a bridgehead . Regiments of the Estonian SS Division repulsed the attacks , causing great Soviet losses . 
 Soviet air assaults against civilians in Estonian towns were a part of the offensive , aimed at forcing the Estonians away from supporting the German side . The Soviet Long Range Aviation branch assaulted the Estonian capital of Tallinn on the night of 8 – 9 March . Approximately 40 % of the housing was destroyed in the city ; 25 @,@ 000 people were left homeless and 500 civilians were killed . The result of the air raid was the opposite of what the Soviets intended , as people felt disgusted by the Soviet atrocities ; more men answered the German conscription call . 
 The Soviet tank attack at Auvere Station was stopped by a squadron of the 502nd Heavy Tank Battalion on 17 March . The ensuing offensive continued for another week until the Soviet forces had suffered enough casualties to switch over to a defensive stance . This enabled " Narwa " to take the initiative . 
 = = = Strachwitz offensive = = = 
 The Strachwitz Battle Group annihilated the Soviet 8th Army shock troop wedge at the western end of the Krivasoo Bridgehead on 26 March . The German battle group destroyed the eastern tip of the bridgehead on 6 April . Generalmajor Hyacinth Graf Strachwitz von Groß @-@ <unk> und <unk> , inspired by the success , tried to eliminate the whole bridgehead but was unable to proceed due to the spring thaw that had rendered the swamp impassable for the Tiger I tanks . By the end of April , the parties had mutually exhausted their strengths . Relative calm settled on the front until late July 1944 . 
 = = = The Soviets capture Narva = = = 
 The Soviet breakthrough in Belorussia forced the Army Group North to withdraw a large portion of their troops from Narva to the central part of the Eastern Front and to Finland . As there were insufficient forces for the defence of the former front line at Narva in July , the German army detachment began preparations for withdrawal to the Tannenberg defence line in the <unk> Hills 16 kilometres from Narva . The commanders of the Leningrad Front were unaware of the preparations ; they designed a new Narva Offensive . Shock troops from the Finnish front were concentrated near the town , giving the Leningrad Front a 4 : 1 superiority both in manpower and equipment . Before the German forces had implemented their plan , the Soviet 8th Army launched their offensive ; the Battle of Auvere was the result . The I.Battalion , 1st Estonian and the 44th Infantry Regiment repulsed the attack , inflicting heavy losses on the 8th Army . The " Nordland " and " Nederland " detachments in Ivangorod left their positions quietly during the night before 25 July . The evacuation was carried out according to the German plans until the 2nd Shock Army resumed the offensive in the morning . Supported by 280 @,@ 000 shells and grenades from 1360 assault guns , the army crossed the river north of the town . The <unk> , 1st Estonian Regiment kept the Soviet shock Army from capturing the highway behind the retreating troops . The defensive operation led to the destruction of the SS Volunteer Panzergrenadier Regiment 48 " General <unk> " due to tactical errors . The Soviet forces captured Narva on 26 July . 
 = = = Tannenberg Line = = = 
 The Soviet vanguard 201st and 256th Rifle Divisions attacked the Tannenberg Line and captured part of the Orphanage Hill , the easternmost of the area . The Anti @-@ Tank Company , SS Panzergrenadier Regiment 24 " Danmark " returned the hill to the hands of the " Narwa " the following night . The III ( Germanic ) SS Panzer Corps repulsed subsequent Soviet attempts to capture the hills by tanks on the following day . The SS Reconnaissance Battalion 11 and the I.Battalion , Waffen Grenadier Regiment 47 ( 3rd Estonian ) launched a counterattack during the night before 28 July . The assault collapsed under the Soviet tank fire which destroyed the Estonian battalion . In a pitched battle carried over to the next day without a break in the fighting , the two Soviet armies forced " Narwa " into new positions at the Grenadier Hill , the central one . 
 The climax of the Battle of Tannenberg Line was the Soviet attack of 29 July . The shock units suppressed the German resistance on the Orphanage Hill , while the Soviet main forces suffered heavy casualties in the subsequent assault at the Grenadier Hill . The Soviet tanks encircled it and the Tower Hill , the westernmost one . Steiner , the commander of the III SS Panzer Corps , sent out the remaining seven tanks , which hit the surprised Soviet armour and forced them back . This enabled an improvised battle group consisting of different nationalities led by Hauptsturmführer Paul <unk> to launch a counterattack which recaptured the Grenadier Hill . Of the 136 @,@ 830 Soviets initiating the offensive , a few thousand had survived . The Soviet tank regiments had been demolished . 
 With swift reinforcements , the two Soviet armies continued their attacks . The Stavka demanded the destruction of the " Narwa " and the capture of Rakvere by 7 August . The 2nd Shock Army was back to 20 @,@ 000 troops by 2 August while numerous attempts using unchanged tactics failed to break the multinational defence of the " Narwa " . Leonid Govorov , the commander of the Leningrad Front terminated the offensive on 10 August . 
 = = Casualties = = 
 During the Soviet era , the losses in the battle of Narva were not released by the Soviets . In recent years , Russian authors have published some figures but not for the whole course of the battles . The number of Soviet casualties can only be estimated indirectly . 
 The Army Detachment " Narwa " lost 23 @,@ 963 personnel as dead , wounded and missing in action in February 1944 . During the following months through to 30 July 1944 , an additional 34 @,@ 159 German personnel were lost , 5 @,@ 748 of them dead and 1 @,@ 179 missing in action . The total German casualties during the initial phase of the campaign was approximately 58 @,@ 000 men , 12 @,@ 000 of them dead or missing in action . From 24 July to 10 August 1944 , the German forces buried 1709 men in Estonia . Adding the troops missing in action , the number of dead in the period is estimated at approximately 2 @,@ 500 . Accounting the standard ratio of 1 / 4 of the wounded as irrecoverable losses , the number of German casualties in the later period of the battle was approximately 10 @,@ 000 . The total German casualties during the Battle of Narva is estimated at 14 @,@ 000 dead or missing and 54 @,@ 000 wounded or sick . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Baltic Offensive = = = 
 On 1 September , Finland announced the cessation of military cooperation with Germany to sign an armistice with the Soviet Union . On 4 September , Finland opened access for the Soviets to Finnish waters . With the Soviet offensive at Riga threatening to complete their encirclement , the Army Group North started preparations for the withdrawal of troops from Estonia in an operation codenamed Aster . The possible transportation corridors were thoroughly prepared using maps at headquarters . On 14 September , a provisional order to start preparations for withdrawal was given to the " Nordland " Division . On 17 September 1944 , a naval force under Vice @-@ Admiral Theodor Burchardi began evacuating elements of the German formations and Estonian civilians . Within six days , around 50 @,@ 000 troops and 1 @,@ 000 prisoners had been removed . The elements of the 18th Army in Estonia were ordered to withdraw into Latvia . 
 The Soviet 1st , 2nd and 3rd Baltic Fronts launched their Baltic Offensive on 14 September . The operation was aimed at cutting off the Army Group North in Estonia . After much argument , Adolf Hitler agreed to allow the total evacuation of the troops in mainland Estonia . The 2nd Shock Army launched its Tallinn Offensive on 17 September from the Emajõgi River Front in South Estonia . At midnight on 18 September , the Army Detachment " Narwa " left its positions in the Tannenberg Line . The 8th Army reconnaissance reported the evacuation five hours after it had been completed and the Soviets started to chase the troops towards Estonian harbours and the Latvian border . The III SS Panzer Corps reached Pärnu by 20 September , while the II SS Corps retreated southwards to form the 18th Army 's rearguard . The Soviet armies advanced to take Tallinn on 22 September . The Soviets had demolished the harbour at Haapsalu by 24 September . The German Panzer Corps evacuated Vormsi Island just off the coast on the following day , successfully completing the evacuation of mainland Estonia with only minor casualties . The 8th Army went on to take the remaining West Estonian archipelago in the Moonsund Landing Operation . The Baltic Offensive resulted in the expulsion of the German forces from Estonia , a large part of Latvia , and Lithuania . 
 During the withdrawal from Estonia , the German command released thousands of native Estonian conscripts from military service . The Soviet command began conscripting Baltic natives as areas were brought under Soviet control . While some ended up serving on both sides , thousands joined the Forest Brothers partisan detachments to avoid conscription . 
 Army Group North land lines of communication were permanently severed from Army Group Centre and it was relegated to the Courland Pocket , an occupied Baltic seashore area in Latvia . On 25 January , Adolf Hitler renamed Army Group North the " Courland " , implicitly realising that there was no possibility of restoring a new land corridor between Courland and East Prussia . The Red Army commenced the encirclement and reduction of the pocket , enabling the Soviets to focus on operations towards East Prussia . The Army Group Courland retained a possibility of being a major threat . Operations by the Red Army against the Courland Pocket continued until the surrender of Army Group Courland on 9 May 1945 , when close to 200 @,@ 000 Germans were taken prisoner there . 
 = = = Outcome for Finland = = = 
 The lengthy German defence during the Battle of Narva denied the Soviets the use of Estonia as a favorable base for amphibious invasions and air attacks against Helsinki and other Finnish cities . Stavka 's hopes of assaulting Finland from Estonia and forcing it into capitulation were diminished . Finnish Chief of Defence Carl Gustav Emil Mannerheim repeatedly reminded the German side that in the event their troops in Estonia retreated , Finland would be forced to make peace even on extremely unfavourable terms . Thus , the prolonged Battle of Narva helped Finland avoid a Soviet occupation , sustained its capacity for resistance and enabled them to enter negotiations for the Moscow Armistice on their own terms . 
 = = = Attempt to restore Estonian Government = = = 
 The lengthy German defence prevented a swift Soviet breakthrough into Estonia and gave the underground National Committee of the Republic of Estonia enough time to attempt to re @-@ establish Estonian independence . On 1 August 1944 , the national committee pronounced itself Estonia 's highest authority and on 18 September 1944 , acting head of state Uluots appointed a new government led by Otto Tief . Over the radio in English , the government declared its neutrality in the war . The government issued two editions of the Riigi <unk> ( State Gazette ) but did not have time to distribute them . On 21 September , the national forces seized the government buildings in <unk> , Tallinn and ordered the German forces to leave . The flag of Estonia was hoisted at the tower of <unk> Hermann , to be removed by the Soviets four days later . The Estonian Government in Exile served to carry the continuity of the Estonian state forward until 1992 , when it handed its credentials over to the incoming President , Lennart Meri . 
 = = = Civilian refugees = = = 
 The delay of the Soviet advance allowed over 25 @,@ 000 Estonians and 3 @,@ 700 Swedes to flee to neutral Sweden and 6 @,@ 000 Estonians to Finland . Thousands of refugees died on boats and ships sunk in the Baltic Sea . In September , 90 @,@ 000 soldiers and 85 @,@ 000 Estonian , Finnish and German refugees and Soviet prisoners of war were evacuated to Germany . The sole German cost of this evacuation was the loss of a steamboat . More German naval evacuations followed from Estonian ports , where up to 1 @,@ 200 people were drowned in Soviet attacks . 
 = = = Soviet reoccupation = = = 
 Soviet rule of Estonia was re @-@ established by force , and sovietisation followed , which was mostly carried out in 1944 – 1950 . The forced collectivisation of agriculture began in 1947 , and was completed after the mass deportation of Estonians in March 1949 . All private farms were confiscated , and farmers were made to join the collective farms . Besides the armed resistance of the Forest Brothers , a number of underground nationalist schoolchildren groups were active . Most of their members were sentenced to long terms of imprisonment . The punitive actions decreased rapidly after Stalin 's death in 1953 ; from 1956 – 58 , a large part of the deportees and political prisoners were allowed to return to Estonia . Political arrests and numerous other kind of crimes against humanity were committed all through the occupation period until the late 1980s . After all , the attempt to integrate Estonian society into the Soviet system failed . Although the armed resistance was defeated , the population remained anti @-@ Soviet . This helped the Estonians to organise a new resistance movement in the late 1980s , regain their independence in 1991 , and then rapidly develop a modern society . 
 = 166th Aviation Brigade ( United States ) = 
 The 166th Aviation Brigade was an aviation training brigade of the United States Army headquartered at Fort Hood , Texas . It was a subordinate unit of First Army - Division West . An " AC / RC " ( Active Component / Reserve Component ) formation , the 166th Aviation Brigade was the sole organization responsible for the post @-@ mobilization training of United States Army Reserve & National Guard aviation units . The unit was formerly designated as 3rd Brigade , 75th Division . 
 From 1997 , the 166th Aviation Brigade has trained other aviation units for front @-@ line service . As such , it has never seen combat , and has thus never earned any campaign streamers or unit awards . As the only brigade in the First Army responsible for training aviation units , the 166th Aviation Brigade is the principal unit for training Army Reserve and Army National Guard assets preparing to deploy to contingencies around the world , which means it is responsible for 47 percent of all Army Aviation assets . 
 The 166th Aviation Brigade partners with its First Army - Division West sister brigade , the 479th Field Artillery Brigade for its combat aviation brigade ( CAB ) mobilizations , but maintains validation authority , or final approval over a CAB 's successful completion of mobilization training . The 166th Aviation Brigade inactivated at Fort hood on 24 June 2015 . 
 = = Organization = = 
 The 166th Aviation Brigade consists of eight battalions from five regiments . Its Headquarters and Headquarters Company is located at Fort Hood , its Reserve Component battalions are located at Fort Des Moines , Iowa , Fort Leavenworth , Kansas , Fort Riley , Kansas and Jefferson Barracks , Missouri , and its Active Component battalions are located at Fort Riley , Kansas , Fort Stewart , Georgia , Fort Knox , Kentucky and Fort Hood , Texas . 
 The 1st Battalion , 291st Aviation Regiment is the brigade 's primary assault helicopter training unit , specializing in fast @-@ attack helicopters such as the AH @-@ 64 Apache . The 2nd Battalion , 291st Aviation Regiment is the brigade 's primary utility , lift , and air ambulance helicopter training unit , specializing in utility helicopters such as the UH @-@ 60 Black Hawk and the CH @-@ 47 Chinook . The 1st Battalion , 337th Regiment ( Training Support ) specializes in mobilization and de @-@ mobilization for aviation units . The remaining battalions , including the 1st Battalion , 351st Regiment ( Training Support ) , 3rd Battalion , 382nd Regiment ( Logistics Support ) , and the 1st , 2nd , and 3rd Battalions of the 383rd Regiment ( Combat Support / Combat Sustainment Support ) specialize in areas of general instruction about other aspects of mobilization , conducting exercises , and logistics management . 
 While its Reserve Component battalions have somewhat maintained their former mission of training National Guard and Army Reserve units in Iowa , Kansas , Nebraska , and Missouri as they did before the brigade reflagged , they have shifted toward supporting the brigade 's primary mission - the mobilization of Combat Aviation Brigades ( <unk> ) by either assisting with ground training , or training and evaluating the <unk> ' aviation support battalions . 
 = = History = = 
 The 166th Aviation Brigade was first constituted 16 September 1988 in the Army Reserve as Headquarters , 166th Aviation Group . It took two years for the formation to be organized and the unit was finally activated on 16 September 1990 in Germany . It received a distinctive unit insignia on 3 April 1991 . Its headquarters was at <unk> . 
 The formation was inactivated on 15 June 1997 in Germany . Over the next four months , the unit 's inactive components were reorganized and redesignated as a brigade sized unit , allowing it to take on a larger support staff that could command more soldiers . This transformation occurred as the brigade was reassigned to the continental United States . It was activated on 24 October 1997 as the 166th Aviation Brigade at Fort Riley , Kansas . It was also activated into the Active duty force . 
 The brigade began to undertake training support duties for units in the process of mobilization and de @-@ mobilization . It was also tasked to provide support for local authorities in the event of peacetime crises and natural disasters . Soldiers of the brigade also participated in assistance with community projects around the Fort Riley community , including repairing and refurbishing run down properties for shelter house projects as well as disabled veterans . After two years of duty , the brigade was inactivated on 16 October 1999 at Fort Riley , Kansas . 
 As part of the Army 's Transformation Plan , the 3rd Brigade , 75th Division was redesignated as the 166th Aviation Brigade , under the command of Division West of the First Army . Its mission would be to train and mobilize aviation units of the Army 's reserve and national guard components . It was to be the only brigade under the First Army that specialized in training for Army aviation units . It was activated 1 December 2006 as a reserve unit at Fort Riley . The brigade became a partner organization of the 1st Infantry Division , which was stationed at Fort Riley and could provide better support than the headquarters of First Army Division West , which was headquartered at Fort Carson , Colorado and maintained units all over the western United States . The brigade received a shoulder sleeve insignia on 13 June 2007 , but it has not been authorized for wear due to First Army policy requiring its units to wear its SSI . 
 In the summer of 2008 , the brigade 's combat service / combat sustainment support battalions took part in equipment testing and training in Rapid City , South Dakota . It tested the <unk> Agile Remote Control Robot IV , a route clearance robot , with the assistance of the South Dakota National Guard . The bulk of the brigade spent the summer at Fort Sill , Oklahoma to train aviation assets for deploying units . In June 2008 , the brigade trained the aviation assets of the 34th Infantry Division in air combat , air assault , and other tactics related to aviation . For this mission , the brigade was assisted by the 479th Field Artillery Brigade , which handled ground exercises . As part of a new training routine , the brigade trained the 34th Infantry Division 's aviation units at Fort Rucker , spending a longer time training the unit because it continued to train the brigade as it mobilized and prepared to deploy . Other units trained with the Division , but none through the entire mobilization process . This process used new and never @-@ before @-@ used facilities to streamline training exercises . Purportedly , it gave the 166th Aviation Brigade much additional time for training , as the streamlining process made some programs more efficient , cutting time needed to prepare for them in half . 
 After extensive evaluation , the 166th Aviation Brigade completed training for the Combat Aviation Brigade ( CAB ) , 34th Infantry Division on 4 August 2008 . The brigade returned to Fort Riley for a month before beginning the process over again with pre @-@ mobilization training of the CAB , 28th Infantry Division , and returned to Fort Sill for post @-@ mobilization training in late January 2008 . 
 As part of a First Army realignment of training support brigades , the Department of the Army approved a change of station for First Army - Division West and two of its training support brigades . The 166th Aviation Brigade moved to Fort Hood , Texas on 15 July 2009 . The brigade 's Active Component battalions , all of which are aviation units , moved at a later date , most likely the summer 2010 ( with the exception of 1st Battalion , 291st Regiment , which was already located at the installation ) .The 166th Aviation Brigade inactivated at Fort hood on 24 June 2015 . 
 = = Honors = = 
 As the brigade has been in a training and supporting role for the Army since its creation , the 166th Aviation Brigade has never been awarded a campaign streamer for campaign participation . It has also never been awarded a unit decoration . 
 = Baby ( Justin Bieber song ) = 
 " Baby " is a song by Canadian recording artist Justin Bieber . It was released as the lead single from the latter half of Bieber 's debut album , My World 2 @.@ 0 . The track was written by Bieber with Christopher " Tricky " Stewart and Terius " The @-@ Dream " Nash , both of whom worked with Bieber on " One Time " , and also by R & B singer Christina Milian and labelmate , rapper Ludacris . 
 It was available for digital download on January 18 , 2010 . The song received airplay directly after release , officially impacting mainstream and rhythmic radio on January 26 , 2010 . The song is uptempo R & B , blending together dance @-@ pop and hip @-@ hop elements , while using influences of doo @-@ wop music . The song has received positive reviews from critics who complimented the song 's effective lyrics and chorus , and commended Ludacris ' part and the song 's ability to have an urban twist . 
 The song was a commercial success , peaking at number one in France , and charting in the top ten of the United Kingdom , Canada , the United States , Australia , Norway , Japan , Ireland , Hungary , Belgium ( Flanders ) , Slovakia and New Zealand . The accompanying music video takes place in a mall / bowling @-@ alley setting . The video features several cameos such as Drake , Lil Twist and Tinashe , in which Bieber chases after a girl . As of May 2013 , the song has sold 3 @.@ 9 million digital downloads in the United States . 
 The official music video is the fifteenth most @-@ viewed video all @-@ time on YouTube , and is also , as of 2016 , the YouTube video with the most dislikes . It had been the most @-@ viewed from July 12 , 2010 until November 24 , 2012 , when it was surpassed by the music video for " Gangnam Style " by Psy . Bieber performed the song several times , including Saturday Night Live , and the ninth season of American Idol . Bieber also performed an acoustic rendition of the remix version with Drake at the 2010 Juno Awards . The official remix in the United Kingdom features British hip @-@ hop artist Chipmunk . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 " Baby " was written by Bieber with Christopher " Tricky " Stewart and Terius " The @-@ Dream " Nash , both of whom worked with Bieber on " One Time " , R & B singer and The @-@ Dream 's then wife Christina Milian and labelmate , Ludacris . When asked how the collaboration initially came about , Bieber said , " [ Ludacris and I ] both live in Atlanta . I met him a year prior to this and we figured it was a perfect collaboration for him , so we invited him out to do it . " Bieber first premiered the song performing on MuchMusic on December 28 , 2009 . A few days before the release of the single , Bieber posted an acoustic version of the song to his YouTube with his guitarist Dan <unk> , similar to the way he did with " Favorite Girl " . Billboard said that : " Bieber delivers his characteristically clean vocals with conviction : " My first love broke my heart for the first time / and I 'm like , ' baby , baby , baby , no ! ' I thought you 'd always be mine . " Also in a review of the acoustic version Bill Lamb of About.com said that " I think the vocals here will convince some that Justin Bieber really does have the vocal chops . " 
 = = Style and composition = = 
 The song is predominantly upbeat , featuring Bieber 's R & B vocals over a backdrop containing a dance infused beat , full of keyboard and " disco string " synths . The song is composed in the key of E ♭ major with Bieber 's vocal range spanning from the low @-@ note of G3 to the high @-@ note of C5 . According to Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone , the song " blends winks at Fifties doo @-@ wop with hip @-@ hop chants " , comparing the style and the lyrics " My first love broke my heart for the first time / And I was like / Baby , baby , baby , <unk> / I thought you 'd always be mine " to fifties ballads like " Tears on My Pillow " , " Why Do Fools Fall in Love " and " Earth Angel " . Lyrically , Bieber 's lines explain his distress over his lost love , and promise to get it back , featured in lines like , " And I wanna play it cool / But I 'm <unk> ' you … / I 'm in pieces / So come and fix me … " . The chorus features the distinct and repetitive " baby , baby , baby , <unk> ( <unk> ) " hook . After the second verse , Ludacris comes in with the verse @-@ rap , an anecdote of young love when he was thirteen , as it runs " When I was 13 / I had my first love / She had me going crazy / Oh , I was star @-@ struck / She woke me up daily / Don 't need no Starbucks … " . 
 A famous section of the song plays " Baby , Baby baby oh . Like baby , baby baby oh " . It is the catchphrase of the song that identifies the song . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Nick Levine of Digital Spy felt the song was " no great departure from what he 's given us before " , but felt the production of Tricky and The @-@ Dream helped give the song a " simple " , " big " chorus about " puppy love " that works . Melanie Bertoldi of Billboard said , " The midtempo number 's undeniably contagious chorus should keep Bieber 's tween fan base satisfied , and Ludacris ' brief cameo adds a welcome urban twist . " <unk> went on to say , " The matchup adds a layer of maturity to Bieber 's repertoire and should further solidify his growing presence on the charts . " Rap @-@ Up magazine said that " the sweet pop fare gets a little street cred courtesy of the teen sensation 's labelmate Ludacris . " Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone appreciated the song 's vintage doo @-@ wop and fifties aesthetic and hip @-@ hop chants , and said the song included " one of the catchiest choruses concocted by the @-@ Dream and Tricky Stewart , the duo behind " Umbrella " and " Single Ladies . " Luke O 'Neill of Boston Globe had mixed thoughts about the song calling Ludacris ' cameo " goofy " , and said , the song " effects a musical anachronism , albeit a catchy one , but in this sped @-@ up recycling moment all styles all at once are grist for the mill . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " Baby " debuted at number five on the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming Bieber 's highest charting single in the US . Bieber then went on to surpass this chart position when " Boyfriend " debuted at number two in April 2012 . The song was also Ludacris 's biggest song to date , solo or featuring , since 2007 's " Glamorous " . " Baby " was beaten out as the week 's highest debut by Taylor Swift 's " Today Was a Fairytale " , which debuted at number two . The debuting of the pair of songs was just the third time in history that the Hot 100 had two new top @-@ five debuts . The instance had last happened in 2003 when American Idol 's Ruben Studdard and Clay Aiken 's debut singles charted at number one and two . During its first week of radio impact , the song had over 1400 spins , and was the top gainer for mainstream and rhythmic radio formats . The song debuted at thirty @-@ three on the Pop Songs chart on the week labeled February 13 , 2010 . The song missed out becoming the greatest gainer by one spot , which was Kesha 's " Blah Blah Blah " . However the following week , the song did collect greatest gainer recognition , jumping to twenty @-@ five on the chart , and has since peaked at sixteen . On August 2 , 2010 , the song was certified double @-@ platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America for shipments of 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 units . As of May 2013 , the song has sold 3 @.@ 9 million digital downloads in the United States . With the inclusion of streaming in the RIAA certifications in 2013 , the song became the highest certificated single of all time with <unk> ( passing " Candle in the Wind 1997 " by Elton John with <unk> ) . 
 " Baby " debuted and peaked on the Canadian Hot 100 at number three , becoming his highest charting single at the time . On the issue dated February 8 , 2010 , the song debuted in Australia on the official ARIA Singles Chart at number thirty @-@ seven . After twelve weeks of ascending and descending the charts the single reached a peak of three . " Baby " has since been certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipments of 70 @,@ 000 units . In New Zealand , the song entered the chart at nineteen . After weeks of ascending and descending the charts , " Baby " reached a peak of four . The song dropped to the number five position the following week and after weeks of fluctuating around the chart it attained the number four position once again . It has since been certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) . The song peaked at number three on the UK Singles Chart on the issue date March 14 , 2010 . The following week , " Baby " fell to number four , but climbed back to its previous peak position of three on the issue date March 28 , 2010 . In the process of climbing the charts , " Baby " gained a new peak of two on the R & B Singles Chart . As of June 2012 , Baby has sold 442 @,@ 432 copies in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Music video = = 
 Filming for the music video began during the week of January 25 , 2010 , in Los Angeles . It was filmed at Universal CityWalk by director Ray Kay , who had previously directed videos for Beyoncé Knowles , Lady Gaga , Alexandra Burke , and Cheryl Cole , among others . Ludacris said that the video " is like a 2010 version of Michael Jackson 's " The Way You Make Me Feel " . " Bieber said that the video " will capture the song 's message of trying to woo back a girl . " In explaining the concept of the video , Bieber said , " It starts off , I really like this girl , but we didn 't [ get ] along ; we couldn 't be together . Basically I want her back and [ I 'm ] kind of going through the whole thing . I 'm chasing her around , trying to get her , and she 's kind of playing hard to get , but I 'm persistent . I keep going . " The video premiered exclusively on Vevo on Friday , February 19 , 2010 . Singer and actress Jasmine Villegas portrays Bieber 's love interest in the video . Bieber 's friends , Young Money artists Drake and Lil Twist also appeared in the video , along with Tinashe and jerkin ' crew The Rangers . 
 The video takes place in a mall @-@ like setting with a bowling alley and more . After the video was released , MTV commented on the video being the new version of " The Way You Make Me Feel " saying , " .. and the choreography does use a few of Jackson 's less @-@ suggestive moves . " The MTV review goes on saying , " most of the video takes place in the bowling alley , there are also scenes of Bieber in other settings , hanging out with Luda , doing the moonwalk , messing with his hair and mugging for the camera . Regardless of his lady 's apparent frustration with him , Bieber eventually wins her over . The video concludes with the pair walking off into the night holding hands . " Rapper Drake appears in the video . 
 Billboard reviewed the video , saying , " Those new dance moves he 's showing off can only mean one thing : all over the world , tweens ' hearts are melting right now . " In July 2010 , the video became the most viewed video in YouTube history until it was surpassed by Psy 's hit single , " Gangnam Style " , in November 2012 . On March 5 , 2014 , " Baby " became the second video , after " Gangnam Style " , to receive 1 billion views on YouTube , and is the fifteenth most viewed video on the site , with over 1 @.@ 41 billion views as of July 2016 . Despite this , the video has many more dislikes than it has likes . Although the song has received over 4 @.@ 7 million likes , the song has received over 6 @.@ 4 million dislikes . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Bieber premiered an acoustic version of the song on December 28 , 2009 , on MuchMusic . He sang the song on VH1 's Pepsi Super Bowl Fan Jam , along with other performers Rihanna , JoJo and Timbaland , and on CBS ' The Early Show as a part of their Super Bowl programming . He performed the song the first time with Ludacris on BET 's SOS : Saving Ourselves – Help for Haiti Telethon , on February 6 , 2009 , which also aired on VH1 , and MTV . During the chorus , he changed the lyrics to " Baby , baby , Haiti " , to show support for the cause , and the reason everyone came together for the show . In the week of his album release , he performed the song on The View and 106 & Park . Bieber also performed the song at the 2010 Kids Choice Awards on March 27 . Bieber performed the song along with " U Smile " on the eighteenth episode of season thirty five of Saturday Night Live . Bieber performed an acoustic rendition of the song along with a freestyle by good friend Drake at the 2010 Juno Awards . In April 2010 , Bieber noted that due to his voice changing , he could no longer hit all the notes in " Baby " , and for live performances , the key is lowered . Bieber performed the song live in Sydney , Australia on April 26 , 2010 , in the Sunrise studios after his public performance was cancelled . Bieber also performed the song on May 11 , 2010 , on The Oprah Winfrey Show . Bieber performed the song on June 4 , 2010 , on the Today Show along with " Never Say Never " , " Somebody to Love " , and " One Time " . He performed the song with " Somebody to Love " at the 2010 MuchMusic Video Awards . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Chart precession and succession = = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = So Yesterday = 
 " So Yesterday " is a song recorded by American singer Hilary Duff for her second studio album , Metamorphosis ( 2003 ) . It was written and produced by The Matrix ( a production team consisting of Lauren Christy , Scott Spock and Graham Edwards ) , with additional writing from Charlie Midnight . The song is influenced by pop rock music , and the lyrics chronicle the protagonist getting over a breakup with her boyfriend , declaring him as " so yesterday " . The song received mixed reviews from music critics , with some of them noting its close similarity to Avril Lavigne 's works , while others named it one of Duff 's best songs ever . 
 " So Yesterday " premiered on AOL Music 's " First Listen " on June 27 , 2003 . It was serviced to mainstream radio in the United States on July 15 , 2003 . The song became Duff 's first single to chart in the US Billboard Hot 100 , reaching number forty @-@ two . It was moderately successful outside the US , reaching top forty in most countries it charted . The song reached number eight in Australia and was certified platinum by Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . 
 The song was accompanied by a music video , directed by Chris Applebaum , which showed Duff playing a prank on her ex @-@ boyfriend . It was successful on various music video channels like MTV and MuchMusic . Duff performed the song on her Metamorphosis Tour and has since performed it on all her concert tours . The song is also featured on the compilations Most Wanted ( 2005 ) , <unk> Hilary ( 2006 ) and Best of Hilary Duff ( 2008 ) , and the music video game Band Hero . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Although Duff recorded songs like " I Can 't Wait " , " Why Not " and " What Dreams Are Made Of " , which received substantial airplay on Radio Disney , executives at Buena Vista Music Group , Duff 's record label , planned to help her reach a more mature audience . So , Andre <unk> , an executive at Buena Vista , along with Duff and her mother , enlisted the songwriting and production team " The Matrix " ( consisting of Lauren Christy , Scott Spock and Graham Edwards ) to produce songs for Duff 's debut album Metamorphosis ( 2003 ) . " So Yesterday " became one of three songs produced by the team for the album , and was the last song recorded for the album . Duff herself has said that when she first heard the song , she did not really like it ; however , her opinion changed after she listened to it more often . She then decided she would give the song a " 100 percent " and not comment negatively of it . According to her , she " ended up loving it " , stating , " It was such a fun song , and it means a lot . " Bob Cavallo , chairman of Buena Vista Records , said that the song was " more mature than the past work that she 's done . " 
 " So Yesterday " premiered on AOL Music 's " First Listen " on June 27 , 2003 , and it drew over 500 @,@ 000 streams in two days . It was released to mainstream radio in the United States on July 15 , and was the " most added " song on the format in its first two weeks of release . The song is featured on all of Duff 's compilations album , including Most Wanted ( 2005 ) , 4ever ( 2006 ) and her greatest hits album , Best of Hilary Duff ( 2008 ) . It is also featured on the music video game Band Hero as a bonus download . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Lyrically , the song talks about someone who has got over a broken relationship , declaring the partner as " so yesterday " . According to Duff , the song 's lyrics are very empowering towards breaking up with someone and getting over it . In a 2006 interview with Instinct , Duff said that people often told her that " So Yesterday " was " the ultimate post @-@ breakup anthem " . She said her mother instilled the notion of inner strength in her , and that she wanted the music she makes to be positive . " I don 't think there 's very much of that out there anymore . " , she said . She stressed the importance of strong songs that are not all about how " a boy broke your heart and you 're never going to get on your feet again " , saying it was good for girls to hear . 
 Musically , " So Yesterday " is moderately paced , with influences of pop and rock music and moves at a tempo of 76 bpm . The song is set in the signature of common time , and is written in the key of C ♭ major . The song has the sequence of Am – G – Fmaj7 as its chord progression . Duff 's vocal range in the song spans from the note of G ♯ 3 to the note of B ♯ 4 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon its release , the song received mixed reviews from critics . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic gave a positive review and commented that the song sounded natural coming from a teenager like Duff . He also noted the influence of Avril Lavigne on the song . Billboard gave a mixed review , also commenting on Lavigne 's influence on the song . Similarly , Spence D. of IGN Music was mixed in his review stating , " [ it 's ] like bubblegum ice cream : smooth and sweet at first listen , but the flavor eventually wears off , leaving somewhat generic pop anthems that will most likely be forgotten by the aforementioned throngs of young girl worshippers as they age along with Duff . " While reviewing Duff 's compilation Most Wanted , Talia Kraines of BBC Music commented that the song was Duff 's best . Similarly , Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine , noted the track as " kind of cute . " Elysa Gardner of USA Today gave a negative review on the song 's title writing , " [ That ] song title may , unfortunately , prove prophetic for an artist who seems so content to merely ride the wave of the moment " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " So Yesterday " debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 of August 16 , 2003 , at number 53 , and eventually peaked at number 42 . It spent 20 weeks on the Hot 100 . The song topped the US Billboard Hot 100 Singles Sales chart , making Duff the first artist in four months not affiliated with American Idol , to top the chart . The song peaked at number two in Canadian Singles Chart . In Australia the song debuted at number thirty @-@ nine , peaked at number eight in its eighth week , and remained on the chart for twenty weeks . It was the forty @-@ ninth best selling single of 2003 in Australia , and was certified platinum in 2004 . In Japan , the song reached number 199 on the Oricon weekly charts . In United Kingdom , the song debuted at number nine on the UK Singles Chart . The song peaked in the top ten on the charts in other European countries such as the Netherlands and France . As of July 27 , 2014 , the song had sold 252 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video premiered on MTV on July 24 , 2003 . It was directed by Chris Applebaum . It was also featured on MTV 's Making the Video two days after the video 's premiere on July 26 , 2003 . According to Disney Music Group chairman Bob Cavallo , care was taken to see that the video would not be offensive to Duff 's young fans and parents , but would work for MTV . 
 In the video , Duff 's plays a break @-@ up prank on her aloof boyfriend . While he is at the beach , she steals his clothes , including an orange T @-@ shirt that reads " Everything is bigger in Texas ! " . She spends several days taking snapshots of strangers wearing the T @-@ shirt and anonymously sneaking them into his mailbox . His bewilderment turns to dismay when he receives the final package returning the garment along with a picture of Duff smiling , looking back , and wearing a shirt that declares , " you 're so yesterday " . Throughout the whole video , Duff is shown performing the song with her band . The music video ranked at number one on Total Request Live . It was a staple on the UK incarnation of Total Request Live , reaching a peak of # 4 . In late August 2003 it was the most streamed music video on AOL . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " So Yesterday " was performed at the 31st American Music Award in November 2003 . The song was also performed at the British chart program Top of the Pops in 2003 . Duff performed an acoustic version of the song at Sessions @ AOL and Studio Disney . Apart from the live television performances , the song was performed on many of Duff 's tours . " So Yesterday " was performed on every show on her Metamorphosis Tour ( 2003 ) . The live acoustic performance at Sessions @ AOL was taped and is featured on Duff 's video compilation All Access Pass , and the performance at the Metamorphosis tour is featured on Duff 's live video compilation The Girl Can Rock . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriters : Lauren Christy , Scott Spock , Graham Edwards , Charlie Midnight 
 Production : The Matrix 
 Instruments and programming : The Matrix 
 Recording and mixing : The Matrix 
 Source 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Amy Winehouse = 
 Amy Jade Winehouse ( 14 September 1983 – 23 July 2011 ) was an English singer and songwriter known for her deep expressive contralto vocals and her eclectic mix of musical genres , including soul ( sometimes labelled as blue @-@ eyed soul and neo soul ) , rhythm and blues , and jazz . Winehouse 's debut album , Frank ( 2003 ) , was a critical success in the UK and was nominated for the Mercury Prize . Her follow @-@ up album , Back to Black ( 2006 ) , led to five 2008 Grammy Awards , tying the then record for the most wins by a female artist in a single night , and made her the first British female to win five Grammys , including three of the general field " Big Four " awards : Best New Artist , Record of the Year and Song of the Year . 
 Winehouse won three Ivor Novello Awards : in 2004 , Best Contemporary Song for " Stronger Than Me " ; in 2007 , Best Contemporary Song again , this time for " Rehab " ; and in 2008 , Best Song Musically and Lyrically for " Love Is a Losing Game . " She also won the 2007 Brit Award for Best British Female Artist , having been nominated for Best British Album , with Back to Black . 
 Winehouse died of alcohol poisoning on 23 July 2011 , aged 27 . Her album Back to Black posthumously became , for a time , the UK 's best @-@ selling album of the 21st century . In 2012 , Winehouse was ranked 26th on VH1 's 100 Greatest Women In Music . The BBC has called her " the pre @-@ eminent vocal talent of her generation . " 
 = = Early life = = 
 Amy Winehouse was born in Chase Farm Hospital in north London , to Jewish parents . Her father , Mitchell " Mitch " Winehouse , was a window panel installer then a taxi driver ; her mother , Janis Winehouse ( née Seaton ) , a pharmacist . The Winehouse ancestors were Russian and Polish immigrants to London . Amy had an older brother , Alex ( born 1979 ) , and the family lived in London 's Southgate area , where she attended <unk> Primary School . 
 Many of Winehouse 's maternal uncles were professional jazz musicians . Amy 's paternal grandmother , Cynthia , was a singer and dated the English jazz saxophonist Ronnie Scott . She and Amy 's parents influenced Amy 's interest in jazz . Her father Mitch often sang Frank Sinatra songs to her , and whenever she got chastised at school she would sing " Fly Me to the Moon " before going up to the headmistress to be told off . Winehouse 's parents separated when she was nine , and she lived with her mother and stayed with her father and his girlfriend in Hatfield Heath , Essex on weekends . 
 In 1992 her grandmother Cynthia suggested she attend the Susi Earnshaw Theatre School , where she went on Saturdays to further her vocal education and to learn to tap dance . She attended the school for four years and founded a short @-@ lived rap group called Sweet ' n ' Sour with Juliette Ashby , her childhood friend before seeking full @-@ time training at Sylvia Young Theatre School . Winehouse was allegedly expelled at 14 for " not applying herself " and also for piercing her nose . Sylvia Young has denied this — " She changed schools at 15 — I 've heard it said she was expelled ; she wasn 't . I 'd never have expelled Amy " — as has Mitch Winehouse . She also appeared in an episode of The Fast Show , 1997 , with other children from the Sylvia Young School and later attended the Mount School , Mill Hill ; the BRIT School in Selhurst , Croydon ; <unk> <unk> School and then Ashmole School . 
 = = Musical career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 After toying around with her brother Alex 's guitar , Winehouse bought her own when she was 14 and began writing music a year later . Soon after , she began working for a living , including , at one time , as an entertainment journalist for the World Entertainment News Network , in addition to singing with local group the <unk> Band . In July 2000 , she became the featured female vocalist with the National Youth Jazz Orchestra ; her influences were to include Sarah Vaughan and Dinah Washington , the latter whom she was already listening to at home . Amy 's best friend , soul singer Tyler James , sent her demo tape to an A & R person . Winehouse signed to Simon Fuller 's 19 Management in 2002 and was paid £ 250 a week against future earnings . While being developed by the management company , she was kept as a recording industry secret although she was a regular jazz standards singer at the Cobden Club . Her future A & R representative at Island ( Universal ) , Darcus Beese , heard of her by accident when the manager of The <unk> Brothers showed him some productions of his clients , which featured Winehouse as key vocalist . When he asked who the singer was , the manager told him he was not allowed to say . Having decided that he wanted to sign her , it took several months of asking around for Beese to eventually discover who the singer was . However , Winehouse had already recorded a number of songs and signed a publishing deal with EMI by this time . Incidentally , she formed a working relationship with producer Salaam Remi through these record publishers . 
 Beese introduced Winehouse to his boss , Nick Gatfield , and the Island head shared his enthusiasm in signing the young artist . Winehouse was signed to Island , as rival interest in Winehouse had started to build to include representatives of EMI and Virgin starting to make moves . Beese told HitQuarters that he felt the reason behind the excitement , over an artist who was an atypical pop star for the time , was due to a backlash against reality TV music shows , which included audiences starved for fresh , genuine young talent . 
 = = = 2003 – 05 : Debut album Frank = = = 
 Winehouse 's debut album , Frank , was released on 20 October 2003 . Produced mainly by Salaam Remi , many songs were influenced by jazz and , apart from two covers , Winehouse co @-@ wrote every song . The album received positive reviews with compliments over the " cool , critical gaze " in its lyrics and brought comparisons of her voice to Sarah Vaughan , Macy Gray and others . 
 The album entered the upper levels of the UK album chart in 2004 when it was nominated for BRIT Awards in the categories of " British Female Solo Artist " and " British Urban Act . " It went on to achieve platinum sales . Later in 2004 , she and Remi won the Ivor Novello Award for Best Contemporary Song , for their first single together , " Stronger Than Me . " The album was also shortlisted for the 2004 Mercury Music Prize . In the same year , she performed at the Glastonbury Festival – <unk> , the V Festival and the Montreal International Jazz Festival ( 7 July 2004 , at the Club Soda ) . After the release of the album , Winehouse commented that she was " only 80 percent behind [ the ] album " because Island Records had overruled her preferences for the songs and mixes to be included . Further singles from the album were " Take the Box , " " In My Bed " / " You Sent Me Flying " and " Pumps " / " Help Yourself . " 
 = = = 2006 – 07 : international success , Back to Black and touring = = = 
 In contrast to her jazz @-@ influenced former album , Winehouse 's focus shifted to the girl groups of the 1950s and 1960s . Winehouse hired New York singer Sharon Jones 's longtime band , the Dap @-@ Kings , to back her up in the studio and on tour . Mitch Winehouse relates in Amy , My Daughter how fascinating watching her process was : her perfectionism in the studio and how she would put what she had sung on a CD and play it in his taxi outside to know how most people would hear her music . In May 2006 , Winehouse 's demo tracks such as " You Know I 'm No Good " and " Rehab " appeared on Mark Ronson 's New York radio show on East Village Radio . These were some of the first new songs played on the radio after the release of " Pumps " and both were slated to appear on her second album . The 11 @-@ track album , completed in five months , was produced entirely by Salaam Remi and Ronson , with the production credits being split between them . Ronson said in a 2010 interview that he liked working with Winehouse because she was blunt when she did not like his work . She in turn thought that when they first met , he was a sound engineer and that she was expecting an older man with a beard . Promotion of Back to Black soon began and , in early October 2006 Winehouse 's official website was relaunched with a new layout and clips of previously unreleased songs . Back to Black was released in the UK on 30 October 2006 . It went to number one on the UK Albums Chart for two weeks in January 2007 , dropping then climbing back for several weeks in February . In the US , it entered at number seven on the Billboard 200 . It was the best @-@ selling album in the UK of 2007 , selling 1 @.@ 85 million copies over the course of the year . 
 The album spawned a number of hit singles . The first single released from the album was the Ronson @-@ produced " Rehab . " The song reached the top ten in the UK and the US . Time magazine named " Rehab " the Best Song of 2007 . Writer Josh Tyrangiel praised Winehouse for her confidence , saying , " What she is mouthy , funny , sultry , and quite possibly crazy " and " It 's impossible not to be seduced by her originality . Combine it with production by Mark Ronson that references four decades worth of soul music without once ripping it off , and you 've got the best song of 2007 . " The album 's second single and lead single in the US , " You Know I 'm No Good , " was released in January 2007 with a remix featuring rap vocals by Ghostface Killah . It ultimately reached number 18 on the UK singles chart . The title track , " Back to Black , " was released in the UK in April 2007 and peaked at number 25 , but was more successful across mainland Europe . " Tears Dry on Their Own , " " Love Is a Losing Game " were also released as singles , but failed to achieve the same level of success . 
 A deluxe edition of Back to Black was also released on 5 November 2007 in the UK . The bonus disc features B @-@ sides , rare , and live tracks , as well as " Valerie . " Winehouse 's debut DVD I Told You I Was Trouble : Live in London was released the same day in the UK and 13 November in the US . It includes a live set recorded at London 's Shepherd 's Bush Empire and a 50 @-@ minute documentary charting the singer 's career over the previous four years . Frank was released in the United States on 20 November 2007 to positive reviews . The album debuted at number 61 on the Billboard 200 chart . In addition to her own album , she collaborated with other artists on singles . Winehouse was a vocalist on the song " Valerie " on Ronson 's solo album Version . The song peaked at number two in the UK , upon its October single release . " Valerie " was nominated for a 2008 Brit Award for " Best British Single . " Her work with ex @-@ <unk> Mutya Buena , " B Boy Baby , " was released on 17 December 2007 . It served as the fourth single from Buena 's debut album , Real Girl . Winehouse was also in talks of working with Missy Elliott for her album , Block Party . 
 Winehouse toured in conjunction with the Back to Black album 's release , performing headliners in September and November 2006 , including a Little Noise Sessions charity concert at the Union Chapel in Islington , North London . On 31 December 2006 , Winehouse appeared on Jools Holland 's Annual Hootenanny live on the BBC and performed a cover of Marvin Gaye 's " I Heard It Through the Grapevine " along with Paul Weller and Holland 's Rhythm and Blues Orchestra . She also performed Toots and the Maytals ' " Monkey Man . " She began a run of another fourteen gigs beginning in February 2007 . At his request , Hollywood star Bruce Willis introduced Winehouse before her performance of " Rehab " at the 2007 MTV Movie Awards in Universal City , California . She had made awards organizers nervous when she went on a Las Vegas jaunt in the hours before the show . During the summer of 2007 , she performed at various festivals , including the Isle of Wight Festival and Glastonbury Festival in England , Lollapalooza festival in Chicago , Belgium 's Rock Werchter and Virgin Music Festival in Baltimore . 
 The rest of her tour , however , did not go as well . In November 2007 the opening night of a 17 @-@ date tour was marred by booing and walkouts at the National Indoor Arena in Birmingham . A critic for the Birmingham Mail said it was " one of the saddest nights of my life ... I saw a supremely talented artist reduced to tears , stumbling around the stage and , unforgivably , swearing at the audience . " Other concerts ended similarly , with , for example , fans at her Hammersmith Apollo performance in London saying that she " looked highly intoxicated throughout , " until she announced on 27 November 2007 , that her performances and public appearances were cancelled for the remainder of the year , citing her doctor 's advice to take a complete rest . A statement issued by concert promoter Live Nation blamed " the rigours involved in touring and the intense emotional strain that Amy has been under in recent weeks " for the decision . Mitch Winehouse wrote about her nervousness before public performances in his 2012 book , Amy , My Daughter . 
 = = = 2008 : Continued success and acclaim = = = 
 On 13 January 2008 , Back to Black held the number @-@ one position on the Billboard Pan European charts for the third consecutive week . On 20 February 2008 , Winehouse performed at the 2008 Brit Awards , performing " Valerie " with Mark Ronson , followed by " Love Is a Losing Game . " She urged the crowd to " make some noise for my Blake . " 
 In February 2008 , Winehouse also won Grammy Awards in the following categories : Record of the Year , Song of the Year , Best Female Pop Vocal Performance for the single " Rehab , " and Best Pop Vocal Album . Additionally , Back to Black was nominated for Album of the Year . Ronson 's work with her won the Grammy Award for Producer of the Year , in the non @-@ classical category . The singer also earned a Grammy as Best New Artist , earning her an entry in the 2009 edition of the Guinness Book of World Records for Most Grammy Awards won by a British Female Act . She ended her acceptance speech for Record of the Year with , " This is for London because Camden town ain 't burning down , " in reference to the Camden Market fire . Winehouse was forced to perform " You Know I 'm No Good " and " Rehab " for the awards ceremony via satellite , as her visa approval had not been processed in time . 
 After the Grammys , the album 's sales increased , catapulting Back to Black to number two on the US Billboard 200 , after it initially peaked in the seventh position . A special deluxe edition of Back to Black topped the UK album charts on 2 March 2008 . Meanwhile , the original edition of the album was ranked at number 30 in its 68th week on the charts , while Frank charted at number 35 . 
 In Paris , she performed what was described as a " well @-@ executed 40 @-@ minute " set at the opening of a Fendi boutique in early March . By 12 March , the album had sold a total of 2 @,@ 467 @,@ 575 copies — 318 @,@ 350 copies had been sold in the previous 10 weeks — putting the album on the UK 's top @-@ 10 best @-@ selling albums of the 21st century for the first time . On 7 April , Back to Black was in the top position of the pan @-@ European charts for the sixth consecutive and thirteenth aggregate week . Amy Winehouse – The Girl Done Good : A Documentary Review , a 78 @-@ minute DVD , was released on 14 April 2008 . The documentary features interviews with those who knew her at a young age , people who helped her achieve success , jazz music experts , and music and pop @-@ culture specialists . 
 At the 2008 Ivor Novello Awards in May , Winehouse became the first @-@ ever artist to receive two nominations for the top award : best song , musically and lyrically . She won the award for " Love Is a Losing Game " and was nominated for " You Know I 'm No Good . " " Rehab , " a Novello winner for best contemporary song in 2006 , also received a 2008 nomination for best @-@ selling British song . Winehouse was also nominated for a 2008 MTV Europe Award in the " Act of the Year " category . 
 Although her father , manager and various members of her touring team reportedly tried to dissuade her , Winehouse performed at the Rock in Rio Lisboa festival in Portugal in May 2008 . Although the set was plagued by a late arrival and problems with her voice , the crowd warmed to her . In addition to her own material she performed two Specials covers . Winehouse performed at Nelson Mandela 's 90th Birthday Party concert at London 's Hyde Park on 27 June , and the next day at the Glastonbury Festival . On 12 July , at the Oxegen Festival she performed a well @-@ received 50 @-@ minute set which was followed the next day by a 14 song set at T in the Park . 
 On 16 August she played at the Staffordshire leg of the V Festival , and the following day played the Chelmsford leg of the festival . Organizers said that Winehouse attracted the biggest crowds of the festival . Audience reaction was reported as mixed . On 6 September , she was Bestival 's Saturday headliner , where her performance was described as polished — terminated by a curfew as the show running overdue , after Winehouse started an hour late — and her storming off stage . 
 A clip of Winehouse 's music was included in the " Roots and Influences " area that looked at connections between different artists at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Annex NYC , which opened in December 2008 . One thread started with Billie Holiday , continued with Aretha Franklin and Mary J. Blige , and then finished with Winehouse . 
 Back to Black was the world 's seventh @-@ biggest @-@ selling album of 2008 . The album 's sales meant that the market performance of Universal Music 's recorded music division did not drop to levels experienced by the overall music market . 
 = = = 2009 – 11 : Final projects before death = = = 
 In a poll of U.S. residents conducted for VisitBritain by Harris Interactive , the results of which were released in March 2009 , one @-@ fifth of those polled indicated they had listened to Winehouse 's music during the previous year . Winehouse performed with Rhythms del Mundo on their cover of the Sam Cooke song , " Cupid , " for an Artists Project Earth benefit album that was released on 13 July 2009 . 
 Winehouse and Ronson contributed a cover of Lesley Gore 's " It 's My Party " to the Quincy Jones tribute album Q Soul Bossa Nostra released 9 November 2010 . Winehouse and drummer Questlove of The Roots had agreed to form a group but her problems obtaining a visa delayed their working together : Salaam Remi had already created some material with Winehouse as part of the project . According to The Times , Universal Music pressed her for new material in 2008 , and Winehouse as of 2 September had not been near a recording studio . In late October Winehouse 's spokesman was quoted as saying that Winehouse had not been given a deadline to complete her third album , for which she was learning to play drums . 
 In May 2009 Winehouse returned to performing at a jazz festival in Saint Lucia amid torrential downpours and technical difficulties . During her set it was reported she was unsteady on her feet and had trouble remembering lyrics . She apologised to the crowd for being " bored " and ended the set in the middle of a song . To a cheering crowd on 23 August at the V festival , Winehouse sang with The Specials on their songs " You 're Wondering Now " and " Ghost Town . " During her stay in Saint Lucia , she also worked on new music with Salaam Remi . Island claimed that a new album would be due in 2010 with Island co @-@ president Darcus Beese saying , " I 've heard a couple of song demos that have absolutely floored me . " In July 2010 , Winehouse was quoted as saying her next album would be released no later than January 2011 , saying " It 's going to be very much the same as my second album , where there 's a lot of jukebox stuff and songs that are ... just jukebox , really . " Ronson said the same month however that he had not started to record the album . She performed " Valerie " with Ronson at a movie premiere but forgot some of the song 's lyrics . In October Winehouse performed a four @-@ song set to promote her fashion line . In December 2010 , she played a 40 @-@ minute concert at a Russian oligarch 's party in Moscow , the tycoon hand picking the songs . 
 During January 2011 , she played five dates in Brazil , with opening acts of Janelle Monáe and Mayer Hawthorne . On 11 February 2011 , Winehouse cut short a performance in Dubai following booing from the audience . Winehouse was reported to be tired , distracted and " tipsy " during the performance . 
 On 18 June 2011 , Winehouse started her twelve @-@ leg 2011 European tour in Belgrade . Local media described her performance as a scandal and disaster , and she was booed off the stage due to her apparently being too drunk to perform . It was reported that she was unable to remember the city she was in , the lyrics of her songs or — when trying to introduce them — the names of the members of her band . The local press also claimed that Winehouse was forced to perform by her bodyguards , who did not allow her to leave the stage when she tried to do so . She then pulled out of performances in Istanbul and Athens which had been scheduled for the following week . On 21 June , it was announced that she had cancelled all shows of her tour and would be given " as long as it takes " to sort herself out . 
 Winehouse 's last public appearance took place at Camden 's Roundhouse , London on 20 July 2011 , when she made a surprise appearance on stage to support her goddaughter , Dionne Bromfield , who was singing " Mama Said " with The Wanted . 
 Winehouse died on 23 July 2011 . On the week of 26 July 2011 , Frank , Back to Black and the Back to Black EP re @-@ entered the Billboard 200 at number 57 , number 9 and number 152 respectively , with the album climbing to number 4 the following week . Back to Black also topped the Billboard Digital Albums chart on the same week and was the second best @-@ seller at iTunes . " Rehab " re @-@ entered and topped the Billboard Hot Digital Songs chart as well , selling up to 38 @,@ 000 more digital downloads . As of August 2011 , " Back to Black " was the best @-@ selling album in the UK in the twenty @-@ first century . 
 Winehouse 's last recording was a duet with American singer Tony Bennett for his latest album , Duets II , released on 20 September 2011 . Their single from the album , " Body and Soul , " was released on 14 September 2011 on MTV and VH1 to commemorate what would have been her 28th birthday . Her father , Mitch Winehouse , launched the Amy Winehouse Foundation with the goal of raising awareness and support for organisations that help vulnerable , young adults with problems such as addiction . Proceeds from " Body and Soul " benefit the Amy Winehouse Foundation . The song received the Grammy for Best Pop Duo / Group Performance at the 54th Grammy Awards on 12 February 2012 . Winehouse 's father , Mitch Winehouse , picked up the award at the awards ceremony with his wife Janis , saying , " We shouldn 't be here . Our darling daughter should be here . These are the cards that we 're dealt . " 
 When interviewed by Jon Stewart on The Daily Show on 29 September 2011 , Bennett stated that in hindsight , he believed Amy : 
 was in trouble at that time because she had a couple of engagements that she didn 't keep up . But what people didn 't realize at that time , that she really knew , and in fact I didn 't even know it when we were making the record , and now looking at the whole thing ; she knew that she was in a lot of trouble ; that she wasn 't going to live . And it wasn 't drugs . It was alcohol toward the end . . . . It was such a sad thing because . . . she was the only singer that really sang what I call the ' right way ' because she was a great jazz @-@ pop singer . . . . She was really a great jazz singer . A true jazz singer . And I regret that because that 's the ' right way ' to sing . 
 An album of previously unreleased material , titled Lioness : Hidden Treasures , was released on 6 December 2011 . It debuted at the top of the UK Albums Chart with the biggest first @-@ week sales of Winehouse 's career . It debuted at number five on the Billboard 200 , selling 114 @,@ 000 units , making it her highest @-@ debuting album in the US . 
 = = Image = = 
 Winehouse 's greatest love was 1960s girl groups . Her stylist , Alex Foden , borrowed her " instantly recognisable " beehive hairdo ( a weave ) and she borrowed her Cleopatra makeup from The Ronettes . Her imitation was so successful , as The Village Voice reports : " Ronnie Spector — who , it could be argued , all but invented Winehouse 's style in the first place when she took the stage at the Brooklyn Fox Theater with her fellow Ronettes more than 40 years ago — was so taken aback at a picture of Winehouse in the New York Post that she exclaimed , " I don 't know her , I never met her , and when I saw that pic , I thought , ' That 's me ! ' But then I found out , no , it 's Amy ! I didn 't have on my glasses . " 
 The New York Times style reporter , Guy Trebay , discussed the multiplicity of influences on Winehouse 's style after her death . Trebay noted , " her stylish husband , Blake Fielder @-@ Civil , may have influenced her look . " Additionally , Trebay observed : 
 She was a 5 @-@ foot @-@ 3 almanac of visual reference , most famously to Ronnie Spector of the Ronettes , but also to the white British soul singer Mari Wilson , less famous for her sound than her beehive ; to the punk god Johnny Thunders ... ; to the fierce council @-@ house chicks ... ( see : Dior and Chanel runways , 2007 and 2008 ) ... to a lineage of bad girls , extending from Cleopatra to Louise Brooks 's Lulu and including Salt @-@ n @-@ Pepa , to irresistible man traps that always seemed to come to the same unfortunate end . 
 Former Rolling Stone editor Joe Levy , who had put her on the magazine 's cover , broke her look down this way : 
 Just as her best music drew on sampling — assembling sonic licks and stylistic fragments borrowed from Motown , Stax , punk and early hip @-@ hop — her personal style was also a knowing collage . There was a certain moment in the ' 90s when , if you were headed downtown and turned left , every girl looked like Bettie Page . But they did not do what Winehouse did , mixing Bettie Page with Brigitte Bardot and adding that little bit of Ronnie Spector . 
 Mitch Winehouse later revealed that the influence for the bold red lipstick , thick eyebrows and heavy eyeliner came from Latinas she saw in Miami , on her trip there to work with Salaam Remi on Back to Black . This same look , however , was repeatedly denigrated by the British press . At the same time that the NME Awards nominated Winehouse in the categories of " Best Solo Artist " and " Best Music DVD " in 2008 , they awarded her " Worst Dressed Performer . " Winehouse was also ranked number two on Richard Blackwell 's 48th annual " Ten Worst Dressed Women " list , behind Victoria Beckham . 
 = = Other ventures = = 
 Winehouse joined a campaign to stop a block of flats being built beside the George Tavern , a famous London East End music venue . Campaign supporters feared the residential development would end the spot 's lucrative sideline as a film and photo location , on which it relies to survive . As part of a breast cancer awareness campaign , Winehouse appeared in a revealing photograph for the April 2008 issue of Easy Living magazine . Winehouse had an estimated £ 10m fortune , tying her for tenth place in the 2008 The Sunday Times listing of the wealth of musicians under age 30 . The following year her fortune had dropped to an estimated £ 5m . Her finances are run by Mitch and Janis Winehouse . It was reported she earned about £ 1m singing at two private parties during Paris Fashion <unk> as well as another £ 1m to perform at a Moscow Art Gallery for Russian oligarch Roman Abramovich . Winehouse loaned a vintage dress used in her video for " Tears Dry on Their Own " as well as a DVD to the British Music Experience , a new museum dedicated to the history of British pop music . The museum , located in The O2 , opened on 9 March 2009 . 
 In January 2009 , Winehouse announced that she was launching her own record label . The first act on her Lioness Records is Winehouse 's 13 @-@ year @-@ old goddaughter , Dionne Bromfield . Her first album , featuring covers of classic soul records , was released on 12 October 2009 . Winehouse is the backing singer on several tracks on the album and she performed backing vocals for Bromfield on the television programme Strictly Come Dancing on 10 October . 
 Winehouse and her family are the subject of a 2009 documentary shot by Daphne Barak titled Saving Amy . Winehouse entered into a joint venture in 2009 with EMI to launch a range of wrapping paper and gift cards containing song lyrics from her album Back to Black . On 8 January 2010 , a television documentary , My Daughter Amy , aired on Channel 4 . Saving Amy was released as a paperback book in January 2010 . 
 Winehouse collaborated on a 17 piece fashion collection with the Fred Perry label . It was released for sale in October 2010 . According to Fred Perry 's marketing director " We had three major design meetings where she was closely involved in product style selection and the application of fabric , colour and styling details , " and gave " crucial input on proportion , colour and fit . " The collection consists of " vintage @-@ inspired looks including Capri pants , a bowling dress , a trench coat , pencil skirts , a longline argyle sweater and a pink @-@ and @-@ black checkerboard @-@ printed collared shirt . " At the behest of her family , three forthcoming collections up to and including autumn / winter 2012 that she had designed prior to her death will be released . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 Winehouse 's dichotomous public image of critical and commercial success versus personal turmoil proved to be controversial . The New Statesman called Winehouse " a filthy @-@ mouthed , down @-@ to @-@ earth diva , " while Newsweek called her " a perfect storm of sex kitten , raw talent and poor impulse control . " Karen Heller with The Philadelphia Inquirer summarised the maelstrom this way : 
 She 's only 24 with six Grammy nominations , crashing headfirst into success and despair , with a <unk> husband in jail , exhibitionist parents with questionable judgement , and the paparazzi documenting her emotional and physical distress . Meanwhile , a haute designer Karl Lagerfeld appropriates her dishevelled style and eating issues to market to the elite while proclaiming her the new Bardot . 
 By 2008 , her continued drug problems threatened her career . Even as Nick Gatfield , the president of Island Records , toyed with the idea of releasing Winehouse " to deal with her problems , " he remarked on her talent , saying , " It 's a reflection of her status [ in the U.S. ] that when you flick through the TV coverage [ of the Grammys ] it 's her image they use . " Post @-@ Grammys , some questioned whether Winehouse should have been honoured with the awards given her recent personal and drug problems , including Natalie Cole , who introduced Winehouse at the ceremony and who herself battled substance @-@ abuse problems while winning a Grammy for Best New Artist in 1975 . ( Winehouse was prevented from traveling to and performing at the Grammy Awards ceremony in the US due to failing a drug test . ) In a newspaper commentary , the executive director of the UN Office on Drugs and Crime , Antonio Maria Costa , said that the alleged drug habits of Winehouse and other celebrities sent a bad message " to others who are vulnerable to addiction " and undermine the efforts of other celebrities trying to raise awareness of problems in Africa , now that more cocaine used in Europe passes through that continent . Winehouse 's spokesperson noted that " Amy has never given a quote about drugs or flaunted it in any way . She 's had some problems and is trying to get better . The U.N. should get its own house in order . " 
 It has been argued that Winehouse became a staple in popularity polls not because of her musical contributions but because of her lifestyle . In January 2008 , her record label stated they believed the extensive media coverage she had received increased record sales . In an April 2008 poll conducted by Sky News , Winehouse was named the second greatest " ultimate heroine " by the UK population at large , topping the voting for that category of those polled under 25 years old . Psychologist Donna Dawson commented that the results demonstrated that women like Winehouse who had " a certain sense of vulnerability or have had to fight against some adversity in their lives " received recognition . 
 In July 2008 , BBC Radio Scotland 's head , Jeff <unk> , stated that the BBC , and media in general , were complicit in undermining celebrities , including Winehouse . He said that public interest in the singer 's lifestyle did not make her lifestyle newsworthy . Rod McKenzie , editor of the BBC Radio One programme Newsbeat , replied : " If you play [ Amy Winehouse 's ] music to a certain demographic , those same people want to know what 's happening in her private life . If you don 't cover it , you 're insulting young license fee payers . " In The Scotsman , British singer and songwriter Lily Allen was quoted to have said – " I know Amy Winehouse very well . And she is very different to what people portray her as being . Yes , she does get out of her mind on drugs sometimes , but she is also a very clever , intelligent , witty , funny person who can hold it together . You just don 't see that side . " 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 Among the awards and recognition for her debut album Frank , Winehouse earned an Ivor Novello Award from the British Academy of Songwriters for Best Contemporary Song ( " Stronger Than Me " ) , a Brit Award nomination for Best British Female Solo Artist , and an inclusion in Robert Dimery 's 2006 book , 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 Her second studio album , Back to Black , produced numerous nominations , including two Brit Awards ( Best British Album , and won her Best British Female Solo Artist ) , six Grammy Awards ( including five wins ) , four Ivor Novello Awards , four MTV Europe Music Awards , three MTV Video Music Awards , three World Music Awards , and it was nominated for the Mercury Prize ( Album of the Year ) and a MOBO Awards ( Best UK Female ) . During her career , Winehouse received 23 awards from 60 nominations . On 13 February 2012 , Winehouse was ranked 26th on VH1 's 100 Greatest Women In Music list . 
 = = Charity work = = 
 Throughout her life Winehouse donated her money , music and time to many charities , particularly those concerned with children . She was once named " the most charitable act " by Pop World . While this side of her personality was never well known to the general public , throughout both the arts community and the charity community she was known for her generosity . Among the charities she supported are Adopt @-@ A @-@ Minefield , Anti @-@ Slavery International , Breast Cancer Campaign , CARE , Children of the Andes , Children 's Medical Research Institute , Christian Children 's Fund , City at Peace , UK charity telethon Comic Relief , London 's Great Ormond Street Hospital for sick children , Greenpeace , <unk> Worldwide , Hear the World , Heifer International , Holy Apostles Soup Kitchen , the Red Cross , <unk> , Lifeline and Rape Crisis <unk> , Opportunity International , Oxfam , Rights and Humanity , Save the Children , Save the Music Foundation , St. Jude Children 's Research Hospital , Teenage Cancer Trust , Christina Noble Children 's Foundation , Little Dreams Foundation , Lotus Outreach , Nelson Mandela Children 's Fund , UNHCR , UNICEF , V @-@ Day , WaterAid , and World Neighbors . 
 In 2008 , Winehouse appeared naked in an issue of Easy Living Magazine to raise awareness of breast cancer . In 2009 , she appeared on a CD called Classics alongside musicians such as The Rolling Stones , The Killers and many Cuban musicians to raise awareness of climate change . In March 2011 , Winehouse donated over £ 20 @,@ 000 worth of clothes to a local charity shop in London . 
 In 2012 , it was revealed that she had paid for the medical tests for a man called Julian Jean <unk> in Saint Lucia in 2009 . " I had surgery on 1 July 2009 ... it cost a fortune and Amy paid for the whole thing . I tried to thank her but she just hugged me and told me not to say anything . Her generosity gave me my life back . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Artwork and Tussauds wax figure = = = 
 London 's Mall Galleries opened an exhibition in May 2008 that included a sculpture of Winehouse , titled Excess . The piece , created by Guy <unk> , had a miniature of the singer lying on top of a cracked champagne bottle , with a pool of spilled liquid underneath . The body was covered with what appeared to be tiny pills , while one outstretched hand held a glass . Another piece , a print titled Celebrity 1 by artist Charlotte Suckling , was shown in the same exhibition . 
 A wax sculpture of Winehouse went on display at the London Madame Tussauds on 23 July 2008 . The singer did not attend the unveiling , although her parents did . A sculpture by Marco <unk> , titled The Only Good Rock Star Is a Dead Rock Star , that depicts Winehouse lying in a pool of blood with an apple and a bullet hole in her head after being shot by American novelist and Beat poet William S. Burroughs ( in a recreation of the accidental killing of his wife Joan Vollmer ) , was scheduled to go on display in New York 's Half Gallery on 14 November 2008 with a sale price of US $ 100 @,@ 000 . <unk> said of the sculpture : " Rock stars are the sacrificial animals of society . " Winehouse 's spokesperson stated : " It 's a funny kind of tribute . The artist seems in thrall to a tabloid persona that is not the real Amy . People often use her image to sell their work . " 
 On 14 September 2014 ( which would have been Winehouse 's 31st birthday ) , a statue was unveiled of her , which was created by sculptor Scott Eaton , at Stables Market in Camden Town , north London . Fans and relatives gathered for the unveiling in Camden 's Stable Market , where it will be a permanent memorial to her . London @-@ based Eaton , who sculpted the piece after being introduced to Winehouse 's father Mitch , said the statue was meant to capture her " attitude and strength , but also give subtle hints of insecurity . " Her father Mitch said of the statue : " Now Amy will oversee the comings and goings of her home town forever ... Amy was in love with Camden and it is the place her fans from all over the world associate her with . " 
 = = = The next generation = = = 
 British singer Adele has credited Winehouse 's success in making her and fellow British singer Duffy 's journey to the United States " a bit smoother . " Lady Gaga credited Winehouse with paving the way for her rise to the top of the charts , explaining that Winehouse made it easier for unconventional women to have mainstream pop success . Raphael Saadiq , Anthony Hamilton and John Legend said " Amy Winehouse was produced by people who wanted to create a marketing coup . The positive side is that it reacquainted an audience with this music and played an introductory role for others . This reinvigorated the genre by overcoming the vintage aspect . " 
 Other artists that have credited Winehouse as a major influence and / or for paving the way for them include Ellie Goulding , Jessie J , Emeli Sandé , Victoria Justice , Misha B , Paloma Faith , Lana Del Rey , Sam Smith , Florence Welch and Estelle . 
 After the release of Back to Black , record companies sought out female artists with a similar sound and fearless and experimental female musicians in general . Adele and Duffy were the second wave of artists with a sound similar to Winehouse 's . A third wave of female musicians that has emerged since the album was released are led by V V Brown , Florence and the Machine , La Roux and Little Boots . In March 2011 , the New York Daily News ran an article attributing the continuing wave of British female artists that have been successful in the United States to Winehouse and her absence . Spin magazine music editor Charles Aaron was quoted as saying " Amy Winehouse was the Nirvana moment for all these women , " " They can all be traced back to her in terms of attitude , musical styles or fashion . " According to Keith Caulfield , chart manager for Billboard , " Because of Amy , or the lack thereof , the marketplace was able to get singers like Adele , Estelle and Duffy , " " Now those ladies have brought on the new ones , like Eliza Doolittle , Rumer and Ellie . " 
 = = = Amy Winehouse Foundation = = = 
 After the singer 's death by alcohol intoxication in July 2011 , the Amy Winehouse Foundation was set up by Winehouse 's family and launched on 14 September 2011 ( which would have been Winehouse 's 28th birthday ) . Its aim is to help young people and it works with other charitable organisations to provide frontline support . Its central office is in North London , but it also has an office in New York ( operating under the name ' The Amy Winehouse Foundation US ' ) . Both Jon Snow and Barbara Windsor are patrons for the charity , and ambassadors include Keira Chaplin and Mica Paris . In October 2015 Mark Ronson became a patron . Amy 's brother Alex works full @-@ time for the foundation , having given up his career as an online music journalist . 
 The charity itself works to prevent the effects of drug and alcohol misuse on young people and it also aims to support , inform and inspire vulnerable and disadvantaged young people to help them reach their full potential . On 12 March 2013 , with the help of ex @-@ addict Russell Brand , the Foundation launched the Amy Winehouse Foundation Resilience Programme For Schools across the UK which aims to provide effective education around drugs , alcohol and dealing with emotional issues . 
 = = = Films = = = 
 A documentary film , Amy , was released in the United Kingdom on 3 July and worldwide on 10 July . The film received its première at the 2015 Cannes Film Festival on 16 May and has been reviewed as " a tragic masterpiece " , " brilliant " , " heartbreaking " and " unmissable " . The soundtrack of the same name was released on 30 October 2015 , along with the DVD that includes music featured in the documentary by film composer Antônio Pinto and classic tracks by Winehouse . 
 The film has received various accolades , including the Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature at the 2016 Oscars , Best Music Film at the 2016 Grammy Awards , the BAFTA for Best Documentary , the MTV Movie Award for Best Documentary , in addition to a nomination for the BAFTA Award for Best British Film . The success of the film has also led Winehouse her second posthumous nomination for Best British Female Solo Artist at the 2016 Brit Awards . 
 On 5 November 2015 , it was announced that a new drama biopic about Winehouse 's life simply entitled as Amy Winehouse is in production , directed and written by Kirsten Sheridan . It was also revealed that actress Noomi Rapace is in talks to star as Winehouse . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Winehouse dated chef @-@ musician Alex Clare ( sometimes referred to as Alex Claire ) in 2006 , while on a break from her on @-@ off boyfriend and future husband , Blake Fielder @-@ Civil . She and Clare lived together briefly , and in a pattern that Fielder @-@ Civil would later repeat , Clare famously sold his story to the News of the World , which published it under the headline " Bondage Crazed Amy Just Can 't Beehive in Bed . " 
 Fielder @-@ Civil ( born August 1978 ) , a former video production assistant , had dropped out of Bourne Grammar School and , aged 16 , moved to London from his native Lincolnshire . In a June 2007 interview , Winehouse admitted she could sometimes be violent toward him after she had been drinking , saying : " If he says one thing I don 't like , then I 'll chin him . " In August 2007 , they were photographed , bloodied and bruised , in the streets of London after an alleged fight , although she contended her injuries were self @-@ inflicted . Winehouse married Fielder @-@ Civil on 18 May 2007 , in Miami Beach , Florida . 
 Winehouse 's parents and in @-@ laws publicly reported their numerous concerns , the latter citing fears that the two might commit suicide . Fielder @-@ Civil 's father encouraged fans to boycott Winehouse 's music , and Mitch Winehouse said this would not help . Fielder @-@ Civil was quoted in a British tabloid as saying he introduced Winehouse to crack cocaine and heroin . During a visit with Mitch Winehouse at the prison in July 2008 , Fielder @-@ Civil reportedly said that he and Winehouse would cut themselves to ease the pain of withdrawal . 
 From 21 July 2008 to 25 February 2009 , Fielder @-@ Civil was imprisoned following his guilty plea on charges of trying to pervert the course of justice and of grievous bodily harm with intent . The incident , in July 2007 , involved his assault of a pub landlord that broke the victim 's cheek . According to the prosecution , the landlord accepted £ 200 @,@ 000 as part of a deal to " effectively throw the [ court ] case and not turn up , " and he testified that the money belonged to Winehouse , but she pulled out of a meeting with the men involved in the plot , to attend an awards ceremony . Mitch Winehouse , as manager of his daughter 's money , has denied the payoff came from her . 
 When Winehouse was spotted with aspiring actor Josh Bowman on holiday in Saint Lucia , in early January 2009 , she said she was " in love again , and I don 't need drugs . " She commented that her " whole marriage was based on doing drugs " and that " for the time being I 've just forgotten I 'm even married . " On 12 January , Winehouse 's spokesman confirmed that " papers have been received " for what Fielder @-@ Civil 's solicitor has said are divorce proceedings based on a claim of adultery . In March , Winehouse was quoted in a magazine as saying , " I still love Blake and I want him to move into my new house with me — that was my plan all along ... I won 't let him divorce me . He 's the male version of me and we 're perfect for each other . " Nonetheless , an uncontested divorce was granted on 16 July 2009 and became final on 28 August 2009 . Fielder @-@ Civil received no money in the settlement . 
 = = = Substance abuse and mental illness = = = 
 Winehouse 's battles with substance abuse were the subject of much media attention . In 2005 , she went through a period of drinking , heavy drug use , and weight loss . People who saw her during the end of that year and early 2006 reported a rebound that coincided with the writing of Back to Black . Her family believes that the mid @-@ 2006 death of her grandmother , who was a stabilising influence , set her off into addiction . In August 2007 , Winehouse cancelled a number of shows in the UK and Europe , citing exhaustion and ill health . She was hospitalised during this period for what was reported as an overdose of heroin , ecstasy , cocaine , ketamine and alcohol . In various interviews , she admitted to having such problems with self @-@ harm , depression , and eating disorders . 
 Winehouse told a magazine that the drugs were to blame for her hospitalisation and that " I really thought that it was over for me then . " Soon afterward , Winehouse 's father commented that when he had made public statements regarding her problems he was using the media because it seemed the only way to get through to her . In an interview with The Album Chart Show on British television , Winehouse said she was manic depressive and not alcoholic , adding that that sounded like " an alcoholic in denial . " A US reporter writes that Winehouse was a " victim of mental illness in a society that doesn 't understand or respond to mental illness with great effectiveness . " 
 In December 2007 , Winehouse 's spokesman reported that the singer was in a physician @-@ supervised programme and was channelling her difficulties by writing a lot of music . The British tabloid The Sun posted a video of a woman , alleged to be Winehouse , apparently smoking crack cocaine and speaking of having taken ecstasy and <unk> . Winehouse 's father moved in with her , and Island Records , her record label , announced the abandonment of plans for an American promotion campaign on her behalf . In late January 2008 , Winehouse reportedly entered a rehabilitation facility for a two @-@ week treatment program . 
 On 23 January 2008 , the video was passed on to the Metropolitan Police , who questioned her on 5 February . No charges were brought . On 26 March 2008 , Winehouse 's spokesman said she was " doing well . " Her record company reportedly believed that her recovery remained fragile . By late April 2008 , her erratic behaviour , including an allegation of assault , caused fear that her drug rehabilitation efforts had been unsuccessful , leading to efforts by Winehouse 's father and manager to seek assistance in having her involuntarily committed . Her dishevelled appearance during and after a scheduled club night in September sparked new rumours of a relapse . Photographers were quoted as saying she appeared to have cuts on her legs and arms . 
 According to her physician , Winehouse quit illegal substances in 2008 . In an October 2010 interview , speaking of her decision to quit drugs , Winehouse said , " I literally woke up one day and was like , ' I don 't want to do this any more ' . " Drinking alcohol emerged as a problem with Winehouse abstaining for a few weeks then lapsing . The physician said that Winehouse was treated with Librium for alcohol withdrawal and anxiety , and underwent psychological and psychiatric evaluations in 2010 , but refused psychological therapy . 
 = = = Violence and legal difficulties = = = 
 In 2006 , Winehouse admitted punching a female fan in the face for criticising her having taken Blake Fielder @-@ Civil as a husband . She then attacked her own spouse as he attempted to calm her down . In October 2007 , Winehouse and Fielder @-@ Civil were arrested in Bergen , Norway , for possession of seven grams of cannabis . The couple were later released and fined 3850 kroner ( around £ 350 ) . Winehouse first appealed the fines , but later dropped the appeal . 
 On 26 April 2008 , Winehouse was cautioned after she admitted to police she slapped a 38 @-@ year @-@ old man in the face , a " common assault " offence , her first of two . She voluntarily turned herself in and was held overnight . Police said , at her arrival she was " in no fit state " to be interviewed . Ten days later , Winehouse was arrested on suspicion of possessing drugs after a video of her apparently smoking crack cocaine was passed to the police in January , but was released on bail a few hours later because they could not confirm , from the video , what she was smoking . The Crown Prosecution Service considered charging her , but cleared her when it could not establish that the substance in the video was a controlled drug . Some members of Parliament reacted negatively . Two London residents were subsequently charged with conspiracy to supply cocaine and ecstasy to Winehouse . One of the pair was sentenced to two years in prison on 13 December 2008 , while the other received a two @-@ year community order . 
 On 5 March 2009 , Winehouse was arrested and charged with common assault following a claim by <unk> Flash that Winehouse hit her in the eye at the September 2008 Prince 's Trust charity ball . Winehouse 's spokesperson announced the cancellation of the singer 's US Coachella Festival appearance in light of the new legal issue , and Winehouse appeared in court on 17 March to enter her plea of not guilty . On 23 July , her trial began with prosecutor Lyall Thompson charging that Winehouse acted with " deliberate and unjustifiable violence " while appearing to be under the influence of alcohol or another substance . She testified that she did not punch Flash , but tried to push her away because she was scared of her ; she cited her worry that Flash would sell her story to a tabloid , Flash 's height advantage , and Flash 's " rude " behaviour . On 24 July , District Judge Timothy Workman ruled that Winehouse was not guilty , citing the facts that all but two of the witnesses were intoxicated at the time of the incident and that medical evidence did not show " the sort of injury that often occurs when there is a forceful punch to the eye . " 
 On 19 December 2009 , Winehouse was arrested for a third time on charges of common assault , plus another charge of public order offence after assaulting the front @-@ of @-@ house manager of the Milton Keynes Theatre after he asked her to move from her seat . 
 = = = Paparazzi = = = 
 With the paparazzi taking photographs of her wherever they could , Winehouse obtained an injunction against a leading paparazzi agency , Big Pictures , under the Protection from Harassment Act 1997 ; the resultant court order issued by the High Court in 2009 banned them from following her . Photographers were also banned from following her within 100 metres of her London home and photographing Winehouse in her home or the homes of her friends and relatives . According to a newspaper report , sources close to the singer said legal action was taken out of concern for the safety of Winehouse and those close to her . 
 = = = Respiratory and other health problems = = = 
 On 23 June 2008 , Winehouse 's publicist corrected earlier misstatements by Mitch Winehouse that his daughter had early stage emphysema , instead claiming she had signs of what could lead to early @-@ stage emphysema . Mitch Winehouse had also stated that his daughter 's lungs were operating at 70 percent capacity and that she had an irregular heartbeat . He said that these problems had been caused by her chain smoking crack cocaine . The singer 's father also reported that doctors had warned Winehouse that , if she continued smoking crack cocaine , she would have to wear an oxygen mask and would eventually die . In a radio interview , Mitch Winehouse said the singer was responding " fabulously " to treatment , which included being covered with nicotine patches . British Lung Foundation spokesman Keith Prowse noted this type of condition could be managed with treatment . Prowse also said the condition was not normal for a person her age but " heavy smoking and inhaling other substances like drugs can age the lungs prematurely . " Norman H. Edelman of the American Lung Association explained that if she stopped smoking , her lung functions would decline at the rate of a normal person , but continued smoking would lead to a more rapid decline in lung function . 
 Winehouse was released from the London Clinic 24 hours after returning from a temporary leave to perform at Nelson Mandela 's 90th birthday and at a concert in Glastonbury , and continued receiving treatment as an outpatient . In July 2008 , Winehouse stated that she had been diagnosed with " some areas of emphysema " and said she was getting herself together by " eating loads of healthy food , sleeping loads , playing my guitar , making music and writing letters to my husband every day . " She also kept a vertical tanning bed in her flat . Winehouse began precautionary testing on her lungs and chest on 25 October 2008 at the London Clinic for what was reported as a chest infection . Winehouse was in and out of the facility and was granted permission to set her own schedule regarding home leave . She returned to the hospital on 23 November 2008 for a reported reaction to her medication . 
 = = Death = = 
 Winehouse 's bodyguard said that he arrived at her residence three days before her death and felt she was somewhat intoxicated . He observed moderate drinking over the next few days . He observed her " laughing , listening to music and watching TV at 2 a.m. the day of her death " . According to the bodyguard , at 10 a.m. he observed her lying on her bed and tried unsuccessfully to rouse her . This did not raise much suspicion because she usually slept late after a night out . According to the bodyguard , shortly after 3 p.m. , he checked on her again and observed her lying in the same position as before , leading to a further check , in which he concluded that she was not breathing and had no pulse . He said he subsequently called emergency services . 
 At 3 : 54 p.m. BST on 23 July 2011 , two ambulances were called to Winehouse 's home in Camden , London . Winehouse was pronounced dead at the scene . Shortly afterwards , the Metropolitan Police confirmed that she had died . After her death was announced , media and camera crews appeared , as crowds gathered near Winehouse 's residence to pay their respects . Forensic investigators entered the flat as police cordoned off the street outside ; they recovered one small and two large bottles of vodka from her room . After her death , the singer broke her second Guinness World Record : for the most songs by a woman to simultaneously appear on the UK singles chart , with eight . 
 A coroner 's inquest reached a verdict of misadventure . The report released on 26 October 2011 explained that Winehouse 's blood alcohol content was 416 mg per 100 ml ( 0 @.@ 416 % ) at the time of her death , more than five times the legal drink @-@ drive limit . According to the coroner , " The unintended consequences of such potentially fatal levels was her sudden death . " 
 Winehouse 's record label , Universal Republic , released a statement that read in part : " We are deeply saddened at the sudden loss of such a gifted musician , artist and performer . " Many musical artists have since paid tribute to Winehouse including U2 , M.I.A. , Lady Gaga , Marianne Faithfull , Bruno Mars , Nicki Minaj , Keisha Buchanan , Rihanna , George Michael , Adele , Kelly Clarkson , Courtney Love , and the punk rock band Green Day , who wrote a song in her tribute titled " Amy " . In her 2012 album Banga , singer Patti Smith released " This Is the Girl , " written as a homage to Winehouse . Because she died seventeen years after Kurt Cobain 's death , there was a large amount of media attention devoted to the 27 Club once again . Three years earlier , she had expressed a fear of dying at that age . 
 Family and friends attended Winehouse 's funeral on 26 July 2011 at <unk> Lane cemetery in north London . Her mother and father , Janis and Mitch Winehouse , close friend Kelly Osbourne , producer Mark Ronson , and her boyfriend Reg Traviss were among those in attendance at the private service led by Rabbi Frank <unk> . Her father delivered the eulogy , saying " Goodnight , my angel , sleep tight . Mummy and Daddy love you ever so much . " Carole King 's " So Far Away " closed the service with mourners singing along . She was later cremated at Golders Green Crematorium . The family planned to sit a two @-@ day shiva . Winehouse 's parents set up The Amy Winehouse Foundation to prevent harm from drug misuse among young people , and Amy Winehouse 's brother Alex is an employee . Winehouse did not leave a will ; her estate is inherited by her parents . 
 On 17 December 2012 , British authorities reopened the probe of Winehouse 's death . On 8 January 2013 , a second inquest confirmed that Winehouse died of accidental alcohol poisoning . In a late June 2013 interview , Alex Winehouse revealed his belief that his sister 's eating disorder , and the consequent physical weakness , was the primary cause of her death : 
 She suffered from bulimia very badly . That 's not , like , a revelation – you knew just by looking at her … She would have died eventually , the way she was going , but what really killed her was the bulimia … I think that it left her weaker and more susceptible . Had she not had an eating disorder , she would have been physically stronger . 
 = = Postmortem retrospectives = = 
 Winehouse 's parents have each written memoirs about their daughter and donated the proceeds from both books to the Amy Winehouse Foundation . In the introduction to Mitch Winehouse 's biography , entitled Amy : My Daughter ( 2012 ) , he explained : " Apart from being her father , I was also her friend , confidant and adviser — not that she always took my advice , but she always heard me out . " Her mother Janis published Loving Amy : A Mother 's Story , in 2014 . 
 Winehouse is the subject of Amy ( 2015 ) , a documentary directed by Asif Kapadia and produced by James Gay @-@ Rees , Kapadia , and Universal Music . Kapadia and Gay @-@ Rees introduced the project at the 2013 Cannes Film Festival . The film debuted at the 2015 Cannes Film Festival and won the 2016 Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature . 
 An exhibit of Winehouse 's personal items , co @-@ curated by her brother and sister @-@ in @-@ law , entitled Amy Winehouse : A Family Portrait , was on display at the Jewish Museum London from 3 July 2013 until 15 September 2013 . Display items , such as books and music , were featured together with captions written by Winehouse 's brother . 
 In late 2011 , there were reports that Winehouse 's former boyfriend , Reg Traviss , was developing a film about her . Winehouse 's father Mitch Winehouse , who owns the copyright to his daughter 's music , said he would not authorize the use of her music for the film . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Frank ( 2003 ) 
 Back to Black ( 2006 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Amy ( 2015 ) 
 = Pennsylvania Route 405 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 405 ( PA 405 ) is a 27 @.@ 963 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 45 @.@ 002 km ) state highway that runs in the north @-@ central part of the U.S. state of Pennsylvania . The southern terminus of PA 147 in West Chillisquaque Township near the borough of Milton . The route heads northward along the West Branch Susquehanna River through Milton , Watsontown and Muncy until entering Hughesville , where it terminates at an intersection with U.S. Route 220 ( US 220 ) . 
 PA 405 originated as the Muncy and Hughesville Plank Road , a 5 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) plank road from Muncy to Hughesville , created in 1853 . The plank road also consisted of a bridge over the Muncy Canal on the outskirts of the community . PA 405 was assigned in 1941 , after switching between numerous designations , including alignments of US 15 , US 111 , US 220 , and US 711 . The alignment of PA 405 was extended to its current southern terminus when PA 147 was realigned onto a new highway . As part of the Central Susquehanna Valley Transportation Project , PA 405 will continue south from its current southern terminus , replacing the stretch of PA 147 until its junction with PA 61 in Sunbury , its new southern terminus . PA 147 will have an new alignment between those two junctions and will not be <unk> with PA 405 at any point . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = PA 147 to Watsontown = = = 
 PA 405 begins at an intersection with PA 147 in Chillisquaque . The route heads to the northwest , heading along a parallel to PA 147 near rural farms and houses . The route reaches the center of Chillisquaque , where it turns westward for a distance through an isolated area along the West Branch of the Susquehanna River . The route meets the shoreline , where PA 405 turns to the northwest along a rural , unpopulated stretch of West Chillisquaque Township . The route heads northward , crossing through a deep patch of forests . A short distance later , the forests dissipate , and PA 405 intersects with PA 45 ( the Purple Heart Highway ) just across the river from Lewisburg . PA 405 continues northward along the Susquehanna River , intersecting with a former alignment of PA 45 a short distance later . The route continues through the rural farmland along the river , entering the small community of East Lewisburg . North of East Lewisburg , PA 405 passes a large farmland plot before leaving the shoreline of the Susquehanna West Branch . The route continues northward a short distance from the Susquehanna River before entering the community of Milton . 
 In Milton , PA 405 crosses over a set of railroad tracks and turns onto Ferry Lane . The route heads eastward until turning northward onto Garfield Street , heading past homes and businesses and intersecting with PA 642 ( Mahoning Street ) . The route continues northward onto South Arch Street , intersecting with Center Street , where it turns northward . At the end of the block , PA 405 intersects with PA 254 ( Broadway ) . The highway continues northward , intersecting with local streets and paralleling railroad tracks . At the intersection with 10th Street , PA 405 turns to the northwest and leaves the community of Milton . The route returns to the shoreline of the West Branch of the Susquehanna River , continuing northward along the <unk> Hills Golf Course . The route continues northward , intersecting with Golf Course Road , where the route becomes surrounded by forests . A short distance later , PA 405 crosses under the four lane alignment of Interstate 80 ( I @-@ 80 ) and intersects an old alignment of the Susquehanna Trail . The route continues northward along the West Branch of the Susquehanna River , passing a large industrial complex before reaching a merge in the railroad tracks . At the merge , PA 405 enters the community of Watsontown . 
 = = = Watsontown to Hughesville = = = 
 After entering Watsontown , PA 405 passes the local memorial park and intersects with PA 44 ( South Main Street ) . PA 405 and PA 44 become concurrent along Main Street into downtown Watsontown . The two highways continue several blocks from the Susquehanna River , intersecting with <unk> Avenue . The surroundings of the highways are highly populated , and the two routes continue in Watsontown until an intersection with East 11th Street , when the two roads leave the community . PA 405 and PA 44 continue northward , intersecting with local roads in a rural region north of Watsontown . The highways continue , entering the community of Dewart , where PA 44 turns to the west towards the Susquehanna West Branch . PA 405 continues northward , bypassing around Dewart and crossing the railroad tracks it had been paralleling for the distance . The route continues northward , leaving Dewart at an intersection with Delaware Drive . The route heads northward , crossing through the rural areas before intersecting with PA 54 , where they merge . PA 405 and PA 54 continue through a deep patch of forests before crossing the river , entering the community of Montgomery . 
 In Montgomery , PA 405 and PA 54 continue for a short distance along Second Street , until Montgomery Street , where PA 405 turns to the northeast , while PA 54 turns to the northwest . PA 405 continues along Montgomery Street , passing through downtown . At an intersection with School House Road , the highway leaves Montgomery . PA 405 continues to the northeast along a set of railroad tracks and at an intersection with Saegers Station Road , enters the community of Saegers . At a merge with Private 158 Road , PA 405 turns to the north , passing the small community to the north . At an intersection with Armstrong Road , the highway turns to the northeast , leaving Saegers . The route continues to the east , crossing over the West Branch once again , entering the community of Muncy . In Muncy , the highway heads to the southeast along Water Street into the community center , where it turns to the northeast . The route leaves Muncy a short distance later , interchanging with I @-@ 180 Exit 13 . PA 405 heads to the northeast until reaching Muncy Creek , where it turns to the southeast , intersecting with the western terminus of PA 442 . PA 405 continues farther , intersecting with local roads , running along South Main Street for a distance , entering the community of Hughesville , where the highway becomes densely populated . The route heads northward , intersecting with the western terminus of PA 118 . The route continues northward for a short distance , with the Route 405 designation terminating at an intersection with US 220 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Old roads = = = 
 The short alignment of PA 405 from Muncy to Hughesville contains the most of the highway 's history . The bridge over the West Branch of the Susquehanna River was originally privately maintained , with the charter for its construction coming down from the Pennsylvania State Legislature on March 13 , 1835 . The charter designated the company that owned the bridge as the Susquehanna Bridge Company at Walton 's Landing ( now Muncy ) and the state appointed eleven commissioners to help erect the toll bridge . In 1853 , a portion of land from the Susquehanna River West Branch ( which was a canal at the time ) was chartered to become a canal . The canal was constructed in 1848 by a privately maintained company for $ 3 @,@ 000 ( 1848 USD ) . The bridge over the canal that currently uses PA 405 was constructed in 1854 at a cost of $ 27 @,@ 000 ( 1854 USD ) , nine times the amount to construct the canal . The portion of PA 405 from Muncy to Hughesville was also chartered in 1853 , consisting of a plank road between the two towns . 
 = = = Designation = = = 
 On May 31 , 1911 , the state of Pennsylvania signed the Sproul Road Bill , which started a drastic state takeover of highways . Originally , only several routes were assigned around the state . The stretch of PA 405 from the southern terminus to the current day intersection with PA 44 was designated as Legislative Route 18 . The portion of PA 405 along the PA 44 concurrency to <unk> was designated as Legislative Route 240 ( most of this alignment is PA 44 ) . The stretch from <unk> to Montgomery was not designated in 1911 . From Montgomery to Muncy , PA 405 follows more of Legislative Route 240 . After Muncy , PA 405 follows Legislative Route 19 until the current terminus in Hughesville . 
