 When the switch was made in 1924 from the old highway system in Pennsylvania , the alignment of PA 405 was designated as PA 4 from the community of Chillisquaque to the intersection with the Susquehanna Trail . PA 4 was designated in 1925 along the main alignment of the Susquehanna Trail . The route designation remained in place for a short time . The stretch from Muncy to Hughesville ( which followed the alignment of the Penn 's Plank Road ) , was designated in 1926 as an alignment of US 220 . The portion of PA 4 from Chillisquaque to the Susquehanna trail was also designated as US 111 and US 711 , both decommissioned spurs of US 11 in 1926 . US 111 remained in place until 1936 , while US 711 and PA 4 were decommissioned in 1928 and 1930 respectively . In 1928 , the segment of PA 4 from Watsontown to Muncy was re @-@ designated as PA 14 . In 1936 , US 111 was decommissioned , and the route from Chillisquaque to Watsontown was redesignated as part of US 15 . PA 14 , US 220 and US 15 remained on most of PA 405 's alignment until 1941 , when the alignment of all three routes were changed . Upon the decommissioning , PA 405 was designated onto the alignment from the Susquehanna Trail ( where it intersected with PA 147 ) to Hughesville . The alignment of PA 405 south of the Susquehanna Trail was part of PA 147 until 1972 , when it was realigned , and PA 405 was extended to Chillisquaque . 
 = = = Proposed extension = = = 
 PA 405 currently has its southern terminus at PA 147 in the community of Chillisquaque . Near that intersection , PA 147 turns into a super @-@ 2 freeway towards Williamsport . The Central Susquehanna Valley Transportation Project is proposing to extend the super @-@ two freeway alignment of PA 147 on a new freeway along the opposite side of the Susquehanna . The designation of PA 405 is proposed to be extended over the non @-@ freeway alignment of PA 147 down to an intersection with PA 61 in Sunbury . An interchange with PA 405 would also be constructed . The 12 miles ( 19 km ) long project will also involve a realignment of US 11 / US 15 onto the new alignment as well , a proposal that lost funding in the 1970s . As of July 2009 , the design is 40 % completed , while the project was put on a freeze by Governor Edward Rendell . The project , which will take $ 9 million ( 2009 USD ) to study and design , and another $ 525 million ( 2009 USD ) to construct . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Hiroki Kikuta = 
 Hiroki Kikuta ( <unk> <unk> , Kikuta Hiroki , born August 29 , 1962 ) is a Japanese video game composer and game designer . His major works are Secret of Mana , Seiken Densetsu 3 , <unk> , and Koudelka , for which he also acted as producer and concept designer . He has composed music for seven other games , and worked as a concept designer in addition to composer for the unreleased MMORPG Chou <unk> Taisen . He became interested in music at an early age , but earned a degree in Religious Studies , Philosophy , and Cultural Anthropology from Kansai University . He spent the next few years working first as a manga illustrator , then as a composer for anime series , before coming to work for Square in 1991 . 
 After composing the soundtracks for his first three best @-@ known works , he formed his own video game production company , Sacnoth , for which he was the president and CEO . After producing and composing Koudelka in 1999 , he left to become a freelance composer . Since his departure he has formed his own record label , Norstrilia , through which he produces albums of his own compositions and collaborations with other artists , as well as his previous scores . His music has been performed in concerts such as the Symphonic Fantasies concerts in Cologne , Germany in September 2009 , and selections of his works have been published as piano arrangements in sheet music books . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Kikuta was born in Aichi Prefecture , Japan . He first became interested in music at the age of ten after hearing songs by Emerson , Lake & Palmer . He began writing his own songs two years later , after listening to country blues music ; it inspired him to study acoustic guitar and write his own songs in hope of one day becoming a singer / songwriter . He was also inspired as a child by music from movies . It was not until he got a synthesizer , however , that he began to feel his potential as a composer . Kikuta went on to earn an interdisciplinary degree in Religious Studies , Philosophy , and Cultural Anthropology from Kansai University , which he attended from 1981 to 1984 . He never received any form of formal musical training , and instead taught himself by reading music theory books and listening to a wide variety of musical genres . 
 After graduating from Kansai , Kikuta worked first as a manga illustrator and later as an anime composer . The manga he illustrated , including one titled Raven , were done under the pen name " Yuuki Ni <unk> Roku " . As an anime composer , he worked on The Adventure of Robin Hood and The Legend of Snow White . In 1991 , Kikuta was hired by Square ( now Square Enix ) , as a composer . After being rejected by his first choice , Nihon Falcom , he applied to Square without expecting to be hired , as they had many applicants for the job and he had never played any of the company 's games . At the interview , however , Nobuo Uematsu was attracted to their shared love of progressive rock , and he was chosen over 100 other applicants . He started off debugging Final Fantasy IV and creating sound effects for Romancing SaGa , as there were not enough game projects in development to open up new jobs for Square 's new hires , but Kikuta was soon given game soundtracks to compose . 
 = = = Career = = = 
 During his seven years at Square , Kikuta composed the soundtracks to only three games : Secret of Mana and Seiken Densetsu 3 for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System and Soukaigi for the PlayStation . Kikuta says that he was given complete freedom to compose the soundtracks , in that he was given no direction at all as to how to compose the music ; he began working on the music before the design of the game was finalized . This freedom was helped by the fact that Uematsu ran the music group as a separate division in the company from the game developers . Kikuta was originally chosen for Secret of Mana after Kenji Ito , who had composed the first game in the Mana series , Final Fantasy Adventure , was forced to drop the project due to other demands , such as the soundtrack to Romancing SaGa . Rather than create MIDI versions of his compositions , like most game composers of that time did , and hand these over to the sound engineering department , Kikuta made his own samples that matched the hardware capabilities of the Super Nintendo . This way he would know exactly how the pieces would sound on the system 's hardware instead of having to deal with audio hardware differences between the original composition and the Super Nintendo . Kikuta spent nearly 24 hours a day in his office working on the soundtrack , alternating between composing and editing . Secret of Mana led to an arranged album , Secret of Mana + , which is composed of a single 50 @-@ minute track made up of " experimental " sounds like waterfalls , bird calls , and cell phone sounds . 
 For Seiken Densetsu 3 , Kikuta was assisted by a sound programmer , Hidenori Suzuki , which allowed him to compose over three times the amount of music he had created for Secret of Mana . The move to the PlayStation for Soukaigi allowed Kikuta to focus on creating live music for the soundtrack , rather than tweaking the synthesizer instruments to make the music files fit in the game cartridge as he had to for the Super Nintendo . He used the added audio processing power to expand his musical creativity , including pieces such as songs in unintelligible Thai and Malaysian by Japanese singers . The game itself , however , was not a success , and Kikuta decided that he wanted more direct control over the next project he worked on . 
 After Kikuta finished Soukaigi , he left Square and founded the video game development company Sacnoth , assuming the position of the president and CEO from 1998 to 1999 . During this time , the company created Koudelka for the PlayStation ; Kikuta was credited as the concept designer , game planner , scenario writer , producer and composer . His philosophy in designing video games is that the best projects have a limited number of people designing the overall experience and making key decisions . He tried to follow this philosophy in creating Koudelka , and tried to bring a sense of " obsessive passion " to the project , reading what he claims were over 100 books on British history and taking the design team on a trip to Wales to study the country . The game was released in December 1999 to poor reviews which criticized the game 's combat system , though they praised the concept , art direction , and music . Kikuta left Sacnoth soon after ; the company changed its name to Nautilus and went on to produce four more games including the Shadow Hearts series before folding in 2007 . 
 In March 2001 , Kikuta founded Norstrilia , named after the novel of the same name . The company serves as his private record label , and publishes his albums . For the next few years he worked as concept designer , game planner , and composer for Chou <unk> Taisen , a Chinese MMORPG , the original design for which he proposed to Enix . Development of the game ceased in 2004 due to disagreements between Enix and the Chinese company that was to maintain the game while it was in progress and it was never released . Since then he has gone on to score six other games , including the eroge visual novel Sora no Iro , Mizu no Iro and the MMORPG Concerto Gate . None of these games have been released outside Japan ; to date the only video games that Kikuta has worked on to appear in North America or Europe are Secret of Mana and Koudelka . 
 Kikuta released Lost Files , his first album of original music , in 2006 . The album includes the demo tapes Kikuta submitted when first applying for the job of game composer at Square , using the sound source of the Nintendo Entertainment System . It was followed in August 2007 by his second original album , Alphabet Planet . He has also composed three other albums and two singles in conjunction with other singers or performers ; these albums have been released though his Norstrilia label and are the only works he has been credited as composing for since Concerto Gate was released in 2007 . His next album , due to be released in spring 2010 , is another album of original works , entitled Tiara . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 A piece from Secret of Mana was performed by the Tokyo Symphony Orchestra for the third Orchestral Game Music Concert in 1993 , while one from Seiken Densetsu 3 was performed for the fifth event in 1996 . The same Secret of Mana track was also performed at the fifth Symphonic Game Music Concert in 2007 in Leipzig , Germany . Music from Secret of Mana made up one fourth of the music in the Symphonic Fantasies concerts in Cologne in September 2009 which were produced by the creators of the Symphonic Game Music Concert series and conducted by Arnie Roth . 
 Two compilation books of piano sheet music from the Mana series have been published as Seiken Densetsu Best Collection Piano Solo Sheet Music first and second editions ; songs from Secret of Mana and Seiken Densetsu 3 are featured in both . All songs in each book have been rewritten by Asako Niwa as beginning to intermediate level piano solos , though they are meant to sound as much like the originals as possible . Selections of remixes of Kikuta 's work appear on Japanese remix albums , called dōjin , and on English remixing websites such as OverClocked ReMix . Kikuta has said that he enjoys listening to these works , mentioning OverClocked ReMix by name . 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 Kikuta finds composing music to be natural , " like breathing " . He considers it to be his " vocation " , and contrasts it with designing and creating video games , which he calls his " wish " and finds to be very difficult to do in comparison to composition . Kikuta does not worry about the style of music that he composes , considering it to only be a tool or method . As a result , his music is frequently composed of combinations of styles mixed together . He is inspired to create his music by things that he has seen , especially while traveling ; he credits much of the musical imagery in Secret of Mana and Seiken Densetsu 3 as being inspired by several islands in Fiji he has visited . Rather than trying to be a " pure artist " that creates art for art 's sake , Kikuta says that his primary goal in composing is to entertain the listeners . He has not been influenced by other video game composers , though he claims to admire Hitoshi Sakimoto , whom he worked with at Square . He has named Pink Floyd as his single biggest musical influence , and guitarist Allan Holdsworth as the artist he would most like to collaborate with . Kikuta 's favorite song that he has composed is " Overture " from Concerto Gate . 
 = = Works = = 
 = James Wilson ( House ) = 
 Dr. James Evan Wilson , M.D. , is a fictional character on the Fox medical drama House . He is played by Robert Sean Leonard . The character first appears in the show 's pilot episode when he introduces a medical case to Dr. Gregory House . Wilson is Dr. House 's only true friend , and frequently provides him with consultations and aid . Wilson is the head of the Department of Oncology at Princeton @-@ Plainsboro Teaching Hospital . 
 During the show 's run , the characters of House and Wilson have been compared to Sherlock Holmes and Dr Watson . Wilson 's portrayer , Robert Sean Leonard , has stated that his character and Dr. House were originally supposed to play these roles ; but Dr. House 's diagnostic team has taken over Dr. Watson 's part . Leonard also read the script of the pilot episode of CBS ' Numb3rs and was planning to audition . He auditioned for House instead because he felt he would more enjoy playing the character that House went to for help and because he liked The Odd Couple dynamic of the relationship . 
 The character was positively received . Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger described Wilson as " the only irreplaceable supporting character " of the show , as well as Maureen Ryan of the Chicago Tribune , who stated that Wilson can " never , never , never , never " leave the show . 
 The character 's name is derived from two neighboring buildings ( James Administration Building and Wilson Hall ) at McGill University 's downtown campus , in Montreal , Quebec . 
 = = Character biography = = 
 Wilson is one of three brothers . He has an undergraduate degree from McGill University , and graduate degrees from Columbia University and the University of Pennsylvania . He is Jewish . 
 Shortly after a medical convention in New Orleans , after graduating medical school , Wilson accidentally broke an antique mirror and started a bar fight when another customer repeatedly played " Leave A Tender Moment Alone " by Billy Joel to the frustration of Wilson , who was going through a divorce with his first wife at the time . Out of interest , House bailed him out and hired an attorney to clear his name , thus starting their professional and personal relationship . In the Season 1 episode " Histories " , it is revealed that one of his brothers is homeless and that Wilson is unaware if he is still alive as he has not seen him in nine years . Wilson has a history of failed marriages : he is married to his third wife during Season 1 and , with the discovery of his wife 's infidelity , separates from her during Season 2 . After the failure of his third marriage , Wilson lives in various temporary accommodations ( including a stint at House 's own apartment ) until he meets Amber Volakis , who is a female substitute for House . He is described as " nearly 40 " in " Don 't Ever Change " , in Season 4 . Wilson and House 's relationship has been sorely tested on many occasions . 
 He was diagnosed with stage II <unk> in the Season 8 episode " Body and Soul " . In the end of the subsequent episode ( in which Wilson and House take an abrupt vacation , and Wilson assumes a much more carefree personality ) , House performed a CT scan to check the status of the cancer . House 's stunned facial expression and silence when the results are displayed seemingly does not bode well for Wilson 's future prognosis , which would be revealed in the final two episodes of the series . It is later revealed that Wilson , should he pursue the most extensive treatment , could live for one to three years , perhaps . He opts to cease the intensive chemotherapy treatment after the ultimately unsuccessful first round , choosing to make the most of the remaining five months or so he would likely have for as long as possible ; ultimately , after many tense conversations , House accepts his decision . However , due to the serious vandalism House caused in the toilet system and plumbing , which ultimately destroyed a room containing an MRI scanner ( where some of his team members were with a patient ) , Foreman and the hospital lawyer notify House that the matter became externally known to the police ; subsequently , his parole officer had his parole revoked by the court . House must report to prison again to serve the remaining six months of his approximately year @-@ long sentence he got earlier , in the last season , when he ran his car into Cuddy 's house . In the series finale , at House 's funeral , Wilson gives an honest description of House as opposed to everyone 's kind words and gets a text message telling him to " Shut up , you idiot . " 
 To his shock , Wilson discovers House alive and well having faked his death and House asks Wilson how he wants to spend his last five months . Sometime later , an unkempt Wilson and House are seen in the countryside on motorcycles , Wilson having presumably quit his job to spend his last five months as he wants . He asks House about what they will do when the cancer gets bad , but House simply tells him that " cancer is boring " and they ride off together . 
 = = Characterization = = 
 House describes Wilson as " a buddy of mine people say ' Thank you ' to , when he tells them they are dying . " House also describes Wilson as an " emotional vampire " . On a date with Dr. Lisa Cuddy ( Lisa Edelstein ) , Wilson evades a question as to whether or not he wants children . 
 However , Wilson defends House when House 's career is in jeopardy , after billionaire entrepreneur and then chairman of Princeton @-@ Plainsboro 's Board Edward Vogler ( Chi McBride ) proposes a motion for House 's dismissal . Wilson is the only one to vote against the motion . In response , Vogler proposes and succeeds in obtaining Wilson 's dismissal , but Wilson is soon reinstated thanks to Cuddy after she convinces the board that Vogler is the real threat to the hospital and his money is not worth his business @-@ obsessed mindset . In a late Season episode it is revealed that Wilson suffers from clinical depression and takes medication . Wilson is also seen to write with his left hand , a trait he shares with Cuddy and Foreman , but when he performs detailed medical work , such as injections or incisions , or <unk> while speaking , appears to be right @-@ handed in general , suggesting he may be ambidextrous . 
 Wilson attempts to change House 's drug habits , with little success . After Cuddy makes a bet to prove House 's addiction to Vicodin , House concedes to Wilson that he has an addiction but says that the addiction is not a problem . It is , in fact , Wilson who usually writes House 's Vicodin prescriptions ( with Cuddy writing a few merely for leverage in her dealings with House ) . In Season 3 , when Detective Michael Tritter ( David Morse ) threatens to jail House for his Vicodin addiction after finding a huge stash in his apartment , Wilson attempts to convince House to go to rehab as the situation worsens . After Tritter pressures Wilson to testify several times , Wilson reluctantly agrees , unknown to House . Before this , Wilson watches House punch Dr. Robert Chase , insult Cuddy , and incorrectly diagnose a child with a condition that would have required the amputation of her left arm and leg . 
 Near the end of Season 4 , Wilson starts a romantic relationship with Amber Volakis , who is essentially a female version of House , and who competed for one of the open jobs on House 's team in the wake of Foreman , Chase , and Cameron 's departure . In the Season 4 finale , she dies in a bus crash sustained while picking up a drunken House from a bar . Her death eventually leads Wilson to conclude that his relationship with House serves to enable House 's dysfunctions . To remove himself from House 's influence , he resigns from Princeton @-@ Plainsboro at the beginning of Season 5 . The two reconcile when Wilson forces House to attend the funeral of House 's father . Wilson realizes that he had been afraid of losing House , who is his true friend , and that Wilson 's life didn 't get any better when he resigned . He then returns to Princeton @-@ Plainsboro . 
 During Season 5 , it is revealed that Wilson 's homeless brother Danny suffered from schizophrenia since adolescence , which is what caused him to run away . Wilson blames himself for his brother 's homelessness , having hung up on Danny right before he disappeared . Wilson also reveals to House that he took the position at Princeton @-@ Plainsboro because it was near the place he had last seen Danny . When Wilson finds out that Danny is in the Psychiatric Ward of New York Mercy Hospital [ fictional ] , House offers to come with him to keep him company , noting that it could end badly . However , when Wilson is let in to see his brother , House is busy with a differential with his team . 
 In Season 6 , Episode 15 , " Private Lives " , House discovers that Wilson , in his youth , had been an actor in a porno flick titled " Feral Pleasures " . Throughout the episode , after House hangs movie posters all over the hospital , people start paraphrasing a quote by Wilson 's character : " Be not afraid . The forest nymphs have taught me how to please a woman " . In addition , Wilson proposes a joke marriage to House in " The Down Low " . 
 Gay references have been made to the relationship between the two characters of the show . House has made a comment about the relationship ( " I 'm gay ! ... Oh that 's not what you meant . It would explain a lot , though : no girlfriend , always with Wilson , the obsession with sneakers ... " ) . Barbara Barnett said that " House is the needy one in the relationship , and Wilson the doormat " Verne Gay of Newsday described House 's love for Wilson as " touching and genuine " . However , Robert Sean Leonard compared the relationship between the two to that of Cesar Millan and his Pit Bull , while Hugh Laurie said that it 's " not just <unk> " . The two characters appeared on the October 13 , 2008 , cover of TV Guide . 
 = = Concept and creation = = 
 Robert Sean Leonard was not initially interested in auditioning for the role of James Wilson . He believes that he got the role because of his friendship with Bryan Singer , whom he had met in the past , shortly after he was paid for his role in Dead Poets ' Society . Singer borrowed money from him to shoot Lion 's Den starring his friend Ethan Hawke , who also attended high school with Singer . In 2004 , Leonard received the scripts for the pilot of both House and CBS ' Numb3rs ( in which he was asked to audition for the part of Charlie Eppes ) . He thought the script for Numb3rs was " kinda cool " . However , he decided to audition for the part of Wilson on House , because his character on Numb3rs was in almost every scene of the show . 
 Within the scope of a popular comparison that draws parallels between House and Sir Arthur Conan Doyle 's Sherlock Holmes , Wilson is equivalent to Doctor Watson . In two @-@ parts episodes such as Euphoria , Part 1 and Euphoria , Part 2 , and House 's Head and Wilson 's Heart , Wilson 's voice is heard narrating the story , while Dr. Watson is the character who narrates the stories in most of Sherlock Holmes novels . Leonard has said that his character and House were originally intended to play roles similar to Dr. Watson and Sherlock Holmes , respectively , in the series although he believes that House 's team has assumed the role of Watson since the show has begun . Producer Katie Jacobs believes that Wilson and House both hide from mature relationships , which brings the two closer together . She has said that the difference between the two characters is that Wilson finds it hard to say no because he wants to please the other person . The similarities between Dr. Wilson and Dr. Watson was also one of the reasons that made Leonard choose House over Numb3rs . 
 Leonard has said that Wilson is one of the few characters to voluntarily maintain a relationship with House , because neither of them work for one another and thus his character has " nothing to lose " by telling him the truth . His character is one of the few who can make House laugh . Katie Jacobs has said that Wilson 's moving into House 's apartment after a failed relationship in " Sex Kills " symbolizes his taking " emotional refuge " in his friend . Leonard said that he is content with the size of his role , and wants to continue playing the character . He has also stated that he would " kill himself " if he had a role as big as the other cast members . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Responses to Leonard 's performance were mostly positive . In a recap of the pilot episode , Tom Shales of The Washington Post quoted " Leonard has been playing upstanding young men for what seems like forever , but he 's still one of the most outstanding upstanding young men in the acting racket " . However , Sherwin <unk> of Slate stated that Leonard often seems so detached that " he 'd be better off in another show " . In a recap of the season four episode " Ugly " Nina Smith of TV Guide said that she thinks that the most convincing writing of the show has always been the scenes in which Cuddy and Wilson " spar " with House . In a 2008 press conference , Katie Jacobs , who works as an executive producer for the show , praised Leonard for being equally adept at comedy and drama . TV Gal , of Zap2it , stated that she " truly appreciates " what Leonard brings to the show , being the only character who " truly stands up to House " and " quietly and subtly " giving the show " some of its best moments " . In an article about whom to keep if the writers of House decided to minor down the cast , Maureen Ryan , of the Chicago Tribune said that Wilson can " never , never , never , never " leave the show . Ryan also listed Wilson on her list of " 5 Great Characters " , saying that Leonard is the " underrated linchpin of the excellent “ House ” cast " . 
 After Wilson 's temporary departure during House 's fifth season , Mary McNamara of the Los Angeles Times immediately stated that she wanted the character to return to the show . Linda Stasi of The New York Post said that Dr. House 's relationship with Lucas Douglas ( Michael Weston ) , who temporarily replaced Wilson , was far more natural than House 's relationship with Wilson . Critics from TV Guide , Entertainment Weekly , Blog Critics and USA Today , all found Leonard 's performance in the season 4 finale worthy of an Emmy Award . 
 = Thriller ( song ) = 
 " Thriller " is a song recorded by American singer Michael Jackson , composed by Rod Temperton , and produced by Quincy Jones . It is the seventh and final single released by Epic Records from his 1982 studio album Thriller . A 14 @-@ minute video showing Jackson in a Halloween @-@ themed performance premiered on November 14 , 1983 , in Los Angeles , California . It was first shown on MTV on December 2 , 1983 . The song was not released as a single until January 23 , 1984 . 
 " Thriller " has appeared on multiple greatest hits compilation albums from Jackson , including HIStory ( 1995 ) , Number Ones ( 2003 ) , The Essential Michael Jackson ( 2005 ) and Michael Jackson 's This Is It ( 2009 ) and was remixed for the Immortal album in 2011 . The song has a voice @-@ over from actor Vincent Price . 
 In the song , sound effects such as a creaking door , thunder , feet walking on wooden planks , winds and howling dogs can be heard , and the lyrics contain frightening themes and elements . " Thriller " received positive reviews from critics and became Jackson 's seventh top @-@ ten single on the Billboard Hot 100 Chart from the album , while reaching the top of the charts in France and Belgium and the top ten in many other countries . 
 " Thriller " was adapted by " American Werewolf In London " director John Landis into a highly successful music video , known independently as " Michael Jackson 's Thriller " . At fourteen minutes the video is substantially longer than the song , which ties together a narrative featuring Jackson and actress Ola Ray in a setting heavily inspired by horror films of the 1950s . In the video 's most iconic scene , Jackson leads other actors costumed as zombies in a choreographed dance routine . Though it garnered some criticism for its occult theme and violent imagery , the video was immediately popular and received high critical acclaim , being nominated for six MTV Video Music Awards in 1984 and winning three . In 2009 it was added to the National Film Registry by the Library of Congress , the first music video ever selected . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Thriller " was written by Rod Temperton , and produced by Quincy Jones . Written by Rod Temperton ; an inspiration was the Jacksons hit , " This Place Hotel " . Early titles include " Starlight " , " Starlight Sun " and " Give Me Some Starlight " . The title was changed to ' Thriller ' after Michael told Temperton he wanted something that would appeal to kids . While still titled " Starlight " , the song 's hook lyrics were " Give me some starlight ! Starlight sun ... " , but after the song was changed to " Thriller " the hook was rewritten to " ' Cause this is thriller ! Thriller night ... " . Temperton commented , 
 Originally , when I did my Thriller demo , I called it Starlight . Quincy said to me , ' You managed to come up with a title for the last album , see what you can do for this album . ' I said , ' Oh great , ' so I went back to the hotel , wrote two or three hundred titles , and came up with the title ' Midnight Man ' . The next morning , I woke up , and I just said this word ... Something in my head just said , this is the title . You could visualize it on the top of the Billboard charts . You could see the merchandising for this one word , how it jumped off the page as ' Thriller ' . 
 While Temperton was writing " Thriller " he stated that he 'd " always envisioned " a " talking section at the end " on the song , but did not really know what " to do with it " , until deciding " to have somebody , a famous voice , in the horror genre , to do this vocal . " Jones ' then @-@ wife , Peggy Lipton , who knew Vincent Price , suggested Price for the vocal part , which Price agreed to do . 
 " Thriller " is considered a disco @-@ funk song . Set in the key of C ♯ Modern Dorian , its instrumentation consists of synthesizer , guitar , trumpet , flugelhorn , saxophone , flute and trombone . The song has a moderate tempo of 118 @.@ 31 beats per minute . The lyrics and sound effects on " Thriller " pertain to frightful elements and themes . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 " Thriller " , along with other songs from Thriller , was recorded by Jackson over the course of eight weeks , in 1982 . Jackson recorded the song at Westlake Recording Studios on Santa Monica Boulevard in Los Angeles , California . Bruce Swedien , the song 's engineer , said of the song being recorded , 
 When we started ' Thriller ' , the first day at Westlake , we were all there and Quincy [ Jones , the producer ] walked in followed by me and Michael and Rod Temperton and some of the other people . Quincy turned to us and he said , ' OK guys , we 're here to save the recording industry . ' Now that 's a pretty big responsibility – but he meant it . And that 's why those albums , and especially ' Thriller ' , sound so incredible . The basic thing is , everybody who was involved gave 150 percent … Quincy 's like a director of a movie and I 'm like a director of photography , and it 's Quincy 's job to cast [ it ] . Quincy can find the people and he gives us the inspiration to do what we do . 
 Swedien and Jones stated that Vincent Price recorded his introduction and voice @-@ over rap for the song in two takes ; Jones , acknowledging that doing a voice @-@ over for a song is " difficult " , praised Price and described his recording takes as being " fabulous " . Swedien said of Jackson recording the song , that , " I tried all sorts of things with Michael – for instance , he would sing the main vocal part and we 'd double it one time and then I 'd ask him to step away from the mic and do it a third time and that really changed the acoustics in the room so it gave Michael 's vocals a unique character … We recorded some of those background vocals in the shower stall at Westlake . " 
 Throughout the song , sound effects such as a creaking door , thunder , feet walking on wooden planks , winds and howling dogs can be heard . Bruce Cannon , a sound effects editor for " Thriller " , said that , " Things like the lightning may have come from old Hollywood movies – we 'll never know which movies – but the best sound @-@ effects editors do go out in the desert and find a coyote , so I have a feeling that was a real howl . " 
 The backing track , especially the bassline , has certain similarities to the 1981 number @-@ one R & B hit " Give It to Me Baby " by Rick James . The bass part was made from two modified <unk> playing in unison . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Thriller " is a contemporary critical favourite . Ashley <unk> , of AOL 's Spinner.com , noted that it " became a signature for Jackson " and described " the groove of its bassline , paired with Michael 's killer vocals and sleek moves " as having " produced a frighteningly great single . " Jon Pareles of The New York Times noted that ' Billie Jean ' , ' Beat It ' , ' Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin ' ' and " the movie in the song ' Thriller ' " , were the songs , unlike the " fluff " " P.Y.T. " , that were " the hits that made Thriller a world @-@ beater ; along with Mr. Jackson 's stage and video presence , listeners must have identified with his willingness to admit terror . " Ann Powers of the Los Angeles Times described " Thriller " as " adequately groovy " with a " funked @-@ out beat " and lyrics " seemingly lifted from some little kid 's ' scary storybook ' " . 
 50 Cent told NME that the song is the one he wished he 'd written : " I had his poster on my wall . He had me <unk> ' around my bedroom . I 'd love to have written any Michael Jackson song , so maybe start with one of the greatest . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Prior to " Thriller " ' s official release as a single , six other songs from the album had charted . " Thriller " became Jackson 's seventh and final Billboard Hot 100 top @-@ ten single from his Thriller album . In Billboard issue date February 11 , 1984 , the song entered the charts at number 20 on the Hot 100 . The song entered the top ten the following week at number eight . One week later , it reached number five , then the next week it rose to number four ; its peak position which it held for a second week . The song was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on December 4 , 1989 , for sales of over one million physical units in the U.S. ( the requirement for gold and platinum singles was lowered after 1989 ) . It has sold a further 3 @.@ 6 million copies in digital downloads as of October 2014 in the US . 
 For the issue date February 25 , 1984 , " Thriller " charted at number 19 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs Chart . The following week , the song placed at number five . On March 10 , 1984 , it charted at number 3 , where it peaked . " Thriller " peaked at number 24 on Billboard 's Adult Contemporary Chart . " Thriller " debuted on the UK Singles Chart on November 19 , 1983 , at number 24 , and the following week charted at number ten , where it peaked ; the song appeared on the chart for 25 weeks . Beginning on February 5 , 1984 , " Thriller " peaked on the French Singles Chart at number one and topped the chart for four consecutive weeks . " Thriller " also topped the Belgian VRT Top 30 Chart for two weeks in January 1984 . 
 Following Jackson 's death , his music experienced a surge in popularity . In the week of Jackson 's death , " Thriller " was Jackson 's best @-@ selling track in the US , with sales of 167 @,@ 000 copies on the Billboard Hot Digital Singles Chart . On July 11 , 2009 , " Thriller " charted on the Billboard Hot Digital Singles Chart at number two ( its peak ) , and the song remained in the charts ' top ten for three consecutive weeks . In the United Kingdom , the song charted at number 23 the week of Jackson 's death . The following week , the song reached its peak at number 12 on the UK Single Chart . On July 12 , 2009 , " Thriller " peaked at number two on the Italian Singles Chart and was later certified gold by the Federation of the Italian Music Industry . " Thriller " reached at number three on the Australian ARIA Chart and Swiss Singles Chart and topped the Spanish Singles Charts for one week . The song also placed within the top ten on the German Singles Chart , Norwegian Singles Chart and Irish Singles Chart , at number nine , number seven and number eight respectively . " Thriller " also landed at number 25 on the Danish Singles Chart . In the third week of July " Thriller " peaked at number 11 in Finland . The song finished at # 78 for the year on Billboard Hot 100 of 1982 . 
 In 2013 , the song re @-@ entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number 42 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 In his 1988 book Moonwalk , Jackson expressed interest in having director John Landis direct the music video for " Thriller " . Having seen Landis ' previous work on the horror film An American Werewolf in London , Jackson envisioned the main character of his short film to undergo similar transitions parallel to those of the characters in Landis ' horror film . Hence , Landis was asked to direct the video seeing as Michael felt he would make the best fit towards properly conveying his personal concepts for the short feature film . Landis accepted Jackson ’ s invitation and production began soon thereafter , filming in various locations in New York and Los Angeles . 
 Contrary to reports of $ 800 @,@ 000 to $ 1 million production budgets , Landis stated that the music video was made for $ 500 @,@ 000 . Within the same excerpt of Moonwalk , Jackson noted how he personally financed much of the short film for " Thriller " out of his own pocket . Due to all the technical details of production and the nature of the video , the budget nearly doubled in costs . John Branca — Jackson 's attorney and advisor — suggested creating a documentary outlining the process of creating the short film . The behind @-@ the @-@ scenes documentary was aimed towards seeking a third @-@ party sponsor to finance the project and thus alleviate some of the costs of the doubled budget . The documentary was entitled , " The Making of Thriller " , and achieved significant sales among audiences . 
 Jackson also said of making the music video , in an interview that aired on December 11 , 1999 , for MTV 's 100 Greatest Videos Ever Made : 
 My idea was to make this short film with conversation ... I like having a beginning and a middle and an ending , which would follow a story . I 'm very much involved in complete making and creating of the piece . It has to be , you know , my soul . Usually , you know , it 's an interpretation of the music . [ ... ] It was a delicate thing to work on because I remember my original approach was , ' How do you make zombies and monsters dance without it being comical ? ' So I said , ' We have to do just the right kind of movement so it doesn 't become something that you laugh at . ' But it just has to take it to another level . So I got in a room with [ choreographer ] Michael Peters , and he and I together kind of imagined how these zombies move by making faces in the mirror . I used to come to rehearsal sometimes with monster makeup on , and I loved doing that . So he and I collaborated and we both choreographed the piece and I thought it should start like that kind of thing and go into this jazzy kind of step , you know . Kind of gruesome things like that , not too much ballet or whatever . 
 The music video of the song also included on the video albums : Video Greatest Hits - HIStory , HIStory on Film , Volume II , Number Ones , on the bonus DVD of Thriller 25 and Michael Jackson 's Vision . 
 Following the release of the music video , a 45 @-@ minute documentary was released that provided candid glimpses behind the scenes of the music video 's production . Entitled Making Michael Jackson 's Thriller , it , like the music video , was shown heavily on MTV for a time and was the top @-@ selling home @-@ video release of all time at one point , with over nine million copies sold . MTV paid $ 250 @,@ 000 for the exclusive rights to show the documentary ; Showtime paid $ 300 @,@ 000 for pay @-@ cable rights ; and Vestron Video reportedly paid $ 500 @,@ 000 to market the cassette , in a profit participation agreement . 
 = = = Concept = = = 
 Set in the 1950s , Michael and his unnamed date ( Ola Ray ) run out of gas near a dark wooded area . They walk off into the forest , and Michael asks her if she would be his " girl " ; she accepts and he gives her a ring . He warns her , however , that he is " different " . A full moon appears , and Michael begins convulsing in agony , transforming into a werecat . His date runs away in terror , but the werecat catches up to her , knocking her down and begins lunging at her with his claws . The scene then cuts to a modern @-@ day movie theater where Michael and his date , along with a repulsed audience , are actually watching the scene unfold in a movie called Thriller . 
 Michael 's date leaves the theater as Michael hands his popcorn to a stranger , catches up to her , and assures her that " It 's only a movie " . Some debate follows as to whether or not she was scared by the movie . They then walk down a foggy road as Michael teases her by singing the verses of " Thriller " . They pass a nearby graveyard , in which zombies begin to rise out of their caskets as Vincent Price performs his soliloquy . The zombies corner Michael and his date threateningly , and suddenly , Michael becomes a zombie himself . The zombies then break into an elaborate song and dance number , followed by the main chorus of " Thriller " ( during which Michael was reverted to human form ) , frightening his date to the point where she runs for cover . 
 Michael ( turned back into a zombie ) and his fellow corpses then back the frightened girl into the corner of a nearby abandoned house . Michael then reaches for his date 's throat as she lets out a <unk> scream , only to awake and realize it was all a dream . Michael then offers to take her home , and she happily obliges . As they walk out of the house , Michael turns around and looks at the camera , thus revealing his yellow werewolf eyes and fangs from the beginning of the video , as we hear Vincent Price 's haunting laugh . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly commented on the music video , " Every aspect of the 14 @-@ minute horror musical , directed with creepy @-@ comical zest by John Landis , is beyond iconic , from Michael 's red leather ensemble to the immortal ( no pun ) herky @-@ jerky zombie dance and <unk> @-@ ha @-@ ha Vincent Price narration . " Though the video was met with widespread praise , it was also criticized for its content . In 1982 , the National Coalition on Television Violence ( <unk> ) classified more than half of 200 MTV music videos surveyed as " too violent " . Both " Thriller " and Jackson 's duet with Paul McCartney , " Say , Say , Say " made the list . The Los Angeles Times quoted Dr. Thomas Radecki , chairman of the <unk> , as saying , " It 's not hard to imagine young viewers after seeing ' Thriller ' saying , ' Gee , if Michael Jackson can terrorize his girlfriend , why can 't I do it too ? ' 
 The music video was nominated for six awards at the 1984 MTV Video Music Awards , winning three out of six of the nominations . " Thriller " won Viewers Choice , Best Overall Performance and Best Choreography — but lost Best Concept Video , Best Male Video and Video of the Year . 
 The music video was listed as the " Greatest Video " on VH1 's " VH1 : 100 Greatest Videos " in 2001 . MTV listed the music video as being the " Greatest Music Video Ever Made " on their list , " MTV : 100 Greatest Music Videos Ever Made " in 1999 . In July 2011 , the music video was named one of " The 30 All @-@ TIME Best Music Videos " by TIME magazine . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Jackson performed " Thriller " on all three of his solo world concert tours . From the Dangerous Tour onwards , half the song was always performed by a masked backup dancer as Jackson prepared for his next song as part of a stage illusion . Despite Jackson performing multiple songs from his Thriller album , " Thriller " was not included on The Jacksons set list during their Victory Tour in 1984 , as Michael Jackson was not satisfied with the way the song sounded live . 
 Jackson performed " Thriller " during his first world tour as a solo artist , the Bad world tour , lasting sixteen months , from 1987 to 1989 , for a total of 123 shows . During the Bad tour , in both legs , the jacket had flashing lights in the middle of the song and at the end . An impersonator was only used for the introduction of the song ; a masked dancer emerges from the costume tent at the side of the stage , and goes back in hiding while Jackson himself , also masked at first , swings down from a rope on the other side of the stage before taking off his mask . 
 " Thriller " was also performed during Jackson 's second world tour , the Dangerous Tour , where stage illusions were used to transition between " Thriller " and " Billie Jean " . In the middle of " Thriller " , Jackson secretly switched places with a masked backup dancer who finishes the song appearing as Jackson prepares for Billie Jean . When the song ends , Jackson appears fully dressed on the upper floor as " Billie Jean " begins . In the third leg of the Dangerous Tour , there was no upper floor but the masked dancer still performed the latter half of the song . 
 Jackson performed " Thriller " for all of his 82 shows during his third , and final , world tour , the HIStory World Tour . Once again , a masked dancer posing as Jackson was used as a stage illusion , this time to the transition between " Thriller " and " Beat It " . As with the Dangerous tour , Jackson switches with the background dancer in the middle of the song . At the end of Thriller , the masked dancer is taken by the zombie dancers into a coffin where it appears he is impaled with spikes and burned . Jackson would appear at the side of the stage in a cherry @-@ picker , starting off " Beat It " . 
 Jackson had planned to perform " Thriller " during his 50 @-@ show concert series , which would have been his fourth concert tour , entitled This Is It from 2009 to 2010 . For Jackson 's performance of the song , he had planned for the stage that he was to perform on to be set up with a background that looked like a " graveyard " ( which was a brief setting in the music video ) with 3 @-@ D effects . Jackson would emerge from a giant black widow spider . According to a setlist that was released in March 2009 , " Thriller " was to close out the 16 @-@ song show , although the film Michael Jackson 's This Is It , which documents the concert series , lists 18 songs and " Man in the Mirror " as the closing song for the planned shows . 
 Live versions of the song are available on the DVDs Live at Wembley July 16 , 1988 and Live in Bucharest : The Dangerous Tour . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 1980s 
 In 1984 , English comedian Lenny Henry recorded a spoof video of Thriller , entitled " Thinner " . 
 In 1989 , American composer Henry Mancini and The Royal Philharmonic Orchestra recorded an orchestral version of the song . 
 2000s 
 In 2000 , British death metal band Ten Masked Men covered the song on their album Return of the Ten Masked Men . 
 In 2001 , American @-@ born Australian singer Joe Dolce covered the song on a compilation album , Andrew Denton 's Musical Challenge . 
 In 2003 , Scottish rock band <unk> recorded " Thriller " for their Livers & Lungs EP . 
 In 2003 , German a cappella group <unk> covered the song for their album <unk> Luft . 
 In 2004 , English electronic music group The Prodigy sampled " Thriller " on their The Way It Is . 
 In 2007 , Ian Brown covered " Thriller " . Amos Barshad and Nick Catucci , of NYMag.com , commented that " before you dismiss " the song , if you " give it a listen " , Brown ’ s " louche , drugged @-@ out reinvention is actually pretty great . " 
 In 2008 , German group Wise Guys recorded an a cappella version of the song as " Schiller " for their tenth album Frei ! . The stage choreography based on Michael Jackson 's music video and member Ferenc also recites a part of Friedrich Schiller 's Die <unk> . 
 In 2008 , " Thriller " was also covered by Ben Gibbard , lead singer of Death Cab for Cutie and The Postal Service . 
 In 2008 , industrial metal band <unk> covered Jackson 's song for their album Happiness in Darkness . 
 In October 2009 , Imogen Heap covered " Thriller " for BBC Radio 1 Live Lounge . 
 2010s 
 In 2010 , Italian gothic metal band The <unk> released a cover of " Thriller " on their album Soul Saliva . 
 In 2011 , Patrick Stump covered the song in an a cappella mash @-@ up tribute along with several other Michael Jackson songs over pre @-@ recorded backing vocals . 
 In 2012 , Italian jazz trumpeter Enrico Rava released a version on his tribute album Rava on the Dance Floor . 
 In 2013 , <unk> <unk> covered an stripped @-@ down slower version of song for fifth season of The X Factor Australia during week two . The cover was released as an single on September 3 , 2013 . <unk> 's performance of " Thriller " debuted at number 63 on the ARIA Singles Chart . 
 In 2014 and 2015 , Demi Lovato covered the song on her Demi World Tour . This version included a remixed dancing at the end , which Lovato would dance to with fellow background dancers . 
 = = Appearances in other media = = 
 Michael Jackson 's Thriller music video , particularly the songs dance routine in the video , have been referenced in television series and films including Donga ( 1985 ) , Coming to America ( 1988 ) , The Malibu Beach Vampires ( 1991 ) , South Park ( 1997 ) , Dead & Breakfast ( 2004 ) , 13 Going on 30 ( 2004 ) , Bo ! in the USA ( 2006 ) . 
 The Chemical Brothers said in a January 2002 interview that if their song " My Elastic Eye " is played on large speakers , the bass would resemble " Thriller " . 
 In 2011 , the cast of American musical TV series Glee ( Naya Rivera , Kevin McHale and Cory Monteith with New Directions ) performed " Thriller " as a mash up with " Heads Will Roll " by Yeah Yeah Yeahs in episode " The Sue Sylvester Shuffle " . 
 Pop singer Britney Spears made a reference to " Thriller " in her music video for " I Wanna Go " ( 2011 ) . In the ending of her video actor Guillermo Díaz leads Spears out of the room . He then turns to the camera with glowing red eyes and his laugh is heard , similar to Vincent Price . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Sales and certifications = = = 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = Royal Artillery Memorial = 
 The Royal Artillery Memorial is a stone memorial at Hyde Park Corner in London , dedicated to casualties in the Royal Regiment of Artillery in the First World War . The memorial was designed by Charles Jagger and Lionel Pearson , and features a giant sculpture of a BL 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch Mk I howitzer upon a large plinth of Portland stone , with stone reliefs depicting scenes from the conflict . Four bronze figures of artillery men are positioned around the outside of the memorial . The memorial is famous for its realist contrast with other First World War memorials , such as the Cenotaph designed by Edwin Lutyens , and attracted much public debate during the 20th century . 
 = = History = = 
 The First World War , which took place between 1914 and 1918 , saw the extensive use of artillery , particularly on the Western Front . Technical advances , combined with the relatively static nature of trench warfare , made these guns a key element of the conflict : over half the casualties in the war were caused by artillery . Artillery guns and their crews were themselves targets , however , and 49 @,@ 076 members of the Royal Artillery died during the conflict . In the years after the war , many former servicemen , including gunners , found the scale of the losses difficult to deal with , or felt that the events challenged their trust in the political leadership that had led them into the war . Visual reminders of the conflict were often avoided : mutilated servicemen , for example , were banned in the 1920s from joining in veterans ' marches , and those with facial injuries often hid them in public . 
 The Royal Artillery War Commemoration Fund ( RAWCF ) was formed in 1918 , made up a mixture of senior officers and other ranks . The RAWCF 's intention was to remember the artillery men who had died during the war , and after some discussions of various options , including purchasing a house for wounded soldiers , or building a number of small shrines across the country , the RAWCF decided to construct a single memorial to the fallen Royal Artillery servicemen . Memorials to lost servicemen from the previous major conflict , the South African War fought between 1899 and 1902 , had , however , been widely criticised as being unimaginative and unimpressive . As a result of these problems , the prominent artist Sir Edward Poynter had put forward recommendations that far more care , time and funding be given to the construction of future war memorials , which were taken on board by the RAWCF . The RAWCF sought a design that would be " unmistakably recognisable " as an artillery monument , and were insistent that the eventual designer take detailed advice from a junior officer who had served in the war . 
 The RAWCF first examined a design by Captain Adrian Jones , who had produced the Boer War Cavalry Memorial a few years before , but his design was rejected . Next , the committee contacted the artists Edwin Lutyens , Herbert Baker and Aston Webb . Lutyens ' sent in three designs , each costed at less than £ 15 @,@ 000 ( less than £ 607 @,@ 000 in 2009 terms ) , but they were felt to be too similar to the Cenotaph and to give insufficient prominence to the artillery . After the RAWCF insisted that a howitzer be prominently incorporated into the designs , Lutyens withdrew . Baker disagreed with the concept of single service monuments , but submitted a proposal costed at over £ 25 @,@ 000 ( over £ 1 @,@ 010 @,@ 000 in 2009 terms ) , which was declined and Baker subsequently withdrew from the project ; Webb declined to submit a proposal and also withdrew . 
 The committee then approached Charles Jagger in early 1921 . Jagger had been trained as a metal engraver before attending the Royal College of Art . He served in the infantry during the First World War and was injured at the battles of Gallipoli and Neuve @-@ Église , being awarded the Military Cross . At the end of the war , Jagger became involved in the design of war memorials , in particular the stark , brutal sculpture at the Hoylake and West Kirby War Memorial . Jagger was approached by the RAWCF both because of his reputation as a designer and because of his service as an infantry officer , although the American artist John Sargent , a patron of Jagger 's , may have encouraged the committee to consider the young artist . The RAWCF requested that he submit a model for a realist sculpture , to include a group of soldiers in bronze on a pedestal . 
 Jagger decided to work with the architect Lionel Pearson , who designed the stone structure of the memorial , and through June and July 1921 the RAWCF and the authorities considered the proposal . Jagger 's model was similar to the eventual memorial , but had only two gunners at either end of an oblong memorial ; the howitzer on the top was smaller than the eventual version , and pointed sideways , rather than lengthways along the pedestal . In reporting to the committee , Jagger said that he felt strongly that the design should unashamedly focus on the events of the war , noting that it " should in every sense be a war memorial " . Jagger explained that the artillery had " terrific power " and was the " last word in force " , and that the howitzer he had chosen was the only suitable weapon to symbolise those capabilities . There were concerns on the committee that the design would offend some members of the public , especially women , but the RAWCF eventually voted 50 to 15 in favour of accepting the design and the proposed cost of £ 25 @,@ 000 . Jagger was formally awarded the contract for the memorial in March 1922 . 
 Due to the pressures of other projects , Jagger did not begin work on the memorial until the following year , by which point he had decided to alter the design . The revised memorial would be a third @-@ larger than before , forming a crucifix , guarded by three bronze soldiers ; after much discussion , it was agreed that the howitzer would point south to produce a pleasing silhouette from the park . A lengthy , year @-@ long debate occurred within the RAWCF as to what inscription should be placed on the memorial , adding to the delay . Jagger then decided that the fourth side of the memorial should feature a dead soldier ; after considerable debate , the RAWCF also agreed to this modification . Jagger 's work continued to take longer than planned , partially due to shortages of staff , the need to approve each amendment to the plan and practical problems on the site itself . The names of his models for two of the statues are known : William <unk> for the Driver and another ex @-@ gunner called Metcalfe for the Ammunition Carrier . 
 The work was opened four months late on 18 October 1925 by Prince Arthur and the Reverend Alfred Jarvis . Despite the delay , the RAWCF and Jagger left on very good terms , the committee exceptionally pleased with the final memorial to the Royal Artillery . 
 Over the years , pollution and water penetration caused damage to the bronzes and stonework . English Heritage conducted a major restoration of the memorial during 2011 , completed in time for Remembrance Day . On 14 January 1970 the memorial was protected under UK law as a Grade II * listed building , but in July 2014 its status was raised to Grade I ; it was one of five memorials in London receiving a higher grade to mark the centenary of the outbreak of World War I. 
 = = Design and symbolism = = 
 The Royal Artillery Memorial today is located in what Malcolm Miles has termed the " leafy traffic island " of Hyde Park Corner in central London . The memorial is 43 feet long , 21 feet wide and 30 feet high ( 13 m by 6 m by 9 m ) ; the pedestal and the one @-@ third oversized replica of a BL 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch howitzer , modelled on a gun in the Imperial War Museum , that sits on top of it are made of Portland stone . Cast by the A. B. Burton foundry , four bronze figures are placed on each side of the memorial : a driver to the west side , an artillery captain on the east , a shell carrier to the south , and a dead soldier on the north . Carved stone reliefs show various detailed military scenes from the First World War . The memorial 's main inscription on the west and east faces reads " In proud remembrance of the forty @-@ nine thousand and seventy @-@ six of all ranks of the Royal Regiment of Artillery who gave their lives for King and country in the Great War 1914 — 1919 " . 
 The memorial forms a sharp contrast with both the earlier monuments of the South African War and most contemporary monuments to the First World War . Memorials of the South African War typically included figures of soldiers , sometimes dying in conflict , but always heroically in a " beautiful death " . Classical symbolism was often used to distance the event of death from the observer , as typified in William Colton 's work at Worcester . Most First World War memorials reacted to the criticism of this approach by adopting cleaner architectural forms , but still retaining the ideal of a " beautiful death " , an approach which can be seen at Lutyens ' Southampton War Memorial , the precursor to his more famous Cenotaph in London . These memorials frequently used abstract , beautiful designs intended to remove the viewer from the real world , and focus them on an idealised sense of self @-@ sacrifice . Soldiers in these memorials were still frequently depicted as Homeric warriors , and classical ideals and symbols remained popular , as can be seen at the Machine Gun Corps Memorial by Francis Derwent Wood , displayed close to the Royal Artillery Memorial itself . Where dead soldiers were shown , they were depicted in an image of serenity and peace , often physically distanced from the viewer on a high platform , the entire effect reflected by the silence that traditionally surrounds ceremonies at the Cenotaph . 
 The Royal Artillery Monument attempted a very different effect . Jagger takes a realist approach to his figures , embracing detailed images of military power with none of the classical symbolism of other monuments , or even Jagger 's own pre @-@ war pieces . The art historian Reginald <unk> likens the memorial to the work of Frank Brangwyn , who focused on depicting the physical labour of soldiers and workers during the war . The memorial shows the three upright bronze figures stood at ease , rather than to attention ; the driver even leans back against the parapet , his cape hanging over his outstretched arms , suggesting an attitude of exhaustion or contemplation . The faceless , heavily laden statue of the fallen soldier appears less at rest than tired , pulled down as if by a great weight . At the same time , the sheer size of the memorial , including the oversized gun and the larger @-@ than @-@ life bronze figures , exudes a sense of strength and power ; the figures are stocky , confident and imposing . This strength and power contributes to the sense of masculinity that pervades the work , from the phallic image of the howitzer , to the solid , muscular figures of the gunners . 
 Despite the realist nature of the bronze statues in the design , commentators have often also noted the dehumanising aspects of the memorial . Its sheer size and bulk of the howitzer serves to distance the observer , dehumanising the soldiers in a similar way to the Cubist war paintings of Wyndham Lewis and Richard Nevinson . Even the carved stone reliefs have an aggressive , hostile quality to them , a consequence of their focus on surface detail at the expense of the humans in the design . When questioned about his lifelike depictions , Jagger remarked to The Daily Express newspaper that the " experience in the trenches persuaded me of the necessity for frankness and truth " . Using what historian John Glaves @-@ Smith describes as themes of " endurance and sacrifice , not dynamism and conflict " , the memorial can be felt to speak to its audience about the experience of war in a way that the Cenotaph , for example , does not . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The Royal Artillery Memorial has continued to be the subject of much critical discussion . After the unveiling , a vigorous debate occurred in the British newspapers about the memorial . The Times was critical , comparing it unfavourably to the Cenotaph , while The Daily Mail highlighted the cost of the monument , and argued that the money could have been better spent on directly caring for injured veterans . Both the dead soldier and the howitzer drew particular comment ; art critic Selwyn Image complained about having any sort of artillery gun on the monument , whilst Lord Curzon was quoted as describing the howitzer as " a toad squatting , which is about to spit fire out of its mouth ... nothing more hideous could ever be conceived " . Modernists , such as Roger Fry , criticised the conventional , secure structure that underpins the memorial . 
 Other opinions were more positive . The Manchester Guardian noted that the frankness of the portrayal was a " terrible revelation long overdue " , and hoped that veterans would be able to show the monument to their wives and children as a way of explaining the events of the war . Ex @-@ servicemen were quoted by the newspaper as reminiscing about the war as they examined the statue , and remarking on how the bronze figures had captured the reality of their time in the artillery . The Illustrated London News reported how , two days after the official ceremony , a crowd had gathered in the rain just before dawn to conduct a small ceremony at the memorial ; the newspaper felt that this said more about the quality of the memorial than the more negative writings of art critics . These voices eventually held sway , and the memorial came to be popularly termed " the special Cenotaph of the Gunners " , with Lord Edward Gleichen praising it in 1928 as " a strikingly imaginative and most worthy representation " . By the 1930s , it was one of the best known monuments in Europe . 
 In later years , the reputation of the work diminished . The art critic Geoffrey Grigson echoed the comments of Lord Curzon , when he complained in 1980 that the memorial was a " squat toad of foolish stone " . A renewed focus on Jagger 's works , including the Royal Artillery memorial , in the 1980s has led to a fresh reappraisal of the piece ; the most recent critical work on the memorial has described it as a " work of the highest quality and distinction " . 
 = Maria : or , The Wrongs of Woman = 
 Maria : or , The Wrongs of Woman is the 18th @-@ century British feminist Mary Wollstonecraft 's unfinished novelistic sequel to her revolutionary political treatise A Vindication of the Rights of Woman ( 1792 ) . The Wrongs of Woman was published posthumously in 1798 by her husband , William Godwin , and is often considered her most radical feminist work . 
 Wollstonecraft 's philosophical and gothic novel revolves around the story of a woman imprisoned in an insane asylum by her husband . It focuses on the societal rather than the individual " wrongs of woman " and criticizes what Wollstonecraft viewed as the patriarchal institution of marriage in eighteenth @-@ century Britain and the legal system that protected it . However , the heroine 's inability to relinquish her romantic fantasies also reveals women 's collusion in their oppression through false and damaging sentimentalism . The novel pioneered the celebration of female sexuality and cross @-@ class identification between women . Such themes , coupled with the publication of Godwin 's scandalous Memoirs of Wollstonecraft 's life , made the novel unpopular at the time it was published . 
 Twentieth @-@ century feminist critics embraced the work , integrating it into the history of the novel and feminist discourse . It is most often viewed as a fictionalized popularization of the Rights of Woman , as an extension of Wollstonecraft 's feminist arguments in Rights of Woman , and as autobiographical . 
 = = Composition and plot summary = = 
 = = = Drafts = = = 
 Wollstonecraft struggled to write The Wrongs of Woman for over a year ; in contrast , she had dashed off A Vindication of the Rights of Men ( 1790 ) , her reply to Edmund Burke 's Reflections on the Revolution in France ( 1790 ) , in under a month and A Vindication of the Rights of Woman ( 1792 ) in six weeks . Godwin comments : 
 She was sensible how arduous a task it is to produce a truly excellent novel ; and she roused her faculties to grapple with it . All her other works were produced with a rapidity , that did not give her powers time fully to expand . But this was written slowly and with mature consideration . She began it in several forms , which she successively rejected , after they were considerably advanced . She wrote many parts of the work again and again , and , when she had finished what she intended for the first part , she felt herself more urgently stimulated to revise and improve what she had written , than to proceed , with constancy of application , in the parts that were to follow . 
 She also researched the book more than her others . By assuming the responsibilities of fiction editor and reviewing almost nothing but novels , she used her editorial position at Joseph Johnson 's Analytical Review to educate herself regarding novelistic techniques . She even visited Bedlam Hospital in February 1797 to research insane asylums . 
 At Wollstonecraft 's death in 1797 , the manuscript was incomplete . Godwin published all of the pieces of the manuscript in the Posthumous Works , adding several sentences and paragraphs of his own to link disjunct sections . 
 = = = Plot summary = = = 
 The Wrongs of Woman begins in medias res with the upper @-@ class Maria 's unjust imprisonment by her husband , George Venables . Not only has he condemned Maria to live in an insane asylum , but he has also taken their child away from her . She manages to befriend one of her attendants in the asylum , an impoverished , lower @-@ class woman named Jemima , who , after realizing that Maria is not mad , agrees to bring her a few books . Some of these have notes scribbled in them by Henry Darnford , another inmate , and Maria falls in love with him via his marginalia . The two begin to communicate and eventually meet . Darnford reveals that he has had a debauched life ; waking up in the asylum after a night of heavy drinking , he has been unable to convince the doctors to release him . 
 Jemima tells her life story to Maria and Darnford , explaining that she was born a bastard . Jemima 's mother died while she was still an infant , making her already precarious social position worse . She was therefore forced to become a servant in her father 's house and later bound out as an apprentice to a master who beat her , starved her , and raped her . When the man 's wife discovers that Jemima is pregnant with his child , she is thrown out of the house . Unable to support herself , she aborts her child and becomes a prostitute . She becomes the kept woman of a man of some wealth who seems obsessed with pleasure of every kind : food , love , etc . After the death of the gentleman keeping her , she becomes an attendant at the asylum where Maria is imprisoned . 
 In chapters seven through fourteen ( about half of the completed manuscript ) , Maria relates her own life story in a narrative she has written for her daughter . She explains how her mother and father loved their eldest son , Robert , more than their other children and how he ruled " <unk> " over his siblings . To escape her unhappy home , Maria visited that of a neighbor and fell in love with his son , George Venables . Venables presented himself to everyone as a respectable and honorable young man ; in actuality , he was a libertine . Maria 's family life became untenable when her mother died and her father took the housekeeper as his mistress . A rich uncle who was fond of Maria , unaware of Venables ' true character , arranged a marriage for her and gave her a dowry of £ 5 @,@ 000 . 
 Maria quickly learned of her husband 's true character . She tried to ignore him by cultivating a greater appreciation for literature and the arts , but he became increasingly dissolute : he <unk> , gambled , and bankrupted the couple . Maria soon became pregnant after unwanted sexual encounters with her husband . As Maria 's uncle is leaving for the continent , he warns Maria of the consequences should she leave her husband . This is the first that separation or divorce are discussed in the novel and Maria seems to take his words as inspiration rather than the warning they are meant to be . After Venables attempts to pay one of his friends to seduce Maria ( a man referred to only as ' Mr. S ' ) so that he can leave her for being an adulteress , Maria tries to leave him . She initially escapes and manages to live in several different locations , often with other women who have also been wronged by their husbands , but he always finds her . When she tries to leave England with her newborn child and the fortune her now deceased uncle has left them , her husband seizes the child and imprisons Maria in the asylum . At this point the completed manuscript breaks off . 
 = = = Fragmentary endings = = = 
 The fragmentary notes for the remainder of the novel indicate two different trajectories for the plot and five separate conclusions . In both major plot arcs , George Venables wins a lawsuit against Darnford for seducing his wife ; Darnford then abandons Maria , flees England , and takes another mistress . When she discovers this treachery , Maria loses the child she was carrying by Darnford ( either through an abortion or a miscarriage ) . In one ending , Maria commits suicide . In another , more complete ending , Maria is saved from suicide by Jemima who has found her first daughter . Maria agrees to live for her child ( as Wollstonecraft herself had done after her second suicide attempt ) . Jemima , Maria and Maria 's daughter form a new family . 
 = = Style = = 
 In her pieces for the Analytical Review , Wollstonecraft developed a set of criteria for what constitutes a good novel : 
 A good tragedy or novel , if the criterion be the effect which it has on the reader , is not always the most moral work , for it is not the reveries of sentiment , but the struggles of passion — of those human passions , that too frequently cloud the reason , and lead mortals into dangerous errors ... which raise the most lively emotions , and leave the most lasting impression on the memory ; an impression rather made by the heart than the understanding : for our affections are not quite voluntary as the <unk> of reason . ( emphasis Wollstonecraft 's ) 
 Wollstonecraft believed that novels should be " probable " and depict " moderation , reason , and contentment " . Thus it is surprising that The Wrongs of Woman draws inspiration from works such as Ann Radcliffe 's A Sicilian Romance ( 1790 ) and relies on gothic conventions such as the literal and figurative " mansion of despair " to which Maria is consigned . But it does so to demonstrate that gothic horrors are a reality for the average Englishwoman . Using elements of the gothic , Wollstonecraft can , for example , portray Maria 's husband as tyrannical and married life as wretched . As Wollstonecraft herself writes in the " Preface " to The Wrongs of Woman : 
 In many instances I could have made the incidents more dramatic , would I have sacrificed my main object , the desire of exhibiting the misery and oppression , peculiar to women , that arise out of the partial laws and customs of society . 
 One model for Wollstonecraft 's novel was Godwin 's Caleb Williams ( 1794 ) , which demonstrated how an adventurous and gothic novel could offer a social critique . 
 = = = Narrator = = = 
 The Wrongs of Woman usually uses third @-@ person narration , although large sections of Maria 's and Jemima 's tales are in first @-@ person narrative . The narrator often relates Maria 's feelings to the reader through the new technique of free indirect discourse , which blurs the line between the third @-@ person narrator and the first @-@ person dialogue of a text . Wollstonecraft juxtaposes the events of the novel with both Maria 's own retelling of them and her innermost feelings . The first @-@ person stories allow Maria and Jemima to address each other as equals : their stories of suffering , while still allowing each character to retain an individualized sense of self , are a levelling and bonding force between the two . 
 = = = Jacobin novel = = = 
 The Wrongs of Woman is what in the late eighteenth century was called a Jacobin novel , a philosophical novel that advocated the ideals of the French Revolution . Wollstonecraft 's novel argues along with others , such as Mary Hays 's Memoirs of Emma Courtney ( 1796 ) , that women are the victims of constant and systematic injustice . Wollstonecraft uses the philosophical dialogues in her novel to demonstrate women 's powerlessness . 
 Like other Jacobin novels , The Wrongs of Woman relies on a web of suggestive character names to convey its message : Jemima is named for Job 's daughter ; Henry Darnford 's name resembles that of Henry Darnley , the second husband of Mary , Queen of Scots ; and George Venables shares a name with the notorious womanizer George , Prince of Wales . Wollstonecraft added to the reality of her philosophical text by quoting from familiar literature , such as Shakespeare , alluding to important historical events , and referencing relevant facts . The Wrongs of Woman comments on the state of women in society by rewriting earlier texts with a feminist slant , such as Henry Fielding 's Tom Jones ; Fielding 's Mrs. Fitzpatrick becomes Wollstonecraft 's Maria . These rhetorical strategies made the philosophical elements of the novel more palatable to the public . 
 = = Themes = = 
 At the end of the Rights of Woman Wollstonecraft promised her readers a second part to the work . Rather than giving them another philosophical treatise , however , she offered them a novel tinged with autobiography , appropriately titled The Wrongs of Woman . In her " Preface " , she writes that the novel should be considered the story of " woman " and not the story of an " individual " . Wollstonecraft attempts to detail , as the scholar Anne K. Mellor has phrased it , " the wrongs done to women and the wrongs done by women " ( emphasis Mellor 's ) . The wrongs done to women include stifling and sexually repressed marriages , which Wollstonecraft describes using the language of slavery , while the wrongs done by women include a false sense of self @-@ worth generated through the language of sensibility . Unlike Wollstonecraft 's first novel , Mary : A Fiction ( 1788 ) , The Wrongs of Woman offers solutions to these problems , namely an empowering female sexuality , a purpose @-@ filled maternal role , and the possibility of a feminism that crosses class boundaries . 
 = = = Marriage and slavery = = = 
 In metaphors carried over from the Rights of Woman , Wollstonecraft describes marriage as a prison and women as slaves within it in The Wrongs of Woman . In the first chapter Maria laments , " [ is ] not the world a vast prison , and women born slaves ? " and later she makes a politically charged allusion to the French prison , the Bastille : " marriage had <unk> me for life " . Moreover , Maria 's body is bought and sold like a slave 's : she is worth £ 5 @,@ 000 on the open marriage market and her new husband attempts to sell her into prostitution . Commenting on her condition , Maria states : " a wife being as much a man 's property as his horse , or his ass , she has nothing she can call her own " . In the Rights of Woman , Wollstonecraft had used the metaphor of slavery not only to describe the horrors of marriage as it currently existed but also to offer a juxtaposition to the possibility of a new kind of marriage , one which assumed equality between affectionate and rational partners . In The Wrongs of Woman , this option is never presented ; instead , the reader is shown a series of disastrous marriages in which women are abused , robbed , and abandoned . 
 " Wollstonecraft 's fundamental insight in Maria " , according to scholar Mary Poovey , " concerns the way in which female sexuality is defined or interpreted — and , by extension , controlled — by bourgeois institutions . The primary agent of this control is marriage " . Wollstonecraft deconstructs the ideology of marriage , by which women are exchangeable commodities , are objectified , and are denied their natural rights . 
 = = = Sensibility and sentimentalism = = = 
 Sensibility in the second half of the eighteenth century was considered both a physical and a moral phenomenon . Physicians and anatomists believed that the more sensitive people 's nerves , the more emotionally affected they would be by their surroundings . Since women were thought to have keener nerves than men , it was also believed that women were more emotional than men . The emotional excess associated with sensibility also theoretically produced an ethic of compassion : those with sensibility could easily sympathize with people in pain . Thus historians have credited the discourse of sensibility and those who promoted it with the increased humanitarian efforts , such as the movement to abolish the slave trade , of the eighteenth century . But sensibility was also thought to paralyze those who had too much of it ; they were weakened by constant vicarious suffering . 
 By the time Wollstonecraft was writing The Wrongs of Woman , sensibility had already been under sustained attack for a number of years . Sensibility , which had initially promised to draw individuals together through sympathy , was now viewed as " profoundly separatist " ; novels , plays , and poems that employed the language of sensibility asserted individual rights , sexual freedom , and unconventional familial relationships based only upon feeling . Sensibility seemed to many , particularly during a time of political reaction , to offer too much political power to women and to emasculate British men needed for fighting France . 
 All of Wollstonecraft 's writings betray a tortured relationship with the language of sensibility and The Wrongs of Woman is no exception . As feminist scholar Mitzi Myers has observed , Wollstonecraft is usually described as an " enlightened philosopher strenuously advocating the cultivation of reason as the guide to both self @-@ realization and social progress " , but her works do not unambiguously support such a model of selfhood . Her emphasis on " feeling , imagination , and interiority " mark her as a Romantic , particularly in Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark ( 1796 ) . Repeatedly , in both her fiction and non @-@ fiction , Wollstonecraft argues that the proper understanding of one 's emotions leads to a transcendent virtue . 
 However , because Wollstonecraft herself is contradictory and vague in the unfinished Wrongs of Woman , there is no real scholarly consensus on what exactly the novel says about sensibility . Wollstonecraft is intentionally breaking the conventions of sentimental fiction , but exactly what her goals are in doing so is unclear . For example , Maria and Jemima can seemingly be identified with the traditional categories of " reason " ( Jemima ) and " sensibility " ( Maria ) , but since such couples were usually male and female , Wollstonecraft 's characterization challenges conventional definitions of gender . 
 Some critics interpret Maria 's story ironically , arguing that the juxtaposition of Maria 's sentimental and romantic narrative with Jemima 's harsh and bleak narrative encourages such a reading . In this interpretation , Maria 's narrative is read as a parody of sentimental fiction that aims to demonstrate the " wrongs " that women inflict upon themselves when they overindulge in sensibility . Although Wollstonecraft promotes sensibility in this text , it is not the same kind that she condemns in the Rights of Woman ; proper sensibility , she contends , rests on sympathy and , most importantly , is controlled by reason . A woman with this kind of sensibility would not be " blown about by every gust of momentary feeling " . Other critics see The Wrongs of Woman as a " negation " of the anti @-@ sentimental arguments offered in the Rights of Woman . Citing Jemima 's infrequent appearances in the narrative and the narrator 's own use of the language of sensibility , they have difficulty in accepting the claim that the novel is undercutting or questioning the rhetoric of sensibility . 
 = = = = Female desire = = = = 
 One of the key differences between Wollstonecraft 's novels and her philosophical treatises , as feminist critic Cora Kaplan has argued , is that her fiction values female emotion while her treatises present it as " reactionary and regressive , almost counter @-@ revolutionary " . The Rights of Woman portrays sexuality as a masculine characteristic , and while Wollstonecraft argues that some masculine characteristics are universal , this is not one of them . In The Wrongs of Woman , however , she accepts , relishes , and uses the sexualized female body as a medium of communication : Maria embraces her lust for Darnford and establishes a relationship with him . While in the Rights of Woman she had emphasized <unk> relationships , arguing that passions should cool between lovers , in The Wrongs of Woman , she celebrates those passions . Challenging contemporary moralists such as John Gregory and Rousseau , Wollstonecraft claimed that women could be fully sexualized beings . 
 Initially , Maria wants to marry Venables because of his charitable nature ; she believes him to be the romantic hero that she has read about in novels . However , she later realizes his duplicity : 
 [ George ] continued to single me out at the dance , press my hand at parting , and utter expressions of unmeaning passion , to which I gave a meaning naturally suggested by the romantic turn of my thoughts . ... When he left us , the colouring of my picture became more vivid — Whither did not my imagination lead me ? In short , I fancied myself in love — in love with the disinterestedness , fortitude , generosity , dignity , and humanity , with which I had invested the hero I dubbed . 
 One of the important questions raised by the novel is whether Maria is deluded in her relationship with Darnford . Maria writes an autobiography for her daughter in which she admits that she was misled by Venables , but critics disagree over the extent to which she is also misled by Darnford . Some suggest that Maria repeats her mistake and imagines Darnford as a hero , citing as evidence Maria 's refusal to leave the madhouse , when she is free to do so , because she wants to remain with him , as well as her infatuation with Rousseau 's novel Julie , or the New Heloise . She imagines Darnford as its " hero " , St. Preux , the sometime lover but not husband of Julie . Maria 's reading and the plots she conjures in her imagination as a result of that reading are the cause of her downfall in this interpretation : unable or unwilling to separate fiction from reality , she incorporates Darnford into her romantic fantasies . Other critics , while agreeing that Maria is led astray by Darnford , argue that it is not her sexuality and eroticism that are the problem , but her choice of partner . They argue that Wollstonecraft is not portraying female sexuality as inherently detrimental , as she had in Mary and the Rights of Woman , rather she is criticizing the directions it often takes . 
 = = = Class and feminism = = = 
 The structure of The Wrongs of Woman , with its interwoven tales of the similarly abused upper @-@ middle @-@ class Maria , the lower @-@ middle @-@ class sailor 's wife Peggy , the working @-@ class shopkeeper , the boarding @-@ house owner , and the working @-@ class domestic servant Jemima , is an " unprecedented " representation of the shared concerns of women in a patriarchal society . Wollstonecraft wrote in a letter , published as part of the preface to The Wrongs of Woman , that she aimed " to show the wrongs of different classes of women , equally oppressive , though , from the difference of education , necessarily various " . Her novel is newly inclusive and one of the first works in the history of feminist literature that hints at a cross @-@ class argument that women of different economic positions have the same interests because they are women . In her narration , Jemima asks " who ever risked anything for me ? — Who ever acknowledged me to be a fellow @-@ creature ? " It is not until Maria grasps her hand in sympathy that she feels this ; furthermore , it is Jemima 's story that first prods Maria 's own " thoughts [ to ] take a wider range " and " thinking of Jemima 's peculiar fate and her own , she was led to consider the oppressed state of women , and to lament that she had given birth to a daughter " . 
 Jemima is the most fleshed out of the lower @-@ class women in the novel ; through her Wollstonecraft refuses to accept the submissiveness traditionally associated with femininity and expresses a frustrated anger that would have been viewed as unseemly in Maria . Jemima 's tale also challenges assumptions regarding prostitutes . Wollstonecraft rewrites the traditional narrative of the redeemed prostitute ( e.g. , Daniel Defoe 's Some Considerations on <unk> ( 1726 ) ) . The novel presents prostitutes as " an exploited class " , akin to wives who are dependent on men , and demonstrates how they are a product of their environment . By making both Jemima and Maria prostitutes , Wollstonecraft rejects two contemporary stereotypes of the prostitute : the image of the woman who takes pleasure in her actions and is in love with her keeper and the image of the victim desirous of pity . Thus , rather than simply repulsing or eliciting the compassion of the reader , Jemima and Maria presumably forge a stronger , more lasting bond with the female reader who shares their plight . 
 Nevertheless , Jemima 's tale still retains elements of Wollstonecraft 's bourgeois ethos ; Jemima and the other working @-@ class women are only presented as Maria 's equal in suffering ; " women are linked across class , then , but less in solidarity than in hopelessness . " As Wollstonecraft scholar Barbara Taylor comments , " Maria 's relationship with Jemima displays something of the class fissures and prejudices that have marked organised feminist politics from their inception . " Jemima is taught to appreciate the finer things in life when she is a kept mistress and Maria later promises to care for her . Importantly , though , in one version of the ending , it is Jemima who rescues Maria and finds her child . 
 = = = Motherhood and the feminine self = = = 
 While some scholars emphasize The Wrongs of Woman 's criticism of the institution of marriage and the laws restricting women in the eighteenth century , others focus on the work 's description of " the experience of being female , with the emotional violence and intellectual debilitation " that accompanies it ( emphasis in original ) . It is in Wollstonecraft 's depiction of a female mind educating itself and creating a specifically feminine sense of self that she " breaks new ground " . Maria 's role as mother allows her to instruct herself , thereby creating her own sense of self ; in advising her daughter through the manuscript she is writing , Maria learns about herself and realizes her past errors . Her ability to formulate her own selfhood can be contrasted to the heroine of Wollstonecraft 's first novel , Mary : A Fiction , who transfers her maternal cravings from character to character . 
 Furthermore , while patriarchal marriages are one of the great wrongs perpetrated upon women , Wollstonecraft argues that a greater wrong is women 's lack of independence . Because they are unable to find respectable , well @-@ paid work , they are reliant upon men . Women such as Jemima are reduced to hard physical labor , stealing , begging , or prostituting themselves in order to survive ; they are demeaned by this work and think meanly of themselves because of it . 
 Because male @-@ female relationships are inherently unequal in her society , Wollstonecraft endeavours to formulate a new kind of friendship in The Wrongs of Woman : motherhood and sisterhood . It is Maria 's pathetic story regarding the kidnapping of her child that first interests Jemima in her plight . The novel fragments also suggest that the tale might not end with a marriage , but rather with the creation of a new kind of family , one constituted by two mothers for Maria 's child . With Jemima 's rescue of Maria , Wollstonecraft appears to reject the traditional romantic plot and invent a new one , necessitated by the failure of society to grant women their natural rights . 
 While more recent critics have emphasized the revolutionary aspects of the cross @-@ class friendship between Jemima and Maria , others have questioned the extent of that radicalism , arguing that Jemima 's story occupies a small section of the novel and is abruptly truncated . Mary Poovey also maintains that Wollstonecraft fails to extend her critique of marriage and society from the individual to the systemic level . 
 = = = Autobiographical elements = = = 
 Like Wollstonecraft 's first novel , Mary : A Fiction , The Wrongs of Woman is heavily autobiographical ; the two novels even repeat many of the same biographical details . After being abandoned by her lover and the father of her child , Gilbert Imlay ( the model for Darnford ) , Wollstonecraft attempted to commit suicide . Her despair over these events is written into the book as well as many other experiences from the mid @-@ 1790s . Moreover , Maria Venables 's family history shows clear similarities to Wollstonecraft 's own . Like Maria , Wollstonecraft had a mother who favored an elder brother and she also devotedly cared for that mother during her dying days , only to be pushed away during the final moments of her life . Wollstonecraft also looked after her sisters like Maria does , albeit without the help of a wealthy uncle . Perhaps most strikingly , Wollstonecraft 's sister Eliza left her husband , at Wollstonecraft 's prodding , much as Maria leaves hers . As Kelly explains , autobiography is common in Jacobin novels . Philosophical novels were expected to be autobiographical ; audiences believed that the philosophizing novelists would draw on their own experiences in order to illustrate their abstract principles . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 The Posthumous Works , of which The Wrongs of Woman was the largest part , had a " reasonably wide audience " when it was published in 1798 , but it " was received by critics with almost universal disfavor " . This was in large part because the simultaneous release of Godwin 's Memoirs of the Author of A Vindication of the Rights of Woman revealed Wollstonecraft 's illegitimate child and her love affairs . Most reviewers and readers transferred the unconventional and unorthodox life Wollstonecraft herself had lived onto Maria and much that Maria had said and done onto Wollstonecraft , thereby realizing Wollstonecraft 's fears that her books would be read only as a mirror of her life . The eighteenth @-@ century moralist Hannah More , for example , called The Wrongs of Woman a " vindication of adultery " . 
 Many critics and even personal acquaintances failed to grasp Wollstonecraft 's fundamental point , that Maria 's " wrongs " are political , not personal . She wrote to one friend who had criticized it : 
 I am vexed and surprised at your not thinking the situation of Maria sufficiently important , and can only account for this want of – shall I say it ? delicacy of feeling , by recollecting that you are a man – For my part I cannot suppose any situation more distressing than for a woman of sensibility with an improving mind to be bound , to such a man as I have described , for life – obliged to renounce all the humanizing affections , and to avoid cultivating her taste lest her perception of grace , and refinement of sentiment should sharpen to agony the pangs of disappointment . 
 Even Godwin , her husband , complained , " I do not want a common @-@ place story of a brutal , insensible husband . " Both the Anti @-@ Jacobin Review and the Monthly Review reviewed the novel harshly . The Anti @-@ Jacobin Review , attacking both Wollstonecraft and her book as well as Godwin 's Political Justice and Memoirs , wrote : 
 The restrictions upon adultery constitute , in Maria 's opinion , A MOST <unk> <unk> TO WOMEN . Such is the moral tendency of this work , such are the lessons which may be learned from the writings of Mrs. Wollstonecraft ; such the advantages which the public may derive from this performance given to the world by Godwin , celebrated by him , and perfectly consonant to the principles of his Political Justice . — But as there have been writers , who have in theory promulgated opinions subversive of morality , yet in their conduct have not been immoral , Godwin has laboured to inform the world , that the theory of Mrs. Wollstonecraft was reduced to practice ; that she lived and acted , as she wrote and taught . [ Footnote in original : We could point out some of this lady 's pupils , who have so far profited by the instructions received from her , as to imitate her conduct , and reduce her principles to practice . ] ( emphasis in original ) 
 Under the heading " Prostitution " in the index to the magazine , the editors listed only one entry : Mary Wollstonecraft . Partially because of these reactions , female sexuality would not be celebrated so overtly in Britain for another century . 
 While Wollstonecraft 's arguments in The Wrongs of Woman may appear commonplace in light of modern feminism , they were " breathtakingly audacious " during the late eighteenth century : " Wollstonecraft 's final novel made explosively plain what the Rights of Woman had only partially intimated : that women 's entitlements — as citizens , mothers , and sexual beings — are incompatible with a patriarchal marriage system . " However , while The Wrongs of Woman is now read as the progenitor of many feminist texts and the inspiration for many feminist arguments and rhetorical styles ( e.g. , the personal confession ) , Wollstonecraft herself was not part of a feminist movement nor did she ever argue for one . Although The Wrongs of Woman presents " woman " as " wronged " , neither Wollstonecraft nor any other British woman who highlighted the inequalities suffered by women at the time ( such as Mary Hays or Mary Robinson ) ever put forth a collective solution . As part of the Enlightenment , they were dedicated to individualistic solutions . 
 = = Modern reprints = = 
 = De Havilland Comet = 
 The de Havilland DH 106 Comet was the world 's first production commercial jetliner . Developed and manufactured by de Havilland at its Hatfield Aerodrome , Hertfordshire , United Kingdom headquarters , the Comet 1 prototype first flew on 27 July 1949 . It featured an aerodynamically clean design with four de Havilland Ghost turbojet engines buried in the wings , a pressurised fuselage , and large square windows . For the era , it offered a relatively quiet , comfortable passenger cabin and showed signs of being a commercial success at its 1952 debut . 
 A year after entering commercial service , the Comets began suffering problems , with three of them breaking up during mid @-@ flight in well @-@ publicised accidents . These were later found to be due to catastrophic metal fatigue in the airframes , not well understood at the time . The Comet was withdrawn from service and extensively tested to discover the cause ; the first incident had been incorrectly blamed on adverse weather . Design flaws , including dangerous stresses at the corners of the square windows and installation methods , were ultimately identified . As a result , the Comet was extensively redesigned with oval windows , structural reinforcement , and other changes . Rival manufacturers meanwhile heeded the lessons learned from the Comet while developing their own aircraft . 
 Although sales never fully recovered , the improved Comet 2 and the prototype Comet 3 culminated in the redesigned Comet 4 series which debuted in 1958 and had a productive career of over 30 years . The Comet was adapted for a variety of military roles such as VIP , medical and passenger transport , as well as surveillance . The most extensive modification resulted in a specialised maritime patrol aircraft variant , the Hawker Siddeley Nimrod . Nimrod remained in service with the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) until June 2011 , over 60 years after the Comet 's first flight . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 On 11 March 1943 , the Cabinet of the United Kingdom formed the Brabazon Committee to determine the UK 's airliner needs after the conclusion of the Second World War . One of its recommendations was for a pressurised , transatlantic <unk> that could carry non @-@ stop , one long ton ( 1 @.@ 0 t ) of payload at a cruising speed of 400 mph ( 640 km / h ) . De Havilland chose to challenge the widely held scepticism of jet engines as too fuel @-@ hungry and unreliable , So committee member Sir Geoffrey de Havilland , head of the de Havilland company , used his personal influence and his company 's expertise to champion the development of a jet propelled aircraft ; and proposed a specification for a pure turbojet @-@ powered design . The committee accepted the proposal , calling it the " Type IV " ( of five designs ) , and awarded a development and production contract to de Havilland under the designation Type 106 in February 1945 . The type and design were to be so advanced that De Havilland had to undertake the design and development of both , the airframe , and the engines . This was because in 1945 no turbojet engine manufacturer in the world was drawing up a design specification for an engine with the thrust and specific fuel consumption , that could power an aircraft at the proposed cruising altitude ( 40 thousand feet ) , speed , and transatlantic range as was called for by the Type 106 . First @-@ phase development of the DH 106 focused on short and intermediate range <unk> with a small passenger compartment and as few as six seats , before being redefined as a long @-@ range airliner with a capacity of 24 seats . Out of all the Brabazon designs , the DH 106 was seen as the riskiest both in terms of introducing untried design elements and for the financial commitment involved . Nevertheless , the British Overseas Airways Corporation ( BOAC ) found the Type IV 's specifications attractive , and initially proposed a purchase of 25 aircraft ; in December 1945 , when a firm contract was laid out , the order total was revised to 10 . 
 A design team was formed in 1946 under the leadership of chief designer Ronald Bishop , who had been responsible for the Mosquito fighter @-@ bomber . A number of unorthodox configurations were considered , ranging from canard to tailless designs ; all were subsequently rejected . The Ministry of Supply was , however , interested in the most radical of the proposed designs and ordered two experimental tailless DH 108s to serve as proof of concept aircraft for testing swept @-@ wing configurations in both low @-@ speed and high @-@ speed flight . During flight tests , the DH 108 gained a reputation for being accident @-@ prone and unstable , leading de Havilland and BOAC to gravitate to conventional configurations and , necessarily , designs with less technical risk . The DH 108s were later modified to test the DH 106 's power controls . 
 In September 1946 , prior to the completion of the DH 108s , BOAC requests necessitated a redesign of the DH 106 from its previous 24 @-@ seat configuration to a larger 36 @-@ seat version . With no time to develop the technology necessary for a proposed tailless configuration , Bishop opted for a more conventional 20 @-@ degree swept @-@ wing design with unswept tail surfaces , married to an enlarged fuselage accommodating 36 passengers in a four @-@ abreast arrangement with a central aisle . Replacing previously specified Halford <unk> Goblin engines , four new , more powerful Rolls @-@ Royce Avons were to be incorporated in pairs buried in the wing roots ; Halford <unk> Ghost engines were eventually applied as an interim solution while the Avons cleared certification . The redesigned aircraft was named the DH 106 Comet in December 1947 . Revised first orders from BOAC and British South American Airways totalled 14 aircraft with delivery projected for 1952 . 
 = = = Testing and prototypes = = = 
 As the Comet represented a new category of passenger aircraft , more rigorous testing was a development priority . From 1947 to 1948 , de Havilland conducted an extensive research and development phase , including the use of several stress test rigs at Hatfield for small components and large assemblies alike . Sections of pressurised fuselage were subjected to high @-@ altitude flight conditions via a large decompression chamber on @-@ site , and tested to failure . However , tracing fuselage failure points proved difficult with this method , and de Havilland ultimately switched to conducting structural tests with a water tank that could be safely configured to increase pressures gradually . The entire forward fuselage section was tested for metal fatigue by repeatedly pressurising to 2 @.@ 75 pounds per square inch ( 19 @.@ 0 kPa ) overpressure and <unk> through more than 16 @,@ 000 cycles , equivalent to about 40 @,@ 000 hours of airline service . The windows were also tested under a pressure of 12 psi ( 83 kPa ) , 4 @.@ 75 psi ( 32 @.@ 8 kPa ) above expected pressures at the normal service ceiling of 36 @,@ 000 ft ( 11 @,@ 000 m ) . One window frame survived 100 psi ( 690 kPa ) , about 1 @,@ 250 percent over the maximum pressure it was expected to encounter in service . 
 The first prototype DH 106 Comet ( carrying Class B markings G @-@ 5 @-@ 1 ) was completed in 1949 , and was initially used to conduct ground tests and brief early flights . The prototype 's maiden flight took place on 27 July 1949 out of Hatfield Aerodrome and lasted 31 minutes . At the controls was de Havilland chief test pilot John Cunningham , a famous night @-@ fighter pilot of the Second World War , along with co @-@ pilot Harold " Tubby " Waters , engineers John Wilson ( electrics ) and Frank Reynolds ( hydraulics ) , and flight test observer Tony Fairbrother . 
 The prototype was registered G @-@ <unk> just before it was publicly displayed at the 1949 Farnborough Airshow prior to the start of flight trials . A year later , the second prototype G @-@ 5 @-@ 2 made its maiden flight . The second prototype was registered G @-@ <unk> in July 1950 and it was used by the BOAC Comet Unit at Hurn from April 1951 to carry out 500 flying hours of crew training and route proving . Australian airline Qantas also sent its own technical experts to observe the performance of the prototypes , seeking to quell internal uncertainty about its prospective Comet purchase . Both prototypes could be externally distinguished from later Comets by the large single @-@ wheeled main landing gear , which was replaced on production models starting with G @-@ ALYP by four @-@ wheeled bogies . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 The Comet was an all @-@ metal low @-@ wing cantilever monoplane powered by four jet engines ; it had a four @-@ place cockpit occupied by two pilots , a flight engineer , and a navigator . The clean , low @-@ drag design of the aircraft featured many design elements that were fairly uncommon at the time , including a swept @-@ wing leading edge , integral wing fuel tanks , and four @-@ wheel bogie main undercarriage units designed by de Havilland . Two pairs of turbojet engines ( on the Comet 1s , Halford <unk> Ghosts , subsequently known as de Havilland Ghost 50 Mk1s ) were buried into the wings . 
 The original Comet was approximately the length of the later Boeing 737 @-@ 100 , but carried fewer people in a significantly more spacious environment . BOAC installed 36 reclining " <unk> " with 45 @-@ inch ( 1 @,@ 100 mm ) centres on its first Comets , allowing for greater leg room in front and behind ; Air France had 11 rows of seats with four seats to a row installed on its Comets . Large picture window views and table seating accommodations for a row of passengers afforded a " feel of comfort and luxury " atypical of transportation of the period . Amenities included a galley that could serve hot and cold food and drinks , a bar , and separate men 's and women 's toilets . Provisions for emergency situations included several life rafts stored in the wings near the engines , and individual life vests were stowed under each seat . 
 One of the most striking aspects of Comet travel was the quiet , " vibration @-@ free flying " as touted by BOAC . For passengers used to propeller @-@ driven airliners , smooth and quiet jet flight was a novel experience . 
 = = = Avionics and systems = = = 
 For ease of training and fleet conversion , de Havilland designed the Comet 's flight deck layout with a degree of similarity to the Lockheed Constellation , an aircraft that was popular at the time with key customers such as BOAC . The cockpit included full dual @-@ controls for the captain and first officer , while a flight engineer controlled various key systems , including fuel , air conditioning , and electrical systems . The navigator occupied a dedicated station with a table across from the flight engineer . 
 Several of the Comet 's avionics systems were new to civil aviation . One such feature was irreversible powered flight controls , which increased the pilot 's ease of control and the safety of the aircraft by preventing aerodynamic forces from changing the directed positions and placement of the aircraft 's control surfaces . Additionally , a large number of the control surfaces , such as the elevators , were equipped with a complex gearing system as a safeguard against accidentally over @-@ stressing the surfaces or airframe at higher speed ranges . 
 The Comet had a total of four hydraulic systems , two primaries , one secondary , and a final emergency system for basic functions such as lowering the undercarriage . The undercarriage could also be lowered by a combination of gravity and a hand @-@ pump . Power was <unk> from all four engines for the hydraulics , cabin air conditioning , and the de @-@ icing system ; these systems had operational redundancy in that they could keep working even if only a single engine was active . The majority of hydraulic components were centred in a single avionics bay . A pressurised refuelling system , developed by Flight Refuelling Ltd , allowed the Comet 's fuel tanks to be refuelled at a far greater rate than other methods . 
 The cockpit was significantly altered for the Comet 4 's introduction , on which an improved layout focusing on the onboard navigational suite was introduced . An EKCO <unk> radar unit was installed in the Comet 4 's nose cone , providing search functions as well as ground and cloud mapping capabilities , and a radar interface was built into the Comet 4 cockpit along with redesigned instruments . 
 Sud @-@ Est 's design bureau , while working on the Sud Aviation Caravelle in 1953 , licensed several design features from de Havilland , building on previous collaborations on earlier licensed designs , including the DH 100 Vampire ; the nose and cockpit layout of the Comet 1 was grafted onto the Caravelle . In 1969 , when the Comet 4 's design was modified by Hawker Siddeley to become the basis for the Nimrod , the cockpit layout was completely redesigned and bore little resemblance to its predecessors except for the control yoke . 
 = = = Fuselage = = = 
 Diverse geographic destinations and cabin pressurisation alike on the Comet demanded the use of a high proportion of alloys , plastics , and other materials new to civil aviation across the aircraft in order to meet certification requirements . The Comet 's high cabin pressure and fast operating speeds were unprecedented in commercial aviation , making its fuselage design an experimental process . At its introduction , Comet airframes would be subjected to an intense , high @-@ speed operating schedule which included simultaneous extreme heat from desert airfields and frosty cold from the kerosene @-@ filled fuel tanks . 
 The Comet 's thin metal skin was composed of advanced new alloys and was both riveted and chemically bonded , which saved weight and reduced the risk of fatigue cracks spreading from the rivets . The chemical bonding process was accomplished using a new adhesive , Redux , which was liberally used in the construction of the wings and the fuselage of the Comet ; it also had the advantage of simplifying the manufacturing process . 
 When several of the fuselage alloys were discovered to be vulnerable to weakening via metal fatigue , a detailed routine inspection process was introduced . As well as thorough visual inspections of the outer skin , mandatory structural sampling was routinely conducted by both civil and military Comet operators . The need to inspect areas not easily viewable by the naked eye led to the introduction of widespread radiography examination in aviation ; this also had the advantage of detecting cracks and flaws too small to be seen otherwise . 
 Operationally , the design of the cargo holds led to considerable difficulty for the ground crew , especially baggage handlers at the airports . The cargo hold had its doors located directly underneath the aircraft , so each item of baggage or cargo had to be loaded vertically upwards from the top of the baggage truck , then slid along the hold floor to be stacked inside . The individual pieces of luggage and cargo also had to be retrieved in a similarly slow manner at the arriving airport . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The Comet was powered by two pairs of turbojet engines buried in the wings close to the fuselage . Chief designer Bishop chose the Comet 's embedded @-@ engine configuration because it avoided the drag of podded engines and allowed for a smaller fin and rudder , since the hazards of asymmetric thrust were reduced . The engines were outfitted with baffles to reduce noise emissions , and extensive soundproofing was also implemented to improve passenger conditions . 
 Placing the engines within the wings had the advantage of a reduction in the risk of foreign object damage , which could seriously damage jet engines . The low @-@ mounted engines and good placement of service panels also made aircraft maintenance easier to perform . However , the Comet 's buried engine configuration increased its structural weight and complexity . Armour had to be placed around the engine cells to contain debris from any serious engine failures ; also , placing the engines inside the wing required a more complicated wing structure . 
 The Comet 1 featured 5 @,@ 050 lbf ( 22 @.@ 5 kN ) de Havilland Ghost 50 Mk1 turbojet engines . Two hydrogen peroxide @-@ powered de Havilland Sprite booster rockets were originally intended to be installed to boost takeoff under hot and high altitude conditions from airports such as Khartoum and Nairobi . These were tested on 30 flights , but the Ghosts alone were considered powerful enough and some airlines concluded that rocket motors were impractical . Sprite fittings were retained on production aircraft . Comet 1s subsequently received more powerful 5 @,@ 700 lbf ( 25 kN ) Ghost DGT3 series engines . 
 From the Comet 2 onwards , the Ghost engines were replaced by the newer and more powerful 7 @,@ 000 lbf ( 31 kN ) Rolls @-@ Royce Avon <unk> engines . To achieve optimum efficiency with the new powerplants , the air intakes were enlarged to increase mass air flow . Upgraded Avon engines were introduced on the Comet 3 , and the Avon @-@ powered Comet 4 was highly praised for its takeoff performance from high altitude locations such as Mexico City . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Introduction = = = 
 The earliest production aircraft , registered G @-@ ALYP ( " Yoke Peter " ) , first flew on 9 January 1951 and was subsequently lent to BOAC for development flying by its Comet Unit . On 22 January 1952 , the fifth production aircraft , registered G @-@ <unk> , received the first Certificate of Airworthiness awarded to a Comet , six months ahead of schedule . On 2 May 1952 , as part of BOAC 's route @-@ proving trials , G @-@ ALYP took off on the world 's first jetliner flight with fare @-@ paying passengers and inaugurated scheduled service from London to Johannesburg . The final Comet from BOAC 's initial order , registered G @-@ <unk> , began flying in September 1952 and carried cargo along South American routes while simulating passenger schedules . 
 The Comet was a hit with passengers including Queen Elizabeth , the Queen Mother and Princess Margaret , who were guests on a special flight on 30 June 1953 hosted by Sir Geoffrey and Lady de Havilland , and thus became the first members of the British Royal Family to fly by jet . Flights on the Comet were about 50 percent faster than on advanced piston @-@ engined aircraft such as the Douglas DC @-@ 6 ( 490 mph for the Comet compared to the DC @-@ 6 's 315 mph ) , and a faster rate of climb further cut flight times . In August 1953 BOAC scheduled nine @-@ stop London to Tokyo flights by Comet for 36 hours , compared to 86 hours and 35 minutes on their Argonaut piston airliner . ( Pan Am 's DC @-@ 6B was scheduled for 46 hours 45 minutes . ) The five @-@ stop flight from London to Johannesburg was scheduled for 21 hr 20 min . 
 In their first year Comets carried 30 @,@ 000 passengers . As the aircraft could be profitable with a load factor as low as 43 percent , commercial success was expected . The Ghost engines allowed the Comet to fly above weather competitors had to fly through . They ran smoothly and were less noisy than piston engines , had low maintenance costs , and were fuel @-@ efficient above 30 @,@ 000 ft ( 9 @,@ 100 m ) . In summer 1953 eight BOAC Comets left London each week : three to Johannesburg , two to Tokyo , two to Singapore and one to Colombo . 
 In 1953 the Comet appeared to have achieved success for de Havilland . In addition to the sales to BOAC , two French airlines , Union <unk> de Transport and Air France , each acquired three Comet 1As , an upgraded variant with greater fuel capacity , for flights to West Africa and the Middle East . A slightly longer version of the Comet 1 with more powerful engines , the Comet 2 , was being developed , and orders were placed by Air India , British Commonwealth Pacific Airlines , Japan Air Lines , Linea Aeropostal Venezolana , and Panair do Brasil . American carriers Capital Airlines , National Airlines , and Pan Am placed orders for the planned Comet 3 , an even larger , longer @-@ range version for transatlantic operations . Qantas was interested in the Comet 1 but concluded that a version with more range and better takeoff performance was needed for the London to Canberra route . 
 = = = Early hull losses = = = 
 On 26 October 1952 , the Comet suffered its first hull loss when a BOAC flight departing Rome 's Ciampino airport failed to become airborne and ran into rough ground at the end of the runway . Two passengers sustained minor injuries , and the aircraft , G @-@ <unk> , was a total loss . On 3 March 1953 , a new Canadian Pacific Airlines Comet 1A , registered CF @-@ <unk> and named Empress of Hawaii , failed to become airborne while attempting a night takeoff from Karachi , Pakistan , on a delivery flight to Australia . The aircraft plunged into a dry drainage canal and collided with an embankment , killing all five crew and six passengers on board . The accident was the first fatal jetliner crash , as well as the Comet 's first accident to result in fatalities . In response , Canadian Pacific cancelled its remaining order for a second Comet 1A and never operated the type in commercial service . 
 Both early accidents were originally attributed to pilot error , as over @-@ rotation had led to a loss of lift from the leading edge of the aircraft 's wings . It was later determined that the Comet 's wing profile experienced a loss of lift at a high angle of attack , and its engine inlets also suffered a lack of pressure recovery in the same conditions . As a result , de Havilland re @-@ profiled the wings ' leading edge with a pronounced " droop " , and wing fences were added to control spanwise flow . A fictionalised investigation into the Comet 's takeoff accidents was the subject of the 1959 novel Cone of Silence by Arthur David Beaty , a former BOAC captain . Cone of Silence was made into a film in 1960 , and Beaty also recounted the story of the Comet 's takeoff accidents in a chapter of his 1984 non @-@ fiction work , Strange Encounters : Mysteries of the Air . 
 The Comet 's second fatal accident occurred on 2 May 1953 , when BOAC Flight 783 , a Comet 1 , registered G @-@ <unk> , crashed in a severe <unk> six minutes after taking off from Calcutta @-@ Dum Dum ( now Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose International Airport ) , India , killing all 43 on board . Witnesses observed the wingless Comet on fire plunging into the village of <unk> , leading investigators to suspect structural failure . 
 = = = = India Court of Inquiry = = = = 
 After the loss of G @-@ <unk> , the Central Government of India convened a court of inquiry to examine the cause of the accident . Professor <unk> Srinivasan joined the inquiry as the main technical expert . A large portion of the aircraft was recovered and reassembled at Farnborough , during which the break @-@ up was found to have begun with a left elevator spar failure in the stabilizer . The inquiry concluded that the aircraft had encountered extreme negative G forces during takeoff ; severe turbulence generated by adverse weather was determined to have induced down @-@ loading , leading to the loss of the wings . Examination of the cockpit controls suggested that the pilot may have inadvertently over @-@ stressed the aircraft when pulling out of a steep dive by over @-@ manipulation of the fully powered flight controls . Investigators did not consider metal fatigue as a contributory cause . 
 The inquiry 's recommendations revolved around the enforcement of stricter speed limits during turbulence , and two significant design changes also resulted : all Comets were equipped with weather radar and the " Q feel " system was introduced , which ensured that control column forces ( invariably called stick forces ) would be proportional to control loads . This artificial feel was the first of its kind to be introduced in any aircraft . The Comet 1 and 1A had been criticised for a lack of " feel " in their controls , and investigators suggested that this might have contributed to the pilot 's alleged over @-@ stressing of the aircraft ; Comet chief test pilot John Cunningham contended , however , that the jetliner flew smoothly and was highly responsive in a manner consistent with other de Havilland aircraft . 
 = = = Comet disasters of 1954 = = = 
 Rome 's Ciampino airport , the site of the first Comet hull loss , was the origin of more disastrous Comet flights just over a year later . On 10 January 1954 , 20 minutes after taking off from Ciampino , the first production Comet , G @-@ ALYP , broke up in mid @-@ air while operating BOAC Flight 781 and crashed into the Mediterranean off the Italian island of Elba with the loss of all 35 on board . With no witnesses to the disaster and only partial radio transmissions as incomplete evidence , no obvious reason for the crash could be deduced . Engineers at de Havilland immediately recommended 60 modifications aimed at any possible design flaw while the Abell Committee met to determine potential causes of the crash . BOAC also voluntarily grounded its Comet fleet pending investigation into the causes of the accident . 
 = = = = Abell Committee Court of Inquiry = = = = 
 Media attention centred on sabotage , while other speculation ranged from clear @-@ air turbulence to an explosion of vapour in an empty fuel tank . The Abell Committee focused on six potential aerodynamic and mechanical causes : control flutter ( which had led to the loss of DH 108 prototypes ) , structural failure due to high loads or metal fatigue of the wing structure , failure of the powered flight controls , failure of the window panels leading to explosive decompression , or fire and other engine problems . The committee concluded that fire was the most likely cause of the problem , and a number of changes were made to the aircraft to protect the engines and wings from damage that might lead to another fire . 
 During the investigation , the Royal Navy conducted recovery operations . The first pieces of wreckage were discovered on 12 February 1954 and the search continued until September 1954 , by which time 70 percent by weight of the main structure , 80 percent of the power section , and 50 percent of the aircraft 's systems and equipment had been recovered . The forensic reconstruction effort had just begun when the Abell Committee reported its findings . No apparent fault in the aircraft was found , and the British government decided against opening a further public inquiry into the accident . The prestigious nature of the Comet project , particularly for the British aerospace industry , and the financial impact of the aircraft 's grounding on BOAC 's operations , both served to pressure the inquiry to end without further investigation . Comet flights resumed on 23 March 1954 . 
 On 8 April 1954 , Comet G @-@ <unk> ( " Yoke Yoke " ) , on charter to South African Airways , was on a leg from Rome to Cairo ( of a longer route , SA Flight 201 from London to Johannesburg ) , when it crashed in the Mediterranean near Naples with the loss of all 21 passengers and crew on board . The Comet fleet was immediately grounded once again and a large investigation board was formed under the direction of the Royal Aircraft Establishment ( RAE ) . Prime Minister Winston Churchill tasked the Royal Navy with helping to locate and retrieve the wreckage so that the cause of the accident could be determined . The Comet 's Certificate of Airworthiness was revoked and Comet 1 line production was suspended at the Hatfield factory while the BOAC fleet was permanently grounded , cocooned and stored . 
 = = = = Cohen Committee Court of Inquiry = = = = 
 On 19 October 1954 , the Cohen Committee was established to examine the causes of the Comet crashes . Chaired by Lord Cohen , the committee tasked an investigation team led by Sir Arnold Hall , Director of the RAE at Farnborough , to perform a more detailed investigation . Hall 's team began considering fatigue as the most likely cause of both accidents , and initiated further research into measurable strain on the aircraft 's skin . With the recovery of large sections of G @-@ ALYP from the Elba crash and BOAC 's donation of an identical airframe , G @-@ ALYU , for further examination , an extensive " water torture " test eventually provided conclusive results . This time , the entire fuselage was tested in a dedicated water tank that was built specifically at Farnborough to accommodate its full length . Stress around the window corners was found to be much higher than expected and stresses on the skin were generally more than previously expected or tested . This was due to stress concentration , a consequence of the windows ' square shape , which generated levels of stress two or three times greater than across the rest of the fuselage . 
 In water tank testing , engineers subjected G @-@ ALYU to repeated re @-@ pressurisation and over @-@ pressurisation , and on 24 June 1954 , after 3 @,@ 057 flight cycles ( 1 @,@ 221 actual and 1 @,@ 836 simulated ) , G @-@ ALYU burst open . Hall , Geoffrey de Havilland and Bishop were immediately called to the scene , where the water tank was drained to reveal that the fuselage had ripped open at a corner of the forward left escape hatch cutout . A further test reproduced the same results . Based on these findings , Comet 1 structural failures could be expected at anywhere from 1 @,@ 000 to 9 @,@ 000 cycles . Before the Elba accident , G @-@ ALYP had made 1 @,@ 290 pressurised flights , while G @-@ <unk> had made 900 pressurised flights before crashing . Dr P.B. Walker , Head of the Structures Department at the RAE , said he was not surprised by this , noting that the difference was about three to one , and previous experience with metal fatigue suggested a total range of nine to one between experiment and outcome in the field could result in failure . 
 The RAE also reconstructed about two @-@ thirds of G @-@ ALYP at Farnborough and found fatigue crack growth from a rivet hole at the low @-@ drag fibreglass forward aperture around the Automatic Direction Finder , which had caused a catastrophic break @-@ up of the aircraft in high altitude flight . The punch rivet construction technique employed in the Comet 's design had exacerbated its structural fatigue problems ; the aircraft 's windows had been engineered to be glued and riveted , but had been punch riveted only . Unlike drill riveting , the imperfect nature of the hole created by punch riveting could cause fatigue cracks to start developing around the rivet . Principal investigator Hall accepted the RAE 's conclusion of design and construction flaws as the likely explanation for G @-@ ALYU 's structural failure after 3 @,@ 060 pressurisation cycles . The Cohen inquiry closed on 24 November 1954 , and although the inquiry had " found that the basic design of the Comet was sound " , de Havilland nonetheless began a refit programme to strengthen the fuselage and wing structure , employing thicker gauge skin and replacing all square windows and panels with rounded versions . 
 = = = Resumption of service = = = 
 With the discovery of the structural problems of the early series , all remaining Comets were withdrawn from service , while de Havilland launched a major effort to build a new version that would be both larger and stronger . All outstanding orders for the Comet 2 were cancelled by airline customers . The square windows of the Comet 1 were replaced by the oval versions used on the Comet 2 , which first flew in 1953 , and the skin sheeting was thickened slightly . Remaining Comet 1s and 1As were either scrapped or modified with oval windows and rip @-@ stop doublers . 
 All production Comet 2s were also modified to alleviate the fatigue problems ( most of these served with the RAF as the Comet C2 ) , while a programme to produce a Comet 2 with more powerful Avons was delayed . The prototype Comet 3 first flew in July 1954 , and was tested in a non @-@ pressurised state pending completion of the Cohen inquiry . Comet commercial flights would not resume until 1958 . 
 Development flying and route proving with the Comet 3 allowed accelerated certification of what was destined to be the most successful variant of the type , the Comet 4 . All airline customers for the Comet 3 subsequently cancelled their orders and switched to the Comet 4 , which was based on the Comet 3 but with improved fuel capacity . BOAC ordered 19 Comet 4s in March 1955 , while American operator Capital Airlines ordered 14 Comets in July 1956 . Capital 's order included 10 Comet 4As , a variant modified for short @-@ range operations with a stretched fuselage and short wings , lacking the pinion ( outboard wing ) fuel tanks of the Comet 4 . However , because of financial problems and a subsequent takeover by United Airlines , Capital would never operate the Comet . 
 The Comet 4 first flew on 27 April 1958 and received its Certificate of Airworthiness on 24 September 1958 ; the first was delivered to BOAC the next day . The base price of a new Comet 4 was around £ 1 @,@ 140 @,@ 000 , equivalent to £ 24 @,@ 020 @,@ 000 in today 's pounds . The Comet 4 enabled BOAC to inaugurate the first regular jet @-@ powered transatlantic services on 4 October 1958 between London and New York ( albeit still requiring a fuel stop at Gander International Airport , Newfoundland , on westward North Atlantic crossings ) . While BOAC gained publicity as the first to provide transatlantic jet service , by the end of the month rival Pan American World Airways was flying the Boeing 707 on the same route , and in 1960 the Douglas DC @-@ 8 as well . The American jets were larger , faster , longer @-@ ranged , and more cost @-@ effective than the Comet . After analysing route structures for the Comet , BOAC reluctantly cast about for a successor , and in 1956 entered into an agreement with Boeing to purchase the 707 . 
 The Comet 4 was ordered by two other airlines : Aerolíneas Argentinas took delivery of six Comet 4s from 1959 to 1960 , using them between Buenos Aires and Santiago , New York and Europe , while East African Airways received three new Comet 4s from 1960 to 1962 and operated them to the United Kingdom and to Kenya , Tanzania , and Uganda . The Comet 4A ordered by Capital Airlines was instead built for BEA as the Comet 4B with a further fuselage stretch of 38 in ( 97 cm ) and seating for 99 passengers . The first Comet 4B flew on 27 June 1959 and BEA began Tel Aviv to London @-@ Heathrow services on 1 April 1960 . Olympic Airways was the only other customer to order the type . The last Comet 4 variant , the Comet 4C , first flew on 31 October 1959 and entered service with Mexicana in 1960 . The Comet 4C had the Comet 4B 's longer fuselage and the longer wings and extra fuel tanks of the original Comet 4 , which gave it a longer range than the 4B . Ordered by Kuwait Airways , Middle East Airlines , <unk> ( later United Arab Airlines ) , and Sudan Airways , it was the most popular Comet variant . 
 = = = Later service = = = 
 In 1959 BOAC began shifting its Comets from transatlantic routes and released the Comet to associate companies , making the Comet 4 's ascendancy as a premier airliner brief . Besides the 707 and DC @-@ 8 , the introduction of the Vickers VC10 allowed competing aircraft to assume the high @-@ speed , long @-@ range passenger service role pioneered by the Comet . In 1960 , as part of a government @-@ backed consolidation of the British aerospace industry , de Havilland itself was acquired by Hawker Siddeley , within which it became a wholly owned division . 
 In the 1960s orders declined , with a total of 76 Comet 4s being delivered from 1958 to 1964 . In November 1965 BOAC retired its Comet 4s from revenue service , while other operators continued commercial passenger flights with the Comet until 1981 . Dan @-@ Air played a significant role in the fleet 's later history and , at one time , owned all 49 remaining airworthy civil Comets . On 14 March 1997 a Comet 4C serial <unk> and named Canopus , which had been acquired by the British Ministry of Technology and used for radio , radar and avionics trials , made the last documented production Comet flight . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Comet is widely regarded jointly as an adventurous step forward and a supreme tragedy ; nevertheless , the aircraft 's legacy does include numerous advances in aircraft design and in accident investigations . The inquiries into the accidents that plagued the Comet 1 were perhaps some of the most extensive and revolutionary that have ever taken place , establishing precedents in accident investigation ; many of the deep @-@ sea salvage and aircraft reconstruction techniques employed have remained in use within the aviation industry . In spite of the Comet being subjected to what was then the most rigorous testing of any contemporary airliner , pressurisation and the dynamic stresses involved were not thoroughly understood at the time of the aircraft 's development , nor was the concept of metal fatigue . While these lessons could be implemented on the drawing board for future aircraft , corrections could only be retroactively applied to the Comet . 
 According to de Havilland 's chief test pilot John Cunningham , who had flown the prototype 's first flight , representatives from American manufacturers such as Boeing and Douglas privately disclosed that if de Havilland had not experienced the Comet 's pressurisation problems first , it would have happened to them . Cunningham likened the Comet to the later Concorde , and added that he had assumed that the aircraft would change aviation , which it subsequently did . Aviation author Bill <unk> concluded that the Comet had pushed " ' the state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art ' beyond its limits . " 
 Aeronautical engineering firms were quick to respond to the Comet 's commercial advantages and technical flaws alike ; other aircraft manufacturers learned from , and profited by , the hard @-@ earned lessons embodied by de Havilland 's Comet . While the Comet 's buried engines were used on some other early jet airliners , such as the Tupolev Tu @-@ 104 , later aircraft , such as the Boeing 707 and Douglas DC @-@ 8 , would differ by employing podded engines held on pylons beneath the wings . Boeing stated that podded engines were selected for their passenger airliners because buried engines carried a higher risk of catastrophic wing failure in the event of engine fire . In response to the Comet tragedies , manufacturers also developed various means of pressurisation testing , often going so far as to explore rapid depressurisation ; subsequent fuselage skins were of a greater thickness than the skin of the Comet . 
 = = Variants = = 
 = = = Comet 1 = = = 
 The square @-@ windowed Comet 1 was the first model produced , a total of 12 aircraft in service and test . Following closely the design features of the two prototypes , the only noticeable change was the adoption of four @-@ wheel bogie main undercarriage units , replacing the single main wheels . Four Ghost 50 Mk 1 engines were fitted ( later replaced by more powerful Ghost DGT3 series engines ) . The span was 115 ft ( 35 @.@ 05 m ) , and overall length 93 ft ( 28 @.@ 35 m ) ; the maximum takeoff weight was over 105 @,@ 000 lb ( 47 @.@ 628 kg ) and over 40 passengers could be carried . 
 An updated Comet 1A was offered with higher @-@ allowed weight , greater fuel capacity , and water @-@ methanol injection ; 10 were produced . In the wake of the 1954 disasters , all Comet 1s and 1As were brought back to Hatfield , first placed in a protective cocoon and retained for testing . All were substantially damaged in stress testing or were scrapped entirely . 
 Comet 1X : Two RCAF Comet 1As were rebuilt with heavier @-@ gauge skins to a Comet 2 standard for the fuselage , and renamed Comet 1X . 
 Comet 1XB : Four Comet 1As were upgraded to a 1XB standard with a reinforced fuselage structure and oval windows . Both 1X series were limited in number of pressurisation cycles . 
 The DH 111 Comet Bomber , a nuclear bomb carrying variant developed to Air Ministry specification <unk> / 46 , was submitted to the Air Ministry on 27 May 1948 . It had been originally proposed in 1948 as the " PR Comet " , a high @-@ altitude photo reconnaissance adaptation of the Comet 1 . The Ghost DGT3 @-@ powered airframe featured a narrowed fuselage , a bulbous nose with H2S Mk IX radar , and a four @-@ crewmember pressurised cockpit under a large bubble canopy . Fuel tanks carrying 2 @,@ 400 imperial gallons ( 11 @,@ 000 L ) were added to attain a range of 3 @,@ 350 miles ( 5 @,@ 390 km ) . The proposed DH 111 received a negative evaluation from the Royal Aircraft Establishment over serious concerns regarding weapons storage ; this along with the redundant capability offered by the RAF 's proposed V bomber trio led de Havilland to abandon the project on 22 October 1948 . 
 = = = Comet 2 = = = 
 The Comet 2 had a slightly larger wing , higher fuel capacity and more powerful Rolls @-@ Royce Avon engines , which all improved the aircraft 's range and performance ; its fuselage was 3 ft 1 in ( 0 @.@ 94 m ) longer than the Comet 1 's . Design changes had been made to make the aircraft more suitable for transatlantic operations . Following the Comet 1 disasters , these models were rebuilt with heavier gauge skin and rounded windows , and the Avon engines featuring larger air intakes and outward @-@ curving jet tailpipes . A total of 12 of the 44 @-@ seat Comet 2s were ordered by BOAC for the South Atlantic route . The first production aircraft ( G @-@ <unk> ) flew on 27 August 1953 . Although these aircraft performed well on test flights on the South Atlantic , their range was still not suitable for the North Atlantic . All but four Comet 2s were allocated to the RAF with deliveries beginning in 1955 . Modifications to the interiors allowed the Comet 2s to be used in a number of different roles . For VIP transport , the seating and accommodations were altered while provisions for carrying medical equipment including iron lungs were incorporated . Specialised ELINT and electronic surveillance capability was later added to some airframes . 
 Comet 2X : Limited to a single Comet Mk 1 powered by four Rolls @-@ Royce Avon 502 turbojet engines and used as a development aircraft for the Comet 2 . 
 Comet 2E : Two Comet 2 airliners were fitted with Avon 504s in the inner nacelles and Avon <unk> in the outer ones . These aircraft were used by BOAC for proving flights during 1957 – 1958 . 
 Comet T2 : The first two of 10 Comet 2s for the RAF were fitted out as crew trainers , with the first aircraft ( <unk> ) flying for the first time on 9 December 1955 . 
 Comet C2 : Eight Comet 2s originally destined for the civil market were completed for the RAF and assigned to No. 216 Squadron . 
 Comet 2R : Three Comet 2s were modified for use in radar and electronic systems development , initially assigned to No. 90 Group ( later Signals Command ) for the RAF . In service with No. 192 and No. 51 Squadrons , the 2R series was equipped to monitor Warsaw Pact signal traffic and operated in this role from 1958 . 
 = = = Comet 3 = = = 
 The Comet 3 , which flew for the first time on 19 July 1954 , was a Comet 2 lengthened by 15 ft 5 in ( 4 @.@ 70 m ) and powered by Avon <unk> engines developing 10 @,@ 000 lbf ( 44 kN ) . The variant added wing pinion tanks , and offered greater capacity and range . The Comet 3 was destined to remain a development series since it did not incorporate the fuselage @-@ strengthening modifications of the later series aircraft , and was not able to be fully pressurised . Only two Comet 3s began construction with G @-@ ANLO , the only airworthy Comet 3 , demonstrated at the Farnborough SBAC Show in September 1954 . The other Comet 3 airframe was not completed to production standard and was used primarily for ground @-@ based structural and technology testing during development of the similarly sized Comet 4 . Nine additional Comet 3 airframes were not completed and their construction was abandoned at Hatfield . In BOAC colours , G @-@ ANLO was flown by John Cunningham in a marathon round @-@ the @-@ world promotional tour in December 1955 . As a flying testbed , it was later modified with Avon <unk> engines fitted , as well as replacing the original long @-@ span wings with reduced span wings as the Comet 3B and demonstrated in British European Airways ( BEA ) livery at the Farnborough Airshow in September 1958 . Assigned in 1961 to the Blind Landing Experimental Unit ( BLEU ) at RAE Bedford , the final testbed role played by G – ANLO was in automatic landing system experiments . When retired in 1973 , the airframe was used for foam arrester trials before the fuselage was salvaged at BAE Woodford , to serve as the mock @-@ up for the Nimrod . 
 = = = Comet 4 = = = 
 The Comet 4 was a further improvement on the stretched Comet 3 with even greater fuel capacity . The design had progressed significantly from the original Comet 1 , growing by 18 ft 6 in ( 5 @.@ 64 m ) and typically seating 74 to 81 passengers compared to the Comet 1 's 36 to 44 ( 119 passengers could be accommodated in a special charter seating package in the later 4C series ) . The Comet 4 was considered the definitive series , having a longer range , higher cruising speed and higher maximum takeoff weight . These improvements were possible largely because of Avon engines with twice the thrust of the Comet 1 's Ghosts . Deliveries to BOAC began on 30 September 1958 with two 48 @-@ seat aircraft , which were used to initiate the first scheduled transatlantic services . 
 Comet 4B : Originally developed for Capital Airlines as the 4A , the 4B featured greater capacity through a 2m longer fuselage , and a shorter wingspan ; 18 were produced . 
 Comet 4C : This variant featured the Comet 4 's wings and the 4B 's longer fuselage ; 23 were produced . 
 The last two Comet 4C fuselages were used to build prototypes of the Hawker Siddeley Nimrod maritime patrol aircraft . A Comet 4C ( SA @-@ R @-@ 7 ) was ordered by Saudi Arabian Airlines with eventual disposition to the Saudi Royal Flight for the exclusive use of King Saud bin Abdul Aziz . Extensively modified at the factory , the aircraft included a VIP front cabin , a bed , special toilets with gold fittings and was distinguished by a green , gold and white colour scheme with polished wings and lower fuselage that was commissioned from aviation artist John Stroud . Following its first flight , the special order Comet 4C was described as " the world 's first executive jet . " 
 = = = Comet 5 proposal = = = 
 The Comet 5 was proposed as an improvement over previous models , including a wider fuselage with five @-@ abreast seating , a wing with greater sweep and podded Rolls @-@ Royce Conway engines . Without support from the Ministry of Transport , the proposal languished as a hypothetical aircraft and was never realised . 
 = = = Hawker Siddeley Nimrod = = = 
 The last two Comet 4C aircraft produced were modified as prototypes ( <unk> & <unk> ) to meet a British requirement for a maritime patrol aircraft for the Royal Air Force ; initially named " Maritime Comet " , the design was designated Type HS 801 . This variant became the Hawker Siddeley Nimrod and production aircraft were built at the Hawker Siddeley factory at Woodford Aerodrome . Entering service in 1969 , five Nimrod variants were produced . The final Nimrod aircraft were retired in June 2011 . 
 = = Operators = = 
 The original operators of the early Comet 1 and the Comet 1A were BOAC , Union <unk> de Transport , and Air France . All early Comets were withdrawn from service for accident inquiries , during which orders from British Commonwealth Pacific Airlines , Japan Air Lines , Linea Aeropostal Venezolana , National Airlines , Pan American World Airways , and Panair do Brasil were cancelled . When the redesigned Comet 4 entered service , it was flown by customers BOAC , Aerolíneas Argentinas , and East African Airways , while the Comet 4B variant was operated by customers BEA and Olympic Airways , and the Comet 4C model was flown by customers Kuwait Airways , Mexicana , Middle East Airlines , <unk> Airlines , and Sudan Airways . 
 Other operators used the Comet either through leasing arrangements or through second @-@ hand acquisitions . BOAC 's Comet 4s were leased out to Air Ceylon , Air India , AREA Ecuador , Central African Airways , and Qantas Empire Airways ; after 1965 they were sold to AREA Ecuador , Dan @-@ Air , Mexicana , Malaysian Airways , and the Ministry of Defence . BEA 's Comet 4Bs were chartered by Cyprus Airways , Malta Airways , and Transportes Aéreos <unk> . Channel Airways obtained five Comet 4Bs from BEA in 1970 for inclusive tour charters . Dan @-@ Air bought all of the surviving flyable Comet 4s from the late 1960s into the 1970s ; some were for spares reclamation but most were operated on the carrier 's inclusive tour charters ; a total of 48 Comets of all marks were acquired by the airline . 
 In military service , the United Kingdom 's Royal Air Force was the largest operator , with the 51 Squadron ( 1958 – 1975 ; Comet C2 , 2R ) , 192 Squadron ( 1957 – 1958 ; Comet C2 , 2R ) , 216 Squadron ( 1956 – 1975 ; Comet C2 and C4 ) , and the Royal Aircraft Establishment using the aircraft . The Royal Canadian Air Force also operated Comet 1As ( later retrofitted to 1XB ) through its 412 Squadron from 1953 to 1963 . 
 = = Accidents and incidents = = 
 The Comet was involved in 26 hull @-@ loss accidents , including 13 fatal crashes which resulted in 426 fatalities . Pilot error was blamed for the type 's first fatal accident , which occurred during takeoff at Karachi , Pakistan on 3 March 1953 and involved a Canadian Pacific Airlines Comet 1A . Three fatal Comet 1 crashes due to structural problems , specifically BOAC Flight 783 / 057 on 2 May 1953 , BOAC Flight 781 on 10 January 1954 , and South African Airways Flight 201 on 8 April 1954 , led to the grounding of the entire Comet fleet . After design modifications were implemented , Comet services resumed in 1958 . 
 Pilot error resulting in controlled flight into terrain was blamed for five fatal Comet 4 accidents : an Aerolíneas Argentinas crash near Asunción , Paraguay on 27 August 1959 , Aerolíneas Argentinas Flight 322 at Campinas near São Paulo , Brazil on 23 November 1961 , United Arab Airlines Flight 869 in Thailand 's Khao Yai mountains on 19 July 1962 , a Saudi Arabian Government crash in the Italian Alps on 20 March 1963 , and United Arab Airlines Flight 844 in Tripoli , Libya on 2 January 1971 . The Dan @-@ Air de Havilland Comet crash in Spain 's Montseny range on 3 July 1970 was attributed to navigational errors by air traffic control and pilots . Other fatal Comet 4 accidents include a British European Airways crash in Ankara , Turkey following instrument failure on 21 December 1961 , United Arab Airlines Flight 869 during inclement weather near Bombay , India on 28 July 1963 , and the terrorist bombing of Cyprus Airways Flight 284 off the Turkish coast on 12 October 1967 . 
 Nine Comets , including Comet 1s operated by BOAC and Union <unk> de Transport and Comet 4s flown by Aerolíneas Argentinas , Dan @-@ Air , Malaysian Airlines , and United Arab Airlines , were irreparably damaged during takeoff or landing accidents that were survived by all on board . A hangar fire damaged a No. 192 Squadron RAF Comet 2R beyond repair on 13 September 1957 , and three Middle East Airlines Comet 4Cs were destroyed by Israeli troops at Beirut , Lebanon on 28 December 1968 . 
 = = Aircraft on display = = 
 Since retirement , three early @-@ generation Comet airframes have survived in museum collections . The only complete remaining Comet 1 , a Comet 1XB with the registration G @-@ APAS , is displayed at the RAF Museum Cosford . While painted in BOAC colours , it never flew for the airline , having been first delivered to Air France and then to the Ministry of Supply after conversion to 1XB standard ; this aircraft also served with the RAF as <unk> . The sole surviving Comet fuselage with the original square @-@ shaped windows , part of a Comet 1A registered F @-@ <unk> , has undergone restoration and is on display at the de Havilland Aircraft Museum in Hertfordshire , England . A Comet C2 Sagittarius with serial <unk> , later maintenance serial <unk> , has been on display at the gate of RAF Lyneham in Wiltshire , England since 1987 . In 2012 , with the planned closure of RAF Lyneham , the aircraft was slated to be dismantled and shipped to the RAF Museum Cosford where it will be re @-@ assembled for display . 
 Seven complete Comet 4s are housed in museum collections . The Imperial War Museum Duxford has a Comet 4 ( G @-@ <unk> ) , originally in Dan @-@ Air colours as part of its Flight Line Display , and later in BOAC livery at its AirSpace building . A Comet 4B ( G @-@ <unk> ) is stored in a facility at the Science Museum at Wroughton in Wiltshire , England . Comet 4Cs are exhibited at the <unk> Leo Junior at Hermeskeil , Germany ( G @-@ <unk> ) , the Museum of Flight near Seattle , Washington ( <unk> ) , the National Museum of Flight near Edinburgh , Scotland ( G @-@ <unk> ) , and the Parque <unk> <unk> in Guanajuato , Mexico ( <unk> ) . 
 The last Comet to fly , Comet 4C Canopus ( <unk> ) , is kept in running condition at Bruntingthorpe Aerodrome , where fast taxi runs are regularly conducted . Since the 2000s , various parties have proposed restoring Canopus , which is maintained by a staff of volunteers , to airworthy , fully flight @-@ capable condition . The Bruntingthorpe Aerodrome also displays a related Hawker Siddeley Nimrod MR2 aircraft . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 Sources : Jane 's All The World 's Aircraft 1965 – 66 , De Havilland Aircraft since 1909 , and Flight International . 
 = = Popular culture = = 
 = Hurricane ! ( American Dad ! ) = 
 " Hurricane ! " is the second episode of the eighth season of the animated comedy series American Dad ! , an episode produced for season 7 . It aired on Fox in the United States on October 2 , 2011 . The episode plot mainly revolves around the Smith family , who prepare for evacuation in response to an oncoming hurricane . Reluctant to leave his home , Stan encourages his family to ride out the storm in their house with him . The hurricane sends a flood to the city of Langley Falls , which puts the entire family in danger . 
 " Hurricane ! " is the final part of the Night of the Hurricane block with Family Guy and The Cleveland Show . Kevin Reilly , the president of the entertainment division of Fox Broadcasting Company , introduced the idea of a crossover to Seth MacFarlane , the creator of all three shows . The episode was first announced at the 2010 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International . The episode plot is loosely modeled to that of the disaster film The Poseidon Adventure . Originally scheduled to air on May 1 , 2011 , as the season finale for the seventh season , " Hurricane ! " was postponed due to the tornado outbreak that occurred from April 25 – 28 . Other factors even included the March 11 , 2011 Japanese tsunami . 
 The episode was well received by television critics , who praised its humor and cultural references . It was viewed by 5 @.@ 72 million viewers upon its initial airing , while also receiving a 2 @.@ 6 / 6 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , according to Nielsen ratings . " Hurricane ! " was written by Erik Sommers , and directed by Tim Parsons . It featured the guest voices of Mike Barker , Lisa Edelstein , Jeff Fischer , Mike Henry , Matt McKenna , Kevin Michael Richardson , and Kristen Schaal . 
 = = Plot = = 
 When a hurricane arrives at Langley Falls , the Smiths prepare to evacuate their home with their neighbor Buckle in his amphibious raft . Stan , however , recommends that the family stay home during the storm , believing it is the best way for everyone to be safe . Hayley and Jeff also wish to stay to help the animals that have been left behind in the zoo . Francine disagrees with Stan 's notion , Steve and Roger supporting her , as she points out Stan 's history with making terrible decisions during crisis situations . But before the debate can be resolved , the seawall breaks and the ocean floods down the street , removing Buckle and his raft out of its path and trapping the Smiths in their home nevertheless . The neighborhood is now flooded , and the house is drifting along the floodwater 's current . In an attempt to save the family from floating into any potential dangerous areas , Stan anchors the home ; however the anchoring system also acts as a hinge and rotates the house upside @-@ down , partially submerging it underwater . 
 The family becomes increasingly frightened and distrustful of him , especially when his latest advice leads Hayley to be attacked by a shark . With the shark loose in the house , the family fights for survival . Stan loses hope and admits Francine 's suggestions are better than his own , until Klaus gives him an encouragement speech which inspires him to prove himself reliable in a crisis once more . Stan obtains a bear from the zoo to battle the shark , which only further aggravates the situation when the two animals work together to kill the family . Refusing to accept Francine 's pleas to just get help , Stan instead throws a javelin that hits his wife in her shoulder instead of the bear . Buckle enters the house with a tranquilizer gun and sedates the two predators before also shooting Stan , who later tells Buckle that he made the right call . Despite the whole ordeal , Stan is no longer convinced that he should stay out of a future crisis . 
 After the storm clears , Stan looks out to scope the damage done by the storm , only to find himself in a stand @-@ off with Cleveland Brown and Peter Griffin , whose houses have ended up on both sides of the Smiths ' house , since the same hurricane hit their respective towns earlier . When Francine comes out the front door , Stan accidentally shoots her , which Peter claims to be " classic American Dad ! " due to its unpredictability . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was first announced in July 2010 by series creator Seth MacFarlane at the Comic @-@ Con International in San Diego , California . Kevin Reilly , the entertainment president of the Fox Broadcasting Company , originally pitched the idea for the crossover , which was inspired by theme nights of comedy shows from the 1980s . MacFarlane described the crossover event to be an " enormous challenge " and a " substantial undertaking " ; he chose to do one central story line so that each writing staff would not have to write stories for unfamiliar characters . He was also willing to do another crossover event if this one received successful ratings . 
 Much of the episode plot in " Hurricane ! " was modeled after the action adventure disaster film , The Poseidon Adventure . In his interview on the plot of the final part of the crossover episode , Mike Barker , a producer for American Dad , stated that " [ they ] end up flooding the house and turning it upside down . " He continued : " Ultimately , the house drifts and ends up in the same neighborhood as the Griffin and Brown homes . " The actual crossing over of the event occurs at the end of this episode when Stan gets involved in a stand off with Cleveland Brown of The Cleveland Show and Peter Griffin of Family Guy . 
 In April 2011 , executives of the Fox Broadcasting Company officially announced that " Hurricane ! " would air on May 1 as part of the Night of the Hurricane crossover , along with The Cleveland Show episode " The Hurricane ! " and Family Guy episode " Seahorse Seashell Party " . However , on April 29 , it was announced that the crossover event would be removed from the schedule , in response to a series of tornadoes that killed nearly 300 people in the Southern United States . The crossover was subsequently replaced by repeats of " I Am the Walrus " from American Dad ! , " Brian Writes a Bestseller " from Family Guy , and " Ain 't Nothin ' But Mutton Bustin ' " from The Cleveland Show . MacFarlane later agreed with the decisions after being consulted with the executives of Fox , and a spokeswoman for the company later announced that the episode would air the succeeding season . 
 " Hurricane ! " was directed by Tim Parsons , in his first directing credit of the season . This episode marked the first time Parsons has directed an American Dad ! episode since the seventh season episode " I Am the Walrus " . It was written by Erik Sommers , which also served as his first writing credit for the season . Sommers ' last production credit was the sixth season episode " You Debt Your Life " . In addition to the regular cast , voice actor Mike Henry , actress Lisa Edelstein and voice actress Kristen Schaal guest starred in the episode as Cleveland Brown , Sharri Rothberg , and Roger 's One Night Stand respectively . Recurring voice actors Jeff Fischer , Mike Barker , Matt McKenna , and Kevin Michael Richardson reprised their roles of Jeff Fischer , Terry Bates , Buckle , and Principal Brian Lewis respectively . In addition to his American Dad ! roles of Stan , Roger , and Greg Corbin , MacFarlane reprised his Family Guy role of Peter Griffin , while Henry guest starred as his role of Cleveland Brown . This episode marked the first time Henry made a guest appearance on American Dad since the season four episode " Stan 's Night Out " . Edelstein and McKenna reprised their roles of Shari and Buckle , having last done so in the season seven episode " Best Little Horror House in Langley Falls " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Hurricane ! " first aired in the United States on October 2 , 2011 as part of the animation television night on Fox . It was preceded by episodes of The Simpsons , and its sister shows The Cleveland Show and Family Guy . It was viewed by 5 @.@ 71 million viewers upon its initial airing , despite simultaneously airing with Desperate Housewives on ABC , Amazing Race on CBS , and a match between the Baltimore Ravens and the New York Jets on NBC . Total viewership for the episode was the third highest of the animation television block on Fox , having moderately higher ratings than that of The Cleveland Show but lower ratings than that of The Simpsons and Family Guy . " Hurricane ! " garnered a 2 @.@ 6 / 6 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , according to Nielsen ratings . Total viewership and ratings were slightly down from the previous episode , " Hot Water " , which was watched by 5 @.@ 83 million viewers and garnered a 3 @.@ 0 / 7 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = = Television reviews = = = 
 Critics generally praised the episode , with many deeming " Hurricane ! " as the best part of the crossover . Terron Moore of Ology praised the episode , giving it an 8 @.@ 5 out of ten rating . Points of acclaim went to the humor of the episode , to which Moore opined that it " was packed with a lot of funny lines , a lot of ridiculous Stan antics [ ... ] , and a pretty funny arc involving Roger and his girlfriend " . 
 Rowan Kaiser of The A.V. Club was polarized with the episode . Although she stated that the episode was not bad , Kaiser stated that it " didn 't quite work " . Kaiser went on to give the episode a ' B- ' grade , scoring higher than the Family Guy episode " Seahorse Seashell Party " , but lower than The Simpsons episode " Bart Stops to Smell the Roosevelts " . Another writer felt that the interactions between Stan and Francine were inferior to previous episodes of the series and wrote , " It breaks away from Francine and Stan 's fun relationship and veers into the more conventional cartoon relationship , where the husband is a buffoon and the wife has to keep him check . " 
 = Juliusz Słowacki = 
 Juliusz Słowacki ( Polish pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ͡ ski ] ; 4 September 1809 – 3 April 1849 ) was a Polish Romantic poet . He is considered one of the " Three Bards " of Polish literature — a major figure in the Polish Romantic period , and the father of modern Polish drama . His works often feature elements of Slavic pagan traditions , Polish history , mysticism and orientalism . His style includes the employment of neologisms and irony . His primary genre was the drama , but he also wrote lyric poetry . His most popular works include the dramas Kordian and Balladyna and the poems Beniowski and Testament mój . 
 Słowacki spent his youth in the " Stolen Lands " , in Kremenets ( Polish : <unk> ; now in Ukraine ) and Vilnius ( Polish : Wilno , in Lithuania ) . He briefly worked for the government of the Kingdom of Poland . During the November 1830 Uprising , he was a courier for the Polish revolutionary government . When the uprising ended in defeat , he found himself abroad and thereafter , like many compatriots , lived the life of an émigré . He settled briefly in Paris , France , and later in Geneva , Switzerland . He also traveled through Italy , Greece and the Middle East . Eventually he returned to Paris , where he spent the last decade of his life . He briefly returned to Poland when another uprising broke out during the Spring of Nations ( 1848 ) . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Youth = = = 
 = = = Emigration = = = 
 Like many of his countrymen , Słowacki decided to stay in France as a political refugee . In 1832 he published his first collections of poems and his first two dramas ( Mindowe and Maria Stuart ) . He also met Mickiewicz again ; reportedly , Mickiewicz approached his younger colleague and shook his hand . However , Słowacki 's poems , written in the 1820s , were unpopular among his Polish compatriots , as they failed to capture the sentiment of a people living under foreign occupation . Słowacki was angered by Mickiewicz , who not only stole the limelight with his <unk> narodu polskiego i <unk> polskiego ( Books of the Polish nation and pilgrimage ) , but his part three of Dziady ( 1832 ) cast Słowacki 's stepfather , professor <unk> , in the role of a villain . In a letter to his mother Słowacki wrote that immediately after reading that work he was ready to challenge Mickiewicz for a duel ; that did not come to pass but from that moment on , Słowacki would see Mickiewicz as his main rival . Few days later , antagonized by worsening reception of his works among the Polish émigré community in Paris , including sharp criticism from Mickiewicz , Słowacki left on a trip to Geneva , Switzerland . The French authorities denied him the right to return to France as part of a larger program to rid the country of the potentially subversive Polish exiles who had settled there . 
 From 1833 @-@ 36 , he lived in Switzerland . A third volume of his poems , published in 1833 and containing works from the period of the Uprising , was far more nationalist in tone , and won more recognition in his homeland . At the same time , he wrote several works featuring romantic themes , and beautiful scenery , such as W <unk> ( In Switzerland ) , <unk> ( Separation ) , <unk> ( Daisies ) and <unk> ( Clouds ) . 
 In 1834 he published the drama Kordian , a romantic drama , illustrating the soul searching of the Polish people in the aftermath of the failed insurrection ; this work is considered one of his best creations . 
 In 1836 , Słowacki left Switzerland and embarked on a journey that started in Italy . In Rome he met and befriended Zygmunt Krasiński , the third of the Three Bards . Krasiński is also considered the first serious literary critic of Słowacki 's work . Słowacki would dedicate several of his works , including Balladyna , to Krasiński . From Rome , Słowacki went to Naples and later , to Sorrento . In August he left for Greece ( Corfu , Argos , Athens , Syros ) , Egypt ( Alexandria , Cairo , El Arish ) and the Middle East , including the Holy Land ( Jerusalem , Bethlehem , Jericho , Nazareth ) and neighboring territories ( Damascus , Beirut ) . It was a journey Słowacki described in his epic poem <unk> do <unk> <unk> z <unk> ( " Travel to the Holy Land from Naples " ) ; his other works of that period <unk> the poem <unk> <unk> ( The Father of the Plague @-@ stricken ) , <unk> Agamemnon ( Agamemnon 's Grave ) , <unk> z <unk> ( A talk with the pyramids ) , Anhelli and Listy <unk> z <unk> ( Poetic Letters from Egypt ) . In June 1837 he returned to Italy , settling briefly in Florence , and moved back to Paris in December 1838 . 
 In 1840 Mickiewicz was elected to the position of professor of Slavic literature at <unk> de France ; it was one of the events that cemented his position over Słowacki in the Polish émigré community . The rivalry between the two Bards for primacy would continue till the ends of lives . In 1841 Słowacki traveled briefly to Frankfurt , but Paris would become his main home till his death . In 1840 and 1841 he wrote two notable dramas : Mazepa , the only of his dramas that was put on stage during his lifetime , and <unk> , published posthumously , well received by critics . Over the next few years Słowacki wrote and published many works , including Testament mój ( My Last Will ) , in which he described his faith that his works would endure after his death . 
 Between 1841 and 1846 , he published Beniowski , considered by some his best lyrical poetry . Starting as a story of a historical figure , it developed into a discussion of the poet 's own life and opinions . In 1842 he joined the religious @-@ philosophical group , Koło <unk> <unk> ( Circle of God 's Cause ) , led by Andrzej Towiański . This group included , among others , Mickiewicz . Towiański 's influence is credited with a new , mystical current in Słowacki 's works , seen in works such as the poem Beniowski and the drama <unk> Marek ( Father Mark ) . Słowacki left the Circle a year later , in 1843 . 
 In the summers of 1843 and 1844 Słowacki traveled to Pornic , a resort on the Atlantic coast in Brittany . It was there , in 1844 , that he wrote <unk> z Ducha ( Genesis from the Spirit ) . This work introduced his own philosophical system that would have a visible influence on his works in his last decade . Around 1839 Słowacki put his capital into the Parisian stock market . He was a shrewd investor who earned enough from the investments to dedicate his life to his literary career ; he was also able to pay the costs of having his books published . 
 = = = Last years = = = 
 In the late 1840s Słowacki attached himself to a group of like @-@ minded young exiles , determined to return to Poland and win its independence . One of his friends was the pianist and composer Frédéric Chopin . Others included enthusiasts of his work , such as Zygmunt Szczęsny <unk> , Józef Alojzy <unk> and Józef <unk> . Despite poor health , when he heard about the events of the Spring of Nations , Słowacki traveled with some friends to Poznań , then under Prussian control , hoping to participate in the Wielkopolska Uprising of 1848 . He addressed the National Committee ( Komitet Narodowy ) in Poznań on 27 April . " I tell you " , he declared as the rebels faced military confrontation with the Prussian Army , " that the new age has dawned , the age of holy anarchy . " But by 9 May , the revolt was crushed . 
 Arrested by the Prussian police , Słowacki was sent back to Paris . On his way there , he passed through Wrocław , where in mid @-@ June he was reunited with his mother , whom he had not seen for almost twenty years . He returned to Paris in July 1848 . His poem <unk> <unk> ( The Slavic Pope ) , published in late 1848 , gained new fame a century later when it seemed to foretell the 1978 ascent of Karol Wojtyła to the throne of St. Peter as Pope John Paul II . His final dramas ( Zawisza Czarny , Samuel Zborowski ) , attempted to explain history of Poland through Słowacki 's genesic philosophy . In March 1849 , Słowacki , his health failing , was visited three times by another Polish writer and poet , Cyprian Norwid , who later wrote about his visits in Czarne <unk> ( Black Flowers ) . Up to his final days , Słowacki was writing poetry ; a day before his death he dictated passages of his final work , Król @-@ Duch ( King @-@ Spirit ) . This grandiose , visionary @-@ symbolic poem , " summary of the entire Romantic culture " , Słowacki 's masterpiece , weaving together Poland 's history and its contemporary political and literary thought , was never finished . 
 Słowacki died in Paris on 3 April 1849 from tuberculosis , and on 5 April he was buried in the Montmartre Cemetery in Paris . He never married . Only about 30 people attended his funeral . Krasiński , although estranged from Słowacki in the last few years , wrote of the funeral : 
 Słowacki 's tombstone at Montmartre was designed by his friend and executor of his last will , painter Charles <unk> @-@ <unk> ; it did not weather the passage of time well however , and in 1851 a new , similar tombstone was put in place , this one designed by Polish sculptor Władysław <unk> . In 1927 Słowacki 's remains were moved to Wawel Cathedral in Poland , but an empty grave still remains at Montmartre . 
 = = Work = = 
 Słowacki was a prolific writer ; his collected works ( <unk> <unk> ) were published in 17 volumes . His legacy includes 25 dramas and 253 works of poetry . He wrote in many genres : dramas , lyrical poems , literary criticism , letters , journals and memoirs , fragments of two novels , and a political brochure ; he was also a translator . His letters to his mother are among the finest letters in all Polish literature . 
 Although the majority of his works were in Polish , he tried his hand at several works in French language ( Le roi de <unk> , Beatrice Cenci ) . Many of his works were published only posthumously , often under arbitrary titles , as Słowacki never named them himself . He also left notes on works that he never began or never completed . Słowacki is also considered the father of modern Polish drama . 
 Polish literary historian Włodzimierz <unk> divides Słowacki 's work into four periods : Wolter 's circle ( <unk> ) , Christian ethic , Towiański 's ethic and genesic ethic . Other scholars offer slightly different <unk> ; for example dividing his works into a classical period , a Swiss period , a Parisian period and a genesis period . Jarosław Ławski combines Towiański 's period with the genesic ones , speaking of a " mystical " period . Overall , Słowacki 's early work was influenced by Byron and Shakespeare , and included works that was often historical in nature , like ( as in Maria Stuart or Mindowe ) , or exotic , Oriental locales ( as in Arab ) . His work took on a more patriotic tone following the failed November Insurrection of 1830 – 1831 . His final works are heavy in mystical and philosophical undertones . In the 1840s he developed his own philosophy , or mystical system , with works such as Król @-@ Duch and Genesis z Ducha being an exposition of his philosophical ideas ( " genesic philosophy " ) according to which the material world is an expression of an ever @-@ improving spirit capable of progression ( transmigration ) into constantly newer forms . As Ławski notes , his philosophical works can transcend clear boundaries of simple literary genres . 
 Słowacki 's works , situated in the period of romanticism in Poland , contain rich and inventive vocabulary , including many neologisms . They use fantasy , mysticism and symbolism and feature themes related to Poland 's history , essence of <unk> , and relation to a larger universe . Ławski , enumerating the main characteristics of Słowacki 's writings , notes first that he was a " creationist " , in the sense of creating new meanings and words ( many of his characters bear names he invented himself , such as Kordian ) . Second , he notes that Słowacki was not only inspired by works of others , from poets and writers to scholars and philosophers , but that his texts were often a masterful , ironic @-@ grotesque polemic with other creators . For example , Słowacki was so impressed by Antoni Malczewski 's Maria that he wrote a sequel to it , Jan Bielecki . Likewise , Kordian is seen as building on William Shakespeare 's Hamlet , and as Słowacki 's response to Mickiewicz 's Dziady . This Ławski calls " ivy @-@ like imagination " , comparing Słowacki 's approach to that of an ivy , growing around works of others and reshaping them into new forms in a sophisticated literary game . Third , Słowacki was a master of irony ; he used it not only on others , but on himself , and even on irony itself – the " irony of irony " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After his death , Słowacki acquired the reputation of a national prophet . He is now considered to be one of the " Three Bards " ( <unk> ) of Polish literature . Słowacki was not a very popular figure in Paris , nor among his contemporaries . He wrote many dramas , which can be seen as his favorite genre , yet he was a playwright who never saw any of his work performed on stage ( only Mazepa was staged during his lifetime , and not in his presence ) . His works , written in Polish , dense with Slavic myths , philosophy and symbols , were difficult to translate to other languages . Słowacki 's unpopularity among other Polish émigrés can be attributed to his unwillingness to pander to contemporary tastes ; and in particular , his refusal to comfort his compatriots , shaken by the loss of Polish statehood and the failure of the November Uprising . Słowacki 's ironic and sometimes pessimistic attitude was not appreciated by his contemporaries , nor was his denial of Polish uniqueness . 
 Whereas Mickiewicz followed the Messianic tradition and in Konrad suggested that Poland 's fate was in the hands of God , Słowacki 's Kordian questioned whether his country was not instead a plaything of Satan . However , the same work has God and the Angels watching over Poland and the Earth . In Anhelli , Słowacki 's describes the tragic fate of Polish exiles in Siberia , painting a gloomy vision of Poland 's destiny ; the same topic was taken by Mickiewicz in the Books of the Polish Nation and of the Polish Pilgrimage as a call for Poles to spread hope and spirituality across Europe . While a small circle of his friends talked about his wit , perseverance and inspiration , in popular memory he was a " sickly man of weak character " , egocentric , bitter due to his failed rivalry with Mickiewicz . Mickiewicz himself wrote of Słowacki 's work as a " beautiful church , but without God inside " . 
 After his death , Słowacki gained a cult @-@ like status in Poland ; in particular , in the cultural center of Kraków . Several obituaries and longer articles appeared in the Polish press upon Słowacki 's death . His works , many of them published posthumously for the first time , found growing acceptance among a new generation ; an 1868 work noted that " Słowacki took the fancy of the Polish youth . He was its singer , its spiritual leader in the full meaning of the term " . Through undoubtedly a poet of the romantic era , he was increasingly popular among the positivists and the authors of the Young Poland period in the late 1800s and early 1900s . His works were popularized by other writers , such as Adam <unk> and Michał <unk> , and his dramas were shown in theaters . He became a major literary figure for the new generation of Polish writers . He also became respected abroad ; a 1902 English language book edited by Charles Dudley Warner noted that " the splendid exuberance of his thought and fancy ranks him among the great poets of the nineteenth century " . 
 In 1927 , some eight years after Poland had regained independence , the Polish government arranged for Słowacki 's remains to be transferred from Paris to Wawel Cathedral , in Kraków . He was interred in the Crypt of the National Bards , beside Mickiewicz . Słowacki 's interment at <unk> Cathedral was controversial , as many of his works were considered heretical by Polish Catholic @-@ Church officials . It took almost two decades and the backing of Józef Piłsudski , for whom Słowacki was a favorite poet , to obtain the Church 's agreement to interring Słowacki at Wawel Cathedral . At the 1927 ceremony , Piłsudski commanded : 
 Several streets and schools in modern Poland bear Juliusz Słowacki 's name . Three parks are dedicated to him : in Bielsko @-@ Biała , in Łódź and in Wrocław . ( Polish ) There are several monuments of Juliusz Słowacki , including ones in Warsaw ( 2001 ) and Wrocław ( 1984 ) . 
 Among the most notable landmarks bearing his name is the Juliusz Słowacki Theatre in Kraków , and the Juliusz <unk> Museum in Kremenets , Ukraine , opened in 2004 at his family 's former manor house . In 2009 the Polish Sejm ( parliament ) declared that year , the two @-@ hundredth anniversary of Słowacki 's birth , to be the Year of Juliusz Słowacki . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 = = = Drama = = = 
 Balladyna ( 1835 , published 1839 , performed 1862 ) 
 <unk> ( 1841 , published 1866 , performed 1867 ) 
 <unk> ( 1835 , published 1866 , performed 1871 ) 
 Kordian ( 1833 , published 1834 , performed 1899 ) 
 <unk> Marek ( Father Marek , 1843 , published same year , performed 1901 ) 
 <unk> <unk> ( The Constant Prince , after Pedro Calderón de la Barca , 1843 , published 1844 , performed 1874 ) 
 Lilla <unk> ( 1839 , published 1840 , performed 1863 ) 
 Maria Stuart ( 1830 , performed 1862 ) 
 Mazepa ( 1839 , published 1840 , performed in Hungarian 1847 , performed in Polish 1851 ) 
 Sen <unk> <unk> ( The Silver Dream of Salomea , 1843 , published 1844 , performed 1900 ) 
 Samuel Zborowski ( 1845 , published 1903 , performed 1911 ) 
 = = = Poetry = = = 
 Anhelli ( 1838 ) 
 Arab ( 1830 ) 
 <unk> , <unk> <unk> ( <unk> , a Greek insurgent , 1833 ) 
 Beniowski ( 1841 – 1846 ) 
 <unk> z Ducha ( Genesis from the Spirit , 1844 ) 
 <unk> <unk> ( An Hour of Thought , 1832 – 1833 ) 
 Hugo . <unk> <unk> ( Hugo . Teutonic Order Novel , 1830 ) 
 Król @-@ Duch ( The Spirit King , portions published 1847 , published in full 1925 ) 
 <unk> <unk> ( The Father of the Plague @-@ stricken , 1838 ) 
 <unk> do <unk> <unk> ( " Voyage to the Holy Land " , 1866 ) 
 Testament mój ( My Last Will , 1839 – 1840 ) 
 W <unk> ( In Switzerland , 1835 , published 1839 ) 
 Wacław ( 1838 ) 
 = Rhode Island Route 37 = 
 Route 37 , also known as the Lincoln Avenue Freeway , is a numbered state highway running 3 @.@ 47 miles ( 5 @.@ 58 km ) in Providence County and Kent County , Rhode Island , United States . The route is a nominally east – west freeway for its entire length . Route 37 serves the cities of Cranston and Warwick and is also a major east – west freeway in the Providence metropolitan area , linking T. F. Green Airport with Interstate 295 . The western terminus of Route 37 is an at @-@ grade intersection with Natick Avenue in Cranston . The freeway has numbered interchanges with I @-@ 295 , Rhode Island Route 2 , Pontiac Avenue , and I @-@ 95 before terminating at a trumpet interchange with U.S. Route 1 in Warwick . 
 Originally conceived as a freeway linking Scituate with suburban Warwick , the proposed alignment of Route 37 was later shortened to an alignment linking I @-@ 295 with I @-@ 95 . Construction on the freeway began in 1963 and was completed by 1969 . An eastward extension across upper Narragansett Bay was proposed in 1966 ; this proposal would have extended Route 37 north to I @-@ 195 and I @-@ 295 in Attleboro , Massachusetts , completing a beltway around the city of Providence . This extended route was approved and given the I @-@ 895 designation in 1968 , but the extension was ultimately canceled by the Rhode Island Department of Transportation ( RIDOT ) . In the 1980s , Route 37 was included in proposals for an eastward extension of Interstate 84 from Hartford , Connecticut to Rhode Island , but this alignment was also canceled . RIDOT has long @-@ range plans to extend Route 37 east to Route 117 in Downtown Warwick , but plans for a westward extension have been abandoned . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 37 begins at an at @-@ grade intersection with Natick Avenue in the city of Cranston ; Natick Avenue is an unnumbered road that is used to access Rhode Island Route 51 ( Phenix Avenue ) . Shortly after the intersection with Natick Avenue , Route 37 begins to head in a northeastern direction and has its first numbered exit at a cloverleaf interchange with I @-@ 295 . The interchange is signed as Exits 1A @-@ B from Route 37 west , but both the northbound and southbound lanes of I @-@ 295 are served via a single on @-@ ramp from Route 37 east . After the junction with I @-@ 295 , Route 37 passes through a densely settled region of Cranston and passes over Route 5 on a single @-@ span bridge . After passing under Glen Hills Drive , the freeway turns to head in a southwestern direction before intersecting Route 2 at a cloverleaf interchange signed as Exits 2A @-@ B. 
 After the interchange with Route 2 , Route 37 passes over Power Road before intersecting with Pontiac Avenue , an unnumbered , four @-@ lane highway in Cranston . The interchange , numbered as Exit 3 , is the only one along the length of Route 37 that does not have a suffixed exit number in either direction . Shortly after Exit 3 , Route 37 crosses over the Pawtuxet River and enters the city of Warwick . In Warwick , the freeway has a complicated interchange with I @-@ 95 that is signed as Exits 4A @-@ B. From westbound Route 37 , exit 4B is a right @-@ hand exit that is used to access I @-@ 95 north , while exit 4A is a left @-@ hand exit that is used to access I @-@ 95 south . Both ramps from eastbound Route 37 are right @-@ hand exits . 
 After the I @-@ 95 interchange , Route 37 widens to three lanes in each direction . The freeway crosses Jefferson Boulevard and Amtrak 's Northeast Corridor railroad on twin @-@ span bridges and passes to the north of the Lincoln Park Cemetery before interchanging with US 1 at exits 5A @-@ B. The freeway terminates at a trumpet interchange with US 1 , with the two left @-@ hand lanes defaulting onto US 1 north and the right @-@ hand lane serving US 1 south , which connects to T. F. Green Airport . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Construction of the freeway = = = 
 The origins of Route 37 date back to 1956 , when the Rhode Island Department of Public Works ( RIDPW ) included the Route 37 Expressway on its list of proposed freeways for the state of Rhode Island . The freeway was originally proposed to begin at Route 116 in Hope , a village of Scituate , and extend east through Cranston to Route 117 in Warwick . The route would also have connections with the proposed I @-@ 295 in Cranston and I @-@ 95 in Warwick . 
 In 1959 , RIDPW approved construction of the expressway , amending the proposed route to an alignment extending roughly from I @-@ 295 to a junction with Route 10 ( Huntington Expressway ) in Warwick ; Route 10 would be extended south to Warwick as part of the plan . The routing was officially designated as Route 37 , but was also referred to as the " Lincoln Avenue Freeway " after a local road in Warwick that the new route would bypass . RIDPW originally planned to begin construction in 1960 , but it was delayed until 1963 due to ongoing construction projects with I @-@ 95 and I @-@ 195 in Providence . Route 37 was routed through mostly undeveloped land in the cities of Warwick and Cranston , and in 1969 , the construction of the freeway to an interchange with US 1 in Warwick was completed . The proposed southern extension of Route 10 was ultimately canceled by RIDPW . 
 = = = Proposed extensions = = = 
 In 1966 , Route 37 was included in a proposal to extend I @-@ 295 across Narragansett Bay to make a full beltway around the city of Providence . The plan , which was approved by both RIDPW and the Massachusetts Highway Department ( MassHighway ) , involved extending Route 37 eastward from its existing terminus at US 1 across Narragansett bay via a new bridge that would connect Warwick with the town of Barrington . The expressway would then head northward into the town of Warren , intersecting I @-@ 195 in the town of Swansea after crossing into Massachusetts . Eventually , the freeway would connect with I @-@ 295 at its existing northern terminus in Attleboro , Massachusetts . 
 In 1969 , the Federal Highway Administration ( FHWA ) designated the proposed expressway as I @-@ 895 instead of the originally proposed I @-@ 295 . The expressway was planned to extend the existing Route 37 by 24 @.@ 4 miles ( 39 @.@ 3 km ) , and was scheduled to be completed by 1975 . In 1971 , however , the expressway 's original routing was canceled due to community opposition in the towns of Barrington and Warren and concerns that a new bridge across Upper Narragansett Bay would interfere with aviation traffic at T. F. Green Airport . In 1971 , RIDOT submitted a new proposed alignment for I @-@ 895 that utilized the Jamestown and Newport Bridges in southern Newport County and bypassed Barrington and Warwick altogether , but the interstate was ultimately canceled in 1982 . 
 In 1981 , ten years after the eastern extension of Route 37 was canceled , RIDOT began planning studies for a western extension of the freeway . The expressway was included in a proposal to extend I @-@ 84 eastward from Hartford , Connecticut to Providence ; more northern alignments for the freeway had been rejected due to concerns of potential damage to the Scituate Reservoir . The southern routing of I @-@ 84 , which would have utilized Route 37 and terminated in Warwick , largely bypassed the reservoir 's watershed . In 1982 , however , I @-@ 84 was officially canceled by RIDOT after studies indicated that the southern alignment was not a feasible alternative . 
 = = = Recent history = = = 
 In June 2006 , erosion resulting from heavy rains exposed human remains near the westbound lanes of Route 37 in Cranston . Subsequent drainage improvements to the freeway led to the discovery of human remains from more than 70 individuals buried in late 19th and early 20th centuries . Archaeological research indicated that the portion of Route 37 in Cranston between Exits 2 and 3 was inadvertently constructed over a portion of the State Farm Cemetery in the 1960s . The cemetery 's wooden burial markers had deteriorated by the time Route 37 was constructed , and environmental studies that would have indicated the location of the cemetery were not conducted prior to the expressway 's construction . In late 2006 , the remains of 71 individuals were exhumed from the site of the previous cemetery and re @-@ interred at the State Institution Cemetery in Warwick . On July 14 , 2009 , RIDOT hosted a memorial service for the 71 people re @-@ interred in Warwick . 
 = = Future = = 
 In 1992 , RIDOT reviewed plans for an eastern extension of Route 37 . The department conducted planning studies on two proposed freeway alignments that would extend Route 37 into Downtown Warwick . The first proposal continued the freeway southeast from US 1 to Airport Road for 0 @.@ 75 miles ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) , while the second proposal extended the freeway east for 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) , intersecting Route 117 and Route 117A in the village of <unk> before terminating at Route 117 ( West Shore Road ) . The first option was ultimately dropped by RIDOT after studies indicated the routing would interfere with aviation traffic at T. F. Green Airport . The freeway extension to Route 117 , however , remains on RIDOT 's long @-@ term plans . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = Armenian Revolutionary Federation = 
 The Armenian Revolutionary Federation ( ARF ) ( classical Armenian : Հայ <unk> <unk> , <unk> ) , also known as Dashnaktsutyun ( in a short form , " Dashnak " ) , is an Armenian nationalist and socialist political party founded in 1890 in Tiflis , Russian Empire ( now Tbilisi , Georgia ) in 1890 by <unk> Mikaelian , Stepan Zorian , and Simon <unk> . The party operates in Armenia , Nagorno @-@ Karabakh and in countries where the Armenian diaspora is present , notably in Lebanon , where the party is represented in the parliament as part of the March 8 alliance . 
 The ARF has traditionally advocated democratic socialism and is a full member of the Socialist International since 2003 , which it had originally joined in 1907 . It possesses the largest number of members from the political parties present in the Armenian diaspora , having established affiliates in more than 20 countries . Compared to other Armenian parties which tend to primarily focus on educational or humanitarian projects , the ARF is the most politically oriented of the organizations and traditionally has been one of the staunchest supporters of Armenian nationalism . The party campaigns for the recognition of the Armenian Genocide and the right to reparations . It also advocates the establishment of United Armenia , partially based on the Treaty of Sèvres of 1920 . 
 The ARF became active within the Ottoman Empire in the early 1890s with the aim of unifying the various small groups in the empire that were advocating for reform and defending Armenian villages from massacres that were widespread in some of the Armenian @-@ populated areas of the empire . ARF members formed fedayi groups that defended Armenian civilians through armed resistance . The Dashnaks also worked for the wider goal of creating a " free , independent and unified " Armenia , although they sometimes set aside this goal in favor of a more realistic approach , such as advocating autonomy . 
 In 1918 , the party was instrumental in the creation of the First Republic of Armenia , which fell to the Soviet communists in 1920 . After its leadership was exiled by the communists , the ARF established itself within Armenian diaspora communities , where it helped Armenians preserve their cultural identity . After the fall of the USSR , it returned to Armenia , where it now again has a significant presence as a major party in Armenia 's parliament . Prior to Serzh Sargsyan 's election as president of Armenia and for a short time thereafter , the ARF was a member of the governing coalition , even though it nominated its own candidate in the presidential elections . 
 ARF then reentered Sargsyan 's cabinet in February 2016 in what was defined as a " long @-@ term political cooperation " agreement with the Republican Party by means of which the ARF would share responsibility for all government policies . 
 = = Early history = = 
 In the late 19th century , Eastern Europe and Russia became the hub of small groups advocating reform in Armenian @-@ populated areas in the Ottoman Empire . In 1890 , recognizing the need to unify these groups in order to be more efficient , <unk> Mikaelian , Simon <unk> and Stepan Zorian created a new political party called the " Federation of Armenian Revolutionaries " ( Հայ <unk> <unk> , Hay <unk> Dashnaktsutyun ) , which would eventually be called the " Armenian Revolutionary Federation " or " Dashnaktsutiun " in 1890 . 
 The Social Democrat Hunchakian Party at one point had agreed to join as well , seeing that the ARF 's political ideology was socialism . However , the <unk> claimed the new party was not Marxist enough and withdrew from the union . The original aim of the ARF was to gain autonomy for the Armenian @-@ populated areas in the Ottoman Empire . The party began to organize itself in the Ottoman Empire in the early 1890s and held its first major meeting in Tiflis , Russian Empire , in 1892 . At that meeting , the party adopted a decentralized modus operandi according to which the chapters in different countries were allowed to plan and implement policies in tune with their local political atmosphere . The party set its goal of a society based on the democratic principles of freedom of assembly , freedom of speech , freedom of religion and agrarian reform . 
 = = = Russian Empire = = = 
 The ARF gradually acquired significant strength and sympathy among Russian Armenians . Mainly because of the ARF 's stance towards the Ottoman Empire , the party enjoyed the support of the central Russian administration , as tsarist and ARF foreign policy had the same alignment until 1903 . On June 12 , 1903 , the tsarist authorities passed an edict to bring all Armenian Church property under imperial control . This was faced by strong ARF opposition , because the ARF perceived the tsarist edict as a threat to the Armenian national existence . As a result , the ARF leadership decided to defend Armenian churches by dispatching militiamen who acted as guards and by holding mass demonstrations . 
 In 1905 – 06 , the Armenian @-@ Tatar massacres broke out during which the ARF became involved in armed activities . Some sources claim that the Russian government incited the massacres in order to reinforce its authority during the revolutionary turmoil of 1905 . The first outbreak of violence occurred in Baku , in February 1905 . The ARF held the Russian authorities responsible for inaction and instigation of massacres that were part of a larger anti @-@ Armenian policy . On May 11 , 1905 , Dashnak revolutionary <unk> <unk> assassinated Russian governor general <unk> , who was considered by the Armenian population as the main instigator of hate and confrontation between the Armenians and the Tatars . Unable to rely on government forces to protect their interests and properties , the Armenian bourgeoisie turned to the ARF for protection . The Dashnak leaders argued that , given employment discrimination against Armenian workers in non @-@ Armenian concerns , the defence provided to the Armenian bourgeoisie was essential to the safekeeping of employment opportunities for Armenian laborers . The Russian Tsar 's envoy in the Caucasus , Vorontsov @-@ <unk> , reported that the ARF bore a major portion of responsibilities for perpetrating the massacres . The ARF , however , argued that it helped to organize the defence of the Armenian population against Muslim attacks . The blows suffered at the hands of the <unk> fighting squads proved a catalyst for the consolidation of the Muslim community of the Caucasus . During that period , the ARF regarded armed activity , including terror , as necessary for the achievement of political goals . 
 In January 1912 , 159 ARF members , being lawyers , bankers , merchants and other intellectuals , were tried before the Russian senate for their participation in the party . They were defended by then @-@ lawyer Alexander Kerensky , who challenged much of the evidence used against them as the " original investigators had been encouraged by the local administration to use any available means " to convict the men . Kerensky succeeded in having the evidence reexamined for one of the defendants . He and several other lawyers " made openly contemptuous declarations " about this discrepancy to the Russian press , which was forbidden to attend the trials , and this in turn greatly embarrassed the senators . The Senate eventually opened an inquiry against the chief magistrate who had brought the charges against the Dashnak members and concluded that he was insane . Ninety @-@ four of the accused were acquitted , while the rest were either imprisoned or exiled for varying periods , the most severe being six years . 
 = = = Persian Empire = = = 
 The Dashnaktsutiun held a meeting on April 26 , 1907 , dubbed the Fourth General Congress , at which ARF leaders such as Aram Manukian , Hamo <unk> and Stepan <unk> discussed their engagement in the Iranian Constitutional Revolution . They established that the movement was one that had political , ideological and economic components and was thus aimed at establishing law and order , human rights and the interests of all working people . They also felt that it would work for the benefit and interest of Armenian @-@ Iranians . The final vote was 25 votes in favour and one absentia . 
 From 1907 to 1908 , during the time when the Young Turks came to power in the Ottoman Empire , Armenians from the Caucasus , Western Armenia , and Iran started to collaborate with Iranian <unk> and revolutionaries . Political parties , notably the Dashnaktsutiun , wanted to influence the direction of the revolution towards greater democracy and to safeguard gains already achieved . The Dashnak contribution to the fight was mostly military , as it sent some of its well known <unk> to Iran after the guerrilla campaign in the Ottoman Empire ended with the rise of the Young Turks . A notable ARF member already in Iran was Yeprem Khan , who had established a branch of the party in the country . Yeprem Khan was highly instrumental in the Constitutional revolution of Iran . After the Persian national parliament was shelled by the Russian Colonel Vladimir <unk> , Yeprem Khan rallied with Sattar Khan and other revolutionary leaders in the Constitutional Revolution of Iran against Mohammad Ali Shah Qajar . Relations between Sattar Khan and the ARF oscillated between amity and resentment . Sometimes he was viewed as being ignorant , while at other times he was dubbed a great hero . Nonetheless , the ARF came to collaborate with him and alongside Yeprem Khan posted many victories including the capture of <unk> in February 1909 . At the end of June 1909 , the fighters arrived in Tehran and after several battles , took over the <unk> building and the <unk> mosque . Yeprem Khan was then appointed chief of Tehran police . This caused tensions between the Dashnaks and Khan . ` 
 = = = Ottoman Empire = = = 
 = = = = Abdul Hamid Period ( 1894 – 1908 ) = = = = 
 The ARF became a major political force in Armenian life . It was especially active in the Ottoman Empire , where it organized or participated in many revolutionary activities . In 1894 , the ARF took part in the Sasun Resistance , supplying arms to the local population to help the people of Sasun defend themselves against the Hamidian purges . In June 1896 , the <unk> organized the Defense of Van in the province of Van , where Ottoman Hamidieh soldiers were to attack the city . The <unk> , assisted by members of the Hunchakian and ARF parties , supplied all able @-@ bodied men of Van with weapons . They rose to defend the civilians from the attack and subsequent massacre . 
 To raise awareness of the massacres of 1895 – 96 , members of the Dashnaktsutiun led by <unk> <unk> , occupied the Ottoman Bank on August 26 , 1896 . The purpose of the raid was to dictate the ARF 's demands of reform in the Armenian populated areas of the Ottoman Empire and to attract European attention to their cause since the Europeans had many assets in the bank . The operation caught European attention but at the cost of more massacres by Sultan Abdul Hamid II . 
 The <unk> Expedition was performed by the Armenian militia against the Kurdish <unk> tribe on July 25 , 1897 . During the Defense of Van , the <unk> tribe had ambushed a squad of Armenian defenders and massacred them . The <unk> Expedition was the ARF 's retaliation . Some Armenians consider this their first victory over the Ottoman Empire and celebrate each year in its remembrance . 
 On March 30 , 1904 , the ARF played a major role in the Sasun Uprising . The ARF sent arms and fedayi to defend the region for the second time . Among the 500 <unk> participating in the resistance were top figures such as Kevork <unk> , <unk> Murad and Hrayr <unk> . They managed to hold off the Ottoman army for several months , despite their lack of fighters and firepower . 
 In 1905 , members of the Armenian Revolutionary Federation organized the Yıldız Attempt , an assassination attempt on Sultan Abdul Hamid II in the capital of the Ottoman Empire , Constantinople ( modern day Istanbul ) . The Yıldız Attempt failed to assassinate the Sultan because the timed bomb missed its target by a few minutes . The <unk> also lost one of its founders , <unk> Mikaelian , in an accidental explosion during the planning of the operation . 
 = = = = Young Turk Revolution ( 1908 – 14 ) = = = = 
 Two of the largest revolutionary groups trying to overthrow Sultan Abdul Hamid II had been the ARF and the Committee of Union and Progress , a group of mostly European @-@ educated Turks . In a general assembly meeting in 1907 , the ARF acknowledged that the Armenian and Turkish revolutionaries had the same goals . Although the Tanzimat reforms had given Armenians more rights and seats in the parliament , the ARF hoped to gain autonomy to govern Armenian populated areas of the Ottoman Empire as a " state within a state " . The " Second congress of the Ottoman opposition " took place in Paris , France , in 1907 . Opposition leaders including Ahmed Riza ( liberal ) , <unk> Bey , and ARF member Khachatur <unk> attended . During the meeting , an alliance between the two parties was officially declared . The ARF decided to cooperate with the Committee of Union and Progress , hoping that if the Young Turks came to power , autonomy would be granted to the Armenians . 
 In 1908 , Abdul Hamid II was overthrown during the Young Turk Revolution , which launched the Second Constitutional Era of the Ottoman Empire . Armenians gained more seats in the 1908 parliament , but the reforms fell short of the greater autonomy that the ARF had hoped for . The Adana massacre in 1909 also created antipathy between Armenians and Turks , and the ARF cut relations with the Young Turks in 1912 . 
 = = = World War I and the Armenian Genocide = = = 
 In 1915 , Dashnak leaders were deported and killed alongside other Armenian intellectuals during a purge by Ottoman officials against the leaders of the empire 's Armenian communities . The ARF , maintaining its ideological commitment to a " Free , Independent , and United Armenia " , led the defense of the Armenian people during the Armenian Genocide , becoming leaders of the successful Van Resistance . <unk> Bey , the Ottoman administrator of Van , tried to suppress the resistance by killing two Armenian leaders ( <unk> and <unk> ) and trying to imprison Aram Manukian , who had risen to fame and gained the nickname " Aram of Van " . Moreover , on April 19 , he issued an order to exterminate all Armenians , and threatened to kill all Muslims who helped them . 
 About 185 @,@ 000 Armenians lived in Vaspurakan . In the city of Van itself , there were around 30 @,@ 000 Armenians , but more Armenians from surrounding villages joined them during the Ottoman offensive . The battle started on April 20 , 1915 , with Aram Manukian as the leader of the resistance , and lasted for two months . In May , the Armenian battalions and Russian regulars entered the city and successfully drove the Ottoman army out of Van . The Dashnaktsutiun was also involved in other less @-@ successful resistance movements in Zeitun , Shabin @-@ Karahisar , Urfa , and Musa Dagh . After the end of the Van resistance , ARF leader Aram Manukian became governor of the Administration for Western Armenia and worked to ease the sufferings of Armenians . 
 At the end of World War I , members of the Young Turks movement considered executors of the Armenian Genocide by the Armenian Revolutionary Federation were assassinated during Operation Nemesis . 
 = = = Republic of Armenia ( 1918 – 1920 ) = = = 
 As a result of the collapse of the Russian Empire in 1917 , the Armenian , Georgian , and Muslim leaders of the Caucasus united to create the Transcaucasian Federation in the winter of 1918 . The Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk had drastic consequences for the Armenians : Turkish forces reoccupied Western Armenia . The federation lasted for only three months , eventually leading to the proclamation of the Republics of Armenia , Georgia , and Azerbaijan . The negotiators for Armenia were from the ARF . 
 With the collapse of the Transcaucasian Federation , the Armenians were left to fend for themselves as the Turkish army approached the capital of Yerevan . At first , fearing a major military defeat and massacre of the population of Armenia , the Dashnaks wanted to evacuate the city of Yerevan . Instead , the Military Council headed by Colonel <unk> decided that they would not surrender and would confront the Turkish army . The opposing armies met on May 28 , 1918 , near Sardarapat . The battle was a major military success for the Armenian army as it was able to halt the invading Turkish forces . The Armenians also stood their ground at the Battle of Kara <unk> and at the Battle of Bash Abaran . The creation of the First Republic of Armenia was proclaimed on the same day of the Battle of Sardarapat , and the ARF became the ruling party . However , the new state was devastated , with a dislocated economy , hundreds of thousands of refugees , and a mostly starving population . 
 During this period , in May 1918 , this group committed a massacre in Guba in <unk> killing 3 000 civilians including Muslims , Mountain Jews and Lezgians . 
 The ARF , led by General Andranik , tried several times to seize Shusha ( known as Shushi by Armenians ) , a city in Karabakh . Just before the Armistice of Mudros was signed , Andranik was on the way from Zangezur to Shusha , to control the main city of Karabakh . Andranik 's forces got within 26 miles ( 42 km ) of the city when the First World War ended , and Turkey , along with Germany and Austria @-@ Hungary , surrendered to the Allies . British forces ordered Andranik to stop all military advances , assuring him that the conflict would be solved with the Paris Peace Conference of 1919 . Andranik , not wanting to antagonize the British , retreated to Goris , Zangezur . 
 The Armenian Revolutionary Federation had a strong presence in the DRA government . Most of the important government posts , such as prime minister , defence minister and interior minister were controlled by its members . 
 The DRA wanted to recover the country 's economy , and create new rules and regulations , but the situation required it to focus on overcoming widespread hunger in the country . The situation was complicated externally , provoked by Turkish and Azeri Muslim riots . In 1920 the situation in the country became worse , with apparent rapprochement between Soviet Russia and Kemal 's Turkey . When the Turkish @-@ Armenian war started in autumn 1920 , Armenia was isolated and abandoned by Western allies . The newly formed League of Nations did not provide any help . Soviet Russia intensified its pressure on Armenia . Losing the war , Armenia signed the Treaty of Alexandropol on December 2 , 1920 , which resulted in the recognition of large territorial losses to Turkey . The Armenia military @-@ revolutionary committee formed in Soviet Azerbaijan . Despite their tight grip on power , the ARF ceded power to the Communist Red Army troops invading from the north , which culminated with a Soviet takeover . The ARF was banned , its leaders exiled , and many of its members dispersed to other parts of the world . 
 = = Exile = = 
 After the communists took over the short @-@ lived First Republic of Armenia and ARF leaders were exiled , the Dashnaks moved their base of operations to where the Armenian diaspora had settled . With the large influx of Armenian refugees in the Levant , the ARF established a strong political structure in Lebanon and to a lesser extent , Syria . From 1921 to 1990 , the Dashnaktsutiun established political structures in more than 200 states including the USA , where another large influx of Armenians settled . 
 With political and geographic division came religious division . One part of the Armenian Church claimed it wanted to be separate from the head , whose seat was in Echmiadzin , Armenian SSR . Some Armenians in the US thought Moscow tried to use the Armenian Church to promote Communists ' ideas outside the country . The Armenian Church thus separated into two branches , Echmiadzin and Cilician , and started to operate separately . In the US , Echmiadzin branch churches of the Armenian Apostolic Church would not admit members of the ARF . This was one of the reasons why the ARF discouraged people from attending these churches and brought the representatives from a different wing of the church , the Armenian <unk> of Cilicia , from Lebanon to the US . In 1933 , members of ARF were convicted in the assassination of Armenian archbishop Levon <unk> in New York City . Prior to his murder , the archbishop had been accused of being exclusively pro @-@ Soviet by the ARF . However , the ARF itself was legally exonerated from any direct complicity in the assassination . 
 During World War II , some Berlin @-@ based ARF members saw an opportunity to remove Soviet control from Armenia by supporting the Nazis . The Armenian Legion , composed largely of former Soviet Red Army POWs , was led by <unk> <unk> . It participated in the occupation of the Crimean Peninsula but was later based in the Netherlands and France a result of Adolf Hitler 's distrust of their loyalty . 
 During the 1950s , tensions arose between the ARF and Armenian SSR . The death of Catholicos Garegin of the Holy See of Cilicia prompted a struggle for succession . The National <unk> Assembly , which was largely influenced by the ARF , elected Zareh of Aleppo . This decision was rejected by the Echmiadzin @-@ based Catholicos of All Armenians , the anti @-@ ARF coalition , and Soviet Armenian authorities . Zareh extended his administrative authority over a large part of the Armenian diaspora , furthering the rift that had already been created by his election . This event split the large Armenian community of Lebanon , creating sporadic clashes between the supporters of Zareh and those who opposed his election . 
 Religious conflict was part of a greater conflict that raged between the two " camps " of the Armenian diaspora . The ARF still resented the fact that they were ousted from Armenia after the Red Army took control , and the ARF leaders supported the creation of a " Free , Independent , and United Armenia " , free from both Soviet and Turkish hegemony . The Social Democrat Hunchakian Party and <unk> Party , the main rivals of the ARF , supported the newly established Soviet rule in Armenia . 
 = = = Lebanon = = = 
 From 1923 to 1958 , conflicts erupted among Armenian political parties struggling to dominate and organize the diaspora . In 1926 , a struggle between committees of the ARF and Hunchakian parties for control of the newly established shanty @-@ town of Bourj Hammoud in Lebanon led to the assassination of ARF member Vahan <unk> . As retaliation for the murder , Hunchakian members Mihran <unk> and S. <unk> were assassinated in 1929 and 1931 respectively . In 1956 , when Bishop Zareh was consecrated Catholicos of Cilicia , the Catholicos of Echmiadzin refused to recognize his authority . This controversy polarized the Armenian community of Lebanon . As a result , in the context of the Lebanese civil strife of 1958 , an armed conflict erupted between supporters ( the ARF ) and opponents ( <unk> , <unk> ) of Zareh . 
 Prior to the Lebanese Civil War of 1975 – 90 , the party was closely allied to the Phalangist Party of Pierre Gemayel and generally ran joint tickets with the Phalangists , especially in Beirut constituencies with large Armenian populations . The refusal of the ARF , along with most Armenian groups , to play an active role in the civil war , however , soured relations between the two parties , and the Lebanese Forces ( a militia dominated by Phalangists and commanded by <unk> Gemayel , Pierre Gemayel 's son ) , responded by attacking the Armenian quarters of many Lebanese towns , including Bourj Hammoud . Many Armenians affiliated with the ARF took up arms voluntarily to defend their quarters . In the midst of the Lebanese civil war , a shadowy guerrilla organization called Justice Commandos of the Armenian Genocide emerged and carried out a string of assassinations from 1975 to 1983 . The guerrilla organization has sometimes been linked to the Dashnaks . 
 Ethnic Armenians are allocated six seats in Lebanon 's 128 @-@ member National Assembly . The Lebanese branch of the ARF has usually controlled a majority of the Armenian vote and won most of the ethnic Armenian seats in the National Assembly . A major change occurred in the parliamentary election of 2000 . With a rift between ARF and the Mustaqbal ( Future ) party of Rafik Hariri and the ARF was left with only one parliamentary seat , its worst result in many decades . The ARF called for a boycott of the 2005 Beirut elections . Relations soured further when on August 5 , 2007 by @-@ election in the <unk> district , which includes the predominantly Armenian area of Bourj Hammoud , ARF decided to support Camille Khoury , the candidate backed by opposition leader Michel Aoun 's Free Patriotic Movement against Phalangist leader <unk> Gemayel and subsequently won the seat . In the 2009 Lebanese general elections , the ARF won 2 seats in parliament which it holds presently . In June 2011 , a new Lebanese government was formed where ARF party members were appointed to two ministerial positions , including Ministry of Industry , as part of the March 8 alliance . 
 The ARF Lebanon branch is headquartered in Bourj Hammoud in the <unk> Centre , along with the ARF Lebanon Central Committee 's <unk> Daily newspaper and " Voice Of Van " 24 @-@ hour radio station . 
 = = Independent Armenia = = 
 The ARF has always maintained its ideological commitment to " a Free , Independent , and United Armenia " . The term United Armenia refers to the borders of Armenia recognized by U.S. President Woodrow Wilson and outlined in the Treaty of Sèvres . After Armenia fell under Soviet control in 1920 , the ARF within the Armenian diaspora opposed Soviet rule over Armenia and rallied in support of Armenian independence . It contributed to organizing a social and cultural framework aimed at preserving the Armenian identity . However , because of tight communist control , the ARF could not operate in the Armenian SSR and the political party remained banned until 1991 . 
 When independence was achieved in 1991 , the ARF soon became one of the major and most active political parties , rivaled mainly by the Pan @-@ Armenian National Movement . Subsequently , on December 28 , 1994 , President Levon Ter @-@ Petrosyan in a famous television speech banned the ARF , which was the nation 's leading opposition party , along with <unk> , the country 's largest daily newspaper . Ter @-@ Petrosyan introduced evidence that supposedly detailed a plot hatched by the ARF to engage in terrorism against his administration , endanger Armenia 's national security and overthrow the government . Throughout the evening , government security forces arrested leading ARF figures , and police seized computers , fax machines , files and printing equipment from ARF offices . In addition to <unk> , government forces also closed several literary , women 's , cultural , and youth publications . Thirty @-@ one men , who would later be known as the " Dro Group " ( named after the Dro Committee , the group that was allegedly behind the plot ) , were arrested . 
 Gerard <unk> , an historian and close adviser of Ter @-@ Petrosyan , collected and presented the evidence against the defendants . He later stated in an interview that he was unsure if the evidence was true , inviting the notion that the party was banned because of its increasing chances of winning seats in the July 1995 parliamentary elections . Several months after the elections , most of the men were found not guilty with the exception of several defendants charged for engaging in corrupt business practices . The ban on the party was lifted , however , less than a week after Ter @-@ Petrosyan fell from power in February 1998 and was replaced by Robert Kocharyan , who was backed by the Dashnaks . 
 However , two members ARF : Arsen Artsruni and Armenak <unk> still arrested so far . 
 In 2007 , the ARF was not part of but had a cooperation agreement in place with the governing coalition , which consisted of two parties in the government coalition , the Republican Party and Prosperous Armenia Party . The Country of Law party was also a member of the governing coalition until it pulled out in May 2006 . With 16 of the 131 seats in the National Assembly of Armenia , the Armenian Revolutionary Federation is the major socialist party in Armenia and the third @-@ largest party in parliament . 
 In addition to its parliamentary seats , the following governmental ministries were also headed by ARF members : Ministry of Agriculture , Davit <unk> ; Ministry of Education and Science , Levon <unk> ; Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs , Aghvan <unk> ; Ministry of Healthcare , <unk> Davidian . On July 13 , 2007 , the ARF History Museum was inaugurated in Yerevan , displaying the history of the party and of its notable members . 
 In 2007 , the ARF announced that it would nominate its own candidate to run for president of Armenia in the February 2008 presidential election . In an innovation on November 24 – 25 , 2007 , the ARF conducted a non @-@ binding Armenia @-@ wide primary election . They invited the public to vote to advise the party which of two candidates , Vahan Hovhannisyan and Armen <unk> , they should formally nominate for president of Armenia in the subsequent official election . What characterized it as a primary instead of a standard opinion poll was that the public knew of the primary in advance , all eligible voters were invited , and the voting was by secret ballot . Nearly 300 @,@ 000 people voted in makeshift tents and mobile ballot boxes . Vahan Hovhannisyan received the most votes and was subsequently nominated for the presidential election by the ARF Supreme Council in a secret ballot . In the presidential election , Hovhannisyan placed fourth with 6 @.@ 2 % of the vote . In 2008 , ARF re @-@ joined the ruling political coalition in Armenia and supported strong police actions during the 2008 Armenian presidential election protests that led to ten deaths . 
 Due to the signature of the so @-@ called Zurich Protocols the ARF left the coalition and became an opposition party once again in 2009 , but relations with other factions in the Armenian opposition have remained frosty . In 2012 parliamentary election the ARF won 5 seats losing 11 parliamentary seats from 2007 . 
 ARF then reentered Sargsyan 's cabinet in February 2016 , obtaining three ministerial posts : Ministry of Economy , Local Government and Education ; also as a result of what was defined as a " long @-@ term political cooperation " agreement with the Republican Party , ARF also got to appoint the regional governors of <unk> and Shirak Provinces . 
 = = = Electoral record = = = 
 In the 2000s , the party usually garnered some 10 to 15 of the vote in national elections . In a 2007 confidential telegram Anthony Godfrey , U.S. Embassy in Armenia chargé d 'affaires , wrote that the party " has had a historically loyal following of 10 to 12 percent of the population , but probably has little chance to expand from that base . " 
 = = Nagorno @-@ Karabakh = = 
 After the Soviet Union expanded into the South Caucasus , it established the Nagorno @-@ Karabakh Autonomous Oblast ( NKAO ) within the Azerbaijan SSR in 1923 . In the final years of the Soviet Union , the Armenian Revolutionary Federation established a branch in Nagorno @-@ Karabakh . In January 1991 , the Dashnaktsutiun won the parliamentary election and governed as the ruling party during the entirety of the Nagorno @-@ Karabakh war . The Dashnaks actively supported the independence of Nagorno @-@ Karabakh ( or Artsakh as Armenians call it ) . It aided the Nagorno @-@ Karabakh Defense Army by sending armed volunteers to the front lines and supplying the army with weapons , food , medicine and moral support . After deciding not to run in the second parliamentary elections , the Armenian Revolutionary Federation ran in the 1999 elections and won 9 of the 33 seats in the National Assembly of Nagorno Karabakh . At the June 2005 elections , the Dashnaktsutiun was part of an electoral alliance with Movement 88 that won 3 out of 33 seats . 
 = = Ideology and goals = = 
 The principal founders of the Armenian Revolutionary Federation were nationalist , socialists , and Marxist elements were omnipresent in the introductory section of the party 's first program written by <unk> , entitled " General Theory " . The ARF first set down its ideological and political goals during the Hamidian regime . It denounced the Ottoman regime and the unbearable conditions of life for its Armenians and advocated changing the regime in power and securing more rights through revolution and armed struggle . The ARF had and still has socialism within its political philosophy . Its program expresses the entire , multifaceted make @-@ up of the Armenian revolutionary movement , including its national @-@ liberation , political , and social @-@ economic aspects . 
 Despite subsequent modifications , the above @-@ mentioned principles and tendencies continue to characterize the ideological world of the Dashnaktsutiun , and its approach toward issues has remained unchanged . In recent decades , the Armenian Revolutionary Federation reasserted itself ideologically and reformulated the section of its program called " General Theory " , adapting it to current concepts of socialism , democracy and rights of self @-@ determination . The party has long supported a parliamentary republican political system and campaigned for a " yes " vote in the 2015 constitutional referendum . 
 Its goals are : 
 Creation of a free , independent , and united Armenia . The borders of United Armenia shall include all territories designated as Armenia by the Treaty of Sèvres as well as the regions of Artsakh , Javakhk , and Nakhichevan ( See map ) . 
 International condemnation of the Genocide committed by the Ottoman Empire against the Armenians , return of the lands which are occupied , and just reparations to the Armenian nation 
 The gathering of worldwide expatriate Armenians on the lands of United Armenia . 
 Strengthening Armenia 's statehood , institutionalization of democracy and the rule of law , securing the people 's economic well being , and establishment of social justice , and a democratic and socialistic independent republic in Armenia 
 The ARF is often accused of having a present strategy that does not differ from the one used during the time of the Ottoman Empire . Its tactics are viewed as still being aimed at convincing Western governments and diplomatic circles to sponsor the party 's demands . 
 In 1907 , the Dashnaktsutiun joined the Second International until its dissolution during World War I. It later joined the reformed Socialist International and remained a full member until 1960 , when it decided to pull out of the organization . In 1996 , it was re @-@ accepted as an observer member , and in 1999 the Dashnaks earned full membership in the international organization . The party was also a member of the Labour and Socialist International between 1923 and 1940 . 
 A member of the ARF is called <unk> ( in Eastern Armenian ) or <unk> ( in Western Armenian ) . Other than calling each other by name , members formally address one another as Comrade ( <unk> or Unger for boys and men , <unk> or <unk> for girls and women ) . 
 = = Affiliate organizations = = 
 The ARF is considered the foremost organization in the Armenian diaspora , having established numerous Armenian schools , community centers , Scouting and athletic groups , relief societies , youth groups , camps , and other organs throughout the world . 
 The ARF also works as an umbrella organ for the Armenian Relief Society , the <unk> Armenian General Athletic Union , the <unk> Cultural Foundation , and many other community organizations . It operates the Armenian Youth Federation , which encourages the youth of the diaspora to join the political cause of the ARF and the Armenian people . 
 The ARF <unk> Student Association and the ARF Armen Karo Student Association are organizations of college and university students on various campuses and are the only ARF organizations whose membership is exclusively from this group . 
 = = = US and Canada = = = 
 Armenian National Committee of America , an @-@ ARF affiliate organization , is the strongest Armenian lobby organization in the United States . Its sister organization Armenian National Committee of Canada , operated in Canada . 
 = = = Other countries = = = 
 Argentina , Australia , Bulgaria , Canada , Cyprus , Egypt , England , France , Georgia , Germany , Greece , Iran , Israel , Russia , Switzerland , Syria , Uruguay subsequently have played a significant role in the campaign for the recognition of the Armenian Genocide in their respective countries . 
 = = Media = = 
 ARF and its affiliate organizations worldwide publish 11 newspapers : 4 daily and 7 weekly . Also , there are two TV channels , including one online . Two radio stations are aired everyday , including one online . 
 Periodicals 
 Television 
 Radio 
 = Mark Giordano = 
 Mark Giordano ( born October 3 , 1983 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey defenceman who currently serves as captain of the Calgary Flames of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . An undrafted player , Giordano signed with the Flames as a free agent in 2004 after playing two seasons of major junior hockey with Owen Sound Attack of the Ontario Hockey League ( OHL ) . Since making his debut in 2006 , Giordano has played his entire NHL career with the Flames but left the team for one season , 2007 – 08 , to play for Dynamo Moscow of the Russian Super League . 
 Praised for his leadership and offensive skills , Giordano is the Flames ' top defenceman and was named to play his first NHL All @-@ Star Game in 2015 . The Flames have also honoured him for his charitable contributions ; he was named recipient of the J. R. " Bud " McCaig Award in 2012 . Internationally , Giordano played with Team Canada at the 2010 IIHF World Championship and was a member of the 2007 Spengler Cup winning team . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Mark Giordano was born in Toronto , Ontario on October 3 , 1983 . His father , Paul , is a real estate agent and his mother , Anna , a hairdresser . Giordano has an older sister , Michelle , and had another older sister , Mia , who was killed in a car accident when he was 14 . He taps his helmet twice with his stick at the end of the national anthems before each game as a quiet tribute to his sister , whose death had a lasting impact on Giordano and his family and brought them closer together . 
 As a youth , Giordano played both hockey and baseball , but focused on hockey as the demands of both sports on his time increased . Giordano played his minor hockey in North York and attended Chaminade College School . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 Giordano played one season of Junior A hockey with the Brampton Capitals of the Ontario Junior Hockey League in 2001 – 02 where he scored 24 goals in the playoffs to help lead the Capitals to the Ontario provincial championship . He then moved up to major junior , playing two seasons with the Owen Sound Attack of the Ontario Hockey League ( OHL ) . He was the top scoring defenceman on the team for both years . As a 19 @-@ year @-@ old rookie , Giordano recorded 48 points for Owen Sound in 2002 – 03 and , as one of the top first @-@ year players in the league , was named to the OHL First All @-@ Rookie Team . 
 Despite his offensive success in junior , Giordano went unselected at the NHL Entry Draft . He accepted an invitation to attend the Phoenix Coyotes ' training camp where , according to then @-@ Owen Sound General Manager Mike Futa , Giordano impressed team officials but believed that he would be best served by playing a second season in the OHL . Giordano finished the 2003 – 04 season with 49 points . 
 After graduating from junior hockey , Giordano enrolled at York University and planned to study at its school of business when he received a late invitation from the Calgary Flames to attend their summer camp . Former Flames coach Jim Playfair recalled that Giordano stood out among the group of invitees and said that his skill and skating ability set him apart : " Darryl ( Sutter ) met with three or four of those kids and gave them all the same contracts : Three years in the American League , and if it works out for you , you 've got a career . Gio took it and ran with it . " The Flames signed him to a contract following the camp . 
 = = = Professional = = = 
 The Flames assigned Giordano to their American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate , the Lowell Lock Monsters , for the 2004 – 05 season where he scored 6 goals and added 10 assists in 66 games . He remained in the AHL for much of the 2005 – 06 season , transferring to Calgary 's new affiliate , the Omaha Ak @-@ Sar @-@ Ben Knights . Giordano led the Knights in scoring , recording 16 goals and 58 points in 73 games . Additionally , he was second among defencemen in the AHL in goal scoring and fourth in points . The Flames recalled him to Calgary at mid @-@ season , and he made his NHL debut on January 30 , 2006 , against the St. Louis Blues . Giordano appeared in seven games with the Flames , and recorded his first NHL point with an assist on April 8 , 2006 , against the Vancouver Canucks . In the 2006 – 07 season , Giordano played only five games in Omaha as he spent the majority of the campaign in Calgary . In 48 games with the Flames , he recorded 7 goals and 15 points . Giordano scored his first two NHL goals on October 14 , 2006 , against the Toronto Maple Leafs . 
 Unable to come to terms on a new contract with the Flames prior to the 2007 – 08 season , Giordano left the NHL to sign with HC Dynamo Moscow of the Russian Super League . According to Playfair , Giordano did not sign in Russia over money . Instead , he left due to the fact that he felt he had proven what he could do in the AHL and , lacking a guarantee that he would be in the NHL , sought a higher calibre league in which to play . He scored 4 goals and 13 points in 50 games with Dynamo , and played with the winning Canadian team at the 2007 Spengler Cup . The Canadian national team named him an alternate at the 2008 IIHF World Championship in case of injury to a roster player , however he never appeared in a game . Though he feared his decision to leave for Russia would damage his relationship with the Flames , Giordano and the team came to terms on a three @-@ year contract that brought him back to Calgary for the 2008 – 09 NHL season . 
 Giordano appeared in 58 games for the Flames and scored 19 points before a shoulder injury ended his season . He required surgery to repair the damage suffered in a game against the Minnesota Wild . He recovered in time to begin the 2009 – 10 season , but several new additions to Calgary 's defensive corps left him concerned about his position with the team . Instead , he solidified his place on the roster with a career year ; Giordano set personal highs in goals ( 11 ) , points ( 30 ) and was + 17 for the Flames . The Hockey News named him one of the most underrated players in the league , and he was invited to join Team Canada at the 2010 IIHF World Championship . Giordano led the team 's defencemen with three goals in the tournament and added an assist in seven games . 
 Despite having the option to become an unrestricted free agent following the 2010 – 11 season , Giordano opted to remain in Calgary and signed a five @-@ year , $ 20 million contract extension with the Flames on October 29 , 2010 . He led the team 's defencemen in scoring and set another career high with 43 points in 82 games . Giordano missed several weeks of the 2011 – 12 season after suffering a torn hamstring . The injury caused Giordano , who was named an alternate captain prior to the season 's start , to miss 21 games . He finished with 27 points in 61 games , then scored 15 points in 47 games in the lockout @-@ shortened 2012 – 13 season . 
 Giordano was named the 19th captain in Flames history on September 20 , 2013 , as he succeeded Jarome Iginla , who was traded late in the 2012 – 13 season . Giordano was praised by his teammates and coaches staff for both his long tenure with the franchise and for his playing style : Giordano played in all situations for the Flames , was one of the hardest workers on the team and was willing to sacrifice himself to block a shot or defend his teammates . Head coach Bob Hartley praised Giordano 's influence on his teammates as the rebuilding Flames team established an identity as a squad which was noted across the league for its work ethic . 
 A blocked shot injured Giordano early in the 2013 – 14 season as he suffered a broken ankle in late October . He missed 18 games due to the injury , during which the Flames gained only five wins . He still recorded career highs of 13 goals and 47 points . Though he was not named to the team , Giordano 's growing reputation placed him on Team Canada 's short list for the 2014 Winter Olympics , and he received a first place vote ( finishing 10th overall ) in voting for the James Norris Memorial Trophy as the league 's top defenceman . 
 A surge in offensive production from Giordano and fellow defencemen T. J. Brodie and Dennis Wideman resulted in the Flames being one of the NHL 's biggest surprises early in the 2014 – 15 season . Predicted to finish near the bottom of the standings before the season , the Flames instead began December with one of the best records in the league , in large part due to the play of Giordano , who led all NHL defencemen with 25 points , four better than Brodie . His plus @-@ minus of + 14 ranked him second in the league . The NHL recognized Giordano 's early season play by naming him its First Star of the month of November . He was subsequently named as the Flames ' representative at the 60th National Hockey League All @-@ Star Game . Giordano played his 500th career game on February 2 , 2015 , in a victory over the Winnipeg Jets . He set a personal best by scoring his 48th point of the season in a 3 – 1 win over the New Jersey Devils on February 25 , but also suffered an injury in the game . The Flames announced one week later that he required surgery for a completely torn biceps tendon ; the estimated recovery time of four to five months meant that his season was over . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Giordano and his wife are spokespeople for Habitat for Humanity . They launched a program called " 5 @-@ for @-@ 5 " in January 2011 that aimed to build five homes for the organization , one in the Calgary area and four in Africa and Asia . Giordano donated $ 25 @,@ 000 of the $ 130 @,@ 000 cost himself , and his contribution was matched by the Flames charitable foundation . The team honoured him for his work with Habitat for Humanity and the Flames Foundation for Life by naming him the recipient of the J. R. " Bud " McCaig Award in 2012 . Prior to the 2014 – 15 season , Giordano and his wife launched another initiative , known as the " Team Giordano Project " , where they and the Flames ' charitable arm donated funding to three Calgary schools to supply new gym equipment and computers , as well as to visit the schools and offer mentorship to the students . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 = Te Quiero ( Ricardo Arjona song ) = 
 " Te Quiero " is a latin pop song by Guatemalan recording artist Ricardo Arjona , released on 5 July 2012 as the third single from his thirteenth studio album , Independiente ( 2011 ) . The song was written by Arjona , who produced it with longtime collaborators Dan Warner and Lee Levin under their stage name Los Gringos . Additional recording work was handled by Peter Wallace , Matt Rollings , Carlos " Cabral " Junior and Isaías García . 
 The song became Arjona 's fifth single to reach number one on the US Billboard Top Latin Songs , his ninth to do so on the Latin Pop Songs chart and third on Latin Tropical Airplay . It also charted at No.10 on the Billboard Mexican Airplay chart . An accompanying music video for " Te Quiero " was released in June 2012 . It was directed by Gabriel Blanco and filmed during Arjona 's concert shows at the Vélez Sarsfield Stadium in Buenos Aires , Argentina , as part of his Metamorfosis World Tour , and marks the first time Arjona releases a music video recorded from his live performances while on tour . 
 = = Background = = 
 Independiente is the first album Arjona released as an independent artist , and through his own record label , Metamorfosis , a company he created to refocus his career . Presided by Arjona and some friends , Metamorfosis is based in Miami and Mexico City , and also includes the photographer and director Ricardo Calderón , Universal Music México 's executive Humberto Calderon and BMG 's Miriam Sommerz . Although the album is marketed with the new label , distribution was handled by Warner Music . Arjona commented many times , that he considered the way he decided to go independent raised more compromise than freedom , saying that " Inside the word ' Independent ' , even when it sounds like extreme freedom , there 's a big amount of compromise and the responsibility of being able to administrate , in the best way possible , such independence . " 
 Independiente was composed and written within one year , and marks the fourth time Arjona had collaborated with Tommy Torres , who had helped writing , composing , producing and providing backing vocals . The other three albums in which the two artists had worked together are Quién Dijo Ayer , in which Torres helped producing the singles " Quién " and " Quiero " , and offering additional work on the new versions of Arjona 's hits ; 5to Piso , and Adentro , respectively . Also , in the album , Arjona returned to his classic and trademark sound , which Torres has helped crafting it since six years now , after the drastic change he made in Poquita Ropa . On that album , the artist made use of the fewest instruments possible , simplifying his sound , and introducing what he called a " stripped @-@ down acoustic effort " of his music . 
 Weeks before the release of Independiente , Arjona issued a letter in which he talked about his past relations with recording companies . In the letter , he revealed that he entered in his first record label as an exchange , commenting that " a producer , friend of mine , told them [ the record label ] that if they don 't sign me they won 't sign two artists he had [ at that time ] " , and that he received the " minimum royalty percentage " out from his most successful albums . Billboard notes that although other groups have decided to launch independently their works after having a contract with major record labels , Arjona is by far the most important artist in the Latin pop to follow this trend . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Te Quiero " is a latin pop song written and produced by Arjona , alongside longtime collaborators Dan Warner and Lee Levin under their stagename Los Gringos . Roger Hudson provided additional background vocals for the song , and Matt Rollings , Peter Wallace , Carlos " Cabral " Junior and Isaías García served as recording engineers , along with Warner and Levin . " Te Quiero " was mixed by David Thoener in The Blue Grotto at Nashville , Tennessee and mastered by Tom Coyne in Sterling Sound at New York City . 
 The song 's composition is heavily based on drums and guitars , along with additional Hammond B @-@ 3 , bass and percussion elements . David Jeffries from Allmusic , on his review of Independiente , stated that the song " builds into a full @-@ band rave @-@ up during its choruses . " A live version of " Te Quiero " was made and used on the music video for the song , and was included on the single release . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 The music video for " Te Quiero " was released on 20 June 2012 . The clip was filmed during Arjona 's concert shows at the Vélez Sarsfield Stadium in Buenos Aires , Argentina , as part of his Metamorfosis World Tour . The video was directed by Gabriel Blanco and was produced by Tamir <unk> . This is the first time Arjona releases a music video recorded from his live performances while on tour . The clip starts showing behind the scenes shots of Arjona , his team and his fans while the song begins to play . Then , it shows the singer on stage singing the song in front of the public at the Velez Stadium , interpolated with shots from people during the performance singing the song . The live version of the song used on the clip was included on the single release of the song . As of 14 August 2012 , the video has reached 2 @.@ 1 million views on YouTube . 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 " Te Quiero " was in the set list for a televised program in 2011 . The special included guest singers such as Gaby Moreno , Ricky Muñoz ( from Mexican band Intocable ) and Paquita la del Barrio . Broadcast by Televisa , the program was made to showcast the new fourteen songs included on Independiente . Ricky Muñoz commented that he was " happy to do things for Ricardo [ Arjona ] " and elaborated that they met each other " some time ago " and that it was " a very special situation . " The show was later broadcast on 5 November 2011 by Canal de las Estrellas . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Te Quiero " – 4 : 38 
 " Te Quiero " ( Live ) – 4 : 56 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are taken from Independiente liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Superman : Ultimate Flight = 
 Superman : Ultimate Flight is a steel flying roller coaster designed by Bolliger & Mabillard . Themed to the popular comic book character , Superman : Ultimate Flight has been installed at three Six Flags theme parks around the United States : Six Flags Over Georgia , Six Flags Great Adventure and Six Flags Great America . Superman : Ultimate Flight simulates flying by positioning its passengers parallel to the track , supported by harnesses and facing the ground through most of the ride . In the station , riders board the train sitting down . After the train is locked and checked , the trains are raised into the flying position . After the ride , the seats are lowered back into the sitting position for the next round of riders . 
 = = History = = 
 The first flying roller coaster , in which passengers ride parallel with the track , was launched in 1997 at Granada Studios Tour as <unk> Total . Shortly after , Bolliger & Mabillard began designing their own flying roller coaster . In January 2002 , both Alton Towers in the United Kingdom and Six Flags Over Georgia in the United States announced their intentions to build Bolliger & Mabillard " Flying Coasters " . On March 16 , 2002 , Alton Towers opened the first installation , Air . Less than a month later , Superman : Ultimate Flight opened at Six Flags Over Georgia , in Austell , Georgia . 
 Six Flags ordered two more versions of the attraction for the 2003 season for Six Flags Great Adventure in Jackson Township , New Jersey , and Six Flags Great America in Gurnee , Illinois . Six Flags Great Adventure 's version of the ride officially opened to the public on April 17 , 2003 . In preparation for the ride 's installation at Six Flags Great America , the park removed Shockwave , an Arrow Dynamics roller coaster that was located on part of the park 's parking lot . Grading works also had to take place to convert the parking lot into something more suitable for Superman : Ultimate Flight . The ride at Six Flags Great America opened on May 3 , 2003 . 
 In 2006 , a clone of the Superman : Ultimate Flight installations opened as Crystal Wing at the Happy Valley amusement park in Beijing , China . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Whilst all three Superman : Ultimate Flight roller coasters are the same model , there are some differences between them . All three feature a top height of 106 feet ( 32 m ) and a 100 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) first drop . They all reach a top speed of 51 miles per hour ( 82 km / h ) and feature two inversions . Superman : Ultimate Flight 's signature element is its 78 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 24 m ) pretzel loop ; it was the first roller coaster in the world to feature one . A single cycle of the ride takes nearly 3 minutes to complete . 
 The original version at Six Flags Over Georgia features a dual @-@ platform loading station , permitting three trains to operate simultaneously . Each train has seven cars , with each car carrying four riders side @-@ by @-@ side in a single row . The other two versions use a more standard single @-@ platform loading station . While this allows a maximum of only two trains to operate at a time , each train compensates by having one additional row for a total of eight rows per train . 
 The length of the ride also varies between the locations . Both the Georgia and New Jersey installations feature a track length of 2 @,@ 759 feet ( 841 m ) , while the Illinois version features a track length of 2 @,@ 798 feet ( 853 m ) . The ride reaches its maximum speed of 51 miles per hour ( 82 km / h ) at the bottom of the 78 foot tall ( 24m ) pretzel loop , not on the first drop because the ride dives slightly below ground level . 
 The New Jersey and Illinois versions were also built on what used to be sections of parking lot . Georgia 's version was built on hilly terrain , and hence there is a short tunnel when the track enters the 270 degree helix leading into the heartline roll . All three roller coasters were manufactured by Clermont Steel Fabricators located in Batavia , Ohio . 
 As its name suggests , Superman : Ultimate Flight is themed after DC Comics ' Superman character . The track of all three rides is red , with yellow rails and blue supports . The rides ' queues are contained within each ride 's footprint and contain various elements of Superman theming . The installations at Six Flags Great America and Six Flag Great Adventure have dedicated gift shops near the ride 's exit that sell a variety of DC Comics merchandise . 
 = = Experience = = 
 = = = Station and loading = = = 
 Once in the station , riders of Superman : Ultimate Flight board a train sitting down , in a similar style to inverted roller coasters . Riders are restrained through a padded over @-@ the @-@ shoulder harness and a lap bar . At the ankles , two flaps hold the legs in position and close as the harness is locked in place . After the train is fully locked and checked , the trains are raised into the flying position and depart the station . 
 = = = Ride layout = = = 
 Superman : Ultimate Flight begins as the train turns to the right and begins to climb the 106 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 32 m ) chain lift hill . After cresting the top of the lift hill , the train drops 100 feet ( 30m ) to the right at 51 miles per hour ( 82 km / h ) and prepares to enter the pretzel loop . In a pretzel loop , a train swoops up to a height of 78 feet ( 24 m ) before diving toward the ground , looping back under the starting point . At the bottom of the loop , riders face upward and experience strong , positive g forces . To complete the pretzel loop , the train climbs back to the top of the element , parallel to where it started . After exiting the element , the train then enters a 270 @-@ degree turn to the left , dropping back through the middle of the pretzel loop . 
 Next , the train passes through two consecutive horseshoe turns , first to the right and then to the left . As the name suggests , Horseshoe turns are highly banked horseshoe @-@ shaped turns which feature track entering from roughly the same direction as where it exits . As the train exits the second horseshoe , it swoops down and begins a 270 @-@ degree helix to the right , which leads into the ride 's second inversion , an inline twist . The inline twist sees riders perform a full rotation around the track , starting from a position where they are facing downward . After completing the twist , the train reaches the brake run and a final right @-@ hand turn that leads back into the station . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Superman : Ultimate Flight was generally well received . Arthur Levine from About.com rated the ride four out of five stars , describing the flying sensation as wonderful . He also praised Six Flags for the choice of theme , saying , " the Superman theme is ideally suited for the flying concept and adds a nice touch " . Alex Bove of Ultimate Rollercoaster also reviewed the ride favorably : " From its comfortable restraints , silky ride and delightful pacing to its avian aesthetics , Superman : Ultimate Flight demonstrates B & M 's unmatched attention to detail and their genuine desire to create enjoyable rides that surprise us over and over again " . Jeremy Thompson of Roller Coaster Philosophy compared the ride unfavorably to Batman : The Ride , which also appears at all three parks : " Batman is gritty and intense and based on quick variations in the layout , while Superman is graceful and slower paced , based on creating a singular flight sensation , and quite honestly it 's all a tad boring " . However , he added that the " flying position does transform the ride experience into something relatively different from the rest " . 
 In Amusement Today 's annual Golden Ticket Awards , Superman : Ultimate Flight was ranked in the top 50 steel roller coasters numerous times since its opening . It peaked at position 35 in 2004 , before dropping off the poll in 2007 . 
 In Mitch Hawker 's worldwide Best Roller Coaster Poll , Superman : Ultimate Flight was ranked as three separate entries from 2002 through to 2010 . The entries were grouped from 2012 onward . The ride 's ranking in the polls is shown in the table below . 
 = The Wounded Montenegrin = 
 The Wounded Montenegrin ( Serbian Latin : Ranjeni <unk> ) is the title of four nearly identical compositions by the artist Paja Jovanović depicting a wounded youth surrounded by peasants in traditional clothing , likely during the Montenegrin – Ottoman War of 1876 – 78 . 
 The first rendering garnered praise from critics , and won the first @-@ place prize at the Academy of Fine Arts ' annual art exhibition in Vienna in 1882 . Given its success , Jovanović was granted an Austro @-@ Hungarian government scholarship and entered into a contract with the French Gallery in London to produce a series of paintings on Balkan life . Art historians consider The Wounded Montenegrin one of Jovanović 's best Orientalist works . Jovanović went on to complete three further versions of the composition in the ensuing decades , three of which are oil paintings . The first is currently on display at the Matica Srpska gallery in Novi Sad , the second and third are in private collections , and the fourth is housed at the Museum of Yugoslav History in Belgrade . 
 = = Description = = 
 The original oil painting measures 114 by 189 centimetres ( 45 in × 74 in ) . It shows a muscular , wounded youth surrounded by ten peasants in a humble , single @-@ room dwelling . The peasants wear hand @-@ sewn shirts , rough leggings and leather shoes . They stand over a dirt floor , and in the background , a collection of eating utensils hang precariously from a makeshift shelf . The youth is cradled in the arms of a crouching , shaved @-@ headed warrior . The two are surrounded by a pair of heavily armed men on either side of them . Nearby , a light @-@ haired girl quietly grieves . To the right of these figures stands a grief @-@ stricken old man , himself surrounded by a number of figures in folk attire . To the far right , two figures can be seen standing inauspiciously in the shadows . The artist 's signature , rendered as <unk> P. , can be found at the bottom right . 
 Jovanović composed a total of four versions of The Wounded Montenegrin , three oil paintings and one sketch . What distinguishes the first rendering from subsequent versions is its size ( it is the largest by far ) , detailed precision , and the artist 's removal of the two figures seen lingering in the shadows in the original . The second version , an oil painting , measures 100 by 152 centimetres ( 39 in × 60 in ) . The artist 's signature , P. Ivanovitch , can be seen at the bottom right . The third rendition is a sketch measuring 23 by 35 centimetres ( 9 @.@ 1 in × 13 @.@ 8 in ) , with the artist 's signature , Pa . Jo . , at the bottom right . The fourth version , another oil painting , measures 70 by 103 centimetres ( 28 in × 41 in ) . The artist 's signature , Paul Ivanovitch , can be seen at the bottom right . 
 Jovanović did not assign titles to his works , as he felt that if a painting was well composed viewers would be able to deduce the title themselves . Thus , the majority of the artist 's works are referred to by a number of different titles . The Wounded Montenegrin also appears under the titles The Wounded Herzegovinian ( Ranjeni <unk> ) , The Wounded Bosnian ( Ranjeni Bosanac ) , Sad Encounter ( <unk> <unk> ) , Sad Farewell ( <unk> <unk> ) and Unsuccessful <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Paja Jovanović ( 1859 – 1957 ) was one of the most prominent Serbian realist painters of the late 19th century . During his early career , he came to be identified with Orientalist painting , depicting scenes from the Balkans , which were then under the control of the Ottoman Empire . Between 1877 and 1882 , he attended the Academy of Fine Arts in Vienna , where he came under the mentorship of painting instructors Christian Griepenkerl and Leopold Müller . Griepenkerl taught the young Jovanović the underlying structural principles of Renaissance and Baroque art , thus helping him better understand spatial problems and the arrangement of large numbers of figures , both moving and static . Müller encouraged Jovanović to take a naturalist approach to painting , recording only what he could see and relying as little as possible on his imagination . It was in this context that Müller instructed Jovanović to make direct studies of Balkan life during his visits home , purposely steering him towards Orientalist painting . 
 Orientalist works , vignettes of " exotic life " in the Middle East , North Africa and the Balkans , were quite popular with Central and Western European art collectors in the late 19th and early 20th centuries . At the time of The Wounded Montenegrin 's composition , events in the Balkans had been making headline news in European capitals for decades . The Montenegrins had fought and lost the 1861 – 62 Montenegrin – Ottoman War . This was followed by about a decade of peace , but in 1872 , the Ottomans massacred more than 20 Montenegrins . The Herzegovina Uprising of 1875 prompted Montenegro and Serbia to declare war on the Ottoman Empire , sparking the Great Eastern Crisis of 1875 – 78 . The wars ended in the Treaty of Berlin in 1878 , but occasional cross @-@ border skirmishing continued until the early 1880s . Although Jovanović never specified , it is likely the painting is set during the 1876 – 78 Montenegrin – Ottoman War . 
 = = = Provenance = = = 
 Jovanović composed the first , and most famous , version of the The Wounded Montenegrin in 1882 while studying at the Vienna Academy . It was sold to a merchant named Schwartz in Vienna later that year . Within several months , Schwartz sold the painting to a Budapest casino for 1 @,@ 000 florins . After World War II , it came into the possession of the Yugoslav embassy in Budapest , which gifted it to the Matica Srpska gallery in 1971 , where it is on permanent display . It is catalogued under inventory code <unk> Y / 3912 . 
 The second version of The Wounded Montenegrin was composed in 1891 . It was initially owned by Arthur Toot & Sons , a London art dealer , before coming into the possession of the Salon . Afterwards , it entered into a private collection , and remained in private ownership until 1989 , when it was auctioned off at Sotheby 's . Between 1989 and 1997 , it was housed at a museum in Rome , but sold again thereafter . It is currently in a private collection . 
 The third version , composed after 1900 , is part of a private collection . The fourth , painted in the 1920s , was in a private collection until World War II . After the war , it was confiscated by the communists . Following the death of Yugoslav leader Josip Broz Tito , it was put on display at Tito 's mausoleum , the House of Flowers . It is currently on display at the Museum of Yugoslav History , and catalogued under the inventory code 59 R. 
 = = Analysis = = 
 In line with Müller 's advice , Jovanović avoided creating a sentimental work and focused instead on depicting characters and situations he observed during his time in the Balkans . This differentiates the painting from other Orientalist paintings of the day , which were based on travel accounts rather than first @-@ hand experience . The art historian Lilien Filipovitch @-@ Robinson notes that the grouping of the figures and their interactions with one another are reminiscent of images of the lamentation over the body of Christ . The right half of the scene recedes into shadow while the brightly illuminated left , where the principal figures are located , appears to expand towards the viewer . Jovanović thus directs the viewer 's eye from left to right , foreground to background , through the circular pattern of the groupings as well as the diagonal lines of the peasants ' swords . In line with Müller 's teachings regarding light and colour , Jovanović adds touches of bright red to give warmth and movement to the scene , making it appear as though it is unfolding before the viewer . The brushwork is varied , ranging from the smooth broad strokes that define the solidity of the walls to quick short ones that make it appear like the figures are in motion . 
 Filipovitch @-@ Robinson praises Jovanović 's " skillful handling " of linear and aerial perspective . She notes that the work is devoid of the " studio @-@ contrived quality " of other Orientalist paintings , and argues that Jovanović 's main goal was not to depict a particular historical event but rather to remind his audience of the Balkan peoples ' ongoing struggle against the Ottoman Turks and provide a human face to those engaged in that struggle . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 The painting was first shown in public in 1882 , at the Vienna Academy 's annual student exhibition , which exhibited works produced during the 1881 – 82 academic year . It was well received by art critics and Jovanović 's peers , who judged it to be the exhibition 's finest work and bestowed him the first @-@ place prize . Jovanović also received an Austro @-@ Hungarian government scholarship . The exact amount accorded to the artist is disputed . Petar Petrović , the curator of the National Museum of Serbia , writes that the scholarship amounted to 300 florins . Art historians Radmila Antić and Nikola <unk> state the scholarship amounted to 1 @,@ 000 florins . Jovanović 's triumph at the student exhibition and the subsequent scholarship gave him the means to travel over the summer holidays , during which he came up with a number of ideas for future paintings , such as The Fencing Lesson ( <unk> ) . Winning the Vienna Academy prize established him as a respected painter of Orientalist works and set the stage for further recognition and success . In 1883 , Jovanović entered into a contract with Ernest <unk> 's French Gallery in London to produce a series of paintings on Balkan life . This contract assured him life @-@ long financial security . 
 Art historians consider The Wounded Montenegrin one of Jovanović 's best Orientalist works . Petrović calls it the " crowning achievement " of the artist 's studies under Müller . Jovanović went on to paint a number of other Orientalist pieces , notably The Snake Charmer ( 1887 ) . 
 = = = Endnotes = = = 
 = Walter de Beauchamp ( nobleman ) = 
 Walter de Beauchamp ( sometimes Walter I of Beauchamp , Walter of Beauchamp , Walter I de Beauchamp , or Walter de <unk> ; died between 1130 and 1133 ) was a medieval nobleman and Sheriff of Worcestershire . Married to the daughter of one of his predecessors as sheriff . Nothing is known for sure of his background before he appears as a witness to royal charters between 1108 and 1111 . Beauchamp also inherited offices in the royal household from his father @-@ in @-@ law , and also appears to have been a royal forester . He and another nobleman divided some of the lands of his father @-@ in @-@ law , but disagreements about the division lasted until the 12th century between the two families . He died between 1130 and 1133 , and one of his descendants later became Earl of Warwick . 
 = = Background and family = = 
 Beauchamp is sometimes known as Walter de Beauchamp of Elmley , to distinguish him from the members of the Beauchamp family of Bedford . He married the daughter of Urse d 'Abetot , who is usually named Emeline , although her name is not given in contemporary records . Urse d 'Abetot was the Sheriff of Worcestershire from around 1069 to around 1108 . Beauchamp may have been a tenant of his father @-@ in @-@ law prior to his marriage . Nothing is known for sure of Beauchamp 's background , and he first witnessed a royal charter sometime between 1108 and 1111 . Some documents suggest that his father may have been named Peveral de Beauchamp and that he had a brother named William Peveral de Beauchamp , but the only identifiable Peveral is younger than Walter . 
 = = Sheriff = = 
 In the 1110s , Beauchamp became Sheriff of Worcestershire , holding the office until 1130 . Some sources state he received the office in 1114 , and others place the acquisition of the office between December 1113 and April 1116 . Beauchamp inherited most of d 'Abetot 's lands and the hereditary office of Sheriff of Worcestershire when Roger d 'Abetot , Urse 's son , forfeited his lands and offices after being exiled by Henry I for murder . King Henry I of England granted Beauchamp the right to hunt wolves and foxes in the royal forests of Worcestershire . Along with the right to hunt in the royal forests came a grant of the right to keep pheasants on his own lands , and the right to fine anyone hunting the birds without his permission . 
 Beauchamp probably held the office of royal forester for Worcestershire as well as sheriff . The evidence for this is that after Beauchamp 's death , his son William was granted the revenues from the royal forests of Worcestershire at the same rate as his father had held them ; this strongly implies that the elder held the office of forester . The historian Judith Green felt that Walter de Beauchamp might possibly have held the office of constable , which had been held by his father @-@ in @-@ law , although the historian C. Warren Hollister felt that Beauchamp definitely did hold the office . He also a held the royal office of dispenser , an office which later became known as a butler . He acquired this because his wife inherited the office from her father . The date when he acquired the office is unknown . While a member of the royal household , Beauchamp witnessed a number of royal charters , mainly when the king was in England . 
 Beauchamp and the Bishop of Worcester had a dispute over the lands that Beauchamp inherited from d 'Abetot . The dispute caused the two sides to agree to the creation of the Worcester Survey , a land survey undertaken in Worcestershire sometime between 1108 and 1118 that shows changes in land ownership after the Domesday Book . 
 D 'Abetot 's widow Adeliza granted her dower lands in the county of Worcestershire to Beauchamp , which was confirmed by King Henry sometime between 1123 and 1129 , although the document cannot be dated more precisely than that . In 1130 , at Michaelmas , Henry allowed Beauchamp to not pay geld on his lands in Berkshire , and he is mentioned in the 1130 Pipe Roll as still living . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Sometime between 1130 and 1133 , Beauchamp died and his son William de Beauchamp took over his lands . Stephen de Beauchamp , a tenant on the Beauchamp lands and a friend of Robert of Gloucester , was likely a younger son of Walter 's . The historian David Crouch says that another son was Walter , who is recorded as William 's brother and was a follower of Waleran , Count of Meulan . Beauchamp was the ancestor of the Beauchamp family of Elmley in Worcestershire , a member of which , William de Beauchamp , became Earl of Warwick . 
 The lands and offices of Urse 's brother Robert were divided between Beauchamp and Robert Marmion . Marmion and Beauchamp disagreed about the division of the lands , leading to a long dispute between the two families that was only settled in the late 12th century . Some sources state that another daughter of Urse d 'Abetot married Robert Marmion , which was the reason for the division of the lands and offices between the two men . Other sources are less sure , accepting this as one possibility among several for the divided inheritance between the Marmion and Beauchamp families . Because there are no contemporary sources showing that Urse had any children besides his son and the daughter who married Beauchamp , another possibility is that Urse 's brother Robert had a daughter who married Marmion , and that Urse managed to acquire part of her inheritance on the strength of his friendship with King William II of England . 
 = British Alpine Hannibal Expedition = 
 The British Alpine Hannibal Expedition was an experimental archeology event that took place in 1959 . British engineer John Hoyte led an expedition that tried to reenact aspects of Hannibal 's legendary crossing of the Alps during the Second Punic War in 218 BCE . The group successfully took the female Asian elephant Jumbo , provided by a zoo in Turin , from France over the Col du Mont Cenis into Italy . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the Carthaginian defeat in the First Punic War of 264 – 241 BCE , Hamilcar Barca secured an extensive territory in the Iberian peninsula for Carthage . At the beginning of the Second Punic War in 218 BCE , his son Hannibal took an army of perhaps 50 @,@ 000 men and 37 war elephants from Hispania ( modern @-@ day Spain ) to Italy , where he led a 15 year campaign against Rome . Hannibal avoided the coastal route , and took his army over the Alps . His march has been described by ancient historians Polybius and Livy . The exact route , however , has been subject of long but inconclusive scholarly discourse . In his 1955 book Alps and elephants : Hannibal 's march , Gavin de Beer lists 12 possible candidates from 30 different books . 
 = = The expedition = = 
 In 1955 , The Times published a debate about the route Hannibal might have taken over the Alps . This debate came to the attention of John Hoyte , then an engineering student at Cambridge University . Hoyte had an interest in both history and mountain climbing , and spent the summer of 1956 with friends hiking the Alps and comparing possible routes to the ancient descriptions . The group came to the conclusion that the Col de <unk> was the most likely pass , an opinion still supported by some modern historians . 
 A few years later , a friend suggested to test this theory with an actual elephant . Hoyte wrote letters to the British consuls in Lyon , France , Geneva , Switzerland , and Turin , enquiring about the possibility of obtaining an elephant for the experiment , but without a serious expectation of success . However , the Turin Zoo had just acquired a female Asian elephant , Jumbo , who was trained as a circus animal . The owner of the zoo volunteered Jumbo and became the first sponsor of the expedition . Hoyte put together a team of 8 people , including Richard Jolly as the expedition secretary and Colonel John Hickman , Lecturer ( later Reader ) in Veterinary Surgery at the University of Cambridge Veterinary School , who had gained experience with elephants during World War II in Burma . The group obtained insurance for Jumbo from Lloyd 's of London and further sponsorship from Life magazine , which later published a 7 page photo report . 
 The expedition started in late July 1959 in <unk> , France . It followed the valley of the Arc river and then ascended towards the Col de <unk> . However , the route up to the pass had become narrowed and dangerous due to rockfall . The group retracted down into the valley and crossed the Col du Mont Cenis , another pass suggested for Hannibal 's route by none less than French emperor Napoleon . After 10 days of travel , the expedition successfully " invaded " Susa in Italy . 
 The members of the expedition originally planned to call the 5 @,@ 700 pound ( 2 @.@ 6 t ) elephant <unk> , however , the animal could not be made to respond to the new name and thus remained Jumbo . Jumbo was 11 years old and equipped with leather boots and knee pads for the most treacherous passages . A specially made coat was provided to keep her warm . Despite a diet consisting of 150 pounds ( 68 kg ) of hay , 50 pounds ( 23 kg ) of apples , 40 pounds ( 18 kg ) of bread , 20 pounds ( 9 @.@ 1 kg ) of carrots , and a vitamin B supplement per day , she lost an estimated 300 pounds ( 140 kg ) during the first 4 days of the trip , and nearly 500 pounds ( 230 kg ) in total . On arrival in Italy , she consumed cake and a Magnum bottle of Chianti . 
 In 1960 , Hoyte published a report on the expedition as Trunk Road for Hannibal : With an Elephant Over the Alps . Expedition member Cynthia Pilkington published the book " Elephant Over the Alps " in 1961 , telling the story of the expedition . 
 = Sayf al @-@ Dawla = 
 Ali ibn Abu 'l @-@ Hayja ' Abdallah ibn Hamdan ibn al @-@ Harith Sayf al @-@ Dawla al @-@ Taghlibi ( Arabic : سيف الدولة أبو <unk> ابن <unk> ) , more commonly known simply by his laqab ( honorific epithet ) of Sayf al @-@ Dawla ( " Sword of the Dynasty " ) , was the founder of the Emirate of Aleppo , encompassing most of northern Syria and parts of western Jazira , and the brother of al @-@ Hasan ibn Abdallah ibn Hamdan ( better known as Nasir al @-@ Dawla ) . 
 The most prominent member of the Hamdanid dynasty , Sayf al @-@ Dawla originally served under his elder brother in the latter 's attempts to establish his control over the weak Abbasid government in Baghdad during the early 940s CE . After the failure of these endeavours , the ambitious Sayf al @-@ Dawla turned towards Syria , where he confronted the ambitions of the Ikhshidids of Egypt to control the province . After two wars with them , his authority over northern Syria , centred at Aleppo , and the western Jazira , centred at Mayyafariqin , was recognized by the Ikhshidids and the Caliph . A series of tribal rebellions plagued his realm until 955 , but he was successful in overcoming them and maintaining the allegiance of the most important Arab tribes . Sayf al @-@ Dawla 's court at Aleppo became the centre of a vibrant cultural life , and the literary cycle he gathered around him , including the great al @-@ Mutanabbi , helped ensure his fame for posterity . 
 Sayf al @-@ Dawla was widely celebrated for his role in the Arab – Byzantine Wars , facing a resurgent Byzantine Empire that in the early 10th century had begun to reconquer Muslim territories . In this struggle against a much superior enemy , he launched raids deep into Byzantine territory and managed to score a few successes , and generally held the upper hand until 955 . After that , the new Byzantine commander , Nikephoros Phokas , and his lieutenants spearheaded an offensive that broke Hamdanid power . The Byzantines annexed Cilicia , and even occupied Aleppo itself briefly in 962 . Sayf al @-@ Dawla 's final years were marked by military defeats , his own growing disability as a result of disease , and a decline in his authority that led to revolts by some of his closest lieutenants . He died in early 967 , leaving a much weakened realm , which by 969 had lost Antioch and the Syrian littoral to the Byzantines and become a Byzantine tributary . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Origin and family = = = 
 Sayf al @-@ Dawla was born Ali ibn Abdallah , the second son of Abdallah Abu 'l @-@ Hayja ibn Hamdan ( died 929 ) , son of Hamdan ibn Hamdun ibn al @-@ Harith , who gave his name to the Hamdanid dynasty . The Hamdanids were a branch of the Banu Taghlib , an Arab tribe resident in the area of the Jazira ( Upper Mesopotamia ) since pre @-@ Islamic times . The <unk> had traditionally controlled Mosul and its region until the late 9th century , when the Abbasid government tried to impose firmer control over the province . Hamdan ibn Hamdun was one of the most determined Taghlibi leaders in opposing this move . Notably , in his effort to fend off the Abbasids , he secured the alliance of the Kurds living in the mountains north of Mosul , a fact which would be of considerable importance in his family 's later fortunes . Family members intermarried with Kurds , who were also prominent in the Hamdanid military . 
 Hamdan was defeated in 895 and imprisoned with his relatives , but his son Husayn ibn Hamdan managed to secure the family 's future . He raised troops for the Caliph among the Taghlib in exchange for tax remissions , and established a commanding influence in the Jazira by acting as a mediator between the Abbasid authorities and the Arab and Kurdish population . It was this strong local base which allowed the family to survive its often strained relationship with the central Abbasid government in Baghdad during the early 10th century . Husayn was a successful general , distinguishing himself against the Kharijites and the Tulunids , but was disgraced after supporting the failed usurpation of Ibn al @-@ Mu 'tazz in 908 . His younger brother Ibrahim was governor of Diyar Rabi 'a ( the province around Nasibin ) in 919 and after his death in the next year he was succeeded by another brother , Dawud . Sayf al @-@ Dawla 's father Abdallah served as emir ( governor ) of Mosul in 905 / 6 – 913 / 4 , was repeatedly disgraced and rehabilitated , until re @-@ assuming control of Mosul in 925 / 6 . Enjoying firm relations with the powerful Mu 'nis al @-@ Muzaffar , he later played a leading role in the short @-@ lived usurpation of al @-@ Qahir against al @-@ Muqtadir in 929 , and was killed during its suppression . 
 Despite the coup 's failure and his death , Abdallah had been able to consolidate his control over Mosul , becoming the virtual founder of a Hamdanid @-@ ruled emirate there . During his long absences in Baghdad in his final years , Abdallah relegated authority over Mosul to his eldest son , al @-@ Hasan , the future Nasir al @-@ Dawla . After Abdallah 's death , Hasan 's position in Mosul was challenged by his uncles , and it was not until 935 that he was able to secure confirmation by Baghdad of his control over Mosul and the entire Jazira up to the Byzantine frontier . 
 = = = Early career under al @-@ Hasan Nasir al @-@ Dawla = = = 
 The young Ali ibn Abdallah began his career under his brother . In 936 , Hasan invited his younger brother to his service , promising him the governorship of Diyar Bakr ( the region around Amida ) in exchange for his help against Ali ibn Ja 'far , the rebellious governor of Mayyafariqin . Ali ibn Abdallah was successful in preventing Ibn Ja 'far from receiving the assistance of his Armenian allies , and also secured control over the northern parts of the neighbouring province of Diyar Mudar after subduing the Qaysi tribes of the region around Saruj . From this position , he also launched expeditions to aid the Muslim emirates of the Byzantine frontier zone ( the Thughur ) against the advancing Byzantines , and intervened in Armenia to reverse growing Byzantine influence ( see below ) . 
 In the meantime , Hasan became involved in the intrigues of the Abbasid court . Since the murder of Caliph al @-@ Muqtadir in 932 , the Abbasid government had all but collapsed , and in 936 the powerful governor of Wasit , Muhammad ibn Ra 'iq , assumed the title of amir al @-@ umara ( " commander of commanders " ) and with it de facto control of the Abbasid government . The Caliph al @-@ Radi was reduced to a figurehead role , while the extensive old civil bureaucracy was drastically reduced both in size and power . Ibn Ra 'iq 's position was anything but secure , however , and soon a convoluted struggle for control of the office of [ amir al @-@ umara , and the Caliphate with it , broke out among the various local rulers and the Turkish military chiefs , which ended in 946 with the victory of the Buyids . 
 Hasan initially supported Ibn Ra 'iq , but in 942 he had him assassinated and secured for himself the post of amir al @-@ umara , receiving the honorific laqab of Nasir al @-@ Dawla ( " Defender of the Dynasty " ) . The Baridis , a local family of Basra , who also desired control over the Caliph , continued to resist , and Nasir al @-@ Dawla now sent Ali against them . After scoring a victory over Abu 'l Husayn al @-@ Baridi at al @-@ Mada 'in , Ali was named governor of Wasit and awarded the laqab of Sayf al @-@ Dawla ( " Sword of the Dynasty " ) , by which he became famous . This double award to the Hamdanid brothers marked the first time that a laqab incorporating the prestigious element al @-@ Dawla was granted to anyone other than the wazir , the Caliphate 's chief minister . 
 The Hamdanids ' success proved short @-@ lived , however . They were politically isolated , and found little support among the Caliphate 's most powerful vassals , the Samanids of Transoxiana and the Ikhshidids of Egypt . Consequently , when in 943 a mutiny over pay issues broke out among their troops ( mostly composed of Turks , Daylamites , Qarmatians and only a few Arabs ) , under the leadership of the Turk Tuzun , they were forced to quit Baghdad . Caliph al @-@ Muttaqi appointed Tuzun as amir al @-@ umara , but soon quarrelled with him and fled north to seek Hamdanid protection . Tuzun , however , defeated Nasir al @-@ Dawla and Sayf al @-@ Dawla in the field , and in 944 an agreement was concluded which allowed the Hamdanids to keep the Jazira and even gave them nominal authority over northern Syria ( which at the time was not under Hamdanid control ) , in exchange for a large tribute . Henceforth , Nasir al @-@ Dawla would be tributary to Baghdad . However , his continued attempts to control Baghdad led to a clash with the Buyids . Eventually , in 958 / 9 Nasir al @-@ Dawla would be forced to seek refuge in the court of his brother , before Sayf al @-@ Dawla could negotiate his return to Mosul with the Buyid emir Mu 'izz al @-@ Dawla . 
 = = = Establishment of the Emirate of Aleppo = = = 
 Northern Syria had been under the control of the Ikhshidids since 935 / 6 , until Ibn Ra 'iq detached it from Egyptian control in 939 / 40 . In 942 , when Nasir al @-@ Dawla replaced the assassinated Ibn Ra 'iq , he attempted to impose his own control over the region , and particularly Ibn Ra 'iq 's own province of Diyar Mudar . Hamdanid troops took control of the <unk> River valley , but the local magnates were still inclined towards the Ikhshidids , and Hamdanid authority was tenuous . The Ikhshidids did not intervene directly , but supported ' Adl al @-@ <unk> , the governor of Rahba . Al @-@ <unk> captured Nasibin , where Sayf al @-@ Dawla had left his treasures , but was finally defeated and captured by Sayf al @-@ Dawla 's cousin Abu Abdallah al @-@ Husayn ibn Sa 'id ibn Hamdan , and executed at Baghdad in May 943 . Husayn then proceeded to occupy the entire province , from Diyar Mudar to the Thughur . Al @-@ Raqqah was taken by storm , but Aleppo surrendered without a fight in February 944 . Al @-@ Muttaqi now sent messages to al @-@ Ikhshid , asking for his support against the various warlords who wanted to control him . The Hamdanids confined the Caliph at Raqqah , but in summer 944 al @-@ Ikhshid arrived in Syria . Husayn abandoned Aleppo to the Egyptian , who then visited the exiled Caliph at Raqqah . Al @-@ Muttaqi confirmed Ikhshidid control over Syria , but after the Caliph refused to relocate himself to Egypt , the Egyptian ruler refused to commit himself to further aid for the Caliph against his enemies . The Ikhshid returned to Egypt , while al @-@ Muttaqi , powerless and dejected , went back to Baghdad , only to be blinded and deposed by Tuzun . 
 It was in this context that Sayf al @-@ Dawla turned his attention to Syria . The previous years had seen a series of personal humiliations , with defeats in the field by Tuzun followed by his failure to persuade al @-@ Muttaqi to nominate him as amir al @-@ umara . It was during the latter attempt that he also had one of his rivals , Muhammad ibn Inal al @-@ <unk> , assassinated . As Thierry Bianquis writes , following the failure of his brother 's designs in Iraq , Sayf al @-@ Dawla 's turn to Syria was " born of resentment when , having returned to Nasibin , he found himself under @-@ employed and badly paid " . Nasir al @-@ Dawla seems to have encouraged his brother to turn to Syria after Husayn 's failure there , writing to Sayf al @-@ Dawla that " Syria lies before you , there is no one in this land who can prevent you from taking it " . With money and troops provided by his brother , Sayf al @-@ Dawla invaded northern Syria in the wake of the Ikhshid 's departure . He gained the support of the local Banu Kilab tribe , to which the Ikhshid @-@ appointed governor of Aleppo belonged , and entered the city unopposed in October 944 . 
 = = = = Conflict with the Ikhshidids = = = = 
 The Ikhshidids reacted , and sent an army north under Abu al @-@ Misk Kafur to confront Sayf al @-@ Dawla , who was besieging Homs . In the ensuing battle , the Hamdanid scored a crushing victory . Homs then opened its gates , and Sayf al @-@ Dawla set his sights on Damascus . Sayf al @-@ Dawla briefly occupied the city in early 945 , but was forced to abandon it in the face of the citizens ' hostility . In April 945 the Ikhshid himself led an army into Syria , although at the same time he also offered terms to Sayf al @-@ Dawla , proposing to accept Hamdanid control over northern Syria and the Thughur . Sayf al @-@ Dawla rejected the Ikhshid 's proposals , but was defeated in battle in May / June and forced to retreat to Raqqah . The Egyptian army proceeded to raid the environs of Aleppo . Nevertheless , in October the two sides came to an agreement , broadly on the lines of the earlier Ikhshidid proposal : the Egyptian ruler acknowledged Hamdanid control over northern Syria , and even consented to sending an annual tribute in exchange for Sayf al @-@ Dawla 's renunciation of all claims on Damascus . The pact was sealed by Sayf al @-@ Dawla 's marriage to a niece of the Ikhshid , and Sayf al @-@ Dawla 's new domain received the — purely formal — sanction by the Caliph , who also re @-@ affirmed his laqab , soon thereafter . 
 The truce with the Ikhshidids lasted until the death of the Ikhshid , in July 946 at Damascus . Sayf al @-@ Dawla immediately marched south , took Damascus , and then proceeded to Palestine . There he was confronted once again by Kafur , who defeated the Hamdanid prince in a battle fought in December . Sayf al @-@ Dawla then retreated to Damascus , and from there to Homs . There he gathered his forces , including large Arab tribal contingents , and in spring of 947 , he attempted to recover Damascus . He was again defeated in battle , however , and in its aftermath the Ikhshidids even occupied Aleppo in July . Kafur , the Ikhshidid army 's leader , did not press his advantage , but instead began negotiations . For the Ikhshidids , the maintenance of Aleppo was less important than southern Syria with Damascus , which was Egypt 's eastern bulwark . As long as their control over this region was not threatened , the Egyptians were more than willing to allow the existence of a Hamdanid state in the north . Furthermore , the Ikhshidids realized that they would have difficulty in asserting and maintaining control over northern Syria and Cilicia , which were traditionally oriented more towards the Jazira and Iraq . Not only would Egypt , threatened by this time by the Fatimids in the east , be spared the cost of maintaining a large army in these distant lands , but the Hamdanid emirate would also fulfil the useful role of a buffer state against incursions both from Iraq and also from Byzantium . The agreement of 945 was reiterated , with the difference that the Ikhshidids ceased paying tribute for Damascus . The frontier thus established , between Jaziran @-@ influenced northern Syria and the Egyptian @-@ controlled southern part of the country , was to last until the Mamluks seized the entire country in 1260 . 
 Sayf al @-@ Dawla , who returned to Aleppo in autumn , was now master of an extensive realm : the north Syrian provinces ( jund Hims , jund Qinnasrin and the jund al- ' <unk> ) in a line running south of Homs to the coast near Tartus , and most of Diyar Bakr and Diyar Mudar in the western Jazira . He also exercised a — mostly nominal — suzerainty over the towns of the Byzantine frontier in Cilicia . Sayf al @-@ Dawla 's domain was a " Syro @-@ Mesopotamian state " , in the expression of the Orientalist Marius Canard , and extensive enough to require two capitals : alongside Aleppo , which became Sayf al @-@ Dawla 's main residence , Mayyafariqin was selected as the capital for the Jaziran provinces . The latter were held ostensibly in charge of his elder brother Nasir al @-@ Dawla , but in reality , the size and political importance of Sayf al @-@ Dawla 's emirate allowed him to effectively throw off the tutelage of Nasir al @-@ Dawla . Although Sayf al @-@ Dawla continued to show his elder brother due deference , henceforth , their positions would be reversed . 
 = = = = Arab tribal revolts = = = = 
 Aside from his confrontation with the Ikhshidids , Sayf al @-@ Dawla 's consolidation over his realm was challenged by the need to maintain good relations with the restive native Arab tribes . Northern Syria at this time was controlled by a number of Arab tribes , who had been resident in the area since the Umayyad period , and in many cases even before that . The region around Homs was settled by the Banu Kalb and the Banu Tayyi , while the north , a broad stripe of land from the Orontes until beyond the Euphrates was controlled by the still largely nomadic Qaysi tribes of Uqayl , <unk> , Ka 'b and <unk> , as well as the aforementioned Banu Kilab around Aleppo . Further south , the originally Yemeni Tanukh were settled around <unk> al @-@ <unk> , while the coasts were settled by the <unk> ' and Kurds . 
