 = = Production = = 
 " 522666 " was directed by David Nutter , who had directed both " Pilot " and " Gehenna " previously , and would also direct " Loin Like a Hunting Flame " later in the season . Writers James Wong and Glen Morgan had previously written " Dead Letters " , and would go on to write an additional thirteen episodes during the first and second seasons of the series . Nutter , Morgan and Wong had all previously collaborated on both Millennium 's sister show The X @-@ Files , and the Morgan and Wong @-@ created series Space : Above and Beyond . 
 Guest star Hiro Kanagawa , who portrays FBI special agent Takahashi , has appeared several times in Millennium 's sister show The X @-@ Files , in the second and fourth seasons ; as well as in The X @-@ Files ' spin @-@ off series The Lone Gunmen . Kanagawa would also make several more appearances on Millennium , acting in unrelated roles in the episodes " The Time Is Now " , " Human Essence " , and " Bardo <unk> " . The episode also featured a guest appearance by William MacDonald as FBI Agent Nolan ; MacDonald would later reappear in the third season episode " Through a Glass Darkly " . 
 Lance Henriksen performed all his own stunts in this episode , having been introduced to acting by a stuntman friend of his . The episode opens with a quote from French existentialist philosopher and writer Jean @-@ Paul Sartre — " I am responsible for everything ... except my very responsibility " , which was taken from the 1943 treatise Being and Nothingness . <unk> 's writing echoes the motivations of the character of Raymond Dees , with author N. E. Genge noting that both believed that " just because the individual was incapable of changing destiny alone was no reason for him to stop trying " . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " 522666 " was first broadcast on the Fox Network on November 22 , 1996 , and earned a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 6 , meaning that roughly 7 @.@ 6 percent of all television @-@ equipped households were tuned in to the episode . 
 The episode received mixed to positive reviews from critics . The A.V. Club 's Zack Handlen rated the episode a B- , finding that the episode 's ' cat and mouse ' chase between Black and Dees was " well constructed " and " exciting " , and drawing comparisons between the episode and the film Seven . However , he felt that the ending was poor , and that Megan Gallagher 's portrayal of Catherine Black let the episode down . Bill Gibron , writing for DVD Talk , rated the episode 3 out of 5 , finding that the focus on technological investigative techniques was " decidedly dull " , and that although the episode 's premise was initially " interesting " , it grew " derivative after a while " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , note that the episode 's premise is the first in the series " to play it entirely straight " , avoiding Black 's paranormal abilities . Shearman and Pearson rated the episode four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , describing it as not only " a chilling study of one man 's madness , but an indictment upon the modern obsession with celebrity " . This interpretation has also been echoed by Mark <unk> , in his work Inner Theatres of Good and Evil . <unk> claims that the episode " reflects the media 's melodramatic <unk> of villains and heroes , showing the bomber not only as a vulgar <unk> , but also as Frank 's savior and a martyr to the mass audience " . 
 = Mark Vlasic = 
 Mark Richard Vlasic ( born October 25 , 1963 ) is a former American football quarterback who played in the National Football League ( NFL ) for six seasons . During this time , he played for the San Diego Chargers , Kansas City Chiefs and Tampa Bay Buccaneers . Over the course of his career , he played in 15 games , completed 75 of 142 passes for 762 yards , threw four touchdowns and five interceptions , and finished his career with a passer rating of 63 @.@ 2 . 
 A graduate of Center High School and the University of Iowa , Vlasic was selected 88th in the 1987 NFL Draft by the San Diego Chargers . He was a backup for Dan Fouts during his first season , then started two games the following year . After not seeing playing time in 1989 , Vlasic started the season opener in 1990 , his last year with San Diego . He played for two seasons with Kansas City and one with Tampa Bay , but was released in 1994 , having not had actual playing time since 1991 . 
 = = High school and college = = 
 Vlasic was born in Rochester , Pennsylvania . He attended high school at Center High School in Center Township , Pennsylvania , and was a standout in football and basketball during his time there . He was the starting quarterback for Center in his junior year , throwing for 777 yards in the first eight games of the season . In his junior year of basketball , Vlasic was a starter , in one game scoring 23 points and 11 rebounds with a bad back . He continued to play football and basketball during his senior year , with performances that included a 36 @-@ point effort against Las Vegas Western High School , making 18 of 20 shots . As a result of his high school career , Vlasic was inducted into the Beaver County Sports Hall of Fame in 1999 . 
 After graduating from high school , Vlasic played college football at the University of Iowa . For four years , he served as a backup to Chuck Long , now a member of the College Football Hall of Fame . During his junior year , as the backup quarterback , he also served as the holder for field goal kicks . After placekicker Rob <unk> won a 12 @-@ 10 game against the University of Michigan thanks to a last second field goal , a mob tore down the goalpost , which injured four fans including Vlasic , who was at the bottom of a pile of fans . 
 The following season Vlasic , now a fifth @-@ year senior , became the starter , as Long graduated . Although he was taking over for the Heisman Trophy runner @-@ up , his strong arm was complimented , albeit <unk> , by coach Hayden Fry , who said , " He 's got a stronger arm than Long , and he proves it every day by overthrowing his receivers . " In Vlasic 's first game as starter , he threw for 288 yards in a 43 @-@ 7 win against Iowa State University , a game that made Hayden Fry the most victorious coach in Iowa football history . After two more victories , Vlasic went down with a separated shoulder , returning to the lineup after freshmen Dan McGwire and Tom <unk> took over the starting role . In a late October game against Northwestern , Vlasic threw a 93 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Quinn Early , the longest in Iowa history , in a 27 @-@ 20 victory against Northwestern University . Despite his injury causing him to serve as a backup most of the season , he was given the start for the 1986 Holiday Bowl against San Diego State University . In the Holiday Bowl , Vlasic completed 15 of 28 passes 222 yards and ran for a touchdown as Iowa won , 39 @-@ 38 . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = San Diego Chargers = = = 
 Vlasic was selected by the San Diego Chargers in the 4th round of the 1987 NFL Draft . Chargers coach Al Saunders chose Vlasic because he wanted to find a young quarterback to observe and succeed Dan Fouts . He signed with the team in late July , and spent the preseason competing with Rick Neuheisel , Tom Flick , and others for the backup quarterback job . While he performed well in the preseason , the Chargers were looking to have him sit out a year so he could learn the ins @-@ and @-@ outs or pro football . After Flick was cut and Mark Herrmann named the primary backup , Vlasic beat out Neuheisel for the final quarterback spot on the Chargers ' roster , though Neuheisel would rejoin the team later that season due to the strike . Despite making the roster , Vlasic spent most of the season after the players ' strike on the team 's inactive list . However , when Fouts was scratched from a December game against the Denver Broncos due to a shoulder injury , Vlasic was called up to be <unk> 's backup . He made his professional debut on December 27 , 1987 , playing the final 5 : 29 of the game . He completed three of six passes for eight yards , was sacked , and threw an interception in the Chargers ' 24 @-@ 0 loss against Denver . 
 Before the 1988 San Diego Chargers season began , Dan Fouts chose to retire from the game after 15 seasons , leaving Vlasic as the main backup to starter Mark Herrmann , and as a result the Chargers began trying to trade for an experienced quarterback . The Chargers also signed Mark Malone and Babe Laufenberg to compete for the starting job , and traded Herrmann to the Indianapolis Colts . After months of training and the 1988 preseason , Vlasic began the season as the third string quarterback behind Malone and Laufenberg , who won the starting job . In November , after Laufenberg was injured , the Chargers decided to make Vlasic the starter instead of Malone due to the latter 's ineffectiveness , as well as a six game losing streak . He made his season debut against the Atlanta Falcons on November 13 , and threw for 190 yards in a 10 – 7 victory . As a result of his performance , coach Al Saunders said that Vlasic would have the starting job for the rest of the season . Vlasic 's second start came against the Los Angeles Rams where he threw for 80 yards and a touchdown . However , he suffered torn ligaments in his left knee late in the third quarter , and was lost for the season . He finished the season with 25 of 52 passes completed and a passer rating of 54 @.@ 2 . 
 Vlasic spent the 1989 off @-@ season recovering form his injury , while the Chargers added another quarterback to the roster upon drafting Billy Joe Tolliver . After working out with the team during the preseason , he started the season on the Physically Unable to Perform list . With the Chargers having a reliable starter in Jim McMahon , who had been signed to the team , Vlasic was kept on the list for the season . In 1990 , McMahon was released and John Friesz was drafted out of the University of Idaho , leaving Vlasic to compete with Friesz and David Archer for the backup quarterback job . As the preseason began for the 1990 San Diego Chargers season , the team released Archer , and the plan was for Friesz to split backup quarterback duties during the preseason . After an impressive preseason by Vlasic and only a pedestrian one by Tolliver , Chargers coach Dan Henning named Vlasic as the starting quarterback against the Dallas Cowboys in the season opener , citing that he was " steadier " than Tolliver . After losing the game 17 – 14 , the switch was made back to Tolliver as the starting quarterback , and was eventually named starter for the rest of the season . Despite this , Vlasic remained optimistic , saying , " I feel confident in my ability , and I always have . I know I can get the job done whatever the situation . I have to believe that . " Over the course of the 1990 season , Vlasic played in six games , completing 19 of 40 passes for 168 yards , one touchdown , two interceptions , and a passer rating of 46 @.@ 7 . 
 At the end of the season , coach Henning said that Tolliver was to be the starter heading into next season , and that the team would not protect Vlasic under Plan B free agency , meaning he could sign with any interested team . As a result , he began to meet with other teams that were looking for a quarterback , including the Cowboys and Green Bay Packers . 
 = = = Kansas City Chiefs = = = 
 After meeting with the Cowboys and Kansas City Chiefs , it was reported that Vlasic signed a two @-@ year deal with the Chiefs in March , with Vlasic 's agent confirming but Chiefs general manager Carl Peterson denying it . The Cowboys stated that they would not enter a bidding war , and the signing was confirmed shortly afterward . Vlasic spent the 1991 preseason competing with Steve <unk> and Mike Elkins for the backup quarterback job . By the end of the preseason , both <unk> and Elkins were cut , leaving Vlasic as the backup behind Steve DeBerg . He spent most of the season backing up DeBerg and getting occasional action . His most significant day as a backup came on November 17 against the Denver Broncos . Vlasic relieved DeBerg , who had thrown four interceptions , and completed nine of 14 passes for 91 yards and a touchdown in a 24 – 20 loss . The highlight of Vlasic 's season was a matchup on December 8 against his old team , the Chargers . After replacing DeBerg in the second half with the Chiefs down by 14 points , Vlasic completed 12 of 18 passes for 150 yards and a touchdown as the Chiefs beat the Chargers in overtime , 20 – 17 , and giving the Chiefs a playoff berth in the process . As a result of this performance , Vlasic was given the start for next week 's game against the San Francisco 49ers . However , he sprained his knee in the second quarter , and did not play the final regular season game . Vlasic missed the wild card playoff game against the Oakland Raiders , but was available for the divisional playoff series against the Buffalo Bills . After DeBerg left in the second quarter due to injury , Vlasic entered the game in what was his only playoff appearance . He completed nine of 20 passes for 124 yards and threw four interceptions in a 37 – 14 blowout that marked the end of the Chiefs ' playoff run . Vlasic 's stats for 1991 were 28 completions in 44 attempts , 316 yards , two touchdowns , and a passer rating of 100 @.@ 2 . 
 As the 1992 Kansas City Chiefs season began , the team 's first big move was the signing of quarterback Dave Krieg to compete with DeBerg and Vlasic . A couple weeks after Krieg 's signing , DeBerg signed with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers , leaving Vlasic as the primary backup to Krieg . The Chiefs went into training camp and went through the preseason with Krieg , Vlasic , and rookie draft pick Matt <unk> . Krieg ended up playing every snap of the season , leaving both Vlasic without a year 's worth of playing time as his contract expired . The trading of Joe Montana to the Chiefs put a definitive end to Vlasic 's time in Kansas City . 
 = = = Tampa Bay Buccaneers = = = 
 On April 30 , 1992 Vlasic signed a two @-@ year contract with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers , reuniting himself with former teammate Steve DeBerg . Vlasic began the preseason competing the third string quarterback job behind Mike <unk> while DeBerg and Craig Erickson competed for the starting job . At the end of preseason , however , Vlasic was among the final group cut by the Buccaneers . When DeBerg was cut from the team in early November , Vlasic was re @-@ signed to the team in his place . He remained on the roster for the 1994 preseason , but his only preseason pass was intercepted and returned for a touchdown , and he was waived shortly afterward . This marked the end of Vlasic 's professional football career . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Before his inaugural season of pro football , Vlasic , a finance major at Iowa , got a real estate license in case pro football did not work out . Vlasic is currently a Senior Wealth Advisor with Mariner Wealth Advisors in Leawood KS . 
 He has a wife , Amy , two daughters , Erica and Vanessa , a son , Ethan , and a dog Lola . 
 = Marguerite LeHand = 
 Marguerite Alice " Missy " LeHand ( September 13 , 1898 – July 31 , 1944 ) was private secretary to U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt ( FDR ) for 21 years . According to Roosevelt biographer Doris Kearns Goodwin , during FDR 's presidency , LeHand became " the most celebrated private secretary in the country " . 
 Born into a poor Irish @-@ American family in New York , LeHand attended secretarial school , took a series of clerical jobs , and eventually began to work for the Democratic Party 's New York office . There she came to the attention of FDR 's wife Eleanor during his 1920 vice presidential candidacy and was hired as FDR 's personal secretary . After FDR was partially paralyzed by polio , LeHand became his daily companion , to the extent of adopting his favorite hobbies , games , and drinks . She remained his secretary when he became Governor of New York in 1929 and when he became president in 1933 , serving until a 1941 stroke left her unable to speak . She moved to her sister 's home in Boston and died in 1944 . 
 The exact nature of LeHand 's relationship with FDR is debated by historians . It is generally accepted that their relationship contained a romantic element , though scholars remain divided on whether the pair had a sexual relationship . LeHand was engaged to U.S. Ambassador William Bullitt in 1933 , but never married , later asking a friend , " How could anyone ever come up to FDR ? " 
 = = Early life = = 
 LeHand was born in Potsdam , New York , to Daniel J. and Mary J. ( née Graffin ) LeHand , who were the children of Irish immigrants . When Marguerite was young , her father , a gardener with a drinking problem , deserted the family . She had a sister , Anna , and two brothers , Daniel and Bernard . The family later moved to Somerville , Massachusetts . As a child , LeHand was struck by rheumatic fever , and Eleanor Roosevelt later stated that the disease had left her delicate and barred from strenuous exercise . She graduated from Somerville High School in 1917 and then attended secretarial school . Although she never attended college , in 1937 Rosary College recognized her professional achievements with an honorary Doctor of Laws . 
 After holding a variety of clerical positions in the Boston area and passing the Civil Service exam , she moved to Washington , DC to serve as a clerk during the First World War . At the recommendation of Charles McCarthy , Roosevelt 's assistant at the Navy Department , she became a secretary with the Democratic Party 's New York headquarters . In 1920 , when Franklin Roosevelt was running for Vice President on a ticket with James M. Cox against Warren Harding and Calvin Coolidge , LeHand 's work on the campaign and her clear personal devotion to FDR caught the eye of the Roosevelts . In early 1921 , FDR hired her as his personal secretary and gave her the initial job of cleaning up his correspondence . Roosevelt biographer Jean Edward Smith described the young LeHand as " five feet , seven inches tall ... warm and attractive , with ink @-@ blue eyes , black hair already turning gray , and an engaging throaty voice . She was also modest , well mannered , exceptionally capable , and thoroughly organized . " 
 = = Secretary to Roosevelt = = 
 LeHand quickly became a key part of Roosevelt 's staff , managing his correspondence and appointment calendar . She was nicknamed " Missy " by Roosevelt 's sons and soon became popularly known by this name . In turn , she nicknamed her boss " F.D. " , a name only she was allowed to use . In the summer of 1921 , Roosevelt was struck by polio during a vacation to Campobello Island , leaving him paralyzed below the waist ; LeHand then became his inseparable companion . She once described her early work with FDR thus : 
 The first thing for a private secretary to do is to study her employer . After I went to work for Mr. Roosevelt , for months I read carefully all the letters he dictated ... I learned what letters he wanted to see and which ones it was not necessary to show him ... I came to know exactly how Mr. Roosevelt would answer some of his letters , how he would couch his thoughts . When he discovered that I had learned these things it took a load off his shoulders , for instead of having to dictate the answers to many letters he could just say yes or no and I knew what to say and how to say it . 
 Each winter in the mid @-@ 1920s , FDR would spend four months on his houseboat , <unk> , off the Florida coast . LeHand lived with him and acted as his hostess . She also accompanied him to the spa town of Warm Springs , Georgia , overseeing and encouraging his physical therapy . In early 1927 , FDR sold the <unk> , leaving LeHand distraught by the disruption of their life together ; she had a nervous breakdown , and was briefly hospitalized and placed under suicide watch . She recovered and returned to work in November . 
 LeHand opposed FDR 's proposed plan to run for Governor of New York in 1928 , telling him , " Don 't you dare " . When he ultimately decided to run , she suffered another illness that Goodwin describes as " probably a second nervous breakdown " . By the time he was elected and assumed office , however , she was well enough to resume work and moved into the second floor of the Governor 's Mansion in Albany , continuing on as his secretary . With Eleanor often away working in New York City during this time , LeHand was FDR 's day @-@ to @-@ day companion . During her long tenure as FDR 's secretary , LeHand came to share many of his likes and dislikes . She enthusiastically learned to play poker , and would spend hours working with him on his stamp collection . She adopted even his figures of speech and favorite drinks . 
 Roosevelt was elected President of the United States in 1932 , assuming the office in 1933 . There was little doubt that LeHand would follow him to the White House . As her obituary in the New York Times said , " when her employer was elected to the Presidency , it had become an established fact that neither other offers of employment or proposals of marriage could entice the prematurely gray and handsome young woman from the career she had chosen . " During Roosevelt 's tenure as president , LeHand became a federal employee . Until the 1941 stroke that incapacitated her , she lived on the third floor of the White House and continued to manage Roosevelt 's daily business . She also presided as the White House hostess during Eleanor 's absences . In August 1933 , Newsweek ran a profile of her describing her as FDR 's " Super @-@ Secretary " , making her nationally famous . 
 = = Relationship with Roosevelt = = 
 The question of whether LeHand and Roosevelt 's relationship contained a sexual component was widely discussed among their contemporaries and continues to be debated by historians . Hazel Rowley argues that " there is no doubt that Franklin 's relationship with Missy was romantic " , but notes the possibility that the relationship could not have been consummated due to FDR 's disability . Goodwin states that " beneath the complexity , it is absolutely clear that Franklin was the love of Missy 's life , and that he adored her and depended on her for affection and support as well as work " . Doug Wead wrote in his work on the parents of presidents , The Raising of a President , 
 Some Roosevelt historians insist that their relationship was never consummated . Eleanor and the children accepted the relationship , which speaks for its innocence . Sara [ Roosevelt ] spoke favorably of Missy 's family and upbringing . Years later , only Elliott , of all the children , would declare that it had not been as benign as historians like to believe . 
 In 1973 , FDR 's son Elliott published An Untold Story : The Roosevelts of Hyde Park , in which he recalled seeing LeHand in his father 's lap and alleged that she " shared a familiar life in all its aspects with father " . His eldest brother Jimmy disagreed , arguing that FDR 's illness had made sexual function too difficult for him to have a physical affair . " I suppose you could say they came to love one another " , he wrote , " but it was not a physical love . " 
 Despite the closeness of LeHand and Franklin 's relationship , Eleanor and LeHand remained on good terms . Eleanor Roosevelt biographer Blanche Wiesen Cook describes the First Lady as treating LeHand warmly , " as an elder daughter or , in the manner of Asian matriarchs , as the junior wife " . The two women went shopping together , and Eleanor took a solicitous interest in LeHand 's smoking and general health . Eleanor also accompanied LeHand to her mother 's funeral in Potsdam in 1932 . Elliott later stated that he believed " Missy alleviated Mother 's guilt " , allowing her to travel without worrying that Franklin would lack for companionship . In one of her later books , Eleanor wrote that she occasionally failed to " meet the need of someone whom I dearly love " , stating , " You must learn to allow someone else to meet the need , without bitterness or envy , and accept it . " Cook reads these passages as veiled references to LeHand 's role in Franklin 's life , and Eleanor 's acceptance of that role . 
 = = = Other relationships = = = 
 LeHand had a brief romance with Eleanor 's bodyguard ( and rumored love ) Earl Miller in 1931 . Miller later told biographer Joseph Lash that he had begun the affair out of respect for Eleanor , feeling that she was hurt by LeHand 's relationship with Franklin . LeHand quickly became attached to Miller , but broke off the affair after discovering that he was also seeing another White House worker . 
 In 1933 , LeHand became engaged to the diplomat William Christian Bullitt , Jr . , then the U.S. ambassador to Russia . FDR 's son James later described this as " the one real romance " of her life . However , the engagement ended after LeHand visited him in Moscow and reportedly discovered him having an affair . Later in life , a friend asked LeHand if she regretted not having married , to which LeHand replied , " Absolutely not ... How could anyone ever come up to FDR ? " 
 FDR aide and confidant Harry Hopkins briefly courted LeHand in 1939 , following the death of his second wife , Barbara . Goodwin states while the pair were close , and their friendship sparked Washington gossip , but nothing appears to have come of it : " Missy had probably cut it short , as she had cut short every other relationship in her life that might subordinate her great love for FDR . " 
 = = Illness , death , and memorials = = 
 In June 1941 , LeHand , who had suffered rheumatic fever as a child and was somewhat frail , collapsed at a White House dinner party and two weeks later suffered a major stroke that left her partially paralyzed with little speech function . A factor that may have led to her illness was stress stemming from fears that the exiled Princess Märtha of Sweden , a Washington @-@ area resident during World War II , had replaced her as FDR 's favorite companion , occupying the seat next to him that had long been LeHand 's in automobile rides . FDR paid LeHand 's medical bills and made provisions in his will for her care . During the 1941 Christmas season , LeHand , now an invalid , attempted suicide . In early 1942 , she spent some weeks in her old room at the White House , but quickly deteriorated due to her frustrations at not being able to help . After an incident in which she tried to set herself on fire , it was agreed that LeHand would return to her sister 's home in Somerville , Massachusetts , and she departed from Washington on May 16 , 1942 . 
 FDR rewrote his will to leave half of the income from his estate ( which was eventually probated at more than $ 3 million ) for LeHand 's care , and half to Eleanor . The will stated that upon LeHand 's death the income would go to Eleanor , with the principal eventually divided equally among his children . As LeHand died before FDR , her half reverted to Eleanor . 
 An assistant of LeHand 's , Grace Tully , took over as Roosevelt 's secretary , but was never a companion for Roosevelt in the same way as LeHand had been . During LeHand 's brief return to the White House after her stroke , to help her feel included , Tully brought letters and State Department correspondence for her to read . 
 When LeHand died on July 31 , 1944 , the president issued a statement : 
 Memories of more than a score of years of devoted service enhance the sense of personal loss which Miss LeHand 's passing brings . Faithful and painstaking , with charm of manner inspired by tact and kindness of heart , she was utterly selfless in her devotion to duty . Hers was a quiet efficiency , which made her a real genius in getting things done . Her memory will ever be held in affectionate remembrance and appreciation , not only by all the members of our family but by the wide circle of those whose duties brought them into contact with her . 
 Eleanor Roosevelt attended LeHand 's funeral in Cambridge , Massachusetts , over which Bishop ( later Cardinal ) Richard Cushing presided . Other mourners included Associate Supreme Court Justice Felix Frankfurter and former ambassador Joseph P. Kennedy . In her will , LeHand left the furniture in her White House apartment to Grace Tully and the First Couple . 
 = = = SS Marguerite LeHand = = = 
 In March 1945 , the United States Maritime Commission christened an 18 @,@ 000 ton C3 cargo vessel , the SS Marguerite LeHand , in Pascagoula , Mississippi . As LeHand was leaving on her maiden voyage , she struck the U.S. Coast Guard lighthouse tender Magnolia amidships , sinking it and killing one Coast Guardsman . 
 = = = Representations in television and film = = = 
 LeHand was a character in the 1958 Broadway play Sunrise at Campobello and its 1960 film adaptation , in which she was played by Jean Hagen . The productions portray FDR 's initial struggles with polio after his 1921 diagnosis , and his decision to continue his political career . 
 Priscilla Pointer played the role of LeHand in the 1977 ABC television production Eleanor and Franklin : The White House Years . In the 2012 movie Hyde Park on Hudson , which portrays the visit of British monarchs George VI and Queen Consort Elizabeth to FDR 's estate at Hyde Park , LeHand is played by Elizabeth Marvel . 
 LeHand 's work and friendship with Franklin Roosevelt is chronicled in the 2014 documentary film The Roosevelts , directed by Ken Burns . 
 = Maria Kanellis = 
 Maria Louise Kanellis @-@ Bennett ( born February 25 , 1982 ) is an American professional wrestler , valet , actress and singer currently signed to Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) under the ring name Maria ( Kanellis @-@ Bennett ) . She is best known for her time with World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) , and Ring of Honor ( ROH ) as the valet of her real @-@ life husband Michael Bennett . 
 Kanellis 's career began as a contestant on the reality show Outback Jack in 2004 . In the same year , she placed fifth in the Raw Diva Search , but was later hired by WWE as a backstage interviewer . Kanellis began competing in the ring as a wrestler in 2005 . She also posed for the April 2008 cover of Playboy magazine , which was incorporated into a storyline on Raw . She released her debut album Sevin Sins on April 13 , 2010 on iTunes . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Kanellis was born in Ottawa , Illinois . She has two younger siblings ; a brother and sister named Bill and Janny , respectively . Kanellis grew up with an interest in playing sports , particularly volleyball , basketball , and softball . She graduated from Ottawa Township High School in 2000 , before spending some time as a student at Northern Illinois University . Before her career in wrestling began , Kanellis regularly competed in beauty pageants . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = World Wrestling Entertainment = = = 
 = = = = Diva Search and debut ( 2004 @-@ 2005 ) = = = = 
 She competed in the Raw Diva Search in 2004 , deciding to enter the contest after seeing an advertisement while watching Raw . Even though she only placed fifth in the contest , she was hired by the company . She stood out in the contest by giving fellow contestant Carmella DeCesare the finger after being eliminated from the contest . Maria began making appearances in Ohio Valley Wrestling ( OVW ) , WWE 's then @-@ developmental territory , under head trainer Paul Heyman . She contributed booking ideas , and her work at OVW earned her a spot on the Raw brand roster . Maria was brought on to Raw as a ditzy backstage interviewer and the host of WWE <unk> in November 2004 . Her gimmick involved her asking wrong questions , irritating and amusing WWE Superstars and Divas this <unk> would last until 2008 . 
 In 2005 , Maria began a more physical role , and was defeated in her first official match on the January 10 , 2005 episode of Raw by Christy Hemme in a Lingerie Pillow Fight . She also competed in a Fulfill Your Fantasy Diva Battle Royal at Taboo Tuesday for the WWE Women 's Championship , but was the first to be eliminated , courtesy of Trish Stratus and Mickie James . In another physical moment , Stratus slapped Maria so hard that one of her fillings legitimately fell out . On November 14 , Maria competed in a non @-@ title Diva Battle Royal at the Eddie Guerrero tribute Raw show . Maria stood by herself for most of the match , only getting involved when she saw the opportunity to eliminate a competitor , and ultimately eliminated both Jillian Hall and Victoria . She was one of the last three women left in the match , but was eliminated by both Melina and Trish Stratus . 
 On the November 28 episode of Raw , Maria interviewed then @-@ Raw General Manager Eric Bischoff , and asked him whether or not he thought he was going to be fired . He then booked her in a match with Kurt Angle out of spite , and Maria was laid out with the Angle Slam . As a result , one week later , Maria testified in the trial against Bischoff , who was being fired because of his controversial actions as General Manager . As Mick Foley questioned her , she answered , " Last week Bischoff abused his power in a way that was both malicious and capricious , and it 's this rash of discourse that ultimately led to a locker room of disdain and mutiny , and it should be grounds for his immediate dismissal . " 
 = = = = Various feuds ( 2006 – 2007 ) = = = = 
 In early 2006 , Maria defeated Victoria in a match . Afterwards , she was attacked and stripped of her clothes by Vince 's Devils ( Victoria , Torrie Wilson , and Candice Michelle ) , but she was saved by Ashley Massaro . During a commercial break that night , Vince McMahon announced a Gauntlet Bra & Panties Match for New Year 's Revolution between all five girls . At the event , Maria was the first to enter the Gauntlet match and eliminated Michelle and Wilson before being eliminated by Victoria . The match was ultimately won by Massaro . On April 10 , episode of Raw , Maria received a shot at the WWE Women 's Championship , but was defeated by the defending champion Mickie James . 
 Maria teamed with John Cena to take on Edge and Lita in the main event on the February 6 episode of Raw . Maria scored the victory after a spear meant for Cena hit Lita . One month later , Maria lost a singles match to Lita . After the match , Edge was preparing to spear Maria , but Mick Foley ran in to help her . On October 16 , Maria won a Fatal Four @-@ Way Bra and Panties match against Victoria , Candice Michelle , and Torrie Wilson to advance to the semi @-@ finals in a Women 's Championship Tournament . Maria , however , lost in the semi @-@ finals of the tournament to Lita . 
 On the January 1 , 2007 episode of Raw , Maria attempted to interview Kevin Federline , but was instead slapped by Melina and called a " bitch " . This led to a match between the two later that night , which Melina won . At New Year 's Revolution , Maria and Candice Michelle ran to the ring during the Women 's Championship match between Victoria and Mickie James to stop Melina from interfering , helping James retain the championship . For two consecutive weeks afterward , Maria had two tag team partners , Mickie James and Jeff Hardy , respectively , to take on Melina and a partner . She lost the match with James , but won the other with Hardy . 
 = = = = Relationship with Santino Marella ( 2007 – 2008 ) = = = = 
 Maria began an on @-@ screen romance with Santino Marella in June 2007 . She also resumed competing in the ring occasionally , often jobbing , or losing quickly , in short matches . On the November 5 episode of Raw , Marella was confronted by the returning Stone Cold Steve Austin for criticizing his movie , The Condemned . As a part of the storyline , the argument ended as Marella received a Stone Cold Stunner from Austin , who then went backstage , only to return with a Budweiser beer truck to hose down Marella and Maria with beer . 
 After former Playboy cover @-@ girl Ashley Massaro 's return in early 2008 , Kanellis engaged in backstage segments where Massaro suggested Maria should be on the cover of Playboy , including at the Royal Rumble , to the disdain of Marella . As a part of the storyline , Maria defeated Beth Phoenix on February 18 , to " earn the right " to be on the cover of the magazine . During her Playboy cover unveiling , Maria 's cover was plastered over with images of Marella . After Marella offered an ultimatum of posing for the magazine or staying with him as a couple , she stated , " No man and no one is going to make this decision for me " and broke up with her on @-@ screen boyfriend . Maria , along with Ashley , ( who had replaced an injured Candice Michelle ) were defeated by Phoenix and Melina at WrestleMania XXIV in a Playboy BunnyMania Lumberjill match . After the match , Maria passionately kissed the Master of Ceremonies , Snoop Dogg . 
 = = = = SmackDown ( 2008 – 2010 ) = = = = 
 As part of the 2008 WWE Supplemental Draft , Maria was drafted to the SmackDown brand . She made her debut on the August 1 episode of SmackDown by defeating Victoria . On the October 17 episode of SmackDown ! , Maria won a " Las Vegas Dice on a Pole " match to become the number one contender for the WWE Divas Championship , but lost a subsequent match for the title against then @-@ champion Michelle McCool . 
 Maria participated in the Raw Divas vs. Smackdown Divas match at Survivor Series , where she eliminated Jillian Hall , but her team ultimately lost the match . On the December 5 episode of SmackDown ! , Maria got an upset victory over the Divas Champion Michelle McCool , but she was defeated by Maryse in a number one contender 's match for the title two weeks later . At the Armageddon pay @-@ per @-@ view on December 14 , Maria teamed up with Kelly Kelly , Mickie James and McCool defeating Maryse , Jillian Hall , Victoria and Natalya in an Eight @-@ Diva Santa 's Little Helper tag team match . On the December 26 episode of SmackDown ! , she served as a special guest referee in the Divas Championship match between Maryse and McCool , where Maryse became the new champion . After the match , McCool turned heel and attacked Maria , injuring her shoulder . Maria returned and attacked McCool during a match , on the January 21 , 2009 , episode of SmackDown . On the February 10 episode of SmackDown , she defeated McCool following interference from Eve Torres . Over the next several weeks , Maria competed in various tag @-@ team matches against McCool , with Maria winning three out of four matches . She also competed at WrestleMania XXV for the " Miss WrestleMania " crown , but was eliminated by Victoria . Throughout June , Maria served as the special guest referee in Diva matches . 
 Maria made her in @-@ ring return on the July 3 episode of SmackDown , teaming with Melina to defeat LayCool ( Michelle McCool and Layla . Soon after , she entered into an on @-@ screen relationship with Dolph Ziggler , despite her being a fan favorite and him being a villainous character . At Night of Champions , Maria accompanied Ziggler to his match with Rey Mysterio for Intercontinental Championship . In the following weeks , Melina implied that Ziggler was cheating on Maria , which Maria did not believe . Maria and Ziggler later broke up on the October 10 episode of SmackDown in a backstage segment , after she cost him his match with John Morrison . 
 Maria then took a brief hiatus from the ring to film the Celebrity Apprentice , but returned on the December 4 episode of SmackDown by helping Mickie James fend off an attack by LayCool . She made her in @-@ ring return the following week , teaming up with James to defeat LayCool . On December 14 , Maria won the Slammy Award for Diva of the Year , which was voted for by WWE fans . On the February 12 , 2010 , episode of SmackDown , Maria began an on @-@ screen relationship with Matt Hardy . Her last match in WWE was a six @-@ person @-@ tag @-@ team match on the February 25 episode of WWE Superstars , where she , Hardy , and The Great Khali lost to The Hart Dynasty ( Tyson Kidd , David Hart Smith and Natalya Neidhart . Maria was released from her WWE contract on February 26 . 
 = = = Ring of Honor ( 2011 – 2015 ) = = = 
 Maria confirmed on her Twitter account that she would be appearing at Ring of Honor 's Final Battle pay @-@ per @-@ view on December 23 , 2011 . She accompanied her real @-@ life boyfriend , Mike Bennett , as a villainess , in a three @-@ way elimination match against Jay Lethal and El Generico for the ROH World Television Championship . At the event , Bennett was unsuccessful in winning the title . Kanellis continued accompanying Bennett at the January 7 , 2012 , tapings of Ring of Honor Wrestling , where she was dubbed the " First Lady of ROH " . 
 At the June 21 tapings of Ring of Honor Wrestling , Kanellis accompanied Bennett and Brutal Bob Evans to ring , where they lost to Eddie Edwards and Adam Cole . After the match , Kanellis , Bennett and Bob attacked Cole and Edwards , but were stopped by Sara Del Rey , who Edwards had brought in to neutralize Kanellis . At the Boiling Point pay @-@ per @-@ view on August 11 , Maria and Bennett lost to Del Rey and Edwards in an mixed tag team match . Kanellis ' storyline with Del Rey ended abruptly the following month , when Del Rey signed a contract with WWE . In September 2012 , Kanellis and Bennett became involved in a storyline with Mike Mondo after he kissed Kanellis during one of Bennett 's matches . Mondo continued to cost Bennett matches , until Glory by Honor in October , when Bennett defeated Mondo to end the feud . At the November 3 tapings of Ring of Honor Wrestling , Maria accompied Bennett to the ring where he unsuccessfully challenged Kevin Steen for the ROH World Heavyweight Championship . On December 16 at Final Battle 2012 : Doomsday pay @-@ per @-@ view , Kanellis along with Bob accompied Bennett to the ring where he defeated Jerry Lynn in his final ROH match before retirement . At the Border Wars pay @-@ per @-@ view on May 4 , 2013 , Kanellis accompied Bennett to the ring where he was defeated by Roderick Strong , despite Kanellis attempting to interfere on Bennett 's behalf . On September 19 , Maria and Bennett defeated The Brutal Burgers ( Brutal Bob Evans & Cheeseburger ) in a Intergender tag team match . On October 26 , during Bennett 's match with Kevin Steen at the Glory by Honor XII pay @-@ per @-@ view , Kanellis tried to interfere but was attacked by Lisa Marie Varon . 
 Kanellis and Bennett returned to ROH at the January 4 , 2014 , tapings of Ring of Honor Wrestling which aired on February 1 , with Kanellis helping Bennett defeat Cedric Alexander . Throughout the summer , Maria and Bennett would get involved in Matt Hardy 's feud with The Briscoes , which would result a tag team match at the Best in the World pay @-@ per @-@ view on June 22 , which Hardy and Bennett would lose despite Maria 's interference . During the feud , The Kingdom stole Jay Briscoe 's title ; Matt Hardy customized it as the Iconic Championship . At All Stars Extravaganza 6 , Bennett and Maria customized the title as the Championship of Love . They were interrupted by Jay Briscoe 's brother , Mark . Bennett and Kanellis left ROH after the December 19 , 2015 , Ring of Honor Wrestling taping , after failing to come to terms on a new contract with the promotion . 
 = = = Other promotions ( 2012 – 2015 ) = = = 
 On February 25 , 2012 , Maria won a tournament to determine the inaugural Family Wrestling Entertainment ( FWE ) Women 's Champion . The victory also marked Kanellis ' first championship in professional wrestling . She held the championship until March 24 , when she lost it to Winter in a three @-@ way match also involving Rosita . In July , Kanellis regained the championship from Winter . Kanellis successfully defended her title against Angelina Love at FWE : No Limits . 
 In September 2012 , Kanellis made her debut for Chikara , managing Mike Bennett and The Young Bucks to the finals of the 2012 King of Trios tournament . Alongside Gavin Loudspeaker , Kanellis hosted the 2014 National Pro Wrestling Day . On October 4 , 2014 , Maria lost the FWE Women 's Championship against Ivelisse Vélez 
 = = = New Japan Pro Wrestling ( 2015 ) = = = 
 On April 6 , 2015 , Kanellis managed Bennett and Matt Taven to capture New Japan Pro Wrestling 's IWGP Tag Team Championship at Invasion Attack 2015 . The following day , NJPW announced that , due to Kanellis ' popularity , the promotion had booked its first match involving female wrestlers since October 2002 , which would see Kanellis team up with Bennett and Taven to take on Amber Gallows , Doc Gallows and Karl Anderson at Wrestling Dontaku 2015 on May 3 . Kanellis pinned Amber to win the match . On July 5 at Dominion 7 @.@ 5 in Osaka @-@ jo Hall , Kanellis accompanied Bennett and Taven to their first IWGP Tag Team Championship defense against Doc Gallows and Karl Anderson . The Kingdom lost the match and the championship , after Doc Gallows superkicked Kanellis , which distracted Bennett , leaving Taven alone to lose the match . 
 = = = Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( 2016 – present ) = = = 
 On January 5 , 2016 , during Impact Wrestling 's premiere on Pop TV , Maria made her debut as a heel introducing her husband as " The Miracle " Mike Bennett . In February , Maria started her first feud in the company , with Gail Kim , the then TNA Knockouts Champion , after the latter refused Maria 's help to make her go " mainstream " . On the April 19 episode of Impact Wrestling , Maria won a ladder match to become the new TNA Knockouts Division Commissioner . 
 = = Other media = = 
 In 2004 , she was a contestant on the reality show , Outback Jack . She made it to the final three before being eliminated . 
 During the week of November 5 , 2007 , she appeared on five episodes of Family Feud with several other WWE superstars . She also appeared on the February 6 , 2008 episode of Project Runway with some of the other WWE Divas . On August 17 , 2008 , Maria , Candice Michelle , and Eve Torres were on an episode of Sunset Tan . Kanellis later appeared on VH1 's Top 20 Video Countdown , along with John Cena . On December 17 , 2009 , she was a guest host on G4 's Attack of the Show . Kanellis began a new career as a mixed martial arts announcer for HDNet on March 26 , 2010 at the King of the Cage event in Reno , Nevada . Kanellis was also a contestant on the Celebrity Apprentice , which premiered in March 2010 . She was eliminated on the May 16 episode . She placed fifth out of fourteen contestants . 
 Kanellis was first asked to pose for Playboy when she was nineteen years old , but she turned down the offer in fear of embarrassing her sister . She eventually posed for the cover of the April 2008 issue , with an accompanying nude pictorial . For the pictorial , she chose her own wardrobe and made the black hooded jacket she wore in one of the photos . That same year , FHM named her 53rd of 100 on their " The Sexiest Women 2008 " list . With WWE transitioning to PG content a few months after Kanellis 's pictorial and Playboy itself announcing it would go non @-@ nude starting with the March 2016 issue , Kanellis was ultimately the last active WWE Diva to pose nude for the magazine . 
 Kanellis is also a singer and released her debut album Sevin Sins on April 13 , 2010 , with " Fantasy " as the first single . 
 In early 2011 , Kanellis starred in online comedy webshow Funny or Die , and in March 2011 she launched her own perfume line called Signature . In September 2011 , Kanellis launched her DVD line in conjunction with Code Red DVD called Maria 's B Movie Mayhem . 
 In January 2014 , Kanellis and Bennett launched a weekly podcast called Mike & Maria in Wonderland . 
 = = = Discography = = = 
 = = = = EPs = = = = 
 2010 : Sevin Sins 
 = = = Filmography = = = 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Kanellis previously dated fellow wrestler CM Punk between 2005 and 2007 , after the pair met during their tenures at OVW . In a December 2011 interview , Kanellis confirmed she was dating Mike Bennett , and they later got engaged . On October 10 , 2014 , Bennett and Kanellis got married . Following her wedding she became a step mother to Bennett 's son Austin . 
 In 2013 , Kanellis began working toward an associate degree in art at university . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Beautiful Bulldog ( Running bulldog ) — 2006 — 2007 ; 2009 – present 
 Diving clothesline — 2008 
 Diving crossbody — 2008 — 2009 ; used as a signature thereafter 
 Signature moves 
 Bronco buster , with theatrics 
 Cartwheel evasion 
 Headscissors takedown 
 Enzuigiri 
 Monkey flip 
 Multiple pin variations 
 Inside cradle 
 Roll @-@ up 
 Schoolgirl 
 Sunset flip 
 Roundhouse kick 
 Seeing Stars ( Handstand calf kick ) 
 Split – legged fist drop 
 Thesz press 
 Nicknames 
 " First Lady of ROH " 
 " The First Lady of ( Professional ) Wrestling " 
 Wrestlers managed 
 Santino Marella 
 Dolph Ziggler 
 Michael / Mike Bennett 
 Matt Taven 
 Adam Cole 
 Matt Hardy 
 The Young Bucks 
 Managers 
 Santino Marella 
 Candice Michelle 
 Trish Stratus 
 John Cena 
 Entrance themes 
 " Pa @-@ Pa @-@ Pa @-@ Pa @-@ Party " by Jim Johnston ( WWE ; 2005 – 2006 ) 
 " With Legs Like That " by Zebrahead ( WWE ; 2006 – 2010 / FWE ; 2012 – 2014 ) 
 " Sevin Sins " by Maria Kanellis ( FWE ; 2012 – 2014 ) 
 " <unk> " by Avenue F ( ROH ; 2010 – 2014 ) 
 " Something for You " by David Rolfe ( ROH ; 2014 ; used while part of The Kingdom ) 
 " Something for You / Suffer Unto Me " by Avenue F & David Rolfe ( ROH ; 2014 – 2016 ; used while part of The Kingdom ) 
 " Fire Guitar " by Fabio <unk> ( NJPW ; April 5 , 2015 – December 9 , 2015 ; used while part of The Kingdom ) 
 " Forever in My Dreams " by Thomas <unk> and Nick <unk> ( TNA ; January 5 , 2016 – present ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Family Wrestling Entertainment 
 FWE Women 's Championship ( 2 times ) 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI ranked her No. 21 of the top 50 female wrestlers in the PWI Female 50 in 2008 
 World Wrestling Entertainment 
 Slammy Award for Diva of the Year ( 2009 ) 
 = Nepotism ( The Office ) = 
 " Nepotism " is the seventh season premiere of the American comedy television series The Office and the show 's 127th episode overall . Written by Daniel Chun and directed by Jeffrey Blitz , the episode aired on NBC in the United States on September 23 , 2010 . The episode guest stars Kathy Bates as Jo Bennett , Evan Peters as Luke Cooper , and Hugh Dane as Hank . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In the episode , the office turns against Michael Scott when he refuses to fire the new office assistant , Luke ( Peters ) , who has a terrible attitude and happens to be Michael 's nephew . Meanwhile , after accidentally ruining one of Jim Halpert 's ( John Krasinski ) pranks , Pam Halpert ( Jenna Fischer ) tries to prank Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) in return . 
 " Nepotism " received generally positive reviews from television critics ; many commented upon the episode 's opening lip dub , although some noted it did not advance any story arcs . According to Nielsen ratings , the episode was watched by 8 @.@ 40 million viewers , a slight increase from the sixth season premiere , " Gossip " , and it finished second in its timeslot . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The office returns from summer with a new office assistant , Luke ( Evan Peters ) . However , it soon becomes clear that he only goofs off , deliberately messes up food and coffee runs , and has a poor attitude that leads everyone to openly despise him . When Michael ( Steve Carell ) steps up to defend him , it is revealed that Luke is Michael 's nephew , whom Michael hired in hope that it will end the estrangement between him and his half sister , Luke 's mother . The office demands Michael get rid of Luke , but he refuses . Later on in the day , the office employees discover the trunk of Luke 's car is filled with packages from the office that he neglected to send ( along with Michael 's rejected pants from Talbot 's ) . Since Luke is now costing the office customers , Gabe ( Zach Woods ) sends a heads @-@ up on the situation to CEO Jo Bennett ( Kathy Bates ) , who sternly tells Michael to deal with the situation . During a meeting Luke continues to rebel and act out , so Michael spanks him in front of the entire office , leaving Luke to quit and run away crying and the rest of them satisfied . Gabe assigns Michael six hours of counseling with Toby ( Paul Lieberstein ) after his ' physical assault ' of a fellow employee ; Michael is aghast at having to sit down with his archenemy , but under company policies the only alternative is termination . 
 Meanwhile , the rest of the office tells the camera crew what they 've been doing over the summer . Erin ( Ellie Kemper ) started dating Gabe , and Andy ( Ed Helms ) tries to play it cool by using his anger management techniques . Kelly attended a corporate training class as part of the " Print in All Colors " initiative for Sabre , and is trying to impress everyone by dressing up and ' sounding smarter ' . Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) bought the industrial park building , and Jim ( John Krasinski ) begins a lengthy prank to overload Dwight 's key ring with fake keys . Seeing Jim adding on keys , Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) instinctively laughs , alerting Dwight to Jim 's prank . Though Jim tries to take it gracefully , Pam senses that he is mad at her for spoiling the prank , so she tries to make it up to him by devising a prank of her own . She enlists Kevin to rewire the elevator so the buttons all do different things . To her dismay , Kevin 's alterations to the elevator 's ' circus board ' result in Pam and Dwight getting trapped in the elevator together . In the end the backfired prank does impress Jim . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Nepotism " was written by Daniel Chun and directed by Jeffrey Blitz , both of whom had worked on several previous episodes of The Office as writer and director , respectively . It was the seventh season premiere , and the first new episode to be broadcast since Steve Carell publicly announced he would depart from The Office by the end of the seventh season . At the time that " Nepotism " was filmed , the writers and producers had not yet determined who would replace Michael Scott as the office 's manager , nor whether that character would be the primary protagonist of the show . " Nepotism " features Kathy Bates , Hugh Dane and Evan Peters in guest appearances as Jo Bennet , Hank Tate and Luke Cooper , respectively . It was also the first episode to feature Zach Woods as a regular cast member , although he had previously guest starred as Gabe Lewis in several sixth season episodes . " Nepotism " featured an updated opening credits sequence which more strongly highlighted the entire supporting cast , rather than just the main characters . 
 The official website for The Office included three cut scenes from " Nepotism " within a week of its original release . In the first clip , Toby reveals that he self @-@ published his murder mystery novel and sold four copies , but is now being sued for plagiarism , while Kevin interviews that he 's decided to deliberately lie all the time about everything . In the second clip , which is one minute and 17 seconds , Michael attempts to instruct Luke on how to use the photocopier . In the final clip , Dwight inquires about buying a robot . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 During the cold open , the cast performs a lip dub to " Nobody but Me " , performed by The Human <unk> , with the intention of placing the video on the Internet . This refers to an Internet meme trend that started with a 2009 YouTube video released by students of the Université du Québec à Montréal , in which hundreds of students lip @-@ synched The Black Eyed Peas song " I Gotta Feeling " in one continuous take . 
 After pranking Dwight , Pam declares herself the " Bart Simpson of Scranton " , a reference to the mischievous protagonist from the animated comedy series The Simpsons . Creed indicates he follows Luke on the social @-@ networking website Twitter specifically because Luke does not write about the actress Betty White , who was particularly popular at the time the episode aired . The same day " Nepotism " was broadcast , White appeared in the second @-@ season premiere of Community , another comedy series on NBC . 
 Michael claims that during his summer he caught the West Nile virus , an illness commonly transported by mosquito bite . He also claims to have watched Inception , a Christopher Nolan @-@ directed science fiction film that was critically and commercial successful in the summer of 2010 . Michael alludes , however , that he may have only dreamed about watching the film , a reference to the ambiguity surrounding the movie 's plot about extracting information from dreams . In one scene , Darryl explains he blew out his knee playing softball over the summer and watched a great deal of the cable news network CNN , which led him to develop grave concerns about the ongoing War in Afghanistan . Luke declares himself a lover of cinema and says his favorite films are Citizen Kane , a classic 1941 film by Orson Welles , and The <unk> Saints , a 1999 crime thriller film . When Jim comments on the outrageous number of keys on Dwight 's keyring , Dwight responds by saying , " The bigger the keychain , the more powerful the man " , which Jim recognizes as a quote by the janitor from the show Scrubs . While trying to recall the last time he saw Luke , Michael remembers it was the release year of Ace Ventura : When Nature Calls ( 1995 ) , a comedy film starring Jim Carrey . Michael has Luke pick up pants for him from Talbots , a retail store that specializes in women 's clothing and accessories ; this also serves as a callback to the Season 3 episode " The Negotiation " , where Michael accidentally bought and then wore a women 's pantsuit produced by a clothing brand called <unk> . While reflecting on how difficult it is to work with family , he wonders aloud how the Ringling brothers have managed the Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey Circus for so many years . He also claims that mixing family and business is a beautiful thing by illustrating what a bad idea it would have been to have open auditions for the band Hanson . Throughout the episode , Dwight wears a <unk> , a hydration backpack from which the wearer drinks water through a hose . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Nepotism " first aired on September 23 , 2010 . In its original American broadcast , it was viewed by an estimated 8 @.@ 40 million viewers with a 4 @.@ 4 rating / 11 % share in the 18 – 49 demographic coming second in its time slot and improving its rating by 1 @.@ 80 million viewers from last season 's finale . 
 The Atlantic writer Suzanne <unk> praised the episode , and felt the opening lip @-@ syncing scene highlighted the talents of the entire cast . However , she said the subplots were not as strong as the main story involving Michael , which underscored the challenge writers would have in maintaining The Office after Steve Carell 's departure . The A.V. Club writer Myles McNutt , who said he was critical of the sixth season , said " Nepotism " was effective both in its main storyline involving Michael and Luke , and its B story involving Pam pulling a prank on Dwight . Although slightly disappointed that the episode did not allude to Michael 's eventual replacement , McNutt said " Nepotism " demonstrated The Office would continue to be the same show even without Carell . <unk> <unk> of The Cornell Daily Sun highly praised the episode , claiming it highlighted the best traits of all the characters . She especially praised the cold open and the ending scene with Michael spanking Luke . Phoebe Reilly of New York magazine said the episode lacked any poor points , and said it established the season as one of " a mix of high jinks and heart " . Rick Porter of Zap2it described " Nepotism " as " an old @-@ school episode " with a strong main story and subplot , and praised Kelly 's new attitude following her executive training . His only criticism was that Dwight seemed too over @-@ the @-@ top , particularly while wielding a knife during the cold open lip dub . 
 Kevin Fitzpatrick of UGO Networks said that this was a good episode , but not an especially important one which failed to advance any ongoing story lines . Although he called scenes like Michael spanking Luke and his defense of Luke during the meeting as " classic Scott " , Fitzpatrick also said the episode does little to start establishing a proper send @-@ off for the character 's final season . Time magazine television critic James Poniewozik called it " a fine but unremarkable , meat @-@ and @-@ potatoes Office about a Michael screw @-@ up " , which made him question whether the show could continue after Carell left . Although he complimented individual moments , Poniewozik called the cold open a " self @-@ congratulatory , awkward ( and ) unearned curtain call " . Joel Keller of TV Squad praised the cold open , but felt the rest of the episode was extremely disappointing . Keller said few of the characters ' stories about how they spent their summers stood out , and said Michael 's spanking of Luke was awkward and unfunny . <unk> Kelly Peters of Blast magazine said the episode started strong with the lip synching cold open , but that the rest of the episode was not as funny as the series often is , describing it as " mundane hilarity " . 
 The spanking scene , with Michael Scott 's shouts of , " You are going to learn to be more professional ! That is what you are going to do ! " has become a popular soundbite on The Dennis Prager Show whenever the radio show 's production crew makes a mistake . 
 = Windosill = 
 Windosill is a 2009 puzzle video game by Vectorpark for Microsoft Windows , OS X , Linux , web browsers , and iOS . The player advances through eleven rooms through interacting with each level 's environmental objects . It was developed by artist Patrick Smith , who taught himself to animate and program the game in Adobe Flash . He was inspired by a variety of painters and artists . The game was first released for Windows , OS X , and web browsers in 2009 , and was later ported to the iPad in 2011 with several added features . 
 The game received " universal acclaim " , according to video game review score aggregator Metacritic . Reviewers noted the game 's especially short duration , memorability , art style , and emphasis on exploration over problem solving . Windosill has influenced games including Alto 's Adventure , Blek , Donut County , and Monument Valley . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 In Windosill , the player solves logic puzzles to progress through eleven successive rooms . Everything on @-@ screen is interactive . The player experiments with the environmental objects in each room to find a hidden cube , which unlocks the door to the next level , through which the player guides a toy car . Responsive objects in each room include light switches , piles of leaves , clocks , " a squishy thing with an eye on top " , a building that grows legs when spun , a box that grows hair when touched , and a smokestack that can be squeezed to make clouds . Interactions with these objects reveal subsequent objects and possible interactions . 
 = = Development = = 
 Patrick Smith , a Brooklyn @-@ based artist , drew , animated , and programmed Windosill by himself for Microsoft Windows , OS X , Linux , web browser , and iPad ( iOS ) platforms . His collection of interactive animations and games , which he began around 2001 , are released under the name " Vectorpark " . Although Edge previously covered and praised Smith 's prior work , they wrote that he " is notable for never having made the jump to the mainstream " . 
 Smith first sketched Windosill level ideas in pencil , and transferred his favorites into Adobe Illustrator , where he added detail , " shapes and colors " . He then animated and programmed the scenes in Adobe Flash , and incorporated sounds from <unk> . While Smith studied painting at Washington University , he learned to animate and program on his own . He developed his own 3D and physics code instead of using existing software libraries , as he prefers to use code he fully understands . When Smith built the game , he considered the " aesthetic and functional aspects holistically " . Smith 's main inspirations when creating Windosill were mainly artists and not games : surrealists René Magritte and Joan Miró , metaphysical painter Giorgio de Chirico , animators Max and Dave Fleischer of Fleischer Studios , cartoonists Chris Ware and Jim Woodring , sculptor Alexander Calder , and Italian Renaissance painters Paolo Uccello and Piero della Francesca . Smith credits the latter painters for his use of flat shapes as 3D forms . Windosill was not designed for a specific audience — in fact , Smith designed them for his own enjoyment — but he noted that its " toy @-@ like " qualities and emphasis on discovery were intentional . 
 Windosill was originally released in 2009 as a downloadable Flash game for Microsoft Windows and OS X. In this version , the first half of Windosill 's was free @-@ to @-@ play and its second half could be unlocked with payment . Smith was satisfied with its sales , but said " it will take a long time to fund itself " . An iOS ( iPad @-@ only ) port was released on December 15 , 2011 , and added two features : Complex Gravity ( which adds " tilt controls " ) and See @-@ Thru ( which makes the room 's elements transparent ) . It also includes a 20 @-@ piece collection of concept art . The game was included in the April 2012 Amanita Design Humble Bundle . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received " universal acclaim " , according to video game review score aggregator Metacritic . Reviewers noted the game 's especially short duration , memorability , and emphasis on exploration over problem solving . Multiple reviewers praised the game 's art style . Nissa Campbell of TouchArcade described the style as " surreal " , and Tim Rattray of Slide to Play wrote that Windosill is " serious " in its attempt to " be ' art ' " . Critics described Windosill as not just a game but " a toy " in itself . GameSetWatch selected the game for their " Best of Indie Games " the week of May 2 , 2009 . 
 Campbell of TouchArcade wrote that the iOS port was " always meant to be " due to the <unk> of the game 's puzzles . Campbell added that iOS multitouch changed how players could interact with the puzzles , though it did not change any of the solutions . The reviewer wrote that the controls were intuitive and designed for experimenting , as there is no tutorial . Kirk Hamilton of Kotaku similarly wrote that the game helped him remember " how wonderfully tactile the iPad can be " . 
 Rattray of Slide to Play described Windosill as " an interactive abstract mosaic " and " absolute thrill ride " . He described the puzzle design and production value as " brilliant " , and praised the " fitting " sound effects , " smooth " controls , and " perfect " frame rate . 148Apps 's Dan Lee also called the puzzles " brilliant " , and described them as " so abstract " as to require unconventional thinking . Anthony Burch of Destructoid added that the puzzles were designed such that players would not become " frustrated or bored " . Lee and Rattray said there was little reason to return to the game after playing through , apart from a few minutes to experiment with the added iOS features . While Lee considered this a " niggle " , Rattray praised its brevity . 
 Windosill has influenced games including Alto 's Adventure , Blek , Donut County , and Monument Valley . Smith later made the 2015 interactive alphabet game <unk> . 
 = Clint Grant = 
 Donald Clinton " Clint " Grant ( August 17 , 1916 – April 21 , 2010 ) was an American photographer and photojournalist based in Dallas , Texas . He was a staff photographer with The Dallas Morning News from 1949 to 1986 . He was particularly known for his " humorous and touching " images of animals and children . Grant 's photographs were published in numerous newspapers and magazines , including Paris Match , Newsweek and Time ; five of his feature photos were published on the back page of issues of Life magazine . 
 Grant was on assignment in November 1963 to cover President John F. Kennedy 's trip from Washington , D.C. , to Dallas . One of his photographs made the front page of the November 22 edition of the Morning News ; a copy is believed to be the last thing Kennedy ever signed . Grant also would make several pictures at Parkland Memorial Hospital within minutes after Kennedy 's motorcade arrived following the shooting in Dealey Plaza . 
 Grant was the recipient of multiple photojournalism awards during his career , including the Medallion for Excellence in <unk> . He retired from The Dallas Morning News in 1986 , but continued working in a semi @-@ retired capacity for more than a decade thereafter . He died in Dallas of heart failure at age 93 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Clint Grant was born in Nashville , Tennessee . During his time at Vanderbilt University , economic troubles brought on by the Great Depression forced Grant 's family to move from Nashville ; they settled in Dallas , Texas , where his father was asked to lead the Art Department at the Morning News . Grant got a job with the Photo Department , but he was drafted into the United States Army before he could report to work . Grant served during World War II in Europe , where he never used a camera . 
 Grant married <unk> Ann Halliburton in 1939 after a brief courtship ; they had known each other for ten months before they walked down the aisle . When they met , he worked behind the dairy counter at the local A & P market where she was a customer . 
 = = Photography and photojournalism = = 
 When Grant returned from overseas to Dallas in 1945 , all Morning News staff photographers resumed their duties , leaving him without a job . He ran a photography studio until 1949 , when a position at the newspaper became available . 
 During his early years with the News , Grant was one of up to ten staff photographers , including Jack Beers , Tom Dillard , Doris Jacoby and Joe Laird . He gained a reputation as a " kind and generous " mentor while with the newspaper , accompanying many young photographers on their early assignments ; one such staffer later recalled that whenever the Morning News needed a feature photograph , they would send " the trusty Clint Grant " to the zoo to work with an animal . His editor said Grant 's knack for putting both people and animals at ease for photographs came largely because he " had the patience of Job . " 
 Grant 's work also accompanied sports stories . A photograph of a boxing fan and a fallen fighter was named one of the best sports pictures of 1956 . 
 Grant taught classes in photography in the 1950s and ' 60s at North Texas University , where he served on the journalism advisory board . He was also the official photographer for the Dallas Zoo and the State Fair of Texas . 
 In an interview , Grant said he had his own tricks for making photos , especially of unwilling subjects at the sites of news stories . He would pre @-@ focus , pretend to not aim the camera , and " shoot from the hip . " He believed that any good photojournalist should have the skills necessary to do the job without needing to use the viewfinder . 
 One of Grant 's photos was blown up to eight feet and displayed for one year in Grand Central Terminal in New York . He also photographed the culinary creations of some of the best chefs in Dallas , who all knew Grant and respected his work . A menu item at the Casa Dominguez restaurant in Dallas was named for Grant . 
 Two collections of Grant 's work have been published : Moments from Life : An Exhibition of Photographs from the Grant Estate in 2000 , and 50 Years of the Best Photos of Clint Grant in 2001 . Moments from Life was published to accompany a traveling exhibit of 55 of Grant 's images . One of his photographs was included in Humor in News Photography , a collection published in 1961 . Grant was assigned to photograph some new cars and laid his hat atop one of the taillights ; the resulting image resembled " a Halloween spook , a Martian or the pilot of a satellite . " A Grant picture published by Life magazine was included in its 1988 compilation Life Smiles Back . 
 In addition to his feature photographs , Grant was known for his work accompanying hard news stories . Grant photographed every U.S. president and vice president starting with Harry S. Truman and through the administration of George H. W. Bush . He was present for the 1961 funeral for three @-@ time House Speaker Sam Rayburn , where he captured former Presidents Truman and Dwight D. Eisenhower , President Kennedy , House Parliamentarian Clarence Cannon , and Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson standing together . 
 = = = John F. Kennedy = = = 
 = = = = Dallas , 1960 = = = = 
 John F. Kennedy and his running mate , Lyndon B. Johnson , were close to securing their spots on the Democrats ' ticket when they took a two @-@ day swing through the Dallas – Fort Worth area in September 1960 . Landing at Meacham Airport , the candidates rode in a motorcade through Dallas to the Chance Vought Aircraft factory , where Kennedy made an address . Clint Grant accompanied Kennedy and Johnson , making numerous photographs of the trip ; the pictures were developed , but kept in storage until their publication in 2013 . 
 = = = = Dallas , 1963 = = = = 
 Several days before President Kennedy made his November flight to Texas , Grant had been assigned to cover the state 's delegation in Washington , D.C. , then fly back with the White House press corps ; he was the only photographer to make the trip . At Dallas Love Field , Grant made the only published photograph from that visit of the president and Jacqueline Kennedy , Lyndon Johnson and Lady Bird Johnson , and Texas Governor John Connally and Nellie Connally , all in the same image . Another of Grant 's photos , from San Antonio 's Aerospace Medicine Center , was published on the front page of the Dallas Morning News on November 22 ; a copy was signed that morning by President Kennedy — across the photo , " To Jan White " — and is believed to be the last item he signed before he climbed aboard the presidential limousine for his intended trip to the Dallas Trade Mart . 
 Grant tried to find a seat in the third camera car in the motorcade — the one reserved for local photographers — but it was full ; he was then given a spot in the second camera car . Too far back to capture the shooting in Dealey Plaza , Grant 's car had just turned onto Houston Street from Main Street " when we heard one shot — pause — two shots in rapid succession . " Thinking someone was playing a prank , he gave it no further thought until he saw bystanders " prone on the ground " along Elm Street , where he made a photograph from the moving camera car of Bill and Gayle Newman lying atop their children on the grass . 
 Afterward , Grant suggested to his colleagues that they should catch up with the presidential limousine . Since he was the only Dallas @-@ based member of the press in camera car two , Grant directed his driver to the Trade Mart , where they saw " no cars , no activity " . A worker across the street said he saw a limousine speed past , accompanied by motorcycles with their sirens blaring ; Grant knew immediately that they were headed to Parkland Memorial Hospital . Once at Parkland , Grant started snapping pictures of anything he could , including Vice President Johnson 's car , and a man and a police officer " delivering a box thought to contain blood plasma . " 
 Grant later covered the trial of Jack Ruby . On the day the verdict was read , he believed his assignment was to photograph the jurors , but they " were too well shielded " . 
 Twenty @-@ five years after the assassination , Grant wrote that the events didn 't really sink in until after he 'd finished his work that day . " Then I was stunned , disappointed and embarrassed that it had happened — especially in my home town . I felt like crawling under a log . Although I wasn 't a great admirer , he was my President and I have great respect for whoever holds the office . " 
 = = = = Reporters ' panel , 1993 = = = = 
 Grant took part in " Reporters Remember 11 @-@ 22 @-@ 63 " at Southern Methodist University in Dallas in November 1993 . The panel discussion , broadcast on C @-@ SPAN as Journalists Remember the JFK Assassination , featured members of the press who spoke of their experiences on the day 30 years earlier that Kennedy was killed . From the dais , Grant recalled having asked his boss if he should go back to Washington , D.C. , with Kennedy 's body and being told no . Grant said he returned to Love Field to retrieve his luggage ahead of a planned visit to Vice President Johnson 's ranch nearby ; just as he reached the planes he saw Judge Sarah T. Hughes leaving Air Force One . " I 'd just missed her swearing in the new president . " 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Grant retired his position with The Dallas Morning News in 1986 ; he stayed on in a semi @-@ retired capacity until 1997 . Five years later , Grant was awarded an honorary degree from Knox College in Illinois , which congratulated Grant for " more than 100 state , regional and national honors for photojournalism " . Associate Professor of Art Lynette Lombard lauded Grant for his body of work starting in 1963 and , in particular , his pictures " of world leaders , of children and of everyday life . " In her address , Lombard said , " Clint Grant 's work for the Dallas Morning News made him one of this country 's most important photojournalists . Through his photography , he has helped establish photojournalism as one of our most important forms of documentation of the public record " . 
 Clint Grant died of heart failure in his Dallas home in 2010 . <unk> Grant , his wife of nearly 71 years , died in Dallas six months later . 
 = Battle of Machias ( 1777 ) = 
 The Battle of Machias ( August 13 – 14 , 1777 ) was an amphibious assault on the Massachusetts town of Machias ( in present @-@ day eastern Maine ) by British forces during the American Revolutionary War . Local militia aided by Indian allies successfully prevented British troops from landing . The raid , led by Commodore Sir George Collier was executed in an attempt to head off a planned second assault on Fort Cumberland , which had been besieged in November 1776 . The British forces landed below Machias , seized a ship , and raided a storehouse . 
 The outcome of the raid was disputed . Collier claimed that the action was successful in destroying military stores for an attack on Fort Cumberland ( although such stores had not been delivered to Machias ) , while the defenders claimed that they had successfully prevented the capture of Machias and driven off the British . 
 = = Background = = 
 The small community of Machias , located in the eastern district of Massachusetts that is now the state of Maine , was a persistent thorn in the side of British naval authorities since the start of the American Revolutionary War . In June 1775 its citizens rose up and seized a small naval vessel , and the community had ever since been a base for privateering . 
 In 1777 John Allan , an expatriate Nova Scotian , was authorized by the Second Continental Congress to organize an expedition to establish a Patriot presence in the western part of Nova Scotia ( present @-@ day New Brunswick ) . Although Congress authorized him to recruit as many as 3 @,@ 000 men , the Massachusetts government was only prepared to give him a colonel 's commission and authority to raise a regiment in eastern Massachusetts to establish a presence in the St. John River valley . Allan based his effort in Machias , and had by June landed some 40 men in the area . However , British authorities in Halifax had received some intelligence of Allan 's intended mission , and a larger British force arrived at the St. John River on June 23 . Men Allan had left at the settlements near the mouth of the river skirmished with the British but then withdrew upriver . Allan was forced to make a difficult overland journey back to Machias after his small force retreated up the river . He was joined on this journey by a number of sympathetic Maliseet Indians that he had persuaded to join the American cause . In early August the Massachusetts Provisional Congress voted to disband forces recruited for Allan 's expedition , because of the imminent threat posed by the army of General John Burgoyne in upstate New York . 
 Papers documenting Allan 's fairly elaborate plans , including a projected attack on Fort Cumberland , were taken during the action on the St. John River , and fell into the hands of Captain Sir George Collier , second in command to Admiral Mariot Arbuthnot in the naval station at Halifax . This spurred Collier to act , since there had already been one attempt on Fort Cumberland the previous year . He therefore organized an assault on Machias , Allan 's base of operations and the source of many of his recruits . Because Collier and the commander of land forces at Halifax , General Eyre Massey , did not get along , Collier decided to launch the expedition without taking on any British Army troops . He sailed from Halifax in late July in the frigate HMS Rainbow , accompanied by the brig HMS Blonde , planning to use the marines aboard those ships in ground operations . He was joined by the frigate HMS Mermaid and the sloop HMS Hope while making the passage to Machias . 
 The defense of Machias consisted of local militia under the command of Colonel Jonathan Eddy , the leader of the 1776 attack on Fort Cumberland . He had been warned that the British were organizing an attack . The militia laid a log boom across the Machias River , and constructed several earthen redoubts further upriver , armed with cannons taken from local privateers . The defense was coincidentally reinforced by 40 to 50 Maliseet , Passamaquoddy , and Penobscots that Colonel Allan had called to Machias to explain what had gone wrong with his expedition . 
 = = Battle = = 
 After leaving Halifax , Nova Scotia , Collier 's fleet arrived at the mouth of the river early on August 13 . He boarded 123 marines onto the Hope , and ordered her and the Blonde up the river . Word of this reached the militia , and 35 men mustered to oppose them . The ships reached the log boom , and a firefight began between the two forces . The militia resistance was sufficient to keep the British from attempting a landing that day . Early the next morning , under the cover of fog , the marines were landed . They cut the log boom , seized a sloop carrying lumber , and set fire to a storehouse , seizing stores of flour , rice , corn , shoes , and ammunition before returning to the ships . 
 The two ships then moved further up the river until they reached the town itself . All along the way they were harassed by musket and cannon fire from the shore , as the militia and their Indian allies positioned themselves to dispute possible landing sites . When darkness set in the Indians reportedly began chanting and shouting in an attempt to magnify their numbers . At this point , " To the great Surprise and <unk> of every one [ , ] in Less than half an Hour after Coming to an Anchor , the Brig & Sloop Both <unk> under way without firing a Gun " and " made down the River against the Tide of flood . " The Hope , however , ran aground while making its way downstream in the twilight . The militia hauled a swivel gun to a nearby shore , and peppered her with shot the next morning before she was refloated by the tide and made her way into Machias Bay . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Colonel Allan ascribed the militia 's success to British concerns that they might be entering a trap . He also grandiosely likened the encounter to another battle , writing " not an Action during the War Except Bunker Hill there was such a slaughter " . American estimates of British casualties ran from 40 to 100 , while claiming their own casualties at one killed and one wounded . The British reported their losses as three killed and 18 wounded , which were mainly incurred when the Hope grounded . 
 After departing from Machias , Collier cruised the Maine coast , capturing smaller American ships , and raided communities on the Sheepscot River . There he captured a frigate laden with mast timbers destined for France . In his report Collier declared the mission a success , and claimed to have successfully forestalled another invasion of Nova Scotia . He also believed that with another 100 men " the destruction [ of Machias ] would have been compleat " . General Massey , whose troops had been preparing to participate in the expedition but were excluded by Collier 's abrupt departure from Halifax , wrote that Collier " wanted the whole honour of destroying Machias " , and that he " stole out of Halifax , made a futile attack on Machias , was most shamefully drove from thence ... " 
 Machias was not attacked again during the war , although it became somewhat isolated when the British occupied Castine in 1779 , establishing the colony New Ireland . Collier returned to successfully defend New Ireland from the American patriot Penobscot Expedition . ( Machias and other parts of eastern Maine were successfully occupied by British forces during the War of 1812 , again the British created the colony New Ireland , but were returned to United States control after the war . ) 
 = Insect wing = 
 Insect wings are adult outgrowths of the insect exoskeleton that enable insects to fly . They are found on the second and third thoracic segments ( the mesothorax and metathorax ) , and the two pairs are often referred to as the forewings and hindwings , respectively , though a few insects lack hindwings , even rudiments . The wings are strengthened by a number of longitudinal veins , which often have cross @-@ connections that form closed " cells " in the membrane ( extreme examples include Odonata and Neuroptera ) . The patterns resulting from the fusion and cross @-@ connection of the wing veins are often diagnostic for different evolutionary lineages and can be used for identification to the family or even genus level in many orders of insects . 
 The physical dynamics of flight are composed of direct and indirect flight . Those species that employ direct flight have wing muscles directly attached to the wing base , so that a small downward movement of the wing base lifts the wing itself upward . However , insects with indirect flight have muscles that attach to the thorax and deform it ; since the wings are extensions of the thoracic exoskeleton , the deformations of the thorax cause the wings to move as well . 
 The wings may be present in only one sex ( often the male ) in some groups such as velvet ants and Strepsiptera , or selectively lost in " workers " of social insects such as ants and termites . Rarely , the female is winged but the male not , as in fig wasps . In some cases , wings are produced only at particular times in the life cycle , such as in the dispersal phase of aphids . Beyond the mere presence / absence of wings , the structure and colouration will often vary with morphs , such as in the aphids , migratory phases of locusts and in polymorphic butterflies . 
 At rest , the wings may be held flat , or folded a number of times along specific patterns ; most typically , it is the hindwings which are folded , but in a very few groups such as vespid wasps , it is the forewings . How and why insect wings evolved is not well understood . Three main theories on the origins of insect flight are that wings developed from paranotal lobes , extensions of the thoracic terga ; that they are modifications of movable abdominal gills as found on aquatic naiads of mayflies ; and that insect wings arose from the fusion of pre @-@ existing <unk> and exite structures each with pre @-@ existing articulation and tracheation . 
 = = Morphology = = 
 = = = Internal = = = 
 Each of the wings consists of a thin membrane supported by a system of veins . The membrane is formed by two layers of integument closely apposed , while the veins are formed where the two layers remain separate and the lower cuticle may be thicker and more heavily sclerotized . Within each of the major veins there is a nerve and a trachea , and , since the cavities of the veins are connected with the hemocoel , hemolymph can flow into the wings . Also veins are the wing 's lumen , being an extension of the hemocoel , which contains the tracheae , nerves , and hemolymph . As the wing develops , the dorsal and ventral <unk> layers become closely apposed over most of their area forming the wing membrane . The remaining areas form channels , the future veins , in which the nerves and tracheae may occur . The cuticle surrounding the veins becomes thickened and more heavily sclerotized to provide strength and rigidity to the wing . Two types of hair may occur on the wings : <unk> , which are small and irregularly scattered , and macrotrichia , which are larger , socketed , and may be restricted to veins . The scales of Lepidoptera and Trichoptera are highly modified macrotrichia . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In some very small insects , the venation may be greatly reduced . In <unk> ( Chalcid wasps ) , for instance , only the subcosta and part of the radius are present . Conversely , an increase in venation may occur by the branching of existing veins to produce accessory veins or by the development of additional , intercalary veins between the original ones , as in the wings of Orthoptera ( grasshoppers and crickets ) . Large numbers of cross @-@ veins are present in some insects , and they may form a reticulum as in the wings of Odonata ( dragonflies and damselflies ) and at the base of the forewings of <unk> and <unk> ( katydids and grasshoppers respectively ) . 
 The <unk> is the name given to a hypothetical scheme of wing venation proposed for the very first winged insect . It is based on a combination of speculation and fossil data . Since all winged insects are believed to have evolved from a common ancestor , the <unk> represents the " template " that has been modified ( and streamlined ) by natural selection for 200 million years . According to current dogma , the <unk> contained 6 – 8 longitudinal veins . These veins ( and their branches ) are named according to a system devised by John Comstock and George Needham — the Comstock @-@ Needham System : 
 Costa ( C ) – the leading edge of the wing 
 Subcosta ( Sc ) – second longitudinal vein ( behind the costa ) , typically unbranched 
 Radius ( R ) – third longitudinal vein , one to five branches reach the wing margin 
 Media ( M ) – fourth longitudinal vein , one to four branches reach the wing margin 
 Cubitus ( Cu ) – fifth longitudinal vein , one to three branches reach the wing margin 
 Anal veins ( A1 , A2 , A3 ) – unbranched veins behind the cubitus 
 The costa ( C ) is the leading marginal vein on most insects , although sometimes there is a small vein above the costa called the <unk> , although in almost all extant insects , the <unk> is fused with the costa ; The costa rarely ever branches because is at the leading edge , which is associated at its base with the humeral plate . The trachea of the costal vein is perhaps a branch of the subcostal trachea . Located after the costa is the third vein , the subcosta , which branches into two separate veins : the anterior and posterior . The base of the subcosta is associated with the distal end of the neck of the first axillary ( see section below ) . The fourth vein is the radius ( R ) , which is branched into five separate veins . The radius is generally the strongest vein of the wing . Toward the middle of the wing , it forks into a first undivided branch ( R1 ) and a second branch , called the radial sector ( Ra ) , which subdivides dichotomously into four distal branches ( R2 , R3 , R4 , R5 ) . <unk> , the radius is flexibly united with the anterior end of the second axillary ( <unk> ) . 
 The fifth vein of the wing is the media . In the archetype pattern ( A ) , the media forks into two main branches : a media anterior ( MA ) , which divides into two distal branches ( <unk> , <unk> ) , and a median sector , or media posterior ( MP ) , which has four terminal branches ( M1 , M2 , M3 , M4 ) . In most modern insects the media anterior has been lost , and the usual " media " is the four @-@ branched media posterior with the common basal stem . In the <unk> , according to present interpretations of the wing venation , both branches of the media are retained , while in Odonata the persisting media is the primitive anterior branch . The stem of the media is often united with the radius , but when it occurs as a distinct vein its base is associated with the distal median plate ( m ' ) or is continuously sclerotized with the latter . The cubitus , the sixth vein of the wing , is primarily two branched . The primary forking of the takes place near the base of the wing , forming the two principal branches ( <unk> , Cu2 ) . The anterior branch may break up into a number of secondary branches , but commonly it forks into two distal branches . The second branch of the cubitus ( Cu2 ) in Hymenoptera , Trichoptera , and Lepidoptera was mistaken by Comstock and Needham for the first anal . <unk> the main stem of the cubitus is associated with the distal median plate ( m ' ) of the wing base . 
 Postcubitus ( <unk> ) is the first anal of the Comstock and Needham system . The Postcubitus , however , has the status of an independent wing vein and should be recognized as such . In nymphal wings , its trachea arises between the <unk> trachea and the group of vannal tracheae . In the mature wings of more generalized insect the Postcubitus is always associated proximally with the cubitus and is never intimately connected with the flexor sclerite ( 3Ax ) of the wing base . In Neuroptera , Mecoptera , and Trichoptera the postcubitus may be more closely associated with the vannal veins , but its base is always free from the latter . The postcubitus is usually unbranched ; it is primitively two branched . The vannal veins ( <unk> to nV ) are the anal veins that are immediately associated with the third axillary , and which are directly affected by the movement of this sclerite that brings about the flexion of the wings . In number the vannal veins <unk> from 1 to 12 , according to the expansion of the vannal area of the wing . The vannal tracheae usually arise from a common tracheal stem in nymphal insects , and the veins are regarded as branches of a single anal vein . <unk> the vannal veins are either simple or branched . Jugal Veins ( J ) of the jugal lobe of the wing is often occupied by a network of irregular veins , or it may be entirely membranous ; but sometimes it contains one or two distinct small veins , the first jugal vein , or vena <unk> , and the second jugal vein , or vena cardinalis ( 2J ) . 
 C @-@ Sc cross @-@ veins – run between the costa and subcosta 
 R cross @-@ veins – run between adjacent branches of the radius 
 R @-@ M cross @-@ veins – run between the radius and media 
 M @-@ Cu cross @-@ veins – run between the media and cubitus 
 All the veins of the wing are subject to secondary forking and to union by cross @-@ veins . In some orders of insects the cross @-@ veins are so numerous that the whole <unk> pattern becomes a close network of branching veins and cross @-@ veins . Ordinarily , however , there is a definite number of cross @-@ veins having specific locations . The more constant cross @-@ veins are the humeral cross @-@ vein ( h ) between costa and subcosta , the radial cross @-@ vein ( r ) between R and the first fork of Rs , the <unk> cross @-@ vein ( s ) between the two forks of R8 , the median cross @-@ vein ( m – m ) between M2 and M3 , and the mediocubital cross @-@ vein ( m @-@ cu ) between media and cubitus . 
 The veins of insect wings are characterized by a convex @-@ concave placement , such as those seen in mayflies ( i.e. , concave is " down " and convex is " up " ) which alternate regularly and by its triadic type of branching ; whenever a vein forks there is always an interpolated vein of the opposite position between the two branches . A concave vein will fork into two concave veins ( with the interpolated vein being convex ) and the regular alteration of the veins is preserved . The veins of the wing appear to fall into an undulating pattern according to whether they have a tendency to fold up or down when the wing is relaxed . The basal shafts of the veins are convex , but each vein forks distally into an anterior convex branch and a posterior concave branch . Thus the costa and subcosta are regarded as convex and concave branches of a primary first vein , Rs is the concave branch of the radius , posterior media the concave branch of the media , <unk> and Cu2 are respectively convex and concave , while the primitive Postcubitus and the first vannal have each an anterior convex branch and a posterior concave branch . The convex or concave nature of the veins has been used as evidence in determining the identities of the persisting distal branches of the veins of modern insects , but it has not been demonstrated to be consistent for all wings . 
 = = = Fields = = = 
 Wing areas are delimited and subdivided by fold @-@ lines along which the wing can fold , and flexion @-@ lines along which the wing can flex during flight . The fundamental distinction between the flexion @-@ lines and the fold @-@ lines is often blurred , as fold @-@ lines may permit some flexibility or vice versa . Two constants that are found in nearly all insect wings are the claval ( a flexion @-@ line ) and jugal folds ( or fold line ) ; forming variable and unsatisfactory boundaries . Wing <unk> can very complicated , with transverse folding occurs in the hind wings of Dermaptera and Coleoptera , and in some insects the anal area can be folded like a fan . There are about four different fields found on the insect wings : 
 <unk> 
 Anal area ( vannus ) 
 Jugal area 
 Axillary area 
 Alula 
 Most veins and crossveins occur in the anterior area of the remigium , which is responsible for most of the flight , powered by the thoracic muscles . The posterior portion of the remigium is sometimes called the clavus ; the two other posterior fields are the anal and jugal ares . When the vannal fold has the usual position anterior to the group of anal veins , the remigium contains the costal , subcostal , radial , medial , <unk> , and <unk> veins . In the flexed wing the <unk> posteriorly on the flexible basal connection of the radius with the second axillary , and the base of the mediocubital field is folded medially on the axillary region along the plica basalis ( bf ) between the median plates ( m , m ' ) of the wing base . 
 The vannus is bordered by the vannal fold , which typically occurs between the postcubitus and the first vannal vein . In Orthoptera it usually has this position . In the forewing of <unk> , however , the only fold in this part of the wing lies immediately before the postcubitus . In Plecoptera the vannal fold is posterior to the postcubitus , but proximally it crosses the base of the first vannal vein . In the cicada the vannal fold lies immediately behind the first vannal vein ( <unk> ) . These small variations in the actual position of the vannal fold , however , do not affect the unity of action of the vannal veins , controlled by the flexor sclerite ( 3Ax ) , in the flexion of the wing . In the hind wings of most Orthoptera a secondary vena <unk> forms a rib in the vannal fold . The vannus is usually triangular in shape , and its veins typically spread out from the third axillary like the ribs of a fan . Some of the vannal veins may be branched , and secondary veins may alternate with the primary veins . The vannal region is usually best developed in the hind wing , in which it may be enlarged to form a sustaining surface , as in Plecoptera and Orthoptera . The great <unk> expansions of the hind wings of Acrididae are clearly the vannal regions , since their veins are all supported on the third axillary sclerites on the wing bases , though Martynov ( 1925 ) ascribes most of the fan areas in Acrididae to the jugal regions of the wings . The true jugum of the <unk> wing is represented only by the small membrane ( Ju ) <unk> of the last vannal vein . The jugum is more highly developed in some other Orthoptera , as in the Mantidae . In most of the higher insects with narrow wings the vannus becomes reduced , and the vannal fold is lost , but even in such cases the flexed wing may bend along a line between the postcubitus and the first vannal vein . 
 The Jugal Region , or Neala , is a region of the wing that is usually a small membranous area proximal to the base of the vannus strengthened by a few small , irregular <unk> thickenings ; but when well developed it is a distinct section of the wing and may contain one or two jugal veins . When the jugal area of the forewing is developed as a free lobe , it projects beneath the humeral angle of the hind wing and thus serves to yoke the two wings together . In the <unk> group of Lepidoptera it bears a long finger @-@ like lobe . The jugal region was termed the <unk> ( " new wing " ) because it is evidently a secondary and recently developed part of the wing . 
 The axillary region is region containing the axillary sclerites has in general the form of a scalene triangle . The base of the triangle ( a @-@ b ) is the hinge of the wing with the body ; the apex ( c ) is the distal end of the third axillary sclerite ; the longer side is anterior to the apex . The point d on the anterior side of the triangle marks the articulation of the radial vein with the second axillary sclerite . The line between d and c is the plica basalis ( bf ) , or fold of the wing at the base of the mediocubital field . 
 At the posterior angle of the wing base in some Diptera there is a pair of membranous lobes ( squamae , or <unk> ) known as the alula . The alula is well developed in the house fly . The outer squama ( c ) arises from the wing base behind the third axillary sclerite ( 3Ax ) and evidently represents the jugal lobe of other insects ( A , D ) ; the larger inner squama ( d ) arises from the posterior <unk> margin of the tergum of the wing @-@ bearing segment and forms a protective , <unk> canopy over the halter . In the flexed wing the outer squama of the alula is turned upside down above the inner squama , the latter not being affected by the movement of the wing . In many Diptera a deep incision of the anal area of the wing membrane behind the single vannal vein sets off a proximal <unk> lobe distal to the outer squama of the alula . 
 = = = Joints = = = 
 The various movements of the wings , especially in insects that flex the wings horizontally over the back when at rest , demand a more complicated articular structure at the wing base than a mere hinge of the wing with the body . Each wing is attached to the body by a membranous basal area , but the articular membrane contains a number of small articular sclerites , collectively known as the pteralia . The pteralia include an anterior humeral plate at the base of the costal vein , a group of axillaries ( Ax ) associated with the subcostal , radial , and vannal veins , and two less definite median plates ( m , m ' ) at the base of the mediocubital area . The axillaries are specifically developed only in the wing @-@ flexing insects , where they constitute the flexor mechanism of the wing operated by the flexor muscle arising on the pleuron . Characteristic of the wing base is also a small lobe on the anterior margin of the articular area proximal to the humeral plate , which , in the forewing of some insects , is developed into a large , flat , scale @-@ like flap , the tegula , overlapping the base of the wing . <unk> the articular membrane often forms an ample lobe between the wing and the body , and its margin is generally thickened and corrugated , giving the appearance of a ligament , the so @-@ called axillary cord , continuous <unk> with the posterior marginal <unk> fold of the tergal plate bearing the wing . 
 The articular sclerites , or pteralia , of the wing base of the wing @-@ flexing insects and their relations to the body and the wing veins , shown diagrammatically , are as follows : 
 Humeral plates 
 First Axillary 
 Second Axillary 
 Third Axillary 
 Fourth Axillary 
 Median plates ( m , m ' ) 
 The humeral plate is usually a small sclerite on the anterior margin of the wing base , movable and articulated with the base of the costal vein . Odonata have their humeral plate greatly enlarged , with two muscles arising from the <unk> inserted into the Humeral plates and two from the edge of the <unk> inserted into the axillary plate . 
 The first axillary sclerite ( <unk> ) is the anterior hinge plate of the wing base . Its anterior part is supported on the anterior notal wing process of the tergum ( ANP ) ; its posterior part articulates with the tergal margin . The anterior end of the sclerite is generally produced as a slender arm , the apex of which ( e ) is always associated with the base of the subcostal vein ( Sc ) , though it is not united with the latter . The body of the sclerite articulates laterally with the second axillary . The second axillary sclerite ( <unk> ) is more variable in form than the first axillary , but its mechanical relations are no less definite . It is obliquely hinged to the outer margin of the body of the first axillary , and the radial vein ( R ) is always flexibly attached to its anterior end ( d ) . The second axillary presents both a dorsal and a ventral <unk> in the wing base ; its ventral surface rests upon the <unk> wing process of the pleuron . The second axillary , therefore , is the pivotal sclerite of the wing base , and it specifically manipulates the radial vein . 
 The third axillary sclerite ( 3Ax ) lies in the posterior part of the articular region of the wing . Its form is highly variable and often irregular , but the third axillary is the sclerite on which is inserted the flexor muscle of the wing ( D ) . <unk> it articulates anteriorly ( f ) with the posterior end of the second axillary , and posteriorly ( b ) with the posterior wing process of the tergum ( PNP ) , or with a small fourth axillary when the latter is present . <unk> the third axillary is prolonged in a process which is always associated with the bases of the group of veins in the anal region of the wing here termed the vannal veins ( V ) . The third axillary , therefore , is usually the posterior hinge plate of the wing base and is the active sclerite of the flexor mechanism , which directly manipulates the vannal veins . The contraction of the flexor muscle ( D ) revolves the third axillary on its <unk> articulations ( b , f ) and thereby lifts its distal arm ; this movement produces the flexion of the wing . The Fourth Axillary sclerite is not a constant element of the wing base . When present it is usually a small plate intervening between the third axillary and the posterior notal wing process and is probably a detached piece of the latter . 
 The median plates ( m , m ' ) are also sclerites that are not so definitely differentiated as specific plates as are the three principal axillaries , but nevertheless they are important elements of the flexor apparatus . They lie in the median area of the wing base distal to the second and third axillaries and are separated from each other by an oblique line ( bf ) which forms a prominent convex fold during flexion of the wing . The proximal plate ( m ) is usually attached to the distal arm of the third axillary and perhaps should be regarded as a part of the latter . The distal plate ( m ' ) is less constantly present as a distinct sclerite and may be represented by a general <unk> of the base of the mediocubital field of the wing . When the veins of this region are distinct at their bases , they are associated with the outer median plate . 
 = = = Muscles = = = 
 The muscles that control flight in insects can take up to 10 % to 30 % of the total body mass . The muscles that control flight vary with the two types of flight found in insects : indirect and direct . Insects that use first , indirect , have the muscles attach to the tergum instead of the wings , as the name suggests . As the muscles contract , the thoracic box becomes distorted , transferring the energy to the wing . There are two " bundles " of muscles , those that span parallel to the tergum , the <unk> , and those that are attached to the <unk> and extend to the sternum , the <unk> . In direct muscle , the connection is directly from the pleuron ( thoracic wall ) to individual sclerites located at the base of the wing . The subalar and basalar muscles have ligament attachments to the subalar and basalar sclerites . Here <unk> , a highly elastic material , forms the ligaments connecting flight muscles to the wing apparatus . 
 In more derived orders of insects , such as Diptera ( flies ) and Hymenoptera ( wasp ) , the indirect muscles occupy the greatest volume of the <unk> and function as the primary source of power for the <unk> . Contraction of the <unk> muscles causes the severe arching of the notum which depresses the wing while contraction of the dorsoventral muscles causes opposite motion of notum . Other more primitive insects , such as Orthoptera ( locusts ) , Coleoptera ( beetles ) , and Odonata ( dragonflies ) use direct muscles that are responsible for developing the needed power for the up and down strokes . 
 Insect wing muscle is a strictly aerobic tissue . Per unit protein it consumes fuel and oxygen at rates taking place in a very concentrated and highly organized tissue so that the steady @-@ state rates per unit volume represent an absolute record in biology . The fuel and oxygen rich blood is carried to the muscles through diffusion occurring in large amounts , in order to maintain the high level of energy used during flight . Many wing muscles are large and may be as large as 10 mm in length and 2 mm in width . Moreover , in some Diptera the fibres are of giant dimensions . For instance , in the very active <unk> , the cross @-@ section is 1800 µm long and more than 500 µm wide . The transport of fuel and oxygen from the surroundings to the sites of consumption and the reverse transport of carbon dioxide therefore represent a challenge to the biologist both in relation to transport in the liquid phase and in the intricate system of air tubes , i.e. in the tracheal system . 
 = = = Coupling , folding , and other features = = = 
 In many insect species , the fore and hind wing are coupled together , which improves the aerodynamic efficiency of flight . The most common coupling mechanism ( e.g. , Hymenoptera and Trichoptera ) is a row of small hooks on the forward margin of the hind wing , or " hamuli " , which lock onto the fore wing , keeping them held together ( <unk> coupling ) . In some other insect species ( e.g. , Mecoptera , Lepidoptera , and some Trichoptera ) the jugal lobe of the fore wing covers a portion of the hind wing ( jugal coupling ) , or the margins of the fore and hind wing overlap broadly ( <unk> coupling ) , or the hindwing bristles , or frenulum , hook under the retaining structure or retinaculum on the forewing . 
 When at rest , the wings are held over the back in most insects , which may involve longitudinal folding of the wing membrane and sometimes also transverse folding . Folding may sometimes occur along the flexion lines . Though fold lines may be transverse , as in the hind wings of beetles and earwigs , they are normally radial to the base of the wing , allowing adjacent sections of a wing to be folded over or under each other . The commonest fold line is the jugal fold , situated just behind the third anal vein , although , most Neoptera have a jugal fold just behind vein 3A on the forewings . It is sometimes also present on the hindwings . Where the anal area of the hindwing is large , as in Orthoptera and Blattodea , the whole of this part may be folded under the anterior part of the wing along a vannal fold a little posterior to the claval furrow . In addition , in Orthoptera and Blattodea , the anal area is folded like a fan along the veins , the anal veins being convex , at the crests of the folds , and the accessory veins concave . Whereas the claval furrow and jugal fold are probably homologous in different species , the vannal fold varies in position in different taxa . Folding is produced by a muscle arising on the pleuron and inserted into the third axillary sclerite in such a way that , when it contracts , the sclerite pivots about its points of articulation with the posterior notal process and the second axillary sclerite . 
 As a result , the distal arm of the third axillary sclerite rotates upwards and inwards , so that finally its position is completely reversed . The anal veins are articulated with this sclerite in such a way that when it moves they are carried with it and become flexed over the back of the insect . Activity of the same muscle in flight affects the power output of the wing and so it is also important in flight control . In <unk> insects , the elasticity of the cuticle causes the vannal area of the wing to fold along the veins . Consequently , energy is expended in unfolding this region when the wings are moved to the flight position . In general , wing extension probably results from the contraction of muscles attached to the basalar sclerite or , in some insects , to the subalar sclerite . 
 = = Flight = = 
 Two groups of relatively large insects , the Ephemeroptera ( mayflies ) and the Odonata ( dragonflies and damselflies ) have the flight muscles attached directly to their wings ; the wings can beat no faster than the rate at which nerves can send impulses to command the muscles to beat . All other living winged insects fly using a different mechanism , involving indirect flight muscles which cause the thorax to vibrate ; the wings can beat faster than the rate at which the muscles receive nerve impulses . This mechanism evolved once , and is the defining feature ( synapomorphy ) for the infraclass Neoptera . 
 There are two basic aerodynamic models of insect flight . Most insects use a method that creates a spiralling leading edge vortex . Some very small insects use the fling and clap or Weis @-@ Fogh mechanism in which the wings clap together above the insect 's body and then fling apart . As they fling open , the air gets sucked in and creates a vortex over each wing . This bound vortex then moves across the wing and , in the clap , acts as the starting vortex for the other wing . Circulation and lift are increased , at the price of wear and tear on the wings . 
 Many insects can hover by beating their wings rapidly , requiring sideways stabilization as well as lift . 
 A few insects use gliding flight , without the use of thrust . It is found in some species of arboreal ants , known as gliding ants . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 Sometime in the Carboniferous Period , some 350 million years ago , when there were only two major land masses , insects began flying . How and why insect wings developed , however , is not well understood , largely due to the scarcity of appropriate fossils from the period of their development in the Lower Carboniferous . Three main theories on the origins of insect flight are that wings developed from paranotal lobes , extensions of the thoracic terga ; that they are modifications of movable abdominal gills as found on aquatic naiads of mayflies ; or that they developed from thoracic protrusions used as radiators . 
 = = = Fossils = = = 
 Fossils from the Devonian ( 400 million years ago ) are all wingless , but by the Carboniferous ( 320 million years ago ) , more than 10 different genera of insects had fully functional wings . There is little preservation of transitional forms between the two periods . The earliest winged insects are from this time period ( Pterygota ) , including the Blattoptera , <unk> , primitive stem @-@ group <unk> , Orthoptera and <unk> . Very early <unk> ( during the Carboniferous ) had a very large discoid pronotum and <unk> forewings with a distinct CuP vein ( an unbranched wing vein , lying near the claval fold and reaching the wing posterior margin ) . Even though the oldest definitive insect fossil is the Devonian Rhyniognatha hirsti , estimated at 396 – 407 million years old , it possessed <unk> mandibles , a feature associated with winged insects . 
 During the Permian , the dragonflies Odonata were the dominant aerial predator and probably dominated terrestrial insect predation as well . True Odonata appeared in the Permian and all are amphibian . Their prototypes are the oldest winged fossils , go back to the Devonian , and are different from other wings in every way . Their prototypes may have had the beginnings of many modern attributes even by late Carboniferous and it is possible that they even captured small vertebrates , for some species had a wing span of 71 cm . The earliest beetle @-@ like species during the Permian had pointed , leather like forewings with cells and pits . Hemiptera , or true bugs had appeared in the form of <unk> and <unk> having forewings with unusual venation , possibly diverging from Blattoptera . 
 A single large wing from a species of Diptera in the Triassic ( 10 mm instead of usual 2 – 6 mm ) was found in Australia ( Mt . Crosby ) <unk> family <unk> , despite of the numerous ' <unk> ' features , should be included in <unk> sensu Hennig on account of loss of the convex distal 1A reaching wing margin and formation of the anal loop . 
 = = = Hypotheses = = = 
 <unk> hypothesis : This hypothesis suggests that the insect 's wings developed from paranotal lobes , a <unk> found in insect fossils that is believed to have assisted stabilization while hopping or falling . In favor of this hypothesis is the tendency of most insects , when startled while climbing on branches , to escape by dropping to the ground . Such lobes would have served as parachutes and enable the insect to land more softly . The theory suggests that these lobes gradually grew larger and in a later stage developed a joint with the thorax . Even later would appear the muscles to move these crude wings . This model implies a progressive increase in the effectiveness of the wings , starting with parachuting , then gliding and finally active flight . Still , lack of substantial fossil evidence of the development of the wing joints and muscles poses a major difficulty to the theory , as does the seemingly spontaneous development of articulation and venation , and it has been largely rejected by experts in the field . 
 <unk> hypothesis : This theory suggested that a possible origin for insect wings might have been the movable abdominal gills found in many aquatic insects , such as on naiads of mayflies . According to this theory these tracheal gills , which started their way as exits of the respiratory system and over time were modified into locomotive purposes , eventually developed into wings . The tracheal gills are equipped with little winglets that perpetually vibrate and have their own tiny straight muscles . 
 <unk> @-@ exite hypothesis : The hypothesis with perhaps the strongest evidence is that which stems from the adaptation of <unk> and exites , appendages on the respective inner and outer aspects of the primitive arthropod limb . This was advanced by Trueman based on a study by Goldschmidt in 1945 on Drosophila melanogaster , in which a pod variation displayed a mutation transforming normal wings to what was interpreted as a triple @-@ jointed leg arrangement with some additional appendages but lacking the tarsus , where the wing 's costal surface normally would be . This mutation was reinterpreted as strong evidence for a dorsal exite and <unk> fusion , rather than a leg , with the appendages fitting in much better with this hypothesis . The innervation , articulation and musculature required for the evolution of wings are already present in <unk> . 
 <unk> plus leg gene recruitment hypothesis : The fossil larvae of Coxoplectoptera provided important new clues to the disputed question of the evolutionary origin of insect wings . Before the larvae fossil discovery the paranotal @-@ hypothesis and the leg @-@ exite @-@ hypothesis have been considered as incompatible alternative explanations , which have both been supported by a set of evidences from the fossil record , comparative morphology , developmental biology and genetics . The expression of leg genes in the ontogeny of the insect wing has been universally considered as conclusive evidence in favour of the leg @-@ exite @-@ hypothesis , which proposes that insect wings are derived from mobile leg appendages ( exites ) . However , the larvae of Coxoplectoptera show that the abdominal gills of mayflies and their ancestors , which are generally considered as corresponding structures to insect wings , articulated within the dorsal tergite plates . This cannot be seen in modern mayfly larvae , because their abdominal tergites and sternites are fused to rings , without any traces left even in embryonic development . If larval gills and wings are corresponding ( " serial homologous " ) structures and thus share the same evolutionary origin , the new results from Coxoplectoptera demonstrate that also wings are of tergal origin , as proposed by the classical paranotal @-@ hypothesis . <unk> , <unk> & <unk> ( 2011 ) therefore suggested a new hypothesis that could reconcile the apparently conflicting evidence from paleontology and developmental genetics : wings first originated as stiff outgrowths of tergal plates ( <unk> ) , and only later in evolution became mobile , articulated appendages through secondary recruiting of leg genes . 
 Suggestions have been made that wings may have evolved initially for sailing on the surface of water as seen in some stoneflies . An alternative idea is that it drives from directed aerial gliding descent — a preflight phenomena found in some <unk> , a wingless sister taxa to the winged insects . The earliest fliers were similar to dragonflies with two sets of wings , direct flight muscles , and no ability to fold their wings over their abdomens . Most insects today , which evolved from those first fliers , have simplified to either one pair of wings or two pairs functioning as a single pair and using a system of indirect flight muscles . 
 Natural selection has played an enormous role in refining the wings , control and sensory systems , and anything else that affects aerodynamics or kinematics . One noteworthy trait is wing twist . Most insect wings are twisted , as are helicopter blades , with a higher angle of attack at the base . The twist generally is between 10 and 20 degrees . In addition to this twist , the wing surfaces are not necessarily flat or featureless ; most larger insects have wing membranes distorted and angled between the veins in such a way that the cross @-@ section of the wings approximates an airfoil . Thus , the wing 's basic shape already is capable of generating a small amount of lift at zero angle of attack ( see Insect wing ) . Most insects control their wings by adjusting tilt , stiffness , and flapping frequency of the wings with tiny muscles in the thorax ( below ) . Some insects evolved other wing features that are not advantageous for flight , but play a role in something else , such as mating or protection . 
 Some insects , occupying the biological niches that they do , need to be incredibly maneuverable . They must find their food in tight spaces and be capable of escaping larger predators – or they may themselves be predators , and need to capture prey . Their maneuverability , from an aerodynamic viewpoint , is provided by high lift and thrust forces . Typical insect fliers can attain lift forces up to three times their weight and horizontal thrust forces up to five times their weight . There are two substantially different insect flight mechanisms , and each has its own advantages and disadvantages – just because <unk> have a more primitive flight mechanism does not mean they are less able fliers ; they are , in certain ways , more agile than anything that has evolved afterward . 
 = = Morphogenesis = = 
 While the development of wings in insects is clearly defined in those who are members of Endopterygota , which undergo complete metamorphosis ; in these species , the wing develops while in the pupal stage of the insects life cycle . However , insects that undergo incomplete metamorphosis do not have a pupal stage , therefore they must have a different wing morphogenesis . Insects such as those that are <unk> have wings that start out as buds , which are found underneath the exoskeleton , and do not become exposed until the last instar of the nymph . 
 The first indication of the wing buds is of a thickening of the hypodermis , which can be observed in insect species as early the embryo , and in the earliest stages of the life cycle . During the development of morphological features while in the embryo , or embryogenesis , a cluster of cells grow underneath the ectoderm which later in development , after the lateral ectoderm has grown dorsally to form wind <unk> disc . An example of wing bud development in the larvae , can be seen in those of White butterflies ( Pieris ) . In the second instar the histoblast become more prominent , which now form a pocket @-@ like structure . As of the third and fourth instars , the histoblast become more elongated . This greatly extended and <unk> , or protruding , part is what becomes the wing . By the close of the last instar , or fifth , the wing is pushed out of the wing @-@ pocket , although continues to lie under the old larval cuticle while in its <unk> stage . It is not until the butterfly is in its pupal stage that the wing @-@ bud becomes exposed , and shortly after eclosion , the wing begins to expand and form its definitive shape . 
 The development of tracheation of the wings begin before the wing histoblast form , as it is important to note that they develop near a large trachea . During the fourth instar , cells from the epithelium of this trachea become greatly enlarged extend into the cavity of the wing bud , with each cell having developed a closely coiled <unk> . Each <unk> is of unicellular origin , and is at first intracellular in position ; while tracheae are of multicellular origin and the lumen of each is intercellular in position . The development of tracheoles , each coiled within a single cell of the epithelium of a trachea , and the subsequent opening of communication between the tracheoles and the lumen of the trachea , and the uncoiling and stretching out of the tracheoles , so that they reach all parts of the wing . 
 In the earlier stages of its development , the wing @-@ bud is not provided with special organs of respiration such as tracheation , as it resembles in this respect the other portions of the hypodermis of which it is still a part . It should be noted , however , that the histoblast is developed near a large trachea , a cross @-@ section of which is shown in , which represents sections of these parts of the first , second , third and fourth instars respectively . At the same time the tracheoles <unk> , and extend in bundles in the forming vein @-@ cavities of the wing @-@ bud . At the molt that marks the beginning of the pupal stadium stage , they become functional . At the same time , the larval tracheoles degenerate ; their function having been replaced by the wing tracheae . 
 = = Nomenclature = = 
 Most of the nomenclature of insect orders is based on the Ancient Greek word for wing , πτερόν ( pteron ) , as the suffix <unk> . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 = = = Variation = = = 
 Insect wings are fundamental in identifying and classifying species as there is no other set of structures in studying insects more significant . Each order and insect family has distinctive wing shapes and features . In many cases , even species may be distinguished from each other by differences of color and pattern . For example , just by position one can identify species , albeit to a much lesser extent . Though most insects fold their wings when at rest , dragonflies and some damselflies rest with their wings spread out horizontally , while groups such as the caddisflies , stoneflies , <unk> , and lacewings hold their wings sloped roof @-@ like over their backs . A few moths wrap their wings around their bodies , while many flies and most butterflies close their wings together straight upward over the back . 
 Many times the shape of the wings correlates with the type of insect flight . The best @-@ flying insects tend to have long , slender wings . In many species of Sphingidae ( sphinx moths ) , the forewings are large and sharply pointed , forming with the small hind wings a triangle that is suggestive of the wings of fast , modern airplanes . Another , possibly more important correlation , is that of the size and power of the muscles to the speed and power of flight . In the powerfully flying insects , the wings are most adapted for the stresses and aerodynamics of flight . The veins are thicker , stronger , and closer together toward the front edge ( or " leading edge " ) and thinner yet flexible toward the rear edge ( or " trailing edge " ) . This makes the insect wing an excellently constructed airfoil , capable of exerting both propulsion and lift while minimizing drag . 
 Variation of the wing beat may also occur , not just amongst different species , but even among individuals at different times . In general , the frequency is dependent upon the ratio between the power of the wing muscles and the resistance of the load . Large @-@ winged , light @-@ bodied butterflies may have a wing beat frequency of 4 – 20 per second whereas small @-@ winged , heavy @-@ bodied flies and bees beat their wings more than 100 times a second and mosquitoes can beat up to 988 – 1046 times a second . The same goes for flight ; though it is generally difficult to estimate the speed of insects in flight , most insects can probably fly faster in nature than they do in controlled experiments . 
 = = = Coleoptera = = = 
 In species of Coleoptera ( beetles ) , the only functional wings are the hind wings . The hind wings are longer than the elytra , folded longitudinally and transversely under the elytra . The wing is rotated forwards on its base into flight position . This action spread the wing and unfolded longitudinally and transversely . There is the spring mechanism in the wing structure , sometimes with the help of abdomen movement , to keep the wing in folded position . The beetle wing venation is reduced and modified due to the folding structure , which include : 
 Costa ( C ) , Subcosta posterior ( <unk> ) – at the leading wing marginal , fused for most of the length . 
 Radius anterior ( RA ) – divided into two branches beyond the middle of the wing . 
 Radius posterior ( RP ) – basal connection is lost . 
 Media posterior ( MP ) – branches , long and strong vein . 
 Cubitus anterior ( CuA ) 
 Anal veins ( AA , AP ) – veins behind the cubitus , separated by anal fold . 
 In most species of beetles , the front pair of wings are modified and sclerotised ( hardened ) to form elytra and they protect the delicate hindwings which are folded beneath . The elytra are connected to the <unk> ; being called as such because it is where the wings are connected ( pteron meaning " wing " in Greek ) . The elytra are not used for flight , but tend to cover the hind part of the body and protect the second pair of wings ( alae ) . The elytra must be raised in order to move the hind flight wings . A beetle 's flight wings are crossed with veins and are folded after landing , often along these veins , and are stored below the elytra . In some beetles , the ability to fly has been lost . These include some ground beetles ( family Carabidae ) and some " true weevils " ( family Curculionidae ) , but also some desert and cave @-@ dwelling species of other families . Many of these species have the two elytra fused together , forming a solid shield over the abdomen . In a few families , both the ability to fly and the elytra have been lost , with the best known example being the glow @-@ worms of the family Phengodidae , in which the females are <unk> throughout their lives . 
 = = = Lepidoptera = = = 
 The two pairs of wings are found on the middle and third segment , or mesothorax and metathorax respectively . In the more recent genera , the wings of the second segment are much more pronounced , however some more primitive forms have similarly sized wings of both segments . The wings are covered in scales arranged like shingles , forming the extraordinary variety seen in color . The mesothorax is evolved to have more powerful muscles to propel moth or butterfly through the air , with the wing of said segment having a stronger vein structure . The largest superfamily , Noctuidae , has the wings modified to act as <unk> or hearing organs Modifications in the wing 's venation include : 
 Costa ( C ) – not found in Butterflies . 
 Subcosta ( Sc ) + Radius 1 ( Sc + R1 ) – at the leading wing marginal , fused or very close for most of the length , in hind wing fused and well developed in the humeral area , subcosta never branches in butterfly . 
 Radius ( R2 @-@ R5 ) – radius divides into branches beyond the middle of the wing up to five branches in Papilionidae . On forewing , the last R is stalked in all butterflies except Hesperiidae is separated . 
 Radius sector ( Rs ) – in hind wing . 
 Media ( M1 @-@ M3 ) – the basal section has been lost . 
 Cubitus anterior ( <unk> @-@ <unk> ) – CuP section has been lost . 
 Anal veins ( A , 1A + 2A , 3A ) – either one vein A , or two veins 1A + 2A , 3A . 
 Humeral vein – The hind wing of most butterflies has the humeral vein , except Lycaenidae There is the enlargement of the humeral area of the hind wing which is overlapped with the fore wing . The humeral vein strengthened the hind wing overlapped area so that the two wings coupling better . 
 The wings , head parts of thorax and abdomen of Lepidoptera are covered with minute scales , from which feature the order ' Lepidoptera ' derives its names , the word " <unk> " in Ancient Greek meaning ' scale ' . Most scales are lamellar , or blade @-@ like and attached with a pedicel , while other forms may be hair @-@ like or specialized as secondary sexual characteristics . The lumen or surface of the lamella , has a complex structure . It gives color either due to the <unk> colors contained within or due to its three @-@ dimensional structure . Scales provide a number of functions , which include insulation , thermoregulation , aiding gliding flight , amongst others , the most important of which is the large diversity of vivid or indistinct patterns they provide which help the organism protect itself by camouflage , mimicry , and to seek mates . 
 = = = Odonata = = = 
 Species of Odonata ( <unk> and dragonflies ) both have two pairs of wings which are about equal in size and shape and are clear in color . There are five , if the R + M is counted as 1 , main vein stems on dragonfly and damselfly wings , and wing veins are fused at their bases and the wings cannot be folded over the body at rest , which also include : 
 Costa ( C ) – at the leading edge of the wing , strong and marginal , extends to the apex of the wing . 
 Subcosta ( Sc ) – second longitudinal vein , it is unbranched , joins C at nodus . 
 Radius and Media ( R + M ) – third and fourth longitudinal vein , the strongest vein on the wing , with branches , R1 @-@ R4 , reach the wing margin , the media anterior ( MA ) are also reach the wing margin . <unk> and <unk> are intercalary veins behind R2 and R3 respectively . 
 Cubitus ( Cu ) – fifth longitudinal vein , cubitus posterior ( CuP ) is unbranched and reach the wing margin . 
 Anal veins ( A1 ) – unbranched veins behind the cubitus . 
 A nodus is formed where the second main vein meets the leading edge of the wing . The black <unk> is carried near the wing tip . 
 The main veins and the crossveins form the wing venation pattern . The venation patterns are different in different species . There may be very numerous crossveins or rather few . The Australian <unk> Damselfly 's wings are one of the few veins patterns . The venation pattern is useful for species identification . Almost all Anisoptera settle with the wings held out sideways or slightly downward , however most Zygoptera settle with the wings held together , dorsal surfaces apposed . The thorax of Zygoptera is so oblique that when held in this way the wings fit neatly along the top of the abdomen . They do not appear to be held straight up as in butterflies or mayflies . In a few <unk> families the wings are held horizontally at rest , and in one <unk> genus ( e.g. <unk> , Corduliidae ) the wings are held in the typical damselfly resting position . Adult species possess two pairs of equal or subequal wings . There appear to be only five main vein stems . A nodus is formed where the second main vein ( subcosta ) meets the leading edge of the wing . In most families a conspicuous <unk> is carried near the wing tip . Identification as Odonata can be based on the venation . The only likely confusion is with some lacewings ( order Neuroptera ) which have many crossveins in the wings . Until the early years of the 20th century Odonata were often regarded as being related to lacewings and were given the ordinal name <unk> , but any resemblance between these two orders is entirely superficial . In Anisoptera the hindwing is broader than the forewing and in both wings a <unk> divides the <unk> cell into a Triangle and <unk> . 
 = = = Orthoptera = = = 
 Species of Orthoptera ( Grasshoppers and crickets ) have forewings that are tough opaque tegmina , narrow which are normally covering the hind wings and abdomen at rest . The hind wings are board membranous and folded in fan @-@ like manner , which include the following venation : 
 Costa ( C ) – at the leading marginal of the forewing and hind wing , unbranched . 
 Subcosta ( Sc ) – second longitudinal vein , unbranched . 
 Radius ( R ) – third longitudinal vein , branched to Rs in forewing and hind wing . 
 Media anterior ( MA ) – fourth longitudinal vein , branched in basal part as Media posterior ( MP ) . 
 Cubitus ( Cu ) – fifth longitudinal vein , on forewing and hind wing dividing near the wing base into branched CuA , and unbranched CuP . 
 Anal veins ( A ) – veins behind the cubitus , unbranched , two in forewing , many in hind wing . 
 = = = Phasmatodea = = = 
 Costa ( C ) – at the leading marginal of the hind wing , unbranched , absent in forewing . 
 Subcosta ( Sc ) – second longitudinal vein , unbranched . 
 Radius ( R ) – third longitudinal vein , branched to Rs in hind wing , unbranched in forewing . 
 Media anterior ( MA ) – fourth longitudinal vein , branched in basal part as Media posterior ( MP ) . 
 Cubitus ( Cu ) – fifth longitudinal vein , unbranched . 
 Anal veins ( A ) – veins behind the cubitus , unbranched , two in forewing , many in hind wing 1A @-@ 7A in one group and the rest in another group . 
 Stick insect have forewings that are tough , opaque tegmina , short and covering only the base part of the hind wings at rest . Hind wings from costa to Cubitus are tough and opaque like the forewings . The large anal area are membranous and folded in fan @-@ like manner . There are no or very few branching in Stick Insect wing veins . 
 = = = Dermaptera = = = 
 Other orders such as the Dermaptera ( earwigs ) , Orthoptera ( grasshoppers , crickets ) , Mantodea ( praying mantis ) and Blattodea ( cockroaches ) have rigid leathery forewings that aren 't used for flying , sometimes called tegmen ( pl. tegmina ) , elytra , or <unk> . 
 = = = Hemiptera = = = 
 In Hemiptera ( true bugs ) , the forewings may be hardened , though to a lesser extent than in the beetles . For example , the anterior part of the front wings of stink bugs is hardened , while the posterior part is membranous . They are called <unk> ( pl. <unk> ) . They are only found in the suborder Heteroptera ; the wings of the Homoptera , such as the cicada , are typically entirely membranous . Both forewings and hindwings of Cicada are membranous , most species are glass @-@ like although some are opaque . Cicadas are not good fliers and most fly only a few seconds . When flying , forewing and hind wing are hooked together by a grooved coupling along the hind wing costa and forewing margin . Most species have a basic venation as shown in the following picture . 
 Costa ( C ) – at the leading wing marginal , in forewing extends to the node and lies close to Sc + R. 
 Subcosta + Radius ( Sc + R ) – in forewing Sc and R fused together to the node . Radial sector ( Rs ) arises near the node and <unk> . 
 Radius anterior ( RA ) 
 Radius posterior ( RP ) 
 Media ( M ) – branches to M1 to M4 . 
 Cubitus anterior ( CuA ) – branches to <unk> and <unk> . 
 Cubitus posterior ( CuP ) – <unk> . 
 Anal veins ( A ) – veins behind the cubitus , 1A and 2A fused in the forewing , CuP and 2A are folded . 
 Also notice there are the ambient veins and peripheral membranes on the margin of both wings . 
 = = = Diptera = = = 
 In the Diptera ( true flies ) , there is only one pair of functional wings , with the posterior pair of wings are reduced to halteres , which help the fly to sense its orientation and movement , as well as to improve balance by acting similar to gyroscopes . In <unk> , the very hindmost portion of the wings are modified into somewhat thickened flaps called <unk> which cover the halteres . 
 Costa ( C ) – not found in Diptera . 
 Subcosta ( Sc ) – became the leading wing vein , unbranched . 
 Radius ( R ) – branched to R1 @-@ R5 . 
 Media ( M ) – branched to M1 @-@ M4 . 
 Cubitus anterior ( CuA ) - unbranched , CuP is reduced in Diptera . Some species CuA and 1A are separated , some species meets when reaching the wing margin , some species fused . 
 Anal veins ( A ) – only two anal veins 1A and 2A are present , 2A is not distinctive in some species . 
 <unk> Cell ( dc ) – well defined in most species . 
 = = = Blattodea = = = 
 Species of Blattodea ( cockroaches ) have a forewing , are also known as tegmen , that is more or less sclerotized . It is used in flight as well as a form of protection of the membranous hind wings . The veins of hind wing are about the same as front wing but with large anal lobe folded at rest between CuP and 1A . The anal lobe usually folded in a fan @-@ like manner . 
 Costa ( C ) – at the leading edge of the wing . 
 Subcosta ( Sc ) – second longitudinal vein , it is relatively short . 
 Radius ( R ) – third longitudinal vein , with many pectinate branches . 
 Media ( M ) – fourth longitudinal vein , reach the wing margin . 
 Cubitus anterior ( CuA ) – fifth longitudinal vein , with dichotomous branches occupy large part of tegmen . 
 Cubitus posterior ( CuP ) – is unbranched , curved and reach the wing margin . 
 Anal veins ( A ) – veins behind the cubitus . 
 = = = Hymenoptera = = = 
 The Hymenoptera adults , include sawflies , wasps , bees and non @-@ working ants , all of which have two pairs of membranous wings . 
 Costa ( C ) – not found in Hymenoptera . 
 Subcosta ( Sc ) – unbranched . 
 Radius ( R ) – branched to R1 @-@ R5 . 
 Media ( M ) – M is unbranched , in forewing M is fused with Rs for part of its length . 
 Cubitus ( CuA ) – unbranched , CuP is absent in Hymenoptera . 
 Anal veins ( A ) – only two anal veins 1A and 2A are present , 2A is not distinctive in some species . 
 Wing @-@ coupling – Row of hooks on the leading edge of hind wing engage the hind margin of the forewing , strongly couple the wings in flight . 
 Line of wing folding – Some species , including Vespidae , the forewing are longitudinally folded along the ' line of wing folding ' at rest . 
 <unk> – is present for some species . 
 The forward margin of the hind wing bears a number of hooked bristles , or " hamuli " , which lock onto the fore wing , keeping them held together . The smaller species may have only two or three hamuli on each side , but the largest wasps may have a considerable number , keeping the wings gripped together especially tightly . <unk> wings have relatively few veins compared with many other insects , especially in the smaller species . 
 = = = Other families = = = 
 Termites are relatively poor fliers and are readily blown downwind in wind speeds of less than 2 km / h , shedding their wings soon after landing at an acceptable site , where they mate and attempt to form a nest in damp timber or earth . Wings of most termites have three heavy veins along the basal part of the front edge of the forewing and the crossveins near the wing tip are angled , making trapezoidal cells . Although subterranean termite wings have just two major veins along the front edge of the forewing and the cross veins towards the wingtip are perpendicular to these veins , making square and rectangular cells . 
 Species of Thysanoptera ( thrips ) have slender front and hind wings with long fringes of hair , called fringed wings . While species of Trichoptera ( caddisfly ) have hairy wings with the front and hind wings clothed with setae . 
 = Lucy Li = 
 Lucy Li ( born October 1 , 2002 ) is an American female amateur golfer . She currently holds records as the youngest qualifier for the U.S. Women 's Amateur and the U.S. Women 's Open . She is the second youngest qualifier for the U.S. Women 's Amateur Public Links , but the youngest ever to advance to match play in that event . Li was an age group winner at the inaugural Masters Drive , Chip , and Putt Championship in Augusta , Georgia . She is currently a student of Jim McLean . 
 = = Background = = 
 Born in Stanford , California , Li now lives in Redwood Shores . Her father , Warren Li , is a San Francisco Bay Area computer consultant and stockbroker . Her mother , Amy Zeng , is a former Hewlett @-@ Packard employee . Warren and Amy were raised in China and moved to the United States from Australia in 1998 . Warren has a Ph.D. in computer science , while Amy has a master 's degree in the field . Lucy was born in 2002 . She lived with her Aunt Tao Zeng four months per year to train in Florida near Trump National Doral Miami and McLean 's Golf School . Li is homeschooled . She performs some of her schoolwork through independent study in the months she is in Florida . 
 Li took diving lessons at Stanford University and was platform diving from 10 metres ( 32 @.@ 8 ft ) at age 4 . She was also active in gymnastics and music . Some sources claim that she began practicing at Mariners Point Golf Center at about age 4 or 5 , with informal coaching from her mother and Aunt . Other sources claim that she began playing golf at age 7 while watching her older brother Luke , a Princeton University student , who was hitting balls at a driving range . Li likes to tell the latter story , but Mariners Point head pro , Joby Ross , confirmed that at about 3 or 4 years old Li was very boisterous about her interest in the sport to the point of throwing tantrums when being asked to leave . At age 7 her parents called Jim McLean , who also coaches or has coached Lexi Thompson , <unk> Kerr , Keegan Bradley and Erik Compton , and arranged a visit to meet him at Doral . Afterwards , the family made summer living arrangements with her Aunt . Then , McLean began working with her . Li 's practice course is Cinnabar Hills in San Jose . 
 = = Career = = 
 Li holds record for youngest match @-@ play qualifier in U.S. Women 's Amateur Public Links history ( 10 years , 8 months , 16 days ) , surpassing Michelle Wie 's 2000 record by a mere 7 days . Li was the second youngest qualifier in May 2013 for the U.S. Women 's Amateur Public Links before becoming the youngest to advance to match play that June . The lone person younger than Li was <unk> <unk> , who qualified in 2008 . 
 She is also the youngest U.S. Women 's Amateur qualifier , surpassing <unk> Stone 's 2012 record age of 10 years , 11 months and 2 days by beginning the first day of the tournament at age 10 years , 10 months and 4 days old on August 5 , 2013 . 
 In 2014 , at the first ever Drive , Chip and Putt Championship on the Sunday preceding the 78th edition Masters Tournament at Augusta National Golf Club , she won the Girls 10 – 11 age division . The event was televised on the Golf Channel and was sponsored by the United States Golf Association , Professional Golfers ' Association of America and Augusta National to increase youth participation in the sport . Over 10 @,@ 000 youth from over 110 sites participated in a qualification process that yielded 88 qualifiers from 8 age / gender brackets from each of 11 regions . 
 On May 19 , 2014 , she became the youngest ( age 11 ) to qualify for the U.S. Women 's Open , surpassing Thompson 's record ( 12 years , 4 months , 18 days ) from the 2007 Open . Notably , Li not only qualified , but she won her qualifying event by seven strokes at Old Course at Half Moon Bay Golf Links . Thompson missed the cut in 2007 with a 36 @-@ hole 168 total . Li was the second youngest to compete ; nine years prior to the introduction of qualification in 1976 , Beverly Klass played in the 1967 Open at age 10 years , 7 months , and 21 days . Although Li 's qualification was largely heralded , some were befuddled at the state of the sport when a sixth grader could even qualify for one of the most prestigious events of the year . Li , who had reached a 1 @.@ 5 handicap by April , had a handicap better than threshold 2 @.@ 4 , making her eligible to participate in qualifications . 
 Li was 11 years , 8 months , and 19 days on June 19 , the opening round of the 2014 U.S. Women 's Open , held at Course No. 2 of Pinehurst Resort & Country Club . Edel Golf designed custom clubs that Golf Digest described as " <unk> @-@ out " for Li to use in the Open . In the first round on Thursday , Li shot a 78 ( + 8 ) , which had been the highest score that anyone who made the cut in the 2013 Open had tallied . She followed that up with a second 78 on Friday for 156 ( + 16 ) and missed the cut by seven strokes . She then walked the course as a fan that Sunday . She scheduled an appearance in the July U.S. Women 's Amateur Public Links in DuPont , Washington next . Li shot 74 and 70 to qualify for match play where she lost to Alice Chen in sudden @-@ death of the first round after posting a stroke play equivalent of a 71 . She did not schedule any other USGA events in 2014 , deciding instead to play local events and be an 11 @-@ year @-@ old . In 2015 , she did not qualify for the 2015 U.S. Women 's Open . 
 = Union Stock Yards = 
 The Union Stock Yard & Transit Co . , or The Yards , was the meatpacking district in Chicago for more than a century , starting in 1865 . The district was operated by a group of railroad companies that acquired swampland and turned it into a centralized processing area . By the 1890s , the railroad money behind the Union Stockyards was Vanderbilt money . The Union Stockyards operated in the New City community area for 106 years , helping Chicago become known as " hog butcher for the world " and the center of the American meatpacking industry for decades . 
 The stockyards became the focal point of the rise of some of the earliest international companies . These companies refined novel industrial innovations and influenced financial markets . Both the rise and fall of the district owe their fortunes to the evolution of transportation services and technology in America . The stockyards have become an integral part of the popular culture of Chicago 's history . 
 From the Civil War until the 1920s and peaking in 1924 , more meat was processed in Chicago than in any other place in the world . Construction began in June 1865 with an opening on Christmas Day in 1865 . The Yards closed at midnight on Friday , July 30 , 1971 , after several decades of decline during the decentralization of the meatpacking industry . The Union Stock Yard Gate was designated a Chicago Landmark on February 24 , 1972 , and a National Historic Landmark on May 29 , 1981 . 
 = = History = = 
 Before construction of the various private stockyards , tavern owners provided pastures and care for cattle herds waiting to be sold . With the spreading service of railroads , several small stockyards were created in and around the City of Chicago . In 1848 , a stockyard called the Bulls Head Market was opened to the public . The Bulls Head Stock Yards were located at Madison Street and Ogden Avenue . In the years that followed , several small stockyards were scattered throughout the city . Between 1852 and 1865 , five ( 5 ) railroads were constructed to Chicago . The stockyards that sprang up were usually built along various rail lines of these new railroad companies . Some railroads built their own stockyards in Chicago . The Illinois Central and the Michigan Central railroads combined to build the largest set of pens on the lake shore east of Cottage Grove Avenue from 29th Street to 35th Street . In 1878 , the New York Central Railroad managed to buy a controlling interest in the Michigan Central Railroad . In this way , Cornelius Vanderbilt , owner of the New York Central Railroad , got his start in the stockyard business in Chicago . 
 Several factors contributed to consolidation of the Chicago stockyards : westward expansion of railroads between 1850 and 1870 , which drove great commercial growth in Chicago as a major railroad center , and the Mississippi River blockade during the Civil War that closed all north @-@ south river trade . The United States government purchased a great deal of beef and pork to feed the Union troops fighting the Civil War . As a consequence , hog receipts at the Chicago stockyards rose from 392 @,@ 000 hogs in 1860 to 1 @,@ 410 @,@ 000 hogs over the winter butchering season of 1864 @-@ 1865 ; over the same time period , beef receipts in Chicago rose from 117 @,@ 000 head to 339 @,@ 000 head . With an influx of butchers and small meat packing concerns , the number of businesses greatly increased to process the flood of livestock being shipped to the Chicago stockyards . The goal was to butcher and process the livestock locally rather than transferring it to other northern cities for butchering and processing . Keeping up with the huge number of animals arriving each day proved impossible until a new wave of consolidation and modernization altered the meatpacking business in the post @-@ Civil War era . 
 The Union Stock Yards , designed to consolidate operations , was built in 1864 on swampland south of the city . It was south and west of the earlier stock yards in an area bounded by Halsted Street on the east , South Racine Avenue on the west , with 39th Street as the northern boundary and 47th Street as the southern boundary . Led by the Alton , Chicago & St. Louis Railroad and the Lake Shore and Michigan Southern Railway a consortium of nine railroad companies ( hence the " Union " name ) acquired the 320 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 3 km2 ) swampland area in southwest Chicago for $ 100 @,@ 000 in 1864 . The stockyards were connected to the city 's main rail lines by 15 miles ( 24 km ) of track . In 1864 , the Union Stock Yards were located just outside the southern boundary of the City of Chicago . Within five years the area was incorporated into the city . 
 Eventually , the 375 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 52 km2 ) site had 2300 separate livestock pens , room to accommodate 75 @,@ 000 hogs , 21 @,@ 000 cattle and 22 @,@ 000 sheep at any one time . Additionally , hotels , saloons , restaurants , and offices for merchants and brokers sprang up in the growing community around the stockyards . Led by Timothy Blackstone , a founder and the first president of the Union Stock Yards and Transit Company , " The Yards " experienced tremendous growth . Processing two million animals yearly by 1870 , in two decades the number rose to nine million by 1890 . Between 1865 and 1900 , approximately 400 million livestock were butchered within the confines of the Yards . 
 By the start of the 20th century , the stockyards employed 25 @,@ 000 people and produced 82 percent of the domestic meat consumed nationally . In 1921 , the stockyards employed 40 @,@ 000 people . Two thousand men worked directly for the Union Stock Yard & Transit Co . , and the rest worked for companies such as <unk> , which had plants in the stockyards . By 1900 , the 475 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 92 km2 ) stockyard contained 50 miles ( 80 km ) of road , and had 130 miles ( 210 km ) of track along its perimeter . At its largest size , The Yards covered nearly 1 square mile ( 3 km2 ) of land , from Halsted Street to Ashland Avenue and from 39th ( now Pershing Rd . ) to 47th Streets . 
 At one time , 500 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 2 @,@ 000 m3 ) a day of Chicago River water were pumped into the stockyards . So much stockyard waste drained into the South Fork of the river that it was called Bubbly Creek due to the gaseous products of decomposition . The creek bubbles to this day . When the City permanently reversed the flow of the Chicago River in 1900 , the intent was to prevent the Stock Yards ' waste products , along with other sewage , from flowing into Lake Michigan and contaminating the City 's drinking water . 
 The meatpacking district was served between 1908 and 1957 by a short Chicago ' L ' line with several stops , devoted primarily to the daily transport of thousands of workers and even tourists to the site . The line was constructed when the City of Chicago forced the removal of surface trackage on 40th Street . 
 Evolving methods of transportation and distribution led to declining business and the closing of the Union Stock Yards in 1971 . National Wrecking Company negotiated a contract whereby National Wrecking cleared a 102 @-@ acre site and removed some 50 acres of animal pens , auxiliary buildings and the eight story Exchange Building . It took approximately eight months to complete the job and ready the site for the building of an industrial park . 
 = = = Effect on industry = = = 
 The size and scale of the stockyards , along with technological advancements in rail transport and refrigeration , allowed for the creation of some of America 's first truly global companies led by entrepreneurs such as Gustavus Franklin Swift and Philip Danforth Armour . Philip Armour was the first person to build a modern large @-@ scale meatpacking plant in Chicago in 1867 . The Armour plant was built at 45th Street and Elizabeth Avenue immediately to the west of the Union Stockyards . This new plant employed the modern " assembly line " ( or rather dis @-@ assembly line ) method of work . The mechanized process with its killing wheel and conveyors helped inspire the automobile assembly line that Henry Ford <unk> in 1913 . For a time the Armour plant , located on a twelve ( 12 ) acre site , was renowned as the largest factory in the world . 
 In addition , hedging transactions by the stockyard companies was pivotal in the establishment and growth of the Chicago @-@ based commodity exchanges and futures markets . Selling on the futures market allowed the seller to have a guaranteed price at a set time in the future . This was extremely helpful to those sellers who expected their cattle or hogs to come to market with a glut of other cattle or hogs when prices might necessarily be substantially lower than the guaranteed futures price . 
 Following the arrival of Armour in 1867 , Gustav Swift 's company arrived in Chicago in 1875 and built another modern large @-@ scale meatpacking plant at 42nd Street and South Justine Street . The Morris Company built a meatpacking plant at 42nd Street and Elizabeth Street . The Hammond Company and the Wilson Company also built a meatpacking plants in the area west of the Chicago stockyards . Eventually , meatpacking byproduct manufacturing of leather , soap , fertilizer , glue ( such as the large glue factory located at 44th Street and Loomis Street ) , pharmaceuticals , imitation ivory , gelatin , shoe polish , buttons , perfume , and violin strings prospered in the neighborhood . Additionally , there was a " Hair Factory , " located at 44th Street and Ashland Avenue , which processed hair from butchered animals into saleable items . 
 Next to the Union Stock Yards , the International Amphitheatre building was built on west side of Halsted Street at 42nd Street in the 1930s , originally to hold the annual International Live Stock Exposition which began in 1900 . However , the International Amphitheatre became a venue for many events ( including the 1952 and 1956 Democratic National Conventions , the 1952 and 1960 Republican National Conventions and most famously the 1968 Democratic National Convention ) and its use continued for years after the stockyards closed in 1971 . 
 = = = Fires = = = 
 The Chicago Union Stock Yards Fire started on December 22 , 1910 , destroying $ 400 @,@ 000 of property and killing twenty @-@ one firemen , including the Fire Marshal James J. Horan . Fifty engine companies and seven hook and ladder companies fought the fire until it was declared extinguished by Chief <unk> on December 23 . In 2004 , a memorial to all Chicago firefighters who have died in the line of duty was erected just behind the Union Stock Yards Gate at the intersection of Exchange Avenue and Peoria Street . 
 A larger fire occurred on Saturday , May 19 , 1934 , which burned almost 90 % of the stockyards , including the exchange building , stockyard inn , and the International Livestock Exposition building . This larger fire was seen as far away as Indiana , and caused approximately $ 6 million worth of damages . While only one watchman was killed , a few cattle also perished , but the yards were in business the following Sunday evening . 
 = = = Workers and Unions = = = 
 Following the opening of the new Union Stockyards on December 25 , 1865 , a community of workers began living in the area just west of the packing plants between Ashland Avenue and South Robey Street and bounded on the north by 43rd Street and on the south by 47th Street . At first , the residents were overwhelmingly Irish and German — 60 % Irish and 30 % German . Officially designated the " Town of Lake " until its incorporation into the City of Chicago in about 1870 , the neighborhood was known locally as " <unk> . " However , much later in the 1930s , the community would become known as the " Back of the Yards . " 
 The overwhelming sensation about the neighborhood was the smell of the community caused not just by the packing plants located immediately to the east , but also by the 345 @-@ acre Chicago Union Stock Yards containing 2 @,@ 300 pens of livestock , located further east from the packing plants . 
 = = = Back of the Yards Community = = = 
 Settlement in the area that was to become known as the " Back of the Yards " began in the 1850s before there were any meat packers or stockyards in the area . At this time the area was known as the " Town of Lake . " Indeed , the area would continue to be called Town of Lake until 1939 . Witness that the newspaper of the area was called the Town of Lake Journal . Only with the founding of the community organization called the " Back of the Yards Neighborhood Council " in 1939 did the neighborhood west and south of the meat <unk> start being called the " Back of the Yards . " It was a name that the residents proudly claimed as their own . In 1939 , the Town of Lake Journal officially changed its name to Back of the Yards Journal . 
 Pioneers to the area first called " Town of Lake " were S. S. Crocker and John Caffrey . Indeed , Crocker earned the nickname " Father of the Town of Lake . " By February 1865 the area was incorporated officially as " Town of Lake " the area still consisted of fewer than 700 persons . In the early 1860s the meat packing industry of the United States was still located in Cincinnati , Ohio , the original " <unk> " of the pre @-@ Civil War era . However , with the end of the American Civil War , the meat packing industry had started to move westward along with the westward migration of the population of the United States . For the meat packing industry moving west meant coming to Chicago . As early as 1827 , <unk> Clybourn had established himself as a butcher in a log slaughter house on the north branch of the Chicago River and supplied most to the garrison of Fort Dearborn . Other small butchers came later . In 1848 , the Bull 's Head Stockyard began operations at Madison Street and Ogden Avenue on the West Side of Chicago . Operations for this early stockyard , however , still meant holding and feeding cattle and hogs in transit to meat packing plants further east — Indianapolis and , of course , Cincinnati . 
 = = Decline and current use = = 
 The prosperity of the stockyards was due to both the concentration of railroads and the evolution of refrigerated railroad cars . Its decline was due to further advances in post @-@ World War II transportation and distribution . Direct sales of livestock from breeders to packers , facilitated by advancement in interstate trucking , made it cheaper to slaughter animals where they were raised and excluded the intermediary stockyards . At first , the major meatpacking companies resisted change , but Swift and Armour both surrendered and vacated their plants in the Yards in the 1950s . 
 In 1971 , the area bounded by Pershing Road , Ashland , Halsted , and 47th Street became The Stockyards Industrial Park . The neighborhood to the west and south of the industrial park is still known as Back of the Yards , and is still home to a thriving immigrant population . 
 = = = Gate = = = 
 A remnant of the Union Stock Yard Gate still arches over Exchange Avenue , next to the firefighters ' memorial , and can be seen by those driving along Halsted Street . This limestone gate , marking the entrance to the stockyards , survives as one of the few relics of Chicago 's heritage of livestock and meatpacking . The steer head over the central arch is thought to represent " Sherman , " a prize @-@ winning bull named after John B. Sherman , a founder of the Union Stock Yard and Transit Company . The gate is a designated U.S. National Historic Landmark . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 In 1906 Upton Sinclair published The Jungle , uncovering the horrid conditions in the stockyards around the start of the 20th century . The stockyards are referred to in Carl Sandburg 's poem Chicago : " proud to be Hog Butcher , Tool Maker , Stacker of Wheat , Player with Railroads and Freight Handler to the Nation . " Frank Sinatra mentioned the yards in his 1964 song " My Kind of Town , " and the stockyards receive a mention in the opening chapter of Thomas Pynchon 's novel Against the Day . The Skip James song " Hard Times Killing floor blues " refers to the nickname of the slaughter part of the stockyards during the great depression in the 1930s . The Yards were a major tourist stop , with visitors such as Rudyard Kipling , Paul Bourget and Sarah Bernhardt . The play Saint Joan of the Stockyards , a version of the story of Joan of Arc by Bertolt Brecht takes place in the stockyards . The 1950 film Union Station with William Holden has the final scene at the Union Stockyards . 
 = 2007 Appalachian State vs. Michigan football game = 
 The 2007 Appalachian State vs. Michigan football game was a regular season college football game between the Appalachian State Mountaineers and Michigan Wolverines . It was held at Michigan Stadium in Ann Arbor on September 1 , 2007 , and was the first game of the season for both teams . The Wolverines entered the game ranked No. 5 in both major Football Bowl Subdivision ( FBS ) polls and media outlets considered them to be preseason favorites to win the Big Ten conference championship as well as possible contenders for the national championship , while the Mountaineers were ranked No. 1 in The Sports Network 's Football Championship Subdivision ( FCS ) poll and were preseason favorites to win their third consecutive FCS national championship . 
 Games between FBS and FCS teams typically result in lopsided victories for the FBS team , and the Appalachian State – Michigan game was not expected to be an exception . The predicted outcome was a lopsided victory for Michigan , and Las Vegas sportsbooks did not give a betting line . The game was the first to be broadcast on the then @-@ new Big Ten Network , and began with a strong first half for Appalachian State , who held a 28 – 17 lead at the end of the half . Michigan regained the lead at 32 – 31 in the fourth quarter , but Appalachian State took the lead for a second time on a short field goal with 26 seconds left . The Mountaineers blocked a game @-@ winning field goal attempt from Michigan at the end of regulation to secure a 34 – 32 win . Immediately hailed as one of the greatest upsets in college football history , the game served as the lead story of SportsCenter and was the cover story for the following week 's edition of Sports Illustrated . Appalachian State became the second FCS team to defeat a ranked FBS team , and as a result of the game Michigan dropped out of the top 25 of the AP Poll entirely , marking the first time a team had fallen from the top five to out of the poll entirely as the result of a single game . In the aftermath of the game , the Associated Press amended their polling policy to make FCS teams eligible for the AP Poll , which had previously been limited to FBS teams . 
 The Appalachian State Mountaineers finished the 2007 season with a 13 – 2 record and won a third consecutive FCS title . They also became the first FCS team to receive votes in the final AP Poll , tying South Florida for the 34th overall ranking . Michigan finished their season 9 – 4 , winning the Capital One Bowl , and ranked No. 18 in the final AP Poll . A rematch in 2014 at Michigan Stadium was won decisively by the Wolverines , 52 – 14 . The 2014 rematch was the Mountaineers ' first game as an FBS school . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Divisions and subdivisions = = = 
 The National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) is split into three divisions : Division I , Division II , and Division III . According to the NCAA , Division I consists of " the largest programs that provide the most athletically related financial aid for student @-@ athletes " . Division I football is split into two subdivisions : the Football Bowl Subdivision ( FBS ) and the Football Championship Subdivision ( FCS ) . USA Today notes that the FBS is considered the tier at which major Division I universities play , while the FCS is a tier in which smaller programs compete . FBS member teams are allowed to have up to 85 scholarship players , while FCS member teams are allowed to award 63 scholarships . However , FCS teams can divide their 63 scholarships by giving some players ' partial scholarships ' . FBS teams vie to play in bowl games , while FCS teams aim to qualify for a postseason tournament . The two subdivisions were created in 1978 , and no other Division I sports are split in such a manner . The difference between the two subdivisions is great enough that John V. Lombardi , a former chancellor at UMass , which played FCS football before moving to FBS in 2012 , and a former president at FBS @-@ level Florida and Louisiana State , said that " even a crummy team in [ FBS ] football has higher visibility than a great team in [ FCS ] . " 
 FBS teams are allowed to schedule FCS teams , and one win against an FCS team can be counted towards their bowl @-@ eligible status provided the FCS team meets certain scholarship requirements . FCS teams are often paid upwards of USD $ 500 @,@ 000 for participating in games against FBS teams . This arrangement generally results in lopsided losses for FCS teams , but the money FCS schools earn from games against FBS teams helps fund their athletic departments , as well as offering broader exposure for their athletic programs . 
 = = = Scheduling = = = 
 Appalachian State had routinely scheduled FBS teams , playing against schools such as LSU ( 2005 ) , Auburn ( 1999 ) , Kansas ( 2005 ) , and NC State ( 2006 ) . They also had games against Wake Forest in every season from 1979 to 1996 , as well as in 1998 , 2000 , and 2001 . Appalachian State had won six of these games , all of them against Wake Forest . The Mountaineers had not beaten an FBS team since 2000 . Michigan , a historic college football power with a large fan base , had never played an FCS team . According to Appalachian State athletic director Charlie Cobb , both schools had gaps in their schedule as late as February 2007 ; the friendship between Mountaineers coach Jerry Moore and Wolverines coach Lloyd Carr played a key role in completing the deal . While attempting to determine the amount of money Appalachian State would be paid for playing Michigan , negotiations between the two schools reached a halt . Moore went to school officials and urged them to accept any offer Michigan gave them ; he recalled telling them that " It 's an opportunity game . It 'll be a one @-@ shot , once @-@ in @-@ a @-@ lifetime deal to go up there and play . It 's an unbelievable environment . " Appalachian State ultimately settled on a $ 400 @,@ 000 payment in return for playing against Michigan to open the 2007 season . 
 = = Pre @-@ game = = 
 Michigan was expected to handily defeat Appalachian State , who entered the game as considerable underdogs . Las Vegas sports books did not offer a betting line because they believed that it would be a mismatch . The day before the game , an Associated Press article said that the Mountaineers were " almost certain to lose badly " and " aren 't expected to be anything more than sacrificial lambs . " Another article predicted that Michigan would easily win , but that Michigan 's inexperienced secondary could possibly be tested by quarterback Armanti Edwards . This weakness is what the Mountaineers hoped to capitalize on : they spent most of the week leading up to the game studying game film , and felt that the Michigan defense had a tendency to leave the middle of the field defenseless . On the other hand , the Mountaineers lacked the depth of the Wolverines , having 22 fewer scholarship players . 
 = = = Appalachian State Mountaineers = = = 
 Appalachian State were ranked as the No. 1 team in the preseason FCS poll from The Sports Network , receiving 67 out of 70 first @-@ place votes . The team had won the previous two FCS national championships and were favorites to win a third consecutive title according to media outlets . They had also won their last 14 games , the longest in either Division I subdivision at the time . They had an overall record of 6 – 34 – 1 against major FBS teams . The Mountaineers ran a no @-@ huddle , spread option system , which they implemented in 2005 , their first championship season . Two of the major offensive weapons for the team were Edwards , who had scored 15 passing touchdowns and 15 rushing touchdowns in 2006 , and running back Kevin Richardson , who had scored an FCS @-@ record 30 rushing touchdowns in 2006 . The defensive unit for the Mountaineers was helmed by Corey Lynch , a safety ; the Mountaineer defense ranked 11th in rush defense and 35th in pass defense during the 2006 season , but the team lost five of its six best tacklers from that season , as well as defensive lineman Marques Murrell , who led the FCS in sacks during the 2006 season . Despite losses at the defensive line , the secondary , the team 's defensive strong point , remained virtually intact from the previous season . The Mountaineers ' kicker was senior Julian Rauch , who made 10 out of 14 field goal attempts during the 2006 season . 
 = = = Michigan Wolverines = = = 
 Michigan entered the game as the No. 5 @-@ ranked team in both the AP Poll and the Coaches ' Poll . Media outlets projected the team as favorites to win the Big Ten conference , and as contenders for a national championship . Michigan featured a strong senior class of offensive tackle Jake Long , tailback Mike Hart , and quarterback Chad Henne , each of whom had decided to stay in school rather than declare eligibility for the NFL Draft . The players attributed their decision to several factors , such as Michigan having lost their last three games to rival Ohio State and the Wolverines ' streak of three consecutive bowl losses . The three also desired to finish their college careers on a high note . Mark Schlabach of ESPN.com stated that " [ the trio ] , along with receivers Mario Manningham and Adrian Arrington , gives Michigan what could potentially be one of the most explosive offenses in college football " . Prior to the season , the team named Hart and Long as captains , along with linebacker Shawn Crable , a fifth @-@ year senior . Michigan aimed to open the game in a three @-@ receiver formation , which has the potential to spread the opposing defense out ; Michigan coach Lloyd Carr noted that " when you have some of the skill that we have at the wide receiver positions and can spread a defense out , that 's [ a ] positive . " At the same time , Michigan was anticipated to run only a limited selection of plays from this set , to limit the ability of their upcoming opponents to develop an effective game plan against them . Michigan 's defense , which led the FBS in run defense in 2006 , lost seven starters from the previous season , including four All @-@ Americans ( cornerback Leon Hall and defensive linemen Alan Branch , David Harris , and LaMarr Woodley ) , each of whom were drafted in the first two rounds of the 2007 NFL Draft . Wolverines linebacker Chris Graham , a senior , expected the defense to be defined by speed , noting that each position on the defense was " loaded in speed " . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 = = = Broadcast and game notes = = = 
 The game was the first ever to be broadcast on the Big Ten Network . At the time the network had approximately 17 million subscribers , most of which came from a deal with DirecTV . According to Mark Silverman , the president of the Big Ten Network , only a " small percentage " of Wolverine fans were able to watch it . Silverman attributed this to the fact that Comcast and Charter , two of the major cable television providers in the state of Michigan , did not carry the Big Ten Network . Thom Brennaman provided play @-@ by @-@ play commentary , Charles Davis performed as the color analyst , and Charissa Thompson reported from the sidelines . The game marked Thompson 's debut as a sideline analyst on any network , while Brennaman and Davis were more experienced , having covered high @-@ profile college football games such as the 2007 Fiesta Bowl and the 2007 BCS National Championship Game for Fox Sports . 
 The weather during the game was clear and sunny , with temperatures in the mid @-@ 70s ° F ( low @-@ 20s ° C ) and wind heading north at 10 – 15 miles ( 16 – 24 kilometers ) per hour . The referee , the head of the officiating team , was John O 'Neill . Overall attendance was recorded as 109 @,@ 218 . The game kicked off at 12 : 07 p.m. and ended at 3 : 40 p.m. , having lasted a total of three hours and thirty @-@ seven minutes . 
 = = = First quarter = = = 
 Michigan received the ball first , with Mike Massey returning the Julian Rauch kick to the Michigan 33 @-@ yard line . Michigan gained a first down after converting a third and one with a three @-@ yard run by Mike Hart . Chad Henne then completed an 18 @-@ yard pass to Massey , followed by a 33 @-@ yard rush from Hart , pushing Michigan to the four @-@ yard line of Appalachian State . Hart then ran the ball in for a touchdown , and the ensuing extra point made the score 7 – 0 . Appalachian State 's CoCo Hillary took the kickoff to the 26 @-@ yard line of the Mountaineers . After the Mountaineers opened with a run for no gain and a six @-@ yard completion , Armanti Edwards completed a 68 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Dexter Jackson . The extra point was converted , tying the score at 7 – 7 . The following two drives resulted in three @-@ and @-@ outs for both teams , but after a Mountaineer punt went out of bounds at the Michigan 48 @-@ yard line , the Wolverines mounted a ten @-@ play , 52 @-@ yard drive culminating in a ten @-@ yard touchdown pass from Henne to Greg Matthews . The extra point gave Michigan a 14 – 7 lead . Appalachian State started their drive with 3 : 09 left in the quarter at their own 35 @-@ yard line , completing nine plays and driving to the Michigan 36 yard @-@ line before the end of the quarter . 
 = = = Second quarter = = = 
 Following the start of the second quarter , Appalachian State ran another six plays , ending the drive with a nine @-@ yard touchdown pass by Edwards to Hans <unk> . The extra point again evened the score , this time at 14 – 14 . Michigan was forced into a three @-@ and @-@ out and had to punt the ball , with Appalachian State starting their next drive at the Michigan 37 . On the fifth play of the next drive , the Mountaineers scored a touchdown on a 20 @-@ yard pass from Edwards to Jackson . The Mountaineers converted the extra point attempt , giving them the lead at 21 – 14 . Michigan began their next drive at their 20 @-@ yard line , and drove down to the Appalachian State 40 @-@ yard line in four plays . Their next play , a Brandon Minor run for five yards , was followed by a Minor run for no yards and an incomplete pass . The Wolverines opted to go for it on fourth down but failed to convert , turning the ball over to Appalachian State . The following Mountaineer drive featured nine running plays in a row , the last a six @-@ yard run by Edwards for a touchdown . The extra point was successful , increasing the Mountaineer lead and making the score 28 – 14 . Michigan returned the next kickoff to their 32 @-@ yard line , with 2 : 15 left on the clock . The Wolverines drove to the Appalachian five @-@ yard line , ultimately settling for a field goal with 23 seconds left , cutting Appalachian State 's lead to eleven points . 
 = = = Third quarter = = = 
 Appalachian State returned the opening kickoff of the second half to their own 36 @-@ yard line , but Michigan defender Morgan Trent intercepted an Edwards throw on the second play of the drive . Michigan took possession at the Appalachian State 40 @-@ yard line , driving to the 25 @-@ yard line before kicking a field goal to decrease the Mountaineer lead to eight points . Appalachian State began play after the kickoff at their own 24 @-@ yard line , driving 64 yards in 11 plays and scoring a 31 @-@ yard field goal to make the score 31 – 20 Appalachian State . After the ensuing kickoff , Michigan ran four plays before Minor fumbled the ball on the fifth . The fumble was recovered by Appalachian State defender Pierre Banks at the Michigan 28 @-@ yard line . However , Appalachian State failed to get a first down on the ensuing drive , and Rauch missed a 46 @-@ yard field goal attempt . Michigan went three @-@ and @-@ out on their next drive and had to punt , but a fumble by Edwards on the following Appalachian State drive was recovered by Michigan defender John Thompson , giving them control of the ball at the Appalachian State 31 @-@ yard line . Michigan drove 31 yards over six plays , scoring a touchdown on a four @-@ yard run by Hart . The Wolverines went for a two @-@ point conversion , but failed to convert , making the score 31 – 26 in favor of Appalachian State . Appalachian State received the kickoff at their own 26 @-@ yard line with 19 seconds left in the third quarter , and the quarter ended following a six @-@ yard completion by Edwards to <unk> . 
 = = = Fourth quarter = = = 
 Appalachian State continued their drive but were forced to punt after a three @-@ and @-@ out . Michigan began their drive at the Appalachian State 34 @-@ yard line , but a Henne pass was intercepted by Mountaineer defender Leonard Love on the fourth play of the drive . Love returned the ball 26 @-@ yards , and Appalachian State began the drive at their own 41 @-@ yard line , but were forced to punt after going three @-@ and @-@ out . Michigan got the ball at their own 24 @-@ yard line and mounted a nine @-@ play , 43 @-@ yard drive to the Appalachian State 33 @-@ yard line . On the final play , a fourth and five , Henne 's pass fell incomplete , turning the ball over to Appalachian State , who were again forced to punt after a three @-@ and @-@ out . After returning the punt to their own 46 @-@ yard line , Hart ran the ball 54 yards for a touchdown , giving Michigan the lead 32 – 31 with 4 : 36 left . Michigan chose to go for two , but the conversion attempt failed . Edwards was picked off on the first play of the ensuing drive , giving Michigan control of the ball at the Appalachian State 43 @-@ yard line . Michigan ran five plays before attempting a 43 @-@ yard field goal . The attempt was blocked , however , giving Appalachian State control of the ball with 1 : 37 left . With no timeouts left , the Mountaineers drove 69 yards down the field in just over a minute in game time , setting up a Rauch field goal from 24 yards out with 26 seconds left . The attempt was good , giving Appalachian State a 34 – 32 lead . Michigan regained control of the ball on the ensuing kickoff , and a 46 @-@ yard pass from Henne to Mario Manningham gave the Wolverines a 37 @-@ yard field goal attempt with six seconds left on the clock . The attempt was blocked by Corey Lynch , securing a 34 – 32 win by the Mountaineers . 
 = = = Broadcast Calls = = = 
 Thom Brennaman 's call of the final play for the Big Ten Network : 
 David Jackson and Steve Brown 's call of the final play for Appalachian State Radio : 
 = = = Scoring summary = = = 
 = = Statistical summary = = 
 Appalachian State recorded 227 yards through the air , while Michigan finished with 233 yards . Michigan finished with significantly more rushing yards , recording 246 rushing yards as opposed to the 160 rushing yards gained by Appalachian State . In total , the Wolverines recorded 479 total yards of offense , while Appalachian State recorded 387 total yards . The Wolverines recorded 23 first downs , four more than the Mountaineers , while Appalachian State turned the ball over three times , one more than Michigan . Both teams recorded seven penalties , but Michigan recorded more penalty yards . Appalachian State held the edge in time of possession , holding the ball for 31 minutes and 12 seconds ; Michigan held the ball for 28 minutes and 48 seconds . 
 Appalachian State quarterback Armanti Edwards completed 17 of 23 passes for 227 yards , three touchdowns , and two interceptions while averaging 9 @.@ 9 yards per throw . Kevin Richardson led the team in rushing yards , running the ball 24 times for 88 yards , and Edwards was second on the team with 17 rushes for 62 yards and one touchdown . Edwards accounted for all four Mountaineer touchdowns . Dexter Jackson led the team in receiving , catching three passes for 98 yards and two touchdowns ; he also had one carry for 19 yards . 
 Michigan quarterback Chad Henne completed 19 of 37 passes for 233 yards , with an average of 6 @.@ 3 yards per throw ; he threw one touchdown and one interception . Mike Hart , who missed almost two quarters due to a thigh injury , led Michigan in rushing , recording 188 yards and three touchdowns on 23 carries . Greg Matthews led the Wolverines in receiving , accounting for 68 yards and one touchdown on seven catches . 
 Pierre Banks led the Mountaineers in tackles , recording 12 tackles overall . Banks also recorded the only sack for the Mountaineers and recovered a fumble . Corey Lynch finished second with 11 tackles , as well as blocking a kick . Leonard Love recorded the only interception for the Mountaineers . For Michigan , Shawn Crable led the team with 10 tackles . Crable also forced a fumble and recorded 1 @.@ 5 sacks . Chris Graham finished with 9 tackles , the second @-@ most on the Wolverines . <unk> <unk> and Morgan Trent each intercepted a pass , while Tim Jamison , Terrance Taylor , and Will Johnson received full or partial credit for sacks . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Appalachian State = = = 
 Appalachian State was unanimously selected as the No. 1 team in the FCS football poll in the week after their victory against Michigan . Although several voters in the AP Poll stated they would like to vote for Appalachian State , the Mountaineers were ineligible to receive votes because the poll was only limited to FBS teams ; in response , the AP amended their policy the following week to allow FCS teams to receive votes in the AP Poll . The Mountaineers received 19 points in the week 3 edition of the AP Poll and 5 points in the week 4 edition of the AP Poll . The team also extended their winning streak to 17 games before losing to Wofford in week 5 . Appalachian State lost to rival Georgia Southern in week 7 , dropping them to 5 – 2 and 2 – 2 in the Southern Conference ( SoCon ) , which placed them in a poor position to repeat for a third consecutive time as conference champions . However , the Mountaineers won all of their remaining regular season games to finish 9 – 2 , and their 5 – 2 Southern Conference record was good enough to earn a share of the SoCon conference title with Wofford . After close victories over James Madison ( 28 – 27 ) and Eastern Washington ( 38 – 35 ) in the first two rounds of the FCS playoffs , Appalachian State easily defeated Richmond ( 55 – 35 ) in the semifinals and Delaware ( 49 – 21 ) in the championship game , winning their third consecutive FCS National Championship . They became the first team to win three consecutive FCS titles , and the first Division I football team to win three consecutive titles since Army , who had won three straight titles from 1944 to 1946 . At the end of the season , the Mountaineers became the first FCS team to receive votes in the final AP Poll . They received five votes , which placed Appalachian State at a tie for 34th overall with South Florida . 
 = = = Michigan = = = 
 Michigan 's loss to Appalachian State effectively ended their chances of winning a national championship . The Wolverines dropped out of the top 25 entirely on the AP Poll the following week , the first time a team had missed the top 25 in the AP Poll the week after they were in the top 10 . In their next game , Michigan lost to Oregon 39 – 7 , the largest margin of defeat for Michigan at Michigan Stadium since 1968 . Following the loss to Oregon , Michigan won their next eight games , leading the team to rank as high as No. 13 in the AP Poll . After Michigan lost their final two games , ending the regular season with an 8 – 4 record , they dropped off the poll entirely . After Michigan 's season @-@ ending loss to Ohio State , Carr announced he would retire as the team 's coach after their bowl game . The Wolverines received an invitation to the Capital One Bowl , where they defeated Florida 41 – 35 to finish their season 9 – 4 . Following their win in the Capital One Bowl , Michigan finished at No. 18 in the final AP Poll . 
 = = = Media reaction = = = 
 Thom Brennaman immediately hailed the game as one of the greatest upsets in the history of sports ; Charissa Thompson told coach Jerry Moore that it was " one of the greatest upsets in college football history . " Many media outlets described it as one of , if not the greatest , upsets in the history of college football . The win marked the first time an FCS team had beaten a ranked FBS program . Dan Wetzel of Yahoo ! Sports wrote that : 
 " This game was supposed to be the prime example of what had gone wrong in money hungry college football . The powers that be had expanded the season a couple years back , adding an extra game so big schools could bring in cream @-@ puff opponents while collecting millions in revenue . Michigan had never played a I @-@ AA opponent in its history . Now we know why , the Wolverines were ducking them . Instead of an easy tune @-@ up for Michigan , Appalachian State leaves with its most profound victory ever and a check for $ 400 @,@ 000 that was supposed to be their pay for getting punished . " 
 Sports Illustrated writer Stewart Mandel wrote that he felt " utterly unqualified " to put the game into perspective , and said " there 's no logical reason whatsoever this should have happened . But it did . And it wasn 't the slightest bit fluky . " He also expressed disappointment that he would not be able to vote for the Mountaineers in his AP Poll ballot , explaining that " it may well turn out that Michigan was grossly overrated , but all I know is this : There will not be 25 other teams that accomplish more this opening weekend than Appalachian State did Saturday . There won 't even be five . " Pat Forde of ESPN.com called it " the most astonishing college football result I can remember , " saying that " we 'll still be talking about it a few decades from now . Especially in the locker rooms of every huge underdog , where they 'll say , ' If Appalachian State can beat Michigan , why can 't we shock the world , too ? . ' " He felt the upset was particularly impressive because upsets of such a magnitude do not happen often in college football . The New York Times writer Viv Bernstein called the game " one of the biggest upsets in college football history " and called it " a stunning upset by any measure . " The game was the lead story on SportsCenter and was the cover story for the following week 's edition of Sports Illustrated ; Appalachian Statewide receiver Dexter Jackson was featured on the cover , which has the headline " <unk> Upset : Appalachian State <unk> No. 5 Michigan . " 
 In 2012 , Jerry <unk> of CBS Sports described it as " the biggest upset of the past five years of college football " , and described it as having " set the table " for an " epically chaotic " 2007 season as well as " four years ' worth of headline @-@ making upsets to follow . " Dennis Dodd of CBS Sports said in 2012 that " we may never see its likes again . " He said that the game " reminded us why the college game is the best , " but felt that such a result would become more unlikely in the future , as many conferences are moving to increase to nine conference games , reducing the need to play FCS teams . 
 Since Appalachian State 's victory , two other FCS teams have defeated ranked FBS teams . In 2010 , James Madison defeated 13th @-@ ranked Virginia Tech 21 – 16 . In 2013 , Eastern Washington beat 25th @-@ ranked Oregon State , 49 – 46 . The year also saw North Dakota State record a 24 @-@ 21 victory over Kansas State , the defending Big 12 champions . 
 = = = Reaction in Boone and on other campuses = = = 
 Just minutes after the game ended , Appalachian State students began celebrating on the two main streets in Boone , North Carolina : King Street and Rivers Street . The group eventually advanced to Kidd Brewer Stadium , Appalachian State 's home field , and tore down one of the goalposts . The students proceeded to carry the goalpost over a mile before depositing it in the front yard of the school 's chancellor , Kenneth E. Peacock . He was fine with this , saying " as good as today was for Appalachian State , they can take it up there and put it down . I can 't wait to get there and see it . " Several students jumped nude into the duck pond behind ASU 's dining hall , a campus tradition for celebrating big football victories . When the team returned to their stadium in buses at 11 : 00 p.m. , they were greeted by a crowd of thousands of students and fans . It took the team 20 minutes to get from their buses to the locker room due to the crowd . The celebration in Boone was not limited to Appalachian State 's campus ; the Boone Mall was " flooded " with cars , and a sports apparel shop carrying ASU gear , Sports Fanatic , reported that sales were seven times higher than normal . 
 In Ann Arbor , Michigan , the reaction was far different . The Ann Arbor News reported that the Michigan fans who attended the game were " shell @-@ shocked . " Appalachian State 's win also proved popular among fans of Michigan 's rivals . The Associated Press reported that , following the end of Ohio State 's 38 @-@ 6 home victory against Youngstown State , Ohio Stadium aired the final minutes of the Appalachian State @-@ Michigan game on the stadium 's big screen ; although most of the fans had already left , the outcome " elicited a large roar " from the remaining attendees . Similarly , The Daily Collegian reported that as Penn State was closing a 59 @-@ 0 home victory over Florida International , the update " Twenty seconds to play fourth quarter , Appalachian State 34 , Michigan 32 " was announced over the stadium 's <unk> . The student section and several Penn State players quickly crowded inside of Beaver Stadium to watch the closing seconds on in @-@ stadium televisions ; when the game @-@ winning kick was blocked , they " converged into a mosh pit " in celebration . The Detroit Free Press reported that the loudest cheers during Michigan State 's home victory against UAB came when the scoreboard displayed the final score of the Appalachian State vs. Michigan game ; to conclude his postgame press conference , Michigan State defensive coordinator Pat <unk> stated : " And Michigan lost , too . " The Ohio State locker room erupted into a " roar " after the players learned of Michigan 's loss . Conversely , Michigan State running back Javon Ringer expressed disappointment at the game 's result , saying " I kinda really wanted [ Michigan ] to be undefeated for us . " Ohio State coach Jim Tressel gave a similar reaction , saying that " I 'm never glad when a conference opponent loses outside of your game with them ... You 're always rooting for your brethren in the Big Ten . " ESPN.com reported that in the hours after the game , " at least one street vendor was doing brisk business selling freshly minted Mountaineers T @-@ shirts near the Ohio State campus " , while stores near the campus were " swamped with requests for gear bearing the Mountaineers ' gold and black colors and logo " , primarily from Ohio State fans who were rejoicing over their rival 's defeat . Appalachian State 's campus bookstore received a large number of phone calls from people wanting to buy gear , many of them from Ohio , but were unable to sell them in large quantities due to a state law prohibiting university bookstores from selling items to people who are not students , faculty , or alumni . 
 = = = Rematch = = = 
 In 2011 Appalachian State and Michigan agreed to play a rematch , scheduled for 2014 to be the season @-@ opener for both teams . Appalachian State will be paid $ 850 @,@ 000 to play this game . Michigan 's athletic director , Dave Brandon , felt a rematch would be an excellent way to gain attention for Michigan football and said " The networks were fighting over who gets to televise that game . " Jerry Moore said that " To have the University of Michigan invite us back is the ultimate compliment for us as a program and a university . We 're grateful for the opportunity to have a new generation of players experience a gameday at the Big House and to test themselves against college football 's all @-@ time winningest program . " Appalachian State played their first year of football in the FBS in 2014 and joined the Sun Belt Conference as full members . The rematch would be much different this time around , with Michigan beating Appalachian State 52 – 14 ; Appalachian State never held a lead in the game . 
 = Psilocybe tampanensis = 
 Psilocybe tampanensis is a very rare psychedelic mushroom in the Strophariaceae family . Originally collected in the wild in a sandy meadow near Tampa , Florida in 1977 , the fungus has never again been reported in Florida , but was later collected in Mississippi . The original Florida specimen was cloned , and descendants remain in wide circulation . The fruit bodies ( mushrooms ) produced by the fungus are yellowish @-@ brown in color with convex to conic caps up to 2 @.@ 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 9 in ) in diameter atop a thin stem up to 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) long . Psilocybe tampanensis forms psychoactive truffle @-@ like sclerotia that are known and sold under the nickname " philosopher 's stones " . The fruit bodies and sclerotia are consumed by some for recreational or entheogenic purposes . In nature , sclerotia are produced by the fungus as a form of protection from wildfires and other natural disasters . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was described scientifically by Steven H. Pollock and Mexican mycologist and Psilocybe authority Gastón Guzmán in a 1978 Mycotaxon publication . According to Paul Stamets , Pollock skipped a " boring taxonomic conference " near Tampa , Florida to go mushroom hunting , and found a single specimen growing in a sand dune , which he did not recognize . Pollock later cloned the specimen and produced a pure culture , which remains widely distributed today . The type specimen is kept at the herbarium of the Instituto Politécnico Nacional in Mexico . Guzmán classified P. tampanensis in his section <unk> , a grouping of related Psilocybe species characterized primarily by having spores with lengths greater than 8 micrometers . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap ranges in shape from convex or conic with a slight umbo , expanding in age to become flattened or with a slight central depression ; it reaches diameters of 1 – 2 @.@ 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 9 in ) . The surface is smooth , not striate ( grooved ) , ochraceous brown to straw brown , buff to yellowish @-@ grey when dry , with slight bluish tones at the margin , hygrophanous , and somewhat sticky when wet . The gills are more or less adnate ( broadly attached to the stem slightly above the bottom of the gill , with most of the gill fused to the stem ) and brown to dark purple brown in color with lighter edges . The stem is 2 – 6 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 4 in ) long , 1 – 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 04 – 0 @.@ 08 in ) thick , and equal in width throughout to slightly enlarged near the base . There are fibrils near the top of the stem . The partial veil is cortinate ( cobweb @-@ like , similar to the partial veil of Cortinarius species ) , and soon disappears . The flesh is whitish to yellowish , and bruises blue when injured . The taste and odor are slightly farinaceous ( similar to freshly ground flour ) . 
 The spore print is purple @-@ brown . When viewed with a microscope , the spores of P. tampanensis are somewhat rhombic in face view and roughly elliptical in side view ; they have dimensions of 8 @.@ 8 – 9 @.@ 9 by 8 – 8 @.@ 8 by 5 @.@ 5 – 6 @.@ 6 μm . Spores appear brownish @-@ yellow when mounted in a solution of potassium hydroxide , and have a thick , smooth wall , a distinct germ pore , and a short appendage . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are four @-@ spored , hyaline ( translucent ) , and measure 14 – 22 by 8 – 10 µm . The cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the gill face ) measure 16 – 22 by 4 – 9 µm , and are lageniform ( flask @-@ shaped ) with <unk> thin necks that are 2 @.@ 2 – 3 µm thick , and infrequently have irregular branches . There are no pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the gill face ) . Clamp connections are present in the hyphae . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Guzmán considers Psilocybe tampanensis to be intermediate in form between P. mexicana and P. caerulescens . Psilocybe mexicana has a more Mycena @-@ like fruit body shape , and longer basidia measuring 22 – 24 by 7 @.@ 7 – 11 μm . It is known only from Mexico and Guatemala . Psilocybe caerulescens , found in the USA and Venezuela , is also somewhat similar , but has a <unk> habit ( small to medium @-@ sized mushrooms with a convex cap ) , with spores measuring 6 @.@ 7 – 8 by 5 @.@ 2 – 6 @.@ 5 by 3 @.@ 3 – 5 @.@ 2 μm , and cheilocystidia that are 15 – 22 by 4 @.@ 4 – 5 @.@ 5 μm . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 For almost two decades after its discovery , Psilocybe tampanensis was known only from the type locality , southeast of Brandon , Florida . In 1996 , Guzmán reported finding it in a meadow with sandy soil in a deciduous forest in Pearl River County , Mississippi , a habitat similar to that of the type location . Due to its scarcity , however , its habitat preferences are not known with certainty . Like all Psilocybe species , it is saprobic . 
 Like some other psychoactive grassland species such as Psilocybe semilanceata , Conocybe <unk> , P. tampanensis can form sclerotia – a hardened mass of mycelia that is more resistant to adverse environmental conditions than normal mycelia . This truffle @-@ like form gives the fungus some protection from wildfires and other natural disasters . Other Psilocybe species known to produce sclerotia include Psilocybe mexicana and Psilocybe caerulescens . Sclerotia are also produced when the species is grown in culture . 
 = = Recreational use = = 
 Psilocybe tampanensis contains the psychedelic compounds psilocin and psilocybin , and is consumed for recreational and entheogenic purposes . The species was found to be one of the most popular psychoactive mushrooms confiscated by German authorities in a 2000 report , behind Psilocybe cubensis , Psilocybe semilanceata , and Panaeolus cyanescens . The alkaloid content in the confiscated samples ranged from not detectable to 0 @.@ 19 % psilocybin , and 0 @.@ 01 to 0 @.@ 03 % psilocin . According to mycologist Michael Beug , dried fruit bodies can contain up to 1 % psilocybin and psilocin ; in terms of psychoactive potency , Stamets considers the mushroom " moderately to highly active " . 
 The psychoactive compounds are also present in the sclerotia : in one analysis , the levels of psilocybin obtained from sclerotia ranged from 0 @.@ 31 % to 0 @.@ 68 % by dry weight , and were dependent upon the composition of the growth medium . Sclerotia are sold under the nickname " philosopher 's stones " . They have been described as " resembling congealed <unk> " , and having a somewhat bitter taste similar to walnut . Strains existing as commercial cultivation kits sold originally in countercultural drug magazines are derived from the original fruit body found by Pollock in Florida . Methods were originally developed by Pollock , and later extended by Stamets in the 1980s to cultivate the sclerotia on a substrate of rye grass ( <unk> ) , and on straw . Sclerotia prepared in this way take from 3 to 12 weeks to develop . Pollock was granted a US patent in 1981 for his method of producing sclerotia . 
 = = = Legal status = = = 
 Psilocin and psilocybin are scheduled drugs in many countries , and mushrooms containing them are prohibited by extension . In the United States , Federal law was passed in 1971 that put the psychoactive components into the most restricted schedule I category . For about three decades following this , several European countries remained relatively tolerant of mushroom use and possession . In the 2000s ( decade ) , in response to increases in prevalence and availability , all European countries banned possession or sale of psychedelic mushrooms ; the Netherlands was the last country to enact such laws in 2008 . However , they did not include psilocybin @-@ containing sclerotia in the 2008 law , and thus , psilocybin @-@ containing fungal compounds are available commercially in the Netherlands . In parallel legal developments in Asia , P. tampanensis was one of 13 psychoactive mushrooms specifically prohibited by law in Japan in 2002 . 
 = Hurricane Hernan ( 2002 ) = 
 Hurricane Hernan was the second of three Category 5 hurricanes during the 2002 Pacific hurricane season . The twelfth tropical cyclone , tenth named storm and sixth hurricane of the season , Hernan originated from a tropical wave that formed in the Atlantic Ocean and crossed to the Pacific Ocean . The wave spawned a low pressure system which organized into a tropical depression on August 30 , a tropical storm on August 31 and a hurricane later that day . Hernan rapidly intensified and reached peak intensity as a Category 5 storm on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . Proceeding northwest , it maintained this strength for eight hours , but on September 2 it entered cooler waters and began to weaken . By September 6 it had degenerated into a remnant area of low pressure . 
 Hernan was the second most intense hurricane of the season , and it maintained Category 5 status for the second @-@ longest time of the season , behind Hurricane Kenna . Although Hernan remained far from land , swells of 15 to 20 feet ( 4 to 6 meters ) caused minor beach erosion along the coast of Mexico . In addition , an associated remnant plume of moisture generated light shower activity in southern California as it tracked just offshore . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On August 16 , a tropical wave left the coast of Africa . It traveled westward across the Atlantic Ocean , crossing over Central America and emerging in the eastern Pacific , where it merged with a pre @-@ existing intertropical convergence zone disturbance . The system gradually developed moderate convection , and on August 30 it had developed sufficient convection to be designated Tropical Depression 10 @-@ E. The depression produced persistent strong thunderstorms , primarily in two areas of deep convection located to the northeast and west of the center of circulation . Although the center was elongated , wind shear over the system remained light and outflow was good , which led forecasters to predict modest intensification . On the afternoon of August 30 , banding features became evident , and the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Hernan with sustained winds of 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) . Further organization occurred , and the center of circulation became encircled by convective thunderstorms . On August 31 , the storm was upgraded to Hurricane Hernan as it moved northwestward about 400 miles ( 634 km ) southwest of Acapulco . 
 Light wind shear and favorable ocean temperatures led to steady intensification of the storm , and satellite images indicated that an eye had developed late on August 31 . Minimum pressure lowered to 987 mb ( hPa ) , and the maximum winds increased to 100 mph , Category 2 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . The storm quickly reached Category 3 , a major hurricane , and soon after , Category 4 . As it did so , its eye became ragged , while its lateral movement to the northwest rose to 17 mph around the southern periphery of a strong deep @-@ layer ridge over the United States . By September 1 , the hurricane reached its peak intensity of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 921 mb ( hPa ) . It had reached Category 5 , the second of three such powerful storms that would do so during the season . 
 By September 2 , the storm 's convective thunderstorms warmed slightly , indicating weakening to just below Category 5 . An eyewall replacement cycle took place , and two eye structures formed as gradual weakening continued . By September 2 , the storm was downgraded to Category 3 just before it turned slightly to the west . The storm underwent another eyewall replacement cycle as winds decreased further . As the storm entered cooler waters , winds decreased to 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) , below major hurricane intensity . Soon Hernan was downgraded to Category 1 , and the eye became cloud @-@ filled . On September 5 , Hernan was downgraded to a tropical storm as winds rapidly weakened to 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) despite developing a new band of convection . That same day , the storm was downgraded to a tropical depression as it began to lose tropical characteristics . Strong wind shear developed , further dissipating the depression . On September 6 , the system degenerated into a remnant low @-@ pressure system which spawned a remnant plume of moisture that meandered off the coast of California , producing light showers . 
 = = Impact and intensity = = 
 Hurricane Hernan remained far from shore and caused little damage to land . It brought light wind to Socorro Island off the coast of Mexico . Rough surf caused minor impact ; in the open waters near the center of Hernan , waves generated by the storm were unofficially estimated to exceed 70 feet ( 21 meters ) . However , official buoys reported swells of 57 feet ( 17 meters ) . Along the coast of Mexico , waves reached 15 to 20 feet ( 4 to 6 meters ) , causing minor beach erosion . A portion of Hernan 's remnant moisture off the southern California coast produced light rainfall and slippery roads . Hernan had no known effects on shipping . 
 When Hernan grew from tropical storm to Category 5 , it intensified at a rate of 1 @.@ 73 mbar ( hPa ) per hour , just under the threshold for " rapid intensification " . However , for a 12 @-@ hour period from August 31 to September 1 , it deepened at 2 @.@ 58 mbar ( hPa ) per hour , within the range of " explosive deepening " due to favorable conditions including light wind shear and warm water . 
 = New York State Route 285 = 
 New York State Route 285 ( NY 285 ) was a state highway in Oneida County , New York , in the United States . The southern terminus of the 6 @.@ 87 @-@ mile ( 11 @.@ 06 km ) route was at an intersection with NY 69 west of the hamlet of Taberg in the town of Annsville . Its northern terminus was in the community of Thompson Corners , where it ended at a junction with County Route 67A ( CR 67A ) and CR 70 . NY 285 was little more than a connector between NY 69 and Thompson Corners , as it did not pass through any other areas of interest . 
 NY 285 initially extended from Taberg to the hamlet of Florence when it was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . It was truncated to Thompson Corners c . 1935 , but extended slightly in the 1960s when NY 69 was realigned to bypass Taberg . Ownership and maintenance of NY 285 was transferred to Oneida County on September 1 , 1988 , and the NY 285 designation was removed just over two months later . The route is now County Route 70A . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 285 began at an intersection with NY 69 southwest of the hamlet of Taberg in the town of Annsville . The route headed northward , intersecting with Main Street , which connected NY 285 to Taberg . Here , NY 285 turned to the northwest and became Taberg – Florence Road . Just outside Taberg , the route passed Saint Patrick 's Cemetery , as well as the remains of an old Protestant cemetery situated directly across NY 285 from it . As it continued northwestward through a rural portion of Oneida County , NY 285 passed a junkyard near the intersection with Pond Hill Road . Past an intersection with Carlisle Road , NY 285 entered a state reforestation area . As such , the surrounding landscape became mostly forested areas . Near the center of the reforestation area , the highway intersected with Skinner Settlement Road ( CR 85 ) . After passing over Corkin Hill , NY 285 headed downhill into the town of Florence . 
 After crossing into Florence , NY 285 remained in the reforestation area , and continued towards Thompson Corners on a linear , northwesterly routing . It passed Greely Cemetery , then continued to Thompson Corners , a very small community in southeastern Florence . NY 285 terminated here at an intersection with <unk> Road ( CR 67A ) and Wolcott Hill Road ( CR 70 ) . CR 70 turned northwest at this junction to follow NY 285 's right @-@ of @-@ way to the hamlet of Florence and eventually to the Oneida County line . 
 = = History = = 
 NY 285 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York to a highway connecting NY 69 ( Main Street ) in Taberg to the isolated hamlet of Florence in the town of the same name via Thompson Corners . The route was truncated southeastward to Thompson Corners c . 1935 . In the early 1960s , NY 69 was rerouted to follow a new purpose @-@ built highway that bypassed most of Taberg to the south . Most of NY 69 's original alignment through the hamlet was transferred to the town of Annsville ; however , its former western approach into Taberg along Taberg Road was realigned to meet the bypass and became a short extension of NY 285 . 
 On September 1 , 1988 , ownership and maintenance of NY 285 was transferred from the state of New York to Oneida County . The portion of the exchange relating to NY 285 was described in New York State Highway Law as follows , with annotations in brackets : 
 ... to transfer to the county of Oneida for future maintenance as part of the county highway system in Oneida and to issue official orders of abandonment of those portions of highway described as follows : " beginning at a point on or near state highway five thousand one hundred thirty @-@ nine [ NY 69 ] , west of the hamlet of Taberg , thence running generally northwesterly to a county highway in or near the hamlet of Thompson Corners . 
 In return , the state of New York assumed maintenance over a portion of River Street ( CR 32 ) that connected NY 69 in Oriskany to NY 49 in Marcy . This highway became NY <unk> , an unsigned reference route . Meanwhile , the NY 285 designation remained in place until November 4 , 1988 , when it was officially removed from the highway . The former routing of NY 285 became CR 70A , a spur of the pre @-@ existing CR 70 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route was in Oneida County . 
 = Ich bin vergnügt mit meinem Glücke , BWV 84 = 
 Ich bin vergnügt mit meinem Glücke ( I am content in my good fortune ) , BWV 84 , is a church cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach . He composed the solo cantata for soprano in Leipzig in 1727 for the Sunday Septuagesima , and led the first performance , probably on 9 February 1727 . 
 Bach composed the work in his fourth year as Thomaskantor in Leipzig . The text is similar to a cantata text Ich bin vergnügt mit meinem Stande ( I am content with my position ) , which Picander published in 1728 , but it is not certain that he wrote also the cantata text . Its thoughts about being content are in the spirit of the beginning Enlightenment , expressed in simple language . The closing chorale is the 12th stanza of the hymn " Wer weiß , wie nahe mir mein Ende " by <unk> Juliane von Schwarzburg @-@ <unk> . Ich bin vergnügt mit meinem Glücke is one of the few works which Bach called " Cantata " himself . 
 Bach structured the work in five movements , alternating arias and recitatives , and a closing chorale . The scoring requires only a small ensemble of a soprano soloist , three additional vocal parts for the chorale , and a Baroque instrumental ensemble of oboe , strings and basso continuo . While the first aria is pensive and elegiac , the second aria is of dancing folk @-@ like character . 
 = = History and words = = 
 Bach wrote the solo cantata in Leipzig , in his fourth year as Thomaskantor ( director of church music ) in Leipzig , for the third Sunday before Lent , called Septuagesima . The prescribed readings for the Sunday were taken from the First Epistle to the Corinthians , " race for victory " ( 1 Corinthians 9 : 24 – 10 : 5 ) , and from the Gospel of Matthew , the parable of the Workers in the Vineyard ( Matthew 20 : 1 – 16 ) . Bach had already composed two cantatas for the occasion in earlier years , Nimm , was dein ist , und gehe hin , BWV 144 , in 1724 , and the chorale cantata Ich hab in Gottes Herz und Sinn , BWV 92 , in 1725 . Ich bin vergnügt mit meinem Glücke is one of the few works which Bach called " Cantata " himself . 
 As in the earlier years , the cantata text is related to the gospel in the general way that the Christian should be content with his share of good fortune , without envy of others who may seem more fortunate . The title and the text show similarities to Picander 's Ich bin vergnügt mit meinem Stande ( I am content with my position ) , published in 1728 . It is unclear if both texts are by Picander , or if Picander based his on a former one , or if Picander 's was already available at the time of the composition but was changed . As the Bach scholar Klaus Hofmann observes , the thoughts are in the spirit of the beginning Enlightenment , " praise of frugality , of modesty with that which God has allocated to us , of satisfaction , of lack of envy towards others " . The language is no longer the " rhetorical pathos of baroque poetry " , but " <unk> and artistry of the imagery . The language is simple and terse ; it is rational rather than figurative . " 
 The closing chorale is the 12th stanza of the funeral hymn " Wer weiß , wie nahe mir mein Ende " by <unk> Juliane von Schwarzburg @-@ <unk> ( 1686 ) . Bach had used its first stanza in his cantatas Wo gehest du hin ? BWV 166 ( 1724 ) and in Wer weiß , wie nahe mir mein Ende ? BWV 27 ( 1726 ) . 
 Bach led the first performance , probably on 9 February 1727 . 
 = = Scoring and structure = = 
 Bach structured the cantata in five movements . A sequence of alternating arias and recitatives is concluded by a chorale . Bach scored the work for soprano soloist , a four @-@ part choir only in the chorale , and a Baroque instrumental ensemble of oboe ( Ob ) , two violins ( Vl ) , viola ( Va ) , and basso continuo . The heading of the autograph score reads : " J.J. Dominica <unk> Cantata " , which means : " Jesus help . Cantata for the Sunday Septuagesima " . Bach added a more precise extra page : " Dominica <unk> . / Ich bin vergnügt mit meinem Glücke / à / Soprano Solo è / 3 <unk> / 1 Hautbois / 2 Violini / Viola / e Continuo / di / Joh : Seb : Bach " . The scoring is modest , appropriate for the weeks leading to Lent . The duration is given as about 15 minutes . 
 In the following table of the movements , the scoring follows the Neue Bach @-@ Ausgabe . The keys and time signatures are taken from the book on all cantatas by the Bach scholar Alfred Dürr , using the symbol for common time ( 4 / 4 ) . The continuo , playing throughout , is not shown . 
 = = Music = = 
 Although the vocal and instrumental parts are limited , Bach achieves variety by movements of different instrumentation and character . 
 = = = 1 = = = 
 The opening aria , " Ich bin vergnügt mit meinem Glücke , das mir der liebe Gott <unk> . " ( I am content with the fortune that my dear God bestows on me . ) , is slow and pensive , accompanied by all instruments , reminiscent of the slow movement of an oboe concerto . John Eliot Gardiner , who conducted in 2000 the Bach Cantata Pilgrimage , noted in the project diary that Bach , who possibly was not content with his situation in Leipzig , composed music portraying " ambivalence and complexity " . His music is " dynamic and fluctuating " , capturing " wistful , resigned , elegiac " moods . The musicologist Julian Mincham notes that the aria compares to Ich bin in mir vergnügt , BWV 204 ( I am content in myself ) which he describes as " also a highly personal work for solo soprano with a similar theme , exploring comparable human emotions " . 
 = = = 2 = = = 
 The first recitative , " Gott ist mir ja nichts <unk> " ( God indeed owes me nothing ) , is secco . 
 = = = 3 = = = 
 The second aria , " Ich esse mit Freuden mein <unk> Brot und <unk> dem <unk> von Herzen das Seine . " ( I eat my little bit of bread with joy and heartily leave to my neighbor his own . ) , is dancing and accompanied by two obbligato parts , oboe and violin . They express in vivid figuration in the violin and a slightly simplified version in the oboe the text " ein <unk> Geist , ein <unk> Herze , das lobet und <unk> " ( a happy spirit , a thankful heart , that gives praise ) . Hofmann observes that the aria depicts a " pastoral idyll with a rustic musical scene – a tribute to the Enlightenment utopia of simple , happy country life . " The violin 's figuration suggests the drone of bagpipes or hurdy @-@ gurdy . The voice leaps in upward sixths , in " folk @-@ like character " and conveying " contented tranquillity " . Mincham notes that the first four notes of the oboe ritornello are the first four notes of the closing chorale turned to major . 
 = = = 4 = = = 
 The second recitative , " Im <unk> meines <unk> will ich <unk> mein Brot <unk> " ( In the sweat of my brow I will meanwhile enjoy my bread ) , is accompanied by the strings . 
 = = = 5 = = = 
 The chorale , " Ich <unk> <unk> in dir <unk> und <unk> ohn alle <unk> " ( Meanwhile I live contented in You and die without any trouble ) , is a four @-@ part setting of the tune " Wer nur den <unk> Gott <unk> <unk> " by Georg Neumark . Gardiner interprets the marking a soprano solo e a 3 <unk> ( for soprano and three ripieno parts ) as meaning that no instruments play colla parte with the voices . 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 The listing is taken from the selection provided on the Bach @-@ Cantatas website . In the following table , large choirs and orchestras are marked by red background , ensembles playing on period instruments in historically informed performance are marked by a green background under the header Instr .. 
 = Kumari 21F = 
 Kumari 21F is a 2015 Indian Telugu @-@ language drama film directed by Palnati Surya Pratap , and written and co @-@ produced by Sukumar with Vijay Bandreddi and Thomas Reddy under their banners Sukumar Writings and P. A. Motion Pictures . Devi Sri Prasad composed the film 's music and R. Rathnavelu was its director of photography . Kumari 21F focuses on a romantic relationship between Siddhu , a chef and Kumari , a struggling model . Siddhu 's friends doubt Kumari 's character and she rejects his proposal , citing a lack of maturity . The film 's centrepiece revolves around Siddhu 's realisation and his attempts to unite with Kumari after an incident . 
 The film was produced on a budget of ₹ 60 — 150 million . Sukumar took inspiration from his college days in Razole where a young woman went to a picnic with some young men ; a major undertaking for a woman at that time , which earned her the undeserved label of a " loose " character . Raj Tarun and Hebah Patel were signed to play the roles of Siddhu and Kumari . Neither Prasad nor Rathnavelu was charged remuneration for the film . Principal photography commenced in December 2014 and was finished in 70 working days ; according to Rathnavelu , lighting played a key role during the filming process and digital low lighting photography techniques were used . 
 Kumari 21F was released worldwide on 20 November 2015 in about 500 screens . It received critical acclaim ; praise was directed towards the film 's climax , performances , cinematography and music . Kumari 21F grossed ₹ 380 million and earned a distributor share of ₹ 180 million during its run . It was declared a commercial success based on the return on distributor 's investment of ₹ 100 million and became the 12th highest grossing Telugu film of the year . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Siddhu is a chef leading a middle class life with his mother in <unk> colony . His father <unk> is accused of having an extra @-@ marital affair that leads to the separation of his parents . Siddhu aims to be a chef on a cruise liner in Singapore and his financial status does not support him . His friends Shankar , Srinu and Suresh steal money from people who use the local ATM ; they hide in some local ruins for three days and Siddhu cooks for them and provides liquor , receiving a share of the money in return . 
 Siddhu meets Kumari , a struggling model from Mumbai who has recently moved to the colony . They fall in love ; Siddhu is often confused by Kumari 's bold and daring attitude . His friends tell Siddhu is not Kumari 's first boyfriend and she may have had past relationships . Siddhu grows suspicious about her virginity and Kumari realises this . She rejects his marriage proposal , saying he does not have the maturity to love her . 
 Siddhu tries to make Kumari jealous by romancing his neighbour Madhu , but his ploy fails . Kumari continues to love him unconditionally ; her attitude confuses Siddhu . Siddhu 's friends discover Kumari is actually Meena , a Mumbai @-@ based model who was caught in a police raid at a brothel . She rejects their sexual advances , which angers them . Siddhu refuses to leave her , further angering the trio . 
 After an ATM robbery , the trio escapes and Srinu loses his cellphone ; Kumari finds it and hands it to the police . The trio shelter in the ruins ; when Siddhu meets them , Shankar reveals that Kumari is actually Meena and shares a video of a press meet issued by the Mumbai police that features her and others linked to a prostitution case . Kumari rejects Siddhu 's advances that night ; the following day , he discovers his father never had an extra @-@ marital relationship and his mother misunderstood . To make sure Siddhu is happy , Kumari asks him to visit her that night to fulfill his desire . 
 The trio reach Kumari 's house before Siddhu , sedate her with narcotics mixed with juice and rape her . Siddhu arrives to propose to her and finds the trio there . After chasing them away , he reads Kumari 's letter that makes him recognise his lack of maturity . He starts rearranging everything to make sure Kumari is not aware of the assault . He sees blood stains on her sari and assumes she is a virgin . He removes the sari , washes away the stains , and puts it back . When Kumari gains consciousness , Siddhu tells her she fell asleep after the trio left and he was waiting for her . She is suspicious but Siddhu persuades her and proposes marriage her , to which she agrees . 
 The police arrests Siddhu and interrogates him to find the whereabouts of his friends , which he refuses to reveal . He is released from jail and marries Kumari . Three years later , Siddhu is running a kitchen in Hyderabad and the inspector plans to close the case because he could not find the trio . It is revealed that Siddhu has chained them in the ruins and has been feeding and torturing them for the past three years ; they beg him to kill them . The film ends with Siddhu beating the trio after feeding them and saying he is not mature enough to forgive them . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Raj Tarun as Siddhu 
 Hebah Patel as Meena Kumari 
 Noel Sean as Shankar 
 Naveen <unk> as Suresh 
 <unk> as <unk> Srinu 
 Hema as Siddhu 's mother 
 Bhanu as Madhu 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In October 2014 , Sukumar announced he would co @-@ produce a film along with Vijay Bandreddi and Thomas Reddy under the banner P.A. Motion pictures . P. Surya Pratap , who made his directorial debut with Current ( 2009 ) , was chosen to direct this film . Sukumar titled the film Kumari 21F because it is about a 21 @-@ year @-@ old woman named Kumari . He said it is not a female @-@ centric film and both the lead roles , for which Raj Tarun and Sheena Bajaj were chose , would be equally important . Tarun charged a remuneration of ₹ 25 million . 
 Sukumar wrote the film 's story and screenplay , taking inspiration from his college days in Razole where a young woman went to a picnic with some young men ; a major undertaking for a woman at the time . Rumours were spread and the woman was labelled as a " loose " character , which stayed in Sukumar 's mind . He defined Kumari as an " honest and genuine human being who isn 't afraid of expressing herself " and the " sort of girl most people would know " , despite going overboard at times with her characterisation during the scripting stage . 
 Sukumar 's technicians Devi Sri Prasad and R. Rathnavelu were signed as the film 's music composer and director of photography respectively . In an interview with Behindwoods in December 2014 , Rathnavelu said the necessity of rejuvenating himself after <unk> ( 2014 ) , the film 's script and his friendship with Sukumar were the reasons for choosing to work for this film . Neither Rathnavelu nor Prasad charged any remuneration for the film . Hebah Patel replaced Bajaj after the makers were impressed with her performance in Ala Ela ( 2015 ) . Patel went through many workshops for her role that occupied 80 % of the screen space ; her voice was dubbed by <unk> . Tarun did little preparation for his role because he felt it was " brilliantly conceived " and an extension of the roles he played in <unk> <unk> ( 2014 ) and Cinema <unk> <unk> ( 2015 ) . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Kumari 21F was produced on a budget of ₹ 60 — 150 million . The film 's principal photography commenced in December 2014 , and was finished in 70 working days . Initially , Krishna Nagar , Hyderabad , was chosen as the film 's backdrop . Rathnavelu felt they would create a noisy , crowded environment if shot there and chose to shoot in an isolated colony and in confined spaces . 60 % of the film was shot at the R & B colony in <unk> , Hyderabad . The song " Bang Bang Bangkok " was filmed in picturesque locales in Bangkok , and was choreographed by Prasad . Prasad said he composed a few signature steps during the composition of the song , which Sukumar and Rathnavelu liked . They wanted him choreograph the song . 
 According to Rathnavelu , lighting played a key role in Kumari 21F . He shot the film with limited equipment and mostly used natural light . The experience he gained working on Haridas ( 2013 ) helped him with this film ; he used Digital low lighting photography techniques , thereby using 80 % of the generally required lighting . He found the climax sequences challenging to film because the emphasis was more on visuals rather than dialogue . Patel said of her experience during the filming of some intimate sequences , " There were so many people on the sets , so it was obviously uncomfortable . But then , I got myself mentally prepared for this kind of thing in a workshop I had undergone before the shoot . It also helped that I became good friends with Raj Tarun and that made things way less awkward " . Tarun said he and Patel " put in a part of us into the characters to make the romance more believable " . 
 = = Music = = 
 The official soundtrack was composed by Devi Sri Prasad and consists of five songs . Lyrics were written by <unk> , Krishna Kanth and Chandrabose for one song each . Prasad wrote the lyrics for " Bang Bang Bangkok " , which he sang with <unk> Reddy and Rita . A lyric from the song , " Good boy goes to heaven , Bad boy goes to Bangkok " , was well received . For " Meghaalu Lekunna " , which was sung by <unk> Nisar , Sri Mani wrote the pallavi and Anantha Sreeram wrote the <unk> . " Meghaalu Lekunna " was recorded using a live orchestra , which Nisar found " rare these days " . The soundtrack album was released on 31 October 2015 at Shilpakala Vedika , Hyderabad , with actor Allu Arjun attending the event as the guest of honour . Aditya Music marketed the soundtrack album . 
 Karthik Srinivasan of The Hindu said the song " Meghaalu Lekunna " , " sounds at best like the Telugu version of a song by the Hindi pop band Euphoria " , that the tune is " similarly lush and folkish " , and that Prasad does " some interesting things in the interludes — the use of violins and solo @-@ violin in the first and second interludes , to be specific " . Madhavi Tata of Outlook India called Prasad 's music , particularly " Love <unk> <unk> " ( " To love or not to " ) , a " winner " . The Times of India gave the soundtrack 2 stars out of 5 and said the album " falls desperately short " of the standards expected from Prasad . The reviewer called " Meghaalu Lekunna " a " beautiful and melodious track , courtesy the tantalising acoustic guitar , violin and flute sounds " , and praised Nisar 's rendition of it . 
 Track listing 
 = = Release = = 
 Kumari 21F was released worldwide on 20 November 2015 ; its release clashed with those of <unk> <unk> , the Telugu version of <unk> Vanam and the 24th James Bond film Spectre . Kumari 21F was released in 350 screens in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana , 50 screens in other parts of India , and 90 screens in international markets . Abhishek Pictures acquired the theatrical distribution rights for the Guntur , Krishna , East , West and Nellore areas . Dil Raju acquired the theatrical rights for the Nizam region . New York @-@ based company Creative Cinemas acquired the film 's United States theatrical distribution rights , making it their debut in film distribution in the international market . 
 The film was screened in 22 screens across Tamil Nadu , including 12 in Chennai . It received an " A " ( Adults only ) certificate from the Central Board of Film Certification , which asked the makers to trim a lip @-@ kissing sequence and mute several objectionable lines of dialogue , and suggested a few cuts . Regarding the Board 's decision against unrestricted viewing , Sukumar said , " Even a father was once a young boy . I think this story gives him the space to both identify with his feelings as a young man and to understand what his son or daughter might be going through " . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 One of the first @-@ look posters released in October 2015 was alleged to have been plagiarised from the Russian magazine Chai @-@ <unk> . After the film 's first @-@ look teaser was released by N. T. Rama Rao Jr . , the makers announced a <unk> challenge . Interested female participants were asked to search for an audio clip uploaded by the film 's team and upload it on their Facebook pages . They were asked to e @-@ mail the link or send a message on Facebook . The first 500 participants won invitations to the soundtrack launch event and 21 participants with most likes on their videos shared the stage with the film 's cast and crew at the event . One winner was crowned " Kumari 21F " and received a special gift . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Karthik Keramalu of CNN @-@ IBN gave Kumari 21F 3 @.@ 5 stars out of 5 and called it a " surprisingly good " film , adding , " The emotions of the leads are true and it rightly says that at the end of the day trust is all that matters and nothing else comes into the picture " . Sify gave the film 3 stars out of 5 and called it a " coming @-@ of @-@ age story told in bold manner with an unusual climax " , and praised the film 's music and cinematography . Siddharth Rao of The Times of India also gave the film 3 stars out of 5 and stated , " In an industry where a damsel @-@ in @-@ distress @-@ wooed @-@ and @-@ saved @-@ by @-@ an @-@ angry @-@ young @-@ man is the norm , this is a refreshing film which provokes some thought " . Rao also said , " The best part is the way that the film 's climax is presented ; the director Surya Pratap has definitely done a very mature job " . 
 The Hans India also gave the film 3 stars out of 5 and stated , " Sukumar popularly known as a creative director in the industry , has once again come out with an unusual story . The film may disappoint normal audience but it will surely entertain the youth audience " . Suresh Kavirayani of Deccan Chronicle gave the film 3 stars out of 5 , called it a " [ b ] old and beautiful " one and praised the performances and the film 's climax . Giving 2 @.@ 75 stars out of 5 , Behindwoods also called the film " [ b ] old and beautiful " and stated , " Kumari 21F starts off as a feel good romantic film , shifts gears slowly and gets very intense towards the end ... Sukumar must be credited for having given us a memorable character that would be talked about for years . You don ’ t find such bold female characters in Telugu cinema often . " 
 Y. Sunita Chowdary of The Hindu called the film " [ r ] <unk> and cliched " , and stated , " It 's not enough if a canvas boasts of the biggest names in the industry , the content should be simple and progressive " . She called the performances " strong and authentic " . A. Harini Prasad of The New Indian Express called Kumari 21F a " <unk> Love Story " and stated , " Though the basic theme is enticing , the story @-@ telling fails to impress . Raj <unk> ’ s performance and the climax , which is gripping , are probably the only things that could drive you to the theaters " . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Kumari 21F debuted with an average occupancy of 80 % globally ; it grossed more than ₹ 30 million with a distributor share of more than ₹ 20 million , out of which approximately ₹ 56 @,@ 69 @,@ 014 was collected from Guntur , Krishna , East , West and Nellore areas . It collected US $ 27 @,@ 153 from 80 screens in the US on the first day . In its first weekend , Kumari 21F grossed ₹ 85 million with a distributor share of ₹ 55 million at the AP / Nizam box office . According to trade analyst Taran Adarsh , it grossed US $ 149 @,@ 752 ( ₹ 9 @.@ 9 million ) in its first weekend at the North American box office . The first weekend global gross and share figures stood at ₹ 105 @.@ 8 million and ₹ 63 @.@ 4 million respectively . It collected US $ 188 @,@ 457 ( ₹ 12 @.@ 5 million ) at the US box office in its first weekend , becoming one of the highest grossing Telugu films of the year there . 
 In ten days , Kumari 21F grossed ₹ 174 million and collected a distributor share of ₹ 106 @.@ 6 million at the AP / Nizam box office . It grossed ₹ 23 million with a distributor share of ₹ 0 @.@ 85 million at the Karnataka box office . The ten @-@ day global gross figure stood at ₹ 210 million and Kumari 21F was declared a profitable venture . After losing screens to Size Zero and <unk> , Kumari 21F collected US $ 3 @,@ 190 from eight screens in the US and its 17 @-@ day total stood at US $ 252 @,@ 151 ( ₹ 16 @.@ 8 million ) . Its US screen count was reduced to four in its fourth week and the 24 @-@ day US revenue was US $ 253 @,@ 961 ( ₹ 17 million ) . With this , Kumari 21F secured the tenth position in the list of the ten highest @-@ grossing Telugu films of the year at the US box office . 
 In its lifetime , Kumari 21F grossed ₹ 380 million and earned a distributor share of ₹ 180 million worldwide . It was declared a commercial success based on the return on distributor 's investment of ₹ 100 million and became the 12th highest grossing Telugu film of the year . 
 = Fly on the Wall ( song ) = 
 " Fly on the Wall " is a song recorded by American recording artist Miley Cyrus for her second studio album , Breakout ( 2008 ) . It was released as the third and final single from the album on February 27 , 2009 by Hollywood Records . The song contains pop rock , dance @-@ pop and synthpop elements . The song 's lyrics have been interpreted in a number of ways , such as a description of an abusive boyfriend . In actuality , Cyrus says the song describes paparazzi and their extensive personal privacy invasions . 
 The song received critical praise , with several critics claiming it defied teen pop expectations and was Breakout 's best track . Despite only reaching number eighty @-@ four on the United States chart Billboard Hot 100 , " Fly on the Wall " performed better commercially in various European regions . " Fly on the Wall " reached its highest international peak on the UK Singles Chart , at number sixteen . The single 's music video was directed by Philip Andelman and premiered on FNMTV . The " Thriller " inspired video takes place mainly in a parking garage in which Cyrus encounters and attempts to escape the paparazzi . Cyrus promoted the song through several venues , including a performance on her second headlining tour , the Wonder World Tour , that incorporated a short segment of the " Thriller " dance . Cyrus also performed the song in the Gypsy Heart Tour . The song , along with " Start All Over " and " " Who Owns My Heart " are the only singles released by Cyrus that haven 't been certified at least platinum in the United States . 
 = = Background = = 
 The song 's lyrics , written by Cyrus , Antonina Armato , Tim James and Devrim Karaoglu , have been mistakenly interpreted in a variety of ways . The song 's protagonist sings in first person perspective while condemning an unspecified subject for wanting to invade her privacy . The majority of reviewers thought the protagonist was referring to a " controlling boyfriend " . Ben Ratliff of The New York Times sided with the boyfriend , and believed the song 's protagonist was " bullying some poor boy for the sin of wanting to know what she talks about with her friends . " Sarah Rodman of The Boston Globe believed the song could have described a number of subjects , such as " a former boyfriend , the media , and even her fans . " However , in an interview with Jocelyn Vena of MTV News , Cyrus said the song was about " the media " and " how they think they know everything about [ her ] , when they don 't . They want to be a fly on my wall and watch [ her ] 24 / 7 . " Cyrus elaborated on the concept in an interview with Nancy O 'Dell of Access Hollywood . She stated , 
 " Paparazzi . I wrote it for the media , always feeling like they need to be in my life . Sometimes they just wish that they could blend in and be there all the time . And that they might know me a little bit better if they were in my house , in my room and my different places . So , it 's like going to different spots and trying to get away from them and it 's not going away like little annoying flies . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Fly on the Wall " is a pop rock song with strong uses of electric guitars , keyboards and soprano vocals . Influences derive from electronic music and industrial music . It is set in common time with a moderately fast rock tempo of 143 beats per minute . The song is written in the key of G minor . Cyrus ' vocals spans two octaves , from G3 to D5 . The song has the following chord progression , G5 — D — Gm7 . The song 's chorus has the use of a vocal hook ; the hook sings , " fly on the wall " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Fly on the Wall " received critical acclaim . Heather Phares of Allmusic said the song was a " G @-@ rated version " of Britney Spears ' song " Toxic " and provided hints of Cyrus ' future musical direction . Sarah Rodman of The Boston Globe said " Fly on the Wall " was a change of pace for Cyrus and called it " the album 's most interesting tune . " Mikael Wood of The Los Angeles Times said the song is a result of regular Walt Disney Company standards , yet " the CD 's best cut . " Along with " Full Circle , " Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine said the song was a " more worthy " follow @-@ up to " See You Again . " Mordechai Shinefield of The Village Voice stated the song was " <unk> brilliant " and that it was " the best , angriest song [ on Breakout ] . " Johnny Dee of Virgin Media said the song and " 7 Things " were " feisty pop belters " that would encourage a long @-@ term career . Ratliff negatively compared " Fly on the Wall " to the Pussycat Dolls and said that although Cyrus ' voice is generally rich with a deep range , it became " pinched and stingy " in the single . However , he also said the song was " teen @-@ accurate " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 For the week ending August 9 , 2008 , " Fly on the Wall " charted at number 69 on Hot Digital Songs due to the release of Breakout , but failed to reach the Billboard Hot 100 ; the following week , the song completely fell from the sales chart . During late 2008 , the song reached its peak on several US charts , reaching number 72 in Hot 100 Airplay , and 64 in the Pop 100 and Pop 100 Airplay . For the week ending January 10 , 2009 , the song debuted and peaked at number 83 in the Hot 100 due to airplay , falling from the chart in the succeeding week . In the Canadian Hot 100 , the peaked and debuted at number 73 on the week ending August 9 , 2008 due to digital downloads . It then ascended and descended the Canadian Hot 100 before reaching its last week , ending on February 7 , 2009 . 
 The song was more successful in European nations . For the week ending January 1 , 2009 , " Fly on the Wall " debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number 90 . Throughout January and February 2009 , the song moved up , finding new peaks for four consecutive weeks . For the week ending February 28 , the song ascended to number sixteen and became Cyrus ' second best charting single in the United Kingdom . It then slid several spots down , until its last week on the singles chart at number 86 , for the week ending April 4 . In the European Hot 100 , " Fly on the Wall " peaked at number fifty @-@ seven on the week ending March 7 , 2009 and spent a total of five weeks on the chart . For the week ending January 29 in the Irish Singles Chart , the song debuted at number 49 . Weeks later , the song reached its peak at number 23 before falling off the chart on March 12 . In Austria , the song debuted and peaked on the week ending March 18 at number 57 and fell from the chart after two weeks . It spent seven weeks on the German Singles Chart , where it debuted and peaked at 62 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 In an interview with MTV News , director Philip Andelman explained that Cyrus was already determined to poke fun at the paparazzi when she contacted him for a " Fly on the Wall " music video . Andelman did not want to create " something too serious " and worked to give the video a " playful " aspect . Cyrus elaborated on the concept of the music video in an interview with Nancy O 'Dell of Access Hollywood . Cyrus said , 
 " The concept is kind of ' Thriller ' -esque [ sic ] . It 's kind of like where the paparazzi become these zombies and they 're all like attacking me . And my boyfriend is trying to save me , but I don 't know if he 's a paparazzi too . So , it 's like me trying to hide and get away . It 's really fun , but I 'm escaping from my boyfriend and escaping from the paparazzi and trying to find my way through the whole video . " 
 The video commences with a short segment of dramatic music . It then focuses on Cyrus , wearing a white tank top , jeans , boots and a black leather jacket , and her boyfriend leaving a movie theater and discussing the movie they saw . Suddenly , Cyrus ' boyfriend begins to cough as a full moon emerges from behind the clouds . Cyrus is confused , then horrified as she watches him transform into a paparazzi , and runs away from him as he shouts " Miley , come here ! I just want a couple of shots ! " and tries to snap pictures of her . The music of " Fly on the Wall " begins as Cyrus runs into a parking garage and tries to hide behind a pillar and a black Mercedes @-@ Benz SLR McLaren . As soon as Cyrus tries to move away from the car , a mob of paparazzi begins to chase her with their cameras . Throughout much of the video , Cyrus runs and hides from the mob . Clips interspaced throughout the video feature her in a long silver shirt and jeans singing and dancing in front of the Mercedes . Eventually , Cyrus is cornered by the paparazzi . She is scared , but then surprised and perplexed when the mob unexpectedly begins to dance in a synchronized manner . Her boyfriend , appearing normal , then arrives in the Mercedes to rescue her . Inside the car , Cyrus describes her strange encounter with the paparazzi to him . Unknown to Cyrus , her boyfriend has planted a video camera in the car ; the music video concludes with a shot of the website he posts the video on beneath the headline , " Miley Cyrus Bugs at Paparazzi ! ! ! " The music video to " Fly on the Wall " was first seen on December 5 , 2008 on MTV 's FNMTV . The video is inspired by Michael Jackson 's iconic music video , " Thriller " , but trades zombies for paparazzi . MTV also compared the " Fly on the Wall " video for those for " Circus " by Britney Spears and " Rumors " by Lindsay Lohan . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Cyrus first performed the song at the opening ceremony of the 2008 Disney Channel Games on May 4 , 2008 . The performance had Cyrus in a red coat and was later used a promotional music video on Disney Channel . On May 17 , 2008 , she performed the song at the 2008 Zootopia . On July 18 , 2008 the song was performed in a concert series for Good Morning America along with " Breakout , " " 7 Things " and " Bottom of the Ocean . " During the performance , Cyrus wore a plaid shirt , mini @-@ shorts and boots . On August 1 , 2008 , Cyrus performed " Fly on the Wall " on FNMTV . On November 21 , it was sung at the 2008 American Music Awards . A critic from ABC stated that Cyrus " fearlessly embraced new creative directions " with her performance of " Fly on the Wall . " On November 25 , Cyrus performed the song on the season finale of Dancing with the Stars . On New Year 's Eve of 2008 , Cyrus wore a white T @-@ shirt , pants , boots and a plaid jacket to present FNMTV 's New Year 's Special with Pete Wentz . She opened the episode by performing the song , paired with " 7 Things . " On January 19 , 2009 , the song was performed at the Kids ' Inaugural : " We Are the Future " event in celebration of Barack Obama 's inauguration . For the event , she had an abundance of background dancers , and Cyrus wore a casual patterned gray T @-@ shirt , black pants , and boots . She also performed the song in London in an Apple Store . The set , with some songs by Cyrus ' father , was sold exclusively by the United Kingdom iTunes Store as an extended play titled iTunes Live from London . On June 7 , 2009 at the twentieth annual A Time for Heroes Celebrity Carnival , Cyrus performed " Fly on the Wall " . 
 " Fly on the Wall " was one of the songs on the set list of Cyrus ' first international concert tour , the Wonder World Tour . The performance began with two overhead screens displaying a frog catching a fly while two acrobats scaled imaginary walls . Cyrus and her dancers then emerged from a green tractor to begin the song . She wore an extravagant white dress with a feathered back and used elaborate choreography . At one point during the performance , Cyrus unexpectedly flew over the crowd for a few seconds . At the conclusion , Cyrus and her background dancers grouped together to perform a segment of the dance from Michael Jackson 's " Thriller " music video . She performed it at the Rock in Rio concert in Lisbon , Portugal on May 29 , 2010 and Madrid , Spain on June 4 , 2010 . 
 Cyrus performed the song during the Gypsy Heart Tour . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Wake Up / Escape from the Citadel = 
