 " Wake Up " and " Escape from the Citadel " are the first two episodes of the sixth season of the American animated television series Adventure Time . " Wake Up " was written and storyboarded by Andy Ristaino and Cole Sanchez , whereas " Escape from the Citadel " was storyboarded by Tom Herpich and Steve Wolfhard . Both episodes ' stories were developed by Kent Osborne , Pendleton Ward , Jack Pendarvis , and Adam Muto . The two episodes originally aired on Cartoon Network on April 21 , 2014 . The episodes guest star Kumail Nanjiani as Prismo , M. Emmet Walsh as the Cosmic Owl , Miguel Ferrer as Death , Ron Perlman as the Lich , and Stephen Root as Martin . 
 The series follows the adventures of Finn ( voiced by Jeremy Shada ) , a human boy , and his best friend and adoptive brother Jake ( voiced by John DiMaggio ) , a dog with magical powers to change shape and grow and shrink at will . In " Wake Up " , Finn and Jake try to commit a cosmic crime in order to gain access to a multiverse prison called the Citadel to meet Finn 's father is trapped . Prismo ( voiced by Nanjiani ) offers to help them , but he is murdered by the Lich ( voiced by Perlman ) . In " Escape from the Citadel " , Jake , Finn , and the Lich are transported to the Citadel , where Finn and Jake meet Martin ( voiced by Root ) , Finn 's father , who is not what Finn expected . The three are forced to run from the Lich , as he begins to destroy the Citadel . At this time , Martin flees , and Finn tries to give chase , but his grass sword takes over his entire arm , causing Finn to lose it . Despite Finn 's loss of his father and limb , Finn and Jake are vindicated when the Lich is turned into a giant baby . 
 Both " Wake Up " and " Escape from the Citadel " , were met with critical acclaim . Robert Lloyd of the Los Angeles Times felt that the episode was exciting , whereas Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club applauded the episode 's use of humor as a way of balancing out the heavier aspects of the plot . Many of the reviews also praised Nanjiani 's return as Prismo . Reviews were also complimentary towards the darker nature of " Escape from the Citadel " . Both episodes were watched by 3 @.@ 321 million viewers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = " Wake Up " = = = 
 Jake is partying with Prismo ( voiced by Kumail Nanjiani ) . At the party , Peppermint Butler ( voiced by Steve Little ) and Death ( voiced by Miguel Ferrer ) note that the Lich ( voiced by Ron Perlman ) is sitting ominously in the corner . Prismo explains that , after the events of an earlier episode , the Lich , an entity driven by the pursuit of causing mass death , is now harmless , functioning like a machine without a purpose . Later , Finn confronts Jake about the revelation that his father is still alive . Jake convinces him to ask Prismo to send them to the Citadel . Prismo explains that the only way to gain access to the Citadel is to commit a cosmic crime ; he instructs Finn and Jake to find and wake a certain old man who is asleep in the debris surrounding his Time Room . 
 It is revealed that this man is the actual , corporeal Prismo , and the version Finn and Jake are familiar with is merely a dream . Prismo explains that killing a <unk> — as in , waking up the man — is a cosmic crime , but that he will return when his corporal body falls back asleep . At that instant , the Lich springs into action , physically waking and destroying Prismo , killing him . Suddenly , an interdimensional being arrives and begins taking the Lich to the Citadel , to which Finn and Jake give chase . 
 = = = " Escape from the Citadel " = = = 
 Finn and Jake grab hold of the captured Lich as he is transported to the Citadel . Once there , they discover a human figure encased in a crystal @-@ like substance , who they conclude must be Finn 's father . Meanwhile , the Lich uses his malevolent magic to begin melting the Citadel and turning its prisoners to his will . Finn 's father , Martin ( voiced by Stephen Root ) , is eventually freed by the Lich 's actions , and as the Citadel guardians battle the escaping prisoners he , Finn , and Jake try to escape . One of the Citadel guardians , however , uses its laser and melts away part of Martin 's flesh on his leg . Finn retrieves some guardian blood , which repairs and heals Martin . However , Finn starts to realize that his father is not the hero that he thought he would be . 
 Soon thereafter , Martin leaves Finn and Jake to save himself and the Lich appears , ordering Finn to fall . He delivers a monologue , explaining his desire to extinguish all life in the universe . Finn , overcome by the Lich 's power , feebly tries to fight back and ends up throwing some of the guardian blood on the Lich , which causes him to grotesquely begin growing flesh . With the Lich disposed of , Finn pursues his father , who is hitching a ride with escaping criminals on a loose piece of the Citadel , still held on by a vein . One of the criminals cuts the vein , but Finn holds on , causing his grass sword to envelope his arm and eventually rip away , severing it . Martin escapes , and Finn and Jake share a somber moment . Jake eventually reveals to Finn that the Lich has now been turned into a large humanoid baby ; the two leave him on the doorstep of Tree Trunks ( voiced by Polly Lou Livingston ) and Mr. Pig 's house . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Wake Up " was written and storyboarded by Andy Ristaino and Cole Sanchez , whereas " Escape from the Citadel " was storyboarded by Tom Herpich and Steve Wolfhard ; both episodes ' stories were developed by Kent Osborne , Pendleton Ward , Jack Pendarvis , and Adam Muto . Art direction was handled by Nick Jennings , whereas supervising direction was helmed by Elizabeth Ito ( for " Wake Up " ) and Muto ( for " Escape from the Citadel " ) . The design for the Citadel , which is featured in both episodes , was crafted by series storyboard artist Tom Herpich , who used Google SketchUp to design a 3 @-@ D model of the structure . 
 " Wake Up " featured the return of Kumail Nanjiani as Prismo , M. Emmet Walsh as the Cosmic Owl , and Miguel Ferrer as Death and one of the heads of Grob Gob Glob Grod . " Escape from the Citadel " featured the introduction of Finn 's father , Martin is voiced by Stephen Root . Root had previously voiced the characters <unk> and the Royal Tart <unk> in the second season episode " The Other Tarts " . Ethan Maher voiced the baby version of the Lich . Herpich himself played the part of the Void Caster . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 When the Lich is addressing Finn , he refers to the escaped criminals as " Ancients " , a reference to one of the many name for deities in H.P. Lovecraft 's Cthulhu mythos . Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club wrote that the transformation of Finn 's arm was similar to Tetsuo Shima 's transformation in the anime Akira . Jason Krell of io9 described similarities between the scene immediately following the loss of Finn 's arm and the end of the 1980 film The Empire Strikes Back . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Wake Up " and " Escape from the Citadel " , first aired on Cartoon Network on April 21 , 2014 . The episodes were viewed by 3 @.@ 321 million viewers and scored a 0 @.@ 7 Nielsen rating in the 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old demographic . Nielsen ratings are audience measurement systems that determine the audience size and composition of television programming in the United States , which means that the episodes were seen by 0 @.@ 7 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds who were watching television at the time of the episodes ' airing . Furthermore , the episode was the 23rd most @-@ watched cable program on the night it aired . These episodes were the last to have been watched by over 3 million viewers . 
 Both episodes received largely positive reviews from television critics . Robert Lloyd of the Los Angeles Times , wrote that " Wake Up " and " Escape from the Citadel " form a " beautiful , strange and exciting " two @-@ part special episode of the series . He specifically cited the plot as a highlight , as well as the return to the series by Nanjiani as Prismo . Eric Kohn of IndieWire awarded both this episode and " Escape from the Citadel " an " A – " , writing that while the episode featured extremely dark material , it was never presented in a way so as to drive viewers away . Kohn wrote highly of the comedy and naturalistic dialogue that took place during Prismo 's opening party in " Wake Up " , and felt that the addition about Prismo 's origins helped the show slip " in a certain wise gaze [ concerning ] the fog of time " . In regards to " Escape from the Citadel " , he also noted that " the fate of the Lich takes an amusing new turn , " and that the storyline concerning " Finn 's cursed sword arm — an ingredient that has festered in the sidelines for weeks — reaches a beguiling new state . " 
 Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club awarded " Wake Up " and " Escape from the Citadel " an " A " . Sava praised Nanjiani 's " delightfully low @-@ key " performance in the former , noting that his " soft , smooth voice is perfect for a character that is so laid back he 's completely flat , and his casual delivery of ominous lines helps keep the tone light as the material gets heavier . " Furthermore , he noted that the jokes were more pronounced in this episode , making the opening scene during Prismo 's party that much funnier . Sava felt that the Lich 's monologue to Finn in " Escape from the Citadel " was " even creepier thanks to Ron Perlman 's gravely voice for The Lich and the evocative staging by writers / storyboard artists Tom Herpich and Steve Wolfhard " , who were able to " achieve a fascinating combination of terror and hope when Finn touches The Lich with Guardian blood and starts a grotesquely stunning transformation that strips the villain of his power by making him a giant baby . " Sava also complimented the episode for being full of harsh realizations concerning Finn 's father and the vulnerability of his body . Ultimately he concluded that " the developments of these two episodes dramatically alter the series ' status quo to give this season an added boost of momentum from the very beginning . " 
 = The Game ( mind game ) = 
 The Game is a mental game where the objective is to avoid thinking about The Game itself . Thinking about The Game constitutes a loss , which must be announced each time it occurs . It is impossible to win most versions of The Game . Depending on the variation of The Game , the whole world , or all those aware of the game , are playing it all the time . Tactics have been developed to increase the number of people aware of The Game and thereby increase the number of losses . 
 Though the origins of The Game are unknown , a game featuring ironic processing was played by Leo Tolstoy in 1840 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 There are three commonly reported rules to The Game : 
 Everyone in the world is playing The Game . ( Sometimes narrowed to : " Everybody in the world who knows about The Game is playing The Game " , or alternatively , " You are always playing The Game . " ) A person cannot choose to not play The Game ; it does not require consent to play and one can never stop playing . 
 Whenever one thinks about The Game , one loses . 
 Losses must be announced . This can be verbally , with a phrase such as " I just lost The Game " , or in any other way : for example , via Facebook . Some people may have signals or expressions that remind others of The Game . 
 What constitutes thinking about The Game is not always clear . If one discusses The Game without explicitly realizing that they have lost , this may or may not constitute a loss . If someone says " What is The Game ? " before understanding the rules , whether they have lost is up for interpretation . According to some interpretations , one does not lose when someone else announces their loss , although the second rule implies that one loses regardless of what made them think about The Game . After a player has announced a loss , or after one thinks of The Game , some variants allow for a grace period between three seconds to thirty minutes to forget about the game , during which the player cannot lose the game again . 
 The common rules do not define a point at which The Game ends . However , some players state that The Game ends when the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom announces on television that " The Game is up . " 
 Most variations of The Game do not allow for a person to win . One interpretation is that one is winning the game whenever they are not thinking about it . An xkcd comic reads : " You just won The Game " and tells players , " You 're free ! " Another is that one has won when they have completely forgotten about The Game . 
 = = = Strategies = = = 
 Strategies focus on making others lose The Game . Common methods include saying " The Game " out loud or writing about The Game on a hidden note , in graffiti in public places , or on banknotes . Associations may be made with The Game , especially over time , so that one thing inadvertently causes one to lose . Some players enjoy thinking of elaborate pranks that will cause others to lose the game . 
 Other strategies involve merchandise : T @-@ shirts , buttons , mugs , posters and bumper stickers have been created to advertise The Game . The Game is also spread via social media websites such as Facebook and Twitter . 
 = = Origin = = 
 The origins of The Game are uncertain . In a 2008 news article , Justine <unk> says The Game has probably been around since the early 1990s , and may have originated in Australia or England . One theory is that it was invented in London in 1996 when two British engineers , Dennis Begley and Gavin McDowall , missed their last train and had to spend the night on the platform ; they attempted to avoid thinking about their situation and whoever thought about it first lost . Another theory also traces The Game to London in 1996 , when it was created by Jamie Miller " to annoy people " . Journalist Mic Wright of The Next Web recalled playing The Game at school in the late 1990s . 
 However , The Game may have been created in 1977 by members of the Cambridge University Science Fiction Society when attempting to create a game that did not fit in with game theory . A blog post by Paul Taylor in August 2002 described The Game ; Taylor claimed to have " found out about [ the game ] online about 6 months ago " . This is the earliest known reference on the internet . 
 The Game is most commonly spread through the internet , such as via Facebook or Twitter , or by word of mouth . 
 = = Psychology = = 
 The Game is an example of ironic processing ( also known as the " White Bear Principle " ) , in which attempts to avoid certain thoughts make those thoughts more persistent . There are early examples of ironic processing : in 1840 , Leo Tolstoy played the " white bear game " with his brother , where he would " stand in a corner and not think of the white bear " . Fyodor Dostoyevsky mentioned the same game in 1863 in the essay Winter Notes on Summer Impressions . 
 One psychological study of The Game by Cory <unk> involved 12 participants ; they were asked to record when and why they lost over four weeks . The study itself caused 57 % of participants ' losses ; <unk> claimed The <unk> effect contributed to this . The participants recorded vastly different numbers of losses ; common reasons included " references to taking notes " , " references to time " and " seeing or thinking about other people who also play The Game " . Priming and sensitization played a large part in losses ; no strong correlation with habituation was found . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Game has been described as challenging and fun to play , and as pointless , childish and infuriating . In some Internet forums , such as Something Awful and GameSpy , and several schools , including one in Ohio , The Game has even been banned . The Game has been described as a game , a meme and a " mind virus " . 
 Newspapers , including Metro , Rutland Herald , The Canadian Press and De Pers , have contained articles about The Game ; Wikinews has interviewed the owner of <unk> Webcomics Saturday Morning Breakfast Cereal , xkcd and Real Life have featured sketches relating to The Game . YouTube videos about The Game have attracted hundreds of thousands of views . In 2008 , the largest Facebook group relating to The Game had over 200 @,@ 000 members . The knowledge engine <unk> answers the query " What is ' The Game ' ? " with the response " You just lost . " 
 Several celebrities know about The Game . Actor Simon Pegg has tweeted about The Game . Alex Baker has talked about The Game on multiple occasions on Kerrang Radio and Facebook . 
 Other attempts to increase losses of The Game have involved hoaxes and hacking . The 2009 Time 100 poll was manipulated by the hacktivist group Anonymous , so that the top 21 people 's names formed an acrostic for " <unk> also the game " , referencing The Game . 
 = Waptia = 
 Waptia fieldensis is an extinct species of arthropod from the Middle Cambrian Burgess Shale Lagerstätte of Canada . It grew to a length of about 8 cm ( 3 in ) and resembled modern shrimp in both morphology and habit . It had a large bivalved carapace and a segmented body terminating into a pair of tail flaps . It was an active swimmer , feeding on organic particles it gathers from the seafloor substrate . It is also one of the oldest animals with direct evidence of brood care . 
 Based on the number of individuals , Waptia fieldensis is the third most abundant arthropod from the Burgess Shale Formation , with thousands of specimens collected . It was among the first fossils found by the American paleontologist Charles D. Walcott in 1909 . He described it in 1912 and named it after two mountains near the discovery site – Mount Wapta and Mount Field . 
 Waptia fieldensis is the only species classified under the genus Waptia . Although it bears a remarkable resemblance to modern crustaceans , its taxonomic affinities remain unclear . It is currently classified as a stem group crustacean and tentatively included in the clade <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 Waptia fieldensis had a maximum body length of 8 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) . The exoskeleton was very thin and easily distorted from fossilisation . It possessed a large bivalved carapace that was narrow at the front with wide posterior margins that covered the cephalon and most of the thorax . The cephalon had five short somites ( body segments ) with three to five pairs of small and poorly preserved feeding appendages . 
 A single pair of long and slender antennae is present , the segments of which are relatively few and elongated . They were most probably used as sensory organs , with most segments possessing small setae ( bristles ) . A pair of short lobed structures ( possible antennules ) are also present , their position corresponding to the location of the second pair of antennae in modern @-@ day crustaceans . In between them is a small triangular rostral plate with a narrow and sharp central ridge . 
 The well @-@ developed compound eyes were stalked . The striking morphological similarities of the eyes of Waptia fieldensis to that of extant mysid shrimps make it very likely that they were capable of producing true visual images or were at least sensitive to motion . A median eye may have also been present . Nervous tissue , including a putative brain , has been identified . 
 The thorax is divided into two groups of somites . The anterior group is composed of four somites , each with well @-@ developed walking limbs with lengths that extend past the margins of the carapace . Their morphological details are not well preserved but their distal segments appear to possess a multitude of small spines . It is unknown if these limbs are biramous , but they are assumed to be the <unk> , the inner branches ( ramus ) of the leg , with the <unk> , or outer branches , absent or not preserved . 
 The posterior thoracic group is made up of six somites , each possessing a pair of long multi @-@ jointed appendages . The segments of these appendages are longer near the body and taper towards the flexible distal segments , extending past the carapace . They bear a fringe of long , slender filaments , all of which are directed towards the middle of the body , a characteristic shared by extant crustaceans . Though usually squashed into blade @-@ like shapes from the fossilisation process , the filaments were slender cylindrical tubes when the animal was alive . The filaments at the tipmost segment are often bunched together . These appendages are believed to be the <unk> and may have functioned as gills and as swimming limbs . They are possibly biramous , with some specimens showing traces of what may be small <unk> at their bases . 
 The abdomen is composed of five somites , all of which lack appendages except the last . The back @-@ facing margins of these somites bear small spines and four or more larger spines . The last abdominal somite forks into a pair of flattened spatulate appendages ( the uropods ) that function as a tail fan ( caudal rami ) . In addition to stabilising the body while swimming , a quick flick of the tail fan can rapidly propel the animal backwards , which may have functioned as a means of escaping predators like in modern shrimp . Traces of four fused segments are evident in the three faint lines dividing each lobe of the tail fan . A long telson is present at the end of the body . Traces of a rounded stomach , small digestive glands , and an intestine that terminates into a tiny anal opening on the telson can also be observed in some specimens . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 Waptia fieldensis was one of the first fossils discovered by Charles D. Walcott from the Burgess Shale in August 1909 . A rough sketch of Waptia is present in his diary for August 31 , 1909 , alongside sketches of Marrella and <unk> . A formal description for the species was published by Walcott in 1912 . The species was named after the two mountains connected by the Fossil Ridge containing the Burgess Shale locality , Mount Wapta and Mount Field of Yoho National Park , British Columbia , Canada . The name of Mount Wapta itself comes from the First Nation <unk> word <unk> , meaning " running water " ; while Mount Field was named after the American telecommunications pioneer Cyrus West Field . 
 = = Taphonomy = = 
 Specimens of Waptia fieldensis were recovered from the Burgess Shale Lagerstätte of Canada , which dates from the Middle Cambrian period ( 510 to 505 million years ago ) . The locality was once about 200 m ( 660 ft ) underwater ; it was located at the bottom of a warm and shallow tropical sea adjacent to a submarine limestone cliff ( now the Cathedral Limestone Formation ) . Undersea landslides caused by the collapse of parts of the limestone cliff would periodically bury the organisms in the area ( as well as organisms carried by the landslides ) in fine @-@ grained mud that later became shale . 
 Based on the number of individuals , Waptia fieldensis constitutes about 2 @.@ 55 % of the total number of organisms recovered from the Burgess Shale , and 0 @.@ 86 % of the Greater Phyllopod bed . This makes them the third most abundant arthropods of the Burgess Shale ( after Marrella and <unk> ) . The National Museum of Natural History alone houses more than a thousand specimens of the species from the Burgess Shale . Waptia fieldensis are often found disarticulated , with parts remaining in close proximity to each other . 
 Several possible specimens of W. fieldensis were also recovered from the Middle Cambrian Spence Shale member of the Langston Formation in Utah in 2008 . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Waptia fieldensis is the only species accepted under the genus Waptia . It is classified under the family <unk> ( established by Walcott in 1912 ) , the order <unk> ( established by Leif Størmer in 1944 ) , and ( tentatively ) the clade <unk> . Early restorations of Waptia fieldensis by Charles R. Knight in 1940 erroneously depicted it as a primitive shrimp , but modern paleontologists now consider it among the Burgess Shale arthropods that are of unknown and uncertain taxonomic placement . 
 Some authors have suggested that it may be allied to crustaceans , but like many Cambrian <unk> , the mouthparts were not preserved , making it impossible to reliably classify them within the crustacean crown group . Others propose that it may be only distantly related to crustaceans , being at least a member of a stem group of crustaceans , or even of all arthropods . Despite being one of the first species recovered and being the third most abundant fossils of the Burgess Shale , there is still no in @-@ depth work on the morphology of Waptia fieldensis . 
 In 1975 , an apparently very similar species was described from the Lower Cambrian ( 515 to 520 million years ago ) Maotianshan Shale Lagerstätte of Chengjiang , China . It was originally placed within the " ostracod " -like genus <unk> , as <unk> ovata . In 1991 , Xian @-@ Guang Hou and Jan Bergström reclassified it under the new genus <unk> when additional discoveries of more complete specimens made its resemblance to W. fieldensis more apparent . Like W. fieldensis , <unk> ovata had a bivalved carapace with a median ridge , a pair of caudal rami , a single pair of antennae , and stalked eyes . In 2004 , Jun @-@ Yuan Chen tentatively transferred it to the genus Waptia . However , C. ovata had eight abdominal somites in contrast to five in W. fieldensis . Its limbs were biramous and were undifferentiated , unlike those of W. fieldensis . Other authors deemed these differences to be enough to separate it from Waptia to its own genus . 
 In 2002 , a second similar species , <unk> spinodorsalis , was recovered from the Lower Cambrian Sirius Passet Lagerstätte of the Buen Formation of northern Greenland . It was also identified as a possible <unk> . Like C. ovata it had biramous undifferentiated appendages , but it also had only five abdominal somites like W. fieldensis . However , the poor preservation of the P. spinodorsalis specimens , particularly of the appendages on the head , make it difficult to ascertain its taxonomic placement . This difficulty is further compounded by evidence that the fossils of P. spinodorsalis may in fact be moults ( exuviae ) , and not of the actual animal . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 In addition to their striking , superficial similarity to contemporary shrimp , Waptia fieldensis were also very shrimp @-@ like in their habits . They were bottom @-@ dwelling ( <unk> ) deposit feeders . The lack of strong feeding appendages indicates that they were more likely to feed by sifting through the sea bottom for edible organic particles . Their tails and the feather @-@ like filaments on their posterior thoracic somites also imply that they were active swimmers . 
 In 2015 , egg clutches were identified in six specimens from the Burgess Shale . The clutch sizes were small , only containing up to 24 eggs , but each egg was relatively large , with an average diameter of 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 079 in ) . They were tucked inside the carapace , attached along the inner surface . Along with <unk> <unk> from the Chengjiang biota ( around 7 million years older than the Burgess Shale ) , which also had fossilized eggs preserved inside the carapace , they constitute the oldest direct evidence of brood care and of K @-@ selection among animals . It indicates that they probably lived in an environment which required them to take special measures to ensure the survival of their young . 
 = Mars Attacks ! = 
 Mars Attacks ! is a 1996 American comedy science fiction film directed by Tim Burton and written by Jonathan Gems . Based on the cult trading card series of the same name minus the punctuation , the film features an ensemble cast consisting of Jack Nicholson ( in a dual role ) , Glenn Close , Annette Bening , Pierce Brosnan , Danny DeVito , Martin Short , Sarah Jessica Parker , Michael J. Fox , Rod Steiger , Tom Jones , Lukas Haas , Natalie Portman , Jim Brown , Lisa Marie Smith , and Sylvia Sidney . The film is a parody of science fiction B movies with elements of black comedy and political satire . 
 Alex Cox had tried to make a Mars Attacks ! film in the 1980s before Burton and Gems began development in 1993 . When Gems turned in his first draft in 1994 , Warner Bros. commissioned rewrites from Gems , Burton , Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski in an attempt to lower the budget to $ 60 million . The final production budget came to $ 80 million , while Warner Bros. spent another $ 20 million on the Mars Attacks ! marketing campaign . Filming took place from February to November 1996 . The film was shot in California , Nevada , Kansas , Arizona and Argentina . The soundtrack became famous for the Martians ' quirky speech pattern , which was created by reversing the sound of a duck 's quack . 
 The filmmakers hired Industrial Light & Magic to create the Martians using computer animation after their previous plan to use stop motion , supervised by Barry Purves , fell through because of budget limitations . Mars Attacks ! was released on December 13 , 1996 to mixed reviews from critics . The film grossed approximately $ 101 million in box office totals , which was seen as a disappointment . Mars Attacks ! was nominated for the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation and earned multiple nominations at the Saturn Awards . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Kentucky , a family watches in confusion a herd of cattle running past their home , on fire . A spaceship explodes before it returns to Mars , and hundreds of other Martian ships leave Mars and head towards Earth . 
 President James Dale along with his aides addresses the United States concerning the historic event . People around the country follow the story . The President 's science aides set up a first contact meeting with the Martians in Pahrump , Nevada as President Dale watches the development on TV with his wife Marsha and his daughter Taffy . 
 Using a universal translator , the Ambassador of the Martians announces that they intend to colonize the Earth . To prevent this intention from causing panic , the translator is reprogrammed to say that the Martians " come in peace " . When a hippie releases a dove as a symbol of peace , the Ambassador shoots it , then he and the other Martians slaughter a large number of people at the event including General Casey , news reporter Jason Stone , and Billy @-@ Glenn Norris before capturing chat show host Nathalie Lake and her pet Chihuahua Poppy whose heads they transpose . 
 Thinking that the Martians assumed that the dove was a symbol of war , President Dale tells Professor Donald Kessler to negotiate with the Martians , whose ambassador is invited to address the United States Congress . At this meeting , the Martians massacre most of Congress . Donald begs the Martian Ambassador to stop , but is rendered unconscious and taken aboard their ship where he is later shown with his body parts dismembered and his disembodied head remaining animated . General Decker tries to convince President Dale to retaliate with nuclear warfare , but he refuses . 
 After an attempt to assassinate Dale fails , The Martians invade Earth , starting with Washington , D.C. As they attack the White House , the Secret Service tries to rush the President and the First Lady to the bunker . Dale makes it , but Taffy is separated from them during the chaos and Marsha is crushed to death by the Nancy Reagan chandelier . After the U.S. government unsuccessfully attempts a nuclear attack on the mother ship , the Martians exact revenge by defacing world landmarks for amusement . That night , the Martians infiltrate the bunker where Dale has been taken and the leader reduces Decker to the size of an insect before killing him . The Martians kill everyone else in the bunker except for Dale , who makes an impassioned speech in an attempt to plea for peace and his life . The Martian uses a false hand to kill Dale . 
 As the Martians ravage Las Vegas with Art Land being one of their victims , Byron Williams , a casino employee and former world champion boxer , leads a small group of survivors consisting of Barbara Land , Tom Jones , a waitress named Cindy , and a gambler to an airfield in the hopes of flying a small jet to safety . They barely make it , losing the gambler in the process , but discover a large group of Martians stationed there as they are preparing to take off . Byron creates a diversion by challenging them to a fistfight . While he succeeds in killing the Ambassador , he is outnumbered and overwhelmed , but Tom , Barbara , and Cindy escape . 
 Billy @-@ Glenn 's brother Richie discovers that the Martians ' heads explode when they hear Slim Whitman 's " Indian Love Call . " He and his grandmother Florence drive around town , using the song to kill Martians . The military thereafter broadcast the song around the globe , killing most of the Martians and their leader , and causing the few remaining survivors to either flee from Earth or surrender . Nathalie and Donald kiss while drowning when the Martian spaceship crashes into the ocean . 
 In the aftermath , Richie and Florence are awarded the Medal of Honor by Taffy , with her being the only surviving member of the government . Byron , who survived his Martian brawl , arrives in D.C. to reunite with his former wife and their two sons ( who saved Dale 's life in the White House using two guns they stole from a dead Martian ) as the devastating is being cleaned up . Barbara , Cindy , and Tom Jones emerge from a cave with some animals to see a crashed Martian ship in the adjacent Lake Tahoe . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Jack Nicholson as President James Dale , the President of the United States . 
 Jack Nicholson also portrays Art Land , a developer in Las Vegas . 
 Glenn Close as First Lady Marsha Dale , James Dale 's wife . 
 Annette Bening as Barbara Land , Art Land 's wife . 
 Pierce Brosnan as Professor Donald Kessler , a science expert who works for President Dale and is later captured and experimented on by the Martians . 
 Danny DeVito as Rude Gambler 
 Martin Short as Press Secretary Jerry Ross 
 Sarah Jessica Parker as Nathalie Lake , a talk show host who is later captured and experimented on by the Martians . 
 Michael J. Fox as Jason Stone , a news reporter who is killed during the Martians ' first attack . 
 Rod Steiger as General Decker , a US Army general who works for President Dale . 
 Lukas Haas as Richie Norris , Billy @-@ Glenn Norris 's younger brother . 
 Natalie Portman as Taffy Dale , James and Marsha Dale 's daughter . 
 Jim Brown as Byron Williams , a Las Vegas casino employee and former boxer . 
 Lisa Marie Smith as Martian Girl , a Martian posing as a human female . 
 Sylvia Sidney as Florence Norris , Richie and Billy @-@ Glenn 's grandmother . 
 Tom Jones as Himself 
 Christina Applegate as Sharona , Billy @-@ Glenn 's girlfriend . 
 Pam Grier as Louise Williams , Byron 's former wife . 
 Jack Black as Billy @-@ Glenn Norris , a US Army private who is Richie 's older brother and gets himself killed trying to stand up to the Martians . 
 Paul Winfield as General Casey 
 Janice Rivera as Cindy , a co @-@ worker of Byron . 
 Brian Haley as Mitch , a Secret Service agent . 
 Joe Don Baker as Mr. Norris , Billy @-@ Glenn and Richie 's father . 
 O @-@ Lan Jones as Sue @-@ Ann Norris , Billy @-@ Glenn and Richie 's mother . 
 Ray J and Brandon Hammond as Cedric and Neville Williams , Byron and Louise 's sons . 
 Jerzy Skolimowski as Dr. Zeigler , a scientist who created a device that ( badly ) translated the Martian language . 
 Barbet Schroeder as Maurice , the President of France . 
 Joseph Maher as White House <unk> 
 Steve Valentine as TV Director 
 Frank Welker as Martian Vocal Effects 
 Roger L. Jackson as Dr. Zeigler 's translator ( voice uncredited ) 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In 1985 , Alex Cox pitched the idea of a film based on the Mars Attacks trading card series as a joint @-@ production to Orion and Tristar Pictures . He wrote three drafts over the next four years , but was replaced by Martin Amis before Orion / Tristar placed Mars Attacks in turnaround . 
 Jonathan Gems , who had previously written multiple unproduced screenplays for director Tim Burton , came up with his own idea for a Mars Attacks film in 1993 . The writer pitched both concepts of Mars Attacks and Dinosaurs Attack ! to Burton , who both decided that Dinosaurs Attack ! would be too similar to Jurassic Park ( 1993 ) . Burton , who was busy preparing Ed Wood ( 1994 ) , believed that Mars Attacks ! would be a perfect opportunity to pay homage to the films of Edward D. Wood , Jr . , especially Plan 9 from Outer Space ( 1959 ) , and other 1950s science fiction B movies , such as Invaders from Mars ( 1953 ) , It Came from Outer Space ( 1953 ) , The War of the Worlds ( 1953 ) , Target Earth ( 1954 ) , Invasion of the Body Snatchers ( 1956 ) and Earth vs. the Flying Saucers ( 1956 ) . 
 Burton set Mars Attacks ! up with Warner Bros. and the studio purchased the film rights to the trading card series on his behalf . The original theatrical release date was planned for the summer of 1996 . Gems completed his original script in 1994 , which was budgeted by Warner Bros. at $ 260 million . The studio wanted to make the film for no more than $ 60 million . After turning in numerous drafts in an attempt to lower the budget , Gems was replaced by Ed Wood writers Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski . 
 Gems eventually returned to the project , writing a total of 12 drafts of the script . Although he is credited with both the screen story and screenplay of Mars Attacks ! , Gems dedicates his novelization of the movie to Burton , who " co @-@ wrote the screenplay and didn 't ask for a credit " . Warner Bros. was dubious of the Martian dialogue and wanted Burton to add closed captioning subtitles , but he resisted . Working with Burton , Gems pared the film 's 60 leading characters down to 23 , and the worldwide destruction planned for the film was isolated to three major cities . Scenes featuring Martians attacking China , the Philippines , Japan , Europe , Africa , India , and Russia were deleted from the screenplay . " Bear in mind this was way before Independence Day ( 1996 ) was written , " Gems commented . " We had things like Manhattan being destroyed building by building , the White House went and so did the Empire State Building . Warner Bros. figured all this would be too expensive , so we cut most of that out to reduce the cost . " Howard Stern claimed that the film 's climax , where an attack by Martians was thwarted by playing Slim Whitman songs to them , was originally created by him when he worked at WNBC in 1982 , in a sketch named " Slim Whitman vs. The Midget Aliens From Mars . " As Burton listened to the sketch while being interviewed by Stern , he dismissed it as mere coincidence . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The decision to hire an A @-@ list ensemble cast for Mars Attacks ! parallels the strategy Irwin Allen used for his disaster films , notably The Poseidon Adventure ( 1972 ) and The Towering Inferno ( 1974 ) . Warren Beatty was the original choice for the role of President Dale , but dropped out . Paul Newman replaced him , but then considered playing another role , and left the production over concerns about the film 's violence . Michael Keaton was also considered . Jack Nicholson was then approached , who jokingly remarked he wanted to play all the roles . Burton agreed to cast Nicholson as both Art Land and President Dale , specifically remembering his positive working relationship with the actor on Batman ( 1989 ) . 
 Susan Sarandon was originally set to play Barbara Land before Annette Bening was cast . Bening modeled the character after Ann @-@ Margret 's performance in Viva Las Vegas ( 1964 ) . Hugh Grant was the first choice for Professor Donald Kessler , which eventually went to Pierce Brosnan . Meryl Streep , Diane Keaton and Stockard Channing were considered for First Lady Marsha Dale , but Glenn Close won the role . In addition to Nicholson , other actors who reunited with Burton on Mars Attacks ! include Sylvia Sidney from Beetlejuice ( 1988 ) , Sarah Jessica Parker ( who signed on before reading the script ) from Ed Wood ( 1994 ) , O @-@ Lan Jones from Edward Scissorhands ( 1990 ) , and Danny DeVito from Batman Returns ( 1992 ) , continuing Burton 's trend of recasting actors several times from his previous works . Mars Attacks ! is also notable for one of the few times that Johnny Depp turned down a role in a Burton film . He was approached to play reporter Jason Stone . Michael J. Fox was cast instead . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The originally scheduled start date was mid @-@ August 1995 but filming was delayed until February 26 , 1996 . Director Tim Burton hired Peter <unk> as the cinematographer because he was a fan of his work in David Cronenberg 's films . Production designer Thomas Wynn ( A Beautiful Mind , Malcolm X ) intended to have the war room pay tribute to Dr. Strangelove ( 1964 ) . During production , Burton insisted that the art direction , cinematography and costume design of Mars Attacks ! incorporate the look of the 1960s trading cards . 
 On designing the Martian ( played by Burton 's then @-@ girlfriend Lisa Marie Smith ) who seduces Jerry Ross ( Martin Short ) , costume designer Colleen Atwood took combined inspiration from the playing cards , Marilyn Monroe , the work of Alberto Vargas and Jane Fonda in Barbarella ( 1968 ) . Filming for Mars Attacks ! ended on June 1 , 1996 . The film score was written / composed by Burton 's regular Danny Elfman , to whom Burton was reconciled after a quarrel occurred during The Nightmare Before Christmas ( 1993 ) , for which they did not co @-@ operate in producing Ed Wood ( 1994 ) . Elfman enlisted the help of Oingo Boingo lead guitarist Steve Bartek to help arrange the compositions for the orchestra . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 Tim Burton initially intended to use stop motion animation to feature the Martians , viewing it as a homage to the work of Ray Harryhausen , primarily Jason and the Argonauts . Similar to his own Beetlejuice , Burton " wanted to make [ the special effects ] look cheap and purposely fake @-@ looking as possible . " He first approached Henry Selick , director of The Nightmare Before Christmas , to supervise the stop motion work , but Selick was busy directing James and the Giant Peach , also produced by Burton . Despite the fact that Warner Bros. was skeptical of the escalating budget and had not yet greenlit the film for production , Burton hired Barry Purves to shepherd the stop @-@ motion work . Purves created an international team of about 70 animators , who worked on Mars Attacks ! for eight months and began compiling test footage in Burbank , California . The department workers studied Gloria Swanson 's choreography and movement as Norma Desmond in Sunset Boulevard for inspiration on the Martians ' movement . 
 When the budget was projected at $ 100 million ( Warner Bros. wanted it for no more than $ 75 million ) , producer Larry J. Franco commissioned a test reel from Industrial Light & Magic ( ILM ) , the visual effects company he worked with on Jumanji . Burton was persuaded to change his mind to employ computer animation , which brought the final production budget to $ 80 million . Although Purves was uncredited for his work , stop @-@ motion supervisors Ian Mackinnon and Peter Saunders , who would later collaborate with Burton on Corpse Bride , received character design credit . Warner Digital Studios was responsible for the scenes of global destruction , airborne flying saucer sequences , the Martian landing in Nevada , and the robot that chases Richie Norris in his pickup truck . Warner Digital also used practical effects , such as building scale models of Big Ben and other landmarks . The destruction of Art Land 's hotel was footage of the real @-@ life night @-@ time demolition of The Landmark Hotel and Casino , a building Burton wished to immortalize . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Warner Bros. spent $ 20 million on the movie 's marketing campaign ; together with $ 80 million spent during production , the final combined budget came to $ 100 million . A novelization , written by writer Jonathan Gems , was published by Puffin Books in January 1997 . The film was released in the United States on December 13 , 1996 , earning $ 9 @.@ 38 million in its opening weekend . Mars Attacks ! eventually made $ 37 @.@ 77 million in US totals and $ 63 @.@ 6 million elsewhere , coming to a worldwide total of $ 101 @.@ 37 million . 
 The film was considered a box office bomb in the US but generally achieved greater success both critically and commercially in Europe . Many observers found similarities with Independence Day , which also came out in 1996 . " It was just a coincidence . Nobody told me about it . I was surprised how close it was , " director Tim Burton continued , " but then it 's a pretty basic genre I guess . Independence Day was different in tone – it was different in everything . It almost seemed like we had done kind of a Mad magazine version of Independence Day . " During Mars Attacks ! theatrical run in January 1997 , TBS purchased the broadcasting rights of the film . 
 = = = Critical reaction = = = 
 Mars Attacks ! drew mixed responses from critics . Based on 63 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes , 52 % of the reviewers enjoyed the film , with an average score of 5 @.@ 9 / 10 . By comparison , Metacritic calculated an average score of 52 / 100 from 19 reviews . Roger Ebert observed the homages to the 1950s science fiction B movies . " Ed Wood himself could have told us what 's wrong with this movie : the makers felt superior to the material . To be funny , even schlock has to believe in itself . Look for Infra @-@ Man ( 1975 ) or Invasion of the Bee Girls ( 1973 ) and you will find movies that lack stars and big budgets and fancy special effects but are funny and fun in a way that Burton 's <unk> never really understands . " 
 Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times wrote that " Mars Attacks ! is all 1990s cynicism and disbelief , mocking the conventions that Independence Day takes seriously . This all sounds clever enough but in truth , Mars Attacks ! is not as much fun as it should be . Few of its numerous actors make a lasting impression and Burton 's heart and soul is not in the humor " . Desson Thomson from The Washington Post said " Mars Attacks ! evokes plenty of sci @-@ fi classics , from The Day the Earth Stood Still ( 1951 ) to Dr. Strangelove ( 1964 ) , but it doesn 't do much beyond that superficial exercise . With the exception of Burton 's jolting sight gags ( I may never recover from the vision of Sarah Jessica Parker 's head grafted on to the body of a chihuahua ) , the comedy is half @-@ developed , pedestrian material . And the climactic battle between Earthlings and Martians is dull and overextended . " 
 Richard Schickel , writing in Time magazine , gave a positive review . " You have to admire everyone 's chutzpah : the breadth of Burton 's ( and writer Jonathan Gems ' ) movie references , which range from Kurosawa to Kubrick ; and above all their refusal to offer us a single likable character . Perhaps they don 't create quite enough deeply funny <unk> to go around , but a thoroughly mean @-@ spirited big @-@ budget movie is always a <unk> rarity . " Jonathan Rosenbaum from the Chicago Reader praised the surreal humor and black comedy , which he found to be in the vein of Dr. Strangelove and Gremlins ( 1984 ) . He said it was far from clear whether the movie was a satire , although critics were describing it as one . Todd McCarthy of Variety called Mars Attacks ! " a cult sci @-@ fi comedy miscast as an elaborate , all @-@ star studio extravaganza . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Mars Attacks ! was on the shortlist for the Academy Award for Best Visual Effects nomination , but the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences chose Independence Day , Dragonheart and Twister instead . The film was nominated for seven categories at the Saturn Awards . Danny Elfman won Best Music , while director Tim Burton , writer Jonathan Gems , actor Lukas Haas , costume designer Colleen Atwood and the visual effects department at Industrial Light & Magic received nominations . Mars Attacks ! was nominated for both the Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film ( which went to Independence Day ) and the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation . 
 = Batman : The Ultimate Evil = 
 Batman : The Ultimate Evil is a novel written by Andrew Vachss and published in 1995 by the Warner Aspect imprint of Warner Books . Vachss was an attorney specializing in child abuse cases , as well as a crime novelist best known for his series of books featuring the character Burke , a private investigator who also takes on child abuse cases . A representative from DC Comics approached Vachss about the possibility of writing a novel featuring Batman . Viewing this as an opportunity to reach a completely different audience , Vachss agreed and wrote a draft . He continued with his themes concerning child sexual abuse and explored the topic of child sex tourism . The publisher required Vachss to follow certain rules , like making a clear distinction between fiction and reality and prohibiting the Batman character from killing , cursing , or having sex . 
 In the story , billionaire Bruce Wayne , who as a child witnessed his parents ' murder , encounters the social worker Debra Kane , who takes Wayne to check up on her clients : he sees clear cases of child abuse and brave but futile resistance to it . Wayne 's loyal butler , Alfred Pennyworth , gives him the secret files from his mother 's investigation into child abuse , which had led to her and her husband 's murder , illuminating the darkest mystery of Wayne 's childhood . As Batman , Wayne investigates child abuse and , through a series of informants , is led to a child sex tourism syndicate using the southeast @-@ Asian country of Udon Khai . Batman travels to Udon Khai and , with the help of a local rebel force of guerrilla fighters , topples the kingpin who controls the industry . In the process , he avenges the murder of his parents . The book ends with a non @-@ fiction essay , by journalist David Hechler , entitled " Child Sex Tourism " . 
 = = Background = = 
 At the time of publication , Vachss worked as an attorney , in New York City , specializing in child abuse cases and writing novels . The duality of Vachss 's work as a lawyer prosecuting and defending real cases and as a crime fiction author exploring fictional criminals resulted in Vachss being compared to the Bruce Wayne / Batman character . Vachss 's eighth novel , Footsteps of the Hawk , in the Burke series featuring a vigilante private investigator of child abuse cases , was released just two months before the publication of Batman : The Ultimate Evil . He had wanted to approach the topic of sex tourism in southeast Asia , but had been unable to find a way for the Burke character to go there ; the Batman character offered the chance for him to write about the topic . 
 Vachss had previously worked with Dark Horse Comics to produce a ten @-@ issue series ( 1992 – 1993 ) titled Hard Looks . Steve <unk> of DC Comics 's book division approached <unk> with the possibility of a partnership . Vachss was hesitant about using creative property that belonged to someone else but recognized the opportunity to reach a new audience . He started writing the novel , on speculation , and DC Comics eventually agreed to the project , allowing Vachss to take some creative liberties . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 At a party , Bruce Wayne meets Debra Kane , a caseworker with Child Protective Services . He asks to join her while she visits clients . She agrees and shows him the varying degrees of child abuse she encounters in the course of her job . Wanting to understand the factors behind child abuse , Bruce , as Batman , breaks into Hellgate Prison and talks with an informant who points him to a child pornography and prostitution ring . Bruce 's butler Alfred Pennyworth reveals that Bruce 's mother , Martha Wayne , had been secretly investigating a similar child prostitution ring and was murdered along with her husband Thomas in order to stop the investigation . 
 Picking up where his mother 's files left off , Bruce finds a connection to a Southeast Asian country named Udon Khai . Using the assumed name Big Jack Hollister , Batman travels to San Francisco to meet a contact who explains how the sex tours to Udon Khai operate . As Hollister , Batman travels to Udon Khai , where he meets Rhama , a local translator hired by Alfred . Rhama shows Hollister life in Udon Khai and how the child sex tourism has affected its population . Saying Hollister sent him , Batman introduces himself to Rhama . Batman and Rhama confront a man who buys and sells children and they rescue a girl who had been sold by her family . They return the child to her village and find that her father , living in extreme poverty , had sold her so that the rest of the family could survive . The population mistakes Batman for a warrior of legend who would break the barriers that confine the population . Believing this to be their chance for a revolution to overthrow the military dictatorship , a rebel group joins Batman in storming the headquarters of the kingpin who controls the sex tour industry . Though Batman returns to Gotham City , the rebels continue to dismantle sex tour industry and overthrow the dictator of Udon Khai . 
 The novel ends with Bruce Wayne maintaining his friendship with Debra Kane as well as recruiting her as one of his informants as Batman , and also deciding to include child molesters as part of his quarry in his war on crime . 
 = = Publication = = 
 The 45 @,@ 000 @-@ word novel was released in November 1995 , simultaneous with an abridged audiobook and a two @-@ issue graphic novel . All three versions included a nonfiction essay about child prostitution in Thailand , titled " Child Sex Tourism " , by journalist David Hechler . The audiobook featured Tony Roberts , whose performance on the three @-@ hour , two @-@ cassette recording received a positive review from <unk> Miller Rosenblum of Billboard , who wrote that Roberts does " an outstanding job creating a distinctive voice for each character and effectively portraying Batman 's complex psyche " . The comic book adaption was drafted by Neal Barrett , Jr. with art by Denys Cowan . The novel was published by the Warner Aspect imprint of the Warner Books and promoted by Vachss with a book tour and as a guest at the 1995 San Diego Comic @-@ Con. Vachss used the promotion of the book to also raise awareness of child abuse and advocate a boycott of manufactured goods from Thailand . He declared that " three years from now , if there isn 't a boycott of Thailand , then this book is a cosmic failure " . Vachss supported Don 't ! Buy ! Thai ! , which believed that " if Thailand sells its children for money , then the only thing that will stop them is the loss of money " . 
 = = Style and themes = = 
 The publishers required that Vachss follow certain rules , including prohibiting the Batman character from killing , cursing , or having sex , and keeping a clear distinction between fiction and reality . For example , while Vachss wanted to write about Thailand , he created a fictional country named Udon Khai which had many similarities with Thailand — though Udon Khai is described as being dominated by a lone kingpin who controls the country 's one @-@ industry economy based on sex tourism while Thailand 's tourism economy , which includes sex tourism , is part of an economic development strategy enabled by international development agencies . Vachss deviated from Batman canon by having the Wayne family butler , Alfred Pennyworth , reveal to Bruce Wayne that his mother , Martha , was a sociologist who was secretly investigating a child pornography ring . In Vachss ' novel , the <unk> were not the victims of a random crime ; instead , Martha was targeted for assassination . One reviewer compared the characterization of Batman as " the same brooding , handsome , rich character that Val Kilmer played [ in Batman Forever ] " but with the " gothic presence of the older Batman seen in 1940s movie serials " . More complex analysis compared the story to an " 18th @-@ century contes philosophiques in which the dark irrationality of the Greek gods has been flattened out into tidy didactic instruction . " 
 Vachss said " writing is my way of preaching . For me , it 's always , always the message . The plot is something I contrive to deliver the message . You 've got to have enough narrative force to get people to finish the book , but if you can give them an exciting story , you can always make your points . " He stated that " the whole point of the book is to raise awareness about the kiddie @-@ sex tourism business in Thailand " . Though the story uses more realism than the escapism typically associated with superhero fiction , Vachss did end the book with endorsements of two real non @-@ profit groups ; Don 't ! Buy ! Thai ! and End Child Prostitution in Asian Tourism . The writing is not subtle , as Vachss noted " If you don 't get angry , you 're not going to do anything " . Understanding that the likely readers were young males with short attention spans , Vachss tried to be dramatic by using what author Adam Begley calls " a motivational hat trick : sympathy for the victims , revenge , and a family calling " . 
 A major theme in the book is the characterization of child abuse . The story follows Bruce Wayne as he learns about the different categories of child abuse , from the ignorant to the incapable and to those who do it for pleasure . Batman , whose motivation is to prevent crimes like the murder of his parents , is contrasted against a social worker whose motivation is protecting children ; Batman realizes that throughout his career he had been fighting criminals , not crime . Vachss asserts that " child protection and crime prevention are the same thing " ; he believes that child abuse is never just a random crime but is done with intent . While Vachss warns that those abused can become future abusers , he also states that " abuse can push two similarly maltreated children in opposite directions . One incest victim becomes a promiscuous adult , another never engages in sex again . ... If you excuse a serial killer because he was tortured as a child , you disrespect the thousands of children who were treated worse and never imitated their oppressor . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 The book was described as a " slim , vivid novel " with a " very simple " and " fast paced " plot line . A review in The Washington Times was positive : " With a plot that takes Batman very seriously — and makes him very human — and a dismaying amount of information on the sexual exploitation of children for profit , this novel makes an <unk> impression " . Likewise , another reviewer found it " an engaging and disturbing one @-@ night read that 's all the more astonishing because Vachss manages to explore and make his points about a wholly depressing topic without driving your moods into the sewer . " Roger Catlin in the Hartford Courant said " Vachss ' bold , simple prose is well suited to his story . He 's good at making Batman 's various devices — the Batmobile , computers , flying gizmos — come to life with his cool description . " 
 A review in the New York Times noted that the basic premise is a good idea , but " studded as it is with undigested chunks of scientific jargon , sociology @-@ speak and polemical rhetoric Batman : The Ultimate Evil misses out almost completely on the pure pulp thrills that lie at the heart of its title character 's appeal . " In the St. Petersburg Times , Adam Begley also noted the use of what he called " techno @-@ babble " . In The Washington Post , Jack Womack wrote that Vachss describes the Batmobile " lovingly yet <unk> , as if a Motor Trend review had been translated into Slovakian by someone more familiar with Czech " and concluded that the novel was " as satisfying — aesthetically , ethically , morally — as a pulse @-@ pounding yarn in which pulp @-@ fiction hero Doc Savage ransacks the shantytowns of South America in a terribly successful search for Doc Mengele . " In Kirkus Reviews , the story was compared to a generic " Destroy All <unk> " video game where Batman " disposes of each lower @-@ level pimp , then moves up to the next level " . Sybil Steinberg in Publishers Weekly noted that " while no classic , this is likely the the [ sic ] most stylish adaptation yet of a comic @-@ book figure , its cold stiletto prose and white @-@ hot passions lifting it leagues above recent Spider @-@ man and Incredible Hulk offerings . It 's also Vachss ' best work since <unk> " . Both the Library Journal and Booklist predicted heavy demand for it at public libraries . 
 = Metroid II : Return of Samus = 
 Metroid II : Return of Samus is an action @-@ adventure video game developed and published by Nintendo for the Game Boy handheld game console . The second installment and the first handheld title in the Metroid series , it was released in North America in November 1991 , and in Japan and Europe the following year . The story of Metroid II follows the protagonist and playable character Samus Aran , who is sent on a mission to exterminate the Metroid creatures from their home planet SR388 before the antagonistic Space Pirates obtain and use them . The gameplay of Metroid II involves killing a fixed number of Metroids before the player can advance deeper through the planet 's tunnels . 
 Metroid II was developed by Nintendo Research & Development 1 ( Nintendo R & D1 ) and produced by Gunpei Yokoi , who both worked on the first Metroid game for the Nintendo Entertainment System . The developers of the game added round metal shoulders on Samus ' Varia Suit to differentiate it from her Power Suit , since both looked similar on the Game Boy 's limited greyscale display . The updated suit has since been a staple of the series , appearing in all subsequent games . A unique color palette for Metroid II was added to the Game Boy Color console , a successor to the original Game Boy with a color screen . 
 The game was given generally favorable reviews . Critics praised Metroid II for its story and settings , while other reviews criticized its graphics and audio . A follow @-@ up to the game , Super Metroid , was released for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System in 1994 . Metroid II became available as a Nintendo 3DS Virtual Console title in 2011 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Metroid II is an action @-@ adventure game in which the player controls the protagonist Samus Aran on the fictional planet SR388 . In this side @-@ scroller , players advance through the game by using Samus ' weapons to kill a fixed number of Metroid creatures . The player is given a detector that displays the number of Metroids remaining in the area . Once all the creatures are eliminated , an earthquake occurs and the planet 's lava levels decrease , allowing Samus to travel deeper through its tunnels . The Metroid creatures are encountered in different evolution stages of their development cycle : original , Alpha , Gamma , Zeta and Omega . The more developed the organism is , the stronger its attack . Metroid II features save modules located around the planet , which allow players to save their progress and continue in another session . 
 The game features two weapons new to the Metroid series : the tri @-@ splitting <unk> Laser Beam , and the Plasma Beam , which passes through enemies when shot . Samus can only equip one beam at a time ; however , she can switch between them by returning to where they are first found . Metroid II features the Space Jump , a new suit enhancement that allows Samus to jump infinitely and access otherwise unreachable areas . The game also sees the return of Samus ' Morph Ball , a mode in which she curls up into a ball to travel through small tunnels . In addition , the game is the first in the series to feature the Spider Ball and Spring Ball . The Spider Ball allows Samus to climb most walls or ceilings , giving her freedom to explore both the surfaces and ceilings of caverns , and the Spring Ball gives Samus the ability to jump while curled up into a ball in the Morph Ball form . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the previous Metroid , bounty hunter Samus Aran ruined the Space Pirates ' plans to use the newly discovered lifeform known as Metroid . To ensure that the Space Pirates can never obtain any more Metroids , the Galactic Federation sends several teams to the Metroid 's home planet , SR388 , to destroy them once and for all . However , when each of the teams disappear , the Galactic Federation contracts Samus to finish the mission . 
 While exploring the planet , Samus encounters Metroids and destroys them , slowly decreasing the planet 's Metroid population . During her mission , she notices the mutations that each creature exhibits : the Metroids grow from small jellyfish @-@ like creatures into large , hovering , lizard @-@ like beasts . After destroying most of the planet 's Metroids , Samus encounters and battles the Queen Metroid . Killing it , Samus proceeds to return to her gunship through the planet 's tunnels . 
 Along the way , she finds a Metroid egg that hatches in front of her . A Metroid hatchling floats out of the broken shell and imprints onto Samus , thinking that she is its mother . Unable to commit to her mission of extermination , Samus spares its life . She exits the tunnels while the Metroid helps clear the way . Reaching the planet 's surface , the Metroid and Samus board the gunship together , setting the plot for Super Metroid . 
 = = Development = = 
 Metroid II was developed by Nintendo Research & Development 1 ( Nintendo R & D1 ) , and produced by Gunpei Yokoi ; they both also worked on the previous Metroid game for the Nintendo Entertainment System . It was directed by Hiroji Kiyotake and Hiroyuki Kimura , and designed by Makoto Kano , while Takahiro Harada serving as the main programmer . Metroid II marked a " new high point " for handheld game consoles , with graphics that were almost as good as the 8 @-@ bit graphics in games for the NES . The game features enhancements from its predecessor that include easier controls which allow Samus to crouch while firing at the same time , and jump while shooting straight down to attack anything below her . The game also utilizes the cartridge 's battery @-@ backed memory for saving the player 's progress . In the 2004 interview for the Nintendo Dream magazine , Kiyotake revealed that the planet SR388 was named after the Yamaha <unk> motorcycle . 
 The Game Boy 's black @-@ and @-@ white graphics resulted in changes to Samus 's gear that eventually became permanent . In the original Metroid , color was used to differentiate between Samus 's Power Suit and her Varia Suit — an upgraded version . However , without color on the Game Boy , the two suits would have appeared similar , requiring the developers to develop a visual indicator for players to determine which suit Samus is wearing . They also updated her Varia Suit , adding round metal shoulders that have been a part of the suit in every game in the series since then . 
 Nintendo R & D1 was also involved in developing the Game Boy Color , a successor to the original Game Boy with a color screen . Nintendo of America 's Dan Owsen noted that Nintendo R & D1 included a special " Metroid palette " in the Game Boy Color 's hardware , which " makes Metroid II look really , really nice on Game Boy Color " , remarking that this made the game 's graphics comparable to the original Metroid on the Nintendo Entertainment System . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Nintendo released Metroid II in North America in November 1991 . This was followed by the release in Japan on January 21 , 1992 , and in Europe on May 21 , 1992 . Nintendo included the game in its Player 's Choice marketing label in North America in 1993 . It was re @-@ released in Japan as a downloadable game for the Nintendo Power flash memory cartridge . On August 17 , 2011 , Nintendo announced that Metroid II , along with other Game Boy games such as Super Mario Land 2 : 6 Golden Coins , Mega Man : Dr. Wily 's Revenge , and several others would be released for the Nintendo 3DS Virtual Console at the end of the year . It was released in Japan on September 28 , 2011 , and in North America and Europe on November 24 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Although considered by a few critics to be the weakest game in the franchise and not as well received as the Nintendo Entertainment System counterpart , Metroid II still received generally favorable reviews . Because Metroid II has a single large level instead of multiple small ones , Tim Jones of IGN found the game a " refreshing departure from the norm " , which made him feel claustrophobic the further into the game he ventured . He praised Metroid II 's replay value , considering its non @-@ linearity as the primary reason for this . In their retrospective video on the Metroid series , GameTrailers believed that the game still maintained the high standards set by its predecessor and noted that it also introduced new methods of exploration to the series that have become staples . 
 AllGame 's Brett Alan Weiss believed that Metroid II would please fans of the original Metroid , and they noticed that the backgrounds were more detailed in this Game Boy iteration . Marcel Van Duyn of Nintendo Life noted that the difficulty was improved over the original game because of the inclusion of " hot spots " that restores health and missiles . On the other hand , Jeremy Parish of 1UP.com was particularly critical of the game , finding the game painful to play and describing it as " something of a dark spot on a brilliant series ' reputation . " Parish found the game 's premise " ambitious " , adding that it provided the series a vital crux : " Samus ' actions in Metroid II fuel the plots of both its sequels : Super Metroid [ ... ] and Metroid Fusion " . GameTrailers similarly commented that it told one of the most pivotal chapters in the series ' overall plot . 
 Van Duyn praised Metroid II 's visual detail , writing that " the platforms in the foreground and the enemies on and around them are all quite detailed , so you can easily identify what you 're trying to kill . " In contrast , Jones considered the graphics average , and noted that the walls appeared mostly the same , which confuses players when wandering through identical tunnels . Parish complained that aside from Samus , the visuals for the environment are " bland and repetitive , full of monotonous rocks and sand with few details to differentiate the various areas , and the enemies are mostly simple and boxy . " Parish also found the music " downright painful " , which he contrasted with the " moody , atmospheric compositions " the series was known for . Van Duyn cited the music as the " only bad point " in the game , stating that the ambient sounds " tend to get annoying after hearing them again and again . " Jones said that " [ a ] lot of the time there is no music , just a steady beat , but when you get into certain areas a slow , moody tune begins to play in the background . " GameTrailers noted that the game is too linear , and was unimpressed with its audio and visuals . 
 In the September 1997 , Nintendo Power 12 staff members voted in a list for the top 100 games of all time . The magazine placed Metroid II at 34th place on their list of 100 games of all time . In their Top 200 Games list , Nintendo Power also ranked the game as the 85th best game on a Nintendo console , and <unk> included it in their list of the best Game Boy games . Nintendo Power listed it as the 12th @-@ best Game Boy / Game Boy Color video game , praising it for introducing several staple abilities to the series . Game Informer 's Ben Reeves called it the ninth best Game Boy game and noted that it was polarizing among fans . 
 = = Sequel and legacy = = 
 Super Metroid , a follow @-@ up to Metroid II , was released for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System in 1994 . Metroid series co @-@ creator Yoshio Sakamoto remarked at the 2010 Game Developers Conference that he was " very moved " by the ending in Metroid II , which influenced him on creating Super Metroid . 
 Due to the black and white color palette used in Metroid II , and no Metroid games released for the Game Boy Color , there have been attempts to create colored versions of Metroid II . A programmer using the pseudonym <unk> created Project Another Metroid 2 Remake , also known as <unk> . The project aims to update the game 's appearance by emulating , and in some cases trumping , the visual designs of Super Metroid and Metroid : Zero Mission . Frank Caron of Ars Technica claims that it features " incredible graphics " and he consider it a " painstaking recreation of the original level design " . He observed , " [ t ] he animations are incredibly smooth , colors vibrant , and backgrounds well @-@ detailed . " <unk> is scheduled for release on August 6 , 2016 . 
 = Heian Palace = 
 The Heian Palace was the original imperial palace of Heian @-@ kyō ( present @-@ day Kyoto ) , the capital of Japan , from 794 to 1227 . The palace , which served as the imperial residence and the administrative centre of for most of the Heian period ( from 794 to 1185 ) , was located at the north @-@ central location of the city in accordance with the Chinese models used for the design of the capital . 
 The palace consisted of a large rectangular walled enclosure , which contained several ceremonial and administrative buildings including the government ministries . Inside this enclosure was the separately walled residential compound of the emperor or the Inner Palace . In addition to the emperor 's living quarters , the Inner Palace contained the residences of the imperial consorts , as well as certain official and ceremonial buildings more closely linked to the person of the emperor . 
 The original role of the palace was to manifest the centralised government model adopted by Japan from China in the 7th century — the <unk> @-@ kan and its subsidiary Eight Ministries . The palace was designed to provide an appropriate setting for the emperor 's residence , the conduct of great affairs of state , and the accompanying ceremonies . While the residential function of the palace continued until the 12th century , the facilities built for grand state ceremonies began to fall into disuse by the 9th century . This was due to both the abandonment of several statutory ceremonies and procedures and the transfer of several remaining ceremonies into the smaller @-@ scale setting of the Inner Palace . 
 From the mid @-@ Heian period , the palace suffered several fires and other disasters . During reconstructions , emperors and some of the office functions resided outside the palace . This , along with the general loss of political power of the court , acted to further diminish the importance of the palace as the administrative centre . Finally in 1227 the palace burned down and was never rebuilt . The site was built over so that almost no trace of it remains . Knowledge of the palace is thus based on contemporary literary sources , surviving diagrams and paintings , and limited excavations conducted mainly since the late 1970s . 
 = = Location = = 
 The palace was located at the northern centre of the rectangular Heian @-@ kyō , following the Chinese model ( specifically that of the Tang dynasty capital of Chang 'an ) adopted already for the Heijō Palace in the earlier capital Heijō @-@ kyō ( in present @-@ day Nara ) , and Nagaoka @-@ kyō . The south @-@ eastern corner of the Greater Palace was located in the middle of the present @-@ day Nijō Castle . The main entrance to the palace was the <unk> gate ( 35 ° 0 ′ 49 ″ N 135 ° 44 ′ 32 ″ E ) , which formed the northern terminus of the great Suzaku Avenue that ran through the centre of the city from the <unk> gate . The palace thus faced south and presided over the symmetrical urban plan of Heian @-@ kyō . In addition to the Suzaku Gate , the palace had 13 other gates located symmetrically along the side walls . A major avenue ( <unk> , ōji ) led to each of the gates , except for the three along the northern side of the palace , which was coterminous with the northern boundary of the city itself . 
 = = History = = 
 The palace was the first and most important structure to be erected at the new capital of Heian @-@ kyō , where the court moved in 794 following Emperor Kanmu 's order . The palace was not completely ready by the time of the move , however — the Daigokuden was completed only in 795 , and the government office in charge of its construction was disbanded only in 805 . 
 The grand Chinese @-@ style compounds of Chōdō @-@ in and Buraku @-@ in started to fall into disuse quite early on , in parallel with the decline of the elaborate Chinese @-@ inspired <unk> government processes and bureaucracy , which were gradually either abandoned or reduced to empty forms . The centre of gravity of the palace complex moved to the Inner Palace or Dairi , and the Shishinden and later even the Seiryōden overtook the Daigokuden as loci for the conduct of official government business . 
 In parallel with the concentration of activity within the Dairi , the Greater Palace began to be regarded as increasingly unsafe , especially by night . One reason may be the prevalent superstition of the period : uninhabited buildings were avoided for fear of spirits and ghosts , and even the great Buraku @-@ in compound was thought to be haunted . In addition , the level of actual security maintained at the palace went into decline , and by the early 11th century only one palace gate , the <unk> in the east , appears to have been guarded . Hence burglary and even violent crime became a problem within the palace by the first half of 11th century . 
 Fires were a constant problem as the palace compound was constructed almost entirely of wood . The Daigokuden was reconstructed after fires in 876 , 1068 and in 1156 despite its limited use . However , after the major fire of 1177 which destroyed much of the Greater Palace , the Daigokuden was never again rebuilt . The <unk> was destroyed by a fire in 1063 and was never rebuilt . 
 As of 960 , the Dairi was also repeatedly destroyed by fires , but it was systematically rebuilt and used as the official imperial residence until the late 12th century . During periods of rebuilding the Dairi following fires , the emperors frequently had to stay at their secondary <unk> @-@ dairi ( <unk> ) palaces within the city . Often these secondary palaces were provided by the powerful Fujiwara family , which especially in the latter part of the Heian period exercised de facto control of politics by providing consorts to successive emperors . Thus the residences of the emperors ' maternal grandparents started to usurp the residential role of the palace even before the end of the Heian period . The institution of rule by retired emperors or the <unk> system ( <unk> , <unk> ) from 1086 further added to the declining importance of the palace as retired emperors exercised power from their own residential palaces inside and outside the city . 
 After a fire in 1177 , the original palace complex was abandoned and emperors resided in smaller palaces ( the former <unk> @-@ dairi ) within the city and villas outside it . In 1227 a fire finally destroyed what remained of the Dairi , and the old Greater Palace went into complete disuse . In 1334 Emperor Go @-@ Daigo issued an edict to rebuild the Greater Palace , but no resources were available to support this and the project came to nothing . The present Kyoto Imperial Palace is located immediately to the west of the site of the <unk> Mansion ( <unk> , <unk> ) , the great Fujiwara residence in the north @-@ eastern corner of the city . The <unk> @-@ kan , the final standing section of the palace , remained in use until 1585 . 
 = = Greater Palace ( <unk> ) = = 
 The Greater Palace ( <unk> , <unk> ) was a walled rectangular area extending approximately 1 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 87 mi ) from north to south between the first and second major east @-@ west avenues ( Ichijō ōji ( <unk> ) and Nijō ōji ( <unk> ) and 1 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 75 mi ) from west to east between the Nishi <unk> ōji ( <unk> ) and <unk> ōji ( <unk> ) north @-@ south avenues . The three main structures within the Greater Palace were the Official Compound Chōdō @-@ in ( <unk> ) , the Reception Compound Buraku @-@ in ( <unk> ) and the Inner Palace ( <unk> , dairi ) . 
 = = = Chōdō @-@ in = = = 
 Chōdō @-@ in was a rectangular walled enclosure situated directly to the north of the <unk> gate in the centre of the southern wall of the Greater Palace . It was based on Chinese models and followed Chinese architectural styles , and archaeological evidence from earlier capitals shows that this building complex was present in earlier palaces and had a remarkably stable design from the 7th century onwards . 
 = = = = Daigokuden = = = = 
 The main building within the Chōdō @-@ in was the Daigokuden ( <unk> ) or the Great Audience Hall , facing south at the northern end of the compound . This was a large ( approximately 52 m ( 170 ft ) east to west and 20 m ( 65 ft ) north to south ) Chinese @-@ style building with white walls , vermilion pillars and green tiled roofs , intended to host the most important state ceremonies and functions . The southern part of the Chōdō @-@ in was occupied by the Twelve Halls where the bureaucracy was seated for ceremonies according to strict order of precedence . The Heian <unk> shrine in Kyoto includes an apparently faithful reconstruction of the Daigokuden in somewhat reduced scale . 
 It was in the Chōdō @-@ in that Accession Audiences were held , the emperor was supposed to preside over early morning deliberations on major state affairs by the bureaucracy , receive monthly reports from officials , hold New Year Congratulations and receive foreign ambassadors . However , the practice of the morning deliberations ceased to be followed by 810 as did the monthly reports . Foreign ambassadors were no longer received for most of the Heian period , and the New Year celebrations were abbreviated and moved into the Dairi by the end of the 10th century , leaving the Accession Audiences and certain Buddhist ceremonials as the only ones held in the Chōdō @-@ in . 
 = = = Buraku @-@ in = = = 
 The Buraku @-@ in was another large rectangular Chinese @-@ style compound , situated to the west of the Chōdō @-@ in . It was built for official celebrations and banquets and used also for other types of entertainment such as archery contests . Like the Chōdō @-@ in , also the Buraku @-@ in had a hall at the central northern end of the enclosure overseeing the court . This hall , the <unk> ( <unk> ) , was used by the emperor and courtiers presiding over activities in the Buraku @-@ in . However , like the Chōdō @-@ in , the Buraku @-@ in also fell gradually into disuse as many functions were moved to the Dairi . Its site is one of the few within the palace area that has been excavated . 
 = = = Other buildings = = = 
 Apart from the Inner Palace , the remaining area of the Greater Palace was occupied by ministries , lesser offices , workshops , storage buildings and the large open space of the Banqueting Pine Grove or En no Matsubara ( <unk> ) to the east of the Dairi . The buildings of the Council of State or <unk> ( <unk> ) were situated in a walled enclosure immediately to the east of the Chōdō @-@ in , laid out in the typical symmetrical plan of buildings opening to a courtyard in the south . The palace also housed the Shingon @-@ in ( <unk> ) , apart from <unk> @-@ ji and Sai @-@ ji , the only Buddhist establishment permitted within the capital . Its placement right next to the Inner Palace shows the influence of the Shingon sect during the early Heian Period . 
 = = Inner Palace ( Dairi ) = = 
 The Inner Palace or Dairi was located to the north @-@ east of the Chōdō @-@ in , somewhat to the east of the central north @-@ south axis of the Greater Palace . Its central feature was the Throne Hall . The Dairi encompassed the emperor 's quarters and the pavilions of the imperial consorts and ladies @-@ in @-@ waiting ( collectively , the <unk> ) . The Dairi was enclosed within two sets of walls . In addition to the Dairi itself , the outer walls enclosed some household offices , storage areas , and the <unk> ( <unk> ) , a walled area of Shinto buildings associated with the emperor 's religious functions , situated to the west of the Dairi itself , at the geographic centre of the Greater Palace . The principal gate of the larger enclosure was the <unk> gate ( <unk> ) , located in the southern wall along the median north @-@ south axis of the Dairi . 
 The Dairi proper , the residential compound of the emperor , was enclosed within another set of walls to the east of <unk> . It measured approximately 215 m ( 710 ft ) north to south and 170 m ( 560 ft ) east to west . The main gate was the <unk> gate ( <unk> ) at the centre of the southern wall of the Dairi enclosure , immediately to the north of the <unk> gate . In contrast to the solemn official Chinese @-@ style architecture of the Chōdō @-@ in and the Buraku @-@ in , the Dairi was built in more intimate Japanese architectural style — if still on a grand scale . The Inner Palace represented a variant of the shinden style architecture used in the aristocratic villas and houses of the period . The buildings , with unpainted surfaces and gabled and shingled cypress bark roofs , were raised on elevated wooden platforms and connected to each other with covered and uncovered slightly elevated passages . Between the buildings and passages were gravel yards and small gardens . 
 = = = Shishinden = = = 
 The largest building of the Dairi was the Throne Hall or Shishinden ( <unk> ) , a building reserved for official functions . It was a rectangular hall measuring approximately 30 m ( 98 ft ) east to west and 25 m ( 82 ft ) north to south , and situated along the median north @-@ south axis of the Dairi , overseeing a rectangular courtyard and facing the <unk> gate . A <unk> orange tree and a <unk> cherry tree stood symmetrically on both sides of the front staircase of the building . The courtyard was flanked on both sides by smaller halls connected to the Shishinden , creating the same configuration of buildings ( influenced by Chinese examples ) that was found in the aristocratic shinden style villas of the period . 
 The Shishinden was used for official functions and ceremonies that were not held at the Daigokuden of the Chōdō @-@ in complex . It took over much of the intended use of the larger and more formal building from an early date , as the daily business of government ceased to be conducted in the presence of the emperor in the Daigokuden already at the beginning of the ninth century . Connected to this diminishing reliance on the official government procedures described in the <unk> code was the establishment of a personal secretariat to the emperor , the Chamberlain 's Office or <unk> ( <unk> ) . This office , which increasingly took over the role of coordinating the work of government organs , was set up in the <unk> ( <unk> ) , the hall to the south @-@ west of the Shishinden . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 To the north of the Shishinden stood the <unk> ( <unk> ) , a similarly constructed hall of somewhat smaller size that was intended to function as the emperor 's living quarters . However , beginning already in the ninth century , the emperors often chose to reside in other buildings of the Dairi . A third still smaller hall , the <unk> ( <unk> ) was located next to the north along the main axis of the Dairi . After the Dairi was rebuilt following a fire in 960 , the regular residence of the emperors moved to the smaller Seiryōden ( <unk> ) , an east @-@ facing building located immediately to the north @-@ west from Shishinden . Gradually the Seiryōden began to be used increasingly for meetings as well , with emperors spending much of their time in this part of the palace . The busiest part of the building was the Courtiers Hall ( <unk> , <unk> ) , where high @-@ ranking nobles came to meet in the presence of the emperor . 
 = = = Other buildings = = = 
 The empress , as well as the official and unofficial imperial consorts , was also housed in the Dairi , occupying buildings in the northern part of the enclosure . The most prestigious buildings , housing the empress and the official consorts , were the ones that had appropriate locations for such use according to the originally Chinese design principles ( the <unk> ( <unk> ) , the <unk> ( <unk> ) and the <unk> ( <unk> ) , as well as the ones closest to the imperial residence in Seiryōden ( the <unk> ( <unk> ) and the <unk> ( <unk> ) ) . The lesser consorts and ladies @-@ in @-@ waiting occupied other buildings in the northern half of the Dairi . 
 One of the Imperial Regalia of Japan , the emperor 's replica of the sacred mirror , was also housed in the <unk> hall ( <unk> ) of the Dairi . 
 The present @-@ day Kyoto Imperial Palace , located in what was the north @-@ eastern corner of Heian @-@ kyō , reproduces much of the Heian @-@ period Dairi , in particular the Shishinden and the Seiryōden . 
 = Montpelier , Brighton = 
 Montpelier is an inner suburban area of Brighton , part of the English city and seaside resort of Brighton and Hove . Developed together with the adjacent Clifton Hill area in the mid @-@ 19th century , it forms a high @-@ class , architecturally cohesive residential district with " an exceptionally complete character " . Stucco @-@ clad terraced housing and villas predominate , but two of the city 's most significant Victorian churches and a landmark hospital building are also in the area , which lies immediately northwest of Brighton city centre and spreads as far as the ancient parish boundary with Hove . 
 Development was initially stimulated when one of the main roads out of Brighton was turnpiked in the late 18th century , but the hilly land — condemned as " hideous masses of unfledged earth " by John Constable , who painted it nevertheless — was mostly devoted to agriculture until the 1820s . The ascent of Brighton from provincial fishing town to fashionable resort prompted a building boom in the next quarter @-@ century , and Montpelier and Clifton Hill were transformed into districts of architecturally homogeneous streets with carefully designed , intricately detailed housing . Little demolition , infilling or redevelopment has occurred since , and hundreds of buildings have been granted listed status . The whole suburb is also one of 34 conservation areas in the city of Brighton and Hove . 
 Historic buildings include The Temple — local landowner Thomas Read Kemp 's house , now a private school — the former Royal Alexandra Hospital for Children , currently being redeveloped , and large mid 19th @-@ century houses such as Montpelier Hall . The area also has several set @-@ piece residential squares and crescents such as Clifton Terrace , Powis Square , Vernon Terrace , Montpelier Crescent and Montpelier Villas . The architectural partnership of Amon Wilds , his son Amon Henry Wilds and Charles Busby — the most important architects in Regency era Brighton and Hove — designed many of these . Montpelier 's range of churches includes some of the city 's finest , but others have been demolished in the postwar period . 
 = = Location and character = = 
 Montpelier is a centrally located inner suburb of the city of Brighton and Hove . The Lanes , the ancient centre of Brighton , is about 0 @.@ 7 miles ( 1 @.@ 1 km ) to the southeast , and central Hove is about 1 @.@ 1 miles ( 1 @.@ 8 km ) to the west . London is 50 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 81 @.@ 3 km ) to the north . There is no single official definition of the area covered by Montpelier and Clifton Hill , but most authorities ( including Brighton and Hove City Council ) define it as the area west of West Hill and east of the ancient parish boundary between Brighton and Hove . The Seven Dials area and the road junction of that name are to the north , forming the apex of the roughly triangular area , and the major city @-@ centre shopping street Western Road lies to the south . Two roads form important through routes for cross @-@ city traffic : Montpelier Road runs south – north from the city centre to Seven Dials , and the west – east Upper North Street links the city centre to Hove . Both are busy , but traffic is limited in the smaller residential streets . 
 Dyke Road — the ancient route from Brighton to Devil 's Dyke and Steyning and eventually on to London — forms the conservation area 's eastern boundary except at the southern end , where it extends east of the road to include St Nicholas ' Church ( Brighton 's original parish church ) , Wykeham Terrace and other small parts of West Hill . The land rises gently from the southwest to a summit at Clifton Hill . Writing in 1833 , J.D. Parry said that the hill " commands a magnificent view , and has very fine air " . John Constable , who stayed in Brighton several times during the 1820s , was less impressed : he described it as " hideous masses of unfledged earth called the country " . Nevertheless , he produced several paintings of the area , which provide a record of its appearance just before it became <unk> . 
 Geologically , Montpelier is built on grassy downland and sheep @-@ pasture , beneath which is chalk . This pattern is repeated across the rest of the city , most of the Sussex coast and for several miles inland . The chalk , " one of the most complete and accessible strata anywhere in Europe " , was formed about 100 million years ago . As in other areas where chalk is prevalent , the soil above it is <unk> . Found in thin layers and with a high calcium content , it has a poor agricultural value . 
 In common with the rest of Brighton , the area has a temperate climate : its Köppen climate classification is Cfb . It is characterised by mild , calm weather with high levels of sunshine , sea breezes and a " healthy , bracing air " attributed to the low level of tree cover . Average rainfall levels increase as the land rises : the 1958 – 1990 mean was 740 millimetres ( 29 in ) on the seafront and about 1 @,@ 000 millimetres ( 39 in ) at the top of the South Downs above Brighton . 
 Locally , a distinction is made between the northern part of the area towards the top of the hill — this area is known as Clifton or Clifton Hill — and the lower land to the south and west , as far as the Hove boundary and Western Road , known as Montpelier . The names are also used interchangeably , and some sources make further distinctions : the area around Powis Grove , Powis Villas , Powis Road and St Michael and All Angels Church is called Powis in one study of the area . Although Montpelier first appears as the name of the area on a map of 1824 , this still makes it the earliest Montpelier in England — predating those in Bristol , Cheltenham and elsewhere in taking and adapting the name of the French spa resort Montpellier . The town was popular with rich English people in the 18th century for convalescence : it had an excellent climate and good medical facilities . The term " Montpelier Estate " is sometimes used for the area as a whole . 
 = = = Demography and politics = = = 
 Montpelier and Clifton Hill are predominantly residential : about 20 % of buildings have other uses , primarily commercial and retail . Some areas have clusters of small shops , and there are many pubs and restaurants . The southern part of Montpelier is very close to Brighton 's main retail area , Western Road and the Churchill Square shopping centre . Many streets provide long southward views towards the sea . 
 The area forms part of Brighton and Hove City Council 's Regency ward , one of 21 wards in the city . This is part of the Brighton Pavilion parliamentary constituency , which elected Caroline Lucas of the Green Party at the 2010 General Election . She held the seat with an increased majority at the 2015 General Election . 
 Regency is classified as a " Prospering Metropolitan B " ward by the Office for National Statistics . 0 @.@ 91 % of the United Kingdom population live in such a ward , whose characteristics include much lower proportions of children , manufacturing sector workers , detached houses and households with more than one car than the national average , and much higher proportions of single @-@ person households , people qualified to degree level and privately rented accommodation than the average . Population density is also much higher in Prospering Metropolitan B wards than in the United Kingdom as a whole . 
 The Regency ward covers 235 @.@ 5 acres ( 95 @.@ 3 ha ) of central Brighton , bounded by Seven Dials to the north , the ancient Brighton / Hove parish boundary to the west , the English Channel to the south and Dyke Road , North Street and Old Steine to the east . It therefore includes territory that is not part of Montpelier , whose southern boundary at Western Road runs through the middle of the ward . At the time of the United Kingdom Census 2001 , for which the size of the ward was measured at 88 acres ( 36 ha ) , Regency had a population of 8 @,@ 510 . Its population density of 96 @.@ 25 persons per hectare was much higher than that of the city Brighton and Hove ( 29 @.@ 98 ) and of South East England as a whole ( 4 @.@ 2 ) . The ethnic mix is similar to that of the wider city and of South East England as a whole : in the Census , 93 @.@ 3 % of people in Regency classified themselves as White , 2 @.@ 1 % as Mixed , 1 @.@ 88 % as Asian or Asian British , 1 @.@ 79 % as Chinese or Other , and 0 @.@ 93 % as Black British . The largest differences in comparison to Brighton and Hove overall were the lower proportion of White people and the higher proportion belonging to Chinese or other ethnic groups . The gender balance is significantly different from that of the city as a whole : while 48 @.@ 38 % of Brighton and Hove 's residents were male ( as recorded by the 2001 Census ) , the proportion rose to 54 @.@ 49 % of people in Regency ward . 
 = = History = = 
 The South Downs , a range of chalk hills , surrounded the ancient fishing and farming village of Brighton ( formerly Brighthelmston ) . The downland pasture sloped down to the English Channel coast and was farmed in one of two ways : some parts were divided into strips according to a local system of " laines " , furlongs " and " paul @-@ pieces " , and other areas were left for the grazing of sheep . The area now covered by Montpelier was an example of the latter . The five laines around Brighton were based on land with a relatively gentle slope ; when the gradient or height made the land too difficult to work , no more strips were marked out and the rest of the land was given over to grazing . A map of Brighton from the 1740s shows that a large section in the northwest of the parish — north of West Laine , west of North Laine and bisected by the road to Steyning — was marked as " sheep down " . It had no official name at the time , but by 1792 it had become known as Church Hill in reference to St Nicholas ' Church , the parish church of Brighton which stood on a hillock near the road . The part west of the road was sometimes described as " Church Hill – West Side " ; the corresponding " East Side " later became known as West Hill during Brighton 's 19th @-@ century growth . The road became a turnpike in 1777 , increasing its importance , and became known as Dyke Road . Vine 's Mill , one of several windmills built on the Downs around Brighton , was erected in 1810 . 
 The sheep down was not common land : its ownership has been traced back to the 11th century ( to Canute , Earl Godwin and his son King Harold ) , and by the late 18th century it was held by two influential local landowners . Thomas Kemp held about 41 acres ( 17 ha ) , and John Sackville , 3rd Duke of Dorset owned over 5 acres ( 2 @.@ 0 ha ) . When Kemp died in 1811 , his landholding transferred to his son Thomas Read Kemp . The Kemp family first acquired the land in 1770 , when it was sold to them by the Friend family — whose history of large @-@ scale land acquisition around Brighton goes back to the late 16th century and the purchase of the former St Bartholomew 's Priory and its grounds . 
 Thomas Read Kemp had moved out of Brighton in 1807 , but decided to return in 1819 . By this time he was enjoying " a rich social life " and his considerable inherited wealth . As he owned so much land around Brighton , there were many sites he could choose for his new home ; he selected a remote site near the track ( running from the seafront to the Ditchling Road ) which later became Montpelier Road . At the time there were only three people living on the farmland of " Church Hill – West Side " , including an eccentric former marine corporal who occupied a cave in a former chalk pit . He had been invalided out of the Navy after fighting in the Battle of Copenhagen in 1801 , but retained his military interest : he made chalk models to sell , and rigged up four pistols to form a miniature battery which he would fire to celebrate military anniversaries . Read Kemp 's house , probably designed by Amon Wilds or his son Amon Henry Wilds , was called The Temple ( and was popularly nicknamed " Kemp 's Folly " or " the Brighton Mansion " ) . He may have chosen the secluded site because it was close to the chalybeate spring at St Ann 's Well in the neighbouring parish of Hove , popularised by Dr Richard Russell in the 1750s but known to generations of shepherds before that for the health @-@ giving effect it had on their sheep . The iron @-@ rich water was used in " a primitive little spa " for about 100 years , and the associated Pump Room and gardens were popular with visitors long after that . 
 The increasing popularity of Brighton as a resort resulted in an " exponential growth in housing " . In 1783 , just after the first expansion outside the ancient four @-@ street village , there were 600 houses ; in 1801 there were 1 @,@ 282 , by 1811 another 1 @,@ 096 had been completed , and in 1821 there were 4 @,@ 299 . The land of Church Hill was ideal for development — land ownership was not complex , unlike in many of the laines , and the sheltered southwest @-@ facing slopes were close to both St Ann 's Well and the centre of Brighton 's fashionable social scene around Old Steine . The area developed rapidly as a residential district from the 1820s , and was one of the earliest of Brighton 's many 19th @-@ century suburbs . From 1823 , Read Kemp became heavily involved in his speculative Kemp Town estate on the edge of Brighton , and he moved to a house there in 1827 ( after which The Temple became a boys ' school ) . He began selling plots of land throughout the area , and streets and areas of housing took shape . Montpelier Road was one of the first to develop , on the site of the long track which had given Read Kemp access to the seafront from his house ; it is not named before 1820 , but it appears on a map of 1822 . Houses such as numbers 53 – 56 , by Amon Henry Wilds , and the semi @-@ detached villas of numbers 91 – 96 , date from about 1830 . Hampton Place , a sloping terrace of " especially pretty houses " , was an 1820s development by speculator William Hallett , who occupied one of the houses himself . Around the same time , Amon Henry Wilds and Charles Busby built several houses on a former track which became Clifton Road , and work started at Montpelier Terrace with the construction of a pair of villas in 1823 . Montpelier Lodge ( c . 1830 ) on Montpelier Terrace stood out from the surrounding stuccoed buildings due to its red @-@ brick walls ; it also had an elaborate entrance with Doric columns and a delicately patterned fanlight . 
 Development accelerated after Thomas Read Kemp was declared bankrupt in 1837 , forcing him to sell all his land and move to France . Parcels of land were rapidly developed with terraced streets ( especially to the south , leading up from Western Road ) and set @-@ piece squares and crescents . The Temple was still isolated until 1834 – 35 , when the firm of George Cheesman & Son built a new vicarage for the Vicar of Brighton Henry Michell Wagner . The " austere Neo @-@ Tudor " house stood back from the nearest road . In about 1840 , Wagner 's sister moved to the newly built Belvedere House nearby , and encouraged development of the adjacent road which became Montpelier Place . ( The four @-@ storey houses of Belvedere Terrace were built on her behalf in the grounds of Belvedere House in about 1852 . ) 
 Brighton was connected to the railway network in 1840 when a line to Shoreham @-@ by @-@ Sea opened , followed in 1841 by the completion of the link to London . This stimulated growth even further , and the 1840s were a boom period for Montpelier . ( Brighton as a whole grew rapidly in the 1840s — between 1841 and 1851 , 2 @,@ 806 new houses were built compared to 437 for the preceding decade — but the effect was greater in Montpelier because the station was close by at the foot of West Hill . ) During the 1840s , Montpelier Villas and Montpelier Crescent were laid out , several houses were built in Clifton Road , Montpelier Road and Montpelier Terrace were fully built up , Upper North Street became an important route lined with " modest yet grandly treated " houses , the " very attractive composition " of Clifton Terrace was built ( it was finished in 1847 ) , Victoria Street was laid out with bay @-@ fronted terraced houses , and Windlesham House was constructed near The Temple . This became the New Sussex Hospital in 1921 after alterations by the Clayton & Black architecture firm , but is now flats called Temple Heights . 
 Developments in the 1850s included Powis Square , Villas and Road , Norfolk Terrace and Vernon Terrace . The Powis area took its name from property developer John Yearsley , who was from Welshpool in Powys . Yearsley bought several acres of land on a leasehold basis from the Kemp family in 1846 ; he acquired the freehold soon after . ( Thomas Read Kemp died in France in 1844 , seven years after leaving Brighton to escape his debts . ) Land was also acquired and developed by the prominent Hallett , Wisden , Baring and Faithfull families . ( The Baring baronets were related to Thomas Read Kemp by marriage ; Henry Faithfull , who worked with Yearsley to develop the Powis area , was the brother of MP George Faithfull ; and Thomas and John Wisden were prolific builders . ) 
 Denmark Terrace , a continuation of Vernon Terrace , was erected in the 1860s ; at its south end it met Temple Gardens , the road on which The Temple stood . Also of the 1860s were parts of Norfolk Road ( where development had started 30 years before ) , St Michael 's Place ( 1868 – 69 ) with terraced houses " impressive in their length and height " , and some infill development in Montpelier Terrace , Clifton Place , Powis Road and Vernon Terrace . Montpelier 's residential development was nearly complete by the 1870s , as suggested by an Ordnance Survey map of that time which shows undeveloped fields only in the area beyond Vernon Terrace . In 1870 or 1871 , Brighton Children 's Hospital — established three years earlier in Western Road — moved to a new building on the site of the former Church Road School in West Hill . In 1880 – 81 , Thomas Lainson built the new Royal Alexandra Hospital for Sick Children nearby at the junction of Dyke Road and Clifton Hill . It was extended and altered in 1904 , 1906 and 1927 – 28 . 
 Some more houses were built in the Edwardian era , mostly in the characteristic Edwardian style with bright red brick " standing out amongst the stucco " . Examples include some in Temple Gardens and Vernon Gardens in the 1890s , a row on one side of Denmark Terrace , Windlesham Road ( where numbers 14 and 16 , built in 1903 , are especially elaborate ) and 18 – 25 Clifton Road ( 1903 – 04 , with ornate gables and turreted corners ) . In 1902 , the London & Brighton Express Electric Railway Company sought permission to build a new surface railway line from Westminster to a terminus near the junction of Montpelier Road and Western Road , passing Clifton Hill . Hove Council supported the parliamentary Bill , but nothing came of it ; when the promoters proposed it again in 1903 , the council were no longer interested . 
 Additions and alterations to the streetscape have been minimal since the early 20th century . Windlesham House became the New Sussex Hospital for Women in 1921 following alterations by Clayton & Black , who similarly rebuilt a 19th @-@ century house on Montpelier Road as a chapel for Brighton 's Christian Scientist community in the same year . The hospital was extended to the rear in the 1930s ( but new flats called York Mansions were built on the site in 2001 ) , and the Royal Alexandra Hospital absorbed a neighbouring villa . Additions to the Brighton & Hove High School , which had taken over The Temple , included a " drab " set of classrooms in the 1960s , a later administration block and a glazed sports hall in 2001 – 02 ( the last two were designed by architects Morgan Carn Partnership ) . <unk> included the former Emanuel Reformed Episcopal Church on Norfolk Terrace ( replaced by a Baptist church ) in 1965 , The Dials Congregational Church in 1972 ( built in 1871 ; replaced by sheltered accommodation ) and Belvedere House ( replaced in the 1970s by the Park Royal flats ) . Other blocks of flats were built in that decade on spare land on Montpelier Terrace and Clifton Terrace . 
 = = Buildings = = 
 = = = Churches = = = 
 The Montpelier and Clifton Hill areas have four extant churches and one former church building which is now in secular use . Three of these buildings have listed status . Another three churches were demolished in the postwar period . 
 The Anglican St Michael and All Angels Church has been a centre of Anglo @-@ Catholicism and High church worship since it opened in 1861 . It was one of several daughter churches planted out of St Paul 's Church in the early Victorian era . George Frederick Bodley designed the original building on behalf of his friend Rev. Charles <unk> , a curate at St Paul 's , and work started in 1858 . William Burges then supplied plans for an extension in 1865 , but these were not executed until 1893 – 95 by J.S. Chapple , an architect from the recently deceased Burges ' office . The two parts are connected by a four @-@ bay arcade inside , and Bodley 's original nave has become an aisle . The building is a tall red @-@ brick and stone Gothic Revival structure with traceried lancet windows . The internal fittings combine " grandeur and artistry in a most satisfying way " , and the 19th @-@ century stained glass has been called the best in Sussex . The church is Grade I @-@ listed . 
 St Mary Magdalen 's Church , another brick and stone Gothic Revival building , was designed for the area 's Roman Catholics in 1861 – 64 by Gilbert Blount . Frederick Walters added a complementary school and presbytery in 1871 and 1891 respectively , and the complex takes up a large site on Upper North Street . A tall tower with a landmark broach spire stands almost separated from the Decorated Gothic nave and chancel . The interior has contrasting stone ( intricately carved to Blount 's designs ) and marble , and Joseph Cribb carved the effigies of Saint Joseph and Saint George which flank the entrance . St Mary Magdalen 's has Grade II @-@ listed status . 
 The First Church of Christ , Scientist , serving the city 's Christian Scientists , is a " notable " former house on Montpelier Road . It was built in the early 1850s and was converted into a church by local architects Clayton & Black in 1921 . The exterior is rusticated and has an elaborate pediment and large pilasters flanking the tiered windows . A panelled gallery survives inside . 
 E. Joseph Wood 's Montpelier Place Baptist Church of 1966 replaced the former Emanuel Reformed Episcopal Church . The low brown @-@ brick building stands on a corner site at the top of Norfolk Terrace . There are echoes of Coventry Cathedral in the treatment of the façade , which has two gabled bays linked by an arcaded wall with a sawtooth @-@ style roof . Each bay has vertical rows of recessed bricks . A flat @-@ roofed church hall adjoins . 
 The Grade II * -listed former St Stephen 's Church on Montpelier Place closed in 1939 and is now used as a day centre for homeless people . George Cheesman designed the plain stuccoed Classical façade , with Doric pilasters and an octagonal lantern , in 1851 . Behind it lies the opulent former ballroom of the Castle Inn , built by John <unk> in 1776 and later transported to Montpelier Place . Arthur Blomfield made additions to the church in 1889 . It was refurbished after a fire in 1988 . 
 Christ Church stood on Montpelier Road south of Western Road between 1837 and 1982 . George Cheesman designed it and Edmund Scott undertook restoration in 1886 ; both architects worked on other local churches as well . The Gothic Revival building had a galleried interior and a spire matching that at Chichester Cathedral . It was gutted in an arson attack in 1978 ; the exterior survived , but it was demolished in 1982 in favour of the International / Modern @-@ style Christ Church House flats . The congregation of the church moved to nearby St Patrick 's Church . 
 The Dials Congregational Church stood at the junction of Clifton Road and Dyke Road ( the site of the present <unk> House ) between 1870 and 1972 , although it closed in 1969 . Its 150 @-@ foot ( 46 m ) " Rhenish helm " <unk> clock tower was prominent on the skyline , and behind was a large horseshoe @-@ shaped auditorium . The Romanesque Revival building , described as " uncouth " by Nikolaus Pevsner , was designed by Thomas Simpson . Work on <unk> House , a sheltered housing scheme , began in 1985 . 
 Norfolk Road Methodist Church , designed by C.O. Ellison , stood on Norfolk Road from 1868 until 1965 . It was a large Early English / Decorated Gothic Revival flint and stone building with a tower and spire , and it had an extensive array of stained glass . Externally and internally — where the main aisle led the eye to the central altar , and the lectern and pulpit stood to one side — there was little to distinguish it from an Anglican church , and it was known as the " Methodist Cathedral of the South " . Demographic changes meant the congregation dwindled , and the church closed in 1964 and was demolished the following year to be replaced by Braemar House , a large block of flats with a " bland red @-@ brick façade " . 
 = = = Other public buildings = = = 
 The Royal Alexandra Hospital for Sick Children , " an important part of Brighton life and a well known local landmark " , was officially opened on 21 July 1881 and was used until 22 June 2007 , when a new children 's hospital opened on the Royal Sussex County Hospital campus elsewhere in the city . Designed by Thomas Lainson , it was a three @-@ storey Queen Anne @-@ style building of red brick with terracotta dressings and mouldings , enlivened by Dutch gables , cupolas and a moulded cartouche . Extensions included a colonnade of balconies ( later enclosed ) by the Clayton & Black firm in 1906 and a Vernacular @-@ style recessed wing of two storeys in 1927 – 28 , partly tile @-@ hung and with timber decoration to the gables . The first mention of its potential closure came in 2001 , when the Government allocated £ 28 million towards new facilities at the Royal Sussex County Hospital on Eastern Road in Kemptown . By 2004 , it seemed likely that the building would be demolished and the site redeveloped with luxury flats . Montpelier residents were unsuccessful in their attempt to get the former hospital listed by English Heritage , who stated that Lainson 's original design had been altered so much that much of its character had been lost . Taylor Wimpey , a housebuilding company , bought the hospital in December 2006 , but their proposals to clear the site and build a combined residential development and GP surgery were refused twice by the city council , in 2007 and 2008 . In 2009 Taylor Wimpey appealed against the latest refusal to grant planning permission for 149 flats and a four @-@ day public inquiry was held at Brighton Town Hall in May 2009 . The local conservation group , the Montpelier and Clifton Hill Association , led the opposition to Taylor Wimpey 's plans to demolish the hospital . The planning inspector , John Papworth , turned down Taylor Wimpey 's appeal , praising the architectural quality of Thomas Lainson 's main building . " I consider that the main block and particularly its southern façade and the southern end of the Dyke Road frontage contribute positively to the character and appearance of the conservation area , ” said Papworth . In 2010 Taylor Wimpey abandoned its plans to clear the site and put forward a compromise plan , which kept the main Lainson building but demolished the later ancillary buildings on the site . This plan , which was supported by the Montpelier and Clifton Hill Association was approved by the council in 2011 . Flats on the site went on sale ( marketed as Royal Alexandra Quarter ) in 2012 . The iconic main hospital building , to be called the Lainson building , is currently being restored and converted to provide 20 flats . 
 The Temple , now the main part of Brighton and Hove High School , was built in 1818 – 19 by Amon Wilds or his son Amon Henry Wilds , and has been described as " certainly exotic enough for their tastes " . The Wilds , along with Charles Busby , were the three architects most closely associated with the development of Brighton and Hove in the Regency era and the exuberant , confident and strongly planned architecture which still characterises the city . The Temple was an early commission : they only moved to Brighton in 1814 . The north and east walls retain their original appearance : long colonnades are formed by a series of arches on top of paired vertical features of " bizarre form " . These have unusual capitals and have been described as resembling Egyptian @-@ style pilasters or engaged columns . The west and south façades also had these , but the building was drastically altered in 1911 – 12 : the domed roof was replaced by a mansard , a curious central spiral staircase housed in a cylindrical structure was removed , and chimneys were taken away . The dimensions of the building match those of Solomon 's Temple in Jerusalem . The Temple is a Grade II listed building , and the large flint and brick wall surrounding the building is also listed at Grade II ; it is decorated with stone lion heads . An extension was also built at the southwest corner in 1891 . 
 Junior pupils shared the building with the senior school until 1904 , after which they moved several times : to Norfolk Terrace , Montpelier Crescent , the former vicarage ( in 1922 ) and finally to new facilities in Hove . The former vicarage is now the school 's sixth @-@ form . George Cheesman & Son designed it on behalf of Vicar of Brighton Henry Michell Wagner in 1834 – 35 ; it is a stuccoed building with prominent gables and windows with mullions and transoms . An ornate staircase survives inside . 
 = = = Residential squares and terraces = = = 
 = = = = Clifton Terrace = = = = 
 This runs east – wast across the slope of the hill , and has private gardens on the site of the former windmill which moved to Albion Hill in 1837 . Most construction work took place in 1846 – 47 , but the 23 @-@ house terrace and its gardens were not finished until 1851 . The houses combine the Regency @-@ style " gaiety and exuberance " with the " charm and vigour " of Victorian architecture , and the use of angled bay windows set below tented canopies is a late example of this distinctive local practice . Each house is built as a villa , mostly with a three @-@ window range shared across two neighbouring houses ( the middle window is blank ) . Numbers 12 – 14 project slightly and are taller . The houses are raised above the roadway , giving views into the private gardens on the south side and " a commanding view of the sea " . Number 25 , which stands separately and was also listed , was originally the Clifton Arms pub . 
 = = = = Denmark Terrace = = = = 
 The " heavy Italianate detailing " of the large four @-@ storey bay @-@ fronted houses on the east side identifies them as 1860s buildings . There are prominent cornices and pairs of porches whose style is reminiscent of the work of 18th @-@ century architect James Gibbs , and some houses are also linked by iron balconies on the top floor ( a balcony runs along the whole length of the terrace at first @-@ floor level ) . " <unk> " red @-@ brick Edwardian houses face the terrace . 
 = = = = Montpelier Crescent = = = = 
 Described as " the one great showpiece of the area " and " the grandest of [ Amon Henry Wilds ' ] many works " , this crescent was developed over about 12 years from 1843 . The main section , numbers 7 – 31 , was built between 1843 and 1847 and is Grade II * -listed . A further 13 houses ( listed at Grade II ) were added in four blocks , two at each end , in about 1855 . The houses are arranged as linked villas , alternating between triplets and pairs : this layout is unique , and the placement of the crescent to face inland towards the South Downs rather than the sea is also unusual . Most houses are of five bays with a central pediment . <unk> entrances , Corinthian pilasters topped by ammonite capitals and decorative mouldings characterise the houses . The gardens in front of the crescent are an important area of open space within the conservation area . 
 = = = = Montpelier Villas = = = = 
 Ten pairs of " delightful " semi @-@ detached villas , five on each side of the road , make up this mid @-@ 1840s development by Amon Henry Wilds . They are in the Italianate style with influences of Regency architecture , and have two bow windows with bonnet @-@ style canopies above , stuccoed walls with extensive rustication , prominently bracketed eaves and cast iron balconies . The " charming " houses are set in spacious plots in a former bluebell wood . The street was completed over the course of three years from about 1845 . All of the villas are listed buildings . 
 = = = = Norfolk Terrace , Norfolk Road and Belvedere Terrace = = = = 
 Norfolk Terrace is an 1850s development . On the west side , the first ( northernmost ) 13 houses are a tall terrace by Thomas Lainson , arranged as four pairs of flat @-@ fronted houses with a wider central elevation whose windows are large and round @-@ arched . The building is in the Italianate style . South of that , the next six houses ( with segmental bay windows and cast iron balconies ) have become the Abbey Hotel . Belvedere Terrace , built in 1852 for Mary Wagner , forms part of the east side of the road . It has four storeys , bow windows and balconies at first @-@ floor level . Two blocks of flats now occupy the site of Belvedere House , demolished in 1965 , but its cobbled flint garden wall survives . Various smaller @-@ scale houses , some of which are listed , line Norfolk Road , which developed between the 1830s and the 1860s ; canted bay windows and cast iron balconies are characteristic features . The street used to be called Chalybeate Street . 
 = = = = Powis Grove , Road , Square and Villas = = = = 
 Powis Square is a rare example in Brighton of a fully enclosed inland square : most such developments are on the seafront , and its architectural details and scale are similar to these . It is horseshoe @-@ shaped , and one side is formed by Powis Road . The square was developed by John Yearsley over a few years around 1850 : the leasehold to the land was granted on 17 September 1846 , and in 1852 seven people had moved in and another 14 houses were built but unoccupied . In some cases façades were built first and the structure of the house came later . A builder called Stephen Davey was responsible for many of the houses , which were originally planned to be flat @-@ fronted but which were given bow fronts when built . They rise to three storeys and have features of Georgian , Victorian and Palladian design . A small garden in the centre of the square , taken over by Brighton Corporation in 1887 , enhances its intimate scale . Powis Road 's houses are not listed , unlike those of Powis Square , and were built a decade later . They also have three storeys , and their façades have canted bay windows and cast iron balconies . St Michael and All Angels Church stands at the southern end . Powis Grove leads through to the east side of Powis Square and has various buildings of the mid 19th @-@ century , and Powis Villas has some listed detached and semi @-@ detached houses of the 1850s and a short terrace with a long canopied veranda . 
 = = = = Vernon Terrace = = = = 
 This long , tall terrace of houses blocked the view of the South Downs that Montpelier Crescent had when it was first built . Along with the crescent , it forms " a townscape of outstanding quality " . Only the west side of the road has houses , as the open space outside Montpelier Crescent fronts the east side . The terrace is in two parts : that to the south dates from the 1850s and is Grade II @-@ listed in two parts . Numbers 1 – 6 have been dated to about 1860 and rise to three storeys ( except numbers 1 and 6 , which have an extra storey ) . Their individual detailing is slightly different , but pilastered doorcases , architraves , first @-@ floor cast iron balconies and small pediments above the windows are common themes . Numbers 7 – 16 date from 1856 – 57 and are each of four storeys with a three @-@ window range ; there is a mixture of bow windows and canted bays . Many windows have architraves and cornices , and there are bow @-@ fronted cast iron balconies at first @-@ floor level ( and to the second and third floors at number 8 ) . 
 = = = Windmills = = = 
 Vine 's Mill , a post mill , only took that name in 1818 . William Vine moved to the area from Patcham , where he had previously been a miller , in August 1818 , having bought the mill at a recent auction . A house came with the windmill ; it survives under the name " Rose Cottage " on Vine Place , which also took its name from him ( it was previously called Mill Place ) . A storm in 1828 damaged the mill , but it was repaired . It was the subject of two paintings by Constable in the 1820s and a locally famous watercolour by Henry Bodle , who married into the Vine family , in 1843 . By this time Vine had died and the mill had been bought by Edward <unk> of Round Hill . It was demolished in 1849 or 1850 , and the gardens at 6 and 7 Powis Villas now occupy the site . 
 A second windmill stood nearby and has been confused with Vine 's Mill in some sources . It is missed off most maps and has been called " something of an enigma " . It was a fan @-@ tailed post mill , larger than Vine 's Mill and of a more modern design — although one historian stated that it existed in 1780 . It did not receive an official name until the mid @-@ 19th century , by which time it had been moved to Windmill Street on Albion Hill in the Carlton Hill area of Brighton : because it had stood where the private gardens of Clifton Terrace were later built , it became known as the Clifton Gardens Mill . The Windmill Inn on Upper North Street , licensed in 1828 , is close to the site of both mills ; sources disagree on which one it was named after . 
 = = = The Coach House = = = 
 Now a Grade II listed building , The Coach House stands on Clifton Hill . It was built as the coach house of Aberdeen Lodge ( now 5 Powis Villas ) . Statue @-@ maker Joseph Rogers Browne built this house for himself , along with the neighbouring villas at numbers 6 and 7 . He later wanted accommodation for his carriages , so in 1852 he erected the brick , flint and stucco building with space for two coaches and three horses . There was also a hay loft and a separate room for the coachman , and the exterior had Coade stone decoration . By the 1920s it had become a garage ; in 1937 , after this closed , the Royal Alexandra Children 's Hospital bought it and used it to store their ambulances . Local conservationists set up a limited company , which bought the building in 2006 , intending to turn it into a community centre and museum ; but it was repossessed in 2008 and was thereafter used for storage by a clothes shop . In its assessment of the building 's architectural importance when granting listed status in 2005 , English Heritage described it as a " substantially intact and rare survival " with " polite architectural and sculptural features " . 
 = = Heritage and conservation area = = 
 A building or structure is defined as " listed " when it is placed on a statutory register of buildings of " special architectural or historic interest " by the Secretary of State for Culture , Media and Sport , a Government department , in accordance with the Planning ( Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas ) Act 1990 . English Heritage , a non @-@ departmental public body , acts as an agency of this department to administer the process and advise the department on relevant issues . As of February 2001 , there were 24 listed buildings with Grade I status , 70 Grade II * -listed and 1 @,@ 124 Grade II @-@ listed buildings in Brighton and Hove . Grade I @-@ listed buildings are defined as being of " exceptional interest " and greater than national importance ; Grade II * , the next highest status , is used for " particularly important buildings of more than special interest " ; and the lowest grade , Grade II , is used for " nationally important buildings of special interest " . Many of Montpelier 's buildings are listed : in 1981 , 320 individual buildings were covered by an English Heritage listing , and the figure in 2010 was 351 . 
 In the United Kingdom , a conservation area is a principally urban area " of special architectural or historic interest , the character or appearance of which it is desirable to preserve or enhance " . Such areas are identified by local authorities according to criteria defined by Sections 69 and 70 of the Planning ( Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas ) Act 1990 . The Montpelier & Clifton Hill conservation area , one of 34 in the city of Brighton and Hove , was created in 1973 . Its boundaries were extended in 1977 , and it now covers 75 @.@ 4 acres ( 30 @.@ 5 ha ) . 
 = = Notable residents = = 
 Many famous people have lived in Montpelier . Sara Forbes Bonetta , an African princess who became a favourite of Queen Victoria , lived at 17 Clifton Hill prior to her marriage at St Nicholas ' Church in 1862 to a merchant who lived at Victoria Road ; she was unhappy in Brighton , describing the house as a " desolate little pigsty " . Frederick William Robertson , a preacher , theologian and divine whose ministry at Brighton 's Holy Trinity Church was nationally famous , lived at 9 Montpelier Terrace from 1847 until 1850 , then at 60 Montpelier Road until his death in 1853 . Another resident of Montpelier Road was Dr William King , an important figure in the British cooperative movement , who owned number 23 . Eleanor Marx lived at 6 Vernon Terrace for a time in the late 19th century . Screenwriter Edward Knoblock 's home was at 20 Clifton Terrace , and another resident of that street was playwright and author Alan Melville : he lived at number 17 from 1951 until 1973 and then at 28 Victoria Street until his death in 1983 . Author Francis King lived at 17 Montpelier Villas , close to the 5 Powis Grove home of former MP Thomas Skeffington @-@ Lodge . He look legal action after noticing an " unflattering " resemblance to himself in King 's 1970 novel A Domestic Animal ; King had to sell his house to pay the legal costs after losing the case . Journalist and television personality Gilbert Harding — " the most @-@ watched man on British television " during the 1950s — lived at 20 Montpelier Villas until his death in 1960 . Bandleader Ray Noble 's birthplace , 1 Montpelier Terrace , has a blue plaque commemorating his time in Brighton . 
 = Hustler 's Ambition = 
 " Hustler 's Ambition " is a song by American rapper 50 Cent . Written by 50 Cent and produced by B @-@ Money " B $ " , the song was released as the first single from the soundtrack to the film Get Rich or Die Tryin ' ( 2005 ) . Built around a soul – influenced production sampling the Frankie Beverly and Maze song " I Need You " , " Hustler 's Ambition " features lyrics regarding 50 Cent 's rise to fortune and fame , intended to mirror the experience faced by 50 Cent 's character in the film : it marks a shift from influence of hardcore hip hop present in 50 Cent 's earlier work . " Hustler 's Ambition " was released to digital retailers in the United States in October 2005 via Interscope Records , with a CD release following in February 2006 . 
 The song received generally favorable reviews from music critics , many of whom complimented the soulful production and 50 Cent 's delivery . Some also found the song to be more musically diverse than the music 50 Cent recorded at the beginning of his career . The song achieved commercial success on a number of music charts , reaching the top 25 of charts across Europe and Australasia , although it only reached number 65 on the US Billboard Hot 100 , making it one of 50 Cent 's least successful songs in the country . A music video for " Hustler 's Ambition " was directed by Anthony Mandler , and shows 50 Cent performing the song inside a warehouse whilst preparing for a boxing match . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 In late 2003 , following the commercial success achieved by 50 Cent 's debut studio album Get Rich or Die Tryin ' , Interscope Records head Jimmy Iovine asserted that 50 Cent had a high enough profile to move into making films . Plans for a film were revealed the following year , when 50 Cent revealed that he would be writing and directing his first motion picture , a semi @-@ autobiographical work based on his difficult childhood experiences , with the Oscar @-@ nominated director Jim Sheridan assisting in the production of the film . The film was originally known under the title Locked and Loaded , although this later became Get Rich or Die Tryin ' . Get Rich or Die Tryin ' was released to cinemas in 2005 , and received generally mixed reviews from contemporary film critics . 
 50 Cent wrote the whole of " Hustler 's Ambition " during a break from filming Get Rich or Die Tryin ' in his trailer on the set of the film . The song 's title was to match that of the film , which had the other working title of Hustler 's Ambition at the time , although the then upcoming release of the film Hustle & Flow , which featured Terrence Howard , a co @-@ star of Get Rich or Die Tryin ' , in its cast led 50 Cent to change the title of the film . American soul singer Frankie Beverly is also credited as having written " Hustler 's Ambition " , as a sample of his song " I Need You " – a collaboration with funk group Maze from their 1978 album Golden Time of Day – is included in the song 's introduction . The production for " Hustler 's Ambition " was provided by record producer Brian Hughes under his production name B @-@ Money " B $ " , with recording carried out by Ky Miller at G @-@ Unit Studios – a recording studio in New York City . The song 's mixing process was carried out by Pat <unk> , with mastering handled by Brian " Big Bass " Gardner . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " Hustler 's Ambition " is a hip hop song of three minutes and fifty @-@ seven seconds in length . After opening with a sample of the Frankie Beverly and Maze song " I Need You " , the instrumentation provided by B @-@ Money " B $ " is built around a " solid bassline " , and features background vocals that harmonize with 50 Cent 's voice . As with much of the material from earlier in 50 Cent 's career , the song follows a rags to riches theme of " getting rich or dying trying " , according to Azeem Ahmad of musicOMH . 50 Cent 's lyrics muse " exactly how far he wants to go " in the entertainment business following his rapid rise to fame over the preceding two years , as well as his believed superiority to other contemporary artists : " Look at me , this is the life I chose / Niggaz around me so cold , man my heart done froze ... I 'm just triple beam , dreamin / niggaz be , <unk> " . Writing for The Michigan Daily , Andrew Kahn noted the " old @-@ school , pre @-@ fame hunger " present in " Hustler 's Ambition " due to the use of the " I Need You " sample . Steve Juon of RapReviews commented on 50 Cent 's enunciation on the song , observing how the background vocals " never distract from 50 's words " and that his " skills as an orator helped him rise to his current station in life " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Hustler 's Ambition " received generally favourable reviews from music critics . David Jeffries of AllMusic called the song " a clever number " and compared it to the material found on 50 Cent 's debut album , Get Rich or Die Tryin ' , commenting that it " recall [ s ] the looser moments of his debut " . Although Azeem Ahmad noted " Hustler 's Ambition " to be more musically diverse that 50 Cent 's previous work in his review of the song for musicOMH , he also wrote that " it 's hardly inspiring to those expecting a slice of raw hip @-@ hop " , although he concluded that that the song sounded better after repeated listenings and that 50 Cent had " once again hit the jackpot " . Andrew Kahn of The Michigan Daily felt the song to be " by far [ his ] best solo song on the album " , and also wrote that it sounded " superior to most of The Massacre 's tracks " . In his review for the Get Rich or Die Tryin ' soundtrack for PopMatters , Mike Schiller observed that " Hustler 's Ambition " effectively represents the struggles that 50 Cent 's character faces in the corresponding film , pointing out that it emphasizes his " hunger for money " and also noted the song to be a " subtle shift in perspective " of 50 Cent 's music , in that it had moved from " club bangers that serve no particular purpose other than to get people dancing " to " raps ... spit through the voice of a fictionalized version of his own younger self " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Despite being released in the wake of several commercially prosperous singles from 50 Cent 's preceding studio album , The Massacre ( 2005 ) , including " Candy Shop " and " Just a Lil Bit " , " Hustler 's Ambition " did not match the chart success of previous 50 Cent singles . In the United States , the song first appeared at number 4 on the US Bubbling Under R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles chart for the week ending October 22 , 2005 , and debuted at number 22 on the US Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart the following week . It debuted at number 73 on the US Billboard Hot 100 for the chart dated November 5 , 2005 , and went on to peak at number 65 , making it 50 Cent 's second lowest peaking song at the time , behind only the 2004 single " If I Can 't " , which reached number 76 . It also reached a peak of number 64 on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , and number 49 on the now @-@ defunct US Pop 100 chart . 
 Outside the United States , " Hustler 's Ambition " was also modestly commercially successful , although it achieved little <unk> on the charts . It debuted and peaked at number 23 in Australia for the week dated March 5 , 2006 , charting for a total of seven weeks , and appeared at number 17 in New Zealand on March 20 in its first of five chart appearances . The song made appearances on several singles charts in mainland Europe , peaking at number 41 in Austria , number 22 in Germany and number 40 in The Netherlands . The song 's highest peak position was achieved in Switzerland , where it debuted and reached its peak of number 10 , and charted at number 39 in the Flanders region of Belgium and number 25 in the Wallonia region . In the British Isles , " Hustler 's Ambition " reached number 11 on Ireland and peaked at number 13 in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Music video = = 
 A music video for " Hustler 's Ambition " was directed by Anthony Mandler , and is of four minutes and 54 seconds in length . It opens with an off @-@ camera monologue from 50 Cent , explaining the hardships often faced by those in poorer communities , whilst – on @-@ camera this time – he enters a warehouse , passing two men as he arrives , containing several pieces of recording equipment . Shots of 50 Cent travelling around the warehouse are then interspersed with those of him performing " Hustler 's Ambition " into a microphone : after arriving in one room , he is shown to be repeatedly hitting a punching bag and lifting weights , as he trains for an upcoming boxing match . 
 Other members of G @-@ Unit Records , including singer Olivia , are then shown to be present in the warehouse as 50 Cent continues to perform the song . Arriving at another boxing match and watching it from a balcony , 50 Cent recognizes a member of the crowd as one of the men he saw outside the warehouse : he then leaves the warehouse , with the video concluding with the fight ending and 50 Cent facing the camera on the street outside the warehouse . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download ( United States ) 
 " Hustler 's Ambition " – 3 : 58 
 " Hustler 's Ambition " ( Clean Version ) – 3 : 58 
 CD single ( Germany ) 
 " Hustler 's Ambition " – 3 : 58 
 " In da Club " ( Live Glasgow Version ) – 3 : 06 
 " <unk> " ( Live Glasgow Version ) – 2 : 42 
 " Hustler 's Ambition " ( UK Edit Version ) ( Video ) – 4 : 55 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 The credits for " Hustler 's Ambition " are adapted from the liner notes of the soundtrack to Get Rich or Die Tryin ' . 
 Recording 
 Recorded at G @-@ Unit Studios , New York City . 
 Personnel 
 50 Cent – songwriting , vocals 
 B @-@ Money " B $ " – songwriting , production 
 Frankie Beverly – songwriting 
 Ky Miller – recording 
 Pat <unk> – mixing 
 Brian " Big Bass " Gardner – mastering 
 Samples 
 Contains a sample of " I Need You " , as written by Frankie Beverly and performed by Frankie Beverly & Maze . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = German destroyer Z2 Georg Thiele = 
 The German destroyer Z2 Georg Thiele was a Type 1934 destroyer built for the Kriegsmarine in the mid @-@ 1930s . At the beginning of World War II , the ship was initially deployed to blockade the Polish coast , but she was quickly transferred to the German Bight to lay minefields in German waters . During the early stages of the Norwegian Campaign , Georg Thiele fought in both naval Battles of Narvik and had to be beached to allow her crew to abandon ship safely after she had been severely damaged by British fire . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Georg Thiele had an overall length of 119 meters ( 390 ft 5 in ) and was 114 meters ( 374 ft 0 in ) long at the waterline . The ship had a beam of 11 @.@ 30 meters ( 37 ft 1 in ) , and a maximum draft of 4 @.@ 23 meters ( 13 ft 11 in ) . She displaced 2 @,@ 223 long tons ( 2 @,@ 259 t ) at standard load and 3 @,@ 156 long tons ( 3 @,@ 207 t ) at deep load . The two Wagner geared steam turbine sets , each driving one propeller shaft , were designed to produce 70 @,@ 000 PS ( 51 @,@ 000 kW ; 69 @,@ 000 shp ) using steam provided by six high @-@ pressure Wagner boilers . The ship had a designed speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) , but her maximum speed was 38 @.@ 7 knots ( 71 @.@ 7 km / h ; 44 @.@ 5 mph ) . Georg Thiele carried a maximum of 752 metric tons ( 740 long tons ) of fuel oil which was intended to give a range of 4 @,@ 400 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 100 km ; 5 @,@ 100 mi ) at a speed of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) , but the ship proved top @-@ heavy in service and 30 % of the fuel had to be retained as ballast low in the ship . The effective range proved to be only 1 @,@ 530 nmi ( 2 @,@ 830 km ; 1 @,@ 760 mi ) at 19 knots . 
 The ship carried five 12 @.@ 7 cm SK C / 34 guns in single mounts with gun shields , two each superimposed , fore and aft . The fifth gun was carried on top of the aft superstructure . Her anti @-@ aircraft armament consisted of four 3 @.@ 7 cm SK C / 30 guns in two twin mounts abreast the rear funnel and six 2 cm C / 30 guns in single mounts . Georg Thiele carried eight above @-@ water 53 @.@ 3 @-@ centimeter ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes in two power @-@ operated mounts . A pair of reload torpedoes were provided for each mount . Four depth charge throwers were mounted on the sides of the rear deckhouse and they were supplemented by six racks for individual depth charges on the sides of the stern . Enough depth charges were carried for either two or four patterns of 16 charges each . Mine rails could be fitted on the rear deck that had a maximum capacity of 60 mines . A system of passive hydrophones designated as ' GHG ' ( Gruppenhorchgerät ) was fitted to detect submarines . The crew numbered 10 officers and 315 enlisted men , plus an additional four officers and 19 enlisted men if serving as a flotilla flagship . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 The ship was ordered on 7 July 1934 and laid down at Deutsche Werke , Kiel , on 25 October 1934 as yard number <unk> . She was launched on 18 August 1935 and completed on 27 February 1937 . The ship was named after Lieutenant Commander ( <unk> ) Georg Thiele who commanded the Seventh Half Flotilla of torpedo boats in the Battle off Texel in October 1914 . Georg Thiele was assigned to the 1st Destroyer Division on 1 December 1937 and made a port visit to Ulvik , Norway in April 1938 , together with her sisters Z3 Max Schultz and Z4 Richard Beitzen . Upon her return she was taken in hand by Deutsche Werke to have her bow rebuilt to reduce the amount of water that came over the bow in head seas . This increased her length by .30 meters ( 1 ft 0 in ) . The ship participated in the 22 August Fleet Review for Adolf Hitler and Miklós Horthy , Regent of the Kingdom of Hungary , and the following fleet exercise . In December , Georg Thiele , together with her sisters Z3 Leberecht Maass , Max Schultz , and Richard Beitzen , sailed to the area of Iceland to evaluate their seaworthiness in a North Atlantic winter with their new bows . On 23 – 24 March 1939 , the ship was one of the destroyers that escorted Hitler aboard the pocket battleship Deutschland to occupy Memel . She participated in the Spring fleet exercise in the western Mediterranean and made several visits to Spanish and Moroccan ports in April and May . Days before the outbreak of World War II , in the early morning hours of 27 August 1939 , Max Schultz accidentally collided with and sank the torpedo boat Tiger near Bornholm . Max Schultz 's bow was severely damaged and she had to be towed , stern @-@ first , by Georg Thiele until two tugboats arrived and took over the tow to Swinemünde . 
 When World War II began , Georg Thiele was initially deployed in the Baltic to operate against the Polish Navy and to enforce a blockade of Poland , but she was soon transferred to the German Bight where she joined her sisters in laying defensive minefields . The ship began a refit in late 1939 that was completed in early April 1940 . 
 = = = Norwegian Campaign = = = 
 Georg Thiele was allocated to Group 1 for the Norwegian portion of Operation Weserübung in April 1940 . The group 's task was to transport the 139th Mountain Infantry Regiment ( 139 . Gebirgsjäger Regiment ) and the headquarters of the 3rd Mountain Division ( 3 . Gebirgs @-@ Division ) to seize Narvik . The ships began loading troops on 6 April and set sail the next day . The German destroyers reached the Ofotfjord on the morning of 9 April and Commodore Friedrich Bonte took his flagship Wilhelm Heidkamp , Georg Thiele and Bernd von Arnim down the fjord to Narvik . A heavy snowstorm allowed Thiele and von Arnim to enter the harbor without challenge and tie up at a pier . The mountain troops immediately began disembarking , but the ships were spotted by the coast defense ship Norge a few minutes later . The latter ship immediately opened fire and was able to fire approximately 13 shells at 600 – 800 meters ( 660 – 870 yd ) range before von Arnim sank the Norwegian ship with torpedoes . None of the Norwegian shells hit either of the two German destroyers due to the darkness and falling snow , despite the short range . 
 Thiele and von Arnim were the first to refuel from the single tanker that had made it safely to Narvik and later moved to the <unk> , a southern arm of the Ofotfjord , closer to the entrance . Shortly before dawn on 10 April , the five destroyers of the British 2nd Destroyer Flotilla surprised the five German destroyers in Narvik harbor . They torpedoed two destroyers and badly damaged the other three while suffering only minor damage themselves . As they were beginning to withdraw they encountered the three destroyers of the 4th Flotilla which had been alerted in the Herjansfjord when the British began their attack . The Germans opened fire first , but the gunnery for both sides was not effective due to the mist and the smoke screen laid by the British as they retreated down the Ofotfjord . The German ships had to turn away to avoid a salvo of three torpedoes fired by one of the destroyers in Narvik , but Thiele and von Arnim had also been alerted and were coming up to engage the British . 
 The two German destroyers crossed the T of the British flotilla and were able to fire full broadsides at a range of only 4 @,@ 000 meters ( 13 @,@ 000 ft ) . They first engaged the British flagship , HMS Hardy , and badly damaged her . Both of her forward guns were knocked out and the forward superstructure was set afire . Hardy was forced to beach herself lest she sink , and the German ships switched their fire to HMS Havock , the next ship in line . Their fire was relatively ineffective and both sides fired torpedoes without scoring any hits . Havock pulled out and dropped to the rear to fight off any pursuit by the ships of the 4th Flotilla . This placed HMS Hunter in the lead and she was quickly set on fire by the German ships . Thiele probably also hit her with a torpedo and she was rammed from behind by HMS Hotspur when the latter ship lost steering control . Hotspur was able to disengage , but Hunter capsized shortly afterward . The three remaining British ships were able to escape from the Germans under the cover of a smoke screen . Georg Thiele had been badly damaged by the British ships as she 'd been hit seven times that knocked her forward gun and her fire @-@ control equipment , flooded one magazine , started fires , and killed thirteen crewmen . 
 On the night of 12 / 13 April , Commander Erich Bey , the senior surviving German officer , received word to expect an attack the following day by British capital ships escorted by a large number of destroyers and supported by carrier aircraft . Thiele had only four guns ready and six remaining torpedoes by this time . The battleship Warspite and nine destroyers duly appeared on 13 April , although earlier than Commander Bey had expected , and caught the Germans out of position . The five operable destroyers , including Thiele , charged out of Narvik harbor and engaged the British ships . Although no hits were scored , they did inflict splinter damage on several of the destroyers . Lack of ammunition forced the German ships to retreat to the Rombaksfjorden ( the easternmost branch of the Ofotfjord ) , east of Narvik , where they might attempt to ambush pursuing British destroyers . Thiele still had some ammunition and torpedoes left and took up position at the <unk> narrows with Z18 Hans Lüdemann to give the remaining two destroyers time to scuttle themselves at the head of the fjord . The pursuing British destroyers initially engaged the latter ship until it exhausted its ammo and retreated to the head of the fjord itself and then switched their attentions to Thiele . The German ship struck the first blow when one of her torpedoes blew the bow off Eskimo , but the return fire from the British ships started several fires and damaged her so heavily that Korvettenkapitän Max @-@ Eckart Wolff , the ship 's captain , ordered her run aground to allow her crew to abandon ship safely . Fourteen men had been killed during the battle and another 28 wounded . The surviving crew of the ship took part in the land fighting at Narvik in the following weeks . Wolff served as a battalion commander in the Marine @-@ Regiment Berger during the land battle . He was awarded the Iron Cross First Class on 12 May 1940 and the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross the following August for his leadership of Z2 at Narvik . 
 The ship later broke in two and capsized . Parts of the bow of Georg Thiele remain visible above the water in <unk> to this day . 
 = Movieland = 
 Movieland , also known as Movieland.com , <unk> and <unk> , is a subscription @-@ based movie download service that has been the subject of thousands of complaints to the Federal Trade Commission , the Washington State Attorney General 's Office , the Better Business Bureau , and other agencies by consumers who said they were held hostage by its repeated pop @-@ up windows and demands for payment , triggered after a free 3 @-@ day trial period . Many said they had never even heard of Movieland until they saw their first pop @-@ up . Movieland advertised that the service had " no spyware " , and that no personal information would need to be filled out to begin the free trial . 
 The Federal Trade Commission ( FTC ) filed a complaint against Movieland and eleven other defendants in August 2006 , charging them with having " engaged in a nationwide scheme to use deception and coercion to extract payments from consumers . " The Attorney General of the state of Washington also filed a complaint , charging Movieland and several other defendants with violating that state 's Computer Spyware Act and its Consumer Protection Act . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Movieland advertises its movie download service by using pop @-@ up ads at other sites . The ads offer a three @-@ day free trial , with access to members @-@ only content including music , news , updated sports scores and adult movies . The ads say there are no forms to fill out , and no need to provide a credit card number or an e @-@ mail address , making the trial appear anonymous . The site 's homepage states that it has " No Spyware " , is " Virus Free " , and " No Extra Charge " . The site installs a program , MediaPipe , which is used to access the service . 
 = = Early consumer complaints = = 
 Movieland.com began operations sometime in the fall of 2005 or earlier . Consumer complaints began soon thereafter . Most consumers claimed they had never signed up for the free trial , never used the service , and never even heard of Movieland until they got their first pop @-@ up demand for payment . Some said they found the software on their computers after downloading a screensaver or other free utility . The company denied that it installed its software by stealthy means . 
 Media coverage as early as January 2006 recounted consumer complaints and mentioned that several anti @-@ spyware companies were buying Google advertisements boasting their product 's ability to " Remove Movieland Now " . In a report updated February 20 , 2008 , the Berkman Center for Internet & Society at Harvard Law School calls Movieland 's MediaPipe component " <unk> " because " it does not fully disclose what it is installing , does not completely remove all components and ' obligations ' during the uninstall process , and modifies other software without disclosure . " Richard <unk> of IT @-@ Harvest referred to Movieland as a form of " <unk> " due to its behaviour . As of July 2008 , the MediaPipe report is still cited by the Berkman Center for Internet & Society at Harvard Law School . 
 = = Complaints by the FTC = = 
 On August 8 , 2006 , the FTC filed a complaint in United States District Court " to obtain preliminary and permanent injunctive relief , rescission of contracts , restitution , disgorgement and other equitable relief for Defendants ' deceptive and unfair acts or practices in violation of Section 5 ( a ) of the FTC Act " . 
 The complaint alleged that the defendants were demanding payment to fix a problem that they themselves created , and were installing disruptive software that could not be removed through reasonable means . According to the FTC complaint , Movieland repeatedly bombarded consumers with pop @-@ up windows , accompanied by music that lasted nearly a minute . They demanded a minimum payment of $ 29 @.@ 95 to end the recurring pop @-@ up cycle , claiming that consumers had signed up for a three @-@ day free trial and did not cancel the service before the trial period was over . 
 The complaint charged that : 
 Installation of Defendants ' download manager is merely a smoke screen concealing Defendants ' true purpose : to install software and other files onto consumers ' computers that enable Defendants to launch pop @-@ up windows on consumers computers demanding payments to Defendants . These pop @-@ up windows , which display both textual and audiovisual payment demands , significantly disrupt consumers ' use of their computers . After Defendants cause these pop @-@ up payment demands to display on a particular computer for the first time , they cause them to <unk> again and again with ever @-@ increasing frequency . " 
 The pop @-@ ups had a large dark background and took up much of the screen , blocking access to other windows , and did not contain close or minimize buttons ; forcing the user to continue . The first pop @-@ up showed the date and time " our content access software was installed on your system and your 3 day free trial began " , the text " Click ' Continue ' to purchase your license and stop these reminders " , and a graphic reading " STOP THESE <unk> NOW " and " <unk> <unk> " . The only option offered was the button labeled " Continue " . 
 Clicking " Continue " brought up the next pop @-@ up , a 40 @-@ second audiovisual clip featuring a woman who introduced herself as " your personal customer service representative " and stated " Because you did not cancel during your trial period , you are now legally obligated to make your payment as per the terms and conditions you agreed to when you installed our content delivery software . " As the clip neared its conclusion , a new dialog box entitled " <unk> OPTIONS " appeared . Choosing its " Close this window " option ended the pop @-@ ups until the unvarying cycle began again . 
 In addition , the complaint alleged that the defendants made numerous false statements in attempting to collect payments from consumers , claiming that the computer owner or someone else consented to receiving the pop @-@ up payment demands until they paid , the owner of any computer that received the pop @-@ ups was legally obligated to pay Movieland , and that the computer owner was obligated to satisfy any contract that any other person entered into while using the computer . The only customer service telephone number provided was a 900 number . When consumers called it , a recorded greeting told them that they would incur a $ 34 @.@ 95 charge if they did not hang up within three seconds . 
 The complaint also alleged that the defendants made it difficult or impossible for consumers to uninstall the software . Those attempting to remove it through the Windows Control Panel " Add or Remove Programs " function were redirected to a web page telling them that they had to pay the $ 29 @.@ 95 fee to stop the pop @-@ ups . The only way many consumers could regain control of their computers was to pay the fee , or pay a computer technician to remove the software . 
 = = = Movieland 's position = = = 
 Movieland representatives said the downloads were not spyware and did not get on computers accidentally , insisting they were not " drive @-@ by downloads " . They said the FTC lawsuit was " improperly brought " , and pointed out that at the time the complaint was filed a federal judge rejected the FTC 's request for a temporary restraining order that would have immediately ended the cited billing practices . 
 The terms of service at the Movieland web site warned that if users did not cancel or pay during the three @-@ day period , pop @-@ up billing reminders would begin and " will appear more frequently until you choose one of the payment options and pay for the license . " 
 Movieland said the pop @-@ ups were " an anti @-@ fraud mechanism " that cannot be received without consumers intentionally downloading the software through several intentional steps , each of which has a default setting of " cancel " . The company also stated " there are no extrinsic programs ( adware or otherwise ) bundled with our software . " The company disputed the FTC claim that the software was " very difficult to get rid of " , and said it could be removed using the Windows Control Panel . 
 = = = Defendants = = = 
 The following ten companies and two individuals were named as defendants in the FTC complaint : 
 Digital Enterprises , Inc. d / b / a Movieland.com 
 Triumphant Videos , Inc. d / b / a <unk> 
 <unk> International , Inc. d / b / a <unk> 
 Alchemy Communications , Inc . 
 <unk> Networks , Inc . 
 Innovative Networks , Inc . 
 Film Web , Inc . 
 Binary Source , Inc. d / b / a <unk> 
 <unk> , Inc. d / b / a <unk> 
 CS Hotline , Inc . 
 Easton Herd , sole officer and director of Digital Enterprises and Triumphant Videos 
 Andrew Garroni , an officer or director of <unk> , Alchemy , Film Web , and Binary Source 
 = = = Pre @-@ trial stipulations = = = 
 In November 2006 , the defendants and the FTC signed stipulations governing their pre @-@ trial conduct . Without admitting any wrongdoing , violation of the law , or involvement in the acts and practices alleged in the complaint , the defendants agreed to make clear and prominent disclosures prior to any software download or installation , to not download or install software without the user 's explicit consent and without disclosing clearly and prominently in the site 's terms of service the nature , frequency , and duration of any pop @-@ up windows that may appear regarding any purported obligation for payment . The pop @-@ ups also must not lock out access to the rest of the computer . 
 They also agreed to fixed limits on how many pop @-@ ups they can generate on a computer ( maximum of 5 per day , 1 per hour ) , the requirement to provide a mute button for any sound content in the pop @-@ ups and be able to close the windows , and provide a hyperlink with toll @-@ free number and email utility , to request stopping the pop @-@ ups under certain conditions . The defendants also promised to clearly label any single @-@ click download or install buttons , and not pre @-@ select these as the default . 
 They are also required to not represent that consumers have any " legal " or " contractual " obligation to pay for the software unless the computer owner has provided personal identification and agreed to pay , and that failure to pay will result in collection proceedings or affect the computer owner 's credit status unless the owner has provided personal identification such as a credit card and agreed to pay . Customer service agents may state that they " believe " the computer owner is responsible for paying for the download , and offer several purchase options including a one @-@ time 30 @-@ day non @-@ renewing license for $ 29 @.@ 95 , after which access to the service will terminate . 
 = = = FTC settlement = = = 
 The FTC complaint was scheduled to be tried in United States District Court in January 2008 , but before trial , the defendants chose to settle out of court with both the FTC . 
 Movieland settled with the FTC in September 2007 . Without admitting any wrongdoing or violation of the law , the defendants agreed to make permanent the terms of the pre @-@ trial stipulations including limiting the number , frequency and duration of the billing pop @-@ ups ; and to pay the FTC $ 501 @,@ 367 to reimburse consumers who paid for the program as a result of the repeated pop @-@ up demands . The defendants also agreed to stop offering anonymous free trials , have users certify at install time that they are at least 18 years of age , provide an install @-@ time link to their terms of service or end user license agreement , not download software that <unk> itself after a user has removed it , and to prominently post removal instructions at their web sites . 
 The agreement also requires Herd and Garroni to notify the FTC of any change of name , address or employment status , and of any new business affiliations , for five years . 
 = = Complaints by the State of Washington = = 
 On August 14 , 2006 , Rob McKenna , the Attorney General of the state of Washington charged Movieland , Digital Enterprises , Herd , and Garroni with violating the state 's Computer Spyware Act and its Consumer Protection Act . The complaint , filed in King County Superior Court in Seattle , alleged misrepresentations and unlawful business acts and practices similar to those alleged in the FTC complaint , and further alleged violations of Washington state law . 
 The defendants were subject to fines of up to $ 100 @,@ 000 per violation of the Spyware Act and $ 2 @,@ 000 per violation of the Consumer Protection Act if found liable . They were also subject to paying restitution to affected consumers . 
 = = = Alleged violations of law = = = 
 The alleged violations of Washington state law included taking control of a user 's computer in violation of the Spyware Act and the Consumer Protection Act ( CPA ) , by remotely installing billing software that initiates and controls the pop @-@ up cycle , misrepresenting the ability to uninstall software in violation of the same acts , by listing the software in Add / Remove Programs although the software cannot be uninstalled , unconscionable business practices in violation of the CPA , by the " aggressive and harassing " billing method used and the failure to disclose it , including use of a billing method " that forces payment by completely obstructing users ' access to their computers " , threats , harassment and intimidation in billing practices in violation of the CPA , by threatening collection proceedings and an adverse effect on users ' credit records , while in fact defendants do not even know the consumer 's name ; and referring to consumers ' " legal obligation " to pay , when in fact there is no legally binding contract , failure to disclose material facts in violation of the CPA , the " aggressive , relentless , threatening " form of the payment demands ; the fact that the <unk> option for the software will be disabled ; and that the defendants " transmit software to the user 's computer surreptitiously " , and misrepresentations in violation of the CPA , including stating the software contains " no spyware " when in fact the software itself constitutes spyware by its behavior . 
 In announcing the suit following a seven @-@ month investigation , Washington Attorney General Rob McKenna rejected one possible defense . " The defendants ' claim that users are legally obligated to pay for their service lacks merit because consumers did not provide knowing consent to the installation of the relentless pop @-@ up demands " , he said . " Furthermore , computer owners are not responsible to satisfy contracts that other people , including minors , entered into while using a computer . " He also said that the defendants ' threats of collection proceedings and adverse effects on users ' credit ratings were empty , as the defendants had no way to personally identify computer users . 
 Assistant Attorney General Paula Selis said the tactics forced some consumers to give in and pay between $ 20 and $ 100 for the service . She said , " We sued them because we were getting complaints from consumers who felt that they were being harassed and held over a barrel for payments that they didn 't agree to make . " Selis said , " It was harassment , it was intimidation of the consumer . It was using a high @-@ pressure tactic to make him or her pay for something they were not legally obligated to pay . " 
 = = = Settlement = = = 
 Movieland settled with Washington in April 2007 under terms similar to the FTC settlement but specific to Washington consumers , agreeing to pay Washington $ 50 @,@ 000 as consumer reimbursement and to prominently state all important contract terms , including the cost of the subscription service , in advertisements . 
 = Surface tension = 
 Surface tension is the elastic tendency of a fluid surface which makes it acquire the least surface area possible . Surface tension allows insects ( e.g. water striders ) , usually denser than water , to float and stride on a water surface . 
 At liquid @-@ air interfaces , surface tension results from the greater attraction of liquid molecules to each other ( due to cohesion ) than to the molecules in the air ( due to adhesion ) . The net effect is an inward force at its surface that causes the liquid to behave as if its surface were covered with a stretched elastic membrane . Thus , the surface becomes under tension from the imbalanced forces , which is probably where the term " surface tension " came from . Because of the relatively high attraction of water molecules for each other through a web of hydrogen bonds , water has a higher surface tension ( 72 @.@ 8 <unk> per meter at 20 ° C ) compared to that of most other liquids . Surface tension is an important factor in the phenomenon of capillarity . 
 Surface tension has the dimension of force per unit length , or of energy per unit area . The two are equivalent , but when referring to energy per unit of area , it is common to use the term surface energy , which is a more general term in the sense that it applies also to solids . 
 In materials science , surface tension is used for either surface stress or surface free energy . 
 = = Causes = = 
 The cohesive forces among liquid molecules are responsible for the phenomenon of surface tension . In the bulk of the liquid , each molecule is pulled equally in every direction by neighboring liquid molecules , resulting in a net force of zero . The molecules at the surface do not have the same molecules on all sides of them and therefore are pulled inwards . This creates some internal pressure and forces liquid surfaces to contract to the minimal area . 
 Surface tension is responsible for the shape of liquid droplets . Although easily deformed , droplets of water tend to be pulled into a spherical shape by the imbalance in cohesive forces of the surface layer . In the absence of other forces , including gravity , drops of virtually all liquids would be approximately spherical . The spherical shape minimizes the necessary " wall tension " of the surface layer according to Laplace 's law . 
 Another way to view surface tension is in terms of energy . A molecule in contact with a neighbor is in a lower state of energy than if it were alone ( not in contact with a neighbor ) . The interior molecules have as many neighbors as they can possibly have , but the boundary molecules are missing neighbors ( compared to interior molecules ) and therefore have a higher energy . For the liquid to minimize its energy state , the number of higher energy boundary molecules must be minimized . The minimized quantity of boundary molecules results in a minimal surface area . As a result of surface area minimization , a surface will assume the smoothest shape it can ( mathematical proof that " smooth " shapes minimize surface area relies on use of the Euler – Lagrange equation ) . Since any curvature in the surface shape results in greater area , a higher energy will also result . Consequently , the surface will push back against any curvature in much the same way as a ball pushed uphill will push back to minimize its gravitational potential energy . 
 = = Effects of surface tension = = 
 = = = Water = = = 
 Several effects of surface tension can be seen with ordinary water : 
 A. <unk> of rain water on a waxy surface , such as a leaf . Water adheres weakly to wax and strongly to itself , so water clusters into drops . Surface tension gives them their near @-@ spherical shape , because a sphere has the smallest possible surface area to volume ratio . 
 B. Formation of drops occurs when a mass of liquid is stretched . The animation shows water adhering to the faucet gaining mass until it is stretched to a point where the surface tension can no longer keep the drop linked to the faucet . It then separates and surface tension forms the drop into a sphere . If a stream of water was running from the faucet , the stream would break up into drops during its fall . Gravity stretches the stream , then surface tension pinches it into spheres . 
 C. <unk> of objects denser than water occurs when the object is <unk> and its weight is small enough to be borne by the forces arising from surface tension . For example , water striders use surface tension to walk on the surface of a pond by the following way . <unk> of leg of the water strider means no attraction between molecules of the leg and molecules of the water , so when the leg pushes down the water , the surface tension of the water only tries to recover its flatness from its deformation due to the leg . This behavior of the water push the water strider upward so it can stand on the surface of the water as long as its mass is small enough so that the water can support it . The surface of the water behaves like an elastic film : the insect 's feet cause indentations in the water 's surface , increasing its surface area and tendency of minimization of surface curvature ( so area ) of the water pushes the insect 's feet upward . 
 D. Separation of oil and water ( in this case , water and liquid wax ) is caused by a tension in the surface between dissimilar liquids . This type of surface tension is called " interface tension " , but its chemistry is the same . 
 E. Tears of wine is the formation of drops and rivulets on the side of a glass containing an alcoholic beverage . Its cause is a complex interaction between the differing surface tensions of water and ethanol ; it is induced by a combination of surface tension modification of water by ethanol together with ethanol evaporating faster than water . 
 = = = Surfactants = = = 
 Surface tension is visible in other common phenomena , especially when surfactants are used to decrease it : 
 Soap bubbles have very large surface areas with very little mass . Bubbles in pure water are unstable . The addition of surfactants , however , can have a stabilizing effect on the bubbles ( see Marangoni effect ) . Note that surfactants actually reduce the surface tension of water by a factor of three or more . 
 <unk> are a type of solution in which surface tension plays a role . Tiny fragments of oil suspended in pure water will spontaneously assemble themselves into much larger masses . But the presence of a surfactant provides a decrease in surface tension , which permits stability of minute droplets of oil in the bulk of water ( or vice versa ) . 
 = = Physics = = 
 = = = Physical units = = = 
 Surface tension , usually represented by the symbol γ , is measured in force per unit length . Its SI unit is newton per meter but the cgs unit of dyne per cm is also used . 
 <formula> 
 = = = Surface area growth = = = 
 Surface tension can be defined in terms of force or <unk> terms of force : surface tension <formula> of a liquid is the force per unit length . In the illustration on the right , the rectangular frame , composed of three unmovable sides ( black ) that form a " U " shape , and a fourth movable side ( blue ) that can slide to the right . Surface tension will pull the blue bar to the left ; the force <formula> required to hold immobile the movable side is proportional to the length <formula> of the movable side . Thus the ratio <formula> depends only on the intrinsic properties of the liquid ( composition , temperature , etc . ) , not on its geometry . For example , if the frame had a more complicated shape , the ratio <formula> , with <formula> the length of the movable side and <formula> the force required to stop it from sliding , is found to be the same for all shapes . We therefore define the surface tension as 
 <formula> . 
 The reason for the <formula> is that the film has two sides , each of which contributes equally to the force ; so the force contributed by a single side is <formula> . 
 In terms of energy : surface tension <formula> of a liquid is the ratio of 1 ) the change in the energy of the liquid , and 2 ) the change in the surface area of the liquid ( that led to the change in energy ) . This can be easily related to the previous definition in terms of force : if <formula> is the force required to stop the side from starting to slide , then this is also the force that would keep the side in the state of sliding at a constant speed ( by Newton 's Second Law ) . But if the side is moving to the right ( in the direction the force is applied ) , then the surface area of the stretched liquid is increasing while the applied force is doing work on the liquid . This means that increasing the surface area increases the energy of the film . The work done by the force <formula> in moving the side by distance <formula> is <formula> ; at the same time the total area of the film increases by <formula> ( the factor of 2 is here because the liquid has two sides , two surfaces ) . Thus , multiplying both the numerator and the denominator of <formula> by <formula> , we get 
 <formula> . 
 This work <formula> is , by the usual arguments , interpreted as being stored as potential energy . Consequently , surface tension can be also measured in SI system as joules per square meter and in the cgs system as ergs per cm2 . Since mechanical systems try to find a state of minimum potential energy , a free droplet of liquid naturally assumes a spherical shape , which has the minimum surface area for a given volume . The equivalence of measurement of energy per unit area to force per unit length can be proven by dimensional analysis . 
 = = = Surface curvature and pressure = = = 
 If no force acts normal to a tensioned surface , the surface must remain flat . But if the pressure on one side of the surface differs from pressure on the other side , the pressure difference times surface area results in a normal force . In order for the surface tension forces to cancel the force due to pressure , the surface must be curved . The diagram shows how surface curvature of a tiny patch of surface leads to a net component of surface tension forces acting normal to the center of the patch . When all the forces are balanced , the resulting equation is known as the Young – Laplace equation : 
 <formula> 
 where : 
 Δp is the pressure difference , known as the Laplace pressure . 
 <formula> is surface tension . 
 Rx and Ry are radii of curvature in each of the axes that are parallel to the surface . 
 The quantity in parentheses on the right hand side is in fact ( twice ) the mean curvature of the surface ( depending on normalisation ) . Solutions to this equation determine the shape of water drops , puddles , <unk> , soap bubbles , and all other shapes determined by surface tension ( such as the shape of the impressions that a water strider 's feet make on the surface of a pond ) . The table below shows how the internal pressure of a water droplet increases with decreasing radius . For not very small drops the effect is subtle , but the pressure difference becomes enormous when the drop sizes approach the molecular size . ( In the limit of a single molecule the concept becomes meaningless . ) 
 = = = Floating objects = = = 
 When an object is placed on a liquid , its weight Fw depresses the surface , and is balanced by the surface tension forces on either side Fs , which are each parallel to the water 's surface at the points where it contacts the object . Notice that the horizontal components of the two Fs arrows point in opposite directions , so they cancel each other , but the vertical components point in the same direction and therefore add up to balance Fw . The object 's surface must not be wettable for this to happen , and its weight must be low enough for the surface tension to support it . 
 <formula> 
 = = = Liquid surface = = = 
 To find the shape of the minimal surface bounded by some arbitrary shaped frame using strictly mathematical means can be a daunting task . Yet by fashioning the frame out of wire and dipping it in soap @-@ solution , a locally minimal surface will appear in the resulting soap @-@ film within seconds . 
 The reason for this is that the pressure difference across a fluid interface is proportional to the mean curvature , as seen in the Young @-@ Laplace equation . For an open soap film , the pressure difference is zero , hence the mean curvature is zero , and minimal surfaces have the property of zero mean curvature . 
 = = = Contact angles = = = 
 The surface of any liquid is an interface between that liquid and some other medium . The top surface of a pond , for example , is an interface between the pond water and the air . Surface tension , then , is not a property of the liquid alone , but a property of the liquid 's interface with another medium . If a liquid is in a container , then besides the liquid / air interface at its top surface , there is also an interface between the liquid and the walls of the container . The surface tension between the liquid and air is usually different ( greater than ) its surface tension with the walls of a container . And where the two surfaces meet , their geometry must be such that all forces balance . 
 Where the two surfaces meet , they form a contact angle , <formula> , which is the angle the tangent to the surface makes with the solid surface . The diagram to the right shows two examples . Tension forces are shown for the liquid @-@ air interface , the liquid @-@ solid interface , and the solid @-@ air interface . The example on the left is where the difference between the liquid @-@ solid and solid @-@ air surface tension , <formula> , is less than the liquid @-@ air surface tension , <formula> , but is nevertheless positive , that is 
 <formula> 
 In the diagram , both the vertical and horizontal forces must cancel exactly at the contact point , known as equilibrium . The horizontal component of <formula> is canceled by the adhesive force , <formula> . 
 <formula> 
 The more telling balance of forces , though , is in the vertical direction . The vertical component of <formula> must exactly cancel the force , <formula> . 
 <formula> 
 Since the forces are in direct proportion to their respective surface tensions , we also have : 
 <formula> 
 where 
 <formula> is the liquid @-@ solid surface tension , 
 <formula> is the liquid @-@ air surface tension , 
 <formula> is the solid @-@ air surface tension , 
 <formula> is the contact angle , where a concave meniscus has contact angle less than 90 ° and a convex meniscus has contact angle of greater than 90 ° . 
 This means that although the difference between the liquid @-@ solid and solid @-@ air surface tension , <formula> , is difficult to measure directly , it can be inferred from the liquid @-@ air surface tension , <formula> , and the equilibrium contact angle , <formula> , which is a function of the easily measurable advancing and receding contact angles ( see main article contact angle ) . 
 This same relationship exists in the diagram on the right . But in this case we see that because the contact angle is less than 90 ° , the liquid @-@ solid / solid @-@ air surface tension difference must be negative : 
 <formula> 
 = = = = Special contact angles = = = = 
 Observe that in the special case of a water @-@ silver interface where the contact angle is equal to 90 ° , the liquid @-@ solid / solid @-@ air surface tension difference is exactly zero . 
 Another special case is where the contact angle is exactly 180 ° . Water with specially prepared Teflon approaches this . Contact angle of 180 ° occurs when the liquid @-@ solid surface tension is exactly equal to the liquid @-@ air surface tension . 
 <formula> 
 = = Methods of measurement = = 
 Because surface tension manifests itself in various effects , it offers a number of paths to its measurement . Which method is optimal depends upon the nature of the liquid being measured , the conditions under which its tension is to be measured , and the stability of its surface when it is deformed . 
 du Noüy ring method : The traditional method used to measure surface or interfacial tension . Wetting properties of the surface or interface have little influence on this measuring technique . Maximum pull exerted on the ring by the surface is measured . 
 Du Noüy @-@ <unk> method : A minimized version of Du Noüy method uses a small diameter metal needle instead of a ring , in combination with a high sensitivity <unk> to record maximum pull . The advantage of this method is that very small sample volumes ( down to few tens of <unk> ) can be measured with very high precision , without the need to correct for buoyancy ( for a needle or rather , rod , with proper geometry ) . Further , the measurement can be performed very quickly , minimally in about 20 seconds . First commercial multichannel <unk> [ <unk> ] were recently built based on this principle . 
 Wilhelmy plate method : A universal method especially suited to check surface tension over long time intervals . A vertical plate of known perimeter is attached to a balance , and the force due to wetting is measured . 
 Spinning drop method : This technique is ideal for measuring low interfacial tensions . The diameter of a drop within a heavy phase is measured while both are rotated . 
 Pendant drop method : Surface and interfacial tension can be measured by this technique , even at elevated temperatures and pressures . Geometry of a drop is analyzed optically . For details , see Drop . 
 Bubble pressure method ( Jaeger 's method ) : A measurement technique for determining surface tension at short surface ages . Maximum pressure of each bubble is measured . 
 Drop volume method : A method for determining interfacial tension as a function of interface age . Liquid of one density is pumped into a second liquid of a different density and time between drops produced is measured . 
 Capillary rise method : The end of a capillary is immersed into the solution . The height at which the solution reaches inside the capillary is related to the surface tension by the equation discussed below . 
 <unk> method : A method of weighting and reading a drop of liquid . 
 <unk> drop method : A method for determining surface tension and density by placing a drop on a substrate and measuring the contact angle ( see <unk> drop technique ) . 
 <unk> frequency of levitated drops : The natural frequency of vibrational oscillations of magnetically levitated drops has been used to measure the surface tension of superfluid 4He . This value is estimated to be 0 @.@ 375 dyn / cm at T = 0 K. 
 Resonant oscillations of spherical and hemispherical liquid drop : The technique is based on measuring the resonant frequency of spherical and hemispherical pendant droplets driven in oscillations by a modulated electric field . The surface tension and viscosity can be evaluated from the obtained resonant curves . 
 = = Effects = = 
 = = = Liquid in a vertical tube = = = 
 An old style mercury barometer consists of a vertical glass tube about 1 cm in diameter partially filled with mercury , and with a vacuum ( called Torricelli 's vacuum ) in the unfilled volume ( see diagram to the right ) . Notice that the mercury level at the center of the tube is higher than at the edges , making the upper surface of the mercury dome @-@ shaped . The center of mass of the entire column of mercury would be slightly lower if the top surface of the mercury were flat over the entire <unk> of the tube . But the dome @-@ shaped top gives slightly less surface area to the entire mass of mercury . Again the two effects combine to minimize the total potential energy . Such a surface shape is known as a convex meniscus . 
 We consider the surface area of the entire mass of mercury , including the part of the surface that is in contact with the glass , because mercury does not adhere to glass at all . So the surface tension of the mercury acts over its entire surface area , including where it is in contact with the glass . If instead of glass , the tube was made out of copper , the situation would be very different . Mercury aggressively adheres to copper . So in a copper tube , the level of mercury at the center of the tube will be lower than at the edges ( that is , it would be a concave meniscus ) . In a situation where the liquid adheres to the walls of its container , we consider the part of the fluid 's surface area that is in contact with the container to have negative surface tension . The fluid then works to maximize the contact surface area . So in this case increasing the area in contact with the container decreases rather than increases the potential energy . That decrease is enough to compensate for the increased potential energy associated with lifting the fluid near the walls of the container . 
 If a tube is sufficiently narrow and the liquid adhesion to its walls is sufficiently strong , surface tension can draw liquid up the tube in a phenomenon known as capillary action . The height to which the column is lifted is given by : 
 <formula> 
 where 
 <formula> is the height the liquid is lifted , 
 <formula> is the liquid @-@ air surface tension , 
 <formula> is the density of the liquid , 
 <formula> is the radius of the capillary , 
 <formula> is the acceleration due to gravity , 
 <formula> is the angle of contact described above . If <formula> is greater than 90 ° , as with mercury in a glass container , the liquid will be depressed rather than lifted . 
 = = = <unk> on a surface = = = 
 Pouring mercury onto a horizontal flat sheet of glass results in a puddle that has a perceptible thickness . The puddle will spread out only to the point where it is a little under half a centimetre thick , and no thinner . Again this is due to the action of mercury 's strong surface tension . The liquid mass flattens out because that brings as much of the mercury to as low a level as possible , but the surface tension , at the same time , is acting to reduce the total surface area . The result of the compromise is a puddle of a nearly fixed thickness . 
 The same surface tension demonstration can be done with water , lime water or even saline , but only on a surface made of a substance to which water does not adhere . Wax is such a substance . Water poured onto a smooth , flat , horizontal wax surface , say a waxed sheet of glass , will behave similarly to the mercury poured onto glass . 
 The thickness of a puddle of liquid on a surface whose contact angle is 180 ° is given by : 
 <formula> 
 where 
 In reality , the thicknesses of the puddles will be slightly less than what is predicted by the above formula because very few surfaces have a contact angle of 180 ° with any liquid . When the contact angle is less than 180 ° , the thickness is given by : 
 <formula> 
 For mercury on glass , <unk> 
 = 487 dyn / cm , <unk> = 
 13 @.@ 5 g / cm3 and θ 
 = 140 ° , which gives <unk> = 
 0 @.@ 36 cm . For water on paraffin at 25 ° C , γ 
 = 72 dyn / cm , ρ = 
 1 @.@ 0 g / cm3 , and θ 
 = 107 ° which gives <unk> = 
 0 @.@ 44 cm . 
 The formula also predicts that when the contact angle is 0 ° , the liquid will spread out into a micro @-@ thin layer over the surface . Such a surface is said to be fully wettable by the liquid . 
 = = = The breakup of streams into drops = = = 
 In day @-@ to @-@ day life all of us observe that a stream of water emerging from a faucet will break up into droplets , no matter how smoothly the stream is emitted from the faucet . This is due to a phenomenon called the Plateau – Rayleigh instability , which is entirely a consequence of the effects of surface tension . 
 The explanation of this instability begins with the existence of tiny perturbations in the stream . These are always present , no matter how smooth the stream is . If the perturbations are resolved into sinusoidal components , we find that some components grow with time while others decay with time . Among those that grow with time , some grow at faster rates than others . Whether a component decays or grows , and how fast it grows is entirely a function of its wave number ( a measure of how many peaks and troughs per centimeter ) and the radii of the original cylindrical stream . 
 = = Thermodynamics = = 
 As stated above , the mechanical work needed to increase a surface is <formula> . Hence at constant temperature and pressure , surface tension equals Gibbs free energy per surface area : 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is Gibbs free energy and <formula> is the area . 
 Thermodynamics requires that all spontaneous changes of state are accompanied by a decrease in Gibbs free energy . 
 From this it is easy to understand why decreasing the surface area of a mass of liquid is always spontaneous ( <formula> ) , provided it is not coupled to any other energy changes . It follows that in order to increase surface area , a certain amount of energy must be added . 
 Gibbs free energy is defined by the equation , <formula> , where <formula> is enthalpy and <formula> is entropy . Based upon this and the fact that surface tension is Gibbs free energy per unit area , it is possible to obtain the following expression for entropy per unit area : 
 <formula> 
 Kelvin 's Equation for surfaces arises by rearranging the previous equations . It states that surface enthalpy or surface energy ( different from surface free energy ) depends both on surface tension and its derivative with temperature at constant pressure by the relationship . 
 <formula> 
 = = = Thermodynamics of soap bubbles = = = 
 The pressure inside an ideal ( one surface ) soap bubble can be derived from thermodynamic free energy considerations . At constant temperature and particle number , <formula> , the differential Helmholtz energy is given by 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is the difference in pressure inside and outside of the bubble , and <formula> is the surface tension . In equilibrium , <formula> , and so , 
 <formula> . 
 For a spherical bubble , the volume and surface area are given simply by 
 <formula> , 
 and 
 <formula> . 
 Substituting these relations into the previous expression , we find 
 <formula> , 
 which is equivalent to the Young – Laplace equation when Rx = Ry . For real soap bubbles , the pressure is doubled due to the presence of two interfaces , one inside and one outside . 
 = = = = Influence of temperature = = = = 
 Surface tension is dependent on temperature . For that reason , when a value is given for the surface tension of an interface , temperature must be explicitly stated . The general trend is that surface tension decreases with the increase of temperature , reaching a value of 0 at the critical temperature . For further details see Eötvös rule . There are only empirical equations to relate surface tension and temperature : 
 Eötvös : 
 <formula> 
 Here V is the molar volume of a substance , TC is the critical temperature and k is a constant valid for almost all substances . A typical value is k 
 = 2 @.@ 1 x 10 − 7 [ J K − 1 mol − 2 / 3 ] . For water one can further use V = 
 18 ml / mol and TC = 647 K ( 374 ° C ) . 
 A variant on Eötvös is described by <unk> and Shields : 
 <formula> 
 where the temperature offset of 6 kelvins provides the formula with a better fit to reality at lower temperatures . 
 Guggenheim @-@ Katayama : 
 <formula> 
 <formula> is a constant for each liquid and n is an empirical factor , whose value is 11 / 9 for organic liquids . This equation was also proposed by van der Waals , who further proposed that <formula> could be given by the expression , <formula> , where <formula> is a universal constant for all liquids , and <formula> is the critical pressure of the liquid ( although later experiments found <formula> to vary to some degree from one liquid to another ) . 
 Both Guggenheim @-@ Katayama and Eötvös take into account the fact that surface tension reaches 0 at the critical temperature , whereas <unk> and Shields fails to match reality at this endpoint . 
 = = = = Influence of solute concentration = = = = 
 <unk> can have different effects on surface tension depending on their structure : 
 Little or no effect , for example sugar 
 Increase surface tension , inorganic salts 
 Decrease surface tension progressively , alcohols 
 Decrease surface tension and , once a minimum is reached , no more effect : surfactants 
 What complicates the effect is that a solute can exist in a different concentration at the surface of a solvent than in its bulk . This difference varies from one solute / solvent combination to another . 
 Gibbs isotherm states that : <formula> 
 <formula> is known as surface concentration , it represents excess of solute per unit area of the surface over what would be present if the bulk concentration prevailed all the way to the surface . It has units of mol / m2 
 <formula> is the concentration of the substance in the bulk solution . 
 <formula> is the gas constant and <formula> the temperature 
 Certain assumptions are taken in its deduction , therefore Gibbs isotherm can only be applied to ideal ( very dilute ) solutions with two components . 
 = = = = Influence of particle size on vapor pressure = = = = 
 The Clausius – <unk> relation leads to another equation also attributed to Kelvin , as the Kelvin equation . It explains why , because of surface tension , the vapor pressure for small droplets of liquid in suspension is greater than standard vapor pressure of that same liquid when the interface is flat . That is to say that when a liquid is forming small droplets , the equilibrium concentration of its vapor in its surroundings is greater . This arises because the pressure inside the droplet is greater than outside . 
 <formula> 
 <formula> is the standard vapor pressure for that liquid at that temperature and pressure . 
 <formula> is the molar volume . 
 <formula> is the gas constant 
 <formula> is the Kelvin radius , the radius of the droplets . 
 The effect explains supersaturation of vapors . In the absence of nucleation sites , tiny droplets must form before they can evolve into larger droplets . This requires a vapor pressure many times the vapor pressure at the phase transition point . 
 This equation is also used in catalyst chemistry to assess <unk> for solids . 
 The effect can be viewed in terms of the average number of molecular neighbors of surface molecules ( see diagram ) . 
 The table shows some calculated values of this effect for water at different drop sizes : 
 The effect becomes clear for very small drop sizes , as a drop of 1 nm radius has about 100 molecules inside , which is a quantity small enough to require a quantum mechanics analysis . 
 = = Surface tension of water and of seawater = = 
 The two most abundant liquids on Earth are fresh water and seawater . This section gives correlations of reference data for the surface tension of both . 
 = = = Surface tension of water = = = 
 The surface tension of pure liquid water in contact with its vapor has been given by IAPWS as 
 <formula> 
 where both T and the critical temperature , TC = 647 @.@ 098 K , are expressed in kelvin . The region of validity the entire vapor @-@ liquid saturation curve , from the triple point ( 0 @.@ 01 ° C ) to the critical point . It also provides reasonable results when extrapolated to metastable ( supercooled ) conditions , down to at least − 25 ° C. This formulation was originally adopted by IAPWS in 1976 , and was adjusted in 1994 to conform to the International Temperature Scale of 1990 . 
 The uncertainty of this formulation is given over the full range of temperature by IAPWS . For temperatures below 100 ° C , the uncertainty is <formula> 0 @.@ 5 % . 
 = = = Surface tension of seawater = = = 
 Nayar et al. published reference data for the surface tension of seawater over the salinity range of 20 ⩽ S ⩽ 131 g / kg and a temperature range of 1 ⩽ t ⩽ 92 ° C at atmospheric pressure . The uncertainty of the measurements varied from 0 @.@ 18 to 0 @.@ 37 mN / m with the average uncertainty being 0 @.@ 22 mN / m . This data is correlated by the following equation 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is the surface tension of seawater in mN / m , <formula> is the surface tension of water in mN / m , S is the Reference Salinity in g / kg , and t is temperature in degrees Celsius . The average absolute percentage deviation between measurements and the correlation was 0 @.@ 19 % while the maximum deviation is 0 @.@ 60 % . 
 The range of temperature and salinity encompasses both the oceanographic range and the range of conditions encountered in thermal desalination technologies . 
 = = Data table = = 
 = = Gallery of effects = = 
 = Edwin Alderson = 
 Lieutenant General Sir Edwin Alfred Hervey Alderson KCB ( 8 April 1859 – 14 December 1927 ) was a senior British Army officer who served in several campaigns of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries . During the First World War he was placed in command of the Canadian Expeditionary Force during the first half of the war but made enemies amongst the Canadian political and military elite and suffered disastrous casualties during operations in 1915 / 16 which forced his sidelining and eventual retirement from service . 
 Despite the opposition he faced , Alderson transformed the ill @-@ trained and poorly prepared Canadian recruits into tough , veteran soldiers and laid the foundations for later victories at Vimy Ridge and in other operations . An accomplished sportsman , Alderson wrote several books and was a keen proponent of hunting and yachting , pastimes he believed to be at risk from developments in motor sports . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in 1859 in Capel St Mary , a village in Suffolk , Edwin Alderson was the son of Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Edward Mott Alderson and his wife Catherine Harriett Swainson . He attended Ipswich School from 1873 to 1876 . At 17 Edwin gained a commission in the Norfolk Artillery Militia and at 19 transferred to the 1st Foot ( later Royal Scots Regiment ) on 4 December 1878 . He transferred again ten days later , replacing a promoted officer , to his father 's regiment , the 97th Foot ( soon to become the Queen 's Own Royal West Kent Regiment ) . Joining the regiment in Halifax , Nova Scotia , Alderson was soon transferred to Gibraltar and later South Africa , where he was detached to the Mounted Infantry Depot at Laing 's Nek . 
 = = = Mounted Infantry = = = 
 The Mounted Infantry Depot was a post where young officers could be stationed , forming a ready reserve of young , educated officers available as volunteers for staff or command positions in African colonial campaigns . It was whilst attached to this post that Alderson saw service in the First Boer War in 1881 in the Transvaal . The following year , Alderson served in the 1882 Anglo @-@ Egyptian War , fighting at the battles of <unk> and Tel @-@ el @-@ Kebir . Two years later , Alderson was attached to the Mounted Camel Regiment during the failed expedition to relieve Khartoum and rescue General Gordon . During this campaign , Alderson was presented with the Bronze Medal of the Royal Humane Society after diving into the Nile to rescue a drowning soldier . For his service in these campaigns , Alderson was promoted to Captain and was stationed at Aldershot with the European Mounted Infantry Depot . The same year he married the daughter of the vicar of <unk> , Northamptonshire , a Miss Alice Mary Sergeant . 
 The next ten years of Alderson 's career were spent on staff duties and with his old regiment in England and Ireland . He also undertook training at the Staff College , Camberley and in 1896 was sent to Mashonaland as a commander of a regiment of local troops during the Second Matabele War . Following the campaign 's successful conclusion , Alderson returned to Aldershot and wrote his first book , " With the Mounted Infantry and the Mashonaland Field Force , 1896 " , an account of the war and a thesis on the tactical uses of mounted infantry . A second book on military tactics followed in 1898 called The Counter @-@ attack . His third book , " Pink and scarlet " was published in 1900 and was another tactical treatise concerning the relationship between fox @-@ hunting and the cavalry and the connection that these gentlemanly and military concerns had in training young officers and developing new innovations in cavalry tactics . In 1908 , he released a compilation of notes made on campaign entitled Lessons from 100 notes made in peace and war . 
 = = = Second Boer War = = = 
 In 1900 , shortly after the outbreak of the Second Boer War , Alderson returned to South Africa to command the Mounted Infantry against the Boer forces . His experience with mounted infantry made him ideal for this role as in the Boer guerillas , the British were fighting against masters of mounted infantry tactics and suffered heavy losses from their hit and run campaigns . Alderson was instrumental in forming British counter @-@ tactics and used his brigade to great effect against the Boers , his elite troops being two regiments of Canadian soldiers . The force was under the overall command of experienced British soldier Edward Hutton , previously GOC Canadian Militia , who became a lifelong friend . Among Canadians he was popular , being preferred to the tactless Hutton by the commander of the 2nd Canadian Mounted Rifles , and in 1901 the then Governor General of Canada , Lord Minto , unsuccessfully petitioned the British government to have Alderson brought to Canada as GOC Militia . 
 By 1901 , Alderson 's innovations had resulted in several successful operations , participating in the battles of Paardeberg and <unk> as well as the relief of Kimberley and the capture of Bloemfontein and Pretoria . The result of Alderson 's contribution of these campaigns was to be rewarded with confirmation as a brigadier general , appointment as a Companion of the Order of the Bath and to receive the ceremonial post of Aide @-@ de @-@ Camp to Queen Victoria , who died the same year . He was mentioned in despatches several times ( including 31 March 1900 ) , and received the Queen 's South Africa Medal . 
 = = = Peacetime 1902 – 1914 = = = 
 In 1903 he was given command of the British 2nd Infantry Brigade at Aldershot and in 1906 was again promoted to major general . Two years later Alderson was posted to the Indian 6th Infantry Division based in Poona , Southern India . In 1912 he returned to England in semi @-@ retirement on half @-@ pay , becoming a hunt master in Shropshire and developing an enthusiasm for yachting . 
 = = First World War = = 
 At the outbreak of the First World War in the summer of 1914 , Alderson was placed in charge of the 1st Mounted Division and all troops in the counties of Norfolk and Suffolk but was soon requested for command of the newly formed First Canadian Contingent due to his experience in South Africa commanding Canadian troops . Personally selected by Sir Sam Hughes , Canadian Minister of Militia , Alderson met the first shipments of Canadian troops in October and almost immediately came into conflict with their minister . Hughes had preceded his men and insisted that the Canadian contingent was not only fully trained and battle ready but also equipped with the best weaponry available . Alderson however saw his charges differently , commenting on the poor quality of the politically appointed officers , the low degree of training and the operational problems of the Ross rifle , a weapon personally approved by Hughes . 
 Training his new charges on Salisbury Plain , Alderson made some headway in toughening his troops encamped in the wet , autumn weather and dismissing the officers appointed by Hughes who had proved ineffectual . When Hughes ' representative in England , Colonel John Wallace Carson , secured preferential accommodation for the Canadian soldiers at the expense of a British brigade , Alderson refused the barracks and in doing so , made both Carson and Hughes into determined enemies . Carson wrote to the Canadian Prime Minister Robert Laird Borden that Alderson " does not treat our men with a firm iron hand covered with the velvet glove which their special temperaments require " . 
 Dispatched to France in February 1915 , the Canadian Division was briefly initiated to trench warfare on the periphery of the Battle of Neuve Chapelle before being attached to the British 2nd Army under Sir Horace Smith @-@ Dorrien in the Belgian town of Ypres . It was in front of Ypres on 22 April that the Canadians bore the brunt of the most furious German attack of the year . In the afternoon at 5 @.@ 00 pm the Germans began heavy shelling of the French trenches and the Canadians and the French Algerian troops stationed next to them saw a fog traveling across no @-@ mans land , covering the advance of German forces . The fog was chlorine gas , the first occasion in which this substance had been used in warfare . The Algerians broke and fled , suffering over 6 @,@ 000 casualties in a matter of minutes and the Canadians were consequently forced to defend twice the length of their front line in the face of a new and deadly weapon . Although the Canadian Division held on for more than two days , much ground was lost and the Division had themselves suffered over 50 % casualties , nearly 6 @,@ 000 men . 
 For Alderson the battle had been a failure : although his troops had held , he had found himself out of touch with the front line and unable to get accurate information about the situation . At one stage he had been commanding 33 battalions across several miles of front line with no central co @-@ ordination and great confusion between his distant headquarters and the trenches . In addition to his personal failings however , the Ross rifles had proven almost useless in battle and some of Alderson 's officer corps had performed poorly . In particular Brigadier @-@ General Richard Turner , commander of the 3rd Brigade , and Turner 's brigade @-@ major , Colonel Garnet Hughes , the son of Sam Hughes , caused much havoc when on the second day of the battle , they unilaterally withdrew the 3rd Brigade from the front line , opening up a 4 @,@ 000 @-@ yard gap through which the Germans threatened the entire Ypres Salient . Colonel John Carson however , who reported personally to Hughes , downplayed the difficulties and blamed the heavy casualties on Alderson 's leadership , indicating that the Division had only been saved from annihilation by the actions of Turner and Hughes . 
 = = = Ross rifle controversy = = = 
 Alderson 's situation worsened at the Battle of Festubert in May 1915 , when the Canadian Division failed to make any headway and suffered nearly 2 @,@ 500 casualties . Another operation a month later , the Second Battle of Givenchy , cost 366 casualties for no appreciable gain . Again , Alderson was not solely at fault in these actions and he remained popular with British Army Headquarters , Prime Minister Borden and with his men , resulting in promotion to command the entire Canadian Expeditionary Force when a second Division arrived late in 1915 . Despite this popularity , Sam Hughes continued to hold a grudge against Alderson and opposed him in political circles , taking offense at Alderson 's refusal to accept promotions made by Hughes or Carson of untried Canadian officers and instead promoting veteran British officers in their place . The main area of argument between the two men however was again over the Ross rifle . 
 By early 1916 it had become clear to all serving on the front lines that the Ross was useless in the filthy conditions of the trenches and its incompatibility with the British Lee – Enfield rifle meant that the Canadian troops were continually running out of ammunition . Hughes however had invested great political capital in the weapon and refused to countenance a switch to the British @-@ made alternative . This issue reached a head when Alderson , newly knighted as a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath , circulated a document listing ten deficiencies with the rifle and claiming 85 % of Canadian soldiers no longer wished to use it . Hughes was furious at Alderson 's defiance and sent letters to 281 senior military figures backing the Ross and attacking Alderson 's character . Alderson responded by ordering all subordinate commanders to prepare reports on the efficiency of the Ross rifle . Carson sent a copy of this order back to Hughes , along with a note from Turner that " action is being delayed too long as regards Alderson " . 
 Turner had his own reasons for wanting Alderson gone , following the Battle of St @-@ Eloi in April 1916 . After British troops had taken a large crater near the ruins of the Belgian town of St Eloi , a brigade of Turner 's division was ordered to hold the gain against German counter @-@ attacks . Due to dreadful management of the Canadian forces by Turner and Brigadier @-@ General Huntly Ketchen , German soldiers overran the crater , causing 1 @,@ 400 Canadian casualties and retaking the land around the crater , negating the gains made at heavy cost just a few days before . Sir Herbert Plumer , the commander of British 2nd Army who had overall responsibility for the front , demanded Ketchen 's immediate dismissal and when Turner claimed that if Ketchen was dismissed he would resign , Alderson sought his dismissal as well . Both officers were supporters of Sam Hughes , who made it clear in no uncertain terms to Commander in Chief Sir Douglas Haig that if Turner went then Haig could no longer rely on Canadian support . 
 Haig 's solution to this diplomatic crisis was a compromise . Alderson was transferred to the nominal post of Inspector @-@ General of Canadian Forces and the highly effective Sir Julian Byng replaced him in command of the Canadian Expeditionary Force , supported by Sir Arthur Currie , who had succeeded Alderson in command of the 1st Canadian Division . In exchange , Haig finally got rid of the Ross rifle , all Canadian troops being reissued Lee – <unk> in preparation for the upcoming Battle of the Somme . Alderson was not made aware of the purely nominal nature of his position until later , when he requested a staff car and was informed that he was no longer entitled to one . In September 1916 , Alderson became Inspector of Infantry in the British Army , a position he retained until 1920 , when he retired from active service at the age of 61 . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Alderson enjoyed an active retirement , becoming Colonel Commandant of the Royal West Kent Regiment and pursuing hunting and yachting with fervour , being an active member of the South Shropshire Hunt and Royal Norfolk and Suffolk Yacht Club . He was also very concerned that the growing popularity of motor sports would result in the demise of these traditional pastimes and expended much energy promoting them . After living the last few years of his life on a houseboat moored in Oulton Broad , he died in December 1927 of a sudden heart attack at Lowestoft and was buried at Chesterton , Oxfordshire , survived by his wife . She later arranged for his private papers to be given to the nation and they are currently stored at British Library and the National Archives of Zimbabwe . 
 = = Reputation = = 
 Alderson retained strong feelings about his treatment at the hands of Hughes and his allies , commenting to a friend that " Canadian politics have been too strong for all of us " . Nonetheless , he was well liked by the men he commanded and was remembered in The Times on his death as " An Englishman of a fine type " and that " the affection which he inspired in all who knew him was great " . The Dictionary of Canadian Biography recalls him as " A decent , honourable , unimaginative man , [ who ] had been more faithful to the interests of Canadian soldiers than their own minister " . 
 Another biographer , Tabitha Marshall , wrote ( 2014 ) that the conflict between Hughes and Alderson " likely affected not only his career but also his place in Canadian history . While his successors as Canadian Corps Commander , Byng and Currie , are well remembered , Alderson is relatively unknown to Canadians . " 
 Alan Clark 's work " The Donkeys " ( 1961 ) , detailing alleged British command incompetence in 1915 , contains a photograph of Alderson decorating a Canadian soldier , captioned " Donkey <unk> Lion " , alleging he was decorating the unnamed soldier for bravery at the Second Battle of Ypres . In fact , the photograph had been taken the following year , on 9 March 1916 , " near Locre " ( Loker ) , Belgium . 
 = = Namesake = = 
 The name Mount Alderson was given in 1915 to one of the peaks in the Waterton Lakes National Park in Alberta , Canada . 
 = = Works = = 
 With the Mounted Infantry and the Mashonaland Field Force , 1896 , 1898 
 The Counter @-@ attack , 1898 
 Pink and Scarlet or Hunting as a School for <unk> William Heinemann , 1900 
 Lessons from 100 notes made in peace and war , 1908 
 = Albany City Hall = 
 Albany City Hall is the seat of government of the city of Albany , New York . It houses the office of the mayor , the Common Council chamber , the city and traffic courts , as well as other city services . The current building was designed by Henry Hobson Richardson in his particular Romanesque style and opened in 1883 at 24 Eagle Street between Corning Place ( then Maiden Lane ) and Pine Street . It is a rectangular , three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ story building with a 202 @-@ foot ( 62 m ) tall tower at its southwest corner . The tower contains one of the only municipal carillons in the country . 
 Albany 's first city hall was the Stadt Huys , built by the Dutch at the intersection of Broadway and Hudson Avenue probably in the 1660s , though possibly earlier . It was probably replaced around 1740 with a larger building , which continued to be known as the Stadt Huys . In 1754 , the Stadt Huys was the location of the Albany Congress , where Benjamin Franklin presented the Albany Plan of Union , the first proposal to unite the British American colonies . In 1797 Albany was declared the state capital of New York and the New York Legislature made its home in Albany 's city hall . In 1809 the Legislature opened the first New York State Capitol and Albany 's government moved in with the Legislature . After purchasing a plot of land at the eastern terminus of Washington Avenue , across Eagle Street from the capitol , the city government moved into a new city hall designed by Philip Hooker in 1832 . 
 In 1880 , Hooker 's city hall was destroyed by fire and a new design was commissioned by Henry Richardson ; the building opened in 1883 . The new city hall still stands and is a fine example of Richardson 's unique Romanesque style . Architectural critics consider the building to have been designed around the high point of Richardson 's career . The building was added to the National Register of Historic Places on September 4 , 1972 . 
 = = Former city halls = = 
 Albany has had multiple buildings dedicated to being the seat of city government over its history . However , historians disagree on details of many of the earlier structures , namely , when they were built . 
 = = = Stadt Huys = = = 
 Albany 's original city hall , the Stadt Huys ( / <unk> <unk> / ; Dutch for " city hall " ; sometimes written Stadt Huis ) may have been built as early as 1635 . Evidence from the journals of Wouter van <unk> , Director of New Netherland ( 1633 – 1638 ) , suggests that at least some type of <unk> building was built on the site during his term in office . George Howell and Jonathan Tenney , in their book Bi @-@ centennial History of Albany , claim that reports from 1646 state the building was a substantial ( at least for its time ) three @-@ story structure , with the lower floor built of stone and used as a jail . However Albany historian Cuyler Reynolds claims the Stadt Huys was not built until 1673 . All sources agree that it stood at the northeast corner of today 's Hudson Avenue and Broadway , the current site of the SUNY System Administration Building . The Stadt Huys officially became city hall when the Dongan Charter incorporated Albany into a city in 1686 . An engraving of a 1695 map of Albany clearly identifies the Stadt Huys at the northeast corner of present @-@ day Hudson Ave and Broadway . 
 It is probable that a new city hall was built on the site of the Stadt Huys around 1740 ; historians at the New York State Museum ( NYSM ) claim it was 1741 . Growing tired of increasingly cramped space , the city government was able to secure funds from the provincial government to construct a new city hall on the same site . This building was also commonly known as the Stadt Huys , even though it was a completely new structure and the English had been in control of New York for more than 75 years . The NYSM describes the new Stadt Huys as a three @-@ story brick structure , adding that it was a " more substantial building " than its predecessor . This new building was the third @-@ largest building in Albany , surpassed only by the local Dutch church ( though not the one that stands today ) and Fort Albany . The roof of the new structure was gabled and was topped with a cupola and belfry . Howell and Tenney claim that the original Stadt Huys was in use for at least 160 years ( meaning a replacement structure would not have been needed until 1795 at the earliest ) , which is in disagreement with the idea that a new Stadt Huys was built in the 1740s . 
 In 1754 , the Stadt Huys was the site of the Albany Congress ; Benjamin Franklin of Pennsylvania presented the Albany Plan of Union there . This was the first formal proposal to unite the British American colonies . The Plan of Union 's original intention was to unite the colonies in defense against aggressions of the French to the north ; it was not an attempt to become independent from the auspices of the British crown . Although it was never adopted by the British Parliament , it was an important precursor to the United States Constitution . A month prior to the meeting , Franklin published his Join , or Die political cartoon , an infamous graphical representation of the Plan of Union . 
 During the Revolutionary War , city hall was home to the Albany Committee of Correspondence ( the political arm of the local revolutionary movement ) , which took over operation of Albany 's government in 1775 and eventually expanded its power to control all of Albany County ( which at that time was the largest county in the colony , extending far past its current borders ) . Tories and prisoners of war were often jailed in city hall alongside common criminals . Following the war , city hall was an occasional meeting place of the newly formed New York Legislature , in addition to being home to the city and county governments , the jail , courts , and local registry . 
 In 1797 Albany was declared the official capital of the state and the Legislature made city hall its home until the first state capitol was opened in 1809 . In an effort to move public buildings away from the bustling and expanding waterfront , the new capitol was located atop the State Street hill , on the same land the current building now stands . City surveyor Simeon De Witt , in his 1794 plan of the city , set aside this land as a public square . Also included on this map are depictions of city hall and the new city jail , located at State and Eagle Streets . In 1809 , Albany city government moved with the Legislature into the new capitol and remained there until a new city hall was opened in 1832 . The old Stadt Huys was eventually demolished after a fire in 1836 . 
 = = = 1832 city hall = = = 
 In an effort to move city and county government functions out of the state capitol , the city purchased a plot of land to build on in 1832 . They chose a spot on the edge of De Witt 's public square , along Eagle Street at the eastern terminus of Lion Street ( later renamed Washington Avenue ) ; the land was bought from St. Peter 's Church for $ 10 @,@ 295 @.@ 95 ( $ 244 @,@ 000 in modern dollars ) . The design of the new city hall was done by Albany architect Philip Hooker . The cornerstone was laid by Mayor John Townsend amid a Masonic ceremony , however the date of this event is in dispute . The building was completed in 1832 at a cost of about $ 92 @,@ 000 ( $ 2 @.@ 18 million in modern dollars ) . The new city hall was a Greek Revival structure , built of white marble with an entrance porch supported by four Doric columns . On the roof was a gilded dome . The interior was simple , with little ornamentation , though a full @-@ length statue of Alexander Hamilton stood in the center of the upper hall , between the Court room and the Common Council Chamber . Upon one side of this hall was a bas @-@ relief of DeWitt Clinton , with a view of a primitive canal @-@ boat in the distance , and on the opposite wall was a similar figure of Sir Walter Scott . The building was destroyed by fire on February 10 , 1880 . Plans for a replacement city hall quickly developed . 
 = = Current city hall = = 
 Following the 1880 fire , Henry Richardson quickly secured the commission for the replacement city hall after a limited competition between six architects and architectural firms . Richardson had been a frequent visitor to Albany over the prior four years , having been one of the lead architects on the state capitol . The budget was limited to $ 185 @,@ 000 ; Richardson 's design came in at $ 184 @,@ 000 . However the appointed public committee upped the price to $ 204 @,@ 000 after granite was substituted for brownstone in the design . The new city hall design dates from the period that is typically regarded as Richardson 's architectural peak . His design was similar to his other designs done in his unique Romanesque style . Architectural historian Henry @-@ Russell Hitchcock described city hall as " one of Richardson 's most Romanesque designs " and the building 's NRHP nomination added : " Albany City Hall 's banded arches , rhythmic fenestration , bold expression of materials and corner placement of the tower are characteristic features of Richardson 's work often to be repeated by his followers . " 
 The building is a load @-@ bearing masonry design laid out in a rectangle , with a 202 @-@ foot ( 62 m ) tall , Venetian @-@ style tower on its southwest corner topped with a pyramidal roof . The main structure is three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stories tall and the front ( west ) face is nine bays wide . The exterior walls are rusticated Milford ( Rhode Island ) granite with Longmeadow ( Massachusetts ) brownstone trim . Save for the bold asymmetrical placement of the tower ( which is a prime example of Richardson 's disregard for architectural correctness and known for being one of his best tower designs ) , the building is noted for its general simplicity in design . The entranceway is a simple triple @-@ arch loggia ; other design elements on the front façade are limited to its windows and a quadruple @-@ arch balcony off the Common Council chamber . The building is simultaneously noted for its general simplicity and care for small details , especially its intricate carvings . The entranceway is flanked by multiple tiers of relief sculpture and gargoyles . Most of the stone cutters originally brought to Albany to work on the capitol were later hired to do the sculptural details on city hall . 
 Many elements of the exterior design are representations of interior functionality . Because the Common Council chamber is located on the second floor ( above the entrance ) , that story is the same height as the first @-@ floor entrance hall . The tower is essentially window @-@ less because it was meant to be the city archive ; a round staircase extends up the southeast corner of the tower for access . The short tower on the building 's southeast corner was originally meant to be the transition between city hall and the ( to @-@ be built ) jail , complete with a " bridge of sighs " to transport inmates straight from their cells in the jail to the court rooms in city hall . 
 Due to lack of funds at the time ( the building 's initial budget doubled , ending up at $ 325 @,@ 000 ( $ 7 @.@ 97 million in modern dollars ) including furnishings ) , Richardson devoted most of his efforts to the building 's exterior . A report from the Times Union states , " There wasn 't enough money for Richardson to do the job as thoroughly as he would have liked . He said in his writing that if there wasn 't sufficient money , he 'd rather do it right on the outside and leave it to a future generation to finish the interior . The interior was finished by city architects a good 30 years after Richardson built it . " The interior was redesigned by Ogden and Gander in 1917 . The mayor 's office is on the first floor of the tower , the Council chamber and offices are on the building 's second floor , and the city clerk 's office is on the second floor of the tower . The mayor 's office contains a painting of the city 's first mayor , Pieter Schuyler . 
 With the leadership of William Gorham Rice in 1927 , a carillon was added to the tower ; it contained sixty bells ( though it could produce only 47 different notes since top notes have double bells ) made by John Taylor & Co in England . Financed by public donations ( from upwards of 25 @,@ 000 people ) , it cost $ 63 @,@ 000 ( $ 8 @.@ 65 million in modern dollars ) and was the first municipal carillon in the United States . In 1986 Mayor Thomas Whalen had the carillon restored , which included replacing 30 bells and adding two notes to its repertoire . The 49 bells weigh 27 short tons ( 24 @,@ 000 kg ) . The largest bell is 5 feet 9 inches ( 1 @.@ 75 m ) in diameter and weighs 10 @,@ 953 pounds ( 4 @,@ 968 kg ) . The carillon is still in use and plays multiple concerts during the week . 
 The clock faces on the tower were added in the 1920s , possibly around the time the carillon was added . The 1897 image of the city hall above shows the tower without the clock faces ( though the stonework shows obvious intent to have clock faces installed ) . City hall was added to the National Register of Historic Places on September 4 , 1972 . 
 = Pim Fortuyn List = 
 The Pim Fortuyn List ( Dutch : Lijst Pim Fortuyn , LPF ) was a right @-@ wing populist political party in the Netherlands . The eponymous founder of the party was Pim Fortuyn , a charismatic former university professor and political columnist who initially had planned to contest the 2002 general election as leader of the Livable Netherlands ( LN ) party . He was however dismissed as party leader in February 2002 due to controversial remarks he made in a newspaper interview on immigration @-@ related issues , and instead founded LPF a few days later . After gaining support in opinion polls , Fortuyn was assassinated on 6 May 2002 , days before the election . The party held onto its support , and went on to become the second @-@ largest party in the election . 
 The LPF formed part of a coalition government with the Christian Democratic Appeal ( CDA ) and the People 's Party for Freedom and Democracy ( VVD ) , but internal conflicts in the LPF led to the coalition 's break @-@ up and fresh elections after a few months . Following the 2003 election , the party was left in opposition . It became clear that the party was not viable without its original leader , and it went into decline until it was finally dissolved in 2008 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Fortuyn announced his intention to run for parliament in a television interview on 20 August 2001 . An unusual aspect of this was that it was not yet clear which political party he would be a candidate for . Although he was already in contact with the Livable Netherlands ( LN ) party , he initially also considered running for the CDA or creating his own list . On 25 November he was chosen as party leader for the LN . The LN functioned as the national extension of a movement that had contested municipal but never national elections . Fortuyn concluded his acceptance speech by saying the words that would become his slogan ; " At your service ! " Almost immediately after Fortuyn became leader , LN went from 2 % in opinion polls to about 17 % . In January 2002 , it was announced that Fortuyn also would head the Livable Rotterdam ( LR ) list for the March 2002 local elections . The official 2002 election study found that immigration and integration problems were the second most important issue for voters after issues concerning the health care system . Helped by the many speeches and interviews given by Fortuyn , immigration issues became the major topic of the national political agenda , thereby forcing other parties to react . 
 Until February , the LN had received disproportionate and generally sympathetic coverage in the media . The situation took a dramatic turn on 9 February , when Fortuyn was interviewed in de Volkskrant , one of the leading national newspapers . Against the strong advice of his campaign team , he made several controversial statements ; including one that said Islam was " a backward culture " , that no more asylum seekers would be allowed into the country , and , if necessary , the possible repeal of anti @-@ racism clauses in the Dutch Constitution to protect freedom of speech . Fortuyn was dismissed as party leader the next day , and in a television interview said that the split was irreparable , although he would have preferred to remain in the party . He founded Pim Fortuyn List ( LPF ) on 11 February . Opinion polls soon showed that he took most of LN 's supporters with him , leaving LN with its original 2 % , while Fortuyn soared to 17 % . The local LR — which held on to Fortuyn as its leader — was hugely successful in the March 2002 local elections , as it won more than one third of the vote and became Rotterdam 's strongest party . 
 = = = Fortuyn assassination = = = 
 It was reported in February 2002 that Fortuyn did not dare to appear in public owing to death threats . In March , he was attacked by pie @-@ throwing activists at the presentation of his new book De <unk> van <unk> <unk> <unk> ( which became the bestselling book by a Dutch author in the Netherlands in 2002 ) . Despite this , the authorities did not provide protection for Fortuyn , nor did he request protection . On 6 May , Fortuyn was assassinated outside a radio studio . This was the first political murder in the Netherlands for centuries ( excluding the Second World War ) . Some claimed that by " demonising " Fortuyn , the political left and the media had created a climate of opinion that had made the assassination possible . Campaigning immediately stopped , and although some suggested postponing the elections , the campaign resumed ( half @-@ heartedly ) after his funeral four days later . His funeral was broadcast live on television and , according to Cas Mudde , lead " to scenes of mass hysteria not seen since the Dutch national football team won the European Championship in 1988 . " The murder of Fortuyn , together with that of Theo van Gogh two years later , would result in a polarisation in the political debate in the Netherlands , and subsequently radical changes in immigration @-@ related policies and public discourse . 
 = = = First Balkenende cabinet ( 2002 – 2003 ) = = = 
 The LPF decided to maintain Fortuyn 's candidacy , and delayed naming a new leader until after the election . The 2002 general election proved a great success for the LPF , yielding 17 % of the votes and 26 seats in the House of Representatives — by far a record number of seats in the Netherlands for a new party — to become the second largest party . LN also made it into Parliament , with two seats . The Labour Party ( <unk> ) and People 's Party for Freedom and Democracy ( VVD ) saw their largest @-@ ever losses , while the Christian Democratic Appeal ( CDA ) won large gains . CDA leader Jan Peter Balkenende had earlier announced that his party would follow a tougher line towards asylum seekers , and he later agreed with much of Fortuyn 's criticism of the purple coalition and Holland 's multicultural society . As leader of the strongest party , Balkenende became the leading candidate for Prime Minister . 
 Following the election , Mat <unk> was chosen as LPF party leader as Fortuyn 's successor . Together with the CDA and the VVD , the party formed part of the governing coalition , and supplied several members for the Balkenende cabinet . The party was granted four of fourteen cabinet seats , for immigration , economics , health and sports . But without its original leader and lack of a clearly defined organisational structure , the LPF soon succumbed to highly public internal squabbles . By October 2002 , the break @-@ up of the government coalition was triggered by the bickering of LPF Ministers Eduard <unk> and Herman <unk> . 
 = = = Opposition and disintegration ( 2003 – 2006 ) = = = 
 In the January 2003 general election , the LPF shrank to 5 @.@ 7 % support and eight seats . Following the election the LPF was exchanged for the Democrats 66 in the government coalition , and would find it hard to maintain support in opposition . Besides Joost Eerdmans , most of its Members of Parliament were not very visible , while party leader <unk> had enough work just keeping the party from further infighting . The party also went into financial straits , and as the new coalition continued most of the former coalition 's policies , it was hard for the LPF to oppose the government . 
 The LPF won just 2 @.@ 6 % of the vote in the 2004 European Parliament election , and did not win a seat . In this election , Paul van Buitenen surprisingly won two seats with his anti @-@ corruption Europe Transparent ( although it was not successful in the long term ) . By 2004 , the LPF had fallen to a less than 1 % support and disintegrated . The party had lost most of its members , and the parliamentary faction had declared itself independent from the party . 
 = = = List Five Fortuyn ( 2006 – 2008 ) = = = 
 The LPF participated in the 2006 general election under its new name List Five Fortuyn ( Lijst <unk> Fortuyn ) . On 25 September 2006 , the party released its campaign commercial , which featured new leader Olaf <unk> coming down from " heaven " with a parachute and presenting himself as a " reincarnation " of Pim Fortuyn . Marten Fortuyn , brother of Pim Fortuyn , declared it " outrageous and tasteless . " In the election , LVF did not receive enough votes to secure a seat with support of only 0 @.@ 2 % . In July 2007 , the party voted to dissolve itself on 1 January 2008 . 
 Fortuyn 's political heritage scattered among various politicians , many of which were not successful . These include Marco Pastors , leader of the One NL , and <unk> <unk> , leader of the Party for the Netherlands — none of which managed to win a seat in the 2006 election . More importantly however , the party had been squeezed out by the tougher line on immigration issues by mainstream politicians such as Minister for Integration and Immigration Rita <unk> , who largely adopted Fortuyn 's policies . By the end of the decade , former LPF supporters had mostly moved to support Geert Wilders and his Party for Freedom ( PVV ) . 
 = = Ideology = = 
 = = = Fortuynism = = = 
 The ideology or political style that is derived from Pim Fortuyn , and in turn the LPF , is often called Fortuynism . Observers variously saw him as a political protest targeting the alleged elitism and bureaucratic style of the Dutch purple coalitions or as offering an appealing political style . The style was characterized variously as one " of openness , directness and clearness " , populism or simply as charisma . Another school holds Fortuynism as a distinct ideology , with an alternative vision of society . Some argued that Fortuynism was not just one ideology , but contained liberalism , populism and nationalism . 
 During the 2002 campaign , Fortuyn was accused of being on the " extreme right " , although others saw only certain similarities . While he employed anti @-@ immigration rhetoric , he was neither a radical nationalist nor a defender of traditional authoritarian values . On the contrary , Fortuyn wanted to protect the socio @-@ culturally liberal values of the Netherlands , women 's rights and sexual minorities ( he was openly homosexual himself ) , from the " backward " Islamic culture . The LPF also won support from some ethnic minorities ; one of Fortuyn 's closest associates was of Cape Verdean origin , and one of the party 's MPs was a young woman of Turkish descent . 
 = = = Foreign policy = = = 
 Although the LPF was established post @-@ 9 / 11 , Fortuyn had already developed a worldview based on the " clash between civilizations " , namely between " modernity " and Islam , or Western society and Islamic culture . The LPF supported NATO , but was eurosceptic and saw the European Union as a " bureaucracy which barely interests its citizens , let alone inspires them . " The party did however not oppose the project of European integration in general , but rather its present organization , lack of democracy and threat to national sovereignty . Opposing the full membership of Turkey , Albania , Ukraine , Belarus and Russia , the LPF maintained that the European Union " shouldn 't cross the Bosporus and the Ural " . 
 = = Election results = = 
 = = = Parliament = = = 
 = = = European Parliament = = = 
 = = Organisation = = 
 = = = Leadership = = = 
