 Quantum evolution was a controversial hypothesis advanced by Columbia University paleontologist George Gaylord Simpson , who was regarded by Stephen Jay Gould as " the greatest and most biologically astute paleontologist of the twentieth century . " Simpson 's conjecture was that according to the geological record , on very rare occasions evolution would proceed very rapidly to form entirely new families , orders , and classes of organisms . This hypothesis differs from punctuated equilibrium in several respects . First , punctuated equilibrium was more modest in scope , in that it was addressing evolution specifically at the species level . Simpson 's idea was principally concerned with evolution at higher taxonomic groups . Second , Eldredge and Gould relied upon a different mechanism . Where Simpson relied upon a synergistic interaction between genetic drift and a shift in the adaptive fitness landscape , Eldredge and Gould relied upon ordinary speciation , particularly Ernst Mayr 's concept of allopatric speciation . Lastly , and perhaps most significantly , quantum evolution took no position on the issue of stasis . Although Simpson acknowledged the existence of stasis in what he called the <unk> mode , he considered it ( along with rapid evolution ) to be unimportant in the larger scope of evolution . In his Major Features of Evolution Simpson stated , " Evolutionary change is so nearly the universal rule that a state of motion is , figuratively , normal in evolving populations . The state of rest , as in <unk> , is the exception and it seems that some restraint or force must be required to maintain it . " Despite such differences between the two models , earlier critiques — from such eminent commentators as Sewall Wright as well as Simpson himself — have argued that punctuated equilibrium is little more than quantum evolution relabeled . 
 = = = Multiple meanings of gradualism = = = 
 Punctuated equilibrium is often portrayed to oppose the concept of gradualism , when it is actually a form of gradualism . This is because even though evolutionary change appears instantaneous between geological sedimentary layers , change is still occurring incrementally , with no great change from one generation to the next . To this end , Gould later commented that " Most of our paleontological colleagues missed this insight because they had not studied evolutionary theory and either did not know about allopatric speciation or had not considered its translation to geological time . Our evolutionary colleagues also failed to grasp the implication ( s ) , primarily because they did not think at geological scales " . 
 Richard Dawkins dedicated a chapter in The Blind Watchmaker to correcting , in his view , the wide confusion regarding rates of change . His first point is to argue that phyletic gradualism — understood in the sense that evolution proceeds at a single uniform rate of speed , called " constant speedism " by Dawkins — is a " caricature of Darwinism " and " does not really exist . " His second argument , which follows from the first , is that once the caricature of " constant speedism " is dismissed , we are left with one logical alternative , which Dawkins terms " variable speedism . " Variable speedism may also be distinguished one of two ways : " discrete variable speedism " and " continuously variable speedism . " Eldredge and Gould , believing that evolution jumps between stability and relative rapidity , are described as " discrete variable <unk> , " and " in this respect they are genuinely radical . " They believe that evolution generally proceeds in bursts , or not at all . " Continuously variable <unk> , " on the other hand believe that " evolutionary rates fluctuate continuously from very fast to very slow and stop , with all intermediates . They see no particular reason to emphasize certain speeds more than others . In particular , stasis , to them , is just an extreme case of ultra @-@ slow evolution . To a <unk> , there is something very special about stasis . " Dawkins therefore commits himself here to an empirical claim about the geological record , in contrast to his earlier claim that " The paleontological evidence can be argued about , and I am not qualified to judge it . " It is this particular commitment that Eldredge and Gould have aimed to overturn . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 Richard Dawkins believes that the apparent gaps represented in the fossil record document migratory events rather than evolutionary events . According to Dawkins , evolution certainly occurred but " probably gradually " elsewhere . However , the punctuational equilibrium model may still be inferred from both the observation of stasis and examples of rapid and episodic speciation events documented in the fossil record . 
 Dawkins also emphasizes that punctuated equilibrium has been " oversold by some journalists " , but partly due to Eldredge and Gould 's " later writings " . Dawkins contends that the theory " does not deserve a particularly large measure of publicity " . It is a " minor gloss , " an " interesting but minor wrinkle on the surface of neo @-@ Darwinian theory , " and " lies firmly within the neo @-@ Darwinian synthesis " . 
 In his book Darwin 's Dangerous Idea , philosopher Daniel Dennett is especially critical of Gould 's presentation of punctuated equilibrium . Dennett argues that Gould alternated between revolutionary and conservative claims about the theory , and that each time Gould made a revolutionary statement — or appeared to do so — he was criticized , and thus retreated to a traditional neo @-@ Darwinian position . Gould responded to Dennett 's claims in The New York Review of Books , and in his technical volume The Structure of Evolutionary Theory . 
 Literary scholar Heidi Scott argued that Gould 's use of analogy and metaphor constitutes a non @-@ scientific discourse attempting to validate a scientific hypothesis . She claims that Gould — particularly in his popular essays — uses a variety of strategies from literature , political science , and personal anecdotes to substantiate the general pattern of punctuated equilibrium in the context of natural science ( long periods of stasis interrupted by rapid , catastrophic change ) . Gould responded that critics often made the mistake of confusing the context of discovery with the context of justification . While Gould is celebrated for the color and energy of his prose , as well as his interdisciplinary knowledge , critics such as Scott have concerns that the theory has gained undeserved credence among non @-@ scientists because of Gould 's rhetorical skills . " Punctuated <unk> " has also been seized upon and misinterpreted by some creationists as refuting evolution of new species by natural selection , since classical Darwinian theory emphasized gradual change rather than punctuated change . 
 John Lyne and Henry Howe , in a more positive evaluation , state that " re @-@ analysis of existing fossil data has shown , to the increasing satisfaction of the paleontological community , that Eldredge and Gould were correct in identifying periods of evolutionary stasis which are interrupted by much shorter periods of evolutionary change . " 
 = = Darwin 's theory = = 
 The sudden appearance of most species in the geologic record and the lack of evidence of substantial gradual change in most species — from their initial appearance until their extinction — has long been noted , including by Charles Darwin who appealed to the imperfection of the record as the favored explanation . When presenting his ideas against the prevailing influences of catastrophism and progressive creationism , which envisaged species being supernaturally created at intervals , Darwin needed to forcefully stress the gradual nature of evolution in accordance with the gradualism promoted by his friend Charles Lyell . He privately expressed concern , noting in the margin of his 1844 Essay , " Better begin with this : If species really , after catastrophes , created in showers world over , my theory false . " 
 It is often incorrectly assumed that he insisted that the rate of change must be constant , or nearly so , but even the first edition of On the Origin of Species states that " Species of different genera and classes have not changed at the same rate , or in the same degree . In the oldest tertiary beds a few living shells may still be found in the midst of a multitude of extinct forms ... The Silurian Lingula differs but little from the living species of this genus " . Lingula is among the few brachiopods surviving today but also known from fossils over 500 million years old . In the fourth edition ( 1866 ) of On the Origin of Species Darwin wrote that " the periods during which species have undergone modification , though long as measured in years , have probably been short in comparison with the periods during which they retain the same form . " Thus <unk> in general is consistent with Darwin 's conception of evolution . 
 According to early versions of punctuated equilibrium , " peripheral isolates " are considered to be of critical importance for speciation . However , Darwin wrote , " I can by no means agree ... that immigration and isolation are necessary elements .... Although isolation is of great importance in the production of new species , on the whole I am inclined to believe that <unk> of area is still more important , especially for the production of species which shall prove capable of enduring for a long period , and of spreading widely . " 
 The importance of isolation in forming species had played a significant part in Darwin 's early thinking , as shown in his Essay of 1844 . But by the time he wrote the Origin he had downplayed its importance . He explained the reasons for his revised view as follows : 
 Throughout a great and open area , not only will there be a greater chance of favourable variations , arising from the large number of individuals of the same species there supported , but the conditions of life are much more complex from the large number of already existing species ; and if some of these species become modified and improved , others will have to be improved in a corresponding degree , or they will be exterminated . Each new form , also , as soon as it has been improved , will be able to spread over the open and continuous area , and will thus come into competition with many other forms ... the new forms produced on large areas , which have already been victorious over many competitors , will be those that will spread most widely , and will give rise to the greatest number of new varieties and species . They will thus play a more important role in the changing history of the organic world . 
 Thus punctuated equilibrium contradicts some of Darwin 's ideas regarding the specific mechanisms of evolution , but generally accords with Darwin 's theory of evolution by natural selection . 
 = = Supplemental modes of rapid evolution = = 
 Recent work in developmental biology has identified dynamical and physical mechanisms of tissue morphogenesis that may underlie abrupt morphological transitions during evolution . Consequently , consideration of mechanisms of phylogenetic change that have been found in reality to be non @-@ gradual is increasingly common in the field of evolutionary developmental biology , particularly in studies of the origin of morphological novelty . A description of such mechanisms can be found in the multi @-@ authored volume Origination of <unk> Form ( MIT Press ; 2003 ) . 
 = = Language change = = 
 In linguistics , R. M. W. Dixon has proposed a punctuated equilibrium model for language histories , with reference particularly to the prehistory of the indigenous languages of Australia and his objections to the proposed Pama – <unk> language family there . Although his model has raised considerable interest , it does not command majority support within linguistics . 
 Separately , recent work using computational phylogenetic methods claims to show that punctuational bursts play an important factor when languages split from one another , accounting for anywhere from 10 to 33 % of the total divergence in vocabulary . Note that punctuational bursts also occurs in mythology in even greater proportions . 
 = William Montagu , 1st Earl of Salisbury = 
 William Montagu , alias de Montacute , 1st Earl of Salisbury , 3rd Baron Montagu , King of Mann ( 1301 – 30 January 1344 ) was an English nobleman and loyal servant of King Edward III . 
 The son of William Montagu , 2nd Baron Montagu , he entered the royal household at an early age and became a close companion of the young Prince Edward . The relationship continued after Edward was crowned king following the deposition of Edward II in 1327 . In 1330 , Montagu was one of Edward 's main accomplices in the coup against Roger Mortimer , who until then had been acting as the king 's protector . 
 In the following years Montagu served the king in various capacities , primarily in the Scottish Wars . He was richly rewarded , and among other things received the lordship of the Isle of Man . In 1337 , he was created Earl of Salisbury , and given an annual income of 1000 marks to go with the title . He served on the Continent in the early years of the Hundred Years ' War , but in 1340 he was captured by the French , and in return for his freedom had to promise never to fight in France again . Salisbury died of wounds suffered at a tournament early in 1344 . 
 Legend has it that Montagu 's wife Catherine was raped by Edward III , but this story is almost certainly French propaganda . William and Catherine had six children , most of whom married into the nobility . Modern historians have called William Montague Edward 's " most intimate personal friend " and " the chief influence behind the throne from Mortimer 's downfall in 1330 until his own death in 1344 . " 
 = = Family background = = 
 William Montagu , born at <unk> , Oxfordshire in 1301 , was the second but eldest surviving son of William Montagu , 2nd Baron Montagu , and Elizabeth de Montfort , daughter of Sir Peter Montfort of <unk> , <unk> by Matilda / Maud de la Mare daughter and heiress of Henry de la Mare of Ashtead , Surrey , Royal Justice , Seneschal of William <unk> II Earl of Salisbury . The Montagu family , a West Country family with roots going back to the Conquest , held extensive lands in Somerset , Dorset and Devon . The father , William Montagu , distinguished himself in the Scottish Wars during the reign of Edward I , and served as steward of Edward II 's household . Some members of the nobility , including Thomas of Lancaster , viewed Montagu with suspicion , as a member of a court party with undue influence on the king . For this reason he was sent to Aquitaine , to serve as seneschal . Here he died on 18 October 1319 . Even though he sat in parliament as a baron , the second lord Montagu never rose above a level of purely regional importance . 
 = = Early service = = 
 The younger William was still a minor at the time of his father 's death , and entered the royal household as a ward of the king in 1320 . On 21 February 1323 he was granted his father 's lands and title . His service to Edward II took him abroad to the Continent in both 1320 and 1325 . In 1326 he was knighted . After the deposition of Edward II in 1327 , Montagu continued in the service of Edward 's son Edward III . He helped the new king in repelling the Scottish invasion of 1327 , and was created knight banneret in 1328 . 
 Montagu enjoyed a close relationship with Edward III , and accompanied him abroad on a diplomatic mission in 1329 . That same year he was sent on an embassy to negotiate a marriage alliance with King Philip VI of France . His most important task , however , came in connection with a mission to the Papacy in Avignon . The young king — along with his government — was under the dominance of his mother Isabella and her lover Roger Mortimer , who had been responsible for the deposition of the king 's father . Montagu explained the king 's situation , and Pope John XXII asked for a special signal that assure him that he was dealing with the king in person . After Montagu 's return , Richard Bury , Keeper of the Privy Seal , wrote to inform the pope that only letters containing the words pater sancte ( holy father ) , in Edward 's own handwriting , were indeed from the king . Only Edward , Bury and Montagu were party to the scheme . 
 = = Coup against Mortimer = = 
 When Mortimer discovered the conspiracy against him , Montagu was brought in for interrogation – along with the king – but gave nothing away . Afterward he supposedly advised Edward to move against his protector , because " It was better that they should eat the dog than that the dog should eat them " . On 19 October 1330 , while Mortimer and Isabella were entrenched in Nottingham Castle , the constable of the castle showed Montagu a secret entrance through an underground tunnel . Along with William de Bohun , Robert Ufford , and John Neville and others , he entered the castle , where he met up with the king . A short brawl followed before Mortimer was captured . The queen stormed into the chamber shouting " Good son , have pity on noble Mortimer " . Edward did not obey his mother 's wishes , and a few weeks later Mortimer was executed for treason in London . As a reward for his part in the coup , Montagu was given lands worth £ 1000 , including the Welsh lordship of Denbigh that had belonged to Mortimer . His family also benefited ; his brother Simon Montacute became Bishop of Worcester and later of Ely . Another brother , Edward Montagu , 1st Baron Montagu , married Alice of Norfolk , a co @-@ heir of Thomas of Brotherton , 1st Earl of Norfolk . 
 = = Service under Edward III = = 
 In the years to come , Montagu acted as Edward 's closest companion . In April 1331 , the two went on a secret expedition to France , disguised as merchants so they would not be recognised . In September of the same year , Montagu held a tournament at Cheapside , where he and the king were costumed as Tartars . From 1333 onwards , Montagu was deeply engaged in the Scottish Wars , and distinguished himself at the Siege of Berwick and the Battle of Halidon Hill . It was after this event that his lordship over the Isle of Man was recognised , a right he held from his grandfather . The lordship was at the moment of a purely theoretical nature , however , since the island was still under Scottish control . 
 In February 1334 Montagu was sent on a commission to Edinburgh , to demand Edward Balliol 's homage to Edward . In the great summer campaign of 1335 , it was Montagu who provided the largest English contingent , with 180 men @-@ at @-@ arms and 136 archers . He was well rewarded for his contributions : after the Scots had been forced to cede the Lowlands , Montagu was granted the county of <unk> . He was also allowed to buy the wardship of Roger Mortimer 's son Roger for 1000 marks , a deal that turned out to be very lucrative for Montagu . At this point , however , the fortunes were turning for the English in Scotland . Montagu campaigned in the north again in 1337 , but the siege of Dunbar met with failure . Following the abortive attempt in Scotland , Edward III turned his attention to the continent . 
 = = The Hundred Years ' War = = 
 Montagu was created Earl of Salisbury on 16 March 1337 . This was one of six comital promotions Edward III made that day , in preparation for what was to become the Hundred Years ' War . To allow Montagu to support his new status , the king granted him land and rent of a value of 1000 marks a year . The money was provided from the royal stannaries of Cornwall . A contemporary poem tells of a vow made by the earl on the eve of the wars – he would not open one of his eyes while fighting in France . The story is probably a satire ; the truth was that Montagu had already lost the use of one of his eyes in a tournament . 
 In April 1337 , Montagu was appointed to a diplomatic commission to Valenciennes , to establish alliances with Flanders and the German princes . In July 1338 , he accompanied the king on another mission to the continent , again providing the greatest number of soldiers , with 123 men @-@ at @-@ arms and 50 archers . In September of that year he was made Marshal of England . After the death of Thomas of Brotherton , Earl of Norfolk , this office had come into the hands of Norfolk 's daughter Margaret . The king did not trust the office with her husband , so he decided instead to bestow it on his trusted companion , Montagu . Edward 's policy of building alliances put him in great debt , and when he left the Low Countries to return to England late in 1338 , Salisbury had to stay behind as surety to the king 's debtors , along with the king 's family and the Earl of Derby . The earl had earlier voiced concerns about the costly alliances , but he nevertheless remained loyal to the king 's strategy . 
 While Edward was away , Salisbury was captured by the French at Lille in April 1340 , and imprisoned in Paris . Reportedly , King Philip VI of France wanted to execute Salisbury and Robert Ufford , Earl of Suffolk , who was captured with him . Philip was , however , dissuaded by John of Bohemia , who argued that the earls could come in handy in an exchange , should any French noblemen be captured . Though released on parole in September , it was not until May 1342 that he reached a final settlement with the French . Salisbury was freed in a prisoner exchange , but only on the condition that he never fight in France again . 
 = = Final years = = 
 Salisbury had long been frustrated by the failure of the government in England to provide sufficient funds for the war effort . On his return , however , he played little part in the conflict of 1341 between King Edward and Chancellor John Stratford . In May that year he was appointed to a committee to hear the king 's charges against Stratford , but little came from this . In 1342 – 43 he fought with Robert of Artois in the Breton War of Succession , and in 1343 helped negotiate the Truce of <unk> . It was probably sometime after this he made good his claim on the Isle of Man , by conquering the island which was until then held by the Scots . 
 His final international commission took place late in 1343 , when he accompanied Henry of Grosmont , Earl of Derby , on a diplomatic mission to Castile . Early in 1344 he was back in England , where he took part in a great tournament at Windsor . It was during this tournament , according to the chronicler Adam <unk> , that he received wounds that would prove fatal . Salisbury died on 30 January 1344 . He was buried at Bisham Priory in Berkshire , adjoining his home , Bisham Manor . He had founded the priory himself in 1337 , on his elevation to the earldom . King Edward 's financial obligations were never paid in full during the earl 's lifetime , and at Salisbury ' death the king owed him £ 11 @,@ 720 . Of this , some £ <unk> were written off by his executors in 1346 . 
 = = Family = = 
 In or before 1327 Salisbury married Catherine , daughter of William de Grandison , 1st Baron Grandison . Two anecdotal stories revolve around Catherine Montagu ; in one she is identified as the " Countess of Salisbury " from whose dropped garter Edward III named the Order of the Garter . In the other , Edward III falls in love with the countess , and arranges to be alone with her so he can rape her . Neither story is supported by contemporary evidence , and the latter almost certainly is a product of French propaganda . 
 William and Catherine had six children , most of whom made highly fortunate matches with other members of the nobility . The first Earl of Salisbury made enormous additions to the family fortune ; at the time of his father 's death , the lands had been valued at just over £ 300 . In 1344 , only the annual income of the lands has been estimated to more than £ 2 @,@ 300 , equivalent to about £ 1 @.@ 83 million in present @-@ day terms . Edward was also free with granting franchises to Salisbury , including the return of writs , which gave the earl authority in his lands normally held by the royally appointed sheriff . Salisbury 's oldest son William succeeded his father in July 1349 , while still a minor , as William Montagu , 2nd Earl of Salisbury . The younger William was one of the founding members of the Order of the Garter , but he never enjoyed the same favour with the king as his father had . 
 The children of William and Catherine were as follows : 
 = = In fiction = = 
 Salisbury is a character in Les Rois maudits ( The Accursed Kings ) , a series of French historical novels by Maurice Druon . He was portrayed by Serge <unk> in the 1972 French miniseries adaptation of the series . 
 = African river martin = 
 The African river martin ( Pseudochelidon eurystomina ) is a passerine bird , one of two members of the river martin subfamily of the swallow family , Hirundinidae . When discovered , it was not initially recognised as a swallow , but a later understanding of differences in structure , including its stout beak and robust legs and feet , led to its current placement in a separate subfamily shared only with the Asian white @-@ eyed river martin . The African river martin is a large swallow , mainly black with a blue @-@ green gloss to the head and a greener tint to the back and wings . The under @-@ wings are brownish , the underparts are purple @-@ black , and the flight feathers are black . This martin has red eyes , a broad orange @-@ red bill and a black , square tail . Young birds are similar in appearance to the adults , but have browner plumage . This species has a variety of unmusical calls , and displays both in flight and on the ground , although the purpose of the terrestrial display is unknown . 
 The main breeding areas are in the Democratic Republic of the Congo ( DRC ) along the Congo River and its tributary , the Ubangi , in habitats characterised by a mixture of tropical forest types including swampy or seasonally flooded woodland . The African river martin is migratory , wintering in coastal savanna in southern Gabon and the Republic of the Congo . Breeding also occurs in these coastal areas , but it is unknown whether the migrants are raising a second brood or if there is a separate resident population . This martin feeds in flocks throughout the year , catching a variety of insects in the air , especially flying ants . It does not use perches during the breeding season , although it will often land on the ground . 
 The African river martin nests in burrows in river sand banks , often alongside rosy bee @-@ eaters , but its incubation and fledging times are not known . It also digs tunnels for night @-@ time shelter when in its wintering areas . It appears to be common within its restricted range , despite being caught in large numbers by the local population for food , and large flocks are sometimes seen . However , due to a lack of detailed information about its breeding range and population numbers , this species is classed as Data Deficient by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 When German zoologist Gustav Hartlaub first described the African river martin in 1861 , it was not initially thought to be a member of the swallow and martin family , and he placed it with the rollers . Later authors either placed it in its own monotypic family , or with the woodswallows . A 1938 study of this martin 's anatomy by Percy Lowe revealed that the species was closest to the swallows and martins , but sufficiently distinct from them to be placed in a separate subfamily , Pseudochelidoninae . 
 The only other member of the subfamily is the white @-@ eyed river martin Pseudochelidon sirintarae , known only from one site in Thailand and possibly extinct . These two species possess a number of features which distinguish them from other swallows and martins , including their robust legs and feet , stout bills , large syrinxes ( vocal organs ) and different bronchial structure . Genetic studies confirmed that the two river martins form a distinct clade from the typical swallows in the Hirundininae subfamily . 
 The two river martins are in some ways intermediate between typical swallows and other passerine birds , and the arrangement of their leg muscles is more like that of a typical passerine than of a swallow . The extent of their differences from other swallows and the wide geographical separation of these two martins suggest that they are relict populations of a group of species that diverged from the main swallow lineage early in its evolutionary history . Like other early hirundine lineages , these martins nest in self @-@ excavated burrows , rather than adopted nest holes or mud nests . Their physical characteristics and breeding behaviour suggest that they may be the most primitive of the swallows . 
 The genus name Pseudochelidon ( Hartlaub , 1861 ) comes from the Ancient Greek language prefix ψευδο / pseudo , meaning " false " , and χελιδον / chelidôn , meaning " swallow " . The species name reflects the superficial similarity to the rollers of the genus <unk> . 
 The African and Asian Pseudochelidon species differ markedly in the size of their bills and eyes , suggesting that they have different feeding ecologies , with the white @-@ eyed river martin probably able to take much larger prey . The African species has a softer , fleshier , and much less prominent gape ( fleshy interior of the bill ) than its Thai relative . The bill of the white @-@ eyed river martin also averages 22 @.@ 5 % wider than that of the African river martin . Following a suggestion by the Thai bird 's discoverer , Kitti Thonglongya , Richard Brooke proposed in 1972 that the white @-@ eyed river martin was sufficiently different from the African species to be placed in a separate genus Eurochelidon , leaving the African martin in a monotypic genus . This treatment was contested by other authorities , and most authors retain the two species in Pseudochelidon , BirdLife International being a notable exception . 
 = = Description = = 
 The adult African river martin is a large swallow , 14 cm ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) long . It is mainly black , with a silky blue @-@ green gloss to the head , becoming distinctly green on the back and wing coverts . The underparts , other than the brownish under @-@ wings , are purple @-@ black , and the flight feathers are black . The black square tail is 4 @.@ 8 cm ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) long , and the soft feather shafts project beyond the barbed section . This feature is most pronounced in the two central feathers , which in the related white @-@ eyed river martin are greatly elongated . The African river martin has brown legs with a 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) long tarsus , red eyes , pink eye @-@ rings , and a broad orange @-@ red bill . The wing length averages 14 cm ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) . 
 The sexes are similar in appearance . There are many bird species in which there is sexual dichromatism which is not apparent to the human eye , but spectroscopic analysis of this martin 's head feathers suggests that the colour differences between the sexes are small even to the birds ' perception . Juveniles are duller and have sooty brown heads . The moult to adult plumage takes place in the wintering areas and is largely complete by October . 
 The African river martin has a strong , fast flight interspersed with glides . It is a vocal species with a variety of sounds . It has a jingling song given in the aerial breeding display , and a number of contact calls , kee @-@ r @-@ r , chee @-@ chee and similar short , unmusical sounds . Flocks call together , cheer @-@ cheer @-@ cheer , as they take to the air , and this martin is very vocal during migration , giving harsh gull @-@ like calls . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The African river martin breeds along the Congo River and its tributary , the Ubangi in the Democratic Republic of the Congo ( DRC ) , an area estimated at 47 @,@ 000 km2 ( 18 @,@ 150 mi2 ) . This part of Africa is poorly known , and this martin may also breed on other tributaries , such as the Kasai , or on other suitable rivers . It also breeds in southern Gabon and the Republic of the Congo . The DRC breeding population is migratory , wintering in coastal savanna in Gabon , but it is not known if the birds nesting at the coast are a separate population , or if the migrants are breeding again in the wintering area . Westwards migration from the DRC is from June to early September , with birds arriving at the coast from mid @-@ August to mid @-@ September . Return migration is mainly from December to March . Three or four birds were seen passing through the southern Central African Republic in 1994 . 
 This martin 's breeding requirement is forested rivers with islands that have sandy banks for nest burrows , and its habitat in the DRC is tropical forest with over 200 cm ( 78 @.@ 5 in ) of rain a year . This area is a patchwork of dry , seasonally flooded and permanently wet woodland , and seasonally flooded savanna , all of which are subject to inundation by the Congo River and its tributaries . The swamp forests contain trees such as Symphonia <unk> , raffia palms and <unk> species , and the riverbanks are often lined with arrowroot . This specialised habitat is shared with two other restricted @-@ range birds , the Congo sunbird and the Congo martin . The main coastal breeding area in Gabon , around Gamba , has a similar mosaic of habitats , with mangroves , swamp forests , wet evergreen woodlands and seasonally wet savanna . There are also two large lagoons , and drier areas of grassland and forest . All the breeding areas form part of a belt of forest that stretches from southern Cameroon through Gabon to the northern parts of the Republic of Congo , and extends through most of the DRC up to its eastern mountains . Outside of the breeding season , this martin roosts in reed @-@ beds or riverine vegetation . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 The African river martin has flight displays in which pairs or small groups chase each other while making jingling calls . It also displays on the ground , with the wings drooped and slightly open , and the head raised but held horizontally ; the function of these terrestrial displays is uncertain . This species nests in colonies in sandbanks along forested rivers from December to April when the river is low . The colonies , sometimes shared with rosy bee @-@ eaters in Gabon , may contain up to 800 birds , each pair excavating a 1 – 2 m ( 39 – 79 in ) long tunnel in the sandbar . Two to four unspotted white eggs are laid onto a few twigs and leaves in the pocket at the end of the tunnel . The eggs measure 21 @.@ 9 mm – 26 @.@ 0 mm × 16 @.@ 4 mm – 18 @.@ 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 86 in – 1 @.@ 02 in × 0 @.@ 65 in – 0 @.@ 72 in ) . The incubation and fledging times are unknown , although it is believed that both parents care for the nestlings . 
 In the breeding areas , this martin rarely uses perches other than the ground , and once it has landed , it may walk around or cleanse itself with the sand . It feeds in flocks often far from the colony . Wintering birds use elevated perches much more readily , landing on treetops , wires and roofs , and feed in flight over rivers and forests , often far from water . The flocks feed on insects including flies , small beetles and bugs , but mainly on winged ants . Wintering birds dig tunnels in the sand in which to roost overnight . 
 = = Status = = 
 The total population size of the African river martin is unknown . In the late 1980s , it appeared to be common , if local , and large numbers were seen on migration in Gabon . However , it is particularly poorly studied in the Democratic Republic of the Congo ( DRC ) , and it is not known if there is any relationship between the birds breeding in the DRC and those breeding in coastal areas of Gabon and Congo . Several hundred birds were seen at <unk> @-@ <unk> National Park in Congo in 1996 and a flock of 15 @,@ 000 birds was seen in Gabon in 1997 . Investigations in Gabon in September 2003 extended the known range of this martin . More than 300 birds were found with hundreds of rosy bee @-@ eaters in the <unk> area and the newly established <unk> National Park , and a mixed flock with rosy bee @-@ eaters at <unk> National Park in Gabon was estimated at 100 @,@ 000 birds in total . In January 2010 , 250 martins were seen at a new location in <unk> , and single birds were observed in hirundine flocks near <unk> , at <unk> , and at <unk> . Despite sightings of large flocks and a population which may exceed 100 @,@ 000 , the species is classed by the IUCN as Data Deficient due to the lack of detailed information on its range and numbers . 
 This species is protected under national laws in the DRC ( Loi <unk> <unk> de la <unk> , 1985 ) . and Gabon ( Loi d <unk> en <unk> des eaux et <unk> , 1982 and Loi relative à la protection et à l <unk> de l <unk> , 1993 ) , and by regional legislation in Nigeria , which does not have national wildlife laws . The Nigerian laws are based directly on older colonial era laws which includes a number of species , such as this martin , which are not native to the country . The African river martin is not a protected species in the Republic of Congo . 
 In the 1950s , this martin was caught and eaten in large quantities in the DRC by the local population , and this practice could be increasing . The African river martins and the bee @-@ eaters with which they share their colonies are dug out of the breeding burrows for food . Breeding colonies in river sandbars are liable to flooding , but thousands of birds were breeding on the grasslands east of Gamba as recently as 2005 . 
 = Don 't Bother = 
 " Don 't Bother " is a song performed by Colombian singer @-@ songwriter Shakira , taken from her seventh studio album and second English @-@ language album , Oral Fixation , Vol . 2 . The song was released on October 4 , 2005 , by Epic Records as the lead single from the album . The song was written by Shakira , Lauren Christy , Graham Edwards and Scott Spock , and was produced by Shakira . " Don 't Bother " is a rock @-@ influenced song in which Shakira assures her former lover that she does not need his sympathy and can move on without him . 
 Upon its release , " Don 't Bother " received generally mixed reviews from music critics , who praised Shakira 's vocals but felt that the lyrics of the song were strange . Commercially , the track fared well on record charts , entering the top ten in countries including Austria , Germany , Italy , Switzerland and the United Kingdom . In the United States , the song peaked at number 42 on the US Billboard Hot 100 , and at number 25 on the Billboard Mainstream Top 40 chart . " Don 't Bother " was later certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for digital downloads of 500 @,@ 000 units . An accompanying music video for the song was directed by Jaume de Laiguana , and features Shakira tormenting her former lover by crushing his car in a wrecking yard . For additional promotion , Shakira performed the song on a number of award and reality shows . It was also included in the setlist of her Oral Fixation Tour . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Don 't Bother " was written by Shakira and American pop music production trio The Matrix , which is composed of Lauren Christy , Graham Edwards , and Scott Spock . Shakira also produced the song . Similar to her seventh studio album Oral Fixation , Vol . 2 , ( 2005 ) , " Don 't Bother " musically shifts to a more rock styled composition as compared to Shakira 's previous releases . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , the song is published in the key of E minor ( Relative key G major is in the chorus ) and has a moderate rock tempo of 130 beats per minute . Shakira 's vocal range on the song spans from the key of E3 to E5 . Through the lyrics of the song , Shakira urges her former lover not to " bother " feeling sorry for her after he chose another woman over her . She promises him that he " won ’ t ever see me [ Shakira ] cry " and that she will move on in her life without him . The song contains a spoken bridge in which Shakira lists a number of things she could do to make him stay with her , such as " move ( ing ) to a communist country " , but admits that they would not have an effect on him . Pam Avoledo from Blogcritics found the theme of the song similar to the one in Shakira 's 2002 single " Objection ( Tango ) " . Shakira described the song as a feminist anthem , saying : 
 " I think ' Don 't Bother ' has a lot of pain in it as a song , but also a lot of humour and sarcasm . Yes , it is a way of exorcising all of these feelings , a form of catharsis , getting rid of all of those emotions that torture us women at some point in our lives " 
 The song was issued by Epic Records as the lead single from Oral Fixation , Vol 2 and was premiered on October 9 , 2005 , in the United States by AOL Music 's First Listen initiative . The single saw its worldwide physical release on October 4 , 2005 . The single was made available for digital download on the iTunes Store on October 18 , 2005 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received generally mixed reviews from music critics . Matt Cibula from PopMatters praised its theme and Shakira 's " furious and sexual and self @-@ mocking " vocal delivery , but found the song " strange " and " internally inconsistent " . Alexis Petridis from the The Guardian complimented the unpredictable nature of the song , although he also noted that the lyrics at times suggested a " faltering grasp of English " . Edward <unk> from Stylus Magazine gave it a positive review , calling the song 's chorus " bruised " and " anthemic " and the lyrics " impossible for native speakers to emulate " . Pam Avoledo from Blogcritics was also positive towards the song , noting improvement in Shakira 's vocal delivery and calling them " brassy yet sensitive " . Spencer D. from IGN Music felt the highlight to the song was Shakira 's spoken bridge , saying that it lets the " light tinges of her accent roll of her tongue and present her as herself rather than the obvious result of previous pop matrons " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic picked the song as a highlight from the album . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In Austria , the song entered the singles chart at number 17 and peaked at number six , spending a total of 24 weeks on the chart . In Finland , the song entered and peaked at number four on the chart , becoming Shakira 's highest peaking single in the region since " Whenever , Wherever " , ( 2001 ) . Its stay in the chart , however , was very short and lasted for only a week . " Don 't Bother " reached number five on the singles chart in Hungary , and also peaked at number six on the airplay chart . In Italy , the song performed moderately well , entering the chart at number 12 and peaking at number eight ; it spent a total of 11 weeks on the chart . In Norway , the song narrowly missed the top five by peaking at number six . In Switzerland , the song entered the chart at number 10 and peaked at number eight ; it stayed on the chart for a long period of 31 weeks . In the United Kingdom , the song debuted and peaked at number nine on the singles chart , spending a total of five weeks on the chart . It was Shakira 's first single since " Objection ( Tango ) " ( 2002 ) , to chart in the country . 
 In the United States , " Don 't Bother " narrowly missed charting inside the top 40 of the Billboard Hot 100 chart by peaking at number 42 . It spent a total of nine weeks on the chart . On the Mainstream Top 40 chart , it peaked at number 25 and spent a total of 10 weeks on the chart . In the US , the song was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America for shipments of 500 @,@ 000 units . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Don 't Bother " was directed by Jaume de Laiguana , who had previously collaborated with Shakira on the video for " No " , and was released on November 15 , 2005 . The video begins with a man parking his sports car in front of a house and proceeding to enter it . Shakira is seen lying on a bed in the house and the man comes up and lies beside her , indicating that they are a couple . As soon as the man falls asleep , Shakira wakes up and lies atop the man and begins to caress him and bite and whisper in his ear a few times , although he does not wake up . Shakira takes the keys of the man 's car and drives it to a wrecking yard . The video then interludes to scenes of Shakira sexually romancing the man in a shower . The scene then changes back to the wrecking yard , where Shakira begins playing a pink guitar . After the spoken bridge of the song , Shakira places her partner 's car in a car crusher , which soon commences demolishing it . The man reacts in a similar manner to the car being crushed and begins experiencing continuous body jerks and spasms , indicating a connection between his car and his body . After the car is fully destroyed , Shakira leaves the man unconscious on the bed , exits the house , and begins walking on the street triumphantly . Shakira explained the usage of the car symbolism in the video , saying that " A man 's car is like an extension of their ego and their manhood . I thought this would be a video that would make women say , ' Yeah , yeah ! ' and it would make men feel " . 
 Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine positively reacted to the video and found it " rich with symbolism " . Shakira revealed that a nun from a Catholic high school she had attended was angered by the video by saying that " One of the nuns is looking for me after seeing the " Don 't Bother " video " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Shakira performed " Don 't Bother " live for the first time at the 2005 MTV Europe Music Awards ceremony held on November 3 , 2005 , where she also won the award for " Best Female Artist " . On December 10 , 2005 , she performed the song along with " La Tortura " on Saturday Night Live . While headlining at the 2007 Live Earth concert held in Hamburg on July 7 , 2007 , Germany , Shakira performed " Don 't Bother " along with three other songs . She performed the song at Rock in Rio held at Madrid , Spain , on July 4 , 2008 . " Don 't Bother " was included in the concert setlist of her Oral Fixation Tour , which was launched to promote the albums Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 and Oral Fixation , Vol . 2 . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 CD single 
 " Don 't Bother " – 4 : 17 
 " No " ft . Gustavo Cerati ( Album Version ) – 4 : 45 
 " Don 't Bother " ( <unk> Main Mix ) – 5 : 34 
 " No " ft . Gustavo Cerati ( Music video ) 
 Digital download 
 " Don 't Bother " – 4 : 17 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Chat Moss = 
 Chat Moss is a large area of peat bog that makes up 30 per cent of the City of Salford , in Greater Manchester , England . North of the Manchester Ship Canal and River Mersey , five miles ( 8 km ) to the west of Manchester , it occupies an area of about 10 @.@ 6 square miles ( 27 @.@ 5 km2 ) . 
 As it might be recognised today , Chat Moss is thought to be about 7 @,@ 000 years old , but peat development seems to have begun there with the ending of the last ice age , about 10 @,@ 000 years ago . The depth of peat ranges from 24 to 30 feet ( 7 to 9 m ) . A great deal of reclamation work has been carried out , particularly during the 19th century , but a large @-@ scale network of drainage channels is still required to keep the land from reverting to bog . In 1958 workers extracting peat discovered the severed head of what is believed to be a Romano @-@ British Celt , possibly a sacrificial victim , in the eastern part of the bog near Worsley . 
 Much of Chat Moss is now prime agricultural land , although farming in the area is in decline . A 228 @-@ acre ( 92 ha ) area of Chat Moss , notified as Astley and Bedford Mosses , was designated a Site of Special Scientific Interest in 1989 . Along with nearby Risley Moss and Holcroft Moss , Astley and Bedford Mosses has also been designated as a European Union Special Area of Conservation , known as Manchester Mosses . 
 Chat Moss threatened the completion of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway , until George Stephenson , with advice from East Anglian marshland specialist Robert Stannard , succeeded in constructing a railway line through it in 1829 ; his solution was to " float " the line on a bed of bound heather and branches topped with tar and covered with rubble stone . The M62 motorway , completed in 1976 , also crosses the bog , to the north of Irlam . 
 = = History = = 
 Chat Moss may be named after St Chad , a 7th @-@ century bishop of Mercia , but as it was once part of a great tree @-@ edged lake , as evidenced by the numerous wood remains in the lower levels of the peat , it is perhaps more likely that the name stems from the Celtic word <unk> , meaning wood . Chat Moss could also derive from <unk> , an Old English personal name and mos , a swamp or alternatively the first element could be the Old English <unk> meaning a piece of wet ground . It was recorded as <unk> in 1277 and <unk> in 1322 . Moss is the local name for a peat bog . 
 Daniel Defoe visited the area in 1724 , on his way from Warrington to Manchester : 
 From hence ( Warrington ) , on the road to Manchester , we pass 'd the great bog or waste call 'd <unk> , the first of that kind that we see in England ... The surface , at a distance , looks black and dirty , and is indeed frightful to think of , for it will bear neither horse or man , unless in an exceeding dry season , and then not so as to be passable , or that any one should travel over them ... What nature meant by such a useless production , ' tis hard to imagine ; but the land is entirely waste , <unk> ... for the poor cottagers fuel , and the quantity used for that is very small . 
 Peat bogs sometimes burst their boundaries , particularly after being subjected to heavy rainfall , and this seems to have happened with Chat Moss in the 16th century . John Leland , writing during the reign of King Henry VIII , described one such event : 
 Chat Moss <unk> up within a mile of Mosley Haul , and <unk> much <unk> with mosse thereabout , and destroyed much fresh @-@ water <unk> thereabout , first corrupting with <unk> water <unk> , and so <unk> carried <unk> water and mosse into Mersey water , and Mersey corrupted carried the <unk> mosse , part to the shores of Wales , part to the isle of Man , and some unto Ireland . 
 Chat Moss presented a significant challenge to the engineers constructing the Liverpool and Manchester Railway in 1826 because of the difficulty in providing a solid base for the track , in particular at a location known as Blackpool Hole . George Stephenson was the engineer in charge of the project , and his initial idea was to dump enough spoil in the bog so that it would reach the bottom . This approach turned out to be impractical however , as the liquidity of the bog allowed the spoil to flow away from where the track was to be laid . The eventual solution , to build the line on a " floating " wood and stone foundation , was hailed as a " great triumph of engineering " . The first train ran through Chat Moss in 1830 , and the line is still in use today . 
 = = = Reclamation = = = 
 The first attempt at reclaiming Chat Moss took place at the start of the 19th century . In 1793 William Roscoe began work on reclaiming the smaller Trafford Moss , now part of Trafford Park . By 1798 that work was sufficiently advanced for Roscoe to enter into a lease of part of Chat Moss from the de Trafford family , but no reclamation work was carried out until 1805 . 
 Reclamation methods varied somewhat during the 19th century , but three basic operations featured ; constructing drains at appropriate intervals ; building a system of roads to allow access to the land so that materials such as clay , lime or marl could be dumped on it , to give it body ; and fertilising the land by adding manure , often in the form of the euphemistically named night soil , collected from neighbouring towns . 
 The reclamation of Chat Moss and Trafford Moss was innovative in that instead of constructing roads to give access for the material to be dumped onto the bog , a movable light railway was developed . Narrow gauge track – which allowed the weight of the wagons to be spread evenly across an area of the bog – was temporarily laid down and then picked up and relaid elsewhere as needed . Roscoe was declared bankrupt in 1821 , but the reclamation work continued under the stewardship of others who took over his leasehold interest , amongst them William Baines , the anti @-@ Corn Law MP and owner of the Leeds Mercury newspaper . 
 Between 1831 and 1851 , the population of nearby Manchester increased by more than 150 per cent , putting considerable pressure on refuse disposal . The problem was exacerbated by a gradual switch from the 1870s onwards from the older cesspit methods of sewage disposal to pail closets , which required regular emptying . By the 1880s , Manchester was producing more than 200 @,@ 000 tons ( 203 @,@ 209 t ) of refuse annually , about 75 per cent of that being night soil . In 1895 , Manchester Corporation purchased 2 @,@ 502 acres ( 1 @,@ 013 ha ) of Chat Moss known as Chat Moss Estate from Sir Humphrey de Trafford , with a view to using the moss as a refuse disposal site . The final price paid by the corporation was £ 137 @,@ 531 7s 1d ( £ 14 @.@ 3 million as of 2016 ) . 
 Refuse was carried on barges down the Manchester Ship Canal as far as <unk> Wharf , where it was loaded onto a light railway system to be taken into the moss for dumping . Farmers on Chat Moss were legally required by their tenancy agreements to accept a specified amount of refuse on their land , and were even obliged to pay for it . Farmers could themselves undertake reclamation work , with the land reclaimed being incorporated into their tenancies . An agreement dated 1905 , between Manchester Corporation and Plant Cottage Farm , shows that the corporation agreed to supply 300 tons ( 305 t ) of refuse per acre free of charge for the first year , with the tenant being obliged to accept 12 tons ( 12 t ) of refuse per acre each year thereafter . The dumping of night soil on Chat Moss ended in 1923 , but general refuse continued to be dumped on a diminishing scale until it finally ended in 1966 . 
 Once drained , stabilised and fertilised , Chat Moss became prime agricultural land , supplying Manchester with salad and other vegetables . The drainage channels , still required today , give the area its distinctive flat landscape broken up by ditches instead of hedges or walls . Even after all of the reclamation work that has taken place , parts of the area remain remote and bleak . 
 A scheme was devised during the Second World War to protect major cities from enemy bombing by lighting decoy fires on nearby open land . Manchester was protected by four of these Starfish sites as they were known , two of them on Chat Moss . RAF Balloon Command was responsible for the administration and manning of the sites , which were fully operational by 23 January 1941 . Each consisted of an air raid shelter for the crew along with various devices to simulate street lighting and the explosions of incendiary bombs . The effectiveness of the decoy sites is uncertain , and they were closed in 1943 . 
 = = = Worsley Man = = = 
 In August 1958 , workmen digging peat in an area of Chat Moss near Worsley discovered a severed head and called the police . It was initially believed that the head had been in the bog for less than a year , and so a search was conducted for more remains , but nothing was found . After X @-@ rays and chemical tests , it was determined that the head had been in the bog for at least 100 years . An inquest was held into the man 's death , at which the coroner returned an open verdict , and the head was put in the care of the Manchester Medical School . 
 The discovery of the nearby Lindow Man in 1984 generated renewed interest in bog bodies , and in 1987 what had become known as Worsley Man was re @-@ examined . The inspection revealed a wound behind the right ear , fractures to the top of the skull , and a cut through the vertebra where he had been decapitated . The remains of a <unk> were also found around his neck , all of which was suggestive of a ritual killing rather than an accidental death , perhaps related to the Celtic cult of the severed head . The condition of the tooth pulp suggested that Worsley Man was 20 – 30 years old at the time of his death , which radiocarbon dating of a fragment of preserved soft tissue indicated was during the late Iron Age , some time around 120 AD , identifying him as a Romano @-@ British Celt . Worsley Man is now in the care of the Manchester Museum . 
 = = Geography and ecology = = 
 At 53 ° 27 ′ 46 ″ N 2 ° 25 ′ 54 ″ W ( 53 @.@ <unk> , <unk> ) , Chat Moss lies at the southern edge of the Lancashire Plain , an area of Bunter sandstones overlaid with marls laid down during the Late Triassic period . Those rocks are themselves overlaid by a layer of boulder clay deposited during the last ice age , about 10 @,@ 000 years ago . The combination of the flat topography and the underlying clay resulted in extensive peat bogs developing along the Mersey Valley , and overflowing beyond the valley . The bogs in the area between the River Glaze in the west , and Worsley and Eccles in the east , to the north of what was the River Irwell – now the Manchester Ship Canal – are known collectively as Chat Moss . 
 Chat Moss is a lowland raised bog . In areas where drainage is poor , water @-@ logging can slow down plant decomposition , producing peat , which over the years can raise the level of the bog above that of the surrounding land . The moss occupies an area of about 10 @.@ 6 square miles ( 27 @.@ 5 km2 ) , and is about 5 miles ( 8 km ) long , about 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) across at its widest point , lying 75 feet ( 23 m ) above sea level . Chat Moss lies mainly in Salford , but extends into Wigan . By the 1990s , an estimated 72 per cent of the bog had been reclaimed , most of it for agriculture . About 230 acres ( 93 ha ) of degraded bog remain , with 766 acres ( 310 ha ) of undamaged peat deposits in four former peat extraction sites . The peat varies in depth between 24 feet ( 7 m ) and 30 feet ( 9 m ) . 
 The main bog mosses found in the peat of Chat Moss are Sphagnum <unk> , S. imbricatum , and S. <unk> . The peat up to about 7 feet ( 2 m ) from the surface is mainly humidified S. <unk> , with fresher S. imbricatum peat nearer the surface . 
 A 228 @-@ acre ( 92 ha ) area of Chat Moss , to the north of the Liverpool – Manchester railway line , notified as Astley & Bedford Mosses , was designated a Site of Special Scientific Interest in 1989 . Astley & Bedford Mosses , along with Risley Moss and Holcroft Moss , is also a European Union designated Special Area of Conservation , known as Manchester Mosses . 
 The major habitats in the moss are bog , heathland , woodland and acidic grassland , subject to varying degrees of wetness depending on the local drainage . The remaining areas of bog are dominated by common cottongrass Eriophorum angustifolium and hare 's @-@ tail cottongrass E. vaginatum . Bog mosses are more scarce , but Sphagnum <unk> , S. <unk> , S. <unk> , S. fimbriatum and S. <unk> occur in patches . As the peat has become drier , areas have been taken over by purple moor grass Molinia caerulea and by downy birch Betula pubescens . The moss also supports several bird species , and is particularly important for wintering raptors such as the hen harrier Circus cyaneus cyaneus , the short @-@ eared owl Asio flammeus and the merlin Falco columbarius , along with breeding species such as the curlew Numenius arquata and the long @-@ eared owl Asio otus . There is a large heronry in Botany Bay Wood , the largest area of woodland in Greater Manchester . 
 The domestic and industrial waste dumped on Chat Moss resulted in very high levels of heavy metals such as lead and copper in the soil , raising concerns that crops grown there may pose a health risk . The high pH of the peaty soil limits the mobility of the metals however , and prevents them being taken up by crops . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Chat Moss makes up the largest area of prime farmland in Greater Manchester , but farming on the moss is in decline . In 2003 , it was reported that of the 54 farms on the moss , occupying 3 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 214 ha ) , almost half the area of the bog , only three were growing vegetables . Others had turned to arable farming , turf growing or horse livery instead of salad and vegetable crops . Chat Moss also contains the largest block of semi @-@ natural woodland in Greater Manchester . 
 Most of the area is now Green Belt , placing restrictions on the kinds of developments that can take place . There are areas of commercial peat extraction , but Salford City Council is seeking to return at least some back to wet mossland . Planning permission for peat extraction expired at the end of 2010 . At a meeting held on 30 June 2011 Salford Council decided not to renew the permission , and on 1 August obtained a court order prohibiting any further extraction pending an appeal by the companies involved . A public inquiry concluded in 2012 supported the council 's decision , and commercial peat extraction on Chat Moss ceased . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In 1994 the British composer Peter Maxwell Davies , who was born in Salford , wrote a seven @-@ minute tone poem for school orchestra , titled Chat Moss . Chat Moss was also the subject of a ceiling painting produced as the result of a research project jointly funded by the Arts and Humanities Research Board and Arts Council England . The project was a collaboration between artist Derek Hampson and geographer Gary <unk> . Hampson chose Chat Moss as their subject because of its 19th @-@ century historical significance as the site of the world 's first passenger railway and its " anti @-@ picturesque appearance " , a " nondescript landscape of stumpy trees and expanses of grass " . The 40 @-@ square @-@ metre ( 430 sq ft ) artwork , painted on more than 100 ceiling tiles , was exhibited in November 2004 at the <unk> Gallery in London . 
 = 2nd Army Group ( Kingdom of Yugoslavia ) = 
 The 2nd Army Group was a Royal Yugoslav Army formation commanded by Armijski đeneral Milutin Nedić during the German @-@ led Axis invasion of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia in April 1941 during World War II . It consisted of the 1st and 2nd Armies , comprising four infantry divisions , one horsed cavalry division , one horsed cavalry regiment , and two brigade @-@ strength infantry detachments . It was responsible for the defence of the border with Hungary from Slatina to the Tisza river . 
 The 2nd Army Group was not directly attacked during the first few days of the invasion , but events to the east and west of its deployment area resulted in successive orders to withdraw to the lines of the Drava and Danube then the Sava . On 10 April , the crumbling defences of the 4th Army on the left flank of the 1st Army Group had been penetrated by the German 8th Panzer Division , which then turned east and drove into the left flank of the 1st Army Group on the following day . By the end of that day , the Germans had effectively routed the 2nd Army Group . Remnants continued to fight along the line of the Sava until early on 14 April , but mass surrenders began that day with tens of thousands of Yugoslav soldiers being taken into captivity by the Germans during their drive on Sarajevo in the centre of the country . The Yugoslav High Command unconditionally surrendered in Belgrade effective at 12 : 00 on 18 April . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The 2nd Army Group was commanded by Armijski đeneral Milutin Nedić , and consisted of the 1st Army , commanded by Armijski đeneral Milan Rađenković , and the 2nd Army , commanded by Armijski đeneral Dragoslav Miljković . The 1st Army consisted of one infantry division , one horsed cavalry division , and two brigade @-@ strength infantry detachments , and was supported by artillery , anti @-@ aircraft artillery , and air reconnaissance elements of the Royal Yugoslav Air Force . The 2nd Army consisted of three infantry divisions and one horsed cavalry regiment , supported by artillery , anti @-@ aircraft artillery and border guards , with air reconnaissance support . The 2nd Army Group did not control any additional support units , and had several units with a significant proportion of Croat soldiers . 
 = = Deployment = = 
 The deployment plan for 2nd Army Group saw the 1st Army in the Bačka region between the Danube and the Tisza , with formations centred around the towns of Sombor , Bačka Topola and Senta , with the 3rd Cavalry Division held in depth , south of the Danube in the Fruška Gora region . The 2nd Army deployment plan saw it in the Baranya and Slavonia regions between Slatina and the Danube , with its formations positioned south of the Drava from just east of Slatina to Valpovo , and around the towns of Osijek and Vinkovci . Of the formations of the 2nd Army Group , two infantry divisions of the 2nd Army were partly mobilised , while the remaining two infantry divisions , the 3rd Cavalry Division , and the two brigade @-@ strength infantry detachments had only commenced mobilisation . To the right of the 1st Army Group was the 6th Army , an independent formation that was responsible for the defence of the Yugoslav Banat region east of the Tisza . The boundary with the 6th Army ran just to the east of the Tisza to the confluence with the Danube , then south across the Sava through Obrenovac . On the left flank of the 2nd Army Group was the 1st Army Group , which was responsible for the defence of northwestern Yugoslavia , along the Yugoslav – Hungarian west of Slatina , Yugoslav – Reich and Yugoslav – Italian borders . The army group boundary ran from just east of Slatina through Požega towards Banja Luka . 
 = = Operations = = 
 The 2nd Army Group faced the Hungarian 3rd Army across the border , and during the first few days after the commencement of the invasion , there were exchanges of fire with Hungarian border guards , but the Yugoslavs faced no direct attacks along the 2nd Army Group sector . Neither the 1st Army Group nor the Hungarians were ready for full @-@ scale fighting , as they were still mobilising and deploying their forces . On 9 April , due to German successes elsewhere in Yugoslavia , the 6th Army on the right flank of the 2nd Army Group was ordered to withdraw south of the Danube and deploy on a line facing east to defend against an attack from the direction of Sofia , Bulgaria . 2nd Army Group also received orders to withdraw south of the line of the Drava and Danube . 1st Army began to withdraw , and on the same day elements were approaching the Danube crossing . The headquarters of the 2nd Army issued orders to evacuate Baranja and reinforce the left flank . 
 The following day , the situation deteriorated significantly when the German XLI Motorised Corps crossed the Yugoslav – Romanian border into the Yugoslav Banat and struck the 6th Army , halting its withdrawal and disrupting its ability to organise a coherent defence behind the Danube . Also on 10 April , the main thrust of the XLVI Motorised Corps of the 2nd Army , consisting of the 8th Panzer Division leading the 16th Motorised Infantry Division , crossed the Drava at Barcs in the 4th Army sector . The 8th Panzer Division turned southeast between the Drava and Sava rivers , and meeting almost no resistance and with strong air support , reached the left flank of the 2nd Army at Slatina by evening , despite poor roads and bad weather . 
 Later that day , as the situation was becoming increasingly desperate throughout the country , Dušan Simović , who was both the Prime Minister and Yugoslav Chief of the General Staff , broadcast the following message : 
 All troops must engage the enemy wherever encountered and with every means at their disposal . Don 't wait for direct orders from above , but act on your own and be guided by your judgement , initiative , and conscience . 
 The bulk of the 1st Army were able to cross the Danube and began to prepare defences , and the 2nd Army was able to evacuate Baranja and organise a defence of the left flank of the 2nd Army Group , now threatened by the 8th Panzer Division , but Croat reservists began to desert their units , significantly reducing the combat power of the 2nd Army . By the evening of 10 April , the 2nd Army Group was ordered to withdraw from these positions and form a defensive line behind the Sava from Debrc to the confluence with the Vrbas river , for which one or two days would be needed . On the night of 10 / 11 April , the whole 2nd Army Group continued its withdrawal , but units of the 2nd Army on the left flank of the 1st Army that included significant numbers of Croats began to dissolve due to the fifth column activities of the fascist Ustaše and their sympathisers . 
 At dawn on 11 April , Hungarian forces , consisting with the Mobile , IV and V Corps of Altábornagy ( Lieutenant General ) Elemér Gorondy @-@ Novák 's 3rd Army , crossed the Yugoslav border north of Osijek and near Subotica , overcame Yugoslav border guards and advanced on Subotica and Palić . The XLVI Motorised Corps continued to push east south of the Drava , with the 8th Panzer Division capturing Našice , Osijek on the Drava , and Vukovar on the Danube , followed by the 16th Motorised Infantry Division which advanced east of Našice , despite bridge demolitions and poor roads . The 8th Panzer Division had effectively routed the 2nd Army Group by 11 April . On the same day , Messerschmitt Bf 110s of I Group of the 26th Heavy Fighter Wing ( German : Zerstörergeschwader 26 , ZG 26 ) destroyed several 1st Air Reconnaissance Group Breguet 19s at Ruma . The rest were flown to Bijeljina , but all of the air reconnaissance assets of the 2nd Army Group were destroyed the following day when I / ZG 26 swept over the airfield in one of the most effective attacks of the campaign . On the night of 11 / 12 April , the 8th Panzer Division captured Sremska Mitrovica on the Sava at 02 : 30 , destroyed a bridge over the Danube at Bogojevo , and advanced on Lazarevac about 20 32 kilometres ( 20 mi ) south of Belgrade . These advances delayed the withdrawal of the 2nd Army Group south of the Sava . 
 By 12 April , the withdrawal of the 2nd Army Group was being threatened from the left flank , and by this time , according to the Polish historian Andrzej <unk> , 2nd Army had " no combat importance at all " . On the right flank , 6th Army attempted to regroup while being pressed by the 11th Panzer Division as it drove towards Belgrade . West of Belgrade , remnants of the 2nd Army Group tried to establish a line along the Sava , but XLVI Motorised Corps had already captured the bridges . When elements of the 8th Panzer Division captured Zemun without a fight , they captured 1st Army 's rear area units . On 12 April , the 1st Army 's 3rd Cavalry Division counter @-@ attacked at Šabac and pushed the Germans back across the Sava . The Hungarians pursued the 1st Army south , and occupied the area between the Danube and the Tisza meeting virtually no resistance . Serb Chetnik irregulars fought isolated engagements , and the Hungarian General Staff considered irregular resistance forces to be their only significant opposition . The Hungarian 1st Parachute Battalion captured canal bridges at Vrbas and Srbobran . This , the first airborne operation in Hungarian history , was not without incident . The battalion 's aircraft consisted of five Italian @-@ made Savoia @-@ Marchetti SM.75 transport aircraft formerly belonging to the civilian airline MALERT , but pressed into service with the Royal Hungarian Air Force ( Hungarian : Magyar Királyi Honvéd Légierő , MKHL ) at the start of the European war . Shortly after takeoff from the airport at Veszprém @-@ Jutas on the afternoon of 12 April , the command plane , code E @-@ 101 , crashed with the loss of 20 or 23 lives , including 19 paratroopers . This was the heaviest single loss suffered by the Hungarians during the Yugoslav campaign . Meanwhile , Sombor was captured against determined Chetnik resistance , and Subotica was also captured . 
 On the evening of 12 April , elements of the SS Motorised Infantry Division Reich , under command of XLI Motorised Corps , crossed the Danube in pneumatic boats and captured Belgrade without resistance . About the same time , most of the elements of XLVI Motorised Corps that were approaching Belgrade from the west were redirected away from the capital , but part of the 8th Panzer Division continued their thrust to capture the Sava bridges to the west of Belgrade , and entered the city during the night . The rest of the 8th Panzer Division turned southeast and drove towards Valjevo to link up with the left flank of the First Panzer Group southwest of Belgrade . The 16th Motorised Infantry Division was redirected south across the Sava , and advanced toward Zvornik . 
 = = Fate = = 
 On 13 April , the Hungarians occupied Baranja without resistance , and pushed south through Bačka to reach the line of Novi Sad and the Great Bačka Canal . Early on 14 April , the remnants of 2nd Army Group continued to fight against the 8th Panzer Division and 16th Motorised Infantry Division along the Sava . On 14 and 15 April , tens of thousands of Yugoslav soldiers were taken prisoner by the Germans during their drive on Sarajevo in the centre of the country , including 30 @,@ 000 around Zvornik and 6 @,@ 000 around Doboj . On 15 April , the 8th and 14th Panzer Divisions entered Sarajevo . After a delay in locating appropriate signatories for the surrender document , the Yugoslav High Command unconditionally surrendered in Belgrade effective at 12 : 00 on 18 April . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = Journals and papers = = = 
 = = = Web = = = 
 = Italian ironclad Ruggiero di Lauria = 
 Ruggiero di Lauria was an ironclad battleship built in the 1880s for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) . She was the lead ship of the Ruggiero di Lauria class , which included two other ships , Francesco Morosini and Andrea Doria . Ruggiero di Lauria , named for the medieval Sicilian admiral Ruggiero di Lauria , was armed with a main battery of four 17 @-@ inch ( 432 mm ) guns , was protected with 17 @.@ 75 @-@ inch ( 451 mm ) thick belt armor , and was capable of a top speed of 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) . 
 The ship 's construction period was very lengthy , beginning in August 1881 and completing in February 1888 . She was quickly rendered obsolescent by the new pre @-@ dreadnought battleships being laid down and , as a result , her career was limited . She spent her career alternating between the Active and Reserve Squadrons , where she took part in training exercises each year with the rest of the fleet . The ship was stricken from the naval register in 1909 and converted into a floating oil tank . She was used in this capacity until 1943 , when she was sunk by bombs during World War II . The wreck was eventually raised and scrapped in 1945 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Ruggiero di Lauria was 105 @.@ 9 meters ( 347 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 19 @.@ 84 m ( 65 @.@ 1 ft ) and an average draft of 8 @.@ 29 m ( 27 @.@ 2 ft ) . She displaced 9 @,@ 886 metric tons ( 9 @,@ 730 long tons ; 10 @,@ 897 short tons ) normally and up to 10 @,@ 997 t ( 10 @,@ 823 long tons ; 12 @,@ 122 short tons ) at full load . Her propulsion system consisted of a pair of compound steam engines each driving a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by eight coal @-@ fired , cylindrical fire @-@ tube boilers . Her engines produced a top speed of 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) at 10 @,@ 591 indicated horsepower ( 7 @,@ 898 kW ) . She could steam for 2 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 200 km ; 3 @,@ 200 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had a crew of 507 – 509 officers and men . 
 Ruggiero di Lauria was armed with a main battery of four 17 in ( 432 mm ) / 27 guns , mounted in two pairs en echelon in a central barbette . She carried a secondary battery of two 6 in ( 152 mm ) / 32 guns , one at the bow and the other at the stern , and four 4 @.@ 7 in ( 119 mm ) / 32 guns . As was customary for capital ships of the period , she carried five 14 in ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes submerged in the hull . She was protected by belt armor that was 17 @.@ 75 in ( 451 mm ) thick , an armored deck that was 3 in ( 76 mm ) thick , and her conning tower was armored with 9 @.@ 8 in ( 249 mm ) of steel plate . The barbette had 14 @.@ 2 in ( 361 mm ) of steel armor . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Ruggiero di Lauria was laid down at the Regio Cantiere di Castellammare di Stabia shipyard on 3 August 1881 and launched on 9 August 1884 . She was not completed for another three and a half years , her construction finally being finished on 1 February 1888 . Because of the rapid pace of naval technological development in the late 19th century , her lengthy construction period meant that she was an obsolete design by the time she entered service . The year after she entered service , the British began building the Royal Sovereign class , the first pre @-@ dreadnought battleships , which marked a significant step forward in capital ship design . In addition , technological progress , particularly in armor production techniques — first Harvey armor and then Krupp armor — rapidly rendered older vessels like Ruggiero di Lauria obsolete . 
 The ship served with the 1st Division of the Active Squadron during the 1893 fleet maneuvers , along with the ironclad Lepanto , which served as the divisional flagship , the torpedo cruisers Euridice and Monzambano , and four torpedo boats . During the maneuvers , which lasted from 6 August to 5 September , the ships of the Active Squadron simulated a French attack on the Italian fleet . In 1895 , Ruggiero di Lauria , the ironclad Sardegna , and the torpedo cruiser Partenope were assigned to the 2nd Division of the Italian fleet in the Reserve Squadron . At the time , the ships of the Reserve Squadron were based in La Spezia . Ruggiero di Lauria joined the ironclads Re Umberto , Sardegna , and Andrea Doria and the cruisers Stromboli , Etruria , and Partenope for a visit to Spithead in the United Kingdom in July 1895 . Later that year , the squadron stopped in Germany for the celebration held to mark the opening of the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal . 
 For the periodic fleet maneuvers of 1897 , Ruggiero di Lauria was assigned to the First Division of the Reserve Squadron , which also included the ironclads Caio Duilio and Lepanto and the protected cruiser Lombardia . The following year , the Reserve Squadron consisted of Ruggiero di Lauria , Francesco Morosini , Lepanto , and five cruisers . In 1899 , Ruggiero di Lauria , Andrea Doria , Sicilia , and Sardegna took part in a naval review in Cagliari for the Italian King Umberto I , which included a French and British squadron as well . That year , Ruggiero di Lauria and her two sisters served in the Active Squadron , which was kept in service for eight months of the year , with the remainder spent with reduced crews . The Squadron also included the ironclads Re Umberto , Sicilia , and Lepanto . In 1900 , Ruggiero di Lauria and her sisters were significantly modified and received a large number of small guns for defense against torpedo boats . These included a pair of 75 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) guns , ten 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) 40 @-@ caliber guns , twelve 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) guns , five 37 mm revolver cannon , and two machine guns . 
 In 1905 , Ruggiero di Lauria and her two sisters were joined in the Reserve Squadron by the three Re Umberto @-@ class ironclads and Enrico Dandolo , three cruisers , and sixteen torpedo boats . This squadron only entered active service for two months of the year for training maneuvers , and the rest of the year was spent with reduced crews . During the annual training maneuvers in October 1906 , a severe storm swept a man overboard , drowning him . During a gunnery competition held during the maneuvers , Ruggiero di Lauria 's gunners came in last place . In 1908 , the Italian Navy decided to discard Ruggiero di Lauria and her sister Francesco Morosini . The former was stricken from the naval register on 11 November 1909 . The ship was then converted into a floating oil depot . She was renamed <unk> and stationed at La Spezia until 1943 , when she was sunk in shallow water by an air raid during World War II . Her wreck was scrapped after the end of the war in 1945 . 
 = Jacob Josefson = 
 Jacob Peter Josefson ( born 2 March 1991 ) is a Swedish professional ice hockey centre , currently with the New Jersey Devils in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . After Josefson began playing hockey at the age of five , he was acquired by Djurgården 's youth organization at the age of ten , where he also began playing junior hockey in 2005 . Josefson made his Elitserien debut on 28 February 2008 , against Timrå IK , and became a regular member of Djurgården 's senior team . His achievements in the Swedish Elitserien drew attention from NHL and he was selected in the first round of the 2009 NHL Entry Draft by the New Jersey Devils , 20th overall . Josefson played with Djurgården for an additional season , before signing on for the Devils in May 2010 . 
 Josefson has represented Sweden at four International Ice Hockey Federation ( IIHF ) sanctioned junior events , winning the silver medal at the 2009 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships and the bronze medal at the 2010 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships . He also participated in the 2008 IIHF World U18 Championships , but only played three of Sweden 's six games , and the 2009 IIHF World U18 Championships . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Josefson was born on 2 March 1991 , in Stockholm , Sweden , to Annika and Peter Josefson . He is the youngest of three brothers . At the age of two , Josefson began skating and joined IK Göta at the age of five . His older brothers had played for the same club . He played with Hammarby IF for a year before he was acquired by Djurgårdens IF at the age of ten , playing for the 1991 team . He also played football until the age of 13 , before deciding to focus entirely on hockey . Josefson attended high school at <unk> Gymnasium in Sweden while playing for Djurgården . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Djurgårdens IF = = = 
 Josefson started to play junior hockey in 2005 for Djurgården 's under @-@ 18 team . During the 2006 – 07 season , he helped Djurgården 's under @-@ 16 team to win the Swedish championship . The 2007 – 08 season began with the national junior hockey tournament TV @-@ pucken . Josefson 's team Stockholm / Vit reached the final which ended with a 2 – 1 defeat to Småland . He made his Elitserien debut on 28 February 2008 , against Timrå IK . This proved to be the only appearance Josefson would make in the Elitserien during the 2007 – 08 season . Josefson played for the J20 @-@ team during most of the season scoring 14 goals and 31 points . His team reached the playoffs , but were defeated by Brynäs IF in the semi @-@ finals . After the loss , he joined the under @-@ 18 team during the playoffs where he helped the team defeat Färjestads BK to capture the Swedish championship . 
 He signed a two @-@ year contract with Djurgården in May 2008 . The club 's initial plan for Josefson was to move him up to the senior team when regular players were out of the lineup with illness or injuries , while his usual team would be the J20 @-@ team . He scored his first goal in Elitserien on 23 September in his third game , a 4 – 1 win against Brynäs IF . Ultimately , Josefson played almost every game of the regular season , and usually played along with Carl Gustafsson and Henrik Eriksson on the 4th line . At the end of the season , Josefson had scored 5 goals and 16 points , a record for players 18 or younger playing with the senior team . Josefson was ranked third in the midterm rankings among European skaters by the NHL Central Scouting Bureau for the 2009 NHL Entry Draft . He was selected in the first round of the 2009 NHL draft by the New Jersey Devils , 20th overall . Josefson was also drafted in the third round , 61st overall , in the 2009 KHL Junior Draft by SKA Saint Petersburg . He participated at the Devils rookie camp in July 2009 . He has been compared with centres Nicklas Bäckström and John Madden . 
 At the beginning of the 2009 – 10 season , Djurgården participated in the Nordic Trophy pre @-@ season tournament . In the second game , Josefson scored a hat trick and added two assists against the Malmö Redhawks . At the end of the group stage , Josefson was the scoring leader with five goals and seven points . He scored his first points for the regular season , three assists , in the Elitserien premiere away against HV71 . Djurgården lost the game 7 – 6 , but on 20 October , Josefson would get his revenge when he scored the game @-@ winning goal in the 3 – 2 victory over HV71 20 . This was also his first goal of the regular season . Josefson missed six Elitserien games due to the World Junior Hockey Championship , but was back in the roster against Timrå IK on 9 January . He recorded an assist against <unk> BK on 30 January , which was his 17th point of the season , putting him ahead of last season 's total . At the end of the regular season , Josefson had scored 8 goals and 20 points in 43 games . The 2009 – 10 playoffs were Josefson 's first Elitserien playoffs , and he played almost every game missing the first two semifinal games against Linköpings HC due to illness . Djurgården lost the finals 4 – 2 to HV71 . Josefson re @-@ signed with Djurgården for another year on 27 April . Despite this and an oral guarantee the club received from Josefson 's agent Peter <unk> that Josefson would stay , Josefson signed with the New Jersey Devils on 14 May 2010 . 
 = = = New Jersey Devils = = = 
 Josefson participated in the pre @-@ season camp with the Devils in September , but was assigned to their American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate , the Albany Devils after the camp . Josefson was called up to the Devils on 14 October 2010 , and made his NHL debut the next day , in a 3 – 2 victory against Colorado Avalanche at the Prudential Center . Josefson was slashed on his left hand and later fell on the same hand during the game against San Jose Sharks on 27 October , this caused a ligament in his thumb to tear , and forced him to undergo surgery . At last , Josefson returned from his injury on 7 January 2011 , when the Albany Devils played against the Charlotte Checkers . Josefson scored his first NHL goal against Al Montoya of the New York Islanders on 12 March 2011 . The Devils failed to reach the playoffs and Josefson ended up with three goals and ten points in 28 regular season games . 
 In the fifth game of the 2011 – 12 season , Josefson broke his right clavicle after crashing shoulder first into the boards . He underwent surgery the following day on 22 October 2011 , and was expected to be sidelined for three or four months . On 3 April 2012 in a game against the Islanders , Josefson bumped awkwardly into Jay Pandolfo resulting in a broken left wrist . He returned to the lineup on 21 May 2012 in the fourth game of the Eastern Conference Finals against Rangers and played a total of six games in the 2012 Stanley Cup playoffs , scoring one point . 
 = = International play = = 
 Josefson played in his first IIHF sanctioned tournament when he was part of Sweden 's team at the 2008 IIHF World U18 Championships . He managed to score a hat @-@ trick in the first game against Belarus . He left the team in the morning before the fourth game due to an accident in which his father and uncle had been exposed to carbon monoxide poisoning . He made his second appearance at the U18 Championship the following year , at the 2009 IIHF World U18 Championships , where he also took the role as alternate captain . He managed to score three goals and seven points in six games . Josefson was a part of Sweden 's national junior team at the 2009 World Junior Championships . He played in all of Sweden 's six games but did not score any points . A few months later he yet again played for Sweden in the U18 Championship but could not help his team go further than fifth place in the tournament . 
 Josefson participated in the World Junior Championship for the second time when he was named for Team Sweden by head coach Pär <unk> for the 2010 World Junior Championships , along with fellow Djurgården team @-@ mates Daniel <unk> and Marcus Krüger . He scored his first goal of the tournament and the first goal of the game against Austria in the preliminary rounds . He scored two additional goals in Sweden 's 7 – 1 victory over Finland in the last game of the preliminary rounds . Josefson , who also had three assists in the tournament , had six points in total . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = 2015 Amstel Gold Race = 
 The 2015 Amstel Gold Race was the 50th edition of the Amstel Gold Race one @-@ day race . It took place on 19 April and was the eleventh race of the 2015 UCI World Tour . The Amstel Gold Race is part of the Ardennes classics season , although it takes place in the Limburg region of the Netherlands rather than in the Belgian Ardennes . It takes place in the week before La Flèche Wallonne and Liège – Bastogne – Liège , the other principal Ardennes classics . The defending champion in the 2015 edition of the race was Philippe Gilbert , who had won the race three times and had also won the 2012 world championships on a very similar course . 
 The race took place on a 258 kilometres ( 160 mi ) route centred on the town of Valkenburg ; the route included 34 short climbs , several of which were repeated . The decisive climb was the Cauberg , the fourth ascent of which came within 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) of the finishing line . The race typically suits puncheurs . 
 After several attacking groups were caught , the decisive action came on the final ascent of the Cauberg . A small group formed after the climb and sprinted for the race victory . The sprint was won by Michał Kwiatkowski , the reigning world champion ; it was his first road race victory since he won the world championships . Alejandro Valverde ( Movistar Team ) was second , with Michael Matthews ( Orica – GreenEDGE ) third . 
 = = Teams = = 
 The Amstel Gold Race is part of the UCI World Tour , which meant that the 17 UCI WorldTeams were automatically invited and obliged to send a team . The race organisers also made eight wildcard invitations to UCI Professional Continental teams . The peloton was therefore made up of 25 teams . With eight riders on each team , a total of 200 riders were entered . Two of these , IAM Cycling 's Dries Devenyns and Thomas Degand , were forced to pull out before the start ( Degand with a stomach upset and Devenyns with a sore back ) , so 198 riders started the race . 
 = = Route = = 
 The 258 @-@ kilometre ( 160 mi ) route of the 2015 Amstel Gold Race began in Maastricht and left the city towards the north . The riders passed through the towns of <unk> and <unk> on their way to the first climbs of the day . The first climb of the day was the <unk> ; the peloton then passed through Beek and climbed the <unk> . These climbs came within the first 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) of racing . The route then turned south through <unk> , where the riders climbed the third climb , the Lange <unk> , then east in the direction of Heerlen . The course turned , however , before they reached Heerlen , first heading south across the climb of the <unk> , then west . At this point , the route entered a series of circuits around the town of Valkenburg . The riders climbed the Sibbergrubbe and the Cauberg for the first time . The first climb of the Cauberg came after 54 kilometres ( 34 mi ) . 
 The first of the loops around Valkenburg was the longest at 101 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 63 @.@ 1 mi ) . The riders first climbed the Geulhemmerberg as they left Valkenburg , then turned south @-@ east . The next 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) contained no categorised climbs , though the roads were far from flat . The next climb , the Wolfsburg , came after 78 @.@ 1 kilometres ( 48 @.@ 5 mi ) and was followed quickly by the first climb of the <unk> . The route then briefly turned north , before turning south again on the outskirts of Gulpen . The next climb , the <unk> , came after 92 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 57 @.@ 5 mi ) of racing , with the <unk> 6 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) later . The riders then entered a short circuit around the town of <unk> , where the <unk> , the <unk> and the <unk> came within 9 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) of one another . The route then returned to Gulpen along the same roads , with the <unk> the only categorised climb . In Gulpen , the route crossed the <unk> , then turned east to cross the Plettenberg and the <unk> . The riders then reached <unk> , where they turned west again towards Valkenburg . The final part of the loop took the peloton across the climb of <unk> and the <unk> . As they entered Valkenburg , the riders climbed the Sibbergrubbe and the Cauberg for the second time . As the riders crossed the finish line in Valkenburg , they had completed 168 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 104 @.@ 5 mi ) and had 99 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 62 @.@ 0 mi ) remaining . 
 The second loop was shorter than the first at 71 @.@ 3 kilometres ( 44 @.@ 3 mi ) . It again began with the climb of the Geulhemmerberg , then travelled through the outskirts of Maastricht . The route again turned north , this time to climb the Bemelerberg , before another turn to the south @-@ east towards <unk> . The route re @-@ used several of the roads that made up the first loop : the riders climbed the <unk> for the second time , then turned north for the second climb of the <unk> . From this point , the peloton took a different route towards Valkenburg , which included the climbs of the Kruisberg , the Eyserbosweg , the <unk> and the <unk> . On this loop , the riders did not climb the Sibbergrubbe but proceeded directly to the third climb of the Cauberg . This was seen as a moment when an early attack might succeed and came with 21 @.@ 1 kilometres ( 13 @.@ 1 mi ) remaining . 
 The final loop was the shortest of the day at 18 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 11 @.@ 5 mi ) . The riders climbed the Geulhemmerberg for the third time , then the Bemelerberg for the second time . This was the penultimate climb of the day . The final climb was a fourth ascent of the Cauberg . At the base of the climb , there were 2 @,@ 600 metres ( 8 @,@ 500 ft ) remaining . The climb itself is 900 metres ( 3 @,@ 000 ft ) in length , with an average gradient of 7 % and a maximum gradient of 12 % . At the top of the climb , there were approximately 1 @,@ 700 metres ( 5 @,@ 600 ft ) of fairly flat roads to the finish line in Berg en <unk> . 
 = = Pre @-@ race favourites = = 
 The Amstel Gold Race has been won in the past by riders who have attacked a long distance from the finish line . This happened as recently as 2013 , when Roman Kreuziger attacked shortly after the penultimate climb of the Cauberg . Normally , however , the race is decided on the final ascent of the Cauberg ; in the 2014 edition , Philippe Gilbert ( BMC Racing Team ) attacked midway up the climb and was able to take a solo victory . As there is a flat section after the climb , there is also an opportunity for riders dropped on the Cauberg to rejoin any escapees and to bring the race together for a sprint finish . The race was therefore expected to suit puncheurs , especially those who were also able to defend a solo lead ahead of a chasing group . 
 Gilbert , the defending champion , was the main favourite for the race . As well as his 2014 victory , he had won the race in 2010 and 2011 ; he also won the 2012 world championships road race , which was raced on a very similar course . Gilbert had demonstrated good form by coming third the previous week in the Brabantse Pijl . Several other former champions took part in 2014 : Kreuziger ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) , Enrico Gasparotto ( Wanty – Groupe Gobert ) , Damiano Cunego ( Nippo – Vini Fantini ) , Fränk Schleck ( Trek Factory Racing ) , Stefan Schumacher and Davide Rebellin ( both CCC – Sprandi – Polkowice ) . 
 Alejandro Valverde ( Movistar Team ) , who had come fourth in 2014 , was also among the major favourites and was in strong form following three stage wins during the Volta a Catalunya . Michał Kwiatkowski ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) , the current world champion , Joaquim Rodríguez ( Team Katusha ) and Michael Matthews ( Orica – GreenEDGE ) were also considered to have a strong chance of winning the race . Matthews in particular was the favourite to win any small bunch sprint if a group came together after the Cauberg . 
 = = Race report = = 
 An early breakaway was formed by six riders after more than 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) , after the climb of the Lange <unk> . The six riders were Laurens De Vreese ( Astana ) , Jan Polanc ( Lampre – Merida ) , Timo Roosen ( LottoNL – Jumbo ) , Linus Gerdemann ( Cult Energy Pro Cycling ) , Johan Van Zyl ( MTN – Qhubeka ) and Mike Terpstra ( Team Roompot ) . The peloton initially hesitated in letting the break escape , but soon relented and the leading group 's advantage grew to approximately 10 minutes by the time they reached Mechelen after 90 kilometres ( 56 mi ) of racing . The peloton was led by BMC Racing Team and CCC – Sprandi – Polkowice . There were several crashes during this phase of the race ; Jelle Vanendert ( Lotto – Soudal ) , who was second in 2014 , and Lieuwe Westra ( Astana ) were among the riders forced to abandon the race . As the riders crossed the finish line for the second time , with 99 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 62 @.@ 0 mi ) remaining , they had a lead of approximately six minutes as the riders in the peloton began to chase . 
 On the second loop around Valkenburg , Movistar Team came to the front of the peloton to chase the breakaway in support of Alejandro Valverde . They reduced the breakaway 's lead to four minutes and briefly broke a small group free on the descent from the Bemelerberg , but a mechanical problem for Valverde forced them to stop chasing and bring him back to the front of the peloton . As the riders came to the end of the loop , three riders had been dropped from the breakaway and the group 's lead was under a minute . The first attacks from the peloton came on the Eyserbosweg , with David Tanner ( IAM Cycling ) and Simon Clarke ( Orica – GreenEDGE ) attacking and forming a lead group . A second group attacked , made up of Tony Martin ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) , Vincenzo Nibali and Diego Rosa ( both Astana ) , Wilco Kelderman ( LottoNL – Jumbo ) , Damiano Caruso ( BMC ) and Alex Howes ( Cannondale – Garmin ) . With 37 kilometres ( 23 mi ) remaining , Clarke and Tanner had an 11 @-@ second lead over the second group , with the peloton a further 24 seconds behind . The original breakaway , meanwhile , had been caught . 
 Kelderman missed a corner shortly afterwards and was forced to ride through a field to rejoin the race ; he was unable to catch up with the leading riders . The two groups came together shortly afterwards , although there was some disagreement in the group about the riders ' commitment to the breakaway attempt . Rosa and Caruso crashed on a corner , reducing the group to five riders , while Movistar were again leading the chasing peloton . The group was caught with 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) remaining . Clarke then attacked again , but was caught 7 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) later . One final attack was made by Jakob Fuglsang ( Astana ) and Greg Van Avermaet ( BMC Racing Team ) ; Van Avermaet refused to assist Fuglsang in setting the pace and they were soon caught . The peloton was therefore all together for the final ascent of the Cauberg . 
 In 2014 , Samuel Sánchez ( then BMC ) had attacked at the foot of the Cauberg on behalf of his teammate Philippe Gilbert , whose subsequent attack allowed him to take the race victory . BMC attempted to replicate this strategy with an attack from Ben Hermans in the same place as Sánchez 's . Gilbert 's attack , however , was less successful than his 2014 effort : although most riders were dropped , Michael Matthews was able to hold his wheel . Michał Kwiatkowski was chasing alone at this point . Valverde bridged across to Gilbert and Matthews , with another 15 riders joining the group shortly afterwards . Kwiatkowski was a long way behind with 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) remaining , but was able to stay in the slipstream of the other riders and recover from the climb . He then began a long sprint and was able to keep the rest of the group behind him . Valverde finished second , with Matthews third . Kwiatkowski 's win was his first win in the rainbow jersey of the world champion . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = Post @-@ race analysis = = 
 = = = Riders ' reactions = = = 
 Kwiatkowski 's win was his first road race victory since his victory at the 2014 world championships ( his only other 2015 victory was in the prologue individual time trial at the 2015 Paris @-@ Nice ) . He also became the fourth rider to win the Amstel Gold Race while wearing the rainbow jersey ; the others were Eddy Merckx , Jan <unk> and Bernard Hinault . He described the race as " an amazing day " and said that it " [ put ] the dot on the i " following the Etixx – Quick @-@ Step team 's second @-@ place finishes at the Tour of Flanders and the Paris – Roubaix . 
 BMC were praised for their tactics after the race , despite Gilbert 's failure to repeat his victory ; his tenth @-@ place finish was his worst result in several years . Gilbert attributed his failure to stay away from the chasing pack in part to the lack of a tailwind on the final flat section after the Cauberg , while his reputation as the main favourite for the race also worked to his disadvantage . Valverde , meanwhile , was delighted at his second @-@ place finish , which was the best result of his career at the Amstel Gold Race , declaring himself " happy with second " and looking forward to the remainder of the Ardennes classics . 
 = = = UCI World Tour rankings = = = 
 After winning 80 points for his victory in the race , Kwiatkowski moved up from thirteenth place to fourth place in the UCI World Tour rankings . His total of 195 points left him 108 points behind the leader , Richie Porte ( Team Sky ) . Valverde also moved into the top ten of the World Tour rankings . Etixx – Quick @-@ Step moved ahead of Team Sky to take the lead in the teams ' ranking ; Australia remained in the lead of the nations ' rankings . 
 = Pilot ( Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. ) = 
 " Pilot " is the pilot and first episode of the first season of the American television series Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , based on the Marvel Comics organization S.H.I.E.L.D. ( Strategic Homeland Intervention , Enforcement and Logistics Division ) , revolving around the character of Phil Coulson and his team of S.H.I.E.L.D. agents as they investigate a super @-@ powered man and the hacktivist group the Rising Tide . It is the first television episode to be set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe ( MCU ) , sharing continuity with the films of the franchise . The episode was written by series creators Joss Whedon , Jed Whedon , and Maurissa Tancharoen , and was directed by Joss Whedon . 
 The episode was ordered in 2012 , after Joss Whedon wrote and directed Marvel 's The Avengers , and was filmed in early 2013 in Los Angeles , California , with some additional filming in Paris , France . Clark Gregg reprises his role as Coulson from the film series , and is joined by principal cast members Ming @-@ Na Wen , Brett Dalton , Chloe Bennet , Iain De Caestecker , and Elizabeth Henstridge . Cobie Smulders guest stars , reprising her role of Maria Hill from The Avengers , with previous Whedon collaborators J. August Richards and Ron Glass also guest starring . Emphasis was put on consistency and continuity with the MCU films , and some elements are reused from the films throughout the episode , most notably extremis . The visual effects for the episode were nominated at the Visual Effects Society Awards . 
 " Pilot " originally aired on ABC on September 24 , 2013 , and according to Nielsen Media Research , was watched by 12 @.@ 12 million viewers , the highest ratings received by the first episode of a drama series since 2009 . The episode received a mostly positive response from critics , who praised Joss Whedon 's involvement and Richards ' performance , but were disappointed that the episode did not reach the standard of the MCU films . The use of the name ' Rising Tide ' received backlash from a real life group of the same name . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After the events of Iron Man 3 , Mike Peterson is out with his son , Ace , when the top floor of a nearby building explodes . Peterson uses enhanced strength to save a trapped woman from the building , and is filmed doing so by Skye , a member of the hacktivist group the Rising Tide . S.H.I.E.L.D. deputy director Maria Hill interviews Grant Ward for a new team under Agent Phil Coulson , who is officially dead . Coulson assigns Ward level 7 security clearance , and reveals the team 's first mission is to investigate the Rising Tide . Coulson also recruits the reluctant Agent Melinda May , who had previously retired from field duty . 
 Skye meets with Peterson and warns him about S.H.I.E.L.D. ’ s penchant for covering up superhero based events . She is shortly arrested by Coulson , and placed in the S.H.I.E.L.D. team 's mobile base of operations ( a plane nicknamed " The Bus " ) . During questioning Coulson slowly begins to gain her trust , and she reveals her limited knowledge of the mysterious Project Centipede and the location of the explosion ; Agents Leo Fitz and Jemma Simmons go to investigate the scene . 
 Peterson returns to the factory he was recently fired from , and injures his former boss , calling him the " bad guy " and himself the " hero " . Peterson then visits the woman he saved in the hospital , who is actually the doctor that gave him his abilities by implanting the Centipede device in his arm . She warns him against revealing his abilities to the public , which would be against the wishes of her backers . Fitz and Simmons discover from a damaged Centipede device , found at the explosion scene , that it combines several previously known sources of superpowers , including extremis , and it was the unstable extremis within a previous Centipede @-@ created superhero that had caused the explosion . 
 Peterson abducts Skye and makes her delete his and Ace 's personal information from the government 's systems , though she manages to warn the team at the same time . The two are tracked to a train station by Coulson 's team and a gunman sent by Peterson 's doctor . May takes out the gunman , and Ward shoot ’ s Peterson with an advanced stun gun developed by Fitz and Simmons , which stabilizes his extremis . Afterwards , Coulson is offering Skye a place on his team when a call for an " 0 @-@ 8 @-@ 4 " comes in . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In August 2012 , ABC ordered a pilot from Joss Whedon , who wrote and directed The Avengers , for a series set within the MCU . Paul Lee , president of ABC , compared the pilot to the series Once Upon a Time , in terms of budgetary and technological ambition , and spoke of his excitement for the crossover potential with the larger film universe . " Pilot " was executive produced by Joss Whedon , Jed Whedon , Maurissa Tancharoen , Jeffrey Bell and Jeph Loeb . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Joss Whedon said that his previous television shows were based on ensembles , with S.H.I.E.L.D. being based in part on the Buffy the Vampire Slayer episode " The Zeppo " . That episode highlighted a lesser seen character , which was something he wanted to achieve with the character of Agent Phil Coulson . It was written by Whedon , along with his brother Jed Whedon and sister @-@ in @-@ law Maurissa Tancharoen . At the same time , he was writing the script for Avengers : Age of Ultron , which meant that he could use the series to explain the resurrection of Coulson rather than trying to include it in that film . Whedon revealed that he received notes from ABC on things to change in the pilot , but noted that the network was encouraging and excited about the project , so " you take the notes . You don ’ t take all of them . But you never walk in expecting not to get any . " At San Diego Comic @-@ Con 2013 , Tancharoen talked about telling a Marvel story on a television budget , calling it a challenge but noting that the series is " looking at it through a different lens " , telling the human stories in the superhuman universe , with Coulson , who was the human , grounded character in the films , leading a team of ' real people ' , albeit extremely skilled people . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 In October 2012 , a casting sheet for five lead roles was sent out . Later that month , at the New York Comic Con , Joss Whedon , Kevin Feige and Clark Gregg announced that Gregg , who previously portrayed the character in the Marvel Cinematic Universe films Iron Man , Iron Man 2 , Thor , and Marvel 's The Avengers , as well as the Marvel One @-@ Shots short films The Consultant and A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to Thor 's Hammer , would be reprising his role as agent Phil Coulson in the pilot . Toward the end of the month , actress Ming @-@ Na Wen was cast as agent Melinda May . In November 2012 , Elizabeth Henstridge and Iain De Caestecker were cast as agents Jemma Simmons and Leo Fitz , respectively . Later in November , newcomer Brett Dalton was cast as agent Grant Ward , while in December 2012 , Chloe Bennet was cast as Skye , the sixth and final main cast member . 
 In January 2013 , actress Cobie Smulders , who portrayed Maria Hill in The Avengers , indicated that she would be open to appearing in the show . That July it was confirmed that she would guest star in the pilot , with Whedon stating that he wanted to include Smulders because " she IS <unk> . She 's cool and commanding and has the dry humor that plays so well with Clark 's . " Other guest cast members in the episode include two actors that had previously worked with Whedon on other television shows : Ron Glass , who played Shepherd Book in Firefly and the subsequent film Serenity , appears in " Pilot " as a S.H.I.E.L.D. doctor ; and J. August Richards , who appeared in Whedon 's Angel as Charles Gunn , portrays the character Mike Peterson . Additionally , Shannon Lucio and Bob Stephenson guest star as the Centipede doctor Debbie and Mike 's former boss Gary , respectively . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Production on the pilot , under the name of S.H.I.E.L.D. , took place from January 23 to February 12 , 2013 in Los Angeles , to accommodate Joss Whedon 's busy schedule . Additional filming also took place on location in Paris for two days , with Dalton noting that " it lends a kind of authenticity to the show and production value . " When the crew was scouting locations , the weather was " almost too perfect " , but during shooting it was foggy and raining , which Dalton described as " more authentic " rather than unnecessarily " picaresque " . In May 2014 , Jed Whedon revealed that on the first day of shooting the pilot , images of vehicles meant to be kept secret during production of the episode had already been leaked online , quickly showing how difficult dealing with secrecy on a Marvel project would be . 
 = = = Marvel Cinematic Universe tie @-@ ins = = = 
 The episode uses the extremis virus from Iron Man 3 as one source of power for the character of Mike Peterson . Executive producer Jeffrey Bell explained that the idea of using it came up independent of the film , but the crew realized that it would be a good opportunity to tie in with the films , and worked with Marvel [ Studios ] on the tie @-@ in to ensure that " they didn 't feel like we were just ripping off their idea . " Additional sources of power for the character include : Chitauri technology , from The Avengers and Item 47 ; and super @-@ soldier serum , from Captain America : The First Avenger and The Incredible Hulk . The events of The Avengers are referenced numerous times throughout the episode , and archive footage from the film is briefly used in an opening montage . Also , Coulson 's flying car is a working model of the prototype seen in Captain America : The First Avenger . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Broadcast = = = 
 " Pilot " was first aired in the United States on ABC on September 24 , 2013 . It was aired alongside the US broadcast in Canada on CTV , while it was first aired in the United Kingdom on Channel 4 on September 27 , 2013 . It premiered on the Seven Network in Australia on October 2 , 2013 , and on TV2 in New Zealand on February 16 , 2014 . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 The first television spot for the episode was released on May 12 , 2013 , during the season 2 finale of Once Upon a Time . It featured footage from The Avengers , along with new footage for the pilot episode , and was noted as having high production values , which were compared to those of the Marvel One @-@ Shots . Two days later an extended trailer was released , " devoted to expository dialogue , setting up the characters and establishing the pecking order " . " Pilot " was then screened at San Diego Comic @-@ Con on July 19 , 2013 , and was met with a very positive reaction from the crowd . Prior to the airing of the episode in the UK , a viral marketing campaign was underway to promote the show . Posters asking for witnesses of " Suspected Extraordinary Activity " were placed around London . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The episode , along with the rest of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. ' s first season , was released on Blu @-@ ray and DVD on September 9 , 2014 . Bonus features include behind @-@ the @-@ scenes featurettes , audio commentary , deleted scenes , and a blooper reel . It was released in Region 2 on October 20 , and in Region 4 on November 11 , 2014 . On November 20 , 2014 , the episode became available for streaming on Netflix . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In the United States the episode received a 4 @.@ 7 / 14 percent share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 , meaning that it was seen by 4 @.@ 7 percent of all households , and 14 percent of all of those watching television at the time of the broadcast . It was watched by 12 @.@ 12 million viewers . This was the highest ratings received by the first episode of a drama series in the United States for almost four years since the pilot episode of ABC 's V , however NCIS was the most viewed show in the time slot with more than 20 million viewers . " Pilot " was watched by 2 @.@ 71 million viewers during its Canadian premiere , earning the third highest viewership for the week on the network . It was watched by 14 @.@ 2 percent of all viewers in the UK watching television at the time of the broadcast , an average of 3 @.@ 1 million . The broadcast had a 27 percent share of those aged between 16 and 34 . It was the most viewed new drama on Channel 4 in 2013 . The Seven Network premiere in Australia was watched by 1 @.@ 3 million viewers , the top show of the night . In New Zealand , the first episode premiered to 326 @,@ 790 viewers , the fourth highest show of the night , and the most watched show on TV2 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Jason Hughes of The Huffington Post said that " Everything about this premiere worked " . He felt that the show was a cross between Fringe and Heroes with elements of The X @-@ Files included . He thought that there was a potential for the series to be a success and thought that it would attract both Marvel fans and new viewers alike . Dave Bradley gave the episode four and a half out of five for SFX magazine , saying that the show was going to become a phenomenon alongside Doctor Who , The Walking Dead and Game of Thrones . He felt that using the Skye character to introduce the viewer to the series was cheesy , but effective . He praised J August Richards ' performance but did not enjoy some of the characterizations of the main characters , which made him think the team was similar to that seen in Torchwood . 
 Eric Goldman at IGN rated " Pilot " 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 , stating that the " inspired collaboration " between Joss Whedon and Marvel that began with The Avengers is highly entertaining , and should keep fans wanting more , but noting that viewers wanting the series to have the same scale as the MCU films " will be disappointed – this is a high budget TV series , but it is a TV series " . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club gave the episode a " B " , feeling that the episode had enough " fun and funny moments " to indicate that the series could " settle into a groove with time " , but also that there were cautious and predictable moments , and that even at its best , the episode feels like " the product of several hundred cooks . " 
 Brian Lowry , writing for Variety , found the episode to be " OK " , finding some dialogue to be " a little precious and clunky " and feeling the plot to be " yet another twist on a procedural , albeit with a few mythological elements to sweeten the experience " , summing that " with great <unk> and ostentatious synergy come super @-@ sized expectations . " Tim Goodman of The Hollywood Reporter was not sure from the pilot whether the series would go on to be good or not . He thought that having Joss Whedon 's name attached the project would lead to positive reviews for at least a month . Goodman said that " It 's a fun hour and calling it ' good but not great ' has more to do with expectations in the wake of the Marvel movies than anything else . " 
 Jim Steranko , known for his work on Nick Fury , Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D. , felt the episode was unfocused and " had no menace , no tension " . He lamented the absence of Samuel L. Jackson 's Nick Fury , and felt the episode needed " to be much tougher , much stranger , much edgier to reach its potential " . James Hunt of Den of Geek , thought that the episode struggled to meet expectations . He thought that the CGI was worse than that seen on Smallville and that the sets seemed small . However , he praised the script and in particular the speech given by Richards ' character at the end of the episode . He thought that the start was better than Whedon 's Dollhouse , but was not perfect . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 " Pilot " was nominated for Outstanding Visual Effects in a Broadcast Program at the 12th Visual Effects Society Awards , but lost to the Game of Thrones episode " Valar <unk> " . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 The episode introduced a group called the " Rising Tide " , also the name of a real @-@ life volunteer group who work on climate change issues . The group issued a statement saying that they were concerned with the use of the name for the fictional group which appeared to be similar to Anonymous . They have since been mistakenly contacted on Twitter by fans of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D and have created a petition against The Walt Disney Company to stop using the name . 
 = Joseph Parry = 
 Joseph Parry ( 21 May 1841 – 17 February 1903 ) was a Welsh composer and musician . Born in Merthyr Tydfil , Wales , he is best known as the composer of Myfanwy and the hymn tune Aberystwyth , which the National anthem of South Africa , Nkosi Sikelel ' iAfrika , is said to be based on . Parry was also the first Welshman to compose an opera ; his composition , Blodwen , was the first opera in the Welsh language . 
 Born into a large family , Parry left school to work in the local coal mines when he was nine years of age . He then went to work at the Cyfarthfa Ironworks , where his father was also employed . In 1854 the family emigrated to the United States , settling at Danville , Pennsylvania , where Parry again found employment at an iron works . 
 Though Parry had a great interest in music , he had no opportunity to study it until there was a temporary closure of the Rough and Ready Iron Works . Some of his co @-@ workers were also musicians , and they offered music lessons while the iron works was closed . Parry joined a music sight @-@ reading class taught by one of the men . He continued to study harmony with another co @-@ worker , and learned how to read and write while he was learning about harmony . 
 Parry soon began submitting compositions to eisteddfodau in Wales and the United States and winning awards . During a return visit to Wales for the National Eisteddfod at Llandudno , Parry was offered two music scholarships , but was unable to accept due to family obligations . A fund was established for the support of Parry and his family while he studied music . 
 Parry went on to receive a Doctorate in Music from the University of Cambridge ; he was the first Welshman to receive Bachelor 's and Doctor 's degrees in music from the University . He returned to Wales in 1874 to become the first Professor of Music at Aberystwyth University , later accepting a position at Cardiff University . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Parry was born in Merthyr Tydfil in 1841 , the seventh of eight children of Daniel and Elizabeth Parry ( née Richards ) . The family was musically inclined , with all family members singing in the chapel choir . Parry 's mother , who performed at church functions , was remembered for her fine voice ; two of Parry 's sisters , Elizabeth and Jane , and a brother , Henry , gained some prominence in the United States as vocalists . He left school at age nine to work in the mines as the family needed the income . Young Parry worked a 56 hour week for twelve and a half pence while at the mine . By age 12 , Parry was working at the puddling furnaces of the Cyfarthfa Ironworks , where his father also worked . 
 Parry 's father , Daniel , emigrated to the United States in 1853 ; the rest of the family followed in 1854 . Like his father and brother , Parry became a worker at the Rough and Ready Iron Works in Danville , Pennsylvania . Danville had a large Welsh community and he became involved in strengthening Welsh culture locally , attending the Congregational Chapel and the Sunday school . Parry also served as the organist for the Mahoning Presbyterian Church in Danville ; the organ he played is still in service . Although he had sung in church choirs in Wales and the United States , Parry received no formal music lessons until he was 17 and living in Danville . 
 Parry 's opportunity to study music came in the form of a temporary closure of the iron works where he was employed . Parry had the good fortune to become friendly with three fellow workers who were also musicians . During rest periods , the three often would sing . Parry listened with interest at first , later joining in . One of the men started a music sight @-@ reading class while the iron works was closed ; Parry joined this class and became a fine sight @-@ reader . His interest in harmony made him want to study that also . One of his other co @-@ workers agreed to take Parry as a pupil . Young Parry was unable to read or write at the time he began harmony studies . The teacher patiently blended reading lessons with principles of harmony , and Parry quickly became skilled at both ; the teacher often found it hard to keep up with his pupil . During this time , Parry also learned to play the harmonium . 
 = = = Return to Wales = = = 
 Parry competed in the eisteddfod at Utica in 1861 , and took first prize for Temperance Vocal March . Curious as to how his music would be received in his native Wales , in 1864 , he sent an anthem to the National Eisteddfod of Wales at Llandudno . The adjudicators awarded him first prize , believing he was a professional musician . In 1865 , Parry again prepared an entry , but this time he travelled to the contest in Aberystwyth . Parry 's anthem entry was lost in the post , so it could not be judged . Instead , he was given a seat in the Gorsedd and the title " <unk> America " ( " Chief Musician of America " ) . 
 During this visit , Parry and his friends who had accompanied him to Wales travelled the country giving concerts of Parry 's own works . They were well received throughout the land . Parry was offered the opportunity to study for a year under Dr Davies of Swansea , followed by a one year scholarship at the Royal Academy of Music . He had to refuse both offers since he had a wife and child in the United States dependent on him for support . By 1865 , Parry 's musical ability had become well @-@ known in Wales and in the United States . A fund was established to support Parry and his family while he studied music ; donations were received from both countries . Parry aided his own cause by giving concerts in Pennsylvania , New York and Ohio . 
 In August 1868 Parry and his family arrived in England , where he began a three year study at the Royal Academy of Music under William Sterndale Bennett and Manuel Garcia . During his last year of study at the Royal Academy , Parry appeared before Queen Victoria three times , each time by her special request . The Queen made another request of Parry each time he appeared : that he perform only works he had composed . In 1871 , Bennett convinced Parry to enter University of Cambridge for a degree in music . While at Cambridge , Parry became the first Welshman to take both the <unk> and <unk> there . After earning his Bachelor 's degree , Parry and his family returned to Danville , where he operated a school of music for the next three years . When Aberystwyth University established a chair for music , it was offered to Parry ; he moved his family back to Wales , becoming the university 's first Professor of Music . 
 = = = Professor and Doctor of music = = = 
 Parry worked at Aberystwyth from 1874 to 1881 . In addition to his university duties , Parry frequently travelled as an adjudicator and conducting concerts of his compositions . He received his Doctorate from Cambridge in 1878 . At the time a candidate was required to compose a short oratorio and to have the work publicly performed ; the normal method was to have one of the college Chapel Choirs perform the oratorio . But Parry obtained the services of many Welsh singers ; 100 made the trip to Cambridge to perform Parry 's oratorio . When Parry resigned his position at Aberystwyth University in 1880 , he opened his own academy of music in the town . 
 In 1881 , the Parry family left Aberystwyth for Swansea , where Parry became the organist at Ebenezer Chapel and was head of a musical college he founded . When he was offered a chair at Cardiff University in 1888 , Parry and his family moved to the nearby town of Penarth . He lectured and taught at the university and was known as " Y Doctor Mawr " ( " The Great Doctor " ) . Parry also accepted a position as the organist at Christ Church Congregational Church in Penarth . 
 Parry became a candidate for principal of the Guildhall School of Music in 1896 ; the vacancy was due to the death of Sir Joseph Barnby . Officials of the city of Cardiff , colleagues and students at Cardiff University , as well as Parry 's former teachers wrote letters to the School of Music Committee in support of his election to the position . There were 38 applicants for the position ; the field was reduced to two candidates through a series of ballots by the Court of Common Council . Parry was no longer under consideration after the first round of reductions . He remained at the university and continued his work as an eisteddfod adjudicator , a conductor at <unk> Canu , and as a performer and lecturer throughout Wales and the United States until the time of his death . 
 = = = Personal life and characteristics = = = 
 In 1861 , Parry married Jane Thomas . She was the daughter of Welsh immigrants and the sister of Gomer Thomas , who published many of Parry 's early compositions . The couple had three sons and two daughters . The older children were born when the family was still living in Danville ; only Parry 's youngest child was born in Wales . Two of Parry 's three sons died after the family moved to Penarth . Parry 's youngest son , William , died in 1892 ; his oldest son , Joseph Haydn , died two years later . While all of Parry 's children are said to have had musical talent , his eldest , Joseph Haydn , followed in his father 's footsteps as a composer and teacher . 
 Later in 1894 , Parry and his wife hoped a trip to the US would help ease some of the sadness over the deaths of their two sons . Parry had last visited the United States on a vocal concert tour in 1880 . Though the Parrys would be visiting family , he believed he should be available to the public during the visit since many people in the US had helped him financially when he was studying music in England . 
 Parry asked an old friend to notify the Welsh community in the United States that he would be visiting and would adjudicate at eisteddfodau , lecture or lead <unk> <unk> if desired . The community could arrange for Parry to visit by contacting Rev. Thomas Edwards of Edwardsville , Pennsylvania . Parry and his family visited many cities and towns in the eastern US and were warmly received wherever they went . He kept those back in Cardiff advised of his travels through letters to The Western Mail which were printed by the newspaper . Parry 's last journey to the United States in 1898 included a visit to Salt Lake City , where he adjudicated at the third Salt Lake eisteddfod which was held in the Mormon Tabernacle . His last major work , an opera entitled The Maid of Cefn Ydfa , premiered at the Grand Theatre in Cardiff in late December 1902 . 
 Parry was known as a religious man and a hard worker both at the iron works and at his craft . Despite his recognition in Wales and in the United States , he was not a wealthy man . Parry had little aptitude for business . With his permission , a committee of his friends managed his affairs , with Parry creating compositions and his friends tending to the business of publications . Since his compositions were based primarily on Welsh subjects , many of Parry 's friends believed it would have been to his advantage to have settled in London , where there were more cosmopolitan experiences to draw inspiration from . In 1859 , Parry and his family became citizens of the United States ; he was equally proud of being a Welshman and a United States citizen . 
 David Jenkins , who was a student and assistant to Parry at Aberystwyth , described him as impulsive and unable to criticise his own works , too erratic to be a good conductor and too impatient for all but advanced students , but with a boyish enthusiasm , especially for music . Sir Alexander Mackenzie , who also worked with Parry , also noted his great enthusiasm and described him as a man of great musical ability . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 About two weeks before his death , Parry became suddenly ill . The medical condition was serious enough to warrant surgery . An operation was performed and a full recovery was expected . Some days after the surgery , it was necessary to perform a second operation due to complications . Parry developed a high fever from blood poisoning a few days after the second surgery . There was a slight rally , but Parry continued to have relapses and grew steadily weaker . Parry , who had planned a tour of Australia and the US for 1904 , lay in his sick bed when The Maid of Cefn Ydfa was signed for performances by three opera companies ; he was never able to be told of the good news . Parry died at his Penarth home on 17 February 1903 . His last composition was written during his final illness @-@ a tribute to his wife , Jane , entitled Dear Wife . 
 At least 7 @,@ 000 people from all parts of the country gathered in Penarth for the funeral of Joseph Parry . They lined the route from Parry 's home to Christ Church , where the family worshipped and to the churchyard at St Augustine 's . His family and friends were joined by officials from the city of Cardiff , faculty and students from Cardiff University , representatives from the National Eisteddfod and many members of various choirs throughout Wales . Ministers of various denominations were also part of those gathered to pay respects to Parry . He was buried on the north side of St Augustine 's Churchyard , Penarth . Parry 's monument is a marble column topped by a lyre with seven strings , with the strings representing the members of Parry 's family . Two of the seven strings of the lyre are broken to represent the deaths of his two sons , who died before Parry . 
 Shortly after his death , a national fund was established in Parry 's name . This was meant to provide support for his widow , Jane , through an annual annuity ; any funds remaining after Jane 's death were to be used to provide a national music scholarship named for Parry . 
 = = Compositions and other works = = 
 Parry was a prolific composer ; one of his early works , " My Childhood Dreams " , was published while he was living in Danville . Despite his penchant for composing , most of his major works were not commercially successful . His oratorio , Saul of Tarsus , was commissioned for the National Eisteddfod at Rhyl in 1892 , and was somewhat successful . Parry and others considered it to be his best work ; the problem with the oratorio was that it was difficult to perform and that the score for the composition is 305 pages long . 
 Parry is believed to have composed 27 complete works , among them ten operas , five cantatas and two oratorios , as well as countless songs and hymns . By the 1890s , Parry was sufficiently well known and was asked to produce many of his works on a commission basis . He dealt with a variety of publishers for some of his works , while he published others himself . Parry published his opera , Blodwen , himself but the reasons for this are not clear . He appears to have done less self @-@ publishing in the 1890s . Part of the reason for this may have been the loss of his printing plates in the Western Mail fire of 1893 . 
 During Parry 's lifetime , many of his works remained unpublished ; the shelves of his study held stacks of manuscripts . A friend of Parry 's talked with him about the possibility of losing all of his manuscripts if there was a fire and suggested Parry needed a safe to store his manuscripts in . When Parry said he could not afford to buy a safe , the friend gave him one as a gift . Over 100 years after his death , one of his unknown works , Te Deum , was discovered by accident in the National Library of Wales archives . 
 After Parry 's death , the Welsh Congregational Church sought to purchase the copyrights of all Parry 's works and to publish them . The church was successful in obtaining the copyright to Aberystwyth and more than 60 other hymns and anthems written by Parry . In 1916 , Parry 's widow , Jane , sold the rights to all works which Parry owned the copyrights of to Snell and Sons , music publishers , for £ 1150 . 
 = = = Aberystwyth = = = 
 The music , written by Parry , was first published in 1879 by Stephen and Jones in Second Book of Tunes and Hymns . It was paired with Charles Wesley 's words , " Jesus , Lover of My Soul " , and first sung at the English Congregational Church in Portland Street in Aberystwyth , where Parry worked as an organist . 
 Enoch Sontonga worked in a Methodist mission school near Johannesburg . Sontonga , like Parry , was a choirmaster ; in 1897 , he set new words to Parry 's music and called the hymn Nkosi Sikelel ' iAfrika . Welsh missionaries often brought various copies of hymnals to their African missions ; it is believed Parry 's hymn reached Africa in this manner . While Sontonga wrote only one stanza of lyrics and a chorus for the song , Samuel <unk> composed seven more stanzas in 1927 . The song became the national anthem of South Africa and four other African nations . 
 = = = Blodwen = = = 
 Parry 's opera , Blodwen , was first performed in Aberystwyth 's Temperance Hall on 21 May 1878 , although Parry did not publish it until 1888 , while at Swansea . This was the first opera written by a Welsh composer and also the first opera to be performed in Welsh . The opera , with its libretto written by Richard Davies , is set during the time of the Welsh Revolt — the last attempt by the Welsh to preserve their independence . 
 At the time , very few people in Wales had seen an opera , and they had no idea what it was like . The opera programmes provided explanations , especially that the singers would wear costumes but would not be acting . Those who were members of Welsh nonconformist churches needed reassurance that this was not a theatrical performance , as acting and theatres were held in as much contempt as taverns . Parry was raised in the nonconformist <unk> Chapel and adhered to the tenets of his faith for his entire life . The majority of participants in the first performance of Blodwen were music students of Parry ; his two older sons were also part of the production , playing piano and harmonium . Before the performance , Parry spoke to the audience . He repeated what had been printed in the programmes : that the participants were not acting and explained to those gathered what an opera was . Despite this , there were some clergymen who were not pleased . 
 Soon after the first performance of Blodwen , a local couple named their baby daughter after the opera 's heroine . There were no recorded instances of any children being named Blodwen until after the premiere of Parry 's opera . Records show the great popularity of the name for girls and also the popularity of Howell , the name of the hero , for boys . The opera was successful , with a further 500 performances worldwide by 1896 . Despite the success of Aberystwyth and Myfanwy , Blodwen seems to have been Parry 's most popular work while he was living , 
 = = = Myfanwy = = = 
 While Parry is most often thought of as the sole creator of the ballad , it was actually the work of three men . At some point , Thomas Walter Price , a poet and journalist , published a poem in English called Arabella . It is believed that Parry wrote the music before the Welsh words of Myfanwy were written by Richard Davies . Parry 's work was published in 1875 , with Parry selling all rights to the song to a publisher for £ 12 . The song was first performed at the first concert of the Aberystwyth and University Musical Society on 28 May 1875 , with Parry as the conductor . It remains a standard in repertoires of Welsh male choirs today . 
 = = = Te Deum = = = 
 Edward @-@ Rhys Harry reconstructed Parry 's setting of the Te Deum taken from the text of The Book of Common Prayer . The manuscript was discovered in the National Library of Wales archives . Parry wrote the manuscript in 1863 , while living in Danville . Harry uncovered the manuscript while researching choral traditions at the library . He worked a year at transcribing the original Parry manuscript . The London Welsh Chorale gave the work its world première performance under Harry at St Giles <unk> , Barbican , London on 14 July 2012 . 
 = = = Other works = = = 
 Parry was also involved in music @-@ related publishing . Beginning in 1861 , he was a regular contributor of Tonic sol @-@ fa material to the Welsh music journal , Y <unk> <unk> . Parry 's work with making Tonic sol @-@ fa accessible allowed everyone with an interest in choral work to participate . He edited Cambrian <unk> ( A National Collection of Welsh Songs ) in 1893 . He also complied Dr Parry 's Book of Songs , which was a collection of his own works , and wrote <unk> <unk> ( " Elements of Music " ) , a Welsh handbook on theory , in 1888 . In 1895 , Parry entered into an agreement with an American music publishing firm , the John Church Company . The company published some of Parry 's songs along with English translations of poems by Heinrich Heine . The translations were done by poets of note , including James Thomson . Since it is doubtful that Parry was familiar with Heine 's work , there is the possibility that Parry was commissioned by the company to write the songs during an extensive US trip he had made the year before . 
 After his move to Penarth , Parry became involved in journalism , writing regular columns for both The Cardiff Times and The South Wales Weekly News . He also did some writing for The Western Mail . In his later years , Parry wrote an autobiography which has been described as inaccurate ; he never published the information . The National Library of Wales acquired this manuscript in 1935 from Edna Parry Waite , Parry 's daughter and his last surviving child . The National Library published Parry 's writings as a bilingual book , The Little Hero @-@ the Autobiography of Joseph Parry , in 2004 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Britain = = = 
 In 1947 , another son of Merthyr Tydfil , Jack Jones , based his novel , Off to Philadelphia in the Morning , on the events in the life of Joseph Parry . The book became a BBC three @-@ part presentation of the same name in 1978 . Jones never offered the book as anything except a work of fiction ; despite this , some aspects of the novel have been misconstrued as fact . 
 The centenary of Parry 's death was marked by an open air concert in Merthyr Tydfil 's Cyfarthfa Park featuring performances of Parry 's works . The concert was recorded on 28 July 2002 by Welsh television production company Avanti Media . It was broadcast by S4C on 17 February 2003 . A great @-@ <unk> of Parry 's , who was a professional opera singer , was present for the event . 
 An anthem Parry composed with the Rev. Robert David Thomas while living in Pennsylvania was performed for the first time in Wales to mark the centenary of the composer 's death . There was no record of the anthem , " Cymry Glan Americ " , having been performed in Wales ; it is not certain if the work , which was written on January 1 , 1872 had ever been performed previously . A relative of Rev. Thomas located the composition and shared the information with Geraint Jones , the conductor of the Trefor brass band . Jones and his band performed the anthem on 28 May 2002 in Pwllheli at the centenary of the town hall . 
 In 2011 conductor Edward @-@ Rhys Harry oversaw the total reconstruction of Parry 's oratorio Emmanuel , which was performed by Cor Bro <unk> and The British Sinfonietta , conducted by Harry , in December of that year . In May 2013 , Emmanuel was performed in the US for the first time when Harry and <unk> Bro <unk> performed in New York and Philadelphia . 
 = = = Parry 's cottage = = = 
 The cottage at 4 Chapel Row , Merthyr Tydfil , where Parry was born , is now open to the public as a museum . The row of cottages was attached to the Bethesda Chapel , where the family attended services . There are two bedrooms upstairs with the kitchen and another bedroom downstairs . The Parry family lived here with two lodgers until emigrating to the United States in 1854 . 
 The chapel and its attached cottages were slated for demolition in 1977 ; efforts by the local council and students from Cyfarthfa High School saved the row of cottages , but not the Bethesda Chapel . In 1979 , the Merthyr Tydfil Heritage Trust opened the cottage to the public . Exhibitions were installed upstairs in 1986 and restoration of the ground floor was completed in 1990 . Parry 's home was refurbished in 2016 through funds from a local company and was reopened to the public beginning on what would have been the composer 's 175th birthday . The home is now part of the Cyfarthfa Heritage Area . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 Parry is warmly remembered , particularly at the Mahoning Presbyterian Church in Danville , where he served as organist and choirmaster . Each time he visited the US , Parry returned to the church to play the organ . The Susquehanna Valley Welsh Society holds an annual <unk> Canu in his honour at the church on the Sunday nearest his May 21st birthday . In 2007 , the church 's steeple was restored with help from the National Welsh American Foundation . The re @-@ dedication of the church was held on May 21st , the birthday of Parry . A plaque has been placed at one of his homes in Danville ; the community marked the centenary of his death at the local Danville Festival by a memorial concert of Parry 's works . 
 = New York State Route 122 = 
 New York State Route 122 ( NY 122 ) is an east – west state highway in northern Franklin County , New York , in the United States . The western terminus of the route is at an intersection with NY 37 in the town of Westville . Its eastern terminus is at a junction with U.S. Route 11 ( US 11 ) in the town of Burke . Near its midpoint , NY 122 has a short overlap with NY 30 in the town of Constable . NY 122 serves as a northerly bypass of the village of Malone , situated 6 miles ( 10 km ) to the south . 
 NY 122 was assigned c . 1938 as a north – south connector between what is now NY 11B and US 11 in the nearby town of Bangor . It was extended northeast to Burke via Westville after the state acquired ownership of the Westville – Burke highway in 1980 , and truncated to begin in Westville about 10 years later . Modern NY 122 follows what was originally designated New York State Route 188 during the 1930s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 122 begins at an intersection with NY 37 in the Westville hamlet of Westville Center as an eastward continuation of County Route 19 ( CR 19 , Jewett Road ) . The route initially heads eastward from NY 37 as a rural , two @-@ lane road before ducking to the southeast . After an intersection with Bird Road roughly 0 @.@ 75 miles ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) from Westville Center , it continues on a southeasterly track for 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) , running alongside the Salmon River before curving eastward into the town of Constable . NY 122 soon enters the hamlet of the same name , where the undeveloped surroundings give way to a stretch of residences on both sides of the highway . 
 In the center of Constable , NY 122 intersects NY 30 , which overlaps with NY 122 for one block on its way from Malone to the Canadian border . The highway continues east from NY 30 , serving residences in the eastern part of the hamlet before curving to the southeast and entering another rural area . The road crosses into the town of Burke at a junction with Constable – Burke Town Line Road 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) east of Constable , and subsequently takes on a more pronounced southeasterly alignment . NY 122 ends 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) later at an intersection with US 11 just west of the hamlet of Burke Center . 
 = = History = = 
 In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , a north – south highway in the town of Bangor that linked the hamlets of Bangor and North Bangor was designated as part of NY 187 , an east – west route connecting Nicholville to North Bangor via Bangor . Farther north , an east – west roadway between NY 10 ( now NY 30 ) in Constable and US 11 in Burke was assigned the NY 188 designation . NY 187 was realigned c . 1937 to continue east from Bangor to Malone via modern NY 11B . Its former routing between Bangor and North Bangor was designated as NY 122 by the following year . Meanwhile , NY 188 was extended west to NY 37 in Westville c . 1932 before it was removed c . 1939 . 
 On April 1 , 1980 , ownership and maintenance of former NY 188 ( by this point redesignated as CR 22 ) was transferred from Franklin County to the state of New York as part of a highway maintenance swap between the two levels of government . In return , the state transferred all of then @-@ NY 122 to Franklin County . The new Westville – Burke state highway became part of NY 122 , which was extended north along CR 19 to Westville Center and east along former NY 188 to Burke . NY 122 was truncated between 1985 and 1993 to consist only of the state @-@ maintained part of the route between Westville and Burke . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Franklin County . 
 = John D. Rockefeller = 
 John Davison Rockefeller Sr. ( July 8 , 1839 – May 23 , 1937 ) was an American industrialist and philanthropist . He was a co @-@ founder of the Standard Oil Company , which dominated the oil industry and was the first great U.S. business trust . Rockefeller revolutionized the petroleum industry , and along with other key contemporary industrialists such as Andrew Carnegie , defined the structure of modern philanthropy . In 1870 , he founded Standard Oil Company and actively ran it until he officially retired in 1897 . 
 Rockefeller founded Standard Oil as an Ohio partnership with his brother William along with Henry Flagler , Jabez A. Bostwick , chemist Samuel Andrews , and a silent partner , Stephen V. Harkness . As kerosene and gasoline grew in importance , Rockefeller 's wealth soared and he became the world 's richest man and the first American worth more than a billion dollars , controlling 90 % of all oil in the United States at his peak . His fortune upon his death in 1937 stood at US $ 1 @.@ 4 billion ( equivalent to $ 23 billion in 2015 dollars ) . At the time , his fortune accounted for more than 1 @.@ 5 % of the national economy , equivalent to $ 253 billion in 2013 . His peak net worth was estimated at $ 336 billion or almost 2 % of the American economy ( in 2007 USD ; inflation @-@ adjusted ) at 74 years of age , making him arguably the richest person in modern history . 
 Rockefeller spent the last 40 years of his life in retirement at his estate , Kykuit , in Westchester County , New York . His fortune was mainly used to create the modern systematic approach of targeted philanthropy . He was able to do this through the creation of foundations that had a major effect on medicine , education and scientific research . His foundations pioneered the development of medical research and were instrumental in the eradication of hookworm and yellow fever . 
 Rockefeller was also the founder of both the University of Chicago and Rockefeller University and funded the establishment of Central Philippine University in the Philippines . He was a devout and devoted Northern Baptist , and supported many church @-@ based institutions . Rockefeller adhered to total abstinence from alcohol and tobacco throughout his life . He was a faithful congregant of the Erie Street Baptist Mission Church , where he taught Sunday school , and served as a trustee , clerk , and occasional janitor . Religion was a guiding force throughout his life , and Rockefeller believed it to be the source of his success . Rockefeller was also considered a supporter of capitalism based on a perspective of social <unk> , and is often quoted as saying " The growth of a large business is merely a survival of the fittest . " 
 = = Early life = = 
 Rockefeller was the second of six children and eldest son born in Richford , New York , to con artist William Avery " Bill " Rockefeller ( November 13 , 1810 – May 11 , 1906 ) and Eliza Davison ( September 12 , 1813 – March 28 , 1889 ) . His siblings were Lucy ( 1838 – 1878 ) , William Jr . ( 1841 – 1922 ) , Mary ( 1843 – 1925 ) , and twins Franklin ( Frank ) ( 1845 – 1917 ) and Frances ( 1845 – 1847 ) . His father was of English and German descent while his mother was of Scots @-@ Irish descent . Bill was first a lumberman and then a traveling salesman who identified himself as a " botanic physician " and sold elixirs . The locals referred to the mysterious but fun @-@ loving man as " Big Bill " and " Devil Bill " . He was a sworn foe of conventional morality who had opted for a vagabond existence and who returned to his family infrequently . Throughout his life , Bill became notorious for shady schemes . In between the births of Lucy and John , Bill and his mistress / housekeeper Nancy Brown had a daughter named Clorinda ( c . 1838 – ? , died young ) . Between John and William Jr . ' s births , Bill and Nancy had another daughter , Cornelia ( c . 1840 – ? ) . 
 Eliza , a homemaker and devout Northern Baptist , struggled to maintain a semblance of stability at home , as Bill was frequently gone for extended periods . She also put up with his philandering and his double life , which included bigamy . Thrifty by nature and necessity , she taught her son that " willful waste makes woeful want " . Young Rockefeller did his share of the regular household chores and earned extra money raising turkeys , selling potatoes and candy , and eventually lending small sums of money to neighbors . He followed his father 's advice to " trade dishes for platters " and always get the better part of any deal . Bill once bragged , " I cheat my boys every chance I get . I want to make ' em sharp . " 
 When he was a boy , his family moved to Moravia , NY , and in 1851 to Owego , where he attended Owego Academy . In 1853 , his family moved to <unk> , a suburb of Cleveland . Rockefeller attended Cleveland 's Central High School , the first high school in Cleveland and the first free , public high school west of the Alleghenies . Then , he took a ten @-@ week business course at Folsom 's Commercial College , where he studied bookkeeping . 
 In spite of his father 's absences and frequent family moves , young John was a well @-@ behaved , serious , and studious boy . His contemporaries described him as reserved , earnest , religious , methodical , and discreet . He was an excellent debater and expressed himself precisely . He also had a deep love of music and dreamed of it as a possible career . Early on , he displayed an excellent mind for numbers and detailed accounting . 
 = = Pre @-@ Standard Oil career = = 
 = = = As a bookkeeper = = = 
 In September 1855 , when Rockefeller was sixteen , he got his first job as an assistant bookkeeper working for a small produce commission firm called Hewitt & Tuttle . He worked long hours and delighted , as he later recalled , in " all the methods and systems of the office . " He was particularly adept at calculating transportation costs , which served him well later in his career . Making 50 cents a day , the full salary for his first three months ' work was $ 50 ( equivalent to $ 1 thousand in 2015 dollars ) . As a youth , Rockefeller reportedly said that his two great ambitions were to make $ 100 thousand ( equivalent to $ 3 million in 2015 dollars ) and to live 100 years . 
 = = = Business partnership and Civil War service = = = 
 In 1859 , Rockefeller went into the produce commission business with a partner , Maurice B. Clark , and they raised $ 4 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 100 thousand in 2015 dollars ) in capital . Rockefeller went steadily ahead in business from there , making money each year of his career . After wholesale foodstuffs , the partners built an oil refinery in 1863 in " The Flats " , then Cleveland 's burgeoning industrial area . The refinery was directly owned by Andrews , Clark & Company , which was composed of Clark & Rockefeller , chemist Samuel Andrews , and M. B. Clark 's two brothers . The commercial oil business was then in its infancy . Whale oil had become too expensive for the masses , and a cheaper , general @-@ purpose lighting fuel was needed . 
 While his brother Frank fought in the Civil War , Rockefeller tended his business and hired substitute soldiers . He gave money to the Union cause , as did many rich Northerners who avoided combat . Rockefeller was an abolitionist who voted for President Abraham Lincoln and supported the then @-@ new Republican Party . As he said , " God gave me money " , and he did not apologize for it . He felt at ease and righteous following John Wesley 's dictum , " gain all you can , save all you can , and give all you can . " 
 In February 1865 , in what was later described by oil industry historian Daniel Yergin as a " critical " action , Rockefeller bought out the Clark brothers for $ 72 @,@ 500 ( equivalent to $ 1 million in 2015 dollars ) at auction and established the firm of Rockefeller & Andrews . Rockefeller said , " It was the day that determined my career . " He was well positioned to take advantage of postwar prosperity and the great expansion westward fostered by the growth of railroads and an oil @-@ fueled economy . He borrowed heavily , reinvested profits , adapted rapidly to changing markets , and fielded observers to track the quickly expanding industry . 
 = = = Beginning in the oil business = = = 
 In 1866 , his brother William Rockefeller Jr. built another refinery in Cleveland and brought John into the partnership . In 1867 , Henry M. Flagler became a partner , and the firm of Rockefeller , Andrews & Flagler was established . By 1868 , with Rockefeller continuing practices of borrowing and <unk> profits , controlling costs , and using refineries ' waste , the company owned two Cleveland refineries and a marketing subsidiary in New York ; it was the largest oil refinery in the world . Rockefeller , Andrews & Flagler was the predecessor of the Standard Oil Company . 
 = = Standard Oil = = 
 = = = Founding and early growth = = = 
 By the end of the American Civil War , Cleveland was one of the five main refining centers in the U.S. ( besides Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , New York , and the region in northwestern Pennsylvania where most of the oil originated ) . By 1869 there was three times more kerosene refining capacity than needed to supply the market , and the capacity remained in excess for many years . 
 On 10 January , 1870 , Rockefeller abolished the partnership of Rockefeller , Andrews & Flagler , forming Standard Oil of Ohio , which rapidly became the most profitable refiner in Ohio . Standard Oil grew to become one of the largest shippers of oil and kerosene in the country . The railroads competed fiercely for traffic and , in an attempt to create a cartel to control freight rates , formed the South Improvement Company in collusion with Standard and other oil companies outside the main oil centers . The cartel received preferential treatment as a high @-@ volume shipper , which included not just steep rebates of up to 50 % for their product but also rebates for the shipment of competing products . Part of this scheme was the announcement of sharply increased freight charges . This touched off a firestorm of protest from independent oil well owners , including boycotts and vandalism , which led to the discovery of Standard Oil 's part in the deal . A major New York refiner , Charles Pratt and Company , headed by Charles Pratt and Henry H. Rogers , led the opposition to this plan , and railroads soon backed off . Pennsylvania revoked the cartel 's charter , and non @-@ preferential rates were restored for the time being . 
 Undeterred , though vilified for the first time by the press , Rockefeller continued with his self @-@ reinforcing cycle of buying competing refiners , improving the efficiency of his operations , pressing for discounts on oil shipments , undercutting his competition , making secret deals , raising investment pools , and buying rivals out . In less than four months in 1872 , in what was later known as " The Cleveland Conquest " or " The Cleveland Massacre " , Standard Oil absorbed 22 of its 26 Cleveland competitors . Eventually , even his former antagonists , Pratt and Rogers , saw the futility of continuing to compete against Standard Oil : in 1874 , they made a secret agreement with Rockefeller to be acquired . Pratt and Rogers became Rockefeller 's partners . Rogers , in particular , became one of Rockefeller 's key men in the formation of the Standard Oil Trust . Pratt 's son , Charles Millard Pratt , became Secretary of Standard Oil . For many of his competitors , Rockefeller had merely to show them his books so they could see what they were up against and make them a decent offer . If they refused his offer , he told them he would run them into bankruptcy and then cheaply buy up their assets at auction . He saw himself as the industry 's savior , " an angel of mercy " absorbing the weak and making the industry as a whole stronger , more efficient , and more competitive . Standard was growing horizontally and vertically . It added its own pipelines , tank cars , and home delivery network . It kept oil prices low to stave off competitors , made its products affordable to the average household , and , to increase market penetration , sometimes sold below cost . It developed over 300 oil @-@ based products from tar to paint to Vaseline petroleum jelly to chewing gum . By the end of the 1870s , Standard was refining over 90 % of the oil in the U.S. Rockefeller had already become a millionaire ( $ 1 million is equivalent to $ 25 million in 2015 dollars ) . 
 " He instinctively realized that orderliness would only proceed from centralized control of large aggregations of plant and capital , with the one aim of an orderly flow of products from the producer to the consumer . That orderly , economic , efficient flow is what we now , many years later , call ' vertical integration ' I do not know whether Mr. Rockefeller ever used the word ' integration ' . I only know he conceived the idea . " A Standard Oil of Ohio successor of Rockefeller 
 In 1877 , Standard clashed with Thomas A. Scott , the president of the Pennsylvania Railroad , Standard 's chief hauler . Rockefeller envisioned pipelines as an alternative transport system for oil and began a campaign to build and acquire them . The railroad , seeing Standard 's incursion into the transportation and pipeline fields , struck back and formed a subsidiary to buy and build oil refineries and pipelines . Standard countered and held back its shipments and , with the help of other railroads , started a price war that dramatically reduced freight payments and caused labor unrest . Rockefeller prevailed and the railroad sold its oil interests to Standard . But in the aftermath of that battle , in 1879 the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania indicted Rockefeller on charges of monopolizing the oil trade , starting an avalanche of similar court proceedings in other states and making a national issue of Standard Oil 's business practices . 
 Rockefeller was under great strain during the 1870s and 1880s when he was carrying out his plan of consolidation and integration and being attacked by the press . He complained that he could not stay asleep most nights . Rockefeller later commented : 
 " All the fortune that I have made has not served to compensate me for the anxiety of that period . " 
 = = = Monopoly = = = 
 Standard Oil gradually gained almost complete control of oil refining and marketing in the United States through horizontal integration . In the kerosene industry , Standard Oil replaced the old distribution system with its own vertical system . It supplied kerosene by tank cars that brought the fuel to local markets , and tank wagons then delivered to retail customers , thus bypassing the existing network of wholesale jobbers . Despite improving the quality and availability of kerosene products while greatly reducing their cost to the public ( the price of kerosene dropped by nearly 80 % over the life of the company ) , Standard Oil 's business practices created intense controversy . Standard 's most potent weapons against competitors were underselling , differential pricing , and secret transportation rebates . The firm was attacked by journalists and politicians throughout its existence , in part for these monopolistic methods , giving momentum to the antitrust movement . By 1880 , according to the New York World , Standard Oil was " the most cruel , impudent , pitiless , and grasping monopoly that ever fastened upon a country " . To the critics Rockefeller replied , " In a business so large as ours ... some things are likely to be done which we cannot approve . We correct them as soon as they come to our knowledge . " 
 At that time , many legislatures had made it difficult to incorporate in one state and operate in another . As a result , Rockefeller and his associates owned dozens of separate corporations , each of which operated in just one state ; the management of the whole enterprise was rather unwieldy . In 1882 , Rockefeller 's lawyers created an innovative form of corporation to centralize their holdings , giving birth to the Standard Oil Trust . The " trust " was a corporation of corporations , and the entity 's size and wealth drew much attention . Nine trustees , including Rockefeller , ran the 41 companies in the trust . The public and the press were immediately suspicious of this new legal entity , and other businesses seized upon the idea and emulated it , further inflaming public sentiment . Standard Oil had gained an aura of invincibility , always prevailing against competitors , critics , and political enemies . It had become the richest , biggest , most feared business in the world , seemingly immune to the boom and bust of the business cycle , consistently making profits year after year . 
 The company 's vast American empire included 20 @,@ 000 domestic wells , 4 @,@ 000 miles of pipeline , 5 @,@ 000 tank cars , and over 100 @,@ 000 employees . Its share of world oil refining topped out above 90 % but slowly dropped to about 80 % for the rest of the century . In spite of the formation of the trust and its perceived immunity from all competition , by the 1880s Standard Oil had passed its peak of power over the world oil market . Rockefeller finally gave up his dream of controlling all the world 's oil refining , he admitted later , " We realized that public sentiment would be against us if we actually refined all the oil . " Over time foreign competition and new finds abroad eroded his dominance . In the early 1880s , Rockefeller created one of his most important innovations . Rather than try to influence the price of crude oil directly , Standard Oil had been exercising indirect control by altering oil storage charges to suit market conditions . Rockefeller then ordered the issuance of certificates against oil stored in its pipelines . These certificates became traded by speculators , thus creating the first oil @-@ futures market which effectively set spot market prices from then on . The National Petroleum Exchange opened in Manhattan in late 1882 to facilitate the trading of oil futures . 
 Even though 85 % of world crude production was still coming from Pennsylvania wells in the 1880s , drilling in Russia and Asia began to reach the world market . Robert Nobel had established his own refining enterprise in the abundant and cheaper Russian oil fields , including the region 's first pipeline and the world 's first oil tanker . The Paris Rothschilds jumped into the fray providing financing . Additional fields were discovered in Burma and Java . Even more critical , the invention of the light bulb gradually began to erode the dominance of kerosene for illumination . But Standard Oil adapted , developing a European presence , expanding into natural gas production in the U.S. then into gasoline for automobiles , which until then had been considered a waste product . 
 Standard Oil moved its headquarters to New York City at 26 Broadway , and Rockefeller became a central figure in the city 's business community . He bought a residence in 1884 on 54th street near the mansions of other magnates such as William Henry Vanderbilt . Despite personal threats and constant pleas for charity , Rockefeller took the new elevated train to his downtown office daily . In 1887 , Congress created the Interstate Commerce Commission which was tasked with enforcing equal rates for all railroad freight , but by then Standard depended more on pipeline transport . More threatening to Standard 's power was the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890 , originally used to control unions , but later central to the breakup of the Standard Oil trust . Ohio was especially vigorous in applying its state anti @-@ trust laws , and finally forced a separation of Standard Oil of Ohio from the rest of the company in 1892 , the first step in the dissolution of the trust . 
 In the 1890s , Rockefeller expanded into iron ore and ore transportation , forcing a collision with steel magnate Andrew Carnegie , and their competition became a major subject of the newspapers and cartoonists . Rockefeller also went on a massive buying spree acquiring leases for crude oil production in Ohio , Indiana , and West Virginia , as the original Pennsylvania oil fields began to play out . Amidst the frenetic expansion , Rockefeller began to think of retirement . The daily management of the trust was turned over to John Dustin Archbold and Rockefeller bought a new estate , Pocantico Hills , north of New York City , turning more time to leisure activities including the new sports of bicycling and golf . 
 Upon his ascent to the presidency , Theodore Roosevelt initiated dozens of suits under the Sherman Antitrust Act and coaxed reforms out of Congress . In 1901 , U.S. Steel , then controlled by J. Pierpont Morgan , having bought Andrew Carnegie 's steel assets , offered to buy Standard 's iron interests as well . A deal brokered by Henry Clay Frick exchanged Standard 's iron interests for U.S. Steel stock and gave Rockefeller and his son membership on the company ’ s board of directors . In full retirement at age 63 , Rockefeller earned over $ 58 million in investments in 1902 . 
 One of the most effective attacks on Rockefeller and his firm was the 1904 publication of The History of the Standard Oil Company , by Ida Tarbell , a leading muckraker . She documented the company 's espionage , price wars , heavy @-@ handed marketing tactics , and courtroom evasions . Although her work prompted a huge backlash against the company , Tarbell stated she was surprised at its magnitude . " I never had an animus against their size and wealth , never objected to their corporate form . I was willing that they should combine and grow as big and wealthy as they could , but only by legitimate means . But they had never played fair , and that ruined their greatness for me . " Tarbell 's father had been driven out of the oil business during the South Improvement Company affair . 
 Rockefeller called her " Miss <unk> " in private but held back in public saying only , " not a word about that misguided woman . " Instead Rockefeller began a publicity campaign to put his company and himself in a better light . Though he had long maintained a policy of active silence with the press , he decided to make himself more accessible and responded with conciliatory comments such as " capital and labor are both wild forces which require intelligent legislation to hold them in restriction . " He wrote and published his memoirs beginning in 1908 . 
 Critics found his writing to be sanitized and disingenuous and thought that statements such as " the underlying , essential element of success in business is to follow the established laws of high @-@ class dealing " seemed to be at odds with his true business methods . 
 Rockefeller and his son continued to consolidate their oil interests as best they could until New Jersey , in 1909 , changed its incorporation laws to effectively allow a re @-@ creation of the trust in the form of a single holding company . Rockefeller retained his nominal title as president until 1911 and he kept his stock . At last in 1911 , the Supreme Court of the United States found Standard Oil Company of New Jersey in violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act . By then the trust still had a 70 % market share of the refined oil market but only 14 % of the U.S. crude oil supply . The court ruled that the trust originated in illegal monopoly practices and ordered it to be broken up into 34 new companies . These included , among many others , Continental Oil , which became Conoco , now part of ConocoPhillips ; Standard of Indiana , which became Amoco , now part of BP ; Standard of California , which became Chevron ; Standard of New Jersey , which became Esso ( and later , Exxon ) , now part of ExxonMobil ; Standard of New York , which became Mobil , now part of ExxonMobil ; and Standard of Ohio , which became <unk> , now part of BP . <unk> and Chevron have remained separate companies . 
 Rockefeller , who had rarely sold shares , held over 25 % of Standard 's stock at the time of the breakup . He and all other stockholders received proportionate shares in each of the 34 companies . In the aftermath , Rockefeller 's control over the oil industry was somewhat reduced but over the next 10 years , the breakup also proved immensely profitable for him . The companies ' combined net worth rose fivefold and Rockefeller ’ s personal wealth jumped to $ 900 million . 
 = = Colorado Fuel and Iron = = 
 In 1902 , facing cash flow problems , John Cleveland Osgood turned to George Jay Gould a principle stockholder of the Denver and Rio Grande for a loan . Gould , via Frederick Taylor Gates , Rockefeller 's financial adviser , brought John D. Rockefeller in to help finance the loan . Analysis of the company 's operations by John D. Rockefeller , Jr. showed a need for substantially more funds which were provided in exchange for acquisition of CF & I 's subsidiaries such as the Colorado and Wyoming Railway Company , the Crystal River Railroad Company , and possibly the Rocky Mountain Coal and Iron Company . Control was passed from the Iowa Group to Gould and Rockefeller interests in 1903 with Gould in control and Rockefeller and Gates representing a minority interests . Osgood left the company in 1904 and devoted his efforts to operating competing coal and coke operations . 
 = = = Strike of 1913 – 14 and the Ludlow Massacre = = = 
 The strike , called in September 1913 , by the United Mine Workers over the issue of union representation , was against coal mine operators in <unk> and Las Animas counties in southern Colorado where the majority of CF & I 's coal and coke production was located , and was fought by the coal mine operators association and its steering committee which included Welborn , president of CF & I , who was spokesman for the coal operators . Lamont Montgomery Bowers , Rockefeller 's man , remained in the background . Few of the miners actually belonged to the union or participated in the strike call , but the majority honored it . Scabs were threatened and sometimes attacked . Both sides purchased substantial arms and ammunition . Striking miners were forced to abandon their homes in company towns and lived in tent cities erected by the union such as the tent city at Ludlow , a railway stop north of Trinidad . 
 Under the protection of the National Guard , some miners returned to work and some strikebreakers imported from the eastern coalfields joined them as Guard troops protected their movements . In February 1914 a substantial portion of the troops were withdrawn , but a substantial contingent remained at Ludlow . On April 20 , 1914 , a general fire @-@ fight occurred between strikers and troops . The camp burned , and 15 women and children in the camp were burned to death . 
 Costs to both mine operators and the union were high . Due to reduced demand for coal resulting from an economic downturn many of CF & I 's coal mines never reopened and many men were thrown out of work . The union was forced to discontinue strike benefits in February 1915 . There was destitution in the coal fields . With the help of funds from the Rockefeller Foundation relief programs were organized by the Colorado Committee on Unemployment and Relief , a state agency created by Governor Carlson , offering work to unemployed miners building roads and doing other useful projects . 
 The casualties suffered at Ludlow were successfully labeled a massacre and mobilized public opinion against the Rockefellers and the coal industry . The United States Commission on Industrial Relations conducted extensive hearings singling out John D. Rockefeller , Jr. and the Rockefellers ' relationship with Bowers for special attention . Bower was relieved of duty and Welborn restored to control in 1915 and industrial relations improved . 
 Initially following the massacre , Rockefeller denied any responsibility and minimized the seriousness of the event . When testifying on the Ludlow Massacre , and asked what action he would have taken as Director , John D. Rockefeller stated , " I would have taken no action . I would have deplored the necessity which compelled the officers of the company to resort to such measures to supplement the State forces to maintain law and order . " Rockefeller admitted that he had made no attempt to bring the militiamen to justice . 
 = = Illnesses and death = = 
 In his 50s Rockefeller suffered from moderate depression and digestive troubles and , during a stressful period in the 1890s , developed alopecia , a condition that causes the loss of some or all body hair . By 1901 he did not have a hair on his body , and he began wearing wigs . The hair never grew back , but his other health complaints subsided as he lightened his workload . 
 Rockefeller died of arteriosclerosis on May 23 , 1937 , less than two months shy of his 98th birthday , at The <unk> , his home in Ormond Beach , Florida . He was buried in Lake View Cemetery in Cleveland . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Against long circulating speculations that his family has French roots , genealogists proved the German origin of Rockefeller and traced them back to the early 17th century . Thereupon Johann Peter Rockenfeller ( baptized 27 September 1682 in the Protestant church of <unk> ) immigrated in 1723 from <unk> ( today a district of Neuwied , Rhineland @-@ Palatinate ) with three children to North America and settled down in Germantown , Pennsylvania . 
 The name Rockenfeller ( from <unk> ) refers to a deserted place <unk> ( English : distaff field ) in the district of Neuwied . Even today there are numerous inhabitants in this region with the surname Rockenfeller . 
 = = = Marriage = = = 
 In 1864 , Rockefeller married Laura Celestia " <unk> " Spelman ( 1839 – 1915 ) , daughter of Harvey Buell Spelman and Lucy Henry . They had four daughters and one son together . He said later , " Her judgment was always better than mine . Without her keen advice , I would be a poor man . " 
 Elizabeth " Bessie " Rockefeller ( August 23 , 1866 – November 14 , 1906 ) 
 Alice Rockefeller ( July 14 , 1869 – August 20 , 1870 ) 
 Alta Rockefeller ( April 12 , 1871 – June 21 , 1962 ) 
 Edith Rockefeller ( August 31 , 1872 – August 25 , 1932 ) 
 John Davison Rockefeller , Jr . ( January 29 , 1874 – May 11 , 1960 ) 
 The Rockefeller wealth , distributed as it was through a system of foundations and trusts , continued to fund family philanthropic , commercial , and , eventually , political aspirations throughout the 20th century . John Jr . ' s youngest son David Rockefeller was a leading New York banker , serving for over 20 years as CEO of Chase Manhattan ( now part of JPMorgan Chase ) . Second son , Nelson Aldrich Rockefeller , was Republican governor of New York and the 41st Vice President of the United States . Fourth son Winthrop Aldrich Rockefeller served as Republican Governor of Arkansas . Grandchildren Abigail Aldrich " Abby " Rockefeller and John Davison Rockefeller III became philanthropists . Grandson Laurance Spelman Rockefeller became a conservationist . Great @-@ grandson John Davison " Jay " Rockefeller IV served from 1985 until 2015 as a Democratic Senator from West Virginia and as a former governor of West Virginia , and another , Winthrop Paul Rockefeller , served ten years as Lieutenant Governor of Arkansas . 
 = = = Religious views = = = 
 John D. Rockefeller was born in the New York state area known as the Burned @-@ over district amidst the Second Great Awakening ; an evangelical revival which drew masses to various Protestant churches — especially Baptist and Methodist ones — urging believers to follow such ideals as hard work , prayer and good deeds to build " the Kingdom of God on Earth " . 
 Early in his life , he regularly went with his siblings and mother Eliza to the local Baptist church — the Erie Street Baptist Church ( later the Euclid Avenue Baptist Church ) — belonging to the Triennial Convention ( 1907 @-@ 1950 called the Northern Baptist Convention ; modern American Baptist Churches USA ) . His mother was deeply religious and disciplined , and had a major influence on him in religious matters . During church service , his mother would urge him to contribute his few pennies to the congregation . He came to associate the church with charity . A Baptist preacher once encouraged him to " make as much money as he could , and then give away as much as he could " . Later in his life , Rockefeller recalled : " It was at this moment , that the financial plan of my life was formed " . Money making was considered by him a god @-@ given gift . 
 A devout Northern Baptist , Rockefeller would read the Bible daily , attend prayer meetings twice a week and even led his own Bible study with his wife . Burton Folsom Jr. has noted , he sometimes gave tens of thousands of dollars to Christian groups , while , at the same time , he was trying to borrow over a million dollar to expand his business . His philosophy of giving was founded upon biblical principles . He truly believed in the biblical principle found in Luke 6 : 38 , " Give , and it will be given to you . A good measure , pressed down , shaken together and running over , will be poured into your lap . For with the measure you use , it will be measured to you . " 
 Rockefeller would support Baptist missionary activity , fund universities , and heavily engage in religious activities at his Cleveland , Ohio church . While traveling the South , he would donate large sums of money to churches belonging to the Southern Baptist Convention , various Black churches , as well as other Christian denominations . One time , he paid for a slave 's freedom and gave to a Roman Catholic orphanage . As he grew rich , his donations became more generous , especially to his church in Cleveland . 
 = = = Rumors = = = 
 At the height of John D. Rockefeller 's power as monopolist there were the first rumors that the family are said to guard as an " embarrassing secret " . Joseph Pulitzer offered a reward of $ 8 @,@ 000 for information about John 's father Bill aka " Doc Rockefeller " , by whom was only known that he was alive under a false name . However , the journalists could not find him before his death , and only two years later the whole story was published . 
 Bill , who traveled as a mountebank across the country , sometimes a glad @-@ handing huckster or occasionally as " herbal doctor " , although he had no legitimate medical training , abandoned his family around 1855 , but remained legally married to Eliza up to her death . He adopted the name William Levingston and married , as a bigamist in Norwich , Ontario , Margaret L. Allen ( 1834 – 1910 ) , without issue . He died in 1906 and his tomb was paid from the property of his second wife . 
 = = Philanthropy = = 
 Rockefeller 's charitable giving began with his first job as a clerk at age 16 , when he gave six percent of his earnings to charity , as recorded in his personal ledger . By the time he was twenty , his charity exceeded ten percent of his income . Much of his giving was church @-@ related . His church was later affiliated with the Northern Baptist Convention , which formed from American Baptists in the North with ties to their historic missions to establish schools and colleges for freedmen in the South after the American Civil War . Rockefeller attended Baptist churches every Sunday ; when traveling he would often attend services at African @-@ American Baptist congregations , leaving a substantial donation . As Rockefeller 's wealth grew , so did his giving , primarily to educational and public health causes , but also for basic science and the arts . He was advised primarily by Frederick Taylor Gates after 1891 , and , after 1897 , also by his son . 
 He was influenced by a meeting with Swami Vivekananda , who urged him to use more of his philanthropy to help the poor and distressed people . 
 Rockefeller believed in the Efficiency Movement , arguing that : " To help an inefficient , ill @-@ located , unnecessary school is a waste ... it is highly probable that enough money has been squandered on unwise educational projects to have built up a national system of higher education adequate to our needs , if the money had been properly directed to that end . " 
 Rockefeller and his advisers invented the conditional grant , which required the recipient to " root the institution in the affections of as many people as possible who , as contributors , become personally concerned , and thereafter may be counted on to give to the institution their watchful interest and cooperation " . 
 In 1884 , Rockefeller provided major funding for a college in Atlanta for African @-@ American women , which became Spelman College ( named for Rockefeller 's in @-@ laws who were ardent abolitionists before the Civil War ) . The oldest existing building on Spelman 's campus , Rockefeller Hall , is named after him . Rockefeller also gave considerable donations to Denison University and other Baptist colleges . 
 Rockefeller gave $ 80 million to the University of Chicago under William Rainey Harper , turning a small Baptist college into a world @-@ class institution by 1900 . He also gave a grant to the American Baptist Missionaries foreign mission board , the American Baptist Foreign Mission Society in establishing Central Philippine University , the first Baptist and second American university in Asia , in 1905 in the Philippines . 
 Rockefeller 's General Education Board , founded in 1903 , was established to promote education at all levels everywhere in the country . In keeping with the historic missions of the Baptists , it was especially active in supporting black schools in the South . Rockefeller also provided financial support to such established eastern institutions as Yale , Harvard , Columbia , Brown , Bryn Mawr , Wellesley and Vassar . 
 On Gates ' advice , Rockefeller became one of the first great benefactors of medical science . In 1901 , he founded the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research in New York City . It changed its name to Rockefeller University in 1965 , after expanding its mission to include graduate education . It claims a connection to 23 Nobel laureates . He founded the Rockefeller Sanitary Commission in 1909 , an organization that eventually eradicated the hookworm disease , which had long plagued rural areas of the American South . His General Education Board made a dramatic impact by funding the recommendations of the Flexner Report of 1910 . The study had been undertaken by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching ; it revolutionized the study of medicine in the United States . 
 Rockefeller created the Rockefeller Foundation in 1913 to continue and expand the scope of the work of the Sanitary Commission , which was closed in 1915 . He gave nearly $ 250 million to the foundation , which focused on public health , medical training , and the arts . It endowed Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene and Public Health , the first of its kind . It also built the Peking Union Medical College in China into a notable institution . The foundation helped in World War I war relief , and it employed William Lyon Mackenzie King of Canada to study industrial relations . In the 1920s , the Rockefeller Foundation funded a hookworm eradication campaign through the International Health Division . This campaign used a combination of politics and science , along with collaboration between healthcare workers and government officials to accomplish its goals . 
 Rockefeller 's fourth main philanthropy , the Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial Foundation , was created in 1918 . Through this , he supported work in the social studies ; this was later absorbed into the Rockefeller Foundation . In total Rockefeller donated about $ 550 million . 
 Rockefeller became well known in his later life for the practice of giving dimes to adults and nickels to children wherever he went . He even gave dimes as a playful gesture to wealthy men , such as tire mogul Harvey Firestone . 
 = = Florida home = = 
 Henry Flagler , one of the co @-@ founders of Standard Oil along with Rockefeller , bought the Ormond Hotel in 1890 , located in Ormond Beach , Florida , two years after it opened . Flagler expanded it to accommodate 600 guests and the hotel soon became one in a series of Gilded Age hotels catering to passengers aboard Flagler 's Florida East Coast Railway . One of Flagler 's guests at the Ormond Hotel was his former business partner John D. Rockefeller , who first stayed at the hotel in 1914 . Rockefeller liked the Ormond Beach area so much that after four seasons at the hotel , he bought an estate in Ormond Beach called " The <unk> " . It would be Rockefeller 's winter home during the latter part of his life . Sold by his heirs in 1939 , it was purchased by the city in 1973 and now serves as a cultural center and is the community 's best @-@ known historical structure . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Rockefeller had a long and controversial career in the oil industry followed by a long career in philanthropy . His image is an amalgam of all of these experiences and the many ways he was viewed by his contemporaries . These contemporaries include his former competitors , many of whom were driven to ruin , but many others of whom sold out at a profit ( or a profitable stake in Standard Oil , as Rockefeller often offered his shares as payment for a business ) , and quite a few of whom became very wealthy as managers as well as owners in Standard Oil . They also include politicians and writers , some of whom served Rockefeller 's interests , and some of whom built their careers by fighting Rockefeller and the " robber barons " . 
 Biographer Allan Nevins , answering Rockefeller 's enemies , concluded : 
 The rise of the Standard Oil men to great wealth was not from poverty . It was not meteor @-@ like , but accomplished over a quarter of a century by courageous venturing in a field so risky that most large capitalists avoided it , by arduous labors , and by more sagacious and farsighted planning than had been applied to any other American industry . The oil fortunes of 1894 were not larger than steel fortunes , banking fortunes , and railroad fortunes made in similar periods . But it is the assertion that the Standard magnates gained their wealth by appropriating " the property of others " that most challenges our attention . We have abundant evidence that Rockefeller 's consistent policy was to offer fair terms to competitors and to buy them out , for cash , stock , or both , at fair appraisals ; we have the statement of one impartial historian that Rockefeller was decidedly " more humane toward competitors " than Carnegie ; we have the conclusion of another that his wealth was " the least tainted of all the great fortunes of his day . " 
 Biographer Ron Chernow wrote of Rockefeller : 
 What makes him problematic — and why he continues to inspire ambivalent reactions — is that his good side was every bit as good as his bad side was bad . Seldom has history produced such a contradictory figure . 
 Notwithstanding these varied aspects of his public life , Rockefeller may ultimately be remembered simply for the raw size of his wealth . In 1902 , an audit showed Rockefeller was worth about $ 200 million — compared to the total national GDP of $ 24 billion then . His wealth continued to grow significantly ( in line with U.S. economic growth ) after as the demand for gasoline soared , eventually reaching about $ 900 million on the eve of the First World War , including significant interests in banking , shipping , mining , railroads , and other industries . According to the New York Times obituary , " it was estimated after Mr. Rockefeller retired from business that he had accumulated close to $ 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 out of the earnings of the Standard Oil trust and out of his other investments . This was probably the greatest amount of wealth that any private citizen had ever been able to accumulate by his own efforts . " By the time of his death in 1937 , Rockefeller 's remaining fortune , largely tied up in permanent family trusts , was estimated at $ 1 @.@ 4 billion , while the total national GDP was $ 92 billion . According to some methods of wealth calculation , Rockefeller 's net worth over the last decades of his life would easily place him as the wealthiest known person in recent history . As a percentage of the United States ' GDP , no other American fortune — including those of Bill Gates or Sam Walton — would even come close . 
 Rockefeller , at the age of 86 , penned the following words to sum up his life : 
 = Donde Quiera Que Estés = 
 " Donde Quiera Que Estés " ( English : " Wherever You Are " ) is a duet recorded by American Latin pop quintet the Barrio Boyzz and American Tejano singer Selena . Released on the Barrio Boyzz ' album of the same name , " Donde Quiera Que Estés " was written by K. C. Porter , Miguel Flores , Desmond Child , and produced by A.B. Quintanilla III , Domingo Padilla and Bebu Silvetti . The lyrics explore feelings felt after a breakup between first @-@ time lovers who hope that their love will one day return . " Donde Quiera Que Estés " is a dance pop song with influences from hip @-@ hop music . 
 Before the recording sessions , the Barrio Boyzz and Selena were unaware of each other until EMI Latin acquainted them to record the song . After filming the music video for the song in New York , the Barrio Boyzz and Selena went on a mini @-@ tour throughout Texas and Mexico . The song peaked at number one on the U.S. Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart for six consecutive weeks . It eventually became the sixth most performed Latin song of 1994 in the United States . " Donde Quiera Que Estés " was nominated for Vocal Duo of the Year at the 1994 Tejano Music Awards . The song was a critical success with music journalist favoring its musical composition . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 " Donde Quiera Que Estés " was written by American music producers K. C. Porter , Miguel Flores , and Desmond Child for EMI Latin 's project . The record company wanted the Barrio Boyzz and Selena to record the tune , the two were unaware of each other and were acquainted to record the song . Selena 's sister and drummer of Selena y Los Dinos , Suzette Quintanilla said in a 2002 interview that " [ the other company ] were like " well who is Selena ? " and vice versa " who is the Barrio Boyzz ? " , we weren 't too familiar with them . " Selena flew to New York with her mother Marcella Quintanilla to record and film the song with the Barrio Boyzz . The song was produced by Selena 's brother – record producer A.B. Quintanilla , American hip @-@ hop producer Domingo Padilla , and Argentine musician and producer Bebu Silvetti . The song was included in the 1993 sophomore album of the same name by the Barrio Boyzz , the album was later certified platinum ( Latin field ) for shipments of 100 @,@ 000 units in the United States . According to El Salvador ( El Mundo ) , Jose Behar , then @-@ president of EMI Latin , initially wanted to expand the Barrio Boyzz and Selena 's exposure from two different regions of the United States where they were relatively unknown . 
 On March 31 , 1995 , Selena was shot and killed by Yolanda Saldívar , her friend and former manager of the singer 's Selena Etc. boutiques . At the time of her death , Selena was working on a crossover album that marketed her as an American solo pop artist . The Barrio Boyzz were asked to re @-@ record the song into a bilingual duet with Selena entitled " Wherever You Are " . The song was added to the track listing of Dreaming of You ( 1995 ) , which was later certified 35 × platinum ( Latin field ) for shipments of 3 @.@ 5 million units in the United States . 
 = = Composition and chart history = = 
 " Donde Quiera Que Estés " is a Spanish @-@ language dance pop song with influences of hip @-@ hop music . It is performed in a moderate groove with a tempo of 90 beats per minute . Both the Spanish and English versions are performed in E minor and the musical instruments used in the recording are the piano and drums . The song makes use of scat singing , which were absent from the Spanish version . The lyrics explored feelings of a couples ending relationship , though both hope that their love will soon return . 
 The song was released onto U.S. radios on 22 January 1994 and debuted at number 20 on the U.S. Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart on the week ending 5 February 1994 . The song jumped to number six in the second week and to number three on the following week . John Lannert of Billboard called " Donde Quiera Que Estés " a " fast @-@ climbing " song and predicted it — along with Los <unk> ' song " La Loca " — to have outperform Ana Gabriel 's chart topper " Luna " in the following week . The song fell to number four on the week ending 26 February 1994 , it reclaimed the third position the following week for two consecutive weeks . On 26 March 1994 , " Donde Quiera Que Estés " peaked at number one on the chart and remained atop the chart for six consecutive weeks . This gave the Barrio Boyzz their second consecutive number one song , with their first being " <unk> de Ti " which peaked at number one on the week ending 18 December 1993 . " Donde Quiera Que Estés " provided Selena her first number one song in two years , her first number one was " Buenos Amigos " with Alvaro Torres , which peaked at number one on 6 June 1992 . " Donde Quiera Que Estés " knocked Gloria Estefan 's " Mi Buen Amor " , which was logged atop the chart for two consecutive weeks . 
 In its fourth week at number one , " Donde Quiera Que Estés " scored a " commanding point bulge " and its score at the time didn 't seem to be diminishing . In its fifth week , Lannert pointed out that La Mafia 's " Vida " song was vastly approaching the number one spot , however , he predicted that the song should remain at number one for one more week before being dethroned . 
 = = Critical reception and legacy = = 
 The song was nominated for Vocal Duo of the Year at the 1994 Tejano Music Awards , where the Barrio Boyzz and Selena performed the track . John Lannert of Billboard called " Donde Quiera Que Estés " a " pop / dance monster " during its reign on the top of Latin charts in 1994 . After Selena 's death , Lannert wrote a retrospective article on the singer for Billboard released on 10 June 1995 , he called " Donde Quiera Que Estés " a " pop duet smash " . After Selena was inducted into the Billboard Latin Music Hall of Fame on that same issue , Lannert allude the song as being a " rhythmic pop number " . On his album review of Dreaming of You , Paul Verna of Billboard called the track a " smash collaboration " . Marco Torres wrote in the Houston Press that " Donde Quiera Que Estés " is " probably the best music video of all time " . He further wrote that Selena " showcases her pop @-@ princess qualities by teaming up with New York City Latino pop group [ the ] Barrio Boyzz " . Torres also states that " this song about first loves is the perfect balance of harmony , sultry whispers and Selena 's ability to turn an otherwise mediocre song into a spectacular hit . " The Argus @-@ Press believed that " Donde Quiera Que Estés " and Selena 's subsequent single " Amor Prohibido " , were added on Dreaming of You to " show how her style grew . " Reviewing " Wherever You Are " , Howard Cohen and Fernando Gonzalez of The Day , called the track a hip @-@ hop number . 
 Salsa singers Isidro Infante and La Elite covered the song for the tribute album Familia RMM Recordando a Selena ( 1996 ) . For the live televised tribute concert Selena ¡ VIVE ! in April 2005 , Aleks Syntek and Fey performed and recorded the song . It was later made available for the album of the concert , released on 10 May 2005 . Syntek later re @-@ released the song for his compilation album 3 Décadas de Duetos ( 2012 ) . In March 2010 , the music video for " Donde <unk> Que Estés " and other Selena music videos formed part of a tribute to mark the fifteenth anniversary of the singer 's death . It was broadcast to 42 million homes nationwide on Music Choice On Demand in the United States for a limited time . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Music video 
 Laurice Bell — director 
 Jose Behar ( EMI Latin ) — producer 
 Desmond Charles ( Tango Productions ) — producer 
 Donde Quiera Que Estés 
 Selena — vocals 
 the Barrio Boyzz — vocals , scats 
 Joe Ojeda — piano 
 Chris Pérez — electric guitar 
 Suzette Quintanilla — drums 
 A.B. Quintanilla — producer 
 Domingo Padilla — producer 
 Bebu Silvetti — producer 
 K. C. Porter — composer 
 Miguel Flores — composer 
 Desmond Child — composer 
 Lisette Lorenzo — art direction 
 = Italian cruiser Calatafimi = 
 Calatafimi was a torpedo cruiser of the Partenope class built for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) in the 1880s . She was built by the Cantiere navale fratelli Orlando shipyard ; her keel was laid in July 1891 , she was launched in May 1894 , and was commissioned in December 1895 . Her main armament were her five torpedo tubes , which were supported by a battery of eleven small @-@ caliber guns . Calatafimi spent most of her career in the main Italian fleet , where she was primarily occupied with training exercises . The ship was sold in March 1907 and broken up for scrap . 
 = = Design = = 
 Calatafimi was 73 @.@ 1 meters ( 239 ft 10 in ) long overall and had a beam of 8 @.@ 22 m ( 27 ft 0 in ) and an average draft of 3 @.@ 48 m ( 11 ft 5 in ) . She displaced 839 metric tons ( 826 long tons ; 925 short tons ) normally . Her propulsion system consisted of a pair of horizontal triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by four coal @-@ fired locomotive boilers . Specific figures for Calatafimi 's engine performance have not survived , but the ships of her class had top speeds of 18 @.@ 1 to 20 @.@ 8 knots ( 33 @.@ 5 to 38 @.@ 5 km / h ; 20 @.@ 8 to 23 @.@ 9 mph ) at 3 @,@ 884 to 4 @,@ 422 indicated horsepower ( 2 @,@ 896 to 3 @,@ 297 kW ) . The ship had a cruising radius of about 1 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 300 km ; 2 @,@ 100 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had a crew of between 96 and 121 personnel . 
 Calatafimi was armed with a main battery of one 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) / 40 gun and six 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) / 43 guns mounted singly.α She was also equipped with three 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) / 20 guns in single mounts . Her primary offensive weapon was her six 450 mm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes . The ship was protected by an armored deck that was up to 1 @.@ 6 in ( 41 mm ) thick ; her conning tower was armored with the same thickness of steel plate . 
 = = Service history = = 
 The new cruiser was originally to have been named <unk> , but she was renamed Calatafimi the day construction began . The last member of her class , Calatafimi was laid down on 15 September 1891 at the Regio Cantiere di Castellammare di Stabia ( Royal Dockyard in Castellammare di Stabia ) , and was launched on 18 March 1893 . After fitting @-@ out work was completed , the ship was commissioned into the fleet on 16 January 1894 . The following year , she was assigned to the 2nd Division of the Permanent Squadron , which included her sister ship Euridice , the ironclad battleship Francesco Morosini , and the protected cruiser Etruria . The Squadron was based at La Spezia at the time , though Calatafimi was stationed primarily in Taranto and Naples , along with most of the other torpedo cruisers of the Italian fleet . In 1895 , unrest in the Ottoman Empire that killed hundreds of foreign nationals prompted several of the European great powers to send an international fleet to pressure the Ottomans into compensating the victims . In November , a small Italian squadron sent to Smyrna to join the fleet in there ; Calatafimi was mobilized as part of a larger force in Naples that consisted of the ironclads Francesco Morosini , Lepanto , and Ruggiero di Lauria , the protected cruiser Elba , the torpedo cruiser Folgore , and five torpedo boats . This second squadron was stocked with coal and ammunition in the event that it would need to reinforce the squadron at Smryna . 
 In 1896 , she took part in the annual summer maneuvers in July as part of the First Division of the Reserve Squadron , which also included the ironclads Re Umberto and Lepanto and the protected cruiser Ettore Fieramosca . In 1898 , Calatafimi was assigned to the Reserve Squadron , which included the ironclads Lepanto , Francesco Morosini , and Ruggiero di Lauria , three protected cruisers , and the torpedo cruiser Goito . The following year , she returned to the Active Squadron , where she served with six ironclads , the armored cruiser Vettor Pisani , the protected cruiser Lombardia , and Goito . The ship was sold for scrap in March 1907 and subsequently broken up . 
 = Delaware Route 299 = 
 Delaware Route 299 ( DE 299 ) is a state highway in New Castle County , Delaware . It runs 9 @.@ 77 mi ( 15 @.@ 72 km ) from Maryland Route 282 ( MD 282 ) at the Maryland border east of Warwick , Maryland to DE 9 in Mathews Corners , passing through Middletown and Odessa . It overlaps U.S. Route 301 ( US 301 ) from just east of the Maryland border to the west end of Middletown . It is also concurrent with DE 15 along the eastern part of the US 301 concurrency . The road runs through a mix of suburban development . 
 Delaware Route 299 was originally designated as DE 4 in 1938 , running as far east as US 13 in Odessa . By 1957 , DE 4 became DE 299 to match MD 299 ( now MD 282 ) and was extended east to DE 9 in 1959 . Over the years , several different routes had followed the DE 299 alignment including DE 71 west of Middletown between 1959 and 1987 and US 301N between Middletown and Odessa from 1959 to 1971 . In 2008 , a widening of DE 299 in the western part of Middletown began ; it was completed in November 2010 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 299 heads east from the Maryland border on Warwick Road , passing through farmland . At the state line , the road continues west into Maryland as MD 282 . Shortly after the state line , it merges onto US 301 and heads to the northeast on Middletown Warwick Road . DE 15 joins with the two routes , heading from the south on Levels Road , and they head into the commercial western part of Middletown . At the point DE 15 makes a left onto Bunker Hill Road , US 301 continues straight and DE 299 makes a right onto Main Street , heading east across Norfolk Southern 's Delmarva Secondary rail line into the downtown area of Middletown . In the center of town , DE 299 intersects DE 71 ( Broad Street ) . 
 After running through the downtown area , the route heads east through suburban commercial development in the eastern part of Middletown , passing to the north of Middletown High School , and becomes Middletown Odessa Road . It intersects the DE 1 toll road at a diamond interchange and heads east through a mix of farms and homes into Odessa , becoming Main Street . In Odessa , the route is lined with homes and intersects US 13 , which is split onto 5th Street northbound and 6th Street southbound . Following this intersection , the road runs through the Odessa Historic District . Past Odessa , DE 299 crosses the Appoquinimink River and heads to the southeast on Old State Road into housing developments . The route makes a left turn onto Taylors Bridge Road briefly and ends at DE 9 in Mathews Corners . 
 Portions of DE 299 are designated as part of the Delaware Byways system . The section between Silver Lake Road in Middletown and DE 9 is part of the Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad Byway while the section between US 13 in Odessa and DE 9 is a spur of the Delaware 's Bayshore Byway . DE 299 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 16 @,@ 456 vehicles at the west end of the DE 15 concurrency to a low of 433 vehicles at the Old State Road intersection . The portion of DE 299 concurrent with US 301 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 By 1920 , what is now DE 299 existed as an unimproved county road . This county road was paved by 1924 . The present @-@ day alignment of DE 299 became a state highway by 1935 . The current DE 299 was originally designated as DE 4 in 1938 , running between the Maryland border and US 13 in Odessa . By 1957 , DE 4 was renumbered to DE 299 to match MD 299 ( now MD 282 ) across the border and DE 71 was designated concurrent with most of the route west of Middletown . US 301 was designated along the DE 71 / DE 299 concurrency in 1959 while US 301N was designated between DE 71 and US 13 . Also at this time , DE 299 was extended east to DE 9 . The US 301N designation was removed between Middletown and Odessa in 1971 . DE 71 was rerouted off US 301 / DE 299 by 1987 . By 1994 , DE 15 was designated to follow a portion of US 301 / DE 299 west of Middletown . In July 2008 , a widening project began on US 301 / DE 299 between United Drive and the east end of the concurrency . This widening to four lanes was completed in November 2010 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in New Castle County . 
 = New Guinea Air Warning Wireless = 
 The New Guinea Air Warning Wireless , also known as the " New Guinea Air Warning Wireless Company " , " NGAWW " , or " The Spotters " , was a unique signals unit of the Australian Army formed in January 1942 in Port Moresby , Territory of Papua , during World War II , to provide early warning of Japanese air attack , and subsequently providing surveillance of shipping and ground based troops . During the first month of operations 16 stations were established , with positions set up along the Papuan coast as well as in the mountains near Port Moresby . They often operated behind Japanese lines and were at risk of being captured by the Japanese due to the nature of their operations , while a number of outstations were over @-@ run and the men manning them killed . By the end of 1942 the company was maintaining 61 operational stations and had a strength of 180 men . 
 Eventually , at its peak in late 1944 there were more than 150 spotter stations deployed on islands and mainland territories throughout Papua , New Guinea and Dutch New Guinea . The company 's headquarters moved to Nadzab in June 1944 , by which time stations had been established as far as Hollandia . However , in September 1944 the Australian military decided that it would not agree to American requests for the unit to serve outside the Australian area of operations and it was subsequently withdrawn after being left without a future operational role . Returning to Australia , it was disbanded in April 1945 . Many of its members received awards for their actions , with the company having the distinction of being Australia 's most highly decorated signals unit of World War II . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Makeshift arrangements = = = 
 The unit that became the New Guinea Air Warning Wireless Company ( NGAWW ) was initially formed in Port Moresby in late January 1942 from volunteers primarily from the 39th Infantry Battalion , a Militia battalion sent to hastily garrison Port Moresby following Japan 's entry into the war . The unit was raised as a result of the experiences of the ill @-@ fated Australian garrison at Rabaul , where the lack of an early warning system to detect Japanese air raids and the movement of an invasion force had complicated its defence before it was ultimately overwhelmed . Operating in a similar manner as the Coastwatchers , they were considered a " top @-@ secret " signals unit . The role of the NGAWW was initially to provide warning of Japanese air raids around Port Moresby . Later , it would be expanded to allow the reporting of Japanese movements by air , land and sea across the South West Pacific Area ( SWPA ) . Other tasks included the long @-@ range transmission of general intelligence about the enemy , friendly force information , meteorological data and the provision of administrative communications for the Australian New Guinea Administrative Unit ( ANGAU ) . 
 Attached to New Guinea Force , the company was conceived by Major Donald Small , Chief Signals Officer of the 8th Military District , who , having experienced the Japanese air raids on Rabaul , observed that the lack of an effective early @-@ warning system around New Britain had resulted in the defenders being caught by surprise when attacked . By employing volunteers from Army units stationed in the area , he planned a network of observation posts , each equipped with a wireless transmitter to screen Port Moresby around a 150 @-@ kilometre ( 93 mi ) radius , providing early warning of air raids , in addition to data on their size , height and strength . The decision of the territory administration to withdraw the civilian wireless operators following the entry of Japan into the war had also left holes in the coastwatching network , reducing its effectiveness . In the nine days following the fall of Rabaul , hasty arrangements were made by Small to assemble an ad hoc group of volunteer infantrymen with only a little signals training using civilian wireless equipment for deployment to the north coast with the assistance of two Short Sunderland flying boats from the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . 
 = = = Initial activities = = = 
 The first group of " spotters " left Port Moresby on 1 February 1942 for the Samarai area , at the strategically important tip of Papua . The NGAWW issued its first air warning on 3 February after spotters at <unk> observed Japanese aircraft heading towards Port Moresby to attack it for the first time . During the first month of operations 16 stations were established , with positions set up along the Papuan coast as well as in the mountains near Port Moresby . The control station for this group was located at <unk> , while there was a rear link to company headquarters at <unk> , approximately 34 kilometres ( 21 mi ) from Port Moresby . However , whilst the outer perimeter was able to provide the anti @-@ aircraft defences at Port Moresby with approximately an hour 's warning of an air raid , the system would be unable to track approaching aircraft if they changed course after crossing the reporting line . As a consequence a second , inner perimeter , was established in March , at a range of 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) from Port Moresby to provide ten minutes ' warning of an attack . 
 The air warning system was set up so that the inner perimeter stations were under RAAF control , while the outer stations were supervised by the Royal Australian Navy ( RAN ) . In addition , there were a number of spotter stations set up and manned by the New Guinea Volunteer Rifles , as well as a few civilian stations reporting to ANGAU . In March the crew of a shot @-@ down Japanese bomber were engaged from an observation post at Gona by a team of spotters , resulting in the killing of the first Japanese in Papua by Australian ground forces . Working with Kanga Force , a network was set up around Wau in May . For three weeks in June 1942 , spotters manned an observation post in a tree just 300 yards ( 270 m ) from the Japanese airstrip at Salamaua . Spotter Ross Kirkwood was photographed by Damien Parer in this post with an agreement not to release the pictures . Yet the photos were soon published in a newspaper in Sydney and the observation post was attacked by the Japanese the day after , with Kirkwood forced to make a narrow escape . In July 1942 , the Buna station reported the landing of Japanese forces in Papua , an event which marked the commencement of the Kokoda Track Campaign . 
 = = = Formation of the NGAWW = = = 
 Following the rapid expansion that had been required to provide effective coverage in response to the crises caused by the initial Japanese movements a review of the makeshift organisation was undertaken . In October 1942 , the NGAWW Company was officially formed as part of New Guinea Force Signals to consolidate the Army , RAAF and Coastwatcher stations . Meanwhile , efforts were made to standardise equipment across the network and to implement common procedures . The company subsequently came under command of New Guinea Force Signals and its headquarters was established at 9 @-@ mile near Port Moresby . Captain Thomas Warren was in command of the company at this time . The establishment of the company at this time included a headquarters , a Moresby area section , a sub @-@ area section , and a spotting station . Sub @-@ area sections were raised as required and at various times were located at Milne Bay , Dobodura , Wau , Bena Bena , Bulolo , Nadzab , Gusap , Hollandia and Aitape . By the end of 1942 the company was maintaining 61 operational stations and had a strength of 180 men . In mid @-@ 1943 , Warren was transferred to Milne Force and he handed over command temporarily to Captain Gordon King . 
 In October 1943 , the unit was given " Separate Independent Establishment " status under the control of New Guinea Force , becoming the only non @-@ commando independent company . Prior to this they had been known as No. 4 Company , 18th Line of Communication Signals ( NGAWW Company ) . They were subsequently authorised to wear the commando " double diamond " colour patch in 1944 . The Unit Colour Patch was made up of the double diamonds of the independent companies ( later commando companies ) in purple ( denoting divisional <unk> or signals ) on a grey background with the white over blue flash of the Corps of Signals , initially in a zigzag pattern forming a " W " , but later as a rectangle in the centre of the field . The grey background represented a unit of the Second Australian Imperial Force ( Second AIF ) and distinguished it from units raised as part of the First AIF during World War I. The officer commanding , Major Cyril Guiney , who had recently taken over command , applied for an increased establishment at this time to expand the size of the unit and allow it to take an increased role in anticipation of employment outside of SWPA ; however , this was ultimately not approved . 
 = = = Subsequent operations = = = 
 In some cases , travelling through unmapped areas , men took up to six weeks just to reach their destinations . They often had to carry all their supplies , arms and their radio , often with the help of Papuan carriers . Teams of two or three spotters typically maintained the stations , each led by an acting non @-@ commissioned @-@ officer ( NCO ) , working in isolation from friendly forces in remote locations for extended periods of time . The teams survived on limited rations , usually supplemented by native food sources . Once their initial supplies were expended they usually had to fend for themselves , although stations were also sometimes re @-@ supplied by airdrop or by sea , but usually only in the event of a failure of mission essential equipment , or when petrol for the radios ran low . Spotting stations were usually only lightly armed , being usually equipped with just one Owen Gun with 600 rounds for the NCO in charge , and a rifle with only 50 rounds for each other man . 
 Personnel from the company were often at risk of being captured by the Japanese due to the nature of their operations , while a number of outstations were over @-@ run and the men manning them killed . Indeed , the landing of Japanese forces on Papua in 1942 had required a shift from providing air raid warnings to furnishing military intelligence . As a result , many stations found themselves isolated behind Japanese lines , relying on the support of the native population whilst evading capture in order to continue operating . Later , as the tide of war turned in the Allies ' favour , it became necessary for the spotters to move ahead of the advancing Allied forces and also compelled the spotters to work in close proximity to Japanese forces . In 1944 , a team operated a station on Lake <unk> , 150 kilometres ( 93 mi ) in advance of the nearest Allied forces . Between them the spotters rescued or buried more than 200 crashed American and Australian airmen , caring for the injured and arranging safe transport for others . 
 In early 1944 , the unit was reorganised as the war moved north and planning began for it to deploy further afield . Major Lennard Cumpston took over command from Guiney in March . Meanwhile , in March and April a number of stations closed or transferred to ANGAU following a reduction in the threat of large @-@ scale air raids against Australian controlled territory . As debate about the future employment of Australian forces in the Pacific continued , the future of the unit was in doubt and there was consideration given to it being disbanded . However , following a request from the Americans a detachment of 43 signalers , cipher operators , and medical orderlies was subsequently attached to US forces during operations as part of the advance to Hollandia and Tadji , with the NGAWW being the only Australian unit involved in this action . 
 In April 1944 , five USAAF personnel , as well as four officers and 20 enlisted men from the US Signal Corps , were seconded to the NGAWW to be trained as spotters for the purpose of establishing the American Air Warning Wireless Unit to function in the Philippines . The company 's headquarters moved to Nadzab in June 1944 , by which time stations had been established as far as Hollandia , with many behind Japanese lines . Eventually , at its peak in late 1944 there were more than 150 spotter stations deployed on islands and mainland territories throughout Papua , New Guinea and Dutch New Guinea . However , in September 1944 the Australian military decided that it would not agree to American requests for the unit to serve outside the Australian area of operations and it was subsequently withdrawn after being left without a future operational role . Meanwhile , Captain John Marsh took over command from Cumpston who was posted to Washington as a liaison officer . Marsh then oversaw the closure of the remaining network and the preparation of the unit for shipping back to Australia . The spotters were subsequently concentrated at Nadzab , with many meeting each other face @-@ to @-@ face for the first time . The unit left New Guinea in December 1944 . 
 = = = Disbandment = = = 
 After Christmas leave the company concentrated at Balcombe in Victoria where it was officially disbanded on 20 April 1945 , although many of the men continued to serve in other signals units until the end of the war . Although complete records were unable to be maintained , a nominal roll of the unit lists the names of approximately 792 men that served in the NGAWW . During its service , the unit lost eight men killed in action , while another three died of other causes while on active service . The company had the distinction of being Australia 's most highly decorated signals unit of World War II , with its members receiving one MBE , ten Military Medals , and ten Mentions in Dispatches . Numerous Commendation Cards were also awarded by the Commander @-@ In @-@ Chief . Flight Lieutenant Leigh Vial ( then an RAAF pilot officer working as a Coastwatcher ) was also awarded the US Distinguished Service Cross for service behind the lines around Salamaua during a joint mission with NGAWW personnel . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 The spotters were initially equipped with Teleradio 3A sets and amateur equipment ; however , many outstations later had these replaced by improved 3B and 3BZ sets to provide higher power communications . This occurred following a decision to standardise on the 3B following the formation of the NGAWW . In addition , some teams operating in more difficult jungle and mountain terrain , such as that closer to Port Moresby , were equipped with RAAF supplied ATR @-@ 2 radios which were lighter than the Teleradio 3A sets provided to the more distant outstations . 
 The Australian @-@ designed and manufactured Type 3 Teleradio transmitter / receiver had been developed prior to the war by Amalgamated Wireless ( Australasia ) ( AWA ) to provide long @-@ range wireless communications across Australia and in the surrounding islands of New Guinea , the Solomons , and Fiji where the plantations , airstrips , mines and settlements were widely separated . The isolated nature of civilian out @-@ stations in these areas meant that there was no other means of communication available . 
 Even before the outbreak of hostilities the RAN had organised many civilian wireless users in the islands of the Pacific into networks of " spotters " , known as Coastwatchers , in order to provide reports of any suspicious activities . Some were issued with the new 3B sets ; however , following suggestions for improvements as the spotters developed their communications techniques , the Teleradio 3BZ was developed by AWA in 1942 . Although it had many similarities to the 3B , its receiver had been partially modified and it had a transmitter which had been redesigned to include six crystal channels . It had also been " tropicalised " to protect it against the effects of the moist environment by reducing its susceptibility to mildew , rot and fungus . 
 The Type 3 set consisted of three main cases containing the transmitter , receiver and speaker . Other parts included the headphones , key , microphone , 6 or 12 volt accumulators , as well as a small petrol charging generator or a pedal generator based on a bicycle frame ( often operated using native labour ) . Often the equipment used by a Coastwatcher would include parts from the 3A , 3B and 3BZ , or whatever other items were locally available to them , yet they were commonly referred to as the " 3BZ " regardless of this . Total weight was approximately 100 kilograms ( 200 lb ) including ancillaries , with the generator weighing 30 kilograms ( 60 lb ) , while the receiver was 15 kilograms ( 32 lb ) . The steel cases of the 3B and 3BZ were 41 centimetres ( 16 in ) wide , 26 centimetres ( 10 in ) high , and 26 centimetres ( 10 in ) deep . Depending on the aerial used , the 3B provided a range of up to 400 kilometres ( 250 mi ) . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After the war the Australian Signal Officer @-@ in @-@ Chief , Major @-@ General Colin Simpson , paid tribute to the spotters , writing that they were " infantrymen without a typical battlefield , artillerymen without field pieces and tank crews without tanks . Apart from a hard core of very talented personnel , all that most spotters had in common was an abysmal ignorance of anything to do with signals . Yet they won the respect of our Allies and every branch of the Australian forces " . He continued , stating that " they were dedicated to their duty and they never failed . The New Guinea Air Warning Wireless Company is a Signal unit of which very little has been heard as their duties were top secret at all times . It can be stated that the successful course of the war could have been seriously delayed , if not greatly prolonged , if this signal unit had not operated so efficiently . " 
 Within the Australian Army the role of long range clandestine communications is currently performed by the 301st and 126th Signals Squadrons , which form part of the 1st and 2nd Commando Regiment respectively , and the 152nd Signal Squadron which operates with the Special Air Service Regiment . They trace their lineage back to units such as the Coastwatchers , New Guinea Air Warning Wireless and the " M " and " Z " Special Units . The role pioneered by these and other units during World War II is now known as Special Reconnaissance ( SR ) : 
 " Special Forces teams are infiltrated behind enemy lines to provide the theater commander with intelligence on the enemy or to gather information on the terrain , local populace , etc. of an area . <unk> , through observation or other collection methods , information concerning enemy capabilities , intentions , and activities in support of strategic / operational objectives or conventional forces . 
 Reconnaissance and surveillance actions conducted at strategic or operational levels to complement national and theater @-@ level collection efforts . Collect meteorological , hydrographic , geographic , and demographic data ; provide target acquisition , area assessment , and post @-@ strike reconnaissance data . " 
 = = Commanding Officers = = 
 The following officers commanded the NGAWW : 
 Major Donald William Francis Small ( 1942 ) ; 
 Captain Thomas Richard Warren ( 1942 – 43 ) ; 
 Captain Gordon Charles Allen King ( 1943 ) ; 
 Major Cyril Kevin Guiney ( 1943 – 44 ) ; 
 Major Lennard Wesley Cumpston ( 1944 ) ; and 
 Captain John Henry Marsh ( 1944 – 45 ) . 
 = Sjumandjaja = 
 Sjumandjaja ( Perfected Spelling : <unk> ; 5 August 1934 – 19 July 1985 ) was an Indonesian director , screenwriter , and actor . During his career he wrote numerous films , directed fourteen , acted in ten , and produced nine ; he also won five Citra Awards from the Indonesian Film Festival . His films reflected social realism . 
 Sjumandjaja was born in Batavia ( modern day Jakarta ) , Dutch East Indies , and grew up there . During high school , he became interested in creative writing and acting , eventually joining the Senen Artists ' Group . In 1956 , when one of his short stories was adapted into a film , Sjumandjaja became active in the filmmaking industry , writing two films for the production company Persari . After receiving a government scholarship , he moved to Moscow and attended the All @-@ Union State Institute of Cinematography . Upon returning to Indonesia in 1965 , Sjumandjaja took a job at the Ministry of Information and continued writing screenplays . In 1971 , after leaving the ministry , he directed his first feature film , Lewat Tengah Malam ( Past Midnight ) . He continued to write and direct films until his death from a heart attack on 19 July 1985 . 
 Reportedly a strict director , Sjumandjaja valued creative value over receiving a director 's fee . He married three times and had three children , two with his first wife and one with his second . His son , Sri Aksana , is the former drummer of Dewa 19 , and his daughter Djenar Maesa Ayu is also a Citra Award @-@ winning director . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Sjumandjaja was born in Batavia on 5 August 1934 . The fifth of eight children , Sjumandjaja was ethnically Javanese but soon became accustomed to the local Betawi culture . He studied Quran reading for a period of three days , but stopped after numerous disagreements with the teacher . When he was ten years old , his father died , leaving Sjumandjaja to be raised by his mother . During the Japanese occupation of the Dutch East Indies from 1942 to 1945 , he witnessed several forced labourers being beaten to death near his home during the construction of Kemayoran Airport . 
 While attending high school at Taman Siswa , Sjumandjaja became interested in drama . Together with his schoolmates S. M. Ardan and Savitri ( daughter of dramatist Sanusi Pane ) , he put on a production of <unk> <unk> <unk> 's play " Awal dan Mira " ( " Awal and Mira " ) ; another schoolmate , Misbach Yusa Biran , directed . During this period , Sjumandjaja was also a member of the Senen Artists ' Group , named after its meeting place in Senen , together with his former classmates and several others such as future Minister of Information Harmoko . With the group he wrote short stories , poems , and works of literary criticism . 
 In 1956 , Sjumandjaja played a role in Terang Bulan Terang di Tengah Kali ( Moon Shining Light in the Middle of the Stream ) , written by Ardan and directed by Wim Umboh . That same year , his short story " <unk> <unk> " ( " <unk> from Kemayoran " ) was adapted into a film by the production company Persari under the title <unk> . The following year , another of Sjumandjaja 's short stories , " <unk> <unk> " ( " My Dear Child " ) was adapted by the company ; he took on the role of assistant director for the film . Sjumandjaja became an employee of Persari in 1958 , under the leadership of Asrul Sani . 
 In 1959 , Sjumandjaja received a government scholarship to study in Moscow . After a year @-@ long preparatory course , in 1960 he enrolled at the All @-@ Union State Institute of Cinematography ; he was the first Indonesian student to attend the institute . A womanizer on campus , he graduated summa cum laude from the institute in 1964 or 1965 . His submission , <unk> ( Shadows ) , a film based on a story by Erskine Caldwell , was a 25 @-@ minute long black and white profile of a woman waiting for her grandson . He was only the seventh person to graduate summa cum laude from the institution , and the first foreigner . 
 = = = Film career = = = 
 After returning to Indonesia in 1965 , Sjumandjaja worked at the Ministry of Information ; from 1966 to 1968 he was the head of the film directorate and succeeded in passing a bill which used the profits from film imports to fund local productions . He later continued directing and screenwriting while taking a five @-@ year term as the head of the Jakarta Art Bureau . His 1971 feature film debut , Lewat Tengah Malam ( Past Midnight ) , produced by Allied Film Indonesia , brought him under close supervision by the Suharto @-@ led government for its social critique , while Pengantin Remadja ( Teenage Newlyweds ) , which he wrote , won an award at the 1971 Asian Film Festival . This was followed by <unk> ( Flamboyant ; 1972 ) . 
 In 1972 , Sjumandjaja founded his production company <unk> Film ; the company 's first film , Si Doel Anak Betawi ( Doel the Betawi Child ) , which he directed , was critically acclaimed and led to a surge in popularity for both Betawi culture and the film 's star Rano Karno . Two of his later films , Si Mamad ( The One Called Mamad ; 1974 ) and <unk> ( A Proposal ; 1976 ) , were based on the works of Anton Chekov , while the 1975 film Laila <unk> ( Laila is Possessed ) was an adaptation of West Side Story . After filming Yang Muda Yang <unk> ( The Young Fall in Love ) , which was delayed by the censorship board , in 1977 , he took another hiatus to deal with health issues . During this period he became a more devout Muslim . 
 On 25 December 1978 , Sjumandjaja announced his return with a new film , Kabut Sutra Ungu ( Mist of Purple Silk ) , an adaptation of the novel by Ike Soepomo . Kabut Sutra Ungu was followed by several more films , including Bukan <unk> ( Not a Play ; 1980 ) , the biopic of female emancipation figure Kartini R. A. Kartini ( 1981 ) , and Budak Nafsu ( Slave to Lust ; 1983 ) , which was based on the novel Fatimah by <unk> Said . Sjumandjaja 's last film before his death , Kerikil @-@ Kerikil Tajam ( Sharp Pebbles ) was released in 1984 . 
 After suffering from a heart attack during prayer at Soepomo 's home on 19 July 1985 , Sjumandjaja was brought to Dr. <unk> <unk> Hospital in Jakarta . He died at 3 : 50 p.m. local time ( UTC + 7 ) and was buried the following day at Kawi @-@ Kawi Public Cemetery . He left behind a nearly finished film , Jakarta Opera , which had been exerting himself heavily to complete . It was later completed by Sutomo Gandasubrata . 
 = = Directing style = = 
 Sjumandjaja was reportedly a very strict director and unwilling to receive criticism from actors . According to El Manik , who played a Japanese soldier in Budak Nafsu , Sjumandjaja refused to listen to El Manik 's concern that a Japanese man would not be able to speak Indonesian fluently , instead telling the actor to write Japanese dialog himself if he wanted . Gandasubrata recalled that Sjumandjaja fired his own father @-@ in @-@ law from Jakarta Opera when the latter could not perform to the director 's expectations . According to producer <unk> <unk> , Sjumandjaja would refuse to accept a directing offer if he found the script uninteresting , valuing creative worth over the director 's fee . 
 Sjumandjaja was influenced by numerous Russian works , which he had seen while in the Soviet Union . These works included Mikhail Kalatozov 's <unk> <unk> ( The Cranes Are Flying ; 1957 ) , Grigori <unk> 's <unk> <unk> ( The Forty @-@ First ; 1956 ) , and Ballada o <unk> ( Ballad of a Soldier ; 1959 ) . The romanticism in these post @-@ Stalinist works was reflected in Sjumandjaja 's work up until Kerikil @-@ Kerikil Tajam . His works have also been classified as social realism , with films such as Si Mamad and Atheis reflecting issues relevant to modern society . Several of his films , such as Yang Muda Yang <unk> , contain themes of self @-@ awareness and discovery , while Budak Nafsu contained what <unk> , writing in Kompas , described as a " vulgar eroticism " . 
 Technique @-@ wise , Sjumandjaja used the camera to emphasise the narrative . <unk> , his first work , used long shots to show the main character 's <unk> . He would often use several shots to show the psychological issues faced by his characters , focusing on both the characters and the space around them . He also used references to well @-@ known cultural works ; a scene in Kartini was framed so to reflect Leonardo da Vinci 's The Last Supper . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 Sjumandjaja received five Citra Awards at the Indonesian Film Festival ( FFI ) for his works , namely Best Screenplay for Laila <unk> ( FFI 1976 ) , Best Director and Best Screenplay for Si Doel Anak Modern ( FFI 1977 ) , Best Director for Budak Nafsu ( FFI 1984 ) , and Best Screenplay for Kerikil @-@ Kerikil Tajam ( FFI 1985 ) . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Sjumandjaja first marriage was to ballet dancer Farida Utoyo , whom he met and married while in the Soviet Union ; Utoyo was studying at the Moscow State Academy of Choreography . With Utoyo he had two sons , <unk> <unk> and Sri Aksana ( former drummer of Dewa 19 ) . The couple 's separation in the early 1970s served as his inspiration for <unk> ( Flamboyant ; 1972 ) . After divorcing Utoyo , Sjumandjaja married actress <unk> Kirana before the release of Si Doel Anak Betawi . In 1973 the couple had a daughter , Djenar Maesa Ayu , who later became a writer @-@ cum @-@ director and won a Citra Award for her debut film Mereka Bilang , Saya Monyet ! ( They Say I 'm a Monkey ! ; 2007 ) . In 1982 his relationship with Kirana soured , and the couple divorced . In 1984 he married a third wife , <unk> <unk> . 
 Sjumandjaja was known as a heavy drinker , which contributed to his health issues . Starting with beer while in high school , he later switched to hard liquor despite suffering from liver issues while still in his teens . Towards the end of his life , when he became more religious , he drank less . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Actor = = = 
 = = = Director = = = 
 = = = Writer = = = 
 = = = Producer = = = 
 = Walter Dix = 
 Walter Dix ( born January 31 , 1986 ) is an American sprinter who specializes in the 100 meters and 200 meters . He is the fourth @-@ fastest 200 @-@ meter runner ever with a best of 19 @.@ 53 seconds , and has broken the 10 @-@ second barrier in the 100 meters , with a best of 9 @.@ 88 seconds . 
 Dix was a highly successful amateur athlete , setting a state record in the 100 m and trying out for the US Olympic Team at the age of eighteen . He joined Florida State University and in his first year he broke the 100 m American junior record and won at the NCAA Outdoor Championships . After a fourth @-@ place finish at the 2005 US Championships , Dix continued with his collegiate success , setting an NCAA record of 19 @.@ 69 seconds in the 200 m and coming within one hundredth of the 100 m record . He completed a 100 m , 200 m , and 4 × 100 meter relay sweep at the 2007 NCAA Outdoor Championships , the first to do so since John Carlos in 1969 . He closed his amateur career in 2008 : another NCAA 200 m title made him the third most decorated track athlete in NCAA history , and he won gold and silver at the 2008 US Olympic Trials . 
 Dix turned professional in mid @-@ 2008 , signing a multimillion @-@ dollar contract with Nike . He reached the Olympic finals in the 100 and 200 m , and won two bronze medals ; the only American track athlete to win two individual medals at the 2008 Summer Olympics . He suffered an injury at the 2009 US Championships , thus missing out on the World Championships , and a contract dispute with his agent resulted in only a handful of appearances that season . In 2011 he was both the 100 and 200 m American champion and won silver medals in the events at the 2011 World Championships . An injury at the 2012 Olympic trials meant he missed a second Olympic appearance . 
 = = Early life = = 
 The son of a track and field coach , Walter Dix competed at athletics meetings from a young age , specialising in sprinting and the long jump . His speed also translated well to the football field , and he often played the sport at school . Dix was an accomplished high school runner : in his final year at Coral Springs High School in 2004 he recorded 10 @.@ 28 seconds in the 100 meters , then third all @-@ time on the Florida high school record list behind only Houston <unk> and Curtis Johnson , and broke the 200 meters Florida high school record with 20 @.@ 62 seconds . Aside from J @-@ Mee Samuels ' 10 @.@ 28 seconds in the 100 m , these were the two fastest marks by a high school athlete that year . Both these times were within the Olympic standard for the events . He competed at the US Olympic Trials in the 200 m , but did not progress beyond the heats stage . 
 = = College track athletics = = 
 He began attending Florida State University ( FSU ) in late 2004 , working with coach Bob Braman . At his first regional meeting for the university , he won the 60 @-@ meter dash , 200 m and 4 × 400 meter relay , and was chosen as the Atlantic Coast Conference rookie of the year . He made his first major impact at the NCAA Indoor Championships : after a sixth @-@ place finish in the 60 m , he came second in the 200 m with a world junior record of 20 @.@ 37 s , beaten only by Wallace Spearmon . Following this , he became USA Track & Field 's Athlete of the Week after setting an American junior record in the 100 m . Running in the Icahn Stadium at the 2005 NCAA East Regional Championships , his heat @-@ winning time of 10 @.@ 06 seconds bettered Stanley Floyd 's 25 @-@ year @-@ old mark . Dix went on to win the 100 m final and also won the 200 m in 20 @.@ 23 seconds , the fourth fastest time by an American junior sprinter . 
 At his first NCAA Outdoor Championships , Dix became FSU 's first winner at the championships since 1980 , and the first to do so as a freshman . He won the 100 m in 10 @.@ 21 seconds , beating the defending NCAA champions <unk> Blanton and Tyson Gay to the title . After recording a personal best of 20 @.@ 18 seconds in the semifinals , he managed a fourth @-@ place finish in the 200 m race . Dix competed at his first US senior championships that year and , as the only amateur to reach the 100 m final , he finished fourth . The only athletes to beat him were Leonard Scott , reigning Olympic Champion Shawn Crawford and the eventual world champion Justin Gatlin . 
 = = = Multiple NCAA champion = = = 
 Dix 's second year at FSU was characterised by success in the 200 m . He won his first indoor NCAA title in the 200 m and was runner @-@ up in the 60 m , having set a personal best of 6 @.@ 59 seconds in the heats . His time of 20 @.@ 27 seconds in the 200 m final was the fastest indoor run in the world that year . His fastest of the season came at the Reebok invitational and his time of 20 @.@ 25 seconds placed him as the 13th fastest runner in 2006 . He completed a 200 m NCAA Championship double by taking the outdoor title , and he also finished as runner @-@ up in the 100 m , second to Xavier Carter . 
 In his third year as an FSU athlete he won four NCAA Division I titles , starting with a 200 m win indoors . In the 2007 NCAA East Regional final , he won the 100 m dash in 10 @.@ 05 seconds . His performance in the 200 m was more impressive however : he set the all @-@ time collegiate record of 19 @.@ 69 seconds in the 200 m , breaking Joe DeLoach 's record that had stood since 1988 . This made him the sixth fastest 200 m runner ever and it was the seventh fastest run in history at the time . 
 At the NCAA Outdoor Championships that year , he won three separate national titles , beating all opposition in the 100 m , 200 m , and 4 × 100 meter relay races . This achievement made him the first man to win the three races at an <unk> Championships since John Carlos did so in 1969 . Dix 's time of 9 @.@ 93 seconds in the 100 m was a world @-@ leader at that point of the season , and was just 0 @.@ 01 behind Ato Boldon 's NCAA record . For these accomplishments , he was again named USATF 's Athlete of the Week . 
 In his final year as an amateur athlete , he spent much of early 2008 battling a hamstring injury . However , he returned in April to win his third 200 m NCAA outdoor title , while placing fourth in the 100 m . Although his personal bests rivalled those of top professional athletes , Dix decided to finish his degree in social science at FSU , as his graduation in May 2008 allowed him to focus on the Olympic Trials thereafter . 
 Over the course of his college career , Dix became only the second athlete to win three NCAA 200 m outdoor titles ( after Ralph Metcalfe ) and , with six outdoor NCAA titles , he is listed as the joint third on all @-@ time list . Furthermore , he finished with two indoor titles and 18 All @-@ American honors . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = 2008 Olympic Games = = = 
 Competing at the 2008 US Olympic Trials in Eugene , Oregon , Dix qualified for the 2008 Summer Olympics in both the 100 and 200 m events . After recording a personal @-@ best @-@ equaling 9 @.@ 93 seconds in the 100 m semifinals , he took second place behind Tyson Gay with a wind @-@ assisted 9 @.@ 80 seconds . He stated that his NCAA experience had helped raise his confidence and that he was less nervous than he was at the 2005 US Championships . The 200 m favorite Gay suffered an injury in the qualifying rounds , and Dix and Crawford both finished the 200 m final with 19 @.@ 86 seconds , with Dix elected the winner by a photo finish . After signing a sponsorship deal with Nike worth around $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 a year , described by his agent as " the largest deal ever for a track athlete just coming out of college " , Dix stated that his aims for the Olympics were personal bests in the individual sprints and a gold in the relay race . 
 Competing in his first Olympics , Dix qualified for the 100 m final with a season 's best of 9 @.@ 95 seconds . In the final he registered a personal best of 9 @.@ 91 seconds , finishing behind new world record holder Usain Bolt of Jamaica and Richard Thompson of Trinidad and Tobago . The Olympic bronze medal was Dix 's first medal at a major international competition . 
 A few days later , he finished fifth in the 200 m final with a time of 19 @.@ 98 seconds , some distance off the winner Usain Bolt who had broken the world record . However , it transpired that both the silver and bronze medalists ( Churandy Martina of the Netherlands Antilles and American Wallace Spearmon ) had stepped out of their lanes thus they were disqualified . As a result , Dix received his second Olympic bronze medal . Further disqualifications occurred in the heats of the Olympic 4 × 100 meter relay race : Darvis Patton and Tyson Gay misjudged a baton pass , causing the American team to be eliminated and spoiling any chance of Dix receiving a relay medal . He finished the Olympics as the only American sprinter to medal in two individual events . Dix closed the season with two sub @-@ 10 second runs at the Weltklasse and Athletissima meetings , finishing second to a Jamaican on both occasions ( Bolt and Asafa Powell ) . 
 = = = Low @-@ key 2009 = = = 
 The year after the Olympics , Dix began the season with a world @-@ leading time of 10 @.@ 00 seconds in Tallahassee in April . He also set a world @-@ leading relay time of 37 @.@ 92 seconds with Travis Padgett , Shawn Crawford and Darvis Patton at the Penn Relays . However , he failed to maintain this strong form through the rest of 2009 . Coach Teddy Long planned to improve Dix 's start and acceleration in his races , but the two parted company in April . He placed third behind Michael Rodgers and Asafa Powell at the Prefontaine Classic but , unusually , this proved to one of the highlights of a low @-@ profile year for Dix . He competed at the US Championships , but injuries forced him out of both the 100 m and 200 m races and he did not qualify for the World Championships . Furthermore , he entered a legal battle with his management company , regarding whether they merited the 20 % portion of his multimillion @-@ dollar sponsorship contract with Nike . The dispute with his agent Kimberly Holland was resolved in July : although the terms were undisclosed , Dix left Holland 's Icon Management and decided to be his own agent . With his father as his coach , a legal battle and no major races to prepare for , Dix ran only a handful of local meetings in the rest of 2009 . 
 = = = Return to top level = = = 
 Dix returned to national competition with an appearance at the 2010 USA Indoor Track and Field Championships . He took fourth place in the final and set a new 60 m indoor best of 6 @.@ 58 seconds . Event winner Ivory Williams was disqualified after testing positive for marijuana and Dix was upgraded to third . He opened his outdoor season at the Seminole Twilight meet in May , recording 9 @.@ 98 seconds in the 100 m and 19 @.@ 89 seconds for the 200 m . He began to participate in Diamond League meetings , competing on the European circuit for the first time . He beat Wallace Spearmon at the Golden Gala 's 200 m race , breaking Michael Johnson 's meet record . He also took to the national stage , winning the 100 m and finishing as the 200 m runner @-@ up at the 2010 USA Outdoor Track and Field Championships . A week later , Dix beat Tyson Gay at the Prefontaine Classic for another meet record of 19 @.@ 72 seconds . In August at a meet in <unk> , Switzerland , Dix ran a new personal best of 9 @.@ 88 seconds , finishing second behind Nesta Carter who also set a new personal best of 9 @.@ 86 seconds . An injury at the London Grand Prix brought an end to his season . 
 In the first meeting of the 2011 IAAF Diamond League , at the Qatar Athletic Super Grand Prix , he won the 200 m with a time of 20 @.@ 06 seconds . Dix took further 200 m victories at the Eugene and London legs of the series , while Usain Bolt won the other three 200 m mid @-@ season legs . He achieved a 100 / 200 sprint double at the 2011 USA Track and Field Championships , winning in the absence of Tyson Gay and Wallace Spearmon . Running in both the events at the 2011 World Championships in Athletics , he first secured the silver medal in the 100 m final – defending champion Bolt was disqualified for a false start and Dix was runner @-@ up to another Jamaican , Yohan Blake , in a comparatively slow 10 @.@ 08 seconds . In the 200 @-@ meter final Bolt beat the field but Dix was the closest to him , running 19 @.@ 70 seconds to take his second silver of the tournament . He attempted to gain a third medal in the 4 × 100 metres relay final , but a mid @-@ race collision between Darvis Patton and Britain 's Harry <unk> @-@ <unk> meant the American team 's baton never reached Dix 's final leg . At the Diamond League 200 m final at the Memorial Van Damme he ran a personal best of 19 @.@ 53 seconds . Blake was even faster ( 19 @.@ 26 ) , however , leaving Dix in second place even as he became the fourth fastest 200 m runner of all @-@ time and then won the league series . 
 He moved to Southern California in 2012 to train with John Smith and opened his outdoor season with a wind @-@ aided run of 9 @.@ 85 seconds . A 200 m win followed at the Doha Diamond League meet . He entered the 2012 US Olympic Trials and reached the 100 m final but , having pulled a muscle in his semi @-@ final , he finished last in the race . This brought an end to his season . 
 = = 2015 Annual Bests = = 
 Event Result Wind Venue Date 
 55m i 6 @.@ 31 Gainesville ( USA ) 23 @.@ 01 @.@ 2015 
 60m 6 @.@ 67 Daytona Beach ( USA ) 21 @.@ 02 @.@ 2015 
 100m 10 @.@ 17 + 1 @.@ 4 Rieti ( ITA ) 13 @.@ 09 @.@ 2015 
 200m 20 @.@ 41 Daytona Beach ( USA ) 21 @.@ 02 @.@ 2015 
 400m 47 @.@ 86 Tampa ( USA ) 13 @.@ 03 @.@ 2015 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Walter Dix is the son of Washington and <unk> Dix . His father , a former sprinter , is an assistant principal and track coach at New River Middle School , while his mother is a high school teacher . He has two older brothers , Alex and William , who also were track runners . While attending Florida State University , Dix became a member of the Phi Beta Sigma fraternity . 
 = = Personal bests = = 
 As of 2013 , Dix 's best in the 200 m outdoors makes him the fourth fastest man of all time , while his indoor best for the distance makes him the seventh fastest . His best in the 100 m is the eighth fastest by an American athlete . 
 All information from IAAF Profile 
 = = Major competition record = = 
 = Hurricane Paine ( 1986 ) = 
 Hurricane Paine contributed to one of the most significant flooding events in Oklahoma history . The 16th tropical storm and 8th hurricane of the 1986 Pacific hurricane season , Paine formed on September 28 off the southeast coast of Mexico . It moved around a ridge , later turning to the north and brushing the Baja California Peninsula . By that time , Paine had attained peak winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) , but it weakened slightly before hitting the Mexican state of Sonora . The remnant moisture combined with a cold front to produce heavy rainfall in the south @-@ central United States . 
 In Mexico , Paine produced rainfall along much of the coastline , with maxima in inland Oaxaca , Jalisco , and Sonora where it moved ashore . Prior to the arrival of the remnants of Paine in the United States , there was an extended period of heavy rainfall , which caused at least 10 deaths , forced thousands of people from their homes , and resulted in heavy flooding damage . The moisture from Paine produced the highest daily rainfall for any station in Oklahoma . Severe river flooding occurred along the Osage and Arkansas Rivers . The overall flooding event caused $ 350 million in damage , of which half came from crop losses . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Hurricane Paine were from a system that entered the eastern Pacific Ocean through Central America on September 27 . By the next day , it organized into Tropical Depression 27 while located about 185 miles ( 300 km ) southwest of the coast of Guatemala . With a high pressure system to its north , the depression moved generally westward at first , although an approaching upper @-@ level trough influenced a more northerly track . The depression slowly organized while paralleling the Mexican coastline , and it was upgraded to Tropical Storm Paine on September 30 , while the storm was about 350 miles ( 565 km ) west @-@ southwest of Acapulco . 
 Tropical Storm Paine quickly intensified after it was first upgraded to a tropical storm . Late on September 30 , a NOAA reconnaissance plane flew into the storm , one of two cyclones in the basin that warranted aircraft data , the other being Hurricane Newton . The plane observed sustained winds of 82 mph ( 133 km / h ) , and as a result , Paine was upgraded to hurricane status . As it neared the Baja California Peninsula , the hurricane turned more northward , and late on October 1 reached peak winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) , while located just offshore of the southern tip of Baja California . Hurricane Paine did not intensify further due to the presence of mid @-@ level wind shear , as well as insufficient moisture in the air ; nevertheless , it was located over an area of 82 @.@ 9 ° F ( 28 @.@ 3 ° C ) water temperatures . The outer eyewall moved across Cabo San Lucas , and the resultant land interaction was believed to have slightly weakened the inner core of the hurricane . 
 After reaching its peak intensity , the hurricane turned north @-@ northeastward , making landfall near San José , Sonora with winds of 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) . Paine rapidly dissipated over land , although the remnants continued northeastward across Mexico into Texas and the south @-@ central United States . Moisture from the system combined with an advancing cold front , producing heavy rainfall over Oklahoma and southeastern Kansas . 
 = = Impact = = 
 As a tropical cyclone , Paine brought rainfall to most of Mexico , including heavier amounts along the coastline and interior northern Oaxaca . The highest total in the country was 12 @.@ 01 inches ( 30 @.@ 5 cm ) in <unk> , Jalisco . Light precipitation fell in the southern portion of the Baja California Peninsula , and where Paine moved ashore , upwards of 7 inches ( 18 cm ) fell across its path . In the area around where it made landfall , strong winds knocked down trees and caused disruptions to city services . 
 In the south @-@ central United States , the remnants of Paine dropped moderate to heavy rainfall in regions that already received above normal rainfall . Isolated locations in Texas , northern Oklahoma , and southeastern Kansas received over 10 inches ( 25 @.@ 4 cm ) of precipitation , and the highest total in the United States was 11 @.@ 35 inches ( 28 @.@ 8 cm ) at Fort Scott , Kansas . Moderate rainfall extended northeastward through Missouri and Illinois . In <unk> , Oklahoma , a station recorded 10 @.@ 42 inches ( 26 @.@ 5 cm ) on September 29 , which was the highest daily precipitation for any station in the state . In combination with previous storms , some locations received over 20 inches of rainfall in an 8 @-@ day period , which produced severe river flooding along the Osage and Arkansas Rivers . The flooding resulted in record discharge rates along many streams and creeks , while many reservoirs were nearly filled to capacity . The Mississippi River in St. Louis reached the fifth highest flood stage on record . 
 Prior to its arrival , flooding across the central United States killed six people , forced thousands of people from their homes , and left at least $ 76 million in damage ( 1986 USD ) . Additional flooding from Paine exacerbated the situation ; the flooding affected 52 of the 77 counties in Oklahoma , which resulted in a total of $ 350 million in damage , half of which from agriculture . The remnants of Paine brought about the end of the extended period of rainfall , which overall had forced 55 @,@ 000 people from their homes , including 1 @,@ 200 in East Saint Louis , Illinois where a floodgate broke . It was described as one of the worst floods in Oklahoma history . 
 = ToeJam & Earl = 
 ToeJam & Earl is an action video game developed by Johnson Voorsanger Productions and published by Sega for the Sega Genesis video game console . Released in 1991 , it centers on the titular ToeJam and Earl — alien rappers who have crash @-@ landed on Earth . As they attempt to escape the planet , players assume the role of either character and collect pieces of their wrecked spacecraft . ToeJam & Earl 's design was heavily influenced by the role @-@ playing video game Rogue , and took from it such features as the random generation of levels and items . It references and parodies 1980s and early 90s urban culture and is set to a funk soundtrack . 
 The game was positively received by critics , who praised its originality , soundtrack , humor and two @-@ player cooperative mode . It attained sleeper hit status despite low initial sales , and its protagonists were used as mascots by Sega . ToeJam & Earl was followed by two sequels : ToeJam & Earl in Panic on Funkotron and ToeJam & Earl III : Mission to Earth , released for the Mega Drive and Xbox , respectively . The sequels ' commercial and critical success was mixed . A fourth title , ToeJam & Earl : Back in the Groove , is currently in development with funds from Kickstarter . The game was re @-@ released for the Wii 's Virtual Console in December 2006 and re @-@ released again on PlayStation Network and Xbox Live Arcade in November 2012 . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 ToeJam & Earl has been called a surreal , comic satire , and a " daringly misanthropic commentary on Earthly life " . ToeJam is red and has three legs . Earl is fat and orange . ToeJam wears a large gold medallion and a backwards baseball cap , while Earl is marked by high @-@ tops and oversized sunglasses ; both outfits are " over @-@ the @-@ top appropriations " of 1990s urban culture . Their speech features California slang . The game is set to a soundtrack which has been described both as jazz @-@ funk , and as hip hop . For the game 's unique sound , composer John Baker was inspired by Herbie Hancock and The Headhunters . 
 In the game 's opening sequence , ToeJam explains that Earl 's erratic piloting abilities have resulted in a crash @-@ landing on planet Earth . He says that they must find the widely scattered pieces of their spacecraft 's wreckage to return to their home planet , Funkotron . The player guides the characters as they avoid Earth 's antagonistic inhabitants and search for the debris . Should the player succeed , the final sequence depicts ToeJam and Earl escaping the planet in their reconstructed spacecraft . Under the player 's control , the characters proceed across a purple landscape that represents Funkotron , and are greeted by their friends and family . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 ToeJam & Earl takes place from a 3 / 4 perspective in a 2D game world . Its gameplay mechanics were inspired by Rogue , which has led to its description as a Roguelike or dungeon @-@ crawl game . The game contains both single @-@ player and two @-@ player cooperative modes . The latter displays a single screen when both characters are near each other , but splits it apart when they are not . Playing the game with two players reveals dialogue and jokes between the characters not heard in the single player game . 
 The game is set on Earth , which is represented by randomly generated islands that float in space , each one a layer above the last . They are connected by elevators . Some islands contain pieces of spacecraft wreckage , of which the player must collect 10 to win the game . The player character drops to the island below if he falls from an island 's edge , which necessitates that the player again locate an elevator . Each island is populated by antagonistic " Earthlings " , such as phantom ice @-@ cream trucks , aggressive packs of " nerds " , giant hamsters , <unk> , man @-@ eating mailboxes , and chickens armed with mortars that shoot tomatoes . Certain Earthlings aid the player . The game has been described as " largely non @-@ violent " , as the protagonists can only attack enemies with thrown tomatoes — one of many temporary , randomly generated power @-@ ups . 
 Power @-@ ups are contained in wrapped presents , which are categorized by appearance . The contents of a present are unknown to the player until it is opened ; afterwards , all presents of that appearance are identified . Identification of presents ' contents is a central gameplay mechanic . Each power @-@ up has a unique effect : while one might increase the player characters ' running speed , another distracts enemies . Certain presents contain harmful power @-@ ups , such the loss of a " life " , or the " randomizer " , which hides the identity of all presents . In the game 's cooperative mode , if one player character opens a present in the vicinity of the other , its contents affect both characters . As players open more presents , the chances of accidentally opening the randomizer are increased , which prevents the game from becoming easier as more presents are identified . 
 = = Development = = 
 ToeJam & Earl creator Greg Johnson became a fan of Rogue as a university student . After he left university , he worked on games for Electronic Arts , including Starflight ( 1986 ) . After the completion of Starflight 2 , Johnson conceived ToeJam & Earl — first the characters , then the plot — while on a beach in Hawaii . The idea was a combination of Rogue 's gameplay concepts and a lighter version of Starflight 's science @-@ fiction themes . Johnson met programmer Mark Voorsanger through a mutual friend , while walking on Mount Tam in 1989 . He related the concept of ToeJam & Earl to Voorsanger , and the two resolved to make the game together . They formed Johnson Voorsanger Productions , and serious work on the game began soon after . Their status as commercial game designers allowed them to meet with Sega of America , and they used cards covered in landscape drawings to demonstrate their idea of randomly generated levels . Sega marketing manager Hugh Bowen was immediately interested in the concept and he enlisted the aid of producer Scott <unk> to sell the game to management ; Sega wanted innovative games and new mascots to compete with Nintendo . 
 The game 's small development team was composed of Johnson 's previous colleagues , and its music was composed by John Baker . The team 's goal was to make a humorous game that was " original , easy to understand and offered an immediate response to the player 's actions " . The designers wanted to include a two @-@ player mode so that they could play together , and considered ToeJam & Earl " a two player game with a one player option . " While Sega believed that hardware issues would prevent the feature from working , Voorsanger successfully implemented it . In a 1992 interview with Sega Visions , Johnson stated that the characters ToeJam and Earl evolved as reflections of his and Voorsanger 's personalities . Voorsanger disagreed , and called the characters " two different aspects of Greg 's personality " . Steve Purcell has stated that he contributed character designs to the game . 
 = = Reception = = 
 ToeJam & Earl received positive reviews , which Bill Paris of UGO described as " almost unanimous critical acclaim " . However , Sega deemed it a commercial failure due to low initial sales . The game built a cult following through word of mouth , and it was further aided by the Mega Drive 's Christmas 1991 sales spike , caused by the release of Sonic the Hedgehog . ToeJam & Earl was later considered a " cult " success . 
 Mean Machines found the game addictive and original , but found fault with its slow @-@ paced combat . One of the reviewers said , " Not everyone will like it — it 's not normal enough for mass appeal — but I think it 's destined to become a massive cult classic " . GamePro called the game 's originality " incredible " , and praised its graphics , music and humor . MegaTech praised the graphics , and the 2 @-@ player option , and said the game was " great fun - pure and simple " . 
 Mega said that it was " An OK game , but one which becomes completely essential when played with someone else . Got any friends ? Buy this . Haven 't got any friends ? Buy this and make some " . The game also appeared at number 26 on its list of the best games of all time . 
 Entertainment Weekly praised the " absolutely hilarious " sound effects and music . 
 Jeff <unk> of Boys ' Life called it " another hot game " for the Mega Drive , alongside Sonic the Hedgehog . 
 Ed Martinez of Game Informer commended the game 's soundtrack and unique concept , but found it to be too easy . 
 A review published in both the Chicago Tribune and Rome News @-@ Tribune likened ToeJam and Earl to " an outer @-@ space , rap version of Abbott and Costello " . The reviewers called it " the funniest game we 've seen in a long time " , and praised its soundtrack , graphics and action . 
 The Toronto Star acclaimed the game 's " hilariously designed split @-@ screen two @-@ player mode " , and said , " If you 've got a Sega @-@ Genesis system , you simply must check out [ this ] awesome rap ' n ' roll game " . Sega Visions praised the game 's " no @-@ repetitive action " and said , " This is the zaniest game that ever rocked Sega 's Genesis system . " Several months after the game 's release , Mega ranked it the 13th best Mega Drive game in its All @-@ Time Top 100 feature . The magazine praised the game 's " superbly manic and zany action " , and deemed it both " original and insane " . The Channel 4 video game programme GamesMaster gave the game a 70 % rating . 
 ToeJam & Earl was re @-@ released on the Nintendo Wii 's Virtual Console in 2006 . Official Nintendo Magazine scored the game 85 % , and praised its humor , originality and two @-@ player mode . However , the reviewer believed that the game 's enjoyability had diminished with time . GameSpot felt that the game 's 1990s idioms were dated , but that the gameplay — particularly the two @-@ player mode — was still enjoyable by modern standards . Jeremy Parish of 1UP found the game 's two @-@ player co @-@ operative mode more enjoyable than its single @-@ player , and described the graphics and sound as " oddly primitive " . Parish considered it " one of the best games to hit VC to date " . Eurogamer 's reviewer negatively received the game , and believed its gameplay to be unsatisfying and overly slow . IGN called the game 's visuals a " mixed bag " and derided the slow pace , but praised its unpredictability and believed that its sound design was " one thing you absolutely can 't fault " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 ToeJam and Earl became " one of Sega 's second tier mascots , alongside Sonic " , and one of the Mega Drive 's " key exclusive franchises " . The characters appeared in a spin @-@ off light gun game , Ready , Aim , Tomatoes , developed by Johnson Voorsanger Productions as one of six mini @-@ games for the Menacer 6 @-@ game cartridge . In early 1992 , the developers began work on a sequel to ToeJam & Earl , and spent three months expanding on the original game 's concept by adding indoor areas and more terrain types . Sega was not impressed by the sequel , and believed it to be unmarketable . The team redesigned it as a platform game , as Sega was inclined to publish games in this genre . The game , titled ToeJam & Earl in Panic on Funkotron , was highly anticipated , and was a commercial and critical success when it released in 1993 . However , fans of the original game were disappointed by the change in design to a perceived generic style . Due to poor North American sales of the Sega Saturn , Sega 's next generation video game console , the ToeJam & Earl franchise was neglected . A ToeJam & Earl game planned for the Dreamcast was cancelled ( a beta of the game was preserved , and on Christmas Day 2013 released on the internet by enthusiasts ) , but a third installment , ToeJam & Earl III : Mission to Earth , was released for the Xbox in 2002 . The release returned to the concepts of the original game , but generated mixed reviews and poor sales . A new ToeJam & Earl game is currently in development by <unk> Studios . 
 ToeJam & Earl has been called " weird " , " strange " , and " thoroughly odd " . Critics have difficulty in determining a genre for the game ; it has been called a platform game and Roguelike , as well as action and action @-@ adventure . While ToeJam & Earl 's success did not match that of the Mega Drive 's other popular titles , it has been considered a " classic " , and a " cult " game . Prior to ToeJam & Earl III 's conception , research by its developers found that the original ToeJam & Earl was preferred over its sequel . In an IGN survey , 65 % of respondents cited it as their favorite of the three games . The game was set to be re @-@ released on Xbox Live Arcade after winning a poll arranged by Sega , but this became uncertain because Johnson owns the rights to the characters rather than Sega . The game , along with its sequel , was announced as part of Sega Vintage Collection series for release on November 7 , 2012 , to be released individually on PlayStation Network and as a collection on Xbox Live Arcade . The notion of a ToeJam & Earl game for the Nintendo DS failed to generate interest from publishers , but Johnson has reiterated the possibility of such a game in the future . 
 In February 2015 , Johnson announced a new title , ToeJam & Earl : Back in the Groove , which is being developed independently from Sega and funded by Kickstarter . The game revisits the format of the original game , featuring 2D character models on 3D worlds with overhead perspective , and is planned to support online multiplayer . The game was seeking a funding target of $ 400 @,@ 000 USD by March 27 , 2015 , and reached its goal on March 25 , 2015 . On the last funding day , it reached $ 508 @,@ 638 USD with 8 @,@ 873 backers , so the game will feature " old school " skins for ToeJam and Earl , the Hyper Funk Zone from ToeJam and Earl : Panic on Funkotron , and will include bonus playable characters such as ToeJam 's cousin <unk> , Earl 's Mom , <unk> and Peabo from ToeJam and Earl : Panic On Funkotron and even Latisha from ToeJam and Earl III : Mission to Earth . 
 = Flag of Singapore = 
 The national flag of Singapore was adopted in 1959 , the year Singapore became self @-@ governing within the British Empire . It was reconfirmed as the national flag when the Republic gained independence on 9 August 1965 . The design is a horizontal bicolour of red above white , overlaid in the canton ( upper @-@ left quadrant ) by a white crescent moon facing a pentagon of five small white five @-@ pointed stars . The elements of the flag denote a young nation on the ascendant , universal brotherhood and equality , and national ideals . 
 Vessels at sea do not use the national flag as an ensign . Merchant vessels and pleasure craft fly a civil ensign of red charged in white with a variant of the crescent and stars emblem in the centre . Non @-@ military government vessels such as coast guard ships fly a state ensign of blue with the national flag in the canton , charged with an eight @-@ pointed red and white compass rose in the lower fly . Naval warships fly a naval ensign similar to the state ensign , but in white with a red compass rose emblem . 
 Rules defined by the Singapore Arms and Flag and National Anthem Act govern the use and display of the national flag . These have been relaxed to allow citizens to fly the flag from vehicles during national holidays and from homes at any time of the year . 
 = = History = = 
