 Singapore was under British rule in the 19th century , having been amalgamated into the Straits Settlements together with Malacca and Penang . The flag that was used to represent the Settlements was a British Blue Ensign containing three gold crowns — one for each settlement — separated by a red inverted pall , which resembles an inverted Y. 
 The Settlement of Singapore had no separate flag , although the city was granted a coat of arms which featured a lion in 1911 . During the occupation of Singapore by the Japanese during the Second World War , the Japanese national flag was used on land by the military and during public events . Soon after the Second World War , Singapore became an independent Crown colony and adopted its own flag . It was modified from the Straits Settlements flag to reduce the number of crowns from three to one . 
 Singapore became self @-@ governing within the British Empire on 3 June 1959 . Six months later , upon the installation of the new Yang di @-@ Pertuan Negara ( head of state ) on 3 December 1959 , the national flag was officially adopted , along with the state coat of arms and the national anthem Majulah Singapura ( " Onward Singapore " ) . Then @-@ Deputy Prime Minister Toh Chin Chye discussed the creation of the national flag in a 1989 interview : 
 [ A ] lthough we were self governing it was necessary right from the beginning that we should rally enough different races together as a Singapore nation ... [ A ] part from the anthem we have to produce the flag and the crest , we insisted that it was a Singapore state flag and should be flown side by side with the Union Jack . 
 The design of the flag was completed in two months by a committee headed by Toh . He initially wanted the flag 's entire background to be red , but the Cabinet decided against this , as red was regarded as a rallying point for communism . According to an account given by Lee Kuan Yew , the Chinese population wanted five stars , which were modeled off the flag of the People 's Republic of China and the Muslim population wanted a crescent moon . Both of these symbols were combined to create the national flag of Singapore . 
 On 30 November 1959 , the Singapore State Arms and Flag and National Anthem Ordinance 1959 was passed to regulate the use and display of the State Arms and State Flag and the performance of the National Anthem . When presenting the motion to the Legislative Assembly of Singapore on 11 November 1959 , <unk> Rajaratnam , the Minister for Culture , stated : " National flags , crest and anthem express symbolically the hopes and ideals of a people ... The possession of a national flag and crest is , for a people , symbolic of self @-@ respect . " 
 In September 1962 , the people of Singapore voted to join the Federation of Malaysia . The process was completed on 16 September 1963 , when the Malaysian flag was hoisted on Singapore by Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew . The Singapore flag was reconfirmed as the national flag when Singapore became fully independent from Malaysia on 9 August 1965 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Singapore Arms and Flag and National Anthem Rules define the flag 's composition and the symbolism of its elements : red symbolizes " universal brotherhood and equality of man " , and white , " pervading and everlasting purity and virtue " . The waxing crescent moon " represents a young nation on the ascendant " . The five stars " stand for the nation 's ideals of democracy , peace , progress , justice and equality " . During the second half of the 20th century , the star and crescent symbol came to be recognized as a symbol of Islamism , and Singapore 's flag came to be seen in this context by the nation 's Muslim activists . It remains the only non @-@ Muslim nation to have a crescent moon in its national flag . 
 The ratio of the flag is two units high by three units wide . For the manufacturing of flags , the Government of Singapore stated that the shade of red used on the flag is Pantone 032 . According to guidelines published by the Ministry of Information , Communications and the Arts ( MICA ) , the flag may be reproduced in any size and displayed at all times , but it must be in its specified proportions and colours . MICA recommends the sizes 915 by 1 @,@ 370 mm ( approx . 36 by 54 in ) , 1 @,@ 220 by 1 @,@ 830 mm ( approx . 48 by 72 in ) , and 1 @,@ 830 by 2 @,@ 740 mm ( approx . 72 by 108 in ) . The material that is recommended for the national flag is bunting wool . 
 = = Regulations and guidelines = = 
 Until 2004 , the flag was used exclusively on or in front of buildings owned by the government , ministries , statutory boards and educational institutions on a year @-@ round basis . The flag could only be flown by individuals and non @-@ governmental organisations during the month of August to mark the country 's national day on 9 August . During the National Day celebrations period ( 1 July — 30 September ) , rules governing the flying of the national flag outside buildings are relaxed . The flag may be displayed on any vehicle ( other than a hearse ) , vessel or aircraft , and may be incorporated as part of any costume or attire , so long as this is done in a respectful manner . 
 These restrictions on individuals and non @-@ governmental organisations were relaxed in 2004 to allow the flag to be flown year @-@ round under certain conditions . A statement from the Ministry of Information and the Arts ( now MICA , the Ministry of Information , Communications and the Arts ) said that " [ t ] he national flag , national anthem and Singapore lion head ... are our most visible symbols of our sovereignty , pride and honour " and urged Singaporeans to use those " rallying " symbols to " identify with the nation " . 
 No rationale was provided for the changes , although BBC News correspondents noted that the government had recently been trying to rally patriotic sentiment dampened by economic issues . ( In 2003 , unemployment in Singapore reached a 17 @-@ year @-@ high of 5 @.@ 9 % , and the severe acute respiratory syndrome ( SARS ) epidemic in East Asia seriously affected the island 's tourist trade , causing Singapore Airlines to suffer a financial loss for the first time in its history . ) 
 Following requests by Singaporeans , guidelines for the use of the flag were further broadened in 2006 to give residents a variety of opportunities to express their loyalty to Singapore during National Day celebrations such as the National Day Parade . MICA permitted them to display the flag on vehicles and on themselves or belongings with minimal restrictions , from the middle of July to the end of August for a trial period . The period was extended in 2007 to three months from July to September . 
 Singaporean citizens , government and non @-@ governmental organisations may display or fly the national flag throughout the year to identify themselves with the nation , and especially encouraged to do so during occasions of national celebration or national significance . Non @-@ Singaporean businesses and organisations are also allowed to display the flag throughout the year . The use and display of the flag is governed by Part III of the Singapore Arms and Flag and National Anthem Rules made under the Singapore Arms and Flag and National Anthem Act . It is an offence to knowingly contravene specified provisions of the Singapore Arms and Flag and National Anthem Rules ; the penalty is a fine not exceeding S $ 1 @,@ 000 . 
 The Singaporean government dictates that no person may treat the national flag with disrespect , such as allowing the flag to touch the ground . The flag must not be displayed below any other flag , emblem or object ; dipped in salute to any person or thing ; or displayed or carried flat or horizontally , but always aloft and free . 
 Within Singapore , the national flag takes precedence over all other flags , subject to international practice . As such , when it is displayed or flown with other flags , it must be in a position of honour ; that is , it should be positioned , where practical , either above all other flags or , if displayed side by side with other flags on the same level , to the left of the other flags ( as seen by a person facing the flags ) . When the flag is raised or carried in a procession with other flags , it must be done so in front of the other flags in a single file , or on the right as seen by the standard bearers if the flags are carried side by side ( i.e. , on the left as seen by the viewer ) . The standard bearer must carry the flag high on his or her right shoulder . 
 When the flag is displayed on a platform or stage , it must be above all decorations and be behind and above any person speaking from the platform or stage . If it is displayed from a staff standing on the platform or stage , it must be on the right side of the person speaking from the platform or stage . Finally , when the flag is hung , it must be hung against a vertical wall or other vertical flat surface , with the crescent and stars on the top left position as seen by any spectator facing the flag and the wall or surface . 
 When the flag is displayed outside a building , it shall be displayed on or in front of the building only from a flagpole . If the flag is flown at night , it should be properly illuminated . The flag must not be displayed on any motor vehicle except on one in which the President of Singapore or any Government minister is travelling on official business . The flag may not be displayed on any private vessel or aircraft . 
 No person may use or apply the flag or any image of it for any commercial purposes or as part of any furnishing , decoration , covering or receptacle , except in such circumstances as may be approved ( by MICA ) in which there is no disrespect for the flag . Further , it is not permitted to use the flag as part of any trademark , or to produce or display any flag which bears any graphics or word superimposed on the design of the national flag . The flag or any image of it may also not be used or applied as or as part of any costume or attire . 
 The Government may ask for the flag to be lowered to half @-@ mast in the event of the death of an important person or for national mourning . No person is permitted to use the flag at any private funeral ceremony . However , the national flag can be draped on a coffin during a military or state funeral . No person may display any flag that is damaged or dirty . Any worn out or damaged flag should be packed into a sealed black trash bag before being disposed and not left visible in dustbins . 
 = = Use of the national flag = = 
 = = = During National Day celebrations = = = 
 Singaporeans are encouraged to display the national flag outside their homes during National Day celebrations , and residents ' committees , particularly those of public housing estates , often arrange co @-@ ordinated displays . However , some Singaporeans decline to do so as they associate it with the People 's Action Party , the ruling party in Parliament , rather than with the nation . During the period beginning 1 July and ending on 30 September of each year , any person may , without the need for the approval of the Minister under paragraph ( 4 ) , incorporate the Flag or an image thereof as part of any costume or attire except that he shall do so in a manner that does not give rise to any disrespect to the Flag . 
 On National Day in 2007 at the Padang , 8 @,@ 667 volunteers holding up red and white umbrellas formed the largest @-@ ever representation of Singapore 's flag at an event organised by Young NTUC , a youth movement associated with the National Trades Union Congress . 
 = = = At other times = = = 
 Outside the National Day celebrations period , the national flag of Singapore is flown from all buildings housing government and government @-@ related departments , such as armed forces installations , court houses , offices , and educational institutions . A picture of the flag is commonly found in each classroom , and schools conduct ceremonies at the beginning and the end of the school day at which the national flag is raised and lowered , the national anthem is sung and the national pledge is taken . 
 The national flag is sometimes flown by Singapore @-@ registered vessels , although this is considered incorrect , as such vessels are required to hoist proper national colours either when entering or leaving port . The ensign is red and charged with a circle enclosing a crescent surmounted by five stars in a circle , all in white . The national flag is not used by coast guard ships and military warships ; both classes of ships have their own specific ensigns . 
 The Singapore Government makes announcements regarding the lowering of the flag to half @-@ mast in the event of a death of an important personage or mourning affecting the nation . The flag has been flown at half @-@ mast during the funerals of former presidents and senior politicians , and on 9 January 2005 as a mark of respect for those who perished in the 2004 Asian Tsunami disaster . 
 = = = In culture = = = 
 Singaporean composer Lim Su Chong composed a song in 1969 entitled Five Stars Arising which took the elements of the national flag as its theme . The lyrics of the song speak of a new moon , five stars and a new flag " arising out of the stormy sea " . The moon is " [ y ] <unk> and bright and bearing hope , and tranquil as can be " , each of the stars is " a lamp to guide our way ; a lamp for all to see " and the flag is " [ c ] <unk> as the blood of all mankind , yet white and pure and free " . The song is often sung during National Day celebrations . 
 In January 2003 , Singaporean artist Justin Lee Chee Kong was prevented by the Media Development Authority ( MDA ) from exhibiting a painting entitled Double Happiness — A Fantasy in Red , which consisted of an image of the Singapore flag with various red images of the Chinese characters for double happiness . The move was made on the grounds that " the National Flag is a national symbol and no words or graphics should be superimposed on it " . 
 Lee reported that the work was simply a display of one 's love for their country and an expression of joy at Singapore 's success , and in a press statement , he asked that the piece be " treated as an artistic and complimentary interpretation of a national icon " . When interviewed by The New Paper , he said " I know as a citizen that we are not allowed to do it , but this is art and I am an artist . " He also complained about double standards as a Chinese artist , Gu Wen Da , had recently exhibited a national flag made of hair at the Esplanade - Theatres on the Bay . Lee felt the use of hair to create the nation 's flag meant that the flag was in the wrong colours , and was distasteful . 
 Also in 2003 , The Rolling Stones performed in Singapore as part of their 2002 / 2003 Licks World Tour . At the first performance , there were two inflatable dolls on stage . Both of the dolls had flags placed in their crotch area ; one had the Rolling Stones logo and the other had a Singapore flag . Because of the illegal use of the state flag , and for fear of dealing with the government , the dolls and the flags were removed from the second concert by the organizer . 
 In August 2007 , a Singaporean pub , Loof , sent an electronic direct mailer ( e @-@ flyer ) to at least 1 @,@ 500 members on its mailing list featuring a close @-@ up shot of the crotch of a female model wearing a red swimsuit or pair of underpants bearing the crescent and five stars of the national flag . This was done as part of the pub 's publicity campaign for its National Day events . According to Loof 's marketing manager , " [ T ] he ad was definitely not meant as an insult to the country or anyone . I hope that the ad will be taken in the spirit of humour and fun . " 
 A majority of people polled by The New Paper felt the advertisement was disrespectful and in bad taste . MICA said that the advertisement did not breach the law as it only reproduced some components of the flag — it did not , for example , incorporate the flag 's red and white background together . However , <unk> Menon , director of MICA 's National Resilience Division , said : " MICA does not encourage such ads which treat the national flag with disrespect . [ ... ] Symbols should be treated with some measure of dignity and we hope Loof will withdraw the ad on its own initiative . " 
 In November 2010 , during the Asian Games held in China , the Singaporean men 's water polo team 's swim trunks came under controversy for inappropriately displaying elements of the Singaporean Flag . Critics deemed the garment insulting and an embarrassment to the country , with the crescent moon positioned in the centre of the brief , directly over the crotch area . The garment had been designed by the team itself but had not received prior approval from the Ministry of Information , Communications and the Arts . However , even after the controversy came to light , the team was still able to continue wearing it as competition rules did not permit changing a team 's uniform midway through the Games . The team was apologetic over the blunder and promised to tweak the design after that competition . 
 = = Other flags of Singapore = = 
 In addition to the national flag and ensigns , there are other flags used for official purposes . 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 Smith , Whitney ( 1966 ) . A History of the Symbols of Singapore . Flag Bulletin 5 ( Winchester , Mass . : Flag Research Center ) . pp. 60 – 67 . ISSN 0015 @-@ <unk> . . 
 " No conflict , clear @-@ cut symbol of unity " . The Sunday Times . 1981 @-@ 08 @-@ 09 @.@ p . 13 . 
 <unk> , Helmer ( 2007 @-@ 03 @-@ 11 ) . " The mathematics and astronomy of the Singapore flag " . Department of Mathematics , National University of Singapore . Retrieved 2007 @-@ 11 @-@ 03 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Singapore Legislative Assembly ( 1959 ) . State Arms and Flag and National Anthem of Singapore ( Legislative Assembly ( New Series ) Misc . 2 of 1959 ) . Singapore : Printed at the Government Printing Office . 
 State Arms & Flag of Singapore . Singapore : Publicity Division , Ministry of Culture . 1977 . 
 Crampton , William ( 1992 ) . The World of Flags : A Pictorial History ( Rev. ed . ) . London : Studio <unk> p . 88 . 
 The National Symbols Kit . Singapore : Prepared by Programmes Section , Ministry of Information and the Arts . 1999 . A kit on the key symbols of Singapore consisting of eight fact sheets , one booklet , one CD and one national flag . 
 = = = Other media = = = 
 Singapore Broadcasting Corporation ( 1988 ) . Flag and Anthem , 3 December 1959 [ <unk> ] . Singapore : Television Corporation of Singapore . A documentary on the national flag and anthem of Singapore . Gives an account on how the present design of the flag was arrived at , and includes an interview with the national anthem 's composer , Zubir Said . 
 = St George 's Academy = 
 St George 's Academy is a co @-@ educational comprehensive secondary school based in the English market town of Sleaford in Lincolnshire , with a satellite school at nearby Ruskington . Its origins date to 1908 , when Sleaford Council School opened at Church Lane to meet the growing demand for elementary education in the town . After the Education Act 1944 , the senior department became a secondary modern . A second school building was constructed at Westholme in the 1950s and expanded in 1983 , allowing the Church Lane site to close ; to mark the occasion , it was renamed St George 's School . After it became grant @-@ maintained , the school received a Technology specialism , became a Technology College in 1994 and later converted to Foundation status . Coteland 's School in Ruskington federated with St George 's in 2007 ; they merged to form the Academy in 2010 . 
 The Sleaford school opened with a capacity for 600 pupils in 1908 , but St George 's had 2 @,@ 220 on roll across both sites in 2015 , of which 374 attended the Sixth Form ; the Ruskington site , with roughly 350 pupils , makes up a small proportion of the total . Pupils generally sit examinations for ten General Certificate of Secondary Education ( GCSE ) qualifications in Year Eleven ( aged 15 – 16 ) , and they have a choice of three or four A @-@ levels in the sixth form , which is part of the Sleaford Joint Sixth Form consortium . In 2013 , 88 % of pupils achieved five GCSEs at grade A * -C and 51 % achieved that including English and mathematics . An Office for Standards in Education , Children 's Services and Skills ( Ofsted ) inspection in 2015 graded St George 's Academy as " good " in every category . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Elementary school = = = 
 During most of the 19th century , schooling in England was provided either on a fee @-@ paying basis or by the Church . To ensure that all children had access to elementary education , the Forster Act 1870 set up Local School Boards to provide elementary schools for all children aged 5 to 10 . From 1880 , schooling became compulsory for that age group . The Education Act 1902 consolidated these boards into local education authorities and allowed them to subsidise schools with money raised from local rate @-@ payers . Alongside a grammar school for boys , a private school for girls and a mixed National School , Sleaford had four elementary schools in 1905 : two Wesleyan ( one was for infants ) , one Catholic and one other infants school . The construction of the Bass maltings ( 1901 – 1906 ) and the Rauceby Asylum ( 1897 – 1902 ) led to an increase in the town 's population and school inspectors found that the four schools could not accommodate every child in the town . The indebted Wesleyan schools could not afford any enlargements so the town 's elementary school managers opted for Kesteven County Council to take responsibility under the 1902 Act . The Council built a schoolhouse on Church Lane at the cost of £ 11 @,@ 500 , which opened as Sleaford Council School on 4 May 1908 . The staff and pupils at the Wesleyan schools were transferred there ; its first headmaster was H. H. Godfrey , who had been master at the Wesleyan school . Built with a capacity of 600 pupils , 280 were on roll when teaching commenced . 
 From the outset , the school was run as an elementary school with an infants ' department . In 1918 , the Fisher Act raised the school leaving age to 14 and many schools subsequently split into junior and senior departments ; to accommodate senior children at Sleaford Council School , the County Council proposed formally introducing separate departments , one for infants and junior pupils ( those aged below 10 ) , and another for the remaining ( senior ) pupils . The Board of Education approved these plans in 1922 . In 1935 the County Council reorganised schooling in Sleaford so that the Council School 's senior department received all the town 's children in elementary education aged over 10 . The Board of Education sanctioned these changes on the condition that new classrooms be added to the Council school to accommodate Senior pupils and a new Infants ' department be erected at the site . Financial setbacks and delays over the purchasing of land meant that the new Infants ' school was not completed until 1939 . 
 = = = Secondary Modern and new site = = = 
 The Education Act 1944 made secondary education available to all children up to the age of 15 ; a ' tripartite system ' of secondary schools was established to provide curricula based on aptitude and ability : grammar schools for " academic " pupils , secondary moderns for practical studies , and technical schools for science and engineering . Pupils were allocated to them depending on their score in the eleven @-@ plus examination . The Senior department at the Sleaford Council School became its own school in March 1945 and was designated a secondary modern ; the County Council announced in May 1947 that the Infants ' School would close and the former Senior school would be allocated £ 50 @,@ 000 for adaptions as part of its conversion into a secondary modern for boys . The school would use parkland at Westholme for playing fields , where a separate secondary modern for girls would be constructed and the High School rebuilt . In 1957 the Secondary Education Sub @-@ Committee amended the plans so that a new mixed secondary modern school be built on Westholme to replace the Church Lane school , which would become a further education college . The school would be allocated over 18 acres ( 7 @.@ 3 ha ) of the parkland . By 1960 , a new school building at Westholme had opened but Sleaford Secondary Modern was now split between there and the Church Lane site . 
 = = = Comprehensive debate = = = 
 The educational opportunities for secondary modern pupils were limited compared to those at grammar schools , prompting criticism of the selection system ; grammar schools and the eleven plus were also criticised for alienating working @-@ class families . A reluctance to improve secondary moderns or expand grammar schools under the Conservatives prompted the Labour Government to issue Circular 10 / 65 in 1965 which requested local education authorities convert to a comprehensive system . In 1971 , Sleaford parents voted in favour of comprehensive education , but rejected the Council 's proposals . New plans were unveiled in 1973 : the High School and the Secondary Modern sites were to become mixed 11 – 16 schools and Carre 's would become a sixth form college . Parents voted for the plans ( 1 @,@ 199 to 628 ) , albeit with a 50 % turnout . The County Council approved them , but allowed governors a veto . Following negotiations with governors at Carre 's , the scheme was revised in 1974 so that Carre 's and the High School became 11 – 18 schools ; the secondary modern would be closed , Westholme absorbed by the High School and the Church Lane site by Carre 's . 
 Despite support from most staff and all three headteachers , the new Lincolnshire County Council voted to return the scheme for further consultation in January 1975 , a moved the Sleaford Standard called " politically motivated " . Two of the leading opponents , councillors Eric Fairchild and Reg Brealey , were governors at the secondary modern and Brealey was a former pupil . He proposed a three @-@ school system , arguing it offered more choice : the secondary modern would be consolidated at Westholme as a single @-@ site 11 – 16 school ; Carre 's and the High School would operate Sixth Forms . Fairchild argued that this would be more popular and cheaper . After the Government ordered the Council to submit a comprehensive proposal in 1977 , it voted to submit the three @-@ school system , which had become popular with parents and was championed by Brealey , who had become chairman of the Governors . But , the Labour Education Secretary , Shirley Williams , dismissed the proposals in 1978 on grounds that the Sixth Forms would be too small . The council then voted against the two @-@ school system again . 
 = = = St George 's : rebuilding , growth and specialist status = = = 
 In the 1979 general election , a Conservative government came to power and the Council shifted focus towards retaining Grammar Schools where they still existed and improving schools where work had been put on hold during the comprehensive debate ; despite 90 % of English councils adopting comprehensive education , Lincolnshire had resisted . In 1979 , the schools sub @-@ committee recommended that the Westholme site be rebuilt . By December , the Council had approved the consolidation of the school at Westholme , but the catchment area was decreased to protect the smaller schools at Billingborough and Billinghay , causing controversy amongst parents in affected areas and governors at the school . A new building was constructed at Westholme between 1981 and 1983 , allowing the Church Lane site to close in 1983 − 4 . Reg Brealey donated £ 250 @,@ 000 in 1982 towards the establishment of a languages centre , which opened in 1985 . To commemorate the new buildings and the end of the dual @-@ site format , the Board of Governors voted to adopt a new name : St George 's School , which came into effect from September 1984 . A new badge , to be worn on pupil 's blazers , was designed by pupil Stephen Robinson : it featured a gold sword atop a red dragon on a blue shield , bordered with gold , all above a scroll with the motto Loyalty . 
 By 1991 , St George 's was grant @-@ maintained ; in 1992 , it was awarded Technology School status , which was accompanied by a Government grant of £ 500 @,@ 000 and a gift of £ 250 @,@ 000 made by Reg Brealey ; these contributed to the construction of a Science and Technology building , which opened in 1994 . Sponsored by Brealey , St George 's was one of the first schools designated a Technology College ( a specialist school ) in England in February 1994 , a status renewed in 1997 . More extensions followed : an English building in 1994 , a library with art and physics classrooms in 1997 , a sports hall in 2001 , and a science building in 2005 . In 2000 , the Technology College status was renewed for the second time and the school received the Schools Curriculum and Sportsmark awards and was recognised as the 10th most improved specialist school in the country . After the abolition of grant @-@ maintained status in 1998 , St George 's converted to a Foundation School . 
 = = = Federation , merger and conversion to an Academy = = = 
 In 2002 , Ofsted recommended that Lincolnshire County Council review schools with under 600 pupils . Two years later , the Council 's education officers suggested that some of these schools merge , close or federate to make them more economical . One such school was Lafford High in Billinghay , which had been under @-@ performing in GCSE and A @-@ level league tables . St George 's became federated with Lafford and another small village school , Aveland High in Billingborough in 2005 and 2006 respectively . A plan to merge them into an Academy was announced the following year ; Coteland 's School in Ruskington was allowed to opt @-@ in . When David Veal retired as headteacher of Coteland 's in 2007 , the school joined the federation ; with that , Paul Watson became executive head of all four schools . Despite improvements , the village schools were performing below the national average and Aveland was one of the lowest performing schools academically in Lincolnshire . The County Council began consulting parents in 2008 about closing Lafford due to falling numbers . Despite denials from Watson , parents complained that he had lost " passion " for the school and that St George 's " cherry @-@ picked " the most able pupils . After a heated meeting with them in 2008 , Watson resigned as Principal at Lafford and the school closed in 2010 . 
 The first Academy plans outlined a £ 24 million grant for rebuilding Aveland and refurbishing Lafford . Despite a delay in 2008 , the scheme was revived the following year : the three remaining schools would merge and up to £ 40 million of funds were being considered to pay for the redevelopment of each site . The chairman of the governors , Graham Arnold , pledged to raise £ 2 million towards the scheme . A feasibility report indicated that Aveland was not sustainable due to falling enrolment and would have to close ; instead the remaining two sites would be redeveloped with £ 20 million of Government funding . The scheme was approved and , on 4 January 2010 , St George 's combined with Coteland 's and Aveland to become St George 's Academy . As planned , September 2012 saw the Billingborough site close and the remaining pupils transfer to the other sites . The oldest part of the Sleaford site was demolished and main building and sixth form centre constructed in its place , while new science and IT buildings were added and a new IT system rolled out ; the original post @-@ war buildings at the Ruskington site were pulled down and a new school built . 
 = = School structure = = 
 St George 's Academy is a state @-@ run comprehensive secondary school and Sixth Form serving pupils aged between 11 and 18 . It converted to an Academy on 4 January 2010 and is run by St George 's Academy Trust and sponsored by the University of Lincoln , Lincolnshire County Council and Graham Arnold , who is the main sponsor . The school operates across two sites : one at Westholme , Sleaford , and the other in Ruskington , which approximately 350 pupils attend . The school is co @-@ educational and has a maximum capacity of 2 @,@ 500 pupils ; as of January 2014 , there are 2 @,@ 220 pupils on roll : 1 @,@ 175 boys and 1 @,@ 045 girls . 11 @.@ 2 % of these pupils receive free school meals . 
 St George 's can admit up to 380 pupils annually . Upon admission , pupils are allocated a mixed ability form , where they are registered , taught Life Skills and have access to pastoral support from their tutors . For all other lessons , pupils are <unk> by ability . Each year group has a progress manager with responsibility for the students in that year . Since the Education Act 2002 , years 7 , 8 and 9 have been grouped into Key Stage 3 and years 10 and 11 into Key Stage 4 , which co @-@ ordinates how the National Curriculum is taught . At St George 's , a manager is assigned to each Key Stage for pastoral support . Before the conversion to Academy status , the school uniform consisted of a navy @-@ blue blazer with the school emblem sewn on , a white shirt , navy @-@ blue tie and dark @-@ grey trousers ( girls could wear plain @-@ blue skirts ) for all pupils in years 7 – 10 ; year 11 pupils could wear a dark @-@ blue jumper , shirt and grey trousers . Since 2010 , girls no longer wear ties , and must wear a revere collar blouse . Dark @-@ grey trousers or a pleated dark @-@ grey skirt are available for girls to wear ; boys have dark @-@ grey trousers . All pupils wear a blue blazer , but those in Key Stage 3 have bright blue piping on their lapels ; shirts are white until Year 11 , when thin blue stripes are worn . 
 There is capacity for 450 pupils in the Sixth Form , including up to 50 people from outside the Academy . Along with Carre 's Grammar School , St George 's is part of the Sleaford Joint Sixth Form , which was founded in 1983 and included Kesteven and Sleaford High School until it withdrew in 2010 . It provides a common timetable across both sites and allows for pupils to choose from A @-@ Level options offered at both schools . Pupils may apply to be based at either school , where their pastoral and tutorial activities take place . Pupils are required meet minimum grade requirements for their subject choices and may have interviews to revise offers where appropriate . The Sixth Form has been based in the Arnold Centre since 2012 . Sixth Formers are not required to wear school uniform , but must wear business @-@ like attire , namely a lounge suit for boys , including a tie , and a business suit for girls , with either full @-@ length trousers , or a knee @-@ length skirt or dress . 
 = = Curriculum = = 
 = = = Key Stages 3 and 4 = = = 
 As of 2014 , the school follows the National Curriculum in Years 7 – 11 and offers a range of GCSEs ( national exams taken by pupils aged 14 – 16 ) and A @-@ Levels ( national exams taken by pupils aged 16 – 18 ) . The school has no affiliation with a particular religious denomination , but religious education is given throughout the school , and pupils may opt to take the subject as part of their GCSE course . Although morning assemblies take place and are Christian in nature , they are non @-@ denominational ; in some cases , local clergy attend as guest speakers . Pupils participate in a number of educational visits throughout their school career and Year 10 pupils are offered the opportunity to participate in a work experience programme , which usually lasts for two @-@ weeks . 
 For Key Stage 3 pupils , the curriculum comprises English , mathematics , science , technology , a modern foreign language , art , Information and Communications Technology ( ICT ) , geography , history , religious education ( RE ) , physical education ( PE ) , and a life skills programme , incorporating citizenship , sex and relationships education and personal and social education . The school offers French , Spanish and German as foreign languages and , in Year 8 , pupils take a second language to supplement the one studied in Year 7 . The use of ICT is central to all teaching and is taught as a subject in Key Stage 3 . 
 In Key Stage 4 ( Years 10 and 11 ) , pupils study a core curriculum comprising English , mathematics , science , PE , RE and citizenship . They are required to take GCSEs in English , mathematics and science , alongside two option blocks , plus either a modern foreign language or a vocational course . English Language is taught in Year 10 and Literature the following year . Mathematics in taken by all pupils ; they may opt @-@ in for a GCSE in Statistics in Year 10 , and the most able pupils may take Further Maths at GCSE in Year 11 . Science courses are based on ability ; pupils may study for three separate science qualifications , a dual or single award in Science or BTEC Applied <unk> pupils may choose a modern foreign language ( French , Spanish or German ) , a humanity ( history or geography ) , computing or separate sciences ( biology , chemistry and physics ) for their options as part of the English Baccalaureate . Additionally , the school offers six technology courses at GCSE ( electronics , food technology , graphics , product design , resistant materials and textiles ) , as well as art and design , drama , music , PE , RE and child development GCSE qualifications . Vocational courses are also offered at Level 2 , including applied business , construction , engineering , health and social care , ICT , music , performing arts , and travel and tourism . Pupils also participate in work @-@ related learning . 
 = = = Sixth Form = = = 
 The majority of pupils take four A @-@ levels subjects in Year 12 , with most choosing to focus on three in Year 13 . The Joint Sixth Form allows pupils to choose from 63 vocational or academic subjects including : art and photography ( separate A @-@ Level or BTEC options ) , applied Science , biology , bricklaying , business ( A @-@ Level or BTEC ) , childcare , carpentry , chemistry , computing or ICT ( A @-@ Level or BTEC ) , drama or performing arts ( A @-@ Level or BTEC ) , electronics , engineering , English ( language and / or literature ) , film or media studies , French , German , geography , government and politics , health and social care , history , hospitality and catering , law , mathematics and further mathematics , music ( A @-@ Level or BTEC ) , philosophy and ethics , psychology , physical education or sport ( A @-@ Level or BTEC ) , physics , product design , public services , light vehicle maintenance , Spanish , sociology , travel and tourism , and work skills . 
 = = = Examinations = = = 
 In 2013 , 88 % of pupils achieved five GCSEs at grade A * -C and 51 % achieved that including English and Maths , the thirty @-@ fourth highest percentage in the county ( out of ninety @-@ six ) . Figures for the 2010 / 11 cohort show that 84 % of pupils continue in education after leaving Year 11 , with 45 % carrying on to Sixth Form , 33 % going into Further Education and 6 % participating in an apprenticeship programme . In 2013 , 50 % of pupils achieved at least three A @-@ Levels at grades A * -E and 4 % achieved at least three A @-@ Levels at a minimum of AAB grades including at least two " facilitating subjects " ; the average point score per pupil was 660 @.@ 4 and the average grade per entry was a D + . 
 = = = Extracurricular activities = = = 
 School clubs and societies include singing and drama clubs , chess club , sports clubs , film club and computer games club . A student council system is in place which acts as a forum between pupils and staff ; elected representatives of each year group attend fortnightly , pupil @-@ run meetings to discuss school policies with staff . On the Ruskington site , a pupil @-@ run Interact Club , sponsored by the Rotary Club of Sleaford and Kesteven , coordinates charitable and community work in the school . The school newspaper club produces an annual newsletter and the school takes part in the BBC School Report day . Badminton , association football , volleyball , trampolining and gymnastics clubs are run every week at the Academy . The physical education department runs Inter @-@ House sports competitions and co @-@ ordinates school rugby , association football , basketball , boccia and netball teams . The music department hosts a junior and senior choir , swing band , Woodwind ensemble , Samba group and Vocal groups ; the music rehearsal rooms can be booked for band practice . Pupils can audition for parts in the school 's annual musical production and summer cabaret . For a fee , pupils may take up music lessons taught by tutors at the school . The school has supported music students in local and regional music festivals . 
 = = Sites and property = = 
 = = = Church Lane , Sleaford ( 1908 – 1984 ) = = = 
 The site at Church Lane was acquired at a cost of £ 900 in c . 1908 ; it was undeveloped when the previous Ordnance Survey map was completed in 1905 . The schoolhouse was constructed to the plans of Mr Dunne of Lincoln by the contractors Messrs Wright and Son , also of Lincoln , who secured the contract for £ 7 @,@ 442 . The school building had entrances for girls and boys , who were taught separately in six classrooms ; the assembly hall was 62 by 28 feet ( 18 @.@ 9 by 8 @.@ 5 m ) with a domed ceiling . An infants ' department consisted of three classrooms , while a workshop and kitchen were housed in separate buildings . 
 When teaching was transferred to the Westholme site in 1984 , the original schoolhouse was demolished . The Infants ' School buildings survived until the early 2000s , when they were also torn down to make way for the new buildings of its successor , Church Lane Primary School . 
 = = = Westholme , Sleaford ( 1957 – present ) = = = 
 Westholme House was designed by Charles Kirk the younger and built by his firm Kirk and Parry in c . 1849 . The Gothic stone mansion , off Westgate , is situated in grounds spanning 32 acres ( 13 ha ) ( as of 2011 ) . The Victorian buildings also include stables , which Sir Nikolaus Pevsner called " charming " , and two Tudor @-@ style lodges . Initially occupied by Kirk 's business partner Thomas Parry , the businessman and Liberal politician Samuel Pattinson lived at the house from at least 1924 until his death in 1942 . His wife , Betsy Sharpley Pattinson , died the same year and their trustees auctioned off the furniture at Westholme in 1944 . During the Second World War , the grounds were occupied by the War Department , but by 1945 Kesteven County Council had acquired the land and planned to use it for educational purposes . In 1957 , the Council proposed a new mixed secondary modern school building on the site and , by 1960 , the new building housed Sleaford Secondary Modern , which operated there and at the Church Lane premises . 
 A new building at Westholme was constructed from 1981 to 1983 at the cost of £ 1 million . It included a gymnasium , changing facilities , and music , technology and domestic science classrooms . A civic centre opened in the main building with conference rooms and a bar which could be hired out . Run by a committee of Town Councillors , school governors and the headmaster , the centre could also let out the school hall and gymnasium to the public . A languages centre , partially funded by Reg Brealey , opened in 1985 . Fitted with a satellite dish that could pick up signals from Russia , the centre housed a computer laboratory and classrooms ; a local reporter described it as " probably the most advanced in the country " at the time its designs were released to the public . In 1994 , science , technology and English buildings opened followed by a library and art centre in 1997 . A second sports hall was completed in 2001 and extended in 2003 to include ICT classrooms ; science and construction buildings were completed in 2005 , a childcare centre in 2008 and an art building in c . 2009 . 
 The school 's conversion to an Academy included a £ 20 million grant , which funded renovations around the site and the construction of two new buildings : a science and IT building , and the Arnold Centre , which opened in 2012 and included a new hall , Sixth Form centre , library , drama studio and classrooms . 
 = = = Billingborough ( 2010 – 2012 ) = = = 
 The Lord Lieutenant of Lincolnshire , the Earl of Ancaster , opened Billingborough County Secondary Modern School in 1963 . On 11 acres ( 4 @.@ 5 ha ) of playing ground , including tennis courts , the steel @-@ framed building was constructed by Messrs. Fosters of Grantham under the supervision of J. W. H. Barnes , county architect . It housed an assembly hall and dining space , gymnasium and three @-@ storeys of classrooms alongside workshops for practical subjects . Following the closure of the Billingborough site , the buildings were demolished in 2014 . 
 = = = Ruskington ( 2010 – present ) = = = 
 In 1947 , Kesteven County Council outlined its 15 @-@ year plan for secondary education , which included the construction of a new secondary modern school at Ruskington . The buildings were completed in the 1950s and teaching commenced at Ruskington Secondary Modern School in 1956 ; the buildings were officially opened by Sir John Wolfenden , Vice @-@ Chancellor of the University of Reading , the following year . Built on a 9 @-@ acre ( 3 @.@ 6 ha ) site at a cost of £ 100 @,@ 658 , the new school buildings consisted of a three @-@ storeys of classrooms and a gymnasium , assembly / dining hall , library and greenhouse . The buildings were built around a prefabricated steel frame and modular concrete blocks clad in brick . Much of the site was devoted to playing fields , which were supplemented by eight grass tennis courts and playground . 
 These buildings were demolished in 2012 and work began on a new school as part of the Academy development plans . A hall and classrooms were completed in January 2015 as the first phase of the rebuilding ; work on the second phase , which is planned to include vocational classrooms and a technology suite , began two months later and was scheduled for completion in September 2015 . With the second phase complete , the new campus buildings were officially opened on 6 November 2015 . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 The first headmaster at Sleaford Council School was H. H. Godfrey , who had been schoolmaster at the Weslyan school on Westgate since the 1890s . His successor at the Senior department , A. R. N. Rooksby , had taught in Grantham , a background not dissimilar to the third headmaster , F. A. <unk> . Appointed in 1973 , John Hodgson was the first university @-@ educated headteacher of the school . All four remained in the role for at least twenty years , with Hodgson being the longest serving at 25 years . Upon retirement , he was succeeded by Paul Watson , who had served at two Lincolnshire schools before his appointment ; he formally used the title " principal " instead of headteacher . He was at St George 's for 15 years until he retired and gave way to Wayne Birks , in 2014 . 
 = Ravi Shankar = 
 Ravi Shankar , KBE ( IPA : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; 7 April 1920 – 11 December 2012 ) , born Rabindra Shankar Chowdhury , his name often preceded by the title Pandit ( ' Master ' ) , was a known Indian musician and a composer of Hindustani classical music . He was one of the best @-@ known exponents of the sitar in the second half of the 20th century and influenced many other musicians throughout the world . 
 Shankar was born to a Bengali family in India , and spent his youth touring India and Europe with the dance group of his brother Uday Shankar . He gave up dancing in 1938 to study sitar playing under court musician Allauddin Khan . After finishing his studies in 1944 , Shankar worked as a composer , creating the music for the Apu Trilogy by Satyajit Ray , and was music director of All India Radio , New Delhi , from 1949 to 1956 . 
 In 1956 he began to tour Europe and the Americas playing Indian classical music and increased its popularity there in the 1960s through teaching , performance , and his association with violinist Yehudi Menuhin and Beatles guitarist George Harrison . His influence on the latter helped popularize the use of Indian instruments in pop music throughout the 1960s . Shankar engaged Western music by writing compositions for sitar and orchestra , and toured the world in the 1970s and 1980s . From 1986 to 1992 , he served as a nominated member of Rajya Sabha , the upper chamber of the Parliament of India . He continued to perform until the end of his life . In 1999 , Shankar was awarded India 's highest civilian honour , the Bharat Ratna . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Shankar was born on 7 April 1920 in Varanasi , British India , to a Bengali family , as the youngest of seven brothers . His father , Shyam Shankar , was a Middle Temple barrister and scholar from East Bengal ( now Bangladesh ) . A respected statesman , lawyer and politician , he served for several years as dewan ( chief minister ) of <unk> , Rajasthan , and used the Sanskrit spelling of the family name and removed its last part . Shyam was married to <unk> Devi who hailed from a small village named <unk> in <unk> block of Ghazipur district , near Benares , and her father was a prosperous landlord . Shyam later worked as a lawyer in London , England , and there he married a second time while Devi raised Shankar in Varanasi , and did not meet his son until he was eight years old . Shankar shortened the Sanskrit version of his first name , Ravindra , to Ravi , for " sun " . Shankar had six siblings , only four of whom lived past infancy : Uday ( who became a famous choreographer and dancer ) , Rajendra , <unk> and <unk> . Shankar attended the <unk> High School in Benares between 1927 and 1928 . 
 At the age of ten , after spending his first decade in Varanasi , Shankar went to Paris with the dance group of his brother , choreographer Uday Shankar . By the age of 13 he had become a member of the group , accompanied its members on tour and learned to dance and play various Indian instruments . Uday 's dance group toured Europe and the United States in the early to mid @-@ 1930s and Shankar learned French , discovered Western classical music , jazz , cinema and became acquainted with Western customs . Shankar heard Allauddin Khan - the lead musician at the court of the princely state of Maihar - play at a music conference in December 1934 in Calcutta , and Uday convinced the Maharaja of Maihar in 1935 to allow Khan to become his group 's soloist for a tour of Europe . Shankar was sporadically trained by Khan on tour , and Khan offered Shankar training to become a serious musician under the condition that he abandon touring and come to Maihar . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Training and work in India = = = 
 Shankar 's parents had died by the time he returned from the European tour , and touring the West had become difficult because of political conflicts that would lead to World War II . Shankar gave up his dancing career in 1938 to go to Maihar and study Indian classical music as Khan 's pupil , living with his family in the traditional <unk> system . Khan was a rigorous teacher and Shankar had training on sitar and surbahar , learned ragas and the musical styles dhrupad , <unk> , and khyal , and was taught the techniques of the instruments rudra veena , <unk> , and <unk> . He often studied with Khan 's children Ali Akbar Khan and Annapurna Devi . Shankar began to perform publicly on sitar in December 1939 and his debut performance was a <unk> ( duet ) with Ali Akbar Khan , who played the string instrument sarod . 
 Shankar completed his training in 1944 @.@ he moved to Mumbai and joined the Indian People 's Theatre Association , for whom he composed music for ballets in 1945 and 1946 . Shankar recomposed the music for the popular song " Sare Jahan Se <unk> " at the age of 25 . He began to record music for HMV India and worked as a music director for All India Radio ( AIR ) , New Delhi , from February 1949 to January 1956 . Shankar founded the Indian National Orchestra at AIR and composed for it ; in his compositions he combined Western and classical Indian instrumentation . Beginning in the mid @-@ 1950s he composed the music for the Apu Trilogy by Satyajit Ray , which became internationally acclaimed . He was music director for several Hindi movies including <unk> and Anuradha . 
 = = = 1956 – 69 : International career = = = 
 V. K. Narayana Menon , director of AIR Delhi , introduced the Western violinist Yehudi Menuhin to Shankar during Menuhin 's first visit to India in 1952 . Shankar had performed as part of a cultural delegation in the Soviet Union in 1954 and Menuhin invited Shankar in 1955 to perform in New York City for a demonstration of Indian classical music , sponsored by the Ford Foundation . Shankar declined to attend because of problems in his marriage , but recommended Ali Akbar Khan to play instead . Khan reluctantly accepted and performed with tabla ( percussion ) player Chatur Lal in the Museum of Modern Art , and he later became the first Indian classical musician to perform on American television and record a full raga performance , for Angel Records . 
 Shankar heard about the positive response Khan received and resigned from AIR in 1956 to tour the United Kingdom , Germany , and the United States . He played for smaller audiences and educated them about Indian music , incorporating ragas from the South Indian Carnatic music in his performances , and recorded his first LP album Three Ragas in London , released in 1956 . In 1958 , Shankar participated in the celebrations of the tenth anniversary of the United Nations and UNESCO music festival in Paris . From 1961 , he toured Europe , the United States , and Australia , and became the first Indian to compose music for non @-@ Indian films . Chatur Lal accompanied Shankar on tabla until 1962 , when Alla Rakha assumed the role . Shankar founded the Kinnara School of Music in Mumbai in 1962 . 
 Shankar befriended Richard Bock , founder of World Pacific Records , on his first American tour and recorded most of his albums in the 1950s and 1960s for Bock 's label . The Byrds recorded at the same studio and heard Shankar 's music , which led them to incorporate some of its elements in theirs , introducing the genre to their friend George Harrison of the Beatles . Harrison became interested in Indian classical music , bought a sitar and used it to record the song " Norwegian Wood ( This Bird Has Flown ) " . This led to Indian music being used by other musicians and created the raga rock trend . 
 Harrison met Shankar in London in June 1966 and visited India later that year for six weeks to study sitar under Shankar in Srinagar . During the visit , a documentary film about Shankar named Raga was shot by Howard Worth , and released in 1971 . Shankar 's association with Harrison greatly increased Shankar 's popularity and Ken Hunt of AllMusic would state that Shankar had become " the most famous Indian musician on the planet " by 1966 . In 1967 , he performed at the Monterey Pop Festival and won a Grammy Award for Best Chamber Music Performance for West Meets East , a collaboration with Yehudi Menuhin . The same year , the Beatles won the Grammy Award for Album of the Year for Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band , which included " Within You Without You " by Harrison , a song that was influenced by Indian classical music . Shankar opened a Western branch of the Kinnara School of Music in Los Angeles , in May 1967 , and published an autobiography , My Music , My Life , in 1968 . In 1968 , he scored for the movie Charly . He performed at the Woodstock Festival in August 1969 , and found he disliked the venue . In the 1970s Shankar distanced himself from the hippie movement . 
 = = = 1970 – 2012 : International career = = = 
 In October 1970 Shankar became chair of the department of Indian music of the California Institute of the Arts after previously teaching at the City College of New York , the University of California , Los Angeles , and being guest lecturer at other colleges and universities , including the Ali Akbar College of Music . In late 1970 , the London Symphony Orchestra invited Shankar to compose a concerto with sitar . Concerto for Sitar & Orchestra was performed with André Previn as conductor and Shankar playing the sitar . Hans Neuhoff of Musik in Geschichte und Gegenwart has criticized the usage of the orchestra in this concert as " amateurish " . George Harrison organized the charity Concert for Bangladesh in August 1971 , in which Shankar participated . After the musicians had tuned up on stage for over a minute , the crowd broke into applause , to which the amused Shankar responded : " If you like our tuning so much , I hope you will enjoy the playing more . " Although interest in Indian music had decreased in the early 1970s , the concert album became one of the best @-@ selling recordings to feature the genre and won Shankar a second Grammy Award . 
 During the 1970s , Shankar and Harrison worked together again , recording Shankar Family & Friends in 1973 and touring North America the following year to a mixed response after Shankar had toured Europe with the Harrison @-@ sponsored Music Festival from India . The demanding schedule weakened Shankar , and he suffered a heart attack in Chicago in November 1974 , causing him to miss a portion of the tour . In his absence , Shankar 's sister @-@ in @-@ law , singer Lakshmi Shankar , conducted the touring orchestra . The touring band visited the White House on invitation of John Gardner Ford , son of US President Gerald Ford . Shankar toured and taught for the remainder of the 1970s and the 1980s and released his second concerto , Raga Mala , conducted by Zubin Mehta , in 1981 . Shankar was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Music Score for his work on the 1982 movie Gandhi , but lost to John Williams ' ET 
 He served as a member of the Rajya Sabha , the upper chamber of the Parliament of India , from 12 May 1986 to 11 May 1992 , after being nominated by Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi . Shankar composed the dance drama <unk> in 1989 . His liberal views on musical co @-@ operation led him to contemporary composer Philip Glass , with whom he released an album , Passages , in 1990 . Shankar underwent an angioplasty in 1992 due to heart problems , after which George Harrison participated in a number of Shankar 's projects . Because of the positive response to Shankar 's 1996 career compilation In Celebration , Shankar wrote a second autobiography , Raga Mala , with Harrison as editor . He performed in between 25 and 40 concerts every year during the late 1990s . Shankar taught his daughter Anoushka Shankar to play sitar and in 1997 became a Regents ' Professor at University of California , San Diego . In the 2000s , he won a Grammy Award for Best World Music Album for Full Circle : Carnegie Hall 2000 and toured with Anoushka , who released a book about her father , <unk> : Love of My Life , in 2002 . Anoushka performed a composition by Shankar for the 2002 Harrison memorial Concert for George and Shankar wrote a third concerto for sitar and orchestra for Anoushka and the Orpheus Chamber Orchestra . In June 2008 , Shankar played what was billed as his last European concert , but his 2011 tour included dates in the United Kingdom . 
 On 1 July 2010 , at the Southbank Centre 's Royal Festival Hall , London , England , Anoushka Shankar , on sitar , performed with the London Philharmonic Orchestra , conducted by David Murphy what was billed the first Symphony by Ravi Shankar . This performance was recorded and is available on CD . It is 40 : 52 minutes long and is composed of 4 movements ( in the tempi allegro ( fast ) , slow , scherzo ( fast ) , finale ( fast ) ) like a classical Western symphony but uses an Indian raga as the mode for each movement : I. Allegro ( Kafi <unk> ) 9 : 21 minutes , II . Lento ( <unk> <unk> ) 7 : 52 minutes , III . Scherzo ( <unk> Kalyan ) 8 : 49 minutes IV . Finale ( Banjara ) 14 : 50 minutes . The website of the Ravi Shankar Foundation provides the information that " The symphony was written in Indian notation in 2010 , and has been interpreted by his student and conductor , David Murphy . " The information available on the website does not explain this process of " interpretation " of Ravi Shankar 's notation by David Murphy , nor how Ravi Shankar 's Indian notation could accommodate Western orchestral writing . 
 = = Style and contributions = = 
 Shankar developed a style distinct from that of his contemporaries and incorporated influences from rhythm practices of Carnatic music . His performances begin with solo alap , jor , and jhala ( introduction and performances with pulse and rapid pulse ) influenced by the slow and serious dhrupad genre , followed by a section with tabla accompaniment featuring compositions associated with the prevalent khyal style . Shankar often closed his performances with a piece inspired by the light @-@ classical thumri genre . 
 Shankar has been considered one of the top sitar players of the second half of the 20th century . He popularised performing on the bass octave of the sitar for the alap section and became known for a distinctive playing style in the middle and high registers that used quick and short deviations of the playing string and his sound creation through stops and strikes on the main playing string . Narayana Menon of The New Grove Dictionary noted Shankar 's liking for rhythmic novelties , among them the use of unconventional rhythmic cycles . Hans Neuhoff of Musik in Geschichte und Gegenwart has argued that Shankar 's playing style was not widely adopted and that he was surpassed by other sitar players in the performance of melodic passages . Shankar 's interplay with Alla Rakha improved appreciation for tabla playing in Hindustani classical music . Shankar promoted the <unk> duet concert style and claims to have introduced new ragas Tilak Shyam , Nat <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 = = = Indian governmental honours = = = 
 Sangeet Natak Akademi Award ( 1962 ) 
 Padma Bhushan ( 1967 ) 
 Sangeet Natak Akademi Fellowship ( 1975 ) . 
 Padma Vibhushan ( 1981 ) 
 Kalidas Samman from the Government of Madhya Pradesh for 1987 – 88 
 Bharat Ratna ( 1999 ) 
 = = = Other governmental and academic honours = = = 
 Ramon Magsaysay Award ( 1992 ) and the . 
 Commander of the Legion of Honour of France ( 2000 ) 
 Honorary Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( KBE ) by Elizabeth II for " services to music " ( 2001 ) 
 Honorary degrees from universities in India and the United States . 
 Honorary member of the American Academy of Arts and Letters 
 Honorary Doctor of Laws from the University of Melbourne , Australia ( 2010 ) 
 = = = Arts awards = = = 
 1964 fellowship from the John D. Rockefeller 3rd Fund 
 Silver Bear Extraordinary Prize of the Jury at the 1957 Berlin International Film Festival ( for composing the music for the movie <unk> ) . 
 UNESCO International Music Council ( 1975 ) 
 Fukuoka Asian Culture Prize ( 1991 ) 
 Praemium Imperiale for music from the Japan Art Association ( 1997 ) 
 Polar Music Prize ( 1998 ) 
 Five Grammy Awards 
 1967 : Best Chamber Music Performance - West Meets East ( with Yehudi Menuhin ) 
 1973 : Album of the Year - The Concert for Bangladesh ( with George Harrison ) 
 2002 : Best World Music Album - Full Circle : Carnegie Hall 2000 
 2013 : Best World Music Album - The Living Room Sessions Pt . 1 
 Lifetime Achievement Award received at the 55th Annual Grammy Awards 
 Nominated for an Academy Award . 
 Posthumous nomination in the 56th Annual Grammy Awards for his album " The Living Room Sessions Part 2 " . 
 First recipient of the Tagore Award in recognition of his outstanding contribution to cultural harmony and universal values ( 2013 ; posthumous ) 
 = = = Other honours and tributes = = = 
 American jazz saxophonist John Coltrane named his son Ravi Coltrane after Shankar . 
 On April 7 , 2016 Google published a Google Doodle to honor his work . 
 = = Personal life and family = = 
 Shankar married Allauddin Khan 's daughter Annapurna Devi in 1941 and their son , Shubhendra Shankar , was born in 1942 . Shankar separated from Devi during the 1940s and had a relationship with Kamala Shastri , a dancer , beginning in the late 1940s . 
 An affair with Sue Jones , a New York concert producer , led to the birth of Norah Jones in 1979 . He separated from Shastri in 1981 and lived with Sue until 1986 . 
 In 1989 he married Sukanya Rajan , whom he had known since the 1970s , at <unk> Temple in Hyderabad , India . Their daughter Anoushka Shankar was born in 1981 . 
 Shankar 's son , Shubhendra " <unk> " Shankar , often accompanied him on tours . He could play the sitar and surbahar , but elected not to pursue a solo career . Shubhendra died of pneumonia in 1992 . 
 Ananda Shankar , the experimental fusion musician , is his nephew . 
 Norah Jones became a successful musician in the 2000s , winning eight Grammy Awards in 2003 . Anoushka Shankar was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best World Music Album in 2003 . Anoushka and her father were both nominated for Best World Music Album at the 2013 Grammy Awards for separate albums . 
 Shankar was a Hindu , and a devotee of the Hindu deity , Hanuman . As well , he was an " ardent " devotee of the revered , Bengali Hindu saint , Sri Anandamayi Ma . Shankar used to visit Anandamayi Ma frequently and performed for her on various occasions . Shankar wrote of his hometown , Varanasi , and his initial encounter with " Ma " : 
 " Varanasi is the eternal abode of Lord Shiva , and one of my favorite temples is that of Lord Hanuman , the monkey god . The city is also where one of the miracles that have happened in my life took place : I met Ma Anandamayi , a great spiritual soul . Seeing the beauty of her face and mind , I became her ardent devotee . Sitting at home now in Encinitas , in Southern California , at the age of 88 , surrounded by the beautiful greens , multi @-@ colored flowers , blue sky , clean air , and the Pacific Ocean , I often reminisce about all the wonderful places I have seen in the world . I cherish the memories of Paris , New York , and a few other places . But Varanasi seems to be etched in my heart ! " 
 In his later years , Shankar became a vegetarian . He wore a large diamond ring which he said was " manifested " by Sathya Sai Baba . He lived with Sukanya in Encinitas , California . 
 Shankar performed his final concert , with daughter Anoushka , on 4 November 2012 at the Terrace Theater in Long Beach , California . 
 = = Illness and death = = 
 On 6 December 2012 , Shankar was admitted to Scripps Memorial Hospital in La Jolla , San Diego , California after complaining of breathing difficulties . He died on 11 December 2012 at around 16 : 30 PST after undergoing heart valve replacement surgery . 
 The Swara <unk> festival organized on 5 – 6 January 2013 was dedicated to Ravi Shankar and Ali Akbar Khan where musicians like Shivkumar Sharma , Birju Maharaj , Hari Prasad Chaurasia , Zakir Hussain , and Girija Devi performed . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = Books = = 
 Shankar , Ravi ( 1968 ) . My Music , My Life . Simon & Schuster . ISBN 0 @-@ 671 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Shankar , Ravi ( 1979 ) . Learning Indian Music : A Systematic Approach . <unk> . OCLC <unk> . 
 Shankar , Ravi ( 1997 ) . Raga Mala : The Autobiography of Ravi Shankar . Genesis Publications . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 46 @-@ 7 . 
 = Bronwyn Bancroft = 
 Bronwyn Bancroft ( born 1958 ) is an Australian artist , notable for being amongst the first Australian fashion designers invited to show her work in Paris . Born in Tenterfield , New South Wales , and trained in Canberra and Sydney , Bancroft worked as a fashion designer , and is an artist , illustrator , and arts administrator . 
 In 1985 , Bancroft established a shop called Designer Aboriginals , selling fabrics made by Aboriginal artists including herself . She was a founding member of Boomalli Aboriginal Artists Co @-@ operative . Art work by Bancroft is held by the National Gallery of Australia , the Art Gallery of New South Wales and the Art Gallery of Western Australia . She has provided art work for more than 20 children 's books , including Stradbroke Dreaming by writer and activist <unk> <unk> , and books by artist and writer Sally Morgan . She has received design commissions , including one for the exterior of a sports centre in Sydney . 
 Bancroft has a long history of involvement in community activism and arts administration , and has served as a board member for the National Gallery of Australia . Her painting Prevention of AIDS ( 1992 ) was used in a campaign to raise awareness of HIV / AIDS in Australia . Bancroft has served on the boards of copyright collection agency <unk> and Tranby Aboriginal College , and the Artists Board at the Museum of Contemporary Art , Sydney . 
 = = Early life = = 
 A Bundjalung woman , Bancroft was born in Tenterfield , a town in rural New South Wales , in 1958 . She was the youngest of seven children of Owen Cecil Joseph Bancroft , known as " Bill " — an Aboriginal Australian from the <unk> clan — and Dot , who is of Scottish – Polish ancestry . Bancroft has said that her great @-@ great @-@ great @-@ grandmother <unk> was one of only two or three survivors from her clan , the rest murdered when their land was settled by a white farmer . Her grandfather and uncle worked in local <unk> . She recalled that her father 's education was obstructed by discrimination because he was Aboriginal . His lack of formal training meant that he had to work away from home cutting railroad sleepers , while her mother worked at home as a dressmaker . Bancroft 's father was an engineer during World War II , managing barges at Madang and Rabaul . 
 Following her father 's advice on the importance of getting an education or a trade , Bancroft completed high school in Tenterfield before moving to Canberra in 1976 with her husband @-@ to @-@ be Ned Manning , who had also been her teacher . There Bancroft completed a Diploma of Visual Communications through the Canberra School of Art , followed by a Master of Studio Practice and a Master of Visual Arts ( Paintings ) at the University of Sydney . She never returned to live in Tenterfield , although her three sisters were living there in 2004 . Her father died around 1990 . Bancroft has three children : Jack was born in 1985 , Ella in 1988 . She separated from Manning when they were very young ; her third child <unk> was born in 1999 . Jack was awarded NSW Young Australian of the Year in 2010 for his work arranging the mentoring of Indigenous school students . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Art and design = = = 
 Bancroft was a founding member of the Boomalli Aboriginal Artists Co @-@ operative , one of Australia 's oldest Indigenous @-@ run artists ' organisations , established in 1987 . She served in the roles of chairperson , director , and treasurer during its first two decades . In 1985 , she opened a shop in Sydney called Designer Aboriginals , selling the work of designers including her own fabrics , and staffed by her Indigenous female students . Bancroft , Euphemia Bostock and Mini Heath were the first Australian fashion designers invited to show their works in Paris , where Bancroft 's painted designs on cloth were exhibited at the 1987 Printemps Fashion Parade . Two years later , in 1989 , she contributed to a London exhibition , Australian Fashion : The Contemporary Art . Despite these successes , she moved away from the fashion industry , telling an interviewer in 2005 that she had not done fabric design for 15 years . Described as " an instinctive colourist " , Bancroft has since worked primarily as a painter , and has developed " a glowing style reminiscent of stained glass windows " . She has cited as influences the American painter Georgia O 'Keeffe , European painters Joan Miró , Wassily Kandinsky , and Marc Chagall , and Australian Indigenous artists such as Emily Kngwarreye , Rover Thomas , and Mary MacLean . 
 Although initially known as a fabric and textile designer , Bancroft has worked with many artistic media , including " jewellery design , painting , collage , illustration , sculpture and interior decoration " . Art works by Bancroft are held by the National Gallery of Australia , the Art Gallery of New South Wales , the Art Gallery of Western Australia and the Queensland Art Gallery . The National Gallery holds one of her <unk> , <unk> , created in 1991 . Between 1989 and 2006 , Bancroft held eight solo exhibitions and participated in at least 53 group exhibitions , including shows at the Australian Museum in Sydney , the National Gallery of Australia in Canberra , and the National Gallery of Victoria . Her art has been exhibited in Indonesia , New Zealand , the USA , France , and Germany . 
 In 2004 , Bancroft was commissioned to design a large mural covering the exterior of a sports centre housing two basketball courts at Tempe Reserve in Marrickville , New South Wales . The mural depicts a snake , a man , and a woman , representing both biblical and Indigenous Australian creation stories . It also includes the goanna , the ancestral totem of the Marrickville area 's original inhabitants , the Wangal people . 
 Bancroft ventured into illustrating children 's books in 1993 , when she provided the artwork for Fat and Juicy Place written by Dianna Kidd . The book was shortlisted for the Children 's Book Council of Australia 's Book of the Year and won the Australian Multicultural Children 's Book Award . In the same year , she illustrated Stradbroke Dreamtime by Indigenous activist and writer <unk> <unk> . She was the third artist to have provided images for successive editions of the book , of which the first edition was released in 1972 . Bancroft has since contributed artwork for over 20 children 's books , including some by prominent Australian writer and artist Sally Morgan , whom she regards as a mentor and friend . These books include Dan 's grandpa ( 1996 ) and Sam 's bush journey ( 2009 ) . The two artists collaborated on an exhibition of prints at Warrnambool Art Gallery in Victoria in 1991 . Researcher and museum curator Margo Neale has described the art of both Bancroft and Morgan as depicting " their relationship to country and family in generally high @-@ keyed works , celebrating and commemorating through personal or collective stories in mainly figurative narratives . " 
 As well as working with established writers , Bancroft has created a number of children 's books in her own right , including An Australian 1 2 3 of Animals and An Australian ABC of Animals , which have been favourably reviewed as imaginative and well @-@ illustrated . Her style of illustration has been described as " bold and mysterious " , and as " traditional Australian Aboriginal representation rendered in bright , eye @-@ catching colors . " In 2009 Bancroft received an Australian literary award — the <unk> Medal — for her contribution to children 's literature . In May 2010 , the Governor @-@ General of Australia Quentin Bryce launched Bancroft 's latest book , Why I Love Australia . A long @-@ time supporter of Bancroft 's work , Ms Bryce said : " Why I love Australia is a work and title that , again , speaks volumes of its author and illustrator . It simply and exquisitely rejoices in telling a story of this magnificent , sacred land we share : the mountains , rivers and gorges ; seas and coral reefs ; grasslands and bushlands ; <unk> and snow ; houses and streets ; the jewelled night sky , and so much more . " 
 Bancroft 's art has also appeared in the publications of a number of other individuals and organisations , including as cover art for books from the Australian Museum and the New South Wales Education Department , for Larissa Behrendt 's novel Home , and for Roberta Sykes 's controversial autobiographical narratives Snake Cradle and Snake Dancing , among others . 
 = = = Administration and activism = = = 
 Bancroft has been active in arts organisations , and served two terms on the board of the National Gallery of Australia during the 1990s . She was chair of the Visual Arts Board of the New South Wales Ministry for the Arts , and of the National Indigenous Arts Advocacy Organisation from 1993 to 1996 . In the lead @-@ up to the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney , Bancroft was a member of the design committee that advised on the development of the games ' official logo , and has acted as a judge for the $ 35 @,@ 000 Country Energy Art Prize . Bancroft was a member of the board of directors of the Australian copyright collection agency , <unk> , and while serving in that position has been an advocate of resale royalty rights for artists . She has observed that " resale royalties are an intrinsic link to the improvement of the inherent rights of Australian artists to a fair income " . She was a member of the Sydney Museum of Contemporary Art 's Artist Advisory Group in 2005 , and is a member of the Museum 's Artists Board . She has served on the board of the Indigenous training organisation , Tranby Aboriginal College . 
 Within and beyond her artistic works , Bancroft has demonstrated concern for a range of social issues , particularly those affecting Indigenous Australians . Her painting Prevention of AIDS ( 1992 ) was reproduced on posters and postcards aimed at raising awareness of HIV / AIDS , and was one of several of her images commissioned by the federal Department of Health to highlight issues regarding the disease in the Indigenous community . In 2000 , two years after the death of activist Mum ( Shirl ) Smith , Bancroft and the Boomalli Aboriginal Artists Co @-@ operative organised a fund @-@ raising exhibition of art works in Smith 's honour . 
 Bancroft is a director of the Australian Indigenous Mentoring Experience , a not @-@ for @-@ profit organisation that aims to increase senior high school and university admission rates for Indigenous students . She has taught and mentored Indigenous school students such as Jessica Birk , a winner of the Australia Council 's inaugural Emerging and Young Artist Award in May 2009 . 
 = = Selected published works = = 
 Walking the boundaries ( illustrator ) , Angus & Robertson , 1993 , ISBN 0 @-@ 207 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 
 Stradbroke dreamtime ( illustrator ) , Angus & Robertson , 1993 , ISBN 0 @-@ 207 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 
 <unk> ( illustrator ) , Angus & Robertson , 1994 , ISBN 0 @-@ 207 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 
 Dan 's Grandpa ( illustrator ) , Fremantle Press , 1996 , ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 159 @-@ 0 
 Leaving ( illustrator ) , Roland Harvey , 2000 , ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 75 @-@ 5 
 The Outback ( illustrator ) , with <unk> Porter , <unk> Books , 2005 , ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 86 @-@ 6 
 An Australian ABC of Animals , Little Hare Books , 2005 , ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 97 @-@ 2 
 Ready to Dream ( illustrator ) , Bloomsbury , 2008 , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 59990 @-@ 049 @-@ 0 
 An Australian 1 , 2 , 3 of animals , Little Hare Books , 2009 , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 921541 @-@ 11 @-@ 7 
 W is for wombat : my first Australian word book , Little Hare Books , 2009 , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 921541 @-@ 17 @-@ 9 
 Why I love Australia , Little Hare Books , 2010 , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 921541 @-@ 78 @-@ 0 
 = = Major collections = = 
 Artbank 
 Art Gallery of New South Wales 
 Art Gallery of Western Australia 
 Australian Museum 
 Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet ( Australia ) 
 National Gallery of Australia 
 National Museum of Australia 
 New York Public Library Print Collection 
 Newark Museum 
 Parliament House Art Collection 
 Queensland Art Gallery 
 = M @-@ 179 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 179 is a 16 @.@ 963 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 27 @.@ 299 km ) state trunkline highway in the western portion of the US state of Michigan . It runs from US Highway 131 ( US 131 ) at exit 61 outside of Bradley to M @-@ 43 just west of Hastings in the Lower Peninsula . The highway crosses through forest land and provides access to state recreational areas . M @-@ 179 has been given the Chief Noonday Recreational Heritage Route designation by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) . Prior to October 1998 , this highway was the eastern portion of county road A @-@ 42 . The number was formally assigned by the next year . This is not the first time the number was used in Michigan , an unrelated M @-@ 179 previously existed in the 1930s through the 1950s farther north . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 179 begins at an interchange with US 131 just west of Bradley . From there , the road travels to the east past the Gun Lake Casino and through the community before bending around the southern edge of Sager Lake . After passing the lake , the highway resumes its easterly course and continues through the rural forest areas of eastern Allegan County , where the road is known as 129th Avenue . M @-@ 179 crosses the county line and heads into Barry County north of Gun Lake . The road is then locally known as Chief Noonday Road . Here it continues its eastward trek until it winds its way through the Yankee Springs State Recreation Area . After passing through the recreation area , the road continues to the east passing through wooded area before a slight curve to the north , after which it continues to the east and terminates at a junction with M @-@ 43 just west of Hastings . 
 The Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) maintains the roadway as a part of the state highway system . As a part of this role , the department tracks the average annual daily traffic on its roadways , a calculation of the number of vehicles to use a highway segment on any average day of the year . In 2009 , MDOT determined that 5 @,@ 622 vehicles in Allegan County and 4 @,@ 253 vehicles in Barry County used M @-@ 179 daily . For the whole length of the highway , the commercial traffic was calculated to be 246 trucks daily in 2009 . No section of the highway has been listed on the National Highway System , a system of roads important to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility . M @-@ 179 has been named the Chief Noonday Trail Recreational Heritage Route ( now a Pure Michigan Byway ) by MDOT for its " natural beauty " and access to recreational areas . 
 = = History = = 
 The original version of M @-@ 179 was established in 1935 as a shortcut near Le Roy between US 131 and what was M @-@ 63 . That route was turned back to local control in late 1958 or 1959 , and the designation disappeared from the system . ( The original M @-@ 63 itself was decommissioned a few years later in 1961 . ) On October 1 , 1998 , as part of the Rationalization process , a jurisdictional transfer turned county road A @-@ 42 between US 131 and M @-@ 43 over to the state , which the state later designated as M @-@ 179 for the following year . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Tzachas = 
 Tzachas ( Greek : <unk> ) , also known as Chaka Bey ( Turkish : <unk> Bey ) was an 11th @-@ century Seljuk Turkish military commander who ruled an independent state based in Smyrna ( present @-@ day Izmir ) . Originally in Byzantine service , he rebelled and seized Smyrna , much of the Aegean coastlands of Asia Minor and the islands lying off shore in 1088 – 91 . At the peak of his power , he even declared himself Byzantine emperor , and sought to assault Constantinople in conjunction with the Pechenegs . In 1092 , a Byzantine naval expedition under John Doukas inflicted a heavy defeat on him and retook Lesbos , while in the next year he was treacherously slain by his son @-@ in @-@ law Kilij Arslan I. Smyrna and the rest of Tzachas ' former domain were recovered by the Byzantines a few years later , in c . 1097 . 
 = = Life = = 
 Very little is known about his life , and that mostly from only one source , the Alexiad of the Byzantine princess Anna Komnene , daughter of Emperor Alexios I Komnenos ( r . 1081 – 1118 ) . He is also mentioned in the 13th @-@ century <unk> , but it is not a very reliable source due to the semi @-@ legendary nature of its material . 
 According to the Alexiad , Tzachas was originally a raider , who was taken as a prisoner by the Byzantines during the reign of Nikephoros III Botaneiates ( ruled 1078 – 81 ) . Tzachas entered Byzantine service and advanced rapidly through imperial favour , receiving the title of <unk> and rich gifts . However , when Alexios I Komnenos deposed Botaneiates in 1081 , Tzachas lost his position and fled Byzantium . 
 From ca . 1088 on , he used his base at Smyrna to wage war against the Byzantines . Employing Christian craftsmen , he built a fleet , with which he captured Phocaea and the eastern Aegean islands of Lesbos ( except for the fortress of Methymna ) , Samos , Chios and Rhodes . A Byzantine fleet under Niketas <unk> was sent against him , but Tzachas defeated it in battle . Some modern scholars have speculated that his activities during this time may have been in conjunction , and perhaps even coordination , with two contemporary Byzantine Greek rebels , Rhapsomates in Cyprus , and Karykes in Crete . 
 In 1090 / 91 , the Byzantines under Constantine Dalassenos recovered Chios . Undeterred , Tzachas rebuilt his forces , and resumed his attacks , even proclaiming himself emperor ( basileus ) and seeking to conclude an alliance against Alexios I with the Pechenegs in Thrace for a joint attack on Constantinople . In 1092 , Dalassenos and the new megas doux , John Doukas , were sent against Tzachas , and attacked the fortress of Mytilene on Lesbos . Tzachas resisted for three months , but finally had to negotiate a surrender of the fortress . During his return to Smyrna , Dalassenos attacked the Turkish fleet , which was almost destroyed . 
 In spring 1093 , Tzachas attacked the port of Abydos in the Sea of Marmara . Alexios I called upon the Sultan of the Seljuk Sultanate of Rum Kilij Arslan I ( r . 1092 – 1107 ) , who was married to Tzachas 's daughter and was thus his son @-@ in @-@ law , to attack Tzachas from the rear . The Sultan advanced to Abydos , where , at the pretext of inviting Tzachas to a banquet , he had his father @-@ in @-@ law murdered . However , in ca . 1097 a " Tzachas " — possibly the original Tzachas ' son — is reported as still holding Smyrna when the Byzantine army under John Doukas recaptured the city . 
 = Country Joe and the Fish = 
 Country Joe and the Fish was an American psychedelic rock band formed in Berkeley , California , in 1965 . The band was among the influential groups in the San Francisco music scene during the mid- to late 1960s . Much of the band 's music was written by founding members Country Joe McDonald and Barry " The Fish " Melton , with lyrics pointedly addressing issues of importance to the counterculture , such as anti @-@ war protests , free love , and recreational drug use . Through a combination of psychedelia and electronic music , the band 's sound was marked by innovative guitar melodies and distorted organ @-@ driven instrumentals which were significant to the development of acid rock . 
 The band self @-@ produced two EPs that drew attention on the underground circuit before signing to Vanguard Records in 1966 . Their debut album , Electric Music for the Mind and Body , followed in 1967 . It contained their only nationally charting single , " Not So Sweet Martha Lorraine " , and their most experimental arrangements . Their second album , I @-@ Feel @-@ Like @-@ I 'm @-@ Fixin ' -to @-@ Die , was released in late 1967 ; its title track , with its dark humor and satire , became their signature tune and is among the era 's most recognizable protest songs . Further success followed , including McDonald 's appearance at Woodstock , but the group 's lineup underwent changes until its disbandment in 1970 . Members of the band continue in the music industry as solo recording artists and sporadically reconvene . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation ( 1965 ) = = = 
 The first lineup of Country Joe and the Fish formed in mid @-@ 1965 , when Country Joe McDonald ( vocals , acoustic guitar ) and Barry " The Fish " Melton ( lead guitar , vocals ) came together as a duo . The two musicians had a background rooted in folk music , were enamored with the recordings of Woody Guthrie , and worked on the local acoustic coffeehouse circuit in the early 1960s . Melton honed his political protest prowess as a guitarist in Los Angeles , at venues such as the Ash Grove , before relocating to Berkeley , California , where he was a regular at the Jabberwock cafe . Prior to the group , McDonald set up two folk and jug bands , the Berkeley String Quartet and the Instant Jug Band , both of which served as outlets for his original material , and with the latter group including Melton . In addition , McDonald was a publisher of the left @-@ wing underground magazine Et Tu Brute , which later became Rag Baby , containing poetry , drawings , and political messages . By early 1965 , McDonald had become involved in the burgeoning folk scene in Berkeley , and the Free Speech Movement that was organizing demonstrations in University of California , Berkeley which opposed the war in Vietnam . Not long afterwards , McDonald was inspired to record a " talking issue " of his magazine , and organized Country Joe and the Fish with Melton and fellow musicians Carl <unk> ( washboard , kazoo ) , Bill Steele ( bass guitar ) , and Mike Beardslee ( vocals ) , out of both necessity of a recording alias and political device , to self @-@ produce an extended play . 
 ED Denson , the co @-@ publisher of Rag Baby , introduced McDonald to Chris Strachwitz , who owned Arhoolie Recording Studios , to self @-@ produce the EP . Sensing the band 's potential , Denson assumed management control , and was responsible for coining the group 's name — a reference to Josef Stalin and to Mao Zedong 's description of a revolutionary as " the fish who swim in the sea of the people " . McDonald , who had recording experience , began utilizing Arhoolie Recording Studios to record four songs split equally between the band and a local folk musician , Peter Krug . It was during this time at Arhoolie Records that Country Joe and the Fish 's folk sound and political protest prowess — an amalgam of their own Guthrie @-@ influenced material and their folk music roots — began to emerge . The band 's side of the EP featured two originals by McDonald , an acoustic version of " I Feel Like I 'm Fixin ' to Die Rag " ( also known as " The Fish Cheer " ) , and " Superbird " . According to McDonald , " The Fish Cheer " was written in 30 minutes , with a purpose of expressing satiric and dark commentary on the US 's involvement in the Vietnam conflict . In October 1965 , 100 copies of the EP , titled Rag Baby Talking Issue No. 1 , were distributed on McDonald 's independent label at a Teach @-@ in in UC Berkeley and underground shops selling Rag Baby magazine . 
 For a brief period , McDonald and Melton performed together as a duo at college campuses in the Northwest on behalf of Students for a Democratic Society before returning as regulars at the Jabberwock cafe . The two were joined by local jug band musicians , including Melton 's roommates , bass player Bruce Barthol and guitarist Paul Armstrong , and bluegrass guitarist David Bennett Cohen , with whom Melton played in another jug band . The addition of drummer John Francis @-@ Gunning rounded out the six @-@ piece ensemble . It was during their residency at the Jabberwock that Country Joe and the Fish learned to play as a group and expand their repertoire . Within months , based on McDonald and Melton 's interest in the live performances of the Paul Butterfield Blues Band , the recordings on Bob Dylan 's album , Highway 61 Revisited , and their use of the mind @-@ altering drug , LSD , the group began equipping themselves with electric instruments and delving more into psychedelia . As a result , Cohen was moved over to the organ . Cohen 's experience with keyboards was limited to having played piano at a semiprofessional capacity at the Jabberwock , but , nonetheless , he quickly adapted to the qualities of the instrument . Melton describes the change of the group : " Once we hit into the electric medium and into the rock medium , we were pandering to the public taste . We became extraordinarily popular . The little folk club where we used to play once every two weeks , we played every single night for a month , or something like that , and filled it . And after a while we filled two shows every single night " . 
 = = = Electric music ( 1966 – 68 ) = = = 
 As Country Joe and the Fish 's popularity grew , the band relocated to San Francisco in early 1966 and became popular fixtures at the Avalon and the Filmore Auditorium . On June 6 , 1966 , the band recorded a second self @-@ produced EP , which was packaged separately from the Rag Baby magazine and , upon its release , debuted the new psychedelic rock incarnation of the group . The EP fulfilled the band 's ambitions to incorporate electric instruments into their music , effectively melding the instrumentals and pioneering an early template for the musical subgenre of acid rock . It included McDonald 's compositions " ( Thing Called ) Love " and " Bass Strings " on the A @-@ side and the six @-@ minute " Section 43 " on the B @-@ side . Music historian Richie Unterberger praised " Section 43 " , saying its " Asiatic guitar , tribal maracas , devious organ , floating harmonica , and ethereal mid @-@ sections of delicate koto @-@ like guitar picking rivaled the Paul Butterfield Blues Band 's East West as the finest psychedelic instrumental ever " . Within three months , airplay of the EP spread across the new so @-@ called progressive radio stations , reaching as far as New York City , and establishing Country Joe and the Fish as a nationally relevant musical act . 
 Through connections that Cohen had with record producer Samuel Charters , the group signed a recording contract with Vanguard Records in December 1966 , just as the label , which had primarily released folk music , was attempting to branch out into the growing psychedelic rock scene . While the band waited to record their debut album , they were present at the Human Be @-@ In , along with other influential San Francisco musical acts , including Jefferson Airplane , Big Brother and the Holding Company , and Quicksilver Messenger Service . The event was a prelude to the Summer of Love and helped publicize counterculture ideals such as ecology , free @-@ love and the use of illicit drugs . 
 In February 1967 , Country Joe and the Fish entered Sierra Sound Laboratories to record their debut album , Electric Music for the Mind and Body , with Charters and Denson overseeing the process . Prior to their studio work , Armstrong left the group and began a two @-@ year alternative assignment as a conscientious objector , driving a truck for Goodwill Industries . Francis @-@ Gunning was involved in the beginnings of the album 's development but left when the rest of the band <unk> about his drumming technique . He was replaced by Gary " Chicken " Hirsh . The next recording session was postponed for three days as the most recognizable lineup of Country Joe and the Fish rehearsed with their new drummer at the Barn , in Santa Cruz . Hirsh 's abilities were immediately distinguishable on the album , as he demonstrated an acute and articulate drum beat that music critic Bruce Eder praised as " some of the best drumming on a psychedelic record this side of the late Spencer Dryden " . 
 Electric Music for the Mind and Body was released on May 11 , 1967 . Much of the album 's material continued to expand upon the band 's new psychedelic medium , with it embracing all facets of the members ' influences , which ranged from their folk roots , blues , raga rock and hard rock . The album also saw Cohen coming forward in a larger role with inventive distorted @-@ organ melodies . In addition , McDonald 's lyrical content , which brazenly pronounced topics of political protest , recreational drug use , and love , augmented by satirical humor , clearly introduced the band 's orientation and message . The compositional structures followed discrete movement patterns emulating the style of John Fahey , who McDonald admired . Though Electric Music for the Mind and Body was among the most complex works to date , it possessed the quality that several other San Francisco acts shared of being recorded mostly live , with only the vocals being overdubbed after the instrumentals were completed . 
 Electric Music for the Mind and Body was a success upon release , charting at number 39 on the Billboard 200 , and remains one of the most enduring psychedelic works of the counterculture era . A single , " Not So Sweet Martha Lorraine " , was distributed a month prior to the release of the album and became the only Country Joe and the Fish single to chart , peaking at number 98 on the Billboard Hot 100 , in large part a culmination of its airplay on FM broadcasting and college stations . A reworked version of " The Fish Cheer " was intended to be released as a track on the album . However , Charters vetoed the decision to see whether the controversial song " Superbird " would face a radio ban . Nonetheless , the band was considered a forerunner in the emerging music scene in San Francisco , exhibiting one of the more polished debuts , just as its contemporaries were still refining their own sound . Melton attributes the album 's success , particularly in San Francisco , to the band 's appearance at the Monterey Pop Festival in June 1967 . Subsequently , the group toured the East Coast with an elaborate psychedelic light show . 
 The band returned to the studio , this time at Vanguard Studios in New York City , between July and September 1967 . When " Superbird " , a tune mocking President Lyndon Johnson , was not banned from radio promotion , the band was given the go @-@ ahead to record " The Fish Cheer " , which saw the group moving away from the original folk composition toward electric instrumentals more synthesized toward psychedelia . The song became the title track of the band 's second album , I @-@ Feel @-@ Like @-@ I 'm @-@ Fixin ' -to @-@ Die , released in November 1967 . The album was not as successful as its predecessor , but still charted at number 67 . The composition represented growing anti @-@ war sentiment expressed by those opposing the Vietnam War , and is often considered one of the most recognized and celebrated protest songs of the era . " The Fish Cheer " was also pivotal in communicating the attitude against the war , but was set apart from other anti @-@ war songs for its use of sarcastic humor and satire on the controversial conflict . Writer Lee <unk> reflects on the song 's meaning , saying , " the happy beat and insouciance of the vocalist are in odd juxtaposition to the lyrics that reinforce the sad fact that the American public was being forced into realizing that Vietnam was no longer a remote place on the other side of the world , and the damage it was doing to the country could no longer be considered collateral , involving someone else . " 
 The song met unprecedented exposure among the band 's young audience after a performance at the Schaefer Music Festival in New York City , in the summer of 1968 . Hirsh suggested that instead of the opening chorus spelling " fish " , it would spell " fuck " , giving birth to the infamous " Fuck Cheer " . The crowd of young teenagers and college students applauded the act ; however executives from The Ed Sullivan Show barred Country Joe and the Fish from their scheduled appearance on the program , and any other possible events . Hirsh has never explained why he recommended the change in lyrics , but the act is seen as a social and political statement advocating free speech . The recorded version of " The Fish Cheer " received airplay , even on mainstream radio stations , which contributed to the success of the band 's third album , Together , its most commercially successful . The album , released in August 1968 , featured songwriting by all of the band members and charted at number 23 nationally . 
 = = = Lineup changes and Woodstock ( 1969 – 70 ) = = = 
 In September 1968 , Barthol left the band , just prior to their fourth album . His departure was due to the rest of the band 's unwillingness to partake in the <unk> for Life , an event established by the Youth International Party in Chicago that was intended to have the participation of several well @-@ known musicians attract thousands of spectators for the 1968 Democratic National Convention . However , the city refused to issue any permits , and the band members , by majority vote , decided to withdraw out of fear that their equipment would be damaged . After the festival resulted in riots and violent clashes between demonstrators and the police , Barthol 's conviction that Country Joe and the Fish should have held a larger role precipitated his departure from the group and move to England . 
 Between January 9 and 11 , 1969 , the band performed at the Fillmore West as a farewell to the group 's most famous lineup , with Jack Casady of Jefferson Airplane standing in as the bass player . The band was joined by Jerry Garcia , Jorma Kaukonen , Steve Miller , and Mickey Hart for the 38 @-@ minute finale , " <unk> 's Reef Jam " . Recordings from the concerts were later assembled on the live album Live ! Fillmore West 1969 , released on March 12 , 1996 . Hirsh and Cohen left soon after recording their next album , Here We Are Again , and a new lineup was configured with Casady and David Getz , who formerly played drums with Big Brother and the Holding Company . The group released Here We Are Again in the spring of 1969 . It charted at number 48 , and saw Country Joe and the Fish moving to a pop @-@ oriented approach . Country Joe and the Fish 's personnel remained relatively stable for the next six months , though Peter S. Albin , also an alumnus of Big Brother and the Holding Company , replaced Casady at bass . 
 However , when McDonald reassembled the band for a last @-@ minute scheduling at the Woodstock Festival , another personnel change resulted in the group 's final lineup , which included recruits Mark <unk> on keyboards , Doug Metzner on bass , and Greg Dewey on drums . Among the festival 's most memorable moments was McDonald 's unexpected solo performance on August 16 , 1969 , which included " The Fuck Cheer " as a finale . The audience <unk> responded by chanting along with McDonald . McDonald 's rendition of " The Fuck Cheer " propelled the song into the mainstream culture in the U.S. , and was featured on the Woodstock film , which was released on March 26 , 1970 . Radio stations regularly played both versions of the cheer , though the opposition to " The Fuck Cheer " limited its exposure to underground stations . In December 1969 , McDonald began his own career outside the band , releasing cover versions of Guthrie @-@ penned songs on Thinking of Woody Guthrie , and country standards on Tonight I 'm Singing Just For You . All the while , the group looked to capitalize on the momentum from Woodstock and their appearance in the film , Zachariah , by releasing their fifth album , CJ Fish , in May 1970 . The album was a moderate success , reaching number 111 nationally . However the band members lacked the motivation for touring and recording , which led to their disbandment in mid @-@ 1970 . 
 = = = Aftermath and reunions = = = 
 McDonald pursued his solo recording career , which spans over 30 albums , and remains an active anti @-@ war campaigner . He has also appeared in every Woodstock reunion festival since 1979 . Melton performed solo as well , under the moniker " The Fish " , and later became a member of the Bay Area supergroup , the Dinosaurs , in the 1980s . Since 1982 , Melton was able to practice law in California and became a Public Defender of Yolo County , California until his retirement in June 2009 . Country Joe and the Fish members sporadically reconvene , most notably when the classic 1967 lineup recorded Reunion in 1977 . The lineup , except Hirsh , came together again as the Country Joe Band in 2004 . In the same year , the group resumed touring , released the Barthol @-@ penned single , " Cakewalk to Baghdad " , and the live album Live in Berkeley . Though the Country Joe Band disbanded in 2006 , some of the members still occasionally tour together . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " Not So Sweet Martha Lorraine " b / w " Masked Marauder " ( 1967 ) ( # 98 Billboard Hot 100 ) 
 " Janis " b / w " Janis " ( instrumental ) ( 1967 ) 
 " Who Am I ? " b / w " Thursday " ( 1968 ) 
 " Rock and Soul Music Part 1 " b / w " Rock and Soul Music Part 2 " ( 1968 ) 
 " Here I Go Again " b / w " Baby You 're Driving Me Crazy " ( 1969 ) 
 " I Feel Like I 'm Fixin ' to Die Rag " b / w " Janis " ( 1969 ) 
 " Hang On " b / w " Hand of Man " ( 1971 ) 
 = = = EPs = = = 
 Talking Issue # 1 , Rag Baby ( 1965 ) 
 Country Joe and the Fish , Rag Baby ( 1966 ) 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 Electric Music for the Mind and Body ( 1967 ) 
 I @-@ Feel @-@ Like @-@ I 'm @-@ Fixin ' -to @-@ Die ( 1967 ) 
 Together ( 1968 ) 
 Here We Are Again ( 1969 ) 
 CJ Fish ( 1970 ) 
 Reunion ( 1977 ) 
 = = = Live album = = = 
 Live ! Fillmore West 1969 ( 1994 ) 
 = = = Compilations = = = 
 Greatest Hits , Vanguard ( 1969 ) 
 The Life and Times of Country Joe and the Fish , Vanguard ( 1971 ) 
 Collector 's Items : The First 3 EPs , Rag Baby ( 1980 ) 
 Collected Country Joe and the Fish , Vanguard ( 1987 ) 
 Time Flies By . Rag Baby ( 2012 ) 
 = Batman : Arkham Asylum = 
 Batman : Arkham Asylum is a 2009 action @-@ adventure video game based on the DC Comics superhero Batman . It was developed by Rocksteady Studios and published by Eidos Interactive in conjunction with Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 video game consoles , and Microsoft Windows . It was released worldwide for consoles , beginning in North America on August 25 , 2009 , with a Microsoft Windows version following on September 15 . 
 Written by veteran Batman writer Paul Dini , Arkham Asylum is based on the long @-@ running comic book mythos . In the game 's main storyline , Batman 's archenemy , the Joker , instigates an elaborate plot to seize control of Arkham Asylum and trap Batman inside with many of his incarcerated foes . With Joker threatening to detonate hidden bombs around fictional Gotham City , Batman is forced to fight his way through the asylum 's inmates and put an end to the Joker 's plans . Most of the game 's leading characters are voiced by actors who have appeared in other media based on the DC Animated Universe ; Kevin Conroy , Mark Hamill , and Arleen Sorkin reprised their roles as Batman , the Joker , and his sidekick Harley Quinn respectively . The game is presented from the third @-@ person perspective with a primary focus on Batman 's combat and stealth abilities , detective skills , and gadgets that can be used in combat and exploration . 
 The game received critical acclaim — particularly for its narrative — and won several awards , including Best Action Adventure game , Best Game , and Game of the Year from different media outlets . It held the Guinness World Record for " Most Critically Acclaimed Superhero Game Ever " . A Game of the Year edition was released on March 26 , 2010 , and an OS X version was released in November 2011 . A remastered version will be released for PlayStation 4 and Xbox One on July 26 , 2016 . Arkham Asylum 's success launched a series of Batman : Arkham sequels , beginning in October 2011 with Batman : Arkham City . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Batman : Arkham Asylum is an action @-@ adventure game viewed from the third @-@ person perspective . The playable character is visible on the screen and the camera can be freely rotated around him . The player controls Batman as he traverses Arkham Asylum , a secure facility for the criminally insane located off the coast of Gotham City . The opening areas of the game are linear , serving as a tutorial for the moves and approaches available to the player . Once the player emerges onto the island he can freely explore the game world , although some areas remain inaccessible until certain milestones in the main story . Batman can run , jump , climb , crouch , glide from heights using his cape , and use his grapple gun to climb low structures or escape to higher ledges . 
 The player can use " Detective Vision " — a visual mode which provides contextual information , tinting the game world blue and highlighting interactive objects like destructible walls and removable grates , the number of enemies in an area and their status — such as their awareness of Batman 's presence — and shows civilians and corpses . The mode is also used to follow footprints , investigate odors , and solve puzzles . 
 Batman has access to several gadgets which he can use to explore or fight . The batarang is a throwing weapon that can temporarily stun enemies or trigger remote devices . A remotely controlled version can be steered once thrown , and the sonic batarang can be used to attract the attention of specific enemies wearing monitoring collars , or detonated to knock a nearby enemy unconscious . Explosive gel can be used on weak walls and floors , and can be remotely detonated — sending rubble crashing onto an enemy . The line launcher can be used to traverse horizontal spans . The <unk> — a grappling device — can be used to interact with remote objects such as vent covers or to grab enemies . The Cryptographic Sequencer is used to override security panels , open new paths , or disable various asylum functions . Some areas are inaccessible until Batman acquires the gadgets necessary to overcoming the obstacle . The player is encouraged to explore the game world away from the main game to find and solve riddles left by the Riddler — who hacks into Batman 's communication system to challenge him with riddles . Objects can be collected , and some of the Riddler 's puzzles require the player to find areas related to the answer to a riddle and scan it with " Detective Vision " . The game world has 240 collectable items , such as Riddler trophies , chattering Joker teeth , interview tapes with some of Arkham 's inmates , and cryptic messages left in the asylum by its founder Amadeus Arkham that discuss the facility 's bleak history . The player is rewarded for solving riddles and finding collectibles with experience points and additional game content , including challenge maps that test the player 's skill at the game 's combat system , character biographies , and in @-@ game statues of Arkham Asylum 's characters . 
 Players can traverse enemy @-@ controlled areas using stealth or direct combat . The game 's " Freeflow " combat uses three main buttons : attack , stun , and counter . The system lets Batman move quickly between enemies , chaining attacks together until all enemies are unconscious . Combining the three main abilities can keep Batman attacking while moving between enemies and avoiding being attacked himself . The more combo attacks that are chained together , the faster and more agile Batman becomes , and special attacks — such as a throw , grapple , and an instant takedown which can immediately defeat an enemy — become available . Combat is rewarded with experience points , which are used to unlock gadgets , combat moves , and health upgrades . Higher combos , a wider variety of moves , and avoiding damage delivers more points . Enemy attacks are preempted with a warning icon , which indicate the attack can be countered . Some enemies require different approaches to overcome ; knife @-@ wielding thugs must be stunned before they can be attacked , and others must be struck from behind . Some enemies are armed with guns which significantly damage Batman . Enemies react to Batman 's elimination of their allies , which raises their fear level and alters their behavior ; for example , they will adopt new patrol routes , requiring the player to adapt to the changing situation . During combat , Batman 's health is diminished by attacks , but is fully restored once the battle ends . 
 The player can use predatory tactics through stealth — including silent takedowns , dropping from overhead perches and snatching enemies away , or using the explosive gel to knock foes off their feet — to tilt the odds in their favor . Some areas feature sections that require the player to use these tactics to avoid alerting the Joker 's henchmen and thus failing to meet an objective . Many areas feature stone gargoyles placed high above , helping Batman remain concealed . Batman can use his grapnel gun to reach the gargoyles , giving him a high vantage point over the area and the enemies . From the gargoyles , Batman can glide down to attack enemies or hang upside down from the gargoyles to grapple a nearby enemy and leave him tethered there . The player can use floor grates to attack from below , hide around corners , use batarangs to stun enemies from afar , and use the grapnel gun to pull enemies over ledges . 
 Arkham Asylum features a series of challenge maps separate from the game 's story mode that are unlocked while playing , and others are available as optional downloadable content ( DLC ) . The maps focus on the completion of specific goals , such as eliminating successive waves of enemies in combat , and subduing patrolling enemies while using stealth . The methods and variety of abilities used to achieve these goals earn an overall performance score that is ranked online against other players . On the PlayStation 3 , the Joker is a playable character in the combat and stealth challenge maps via optional DLC ; he must confront the asylum guards and police commissioner James Gordon . The Joker has his own combat abilities and weapons , such as a handgun , exploding chattering teeth , and x @-@ ray glasses which allow him to see opponents through walls . 
 On compatible systems , the Microsoft Windows version uses <unk> 's PhysX software engine to produce realistic , dynamic interactions with the game world . With PhysX enabled , some areas contain smoke or fog which reacts to Batman moving through it , while with PhysX disabled the fog will not appear at all . Other effects include dynamic interaction with paper and leaves , surfaces which can be scratched and chipped , and dynamic , destructible cloth elements such as banners and cobwebs . The Game of the Year version features the ability to play the game in 3D on any 2D television using anaglyph 3D glasses . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Arkham Asylum is set in the fictional Arkham Asylum , a facility on Arkham Island off the coast of Gotham City that houses criminally insane supervillains . The game features a large ensemble of characters from the history of Batman comics . Three voice actors , who worked on the DC Animated Universe series of film and television , reprised their roles for the game . Kevin Conroy voices Batman — a superhero trained to the peak of human physical perfection and an expert in martial arts , Mark Hamill voices Batman 's psychopathic nemesis the Joker , and the Joker 's sidekick Harley Quinn is voiced by Arleen Sorkin . Batman is aided by his allies Oracle ( Kimberly Brooks ) — who remotely provides him with intelligence , and police commissioner James Gordon ( Tom Kane ) . 
 In the asylum , Batman is faced with several supervillains ; he must defend himself from an enraged Bane ( Fred Tatasciore ) , subdue indiscriminate serial killer Victor Zsasz ( Danny Jacobs ) , confront the monstrous Killer Croc ( Steven Blum ) , defeat the plant @-@ controlling Poison Ivy ( Tasia Valenza ) , and battle his way through hallucinogen @-@ induced nightmares created by the Scarecrow ( Dino Andrade ) . The Riddler ( Wally Wingert ) does not physically appear in the game , but communicates with Batman and challenges him to solve riddles placed around the island . Other characters appearing in the game include the asylum 's warden Quincy Sharp ( also voiced by Kane ) , Batman 's parents Thomas and Martha Wayne ( voiced by Conroy and Valenza respectively ) , and asylum guard Aaron Cash ( Duane R Shepard , Sr ) . The shape @-@ shifting Clayface appears in cameo , taking on the guise of other characters as he tries to trick the player into releasing him . The Mad Hatter was almost included in the game , but the developers removed him . The body of Ra 's al Ghul is in the asylum 's morgue and the Ventriloquist 's dummy , Scarface , appears several times in the story . Several other characters — including the Penguin , Jack Ryder , Mr. Freeze , Two @-@ Face , Catwoman , and the asylum 's founder Amadeus Arkham — are referenced in the game , but do not appear in it . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 After the Joker assaults Gotham City Hall , he is caught by Batman and taken to Arkham Asylum , which temporarily houses many members of the Joker 's gang , who were transferred after a fire at Blackgate Prison . Believing the Joker allowed himself to be captured , Batman accompanies him into the asylum . The Joker 's plan is revealed as Harley Quinn takes control of the security and the Joker escapes into the facility , aided by a corrupt guard who kidnaps Commissioner Gordon . The Joker threatens to detonate bombs hidden around Gotham City if anyone tries to enter Arkham , forcing Batman to work alone . While pursuing Quinn to rescue Gordon , Batman is exposed to the Scarecrow 's fear toxin and hallucinates , seeing Gordon 's death and the corpses of his parents talking to him . Batman fights off Scarecrow and the toxin 's influence , and eventually finds Quinn , knocks her unconscious , and rescues Gordon . The Joker then directs Batman to the captured Bane , who has been experimented on by asylum doctor Penelope Young . The Joker frees Bane and Batman is forced to fight him , after which he navigates his way to a secret Batcave installation he had hidden on the island , where Batman <unk> his gadgets . 
 There , Batman learns that the Joker returned to the asylum to gain access to Young , who has been developing Titan — a more powerful version of the Venom drug that gives Bane his strength — intending to use it to help patients survive more strenuous therapies . Young learned that the Joker had been funding her research to create an army of superhuman henchmen ; her refusal to hand over the formula precipitated Joker 's return to the Asylum . While searching for Young , Batman is again attacked by Scarecrow and the fear toxin , and hallucinates the night of his parents ' deaths . After he recovers , Batman destroys Young 's Titan formula and rescues Young from Victor Zsasz . An explosion kills Young and the Joker obtains the completed batches of Titan . 
 Quinn releases Poison Ivy from her cell and later fights Batman , but is defeated and imprisoned . Quinn inadvertently reveals that Joker has a Titan production facility in the Arkham botanical gardens . Batman travels there and learns that Titan is created by genetically modified plants . He tries to enlist Ivy 's help to create an antidote , but she tells him that it can only be made from spores found exclusively in Killer Croc 's lair in a sewer . En route to Croc , Batman is again attacked by Scarecrow and overcomes several doses of fear toxin . Meanwhile , Joker injects Ivy with Titan , enhancing her powers . Ivy begins ravaging Arkham Island with giant mutant plants . Pursued by Batman into the sewers , Scarecrow is attacked by Croc and disappears . Batman recovers the necessary spores and subdues Croc before returning to the Batcave , but can only synthesize one dose of the antidote before Ivy 's plants breach the cave and destroy his equipment . 
 Batman returns to the botanical gardens and defeats Ivy , halting the rampaging plants . The Joker announces that the preparations for his party are finally complete and Batman travels to the asylum 's visitor center where the Joker 's applauding henchmen welcome him . The Joker reveals he has recaptured Gordon and tries to shoot him with a Titan @-@ filled dart ; Batman leaps to Gordon 's defense and is shot instead . Batman attempts to resist the change , and an upset Joker takes an overdose of Titan , mutating into a massive monster . In a makeshift arena on the building 's roof , the Joker challenges Batman to a fight as Titan @-@ induced monsters in front of news helicopters . Batman refuses to transform , uses the antidote on himself , and defeats the Titan @-@ affected Joker and his henchmen , knocking his nemesis unconscious with an explosive gel @-@ enhanced punch . In the aftermath , those affected by Titan begin to revert to normal , including the Joker — who is restrained and taken into custody as police officers retake the asylum . Batman overhears a call about a crime led by Two @-@ Face in progress and flies back to Gotham City in the Batwing . In a post @-@ credits scene , a crate of Titan formula is shown floating in the ocean near the asylum when a hand surfaces and grabs it . 
 = = Development = = 
 Batman : Arkham Asylum was first announced in August 2008 ; it was developed by British studio Rocksteady Studios under the aegis of Eidos Interactive and Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment . Eidos obtained the rights to make a Batman game in spring 2007 , and approached then little @-@ known Rocksteady after viewing the developer 's prototype . At Eidos ' request , Rocksteady presented their approach to the Batman license , and by May 2007 , they had begun developing the game 's concept , with full production beginning in September . Writer Paul Dini ( Batman : The Animated Series , Detective Comics ) was first approached by DC Comics around late 2007 about the prospect of creating a story for an original Batman video game . Dini found the idea intriguing , believing that few Batman games were based on an original idea , instead being adapted from film or television . DC Comics asked Dini what his approach to writing a new Batman film or graphic novel would be , but one that was designed for gameplay . He later met with the Rocksteady team , where it was decided that Dini 's ideas were in line with what Rocksteady wanted to achieve . By the time Dini joined the project , Rocksteady were investigating the idea of setting the game within Arkham , and had produced preliminary designs depicting it as a huge estate on an island connected to mainland Gotham City by a bridge . The cast had not been finalized , but given the setting it was certain that the Joker would play a large role . The game and story were developed together , with the limitations of mechanics requiring the story to be built around them . The core aim was to make the game engaging enough for players to spend 8 – 10 hours completing it , especially those uninterested in Batman @-@ franchised media . Rocksteady would guide Dini when they thought he was writing too much story or character motivation . 
 Among various Neal Adams and Frank Miller @-@ penned Batman stories , Grant Morrison 's Arkham Asylum : A Serious House on Serious Earth was an inspiration for the game 's design . Producer Nathan <unk> said the narrative and atmosphere of the 2007 game BioShock influenced Arkham Asylum 's design . Director Sefton Hill said the influences of the gadgets and abilities that can be combined and used in different ways in The Legend of Zelda and Metroid . The design team isolated the components that they felt made Batman , and exaggerated these elements . Design ideas which contradicted these facets of the character were dropped , and other elements of Batman , such as his refusal to kill his enemies , were strictly enforced , which provided additional challenges in allowing the player to have complete freedom in the game without transgressing on that fundamental aspect of the character . Arkham Asylum was chosen as the setting because it confined the player to an area containing several enemies , whereas in an open city setting he could receive help , return to the Batcave , or otherwise be able to distance himself from his opponents . 
 The development team wanted to include iconic aspects of the Batman mythos , and decided early on in production to have Conroy , Hamill , and Sorkin reprise their roles in Dini 's Batman : The Animated Series as Batman , the Joker , and Harley Quinn , respectively . Hamill has thousands of lines of dialogue in the game , and Conroy has relatively few in comparison . After seeing character models of the Joker 's Arkham Asylum appearance , Hamill decided to portray the character as dark and gritty while retaining a clownish and playful nature . Although the game features references to plot events in both The Animated Series and Batman comics , the story does not directly follow any singular story or depiction of the character . 
 The game took approximately 21 months to complete ; Rocksteady began development with a team of 40 , which had expanded to around 60 by the game 's completion . Combat was considered one of the greatest challenges in developing the game ; the system went through three iterations . Rocksteady originally developed the game 's combat as a full rhythm action game . It was later set in 2D , which involved colored circles crashing into each other during fights ; the final system was based on this 2D model . Combat was designed to be unique for Batman , and was given a simple control scheme to reflect the ease with which Batman can perform the moves . Arkham Asylum was built on Epic Games ' Unreal Engine 3 . Eidos president Ian Livingstone said one developer spent two years programming Batman 's cape , using over 700 animations and sound effects to make it move realistically . 
 The developers intended to use other Batman characters in the game , but these were removed when it was decided they would not work within the story . For example , Batman 's enemy Mr. Freeze did not fit because the character has different motivations to the Joker . Unlike the Riddler , who is obsessed with proving his superiority over Batman , Mr. Freeze does not hold a personal grudge against Batman , and Mr. Freeze would not care about the other villains ' plans . A garden maze under Poison Ivy 's control was considered as a location ; she could grow it in different directions . In its center , Batman would find the Mad Hatter hosting a tea @-@ party , but the developers decided these ideas would not match the game 's tone . Batman 's vehicles , the Batmobile and Batwing , were considered for inclusion in the game , but developing unique control mechanics and gameplay segments for them would have taken too much time , and compromised its quality ; the vehicles appear in the game , but players cannot control them . 
 Rocksteady began conceiving ideas for a possible sequel , which became Batman : Arkham City , approximately seven months before development of Arkham Asylum was completed . Rocksteady developed ideas for the sequel 's story and setting so the games ' narratives could be effectively connected . A secret room containing hints , blueprints , and concept art for the next game was hidden in the asylum warden 's office in Arkham Asylum . The room remained hidden for six months following the game 's release until Rocksteady revealed its presence . Arkham Asylum 's musical score was composed by Ron Fish and Nick Arundel , who also composed the soundtrack for the sequel , Batman : Arkham City . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 To develop the game 's overall aesthetic , the main aim was to create designs that would combine comic book style with realism . The environmental architecture and characters had to be extravagant enough to represent the Batman universe , but needed realistic texture and detail . The second aim was to recreate the dark , Gothic imagery inherent to the Batman universe , especially Arkham Asylum , so that the structure would feel as insane as those whom it houses . The asylum was considered an ideal location because it can house many of Batman 's foes . 
 Batman 's design was heavily influenced by the work of comic artist Jim Lee , who drew Batman as a strong , muscular character who could believably take part in extreme combat . His black and dark gray costume was based on modern versions , and has military influences and an industrial look . About 13 concept designs were produced before his final appearance took form . Artists avoided film interpretations of the Joker , partly because the developers only had access to the rights to the original Batman license . Alan Moore 's 1988 graphic novel Batman : The Killing Joke influenced the character 's design . Harley Quinn underwent a drastic redesign , removing her black and red full @-@ body outfit and jester 's hat , and replacing them with a costume with design elements from a nurse 's outfit and a schoolgirl 's uniform . WildStorm , Lee 's now @-@ defunct comic book publishing company , produced concept art for the game . 
 Designs for the asylum departed from comic interpretations of a large mansion and instead developed an entire island , with hints of Alcatraz prison , composed of multiple buildings to allow for greater variety and exploration . Each building was designed with a different architectural style to make the facility appear believable and to imbue each location with a history . The medical building was inspired by Victorian architecture and its metalwork structure was intended to inspire feelings of horror . The intensive treatment unit has a Gothic , industrial aesthetic . The catacombs beneath the facility , inspired by early twentieth @-@ century brickwork and Victorian industry , were meant to feel oppressive . The maximum security area was designed to feel claustrophobic and was retrofitted like a bunker , and the Arkham mansion displays a High Gothic style . The designers integrated crooked lines into environmental objects , such as trees and <unk> , where possible . 40 rooms , 34 corridors , 3 exterior areas , and 3 Scarecrow @-@ induced hallucination areas were designed for the game . 
 To bring these areas to life , the level designers produced game mechanic elements using simple room layouts and shapes , while concept artists worked in tandem to create artwork for each location , following the art direction . Environment artists would then build 3D layouts based on those designs . Finding an appropriate color palette for the game world was difficult ; browns and monochromatic colors could depict the desired dark and moody atmosphere , but the developers wanted the aesthetic to resemble the vibrant color schemes of a comic book . To this end , they used saturated colors for in @-@ game lighting . Lighting was an important component of the game , being used to highlight points of interest and to draw the player onward in otherwise boring corridors . To maintain the intended level of detail and allow the game 's console versions to fit into the devices ' memory , each area had to be streamed in and out of memory seamlessly to free up memory for textures and geometry . All of the cutscenes were storyboarded by Rocksteady artists , being visualized in the game engine before the character performances were motion @-@ captured . The design team decided that cutscenes should be used to advance character relationships , and that after each cutscene the player should have had their goal changed or the importance of their actions modified . Priority was given to keeping action scenes under the player 's control rather than showing them in cutscenes . 
 = = Release = = 
 Batman : Arkham Asylum was released for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 in North America on August 25 , 2009 , and on August 28 in Europe and Australia . It was released for Microsoft Windows in North America on September 15 , 2009 , and on September 18 in Europe and Australia . A Game of the Year edition was released on March 26 , 2010 , in Europe and on May 11 in North America . Feral Interactive developed an OS X version , which was released on disc and as a download on November 3 , 2011 . On the Windows version of the game , the developers used an anti @-@ duplication measure that disables Batman 's glide ability and causes other bugs , preventing copied games from progressing beyond a certain point . Although not the first game to implement such countermeasures , Arkham Asylum received media coverage , as this was seen as a novel method of copy protection . 
 A Collector 's Edition containing the game , a 14 @-@ inch ( 36 cm ) replica of Batman 's batarang , a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes DVD , a leather @-@ bound 48 @-@ page book about Arkham 's inmates , and a code to download the " Crime Alley " challenge map was released . Pre @-@ ordering the game at some retailers allowed access to the " Dem Bones " challenge map . The Game of the Year version was initially announced for release only in Europe , Asia , and Australia , but a North American release was later added . The Game of the Year version includes the game , support for TriOviz 3D visual effects , two pairs of themed 3D glasses , and the six released DLC challenge maps — two of which were omitted from the North American version . 
 Batman : Return to Arkham , developed by Virtuos , features remastered versions of Arkham Asylum and Arkham City using the Unreal Engine 4 for the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One . Additionally , both games include all previously released downloadable content , and feature improved graphics , upgraded models and environments , and improvements in the lighting , effects and shaders for both games . Originally intended for release in North America on July 26 , 2016 , and in Europe on July 29 , 2016 , the collection has since been delayed indefinitely in order to give the development team " additional time to deliver a polished Batman Arkham game experience . " 
 = = = Downloadable content = = = 
 In April 2009 , it was announced that the Joker would be a downloadable playable character for use in the game 's challenge maps exclusively for the PlayStation 3 . Additional DLC packs were later released . The Insane Night pack , containing the " Totally Insane " combat and " Nocturnal Hunter " stealth challenge maps , was released on September 17 , 2009 . The " Prey in the Darkness " pack was released on September 23 , 2009 , and contains the " Heart of Darkness " combat and " Hothouse Prey " stealth challenge maps . In North America , the " Prey in the Darkness " pack was released exclusively for the PlayStation 3 . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 A demo version of the game was released via digital download for the PlayStation 3 on August 6 , 2009 , and for Xbox 360 and Microsoft Windows on August 7 . The PlayStation 3 version of Arkham Asylum unlocked a Batcave @-@ themed virtual apartment for players on the social @-@ gaming platform , PlayStation Home . Additionally , North American game retailer GameStop ran a contest which allowed one winner to be rendered in @-@ game as an Arkham inmate . A series of action figures based on character designs from the game were released through Warner Bros. ' outlet DC Direct . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Batman : Arkham Asylum received critical acclaim . Aggregating review websites GameRankings and Metacritic gave the Xbox 360 version 92 @.@ 34 % and 92 / 100 , the PlayStation 3 version 92 @.@ 07 % and 91 / 100 , and the Microsoft Windows version 91 @.@ 89 % and 91 / 100 . The game held the Guinness World Record for " Most Critically Acclaimed Superhero Game Ever " based on an average Metacritic score of 91 @.@ 67 , until it was succeeded by Arkham City . 
 Arkham Asylum was called one of the best comic book superhero games ever made . Edge magazine said it was " by some distance the best superhero game of modern times " , IGN 's Greg Miller called it " the greatest comic book game of all time " , and Eurogamer 's Dan Whitehead called it " the best superhero game bar none " , and wrote that it has " excellent visuals , a compelling story and superb voice acting . " Whitehead also wrote , even without the iconic superhero , it would be a polished and engrossing game featuring compelling story and superb voice acting . PSM3 's Andy Kelly wrote , " Rocksteady have struck the perfect balance of giving you the confident power of a superhero , but with enough weaknesses to make the game challenging ; a remarkable feat of balancing and design " . Wired 's Chris Kohler said that the game 's strength lies in its tight script and masterful acting , making what could be a generic game captivating . 1UP.com 's Thierry Nguyen gave the game an A − , stating that Rocksteady " manages to combine combat , stealth , storytelling , and cartoon voices into the best digital Batman simulator we 've seen to date . " 
 Several reviewers compared Arkham Asylum to other games — including BioShock for its ability to deliver a unique adventure and establish a connection with the game world , and its innovative ideas ; The Legend of Zelda for its adventuring style ; Metroid for its world layout ; and Resident Evil and Tomb Raider for its classic action @-@ adventuring that acts as a true hybrid of brawling , stealth , and platforming . 
 The game world 's design and the game 's attention to detail were well received by critics . Game Informer 's Andrew Reiner said the game 's setting had a taut and mesmerizing atmosphere , and was a place of wonder and inexplicable horror . Miller called it the right mix of creepy and cool , and appreciated the gradual damage reflected on Batman 's suit as the story progressed , but said that pixelated CGI and lip synching issues diminished the presentation . Whitehead said that the impressive animation makes Batman feel alive , but wrote that the world itself was lifeless and lacking in interactive objects . He criticized segments in which character logic was sacrificed for video game tropes , citing repeated use of poison gas and electric floors as obstacles . 
 The combat system was well received for the simplicity of its implementation , allowing players to use it effectively without learning complex combinations of special moves , and the emphasis upon timing and flow to create fluid , graceful , and satisfyingly brutal attacks . Reviewers said that the combat remained challenging with the inclusion of more difficult @-@ to @-@ overcome enemies , and better use of combat was well incentivized without punishing those unable to master it . The design of stealth and the wide variety of methods available to disable enemy opponents were praised . Computer and Video Games ' Andy Robinson wrote that it is a " thinking man 's stealth game " that is the centerpiece of the game , and Edge said that the stealth offering was thrilling . Others wrote about the way in which enemies react with fear to the elimination of their allies , but some reviewers criticized the AI for allowing Batman to easily escape when discovered , and for being oblivious to Batman 's presence . Whitehead said that stealth was not as directly rewarding as combat , citing difficulty in controlling Batman at close quarters and the inconsistent contextual actions . 
 Arkham Asylum 's boss fights were criticized , with many reviewers labeling them as the game 's biggest failing . Reviewers found that the battles often rely on old @-@ fashioned , tedious , and repetitive game tropes that required the player to learn and repeat monotonous routines — some of which , in the case of Bane , had already been employed on lesser enemies — or to confront repetitive attack patterns and one @-@ hit deaths . Reviewers generally agreed that the fights were anti @-@ climactic to their build @-@ up spectacle . The final boss fight with the Joker was singled out for vapid gameplay , a battle with Killer Croc was labeled boring and overly long , and the reviewers said these should not have been in the game . However , the fear toxin @-@ induced hallucination segments of Scarecrow 's battles were almost unanimously praised as some of the game 's best and most cerebral moments for their fourth wall manipulation , subversion of the game 's established narrative and expectations , and meta @-@ textual influences that were compared to the battle against Psycho Mantis in 1998 's Metal Gear Solid , and 2002 's Eternal Darkness . 
 The main voice cast — including Conroy as Batman , Sorkin as Harley Quinn , Valenza as Poison Ivy , and Wingert as Riddler — was well received , but Hamill 's performance received consistent praise , with reviewers commenting upon his excellent inflection and timing on a cackling , maniacal performance that steals the show . Nguyen said that Dini and Hamill 's Joker was the best depiction of the character outside of The Killing Joke and Heath Ledger 's incarnation in The Dark Knight ( 2008 ) . 
 Writer Grant Morrison said the game was the inspiration for his Batman Incorporated comic book . He said he wanted to " capture the feeling of the Batman : Arkham Asylum game ... When I played that game , it was the first time in my life where I actually felt what it is like to be Batman ... We are now the heroes , and we can look through their eyes . " 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Worldwide , the game sold nearly two million units in its first three weeks of release , and had sold 2 @.@ 5 million by the end of September 2009 . According to NPD Group , Batman : Arkham Asylum sold approximately 593 @,@ 000 units in North America during the five tracked days following its release on August 25 . By December 2009 , the PlayStation 3 version of the game had outsold the Xbox 360 version by approximately 10 @,@ 000 units despite multi @-@ platform titles typically selling better on the Xbox 360 at the time . The exclusive content featuring the Joker as a playable character was cited as a possible reason for the success of the PlayStation 3 version . The game took two of the top five spots on the US software chart in its first week of release , and topped the UK all @-@ format chart for two weeks . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 At the 2009 Spike Video Game Awards , Rocksteady Studios won Studio of the Year , while the game received nominations for Best Action Adventure Game , Best Graphics , Best Voice for Hamill and Sorkin , respectively , Best Xbox 360 Game , and Game of the Year . As part of the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences ( AIAS ) 2009 awards , it won Outstanding Achievement awards for Character Performance ( Mark Hamill as the Joker ) , Game Design , and Adapted Story , and was nominated for Adventure Game of the Year , Overall Game of the Year , and Outstanding Achievement awards for Animation , Original Music Composition , and Game Direction . At the 6th British Academy Video Games Awards , it won the awards for Best Game , and Gameplay , and received nominations for Action , Original Score , Story , Use of Audio , Artistic Achievement , and the publicly voted GAME Award of 2009 . It won Best Game Design at the 10th Game Developers Choice Awards , and was nominated for Game of the Year and Best Writing . It was also nominated for Best Sound Editing : Computer Entertainment for the 2010 Golden Reel Awards . According to Metacritic , on all platforms , Arkham Asylum was tied with God of War Collection and Forza Motorsport 3 as the fourth @-@ highest @-@ rated game of 2009 . It was also the highest @-@ rated Microsoft Windows game alongside Dragon Age : Origins and Street Fighter IV , the third @-@ highest @-@ rated Xbox 360 game alongside Forza Motorsport 3 , and the fifth @-@ highest @-@ rated PlayStation 3 game alongside FIFA 10 and Killzone 2 . 
 Batman : Arkham Asylum appeared on several lists of the top video games of 2009 . It was placed at number one by The A.V. Club , number two by CNET , Time and CraveOnline , number three by Complex , IGN UK , Joystiq , and The Daily Telegraph , number four by CBC News and Wired , and number five by Gamasutra and IGN Australia . Giant Bomb named it the 2009 Best Multiplatform Game , GamesRadar labeled it their Game of the Year ahead of Uncharted 2 : Among Thieves , and Eurogamer listed it on their " Games of 2009 " series . GameSpot listed it as having the Best Atmosphere and the Best Use of a Creative License as part of their " Best Games of 2009 " series , and IGN UK named it the Best PC Action Game and Best Xbox 360 story . GameTrailers named the title both Best Action @-@ Adventure Game and Biggest Surprise of 2009 . In 2013 , Eurogamer listed it as the twentieth best game of the contemporary console generation , Game Informer named it the second best superhero game of all time , and GamingBolt listed it as the eighty @-@ ninth greatest game ever made . In 2014 , Empire named it the 28th Greatest Video Game of All Time , behind Arkham City at number 12 , and IGN listed as the twenty @-@ second best game of the console generation . In 2015 , PC Gamer named it the fiftieth best PC game , and IGN listed it as the 91st Top Game of All Time . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Arkham Asylum 's success launched a series of Batman : Arkham sequels , beginning in October 2011 with Batman : Arkham City . Batman : Arkham City , set one year after the events of Arkham Asylum , is the direct sequel to the earlier game . It was developed by Rocksteady Studios , and distributed by Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment . Manipulated by Hugo Strange , Gotham City 's mayor Quincy Sharp closes Arkham Asylum and Blackgate prison , and converts a section of the city 's slums into an open air prison known as Arkham City , to house all of Gotham 's criminals . While a wary Batman watches over the activities in Arkham City , the Joker is dying from his consumption of Titan . The sequel introduces several new characters — including Hugo Strange , Robin , Catwoman , Ra 's al Ghul , and Mr. Freeze — to the series . A limited , six @-@ issue comic series , also titled Batman : Arkham City — bridging the plots of Arkham Asylum and Arkham City — was written by Paul Dini and featured art by Carlos D <unk> . The first issue was released on May 11 , 2011 . A third installment of the Arkham series ( not developed by Rocksteady ) , Batman : Arkham Origins , was released in October 2013 , featuring a story set before the events of Arkham Asylum . A narrative sequel to Arkham City , Batman : Arkham Knight , was released on June 23 , 2015 and is the series ' concluding chapter . 
 = Star Trek : Voyager – Elite Force = 
 Star Trek : Voyager – Elite Force is a first @-@ person shooter video game developed by Raven Software and published by Activision . The game was initially released on September 20 , 2000 for Windows and Mac OS personal computers . Aspyr Media was responsible for porting the game to the Mac OS platform . Elite Force was later ported to the PlayStation 2 console by Pipe Dream Interactive and published by Majesco Entertainment on December 11 , 2001 . 
 The game is set in the Star Trek universe , specifically relating to the fourth Star Trek television series , Star Trek : Voyager . The dates in the game place Elite Force 's plot late in Voyager 's sixth season . The player assumes the role of Ensign Alex Munro , a member of the Hazard Team , a new elite security section created to deal with particularly dangerous and hostile away missions . The game 's plot focuses on the USS Voyager being trapped in a starship graveyard , heavily damaged and under attack from a variety of hostile factions . The Hazard Team is tasked with protecting Voyager as repairs are made , and investigating the cause of their entrapment . 
 Elite Force was one of several Star Trek games announced after Activision secured the license to Star Trek video games from Viacom in 1998 . The game was one of the first to license id Tech 3 , a game engine by id Software used by a number of video games during the early 2000s . Elite Force was a critical success , and is often praised as the first truly successful Star Trek video game , able to appeal to people who were not Star Trek fans . Raven Software released an expansion pack to the game in May 2001 , while Wildstorm adapted the story for a short graphic novel in July 2000 . A sequel developed by Ritual Entertainment , Star Trek : Elite Force II , was published in 2003 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 An example of the first @-@ person shooter genre , Elite Force is based on gameplay conventions shared by multiple other games . The game is focused on story @-@ driven combat within a 3D environment , with all activity viewed as if from the eyes of the game 's protagonist . The player controls the movement of the player character through walking , crouching , jumping or interacting with the environment . The only exception to this is in cut scenes , where the player loses control of the character to a third @-@ person view for scripted events . The player character possesses numerical values for their health and armor , which are displayed on the game 's heads @-@ up display . As the player character takes damage from non @-@ player characters and certain aspects of the environment , both values will decrease ; when the health value reaches zero , the player character will die . Armor lessens the impact to the player character 's health from hostile action , but once depleted the player will be more susceptible to damage . However , both armor and health can be restored by using wall @-@ mounted terminals or from receiving assistance from certain friendly non @-@ player characters such as the Doctor . 
 Elite Force includes an arsenal of Star Trek – themed weapons , such as phasers and <unk> . The weapons vary in power , ammunition consumption and effectiveness in given situations . Usually , the player is equipped with a hand phaser , a low @-@ damage weapon that automatically recharges ammunition , and a phaser compression rifle , a more powerful weapon with an optional sniper mode for long distance kills . Other weapons , acquired as the game progresses , include grenade launchers , stasis weaponry and pulse energy weapons . The player can restock on ammunition by using wall @-@ mounted terminals that dispense weapon energy , or by picking up certain items in the game environment . 
 = = = Single @-@ player = = = 
 The game 's single @-@ player campaign consists of around 30 linear levels , divided up into eight distinct missions . Missions have different objectives , from retrieving a particular item and accessing computer systems , escorting a friendly character through hostile territory , or destroying vital ship and station components . Enemies come in multiple forms in the game , often as Star Trek species such as the Borg and the Klingons . Each group of enemies uses a different means of attacking : most humanoid enemies are armed with weapons similar to the player , and will use cover and squad tactics to attempt to kill the player character . The Borg differ from this in that , instead of using squad tactics , they eventually adapt their personal energy shields to most of the player 's weapons , slowly rendering the player 's attacks useless as they advance . Other enemies may attempt to swarm the player and eliminate them with melee attacks . 
 The player is usually accompanied by one or more friendly non @-@ player characters , who will follow the player and provide assistance in combat against enemies . As they are often key to the story , friendly characters must not be killed in combat except during scripted events . In between combat missions , the player can move around the USS Voyager and interact with other members of its crew , often performing non @-@ combat tasks to progress the story . 
 = = = Multiplayer = = = 
 Elite Force was originally released with a 32 @-@ player multiplayer element , in which participants use the weaponry and characters from the single @-@ player game to compete in several different game modes . Referred to as a " <unk> " , the multiplayer is themed as though it were a holodeck experience . Players can compete against other players in local area network and Internet games , or play against bots , opponents that use the game 's artificial intelligence . Each player can choose one of a variety of Star Trek characters as their aesthetic player character in multiplayer . The initial release contained multiplayer game modes shared by other multiplayer games in the genre . The standard " deathmatch " game mode involves each player moving around a level , collecting weaponry and killing the other players , with the first to reach a particular amount of kills winning . As player characters are killed , they respawn into the game after a short time . " Team deathmatch " follows the same principle , albeit grouping the players into teams to do so . Capture the flag involves two teams of players attempting to retrieve a flag within the other team 's base and returning it to their own to score . 
 The Elite Force expansion pack added an additional five @-@ game types . In an " assimilation " match , one team plays as Borg and must attempt to assimilate the other team ; if a player is assimilated , they join the Borg team , gradually reducing the amount of players on the other team . The " action hero " mode gives one player more weapons , health , and overall power than every other player , but when an opposing player kills this player they take these advantages . A further game type known as " elimination " is a deathmatch game except that players can 't respawn . As player characters are killed , they sit out the remainder of the round until only one player is left alive . The " disintegration " mode gives every player a slow firing semi @-@ automatic phaser rifle that will kill and vaporize an opposing player in one shot , thus requiring shots to be carefully aimed to ensure they hit . The final game mode , called " specialties , " adds a class @-@ based mode for team deathmatch and capture the flag modes , giving players the option to choose from one of six combat roles , such as a sniper , medic or infiltrator , each with different weapons , speeds and abilities . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Elite Force is based on the fourth Star Trek television series , Star Trek : Voyager . The series follows the adventures of the Starfleet vessel USS Voyager , which is stranded by an enigmatic alien power in the Delta Quadrant of the Milky Way galaxy . 70 @,@ 000 light @-@ years from Federation space , the series shows Voyager 's effort to make the 75 @-@ year journey home . The stardate of <unk> @.@ 7 given in the game places Elite Force in the latter parts of the sixth season of Star Trek : Voyager , in the year <unk> . Significant parts of the game are set on Voyager itself , although much of the game takes place on away missions to other ships and space stations . The player interacts with several races from the series , such as the Borg , Hirogen and Malon , as well as new species created solely for the game . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Elite Force incorporates a large cast of characters , both original characters created for the game and characters from the television series . All nine of the core Voyager characters in the sixth season appear , such as Captain Kathryn Janeway and Lieutenant Commander Tuvok , each voiced by the appropriate cast member from the television series . The only exception to this is the character of Seven of Nine , who was voiced by Joan Buddenhagen in the initial release ; however , actress Jeri Ryan retroactively replaced Buddenhagen 's voice through a later patch and the expansion pack . The player takes on the role of Ensign Alex Munro ; depending on the player 's choice of gender , Alex is short for either Alexander or Alexandria . Munro is the second in command of an elite security force , the Hazard Team , a special unit created by Tuvok . Munro reports to Lieutenant Les Foster , the team 's commanding officer . Although fourteen characters make up the Hazard Team , the player only interacts consistently with a limited number of these characters , among them <unk> Murphy , the team 's scout and sharpshooter , Austin Chang , a <unk> and good friend of Munro 's , and Kendrick <unk> , a boisterous heavy weapons specialist . In addition , two core members of the Hazard Team are minor characters from the television series itself ; Juliet <unk> , the team 's combat medic and a telepath , is seen in the episode " Counterpoint " , while Chell , the squad 's technician , is an apprehensive Bolian character who appears in several Voyager episodes . Most character development , such as Munro 's growing relationship with Murphy , takes place between missions , when the player has the chance to explore areas of the ship and interact with the crew . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 The game opens with the Hazard Team conducting a holodeck training exercise set on a Borg ship ; however , the team fails the exercise as most get captured by the Borg , and Munro accidentally destroys the ship while trying to rescue them . Following the termination of the exercise , Voyager is attacked by an unidentified ship . Voyager manages to destroy the ship , but takes heavy damage in the battle . The hostile ship explodes , emitting a shockwave that teleports the now – crippled Voyager to an unknown location , surrounded by derelict ships . As the Voyager crew attempts repairs , the ship is boarded by scavengers , who steal some of Voyager 's cargo supplies before being driven off . In an effort to establish where Voyager is , the Hazard Team is sent to a derelict ship where power is still functioning to download the derelict 's database . The mission goes awry when aliens begin transporting in and attacking the team ; however , the aliens , identifying themselves as Etherians , eventually manage to communicate with the team , and the ordeal is waved off as a misunderstanding , allowing the Hazard Team to access the <unk> database . 
 Through the Etherians , Voyager learns of an energy field being projected by a gigantic space station , the Forge , which is draining power and preventing repairs from being completed . To counteract the effects of the field , chief engineer B 'Elanna Torres suggests the use of a rare substance called Isodesium , and the Hazard Team is sent on a stealth mission to the scavenger base to steal their supplies of Isodesium . However , the mission is a disaster : despite acquiring the Isodesium , one crewman is briefly captured and another team member is critically injured . As the team attempts to extract , Borg drones transport into the extraction point , killing another team member , capturing Lieutenant Foster and taking the Isodesium . In Foster 's absence , Munro is made the team leader . Along with Seven of Nine , the team transports to the Borg cube to retrieve the Isodesium . While on the cube , Munro is given the chance to rescue Foster from assimilation by the Borg . Matters are complicated when the Borg corner the team , leveraging their freedom and the Isodesium for assistance against a number of Species 8472 on board , a race highly resistant to the Borg . Although successful , the Borg attempt to assimilate the team ; anticipating a double cross , however , Munro has Chang detonate an explosive in a sensitive part of the cube and the team escapes with the Isodesium in the chaos . 
 As Voyager installs the Isodesium , a ship is sent from the Forge to tear Voyager apart for resources . Tuvok leads the Hazard Team to a nearby derelict dreadnought gunship to use the gunship 's weaponry to destroy the incoming ship , but is only successful in disabling it as it attaches to Voyager . Voyager is consequently swarmed by crab @-@ like aliens intent on carrying off crew and cargo , although the crew manages to eliminate these aliens . Munro prompts the captain to counterattack , in order to destroy the dampening field projected by the station . The Hazard Team uses the Forge 's ship to infiltrate the Forge and disable its defensive systems , allowing the Voyager crew to attack using shuttlecraft ; however , Crewman <unk> is killed while waiting for Voyager 's reinforcements . The Forge 's power core is destroyed , thereby dropping the dampening field . Munro , however , learns of the species behind the Forge , the Vohrsoth , and the station 's true purpose : to harvest the genetic features of those trapped by the Forge to create an army designed for conquering the galaxy . Munro disobeys orders to ensure the Vohrsoth cannot recreate the Forge and kills the Vohrsoth commander . With power restored , Voyager attacks the Forge and destroys the station , beaming Munro off in the last few moments . Voyager and other active ships in the area are freed , and Munro is promoted to lieutenant . 
 = = Development = = 
 Publisher Activision acquired the rights to produce Star Trek video games from Viacom in September 1998 . With Viacom leaving the video game industry , Activision 's licensing agreement allowed the publisher to hold the rights to Star Trek video games for ten years . Elite Force was one of several Star Trek games announced shortly afterward . Developed by Raven Software , a company whose past projects included the first @-@ person shooters Heretic and Soldier of Fortune , Elite Force was developed using technology created by id Software . Elite Force was one of the first games to license id Tech 3 , the game engine which debuted with Quake III : Arena . During late 1999 and early 2000 , Raven revealed several screenshots and discussed the premise of the game , with Activision setting a release date for the second quarter of 2000 . Activision presented a demonstration of Elite Force at the E3 convention in May 2000 , alongside Away Team and Bridge Commander . In the months following the E3 convention , the biographies of several of the game 's key characters were released as promotional material . On August 29 , 2000 , Activision announced that Raven Software had completed development on Elite Force , stating that the game would be released later in September . Elite Force was consequently published on September 20 , 2000 . Raven continued to support the game post @-@ release , with the addition of patches and bonus content for the game 's multiplayer mode . 
 In a June 2000 interview , Raven Software co @-@ founder Brian Raffel stated that one of the objectives of the game was to make the player feel " like [ they 're ] part of a Voyager episode " . To this end , Elite Force extensively uses scripted sequences to interact with non @-@ player characters , convey plot information and build up the immersion in the game 's setting , with Valve Corporation 's first @-@ person shooter title Half @-@ Life cited as a direct inspiration . However , in contrast to Half @-@ Life , the player is given the ability to influence the outcome of some scripted sequences , which can often involve the injury or death of other characters , sometimes with immediate or delayed repercussions depending on the player 's actions . Over fifty in @-@ game cut scenes were produced for Elite Force , in addition to computer @-@ generated cinematics . In addition , large portions of the USS Voyager were recreated from the series to enhance the player 's immersion in the Star Trek setting . 
 = = Versions and sequels = = 
 = = = Graphic novel = = = 
 Prior to the release of Elite Force , Wildstorm published a graphic novel based on Raven Software 's story . The graphic novel was released in July 2000 as part of a Star Trek : Voyager graphic novel series produced by Wildstorm , written by British comic book authors Dan Abnett and Andy Lanning . The book 's artwork was produced by Jeffrey Moy and W.C. <unk> . The book follows a broadly similar storyline to that of the game , predominantly focusing on USS Voyager being trapped by the Forge , which is controlled by an ancient race , the <unk> , for the purpose of creating an army to conquer the galaxy . The Elite Force graphic novel focuses on a limited number of the Hazard Team , and does not expand on the plot points created by the Etherians and the scavengers in the game , instead using the Borg to fill in these roles . 
 = = = PS2 port = = = 
 The development of a PlayStation 2 version of Elite Force was announced in late 2000 . Whereas the original version of Elite Force had been published by Activision and developed by Raven Software , the PlayStation 2 version was published by Majesco Entertainment and developed by their in @-@ house studio , Pipe Dream Interactive . Elite Force was to be the second PlayStation 2 project undertaken by Majesco . The PlayStation 2 version of the game includes most of the same content as the computer version of the game , albeit that the game 's graphics was simplified slightly for the console . Due to the lack of online support for the PlayStation 2 , the port only allows for four players to compete in a multiplayer game . Pipe Dream paid particular attention to adjusting the controls of the game to suit the PlayStation 2 's gamepad , introducing an auto @-@ aim feature to assist the player . The first screenshots of the game were released in March 2001 , and the game was released on December 11 , 2001 . 
 = = = Expansion Pack for PC = = = 
 An expansion pack to the computer version of Elite Force was announced by Activision in February 2001 . The expansion pack does not add new campaign content in the conventional sense , rather adding a " Virtual Voyager " mode to the game , allowing the player to explore ten more decks of the ship . Within these ten levels , the player can interact with a variety of characters , collect secret items and operate various ship functions such as using replicators , reading characters ' personal logs and accessing the ship 's computer files . Two new combat campaigns are added , integrated as holodeck programs ; the first revolves around Tom Paris ' black @-@ and @-@ white Captain Proton hobby , while the second is based around an infiltration mission into a Klingon base . In addition , five new multiplayer modes were introduced . Development was completed on May 5 , 2001 , and the expansion pack was released on May 16 , 2001 . With ratings of 59 percent and 62 percent on the aggregator sites Game Rankings and Metacritic , respectively , the expansion did not enjoy the critical acclaim of the original material . While the pack was considered to maintain its predecessor 's production values , it was thought to lack the focus and breadth of the original game . As well as updating the original to the latest version , the expansion pack also replaced Joan Buddenhagen 's Seven of Nine character voice with that of Jeri Ryan . 
 = = = Elite Force II = = = 
 Towards the end of March 2002 , rumors were reported that a sequel to Elite Force was in development . Activision confirmed these rumors at the beginning of April , officially announcing Star Trek : Elite Force II on April 4 , 2002 . The game was the last Star Trek title to be developed under Activision 's supervision , following a dispute with Star Trek licensing holder Viacom , and was produced by Ritual Entertainment . Like Elite Force , Elite Force II was developed on the id Tech 3 game engine , one of the last games to do so . Most of the core Hazard Team characters return in Elite Force II , this time set on the USS Enterprise @-@ E following the events of the tenth film , Star Trek : Nemesis . Elite Force II was released in June 2003 to favorable reviews from critics , although with ratings of 80 percent and 78 percent on the review aggregator sites Game Rankings and Metacritic , it was not as successful as its predecessor . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Elite Force was a critical success , scoring 86 percent on the review aggregator sites Metacritic and Game Rankings . Although sales figures for Elite Force have not been released , the game 's sales were reported to have significantly contributed to Activision 's revenues for the second quarter of 2000 . Praise was bestowed on the game 's story , level design , gameplay and graphics , although criticisms focused on the perceived short length of the game 's single @-@ player campaign . In addition , Elite Force was recipient to several Editor 's Choice commendations from individual publications . 
 A number of reviews praised Elite Force 's gameplay and level design . The battles were described by GameSpot as " particularly intense " , enhanced by friendly non @-@ player characters being " surprisingly responsive " in combat , giving the player the sense that they are " not doing all the fighting by [ themselves ] " . While GameSpy voiced the view that Elite Force does not deviate radically from other games in the genre , it stated that " what it does do , it does extremely well " . Admiring the game 's pacing , GameSpy noted that the use of periods with character interaction rather than combat helped prevent the game becoming a " continuous onslaught " and allowed the story to flow smoothly , a point echoed by GameSpot . However , both GameSpot and GameSpy were critical of the game 's artificial intelligence in some circumstances , leading friendly characters to get in the way of the player during firefights . IGN was impressed with the variety of gameplay , from finding solutions to problems in coordination with other characters , engaging in stealth missions and pursuing a wide selection of objectives within the individual missions . Several reviewers were complimentary towards the design of the weapons in the game , commenting that they were powerful and fun to use as well as fitting for the Star Trek theme . 
 The game 's graphics were thought to be very good , using the id Tech 3 engine effectively . Describing the graphics as superb , Game Revolution commented that " from detailed weapons to terrific lighting effects to smooth character animation , everything just looks great " . Eurogamer commented that the characters were " very well done " on the engine , although Allgame felt that the character models for the original Voyager cast were " just a little off " . Other reviewers were equally impressed ; IGN described the graphics as " fantastic " while GameSpy commented that " in each environment it 's obvious that the artists were limited only by their imaginations " . 
 Elite Force 's attention to immersing the player within the Star Trek universe was praised as one of the stronger points of the game ; GamePro suggested that even people who were not fans of the franchise " will marvel at the amount of detail in the ships and characters " , further praising the game 's " faithful " recreation of key sets of the USS Voyager in the TV series . Many reviewers were positive towards the game 's story , GameSpy suggesting that the plot " really draws you in " , while IGN praised the story as one in stark contrast to many of the poorly produced storylines used in the TV series . However , many reviewers felt that the game 's single @-@ player campaign was too short , while others felt the game 's closing levels were disappointing . 
 Due to shared technology and similar gameplay conventions , critics often compared Elite Force 's multiplayer to that in Quake III : Arena , with varied opinions . For their part , Raven Software stated that so little had been fundamentally changed that the multiplayer could almost be labeled as a modification of Quake III . Game Revolution commented that the multiplayer felt more refined than that in Quake III and innovative in its attempt to mimic a holodeck , and while Eurogamer agreed with the latter , criticisms were directed towards the gameplay seeming " very slow and unexciting " . However , other reviewers disagreed ; IGN described the multiplayer as " a solid experience " , and GamePro expressed that it helped compensate for the short length of the single @-@ player campaign . 
 There was a consensus amongst reviewers that Elite Force was the first truly successful Star Trek game , standing out from past titles deemed to be mediocre in quality and design . Game Revolution stated that Elite Force managed to " fight off the curse which until now has plagued most Star Trek action games " , while IGN enthusiastically proclaimed " Trekkies , rejoice ! You 've finally got something to be proud of " . GamePro further commented that " you don 't even have to be a full @-@ fledged Trekker to appreciate the gaming goodness that Elite Force has to offer " . GameSpot put Elite Force 's success down to the influence of Half @-@ Life and its expansion Opposing Force , noting that the influence of these games is " evident in Elite Force 's level design " . GameSpy closed its review by putting Elite Force as one of the year 's best first @-@ person shooters , and " almost certainly the best Star Trek game period , a franchise infamous for its string of bad titles " . Likewise , PC Gamer UK commended the game as " the best Star Trek game ever , and a first @-@ rate FPS in its own right " . 
 Although the original PC version of Elite Force gained critical acclaim , the 2001 PlayStation 2 port received a more negative reception . Majesco 's port of the game garnered mediocre reviews , holding scores of 54 percent and 52 percent on Game Rankings and Metacritic respectively . While the level design , story and atmosphere were praised , critics were negative towards what was seen to be a poorly performed port , with complaints focused on difficult controls , graphical problems and frame rate issues . In addition , the artificial intelligence was deemed to be significantly worse than the earlier PC incarnation of the game . Several reviews suggested that Majesco had simply not put effort into the port , resulting in a level of quality behind that which was expected of PlayStation 2 games at the time . 
 = Darius Charles = 
 Wesley Darius Donald Charles ( born 10 December 1987 ) , known as Darius Charles , is an English professional footballer who plays as a defender for League One club AFC Wimbledon . 
 Charles started his career after progressing through the Brentford youth system and he made his first @-@ team debut in 2005 . He was loaned out by Brentford on seven occasions and he joined the last of these , Ebbsfleet United , permanently in 2009 in a historic transfer . Six months later , a proposed transfer to York City fell through , after he decided against moving to the city . He spent another season with Ebbsfleet before signing for Stevenage in 2010 . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Brentford = = = 
 Charles first played football aged 11 while at school , for Greenford Celtic . He later played for Drayton Manor before signing for and graduating from the Centre of Excellence at Brentford . He made his first @-@ team debut as a left midfielder in a 2 – 1 victory over Hull City on 7 May 2005 ; the final day of the 2004 – 05 season . He made his first appearance of the 2005 – 06 season in the Football League Trophy against Oxford United , which finished as a 1 – 1 draw after extra time and a 4 – 3 defeat in a penalty shoot @-@ out , while Charles played as a left @-@ back . His first league appearance of the season came as an 88th minute substitute in a 1 – 1 draw with Chesterfield on 10 December 2005 . He went on to play as a 32nd @-@ minute substitute in a 3 – 3 draw with Bradford City on 2 January 2006 , which proved to be his final appearance of the season for Brentford , which he finished with three appearances . He was loaned out to Conference South team Thurrock on 3 February 2006 , where he made one appearance , in a 1 – 0 defeat to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . He was subsequently sent out to Yeading on a work experience deal on 16 March 2006 , and he made his debut in a 2 – 1 defeat to Eastbourne Borough , before finishing the loan spell with six appearances . Charles signed a professional contract with Brentford on 27 June 2006 . 
 After having made nine appearances for Brentford during the 2006 – 07 season , he signed for Staines Town of the Isthmian League Premier Division on a one @-@ month loan on 16 October 2006 . He made two appearances for Staines before returning to Brentford in November 2006 . He joined Conference National team Crawley Town on loan on 9 February 2007 until the end of April . He made his debut a day later after coming on as a 72nd @-@ minute substitute in a 2 – 2 draw with St Albans City . He finished the loan spell with six appearances . He played for Brentford on five further occasions , which included scoring the winning goal in the 89th minute of a 4 – 3 victory over Port Vale , and he finished the season with 19 Brentford appearances . Brentford took up their option for his contract to be extended for another season in May 2007 , before he signed a new two @-@ year contract with the option of another year with the club in June . He signed for Sutton United of the Conference South on an initial three @-@ month loan on 2 August 2007 . He made his debut in a 1 – 0 defeat to Basingstoke Town . He was recalled by Brentford in September 2007 , after making seven appearances for Sutton . He made his first appearance for Brentford of the 2007 – 08 season in a 2 – 0 victory over Chester City on 22 September 2007 . 
 = = = Ebbsfleet United = = = 
 He joined Conference Premier team Ebbsfleet United on loan until the end of the season on 21 March 2008 , having made 18 appearances for Brentford up to that point in the 2007 – 08 season . Charles made his Ebbsfleet debut the following day as a 78th @-@ minute substitute in a 3 – 1 defeat to Stevenage Borough . He started in the following match , a 2 – 1 victory over Cambridge United , and he finished the loan spell with nine appearances . He made one more appearance for Brentford in 2007 – 08 , in a 1 – 0 away defeat to Stockport County on 3 May 2008 , finishing the season with 19 appearances for the club . 
 Charles re @-@ signed for Ebbsfleet after joining on loan for the 2008 – 09 season on 21 June . He fouled Simon Brown to concede a penalty kick against Wrexham on 13 September 2008 , which was scored by Brown , as Ebbsfleet lost 3 – 2 . He was sent off for a second bookable offence late into a 1 – 0 defeat to Histon on 6 October 2008 . After his Brentford contract was cancelled he moved to Ebbsfleet permanently on 29 January 2009 , after the owners of Ebbsfleet , <unk> , ratified a compensation fee of £ 25 @,@ 000 , making this the first transfer in football history to be decided by a group of members . He finished the season with 44 appearances and was named Ebbsfleet 's Player of the Year . 
 Conference Premier rivals York City made a £ 10 @,@ 000 bid for Charles in June , which was subsequently rejected , with <unk> members voting against the offer with over a 98 % majority . Following this , York manager Martin Foyle said it was unlikely they would increase their offer for Charles . Ebbsfleet later agreed to sell Charles and striker Michael Gash for a combined fee of £ 80 @,@ 000 to an unnamed club , which was revealed to be York and he was reported to have signed on 29 June 2009 . However , the deal eventually fell through after Charles decided against joining the club as he did not want to relocate to York . Shortly after Ebbsfleet received an enquiry about him from an unnamed League Two club , although nothing came of this interest . He later became Ebbsfleet captain and was sent off for dissent in a 1 – 0 defeat to Tamworth on 21 November 2009 . He made 42 appearances for Ebbsfleet during the 2009 – 10 as they were relegated into the Conference South . 
 = = = Stevenage = = = 
 Charles turned down a new contract with Ebbsfleet to sign for newly promoted League Two team Stevenage on a two @-@ year contract for a compensation fee on 18 May 2010 . He made his Stevenage debut in the club 's 3 – 1 home victory against Stockport , playing 78 minutes of the match . The following week , he started against Aldershot Town , but was taken off after 38 minutes after struggling with injury . Charles returned to the starting eleven on 18 September 2010 , starting in a 0 – 0 draw against Torquay United , Stevenage 's first clean sheet of the season . He scored his first goal for the club in Stevenage 's 1 – 1 draw with Milton Keynes Dons in an FA Cup first round replay on November 2010 . Charles ' goal came in the fifth minute of stoppage time , taking the game to extra time and then to a penalty shoot @-@ out , which Stevenage won 7 – 6 . Charles received a straight red card for a professional foul on John Johnson in Stevenage 's 1 – 0 home loss to Northampton Town on 11 December 2010 , just ten minutes after coming on as a substitute . He scored his second goal for Stevenage in the club 's fourth round FA Cup tie against Championship side Reading , cutting inside and curling the ball past the outstretched arm of Adam Federici to restore parity in a game that Stevenage went on to lose 2 – 1 . Charles scored his first league goal of the 2010 – 11 season with a shot from 12 yards in Stevenage 's 2 – 1 home win against Bradford City on 2 April 2011 . He provided the assist for Joel Byrom 's goal after flicking a right @-@ wing cross in Stevenage 's 2 – 0 play @-@ off victory over Accrington Stanley , a game in which he also hit the crossbar with a strike from 30 yards out . Charles started upfront for Stevenage in the 2011 League Two play @-@ off Final , played at Old Trafford on 28 May 2011 . Charles ' pass through to John Mousinho resulted in the only goal of the game , as a 1 – 0 victory over Torquay United meant Stevenage were promoted into League One . He played 33 games for Stevenage during the 2010 – 11 season , scoring four goals . 
 After starting in both of Stevenage 's opening fixtures of the 2011 – 12 campaign , Charles signed a contract extension on 11 August 2011 , keeping him contracted to the club until 2013 . Two days later , Charles scored his first goal of the season with a close range header in a 1 – 1 draw away at Chesterfield . Charles ' appearances were sporadic throughout the remainder of 2011 , with the player suffering from a knee injury . He made his first start in nearly two months in Stevenage 's 1 – 0 away victory against Reading at the Madejski Stadium in the FA Cup on 7 January 2012 , with Charles scoring the winning goal in the first @-@ half with a finish from the edge of the area . Charles ' season ended prematurely after he suffered a hamstring injury in Stevenage 's 1 – 1 draw with Wycombe Wanderers on 31 March 2012 , with the injury ruling him out of action for up to six weeks . He made 34 appearances during the campaign , scoring five times . 
 Ahead of the 2012 – 13 season , Charles signed a new two @-@ year contract with the club . He started in the club 's first game of the campaign , a 3 – 1 home win over AFC Wimbledon in the League Cup , playing the whole game at left @-@ back . He scored his first goal of the season in a 1 – 1 draw against Shrewsbury Town on 1 September 2012 , after cutting in from the wing to strike into the top corner to restore parity in the match . It turned out to be his only goal of the season as Charles played most of the season at left @-@ back , making 41 appearances during the campaign . With a year remaining on his current deal , Charles ' contract was extended for a further year in June 2013 , keeping him contracted to the club until the summer of 2015 . He made a goalscoring start to the 2013 – 14 campaign , scoring after pouncing on a loose ball in a 4 – 3 home defeat to Oldham Athletic on the opening day of the season . 
 = = = Burton Albion = = = 
 Charles signed for newly promoted League One club Burton Albion on a one @-@ year contract on 19 June 2015 . Having failed to appear for Burton , he joined League Two club AFC Wimbledon on loan until the end of 2015 – 16 on 17 March 2016 . Charles started for AFC Wimbledon as they beat Plymouth Argyle 2 – 0 at Wembley Stadium in the 2016 League Two play @-@ off Final , meaning they were promoted into League One for the first time . 
 = = = AFC Wimbledon = = = 
 On 31 May 2016 , Charles signed for AFC Wimbledon permanently after a successful loan spell at the club . 
 = = International career = = 
 Charles was named in the England C team , who represent England at non @-@ League level , in May 2009 , for the final of the 2007 – 09 International Challenge Trophy against Belgium . He started the match to make his debut for England and they were defeated 1 – 0 . He was called up to the team for a friendly against the Poland Olympic team in November , and he started the game as England won 2 – 1 . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Charles ' preferred position is centre @-@ back , although he can also play as a left @-@ back , left midfielder or centre @-@ forward . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Charles was born in Ealing , London . His footballing hero when growing up was Ronaldo , and this was because he could " change any game with one bit of genius " . He supports Manchester United , and states that the 1999 UEFA Champions League Final between Manchester United and Bayern Munich was the best match he has ever watched . Charles ' ex @-@ partner was pregnant as of July 2009 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of match played 30 May 2016 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Stevenage 
 League Two play @-@ offs : 2010 – 11 
 AFC Wimbledon 
 League Two play @-@ offs : 2015 – 16 
 Individual 
 Ebbsfleet United Player of the Year : 2008 – 09 
 = The Boat Race 1897 = 
 The 54th Boat Race took place on 3 April 1897 . The Boat Race is an annual side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the previous year 's race . The crews were almost evenly matched weight @-@ wise , Oxford marginally the heavier , whose crew consisted almost entirely of veterans of the event . In a race umpired by former rower Frank Willan , Oxford won by two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 19 minutes 12 seconds , the victory taking the overall record to 31 – 22 in their favour . It was Oxford 's eighth consecutive victory and the third fastest winning time in the history of the event . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the boat clubs of University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities , as of 2014 it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having beaten Cambridge by two @-@ fifths of a length in the previous year 's race , and held the overall lead , with 30 victories to Cambridge 's 22 . 
 Oxford were coached by G. C. Bourne who had rowed for Oxford in the 1882 and 1883 races , William Fletcher , who rowed for Oxford in the 1890 , 1891 , 1892 and 1893 races and Douglas McLean ( an Oxford Blue five times between 1883 and 1887 ) . There is no record of who coached the Cambridge crew . Oxford were very quick , and set a full course record ( on the ebb tide ) of 18 minutes and 27 seconds two weeks before the race . Conversely , according to author and former rower George Drinkwater , Cambridge " never fulfilled its early promise ... always slow into the water . " The umpire for the race for the ninth year in a row was Frank Willan who won the event four consecutive times , rowing for Oxford in the 1866 , 1867 , 1868 and 1869 races . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 12 st 6 @.@ 25 lb ( 78 @.@ 8 kg ) , 0 @.@ 875 pounds ( 0 @.@ 4 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . The Cambridge boat included four former Blues in their number five William Augustus Bieber who was participating in his third Boat Race . Five of the Light Blues were studying at Trinity Hall . Their number four , American rower Benjamin Hunting Howell , was the only participant in the race registered as non @-@ British , hailing from the New York . All but one of Oxford 's crew had rowed in the event prior to 1897 , only G. O. C. Edwards was new to the race . Eight of the nine members of the Dark Blue crew were educated at Eton College ; four of their crew were studying at New College . George Drinkwater , former Oxford rower and author stated " this year saw the finest Oxford crew that has ever rowed " . 
 = = Race = = 
 As a result of their impressive performances during the build up to the race , Oxford were clear favourites to win . Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing the Surrey side of the river to Oxford . The race was started at 2 : 24 p.m. in a light breeze from the east on a favourable tide . The Light Blues made the quicker start , with stroke William James Fernie taking his crew off at 41 strokes per minute . Within a quarter of a mile , Cambridge held a half @-@ length lead but the Dark Blues began to draw back into contention and took the lead just before Craven Cottage . 
 A spurt at the Mile Post from the Light Blues kept them in touch but Oxford rowed away from them , taking a clear water advantage by Hammersmith Bridge , effectively ending the contest . Oxford extended their lead " as they liked " and passed the finishing post two and a half lengths clear of Cambridge , in a winning time of 19 minutes 12 seconds . It was Oxford 's eighth consecutive victory and was , at the time , the third fastest winning time in the history of the event . It took the overall record to 31 – 22 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = Coltrane for Lovers = 
 Coltrane for Lovers is a posthumous compilation album by American jazz musician John Coltrane , released on January 23 , 2001 , by Impulse ! Records . Its tracks were recorded during December 1961 to April 1963 at engineer Rudy Van Gelder 's recording studio in Englewood Cliffs , New Jersey . The first in the Verve for Lovers series by Verve Records , the album contains eleven of Coltrane 's romantic ballads recorded during his early years with Impulse ! Records . The songs feature Coltrane 's classic quartet and collaborations with vocalist Johnny Hartman and pianist Duke Ellington . 
 The recordings compiled for Coltrane for Lovers initially received criticism for Coltrane 's stylistic move from complex jazz compositions of the free jazz form to a simplistic formula of ballads and blues . Following the initial controversy , the album 's recordings gained a legacy as one of Coltrane 's most popular recordings and significant in the genre of romantic jazz . The tracks were compiled by producer Richard Seidel and remastering engineer was Allan Tucker at Foothill Digital , New York City . 
 Coltrane for Lovers was issued 33 years after Coltrane 's death and nearly 40 years after the original recording dates . The album peaked at number 5 on the Top Jazz Albums chart and received generally positive reviews from most music critics , despite some criticism from writers who viewed it as a cash @-@ in compilation from the release 's label . The album was later compiled , along with other For Lovers titles , onto the box set The Complete Verve for Lovers Collection . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Shortly before completing his contract with Atlantic in May 1961 , John Coltrane joined the newly formed Impulse ! label , with whom the " Classic Quartet " would record . It is generally assumed that the clinching reason Coltrane signed with Impulse ! was that it would enable him to work again with recording engineer Rudy Van Gelder , who had taped his Prestige sessions , as well as Blue Train . It was at Van Gelder 's new studio in Englewood Cliffs , New Jersey that Coltrane would record most of his records for the label . 
 During this period of Coltrane 's recording career , critics and fans were fiercely divided in their estimation of Coltrane , who had radically altered his style from bebop to the modal and free jazz styles , as featured on Coltrane ( 1962 ) , his first studio project for the Impulse ! label . John Tynan of Down Beat magazine went so far as to call his playing " anti @-@ jazz . " In the midst of this controversy , Coltrane decided to release his next three albums in order to improve the critical perception of himself . In an interview with music journalist Gene Lees , Coltrane was asked of his musical and stylistic change from modal and free jazz to more simplistic forms and standards . He responded by stating " Variety " . 
 John Coltrane 's primary record producer , Bob Thiele , who had worked with Coltrane on his previous albums Live ! at the Village Vanguard ( 1961 ) and Coltrane ( 1962 ) , acknowledged that the next three Coltrane albums to be released were to be recorded at his behest and as ballad @-@ themed to quiet the negative criticism of Coltrane 's more diverse playing . The material chosen for Coltrane 's next records would be suited for more slow @-@ tempo , smooth and romantic playing , in contrast to Coltrane 's forceful , aggressive style that had dominated his previously issued recordings , and which had led to reviewers describing his playing as " angry " . The recordings featured on Coltrane for Lovers were recorded between December 1961 and April 1963 , during his early years with Impulse ! Records . 
 = = Composition = = 
 As Bob Thiele intended , the next of Coltrane 's releases featured the hard bop form of playing , incorporating influences from rhythm and blues , gospel music , and the blues , especially with the saxophone and piano , and <unk> @-@ ahead ballads and standards . Ballads , recorded in late 1961 and 1962 , was at first criticized as predictable and too simple after the aggressiveness Coltrane displayed on his previous recordings , but was later reevaluated favorably , by some as a masterpiece . On Duke Ellington and John Coltrane , Ellington " sat in " with the John Coltrane Quartet for a set dominated by the pianist 's songs . Some performances had Ellington 's usual sidemen , bassist Aaron Bell and drummer Sam <unk> , replacing Jimmy Garrison and Elvin Jones in the group . 
 Recording for the collaboration LP John Coltrane and Johnny Hartman ( 1963 ) found the " classic quartet " backing up singer Hartman on ballad standards . Rolling Stone magazine later described the album as " ... one of Coltrane 's least innovative records , but impeccably dignified and elegant " , and music critic Richard S. Ginell commented by saying that " Coltrane 's eloquence and the warm , masculine baritone of Hartman can still break your heart . " Renowned writer and poet Al Young wrote of the album 's most well @-@ known recording , " My One and Only Love " , and interpretation of the song by Coltrane and Hartman : 
 Shortly after the release of his ballad @-@ oriented albums , Coltrane returned to a more experimental phase , recording Impressions ( 1963 ) and his magnum opus A Love Supreme ( 1965 ) . In spite of this , the previous serious of ballad @-@ oriented recordings served in helping increase Coltrane 's legacy and influence on romantic jazz . 
 = = Release = = 
 Compiling eleven of the recordings from this period seen best fit for a romance @-@ themed compilation , Coltrane for Lovers was issued in the United States by the Verve Music Group on January 23 , 2001 . Thirty @-@ three years after Coltrane 's death and nearly 40 years after the original recording dates , the album entered the Top Jazz Albums chart on February 10 , 2001 and peaked at number 5 . It remained on the chart for 83 weeks , until February 1 , 2003 , nearly two years after entering the chart . 
 The album served as the first of several other For Lovers compilations that the Verve label would later issue , including recordings by Sarah Vaughan , Chet Baker , and Charlie Parker . A similar compilation , entitled Plays for Lovers , was released by Prestige in 2003 . Another Verve compilation of Coltrane ballads , entitled More Coltrane for Lovers , followed in 2005 . Coltrane for Lovers was later compiled , along with other For Lovers titles , onto the box set The Complete Verve for Lovers Collection , released exclusively on Amazon.com on November 14 , 2006 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 In a four @-@ star review , Allmusic editor Alex Henderson called Coltrane for Lovers " an excellent collection that has no problem reminding us just how warm and expressive his ballad playing could be . " After discussing how Coltrane 's ballad @-@ playing has been undervalued in comparison to his more experimental recordings , in a December 21 , 2001 article for The New York Times , writer Ben Ratliff wrote that " This collection ... presents all the argument you need . " Some , however , have criticized the album and Verve negatively for repackaging Coltrane material for an unnecessary cash @-@ in compilation . In The Penguin Guide to Jazz on CD , Richard Cook and Brian Morton gave the album one out of four stars and commented , " Oh , for goodness ' sake ! We 're tempted to tell you that this contains a previously unreleased rehearsal of Ascension , which we have long regarded as excellent make @-@ out music , but it does not . Needless to say , the music is fine ... It 's the concept we have problems with . Avoid . " 
 In a 2007 interview for Esquire magazine , author and Coltrane biographer Ben Ratliff praised Coltrane 's music and balladry , stating " His work contains most of the well @-@ known ideals of jazz ... If you 're interested in improvisation , this guy pushed improvisation to the wall . He was the best blues player of his time . He wrote and played incredible ballads . Record companies are still putting out compilations of Coltrane ballads called Coltrane for Lovers or whatever . You can poke fun at the idea , but if you ever listen to one , they 're indescribably beautiful . " The recordings compiled for Coltrane for Lovers have endured a legacy as one of Coltrane 's best performing and interpreting of ballads and standards . In a September 2000 essay on the recordings , writer Al Young elaborated on John Coltrane 's ability during the period of recording the compiled jazz ballads , writing that " The rapport between performer and audience smooths and deepens when a player of John Coltrane 's caliber breathes personal expression into some aspect of a song 's lyric or meaning . " Young continued in his review of the album , stating : 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All tracks have John Coltrane playing tenor saxophone . 
 Track sources 
 a originally from Coltrane ( 1962 ) 
 b originally from Duke Ellington and John Coltrane ( 1962 ) 
 c originally from Ballads ( 1962 ) 
 d originally from John Coltrane and Johnny Hartman ( 1963 ) 
 e originally from Impressions ( 1963 ) 
 = = Chart history = = 
 Billboard Music Charts ( North America ) – Coltrane for Lovers 
 2001 : Top Jazz Albums – # 5 ( 83 weeks ) 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Musicians = = = 
 = = = Production = = = 
 = Cyclone Tia = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Tia was the first of six tropical cyclones to affect Vanuatu , during the 1991 – 92 South Pacific cyclone season . The system was first noted within the South Pacific convergence zone as a small tropical depression on November 13 , to the northeast of the Solomon Islands . Over the next few days the system gradually developed further within an area of light winds in the upper troposphere , before it was named Tia early on November 16 . Later that day due to a developing northerly steering current , the system slowed down and undertook a small anticlockwise loop before starting to move towards the southwest and rapidly intensify . After rapidly intensifying throughout November 16 and 17 , Tia passed within 55 km ( 35 mi ) of the Solomon Island : Anuta at around 1800 UTC on November 17 , before passing near Tikopia Island six hours later . As Tia moved near Tikopia , the system reached its peak intensity as a category 3 severe tropical cyclone , with 10 ‑ minute sustained windspeeds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) . 
 During November 18 , due to cooler waters and increased wind shear , Tia started to weaken as it moved southwards under the influence of a strengthening upper @-@ level northerly wind flow . Over the next 24 hours , the system continued to move southwards and passed within 150 km ( 95 mi ) of Vanuatu 's Banks Islands , while gradually weakening further . Tia subsequently degenerated into a tropical depression during November 20 , before it was last noted the next day as it crossed a part of its former track , where it had been producing hurricane @-@ force wind speeds a few days earlier . While it was active Tia directly affected the Solomon Islands and Vanuatu , while it indirectly affected Kiribati . The Solomon Island of Tikopia was the worst affected island , after more than 1000 people were left homeless on the island and 90 % of all dwellings were destroyed . Damage was minimal in Vanuatu , and was mainly confined to crops and fruit trees on the Banks and Torres Islands . After this usage of the name Tia , the name was retired and withdrawn from use on the tropical cyclone naming lists . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A small tropical depression developed within the South Pacific convergence zone , to the northeast of the Solomon Islands during November 13 . During that day the system moved towards the south @-@ west , before it sharply turned towards the east early the next day , as an equatorial westerly wind burst took place to the north of the cyclone . During that day the depression gradually developed further within an area of light winds in the upper troposphere and sea @-@ surface temperatures of over 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) . Early on November 15 , the United States Joint Typhoon Warning Center initiated advisories on the depression and designated it as Tropical Cyclone 03P , after it had become equivalent to a tropical storm . During that day the system 's upper level outflow characteristics became more favourable for further development , before the system was named Tia by the Fiji Meteorological Service TCWC Nadi named the system Tia early the next day after the system had developed into a category one tropical cyclone on the Australian tropical cyclone intensity scale . When it was named , Tia moving slowly and was located about 250 nmi ( 465 km ) to the northeast of the Santa Cruz Islands , before the JTWC reported at around 0600 UTC that Tia had become equivalent to a category one hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane scale with 1 ‑ minute sustained windspeeds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . Around this time , because of a developing northerly steering current , Tia slowed down and undertook a small anticlockwise loop , before starting to move towards the southwest and rapidly intensify . 
 After rapidly intensifying throughout November 16 and 17 , Tia passed within 55 km ( 35 mi ) of Anuta Island at around 1800 UTC on November 17 , before passing near Tikopia Island six hours later . As Tia moved near Tikopia , TCWC Nadi reported that the system had reached its peak intensity as a category 3 severe tropical cyclone , with sustained windspeeds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) . The JTWC followed suit six hours later and reported that the cyclone had peaked as a category 2 equivalent hurricane with sustained windspeeds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) . By 1800 UTC on November 18 , due to cooler waters and increased wind shear , Tia started to weaken as it moved southwards under the influence of a strengthening upper @-@ level northerly wind flow . Over the next 24 hours , the system continued to move southwards and passed within 150 km ( 95 mi ) of Vanuatu 's Banks Islands , while gradually weakening further before moving to the southeast under the influence of strong upper level <unk> . By 0000 UTC on November 20 , Tia had weakened into a category one tropical cyclone on the Australian Scale and became slow moving while located about 370 km ( 230 mi ) to the east of Port Villa in Vanautu . During that day the system turned and moved towards the northwest , before TCWC Nadi reported later that day at 1200 UTC , that Tia had weakened below tropical cyclone intensity . However , the JTWC monitored the system as a tropical cyclone for another 24 hours , before issuing their final advisory on the system at 1200 UTC as the system had weakened below tropical cyclone intensity . Tia was subsequently last noted by TCWC Nadi and JTWC later that day as it crossed a part of its former track , where it had been producing hurricane @-@ force windspeeds a few days earlier . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Apart from several smaller islands no major inhabited islands lied in the path of Tia , while no deaths were associated with the system . After this usage of the name Tia , the name was retired and withdrawn from use on the tropical cyclone naming lists . 
 = = = Solomon Islands = = = 
 During November 17 , warnings were issued by the Solomon Islands Meteorological Service for parts of Temotu Province in the Solomon Islands , after it became apparent that Tia was moving towards the eastern most islands of Anuta and Tikopia . During that day the system affected the province and came to within 55 km ( 35 mi ) of Anuta at around 1800 UTC on November 17 , before passing near to Tikopia six hours later . The southern most Solomon Island of Tikopia was the worst affected island , with 90 % of all dwellings destroyed and the remaining 10 % either having walls destroyed or roofs blown off . As a result , more than 1000 people were left homeless on the island , which was declared a disaster area by the Solomon Islands National Disaster Council . The cyclone also destroyed seven of the eight church buildings and all but one of the classroom buildings belonging to the two primary schools . Food crops were destroyed with all coconut trees either blown down or uprooted . High seas and waves caused extensive damage to the coasts and flooded low @-@ lying areas , which damaged the taro , other food crops and the water supply on the island due to salt spray . Sustained windspeeds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) , wind gusts of 172 km / h ( 105 mph ) and a minimum pressure of 987 @.@ 9 hPa ( 29 @.@ 17 inHg ) were all reported by the automatic weather station on Anuta . 
 = = = Other islands = = = 
 On November 16 , the Kiribati islands suffered the side @-@ effects of Cyclone Tia , with several houses in Tarawa and seaweed farms damaged . Late on November 17 , TCWC Nadi started to release special advisories for Vanautu after it had become clear that the systems south @-@ southwest movement , would bring the cyclone sufficiently close to the Banks and Torres Islands to cause either gale or storm force winds . Over the next 24 hours , TCWC Nadi continued to issue these bulletins as the system moved southwards and brought gale force winds to Maewo , Pentecost and the Banks Islands before they issued the final advisory early on November 19 . Tia was the first of six tropical cyclones to affect Vanuatu during the 1991 – 92 South Pacific cyclone season , and caused minor damage that was mainly confined to houses , crops and fruit trees on the Banks and Torres Islands . Within the Banks Islands a church was flattened , several roads were blocked and a man was slightly injured by flying debris . 
 = Evanna Lynch = 
 Evanna Patricia Lynch ( born 16 August 1991 ) is an Irish actress and model . She rose to prominence for her portrayal of Luna Lovegood in the Harry Potter film series , appearing in four films and their tie @-@ in video games . She has made fashion accessories and recorded an audiobook of Foster by Claire Keegan . She has also appeared in photo shoots for various magazines , and modelled for Katrin Thomas and Ciaran Sweeney . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Lynch was born in <unk> , County Louth , Ireland , the daughter of Marguerite and Donal Lynch . She has two older sisters , Emily and Mairead , and one younger brother , Patrick . As a child , Lynch read the Harry Potter series and became a fan , sending letters to the author , J. K. Rowling . She attended <unk> National School in <unk> until June 2004 , and then moved to Our Lady 's College in Drogheda , where her father was the deputy principal . In 2008 , Lynch studied speculative fiction and drama at the Centre for the Talented Youth of Ireland , a summer school for gifted teens , in Glasnevin . While on the Harry Potter set , she was tutored for at least three hours a day . From September 2010 , Lynch attended the Institute of Education to repeat her Leaving Certificate . 
 Lynch has mentioned having a Catholic upbringing but no longer practices . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Harry Potter = = = 
 Lynch credits her being cast in the Harry Potter films to the obsession she had with the Harry Potter book series . At age 11 , during the release of the fifth book in 2003 , she was hospitalized and her family consulted with the book 's publisher and the hospital and Lynch was allowed to leave for an hour and collect a signed copy of the book . While some have stated that her prior relationship with J. K. Rowling ( a strictly epistolary relationship ) was the reason behind the casting decision , this theory has been debunked by both Lynch and Rowling , confirming that Rowling was unaware of Lynch being cast in the role of Luna Lovegood until the producers mentioned Lynch ’ s name . Lynch got the role by reading about the casting call on one of the many Harry Potter fan sites and going to the open audition . In 2006 , Lynch auditioned at a casting call in London for the role of Luna Lovegood in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix , the fifth film in the series adapted from the books . After auditioning against 15 @,@ 000 other girls , and a subsequent screen test with lead actor Daniel Radcliffe , she was cast at the age of 14 . Producers were impressed with her affinity for the character ; David Heyman said " The others could play Luna ; Evanna Lynch is Luna . " Although uninvolved in the casting process , Rowling believed that Lynch was perfect for the role . She had never acted professionally before the Harry Potter series , her experience limited to school plays . Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix was Lynch 's debut screen performance in 2007 . The film was a box office hit , taking US $ 938 million worldwide , and garnered generally favourable reviews . Critics praised the performances of the supporting cast , often singling out Lynch for particular acclaim ; A. O. Scott of The New York Times called her performance " spellbinding " , and Jane Watkins of Country Life said she " [ brought ] an appealing sweetness to her character that 's not so developed in the book " . She reprised her role as Luna in the film 's tie @-@ in video game . 
 Two years later , Lynch again starred as Luna in Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince , the sixth installment in the series . The film was critically and financially successful . Wesley Morris of The Boston Globe wrote that Lynch as Luna " combats the movie 's occasional sluggishness with a hilarious sluggishness of her own " , and Michael Dwyer of The Irish Times called her the best Irish actress of 2009 for her work on the film . Her performance earned her Scream Award and Young Artist Award nominations , and she reprised her role in the film 's tie @-@ in video game . 
 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1 , the first of two films adapted from the seventh and final Harry Potter book , was released in 2010 . The film was a success at the box office and drew generally favourable reviews from critics . James Verniere of The Boston Herald commented that Luna " is still delightfully lunar , " while Simon Miraudo of Quickflix criticised the film commenting that " the delightful Evanna Lynch is brutally underutilised as the loopy Luna Lovegood " . She reprised her role in the film 's tie @-@ in video game . 
 Lynch again appeared as Luna in the eighth and final installment in the series , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 . The film opened to critical acclaim and went on to become the fifth highest @-@ grossing film of all time , grossing US $ 1 @.@ 328 billion in box @-@ office receipts worldwide . Moira Macdonald of The Seattle Times wrote that Lynch " continues to be all @-@ that @-@ and @-@ a @-@ radish @-@ earring as the ever @-@ wafting Luna Lovegood , " and Roger Moore of The Orlando Sentinel named her as " maybe " one of his " favorite players in the finale . " She again reprised her role in the film 's tie @-@ in video game . In August 2012 at <unk> in Chicago she joined the cast of StarKid to play Luna Lovegood in a script reading of the third Harry Potter parody musical , A Very Potter Senior Year ( the other two being A Very Potter Musical and A Very Potter Sequel . ) 
 The author of the Harry Potter series , J.K. Rowling , gave a speech during the world premiere of Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows Part 2 on 7 July 2011 in London , England . She stated that there were seven major cast members in the series , whom she referred to as The Big Seven , and she named Lynch as one of the seven members , along with Daniel Radcliffe , Rupert Grint , Emma Watson , Tom Felton , Matthew Lewis , and Bonnie Wright . Rowling has said that , of all the actors in the film series , Lynch has had the most influence on how her character was subsequently written . In 2012 , she told Charlie Rose that when composing the final books , " I saw her . [ She ] got in my head . I even heard her voice when I was writing Luna . " 
 = = = Further career = = = 
 Lynch went on to guest star as Princess <unk> ( daughter of Taryn , played by Orla Brady ) in the first season finale of the Sky1 television series Sinbad . 
 She was also scheduled to play Fiona Carrick @-@ Smith in the 2013 indie crime drama film Monster Butler . The film was to have been based on the life of British serial killer and thief Archibald Hall . The film was cancelled due to problems with funding . Lynch also starred in indie teen comedy <unk> , which screened at the Tribeca Film Festival in New York in April 2013 and at the Frameline Film Festival in San Francisco on 30 June 2013 . 
 In May 2013 , it was announced that Lynch was to star in the British stage tour production called Houdini which performed at various theatres in the United Kingdom from 9 September 2013 to 12 October 2013 . Lynch played the role of Bess Houdini , the wife and assistant of the famous magician Harry Houdini . 
 In December 2013 , it was announced that Lynch would play Theresa Bornstein in the independent crime thriller Dynamite : A Cautionary Tale . Filming for the production took place in New York City and was set to be filmed for eighteen days . 
 In September 2014 , it was announced that Lynch would star in her first lead role as the titular character in the Irish @-@ produced film My Name Is Emily , written and directed by a man battling amyotrophic lateral sclerosis . Filming began in Ireland that month and the film was released in 2015 . 
 = = Other work = = 
 Lynch has used the fame that she has achieved from her role in the films as a way to promote healthy self @-@ esteem and body image in young girls because of her previous experiences with the disorder anorexia nervosa . From the age of 11 Lynch was in and out of rehabilitation clinics for two years . She soon found a connection with the character of Luna Lovegood from the Harry Potter book series and was inspired by the character ’ s embracing of her own oddities . Lynch wrote an essay entitled “ Why the Body Bind is My Nightmare ” in which she describes her emotional struggle with her appearance and how she managed to overcome this through the use of allusions that pertain to the Harry Potter series . 
 Lynch has made and helped design a number of fashion accessories for the Harry Potter films . She has modelled for Katrin Thomas and Ciaran Sweeney , and in 2012 appeared on the cover of the Fall issue of Runway magazine . She has also recorded an abridged audiobook version of Claire Keegan 's short story Foster . Her charity work includes participation with the Multiple Sclerosis Society of Ireland , in which she launched their MS <unk> fundraiser in 2010 . Lynch is also a member of the Board of Advisors for the non @-@ profit organisation , the Harry Potter Alliance ( HPA ) . With the HPA , she has supported same @-@ sex marriage in Maine , taken part in a webcast fundraiser , written an article about body image and contributed to a fundraising book . In 2015 Lynch became vegan . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Lynch is dating her Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix co @-@ star Robbie Jarvis . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 = = Stage = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Legacy Parkway = 
 Legacy Parkway ( designated as State Route 67 , SR @-@ 67 ) is an 11 @.@ 5 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 18 @.@ 5 km ) four @-@ lane controlled @-@ access parkway located almost completely within Davis County in the northern part of the U.S. state of Utah . The parkway travels north from Interstate 215 ( I @-@ 215 ) in northwestern Salt Lake City to an interchange named the Wasatch Weave in Farmington with two intermediate interchanges providing access to Woods Cross and Centerville . Wetlands of the nearby Great Salt Lake and nature preserves border the western side of the parkway while the eastern side roughly parallels Union Pacific and Utah Transit Authority rail lines and I @-@ 15 . 
 Construction began in 2006 and was completed in 2008 , with the parkway opening in September of the same year . The parkway was controversial in its construction and was challenged in court several times before a compromise was met between the state and the Sierra Club , which limited the speed on the road and banned trucks on the highway except in emergencies . In addition to the restrictions on speed and trucks , the road was reduced from a six @-@ lane expressway to a four @-@ lane parkway . On average , between 20 @,@ 000 and 23 @,@ 000 vehicles use the parkway daily . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The parkway begins at an incomplete interchange with I @-@ 215 in extreme northern Salt Lake County near the Jordan River Off @-@ Highway Vehicle State Recreation Area . The interchange allows motorists from the Interstate to transfer onto Legacy Parkway and travelers to access I @-@ 215 southbound . After about 1 ⁄ 4 mile ( 400 m ) , Legacy Parkway enters Davis County , and heads northerly with two lanes in each direction through semi @-@ rural Woods Cross . The parkway then turns northeasterly and back north again , meeting 500 South at a diamond interchange , which also provides a connection to Redwood Road ( SR @-@ 68 ) . The eastern border of the Legacy Nature Preserve is formed by the parkway as it travels north . In West Bountiful , the parkway curves to the northeast as it follows the contour of the wetlands which lie on the western side of the road . Before reverting to its original northerly direction , the route intersects Parrish Lane ( SR @-@ 105 ) at another diamond interchange . Past the intersection , Union Pacific and Utah Transit Authority ( FrontRunner ) railroad tracks run between the parkway and I @-@ 15 to the east . For the remainder of the parkway 's length , I @-@ 15 is located approximately 300 feet ( 91 m ) east . Upon entering Farmington , the parkway gains one lane in each direction and terminates at a triple @-@ junction with I @-@ 15 , SR @-@ 225 and U.S. Route 89 west of Lagoon . This interchange is referred to as the Wasatch Weave . 
 The design of the road was re @-@ envisioned to include extensive wetland protection west of the parkway and in the parkway median , a trail system along the side of the parkway , and numerous pedestrian overpasses and underpasses for ease of access to the trail system . Many of the architectural features were also specially @-@ designed to give the parkway a unique feel . There are a total of 2 @,@ 225 acres ( 900 ha ) of protected areas to the west of the highway , and an additional 20 acres ( 8 @.@ 1 ha ) of wetlands along the length of the highway . The Legacy Nature Preserve lays along the western border of the parkway near its southern terminus . Further north , the parkway forms much of the eastern border of the Farmington Bay Waterfowl Management Area . For the entirety of the parkway 's length it is paralleled by the Legacy Parkway Trail , and is partially paralleled by the Denver and Rio Grande Western rail trail . 
 Every year , the Utah Department of Transportation ( UDOT ) conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 2012 , UDOT calculated that as many 22 @,@ 955 vehicles used the highway on an average day near its junction with 500 South , and as few as 20 @,@ 240 vehicles used the highway at its southern terminus at I @-@ 215 . The Federal Highway Administration classifies Legacy Parkway as a MAP @-@ 21 Principal Arterial . 
 = = History = = 
 Legacy Parkway is part of the larger Legacy Highway project first proposed by then @-@ governor Mike Leavitt , which ultimately will run north from Nephi toward Brigham City . The concept of a western Davis County highway has existed since the 1960s , with some proposals routing the highway over Antelope Island or across Farmington Bay . Legacy Parkway was to extend to the west side of the Salt Lake City International Airport and connect to I @-@ 80 at 5600 West ; however , that plan was abandoned in October 1997 . A survey taken by Valley Research for The Salt Lake Tribune in December 1997 showed 64 percent of Davis County residents were in support of building the parkway , with just 19 percent opposing the construction . State officials had hoped to have the parkway open in time for the 2002 Winter Olympics being held in Salt Lake City ; however , construction was delayed too many times for that to occur . 
 Initial construction of Legacy Parkway began in 2001 ; however , it was forced to stop as a result of lawsuits over the completeness of the environmental impact statement ( EIS ) . A federal appeals court ruled that the EIS was " inadequate " and " ... arbitrary and capricious " as it did not study other alternate routes that were less harmful to wetlands that the parkway was originally to be routed through . A supplemental EIS ( <unk> ) , which changed the routing of the highway as well as increased the amount of land to be part of the Legacy Nature Preserve , was completed in January 2005 . The <unk> also added in the trail system that now parallels the parkway . On September 21 , 2005 , the State of Utah and the Sierra Club ( acting on behalf of numerous groups opposing the overall Legacy Highway project ) officially signed a compromise regarding Legacy Parkway . Some of the agreements reached include no billboards along the route , no semi @-@ trailer trucks allowed on the parkway ( except in cases where they are used in response to an accident or there is construction on I @-@ 15 ) , and a 55 @-@ mile @-@ per @-@ hour ( 90 km / h ) speed limit . This speed limit is routinely ignored by commuters , who will typically add 10 mph ( 16 km / h ) to the court @-@ ordered speed limit . The speed limit on the parallel I @-@ 15 is 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) ; however speeds in the leftmost lane can reach upwards of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . Original plans for the highway had included a six @-@ lane expressway , compared to the four @-@ lane controlled @-@ access parkway that was built . 
 Construction of the parkway resumed in March 2006 , with limited construction activity followed by heavy construction on the road beginning December 2006 . The parkway earned the Federal Highway Administration 's Environmental Excellence Award in 2007 . The highway was opened by then @-@ governor Jon Huntsman , Jr . , John Njord of UDOT and Stuart Adams of the Utah Transportation Commission on September 13 , 2008 around 4 : 40 PM . The total cost of the parkway was $ 685 million ( equivalent to $ 791 million in 2015 ) . The original budget for the parkway was $ 451 million ( equivalent to $ 521 million in 2015 ) . A 5K and 10K run ( 3 @.@ 1 and 6 @.@ 2 mi ) and a 20 mi ( 32 km ) bike race were held the morning of the opening of the highway along the main roadway to support cancer research . The route was designated a Utah Scenic Byway ( as the Great Salt Lake Legacy Parkway Scenic Byway ) on May 16 , 2002 , six years prior to its opening . Should the parkway be extended further north , significant work will have to be done to reroute the parkway or move the Farmington FrontRunner station and shopping complex which was built just north of the parkway . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = Wie schön leuchtet der Morgenstern , BWV 1 = 
 Wie schön leuchtet der Morgenstern ( How beautifully the morning star shines ) , BWV 1 , is a church cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach . He composed it in 1725 in Leipzig for the feast of the Annunciation and led the first performance on 25 March 1725 , which that year fell on Palm Sunday . It is a chorale cantata , based on Philipp Nicolai 's hymn " Wie schön leuchtet der Morgenstern " ( 1599 ) . 
 Bach was in his second year as Thomaskantor in Leipzig , where the feast was the only occasion during Lent when festive music was permitted . The theme of the hymn suits both the Annunciation and Palm Sunday , in a spirit of longing expectation of an arrival . An unknown poet retained , as in the other chorale cantatas of Bach 's second cantata cycle , the hymn 's first and last stanza unchanged , but paraphrased the themes of the inner stanzas to a sequence of alternating recitatives and arias . Bach scored the cantata for three vocal soloists , a four @-@ part choir and a Baroque instrumental ensemble of two horns , two oboes da caccia , two solo violins , strings and continuo . All instruments play in the opening festive chorale fantasia , while the soprano carries the hymn tune and the lower voices answer in counterpoint of instrumental motifs . An oboe da caccia accents the first aria , the solo violins and strings return in the second aria , and an independent horn part crowns the closing chorale . 
 The cantata was the last chorale cantata of the cycle , possibly because Bach lost a librettist who had inspired him . The work was chosen to open the first attempt to publish Bach 's complete works , a century after his death . 
 = = History and words = = 
 When Bach composed the cantata , he was in his second year as Thomaskantor ( director of church music ) in Leipzig . He had written during his first year a cycle of cantatas for the occasions of the liturgical year that began on the first Sunday after Trinity 1723 . In his second year he had composed a second annual cycle of cantatas that was planned to consist exclusively of chorale cantatas based on Lutheran hymns . Wie schön leuchtet der Morgenstern is based on Philipp Nicolai 's " Wie schön leuchtet der Morgenstern " ( 1599 ) . The hymn in seven stanzas was associated with Epiphany but also with the Annunciation . 
 The prescribed readings for the day are Isaiah 's prophecy of the birth of the Messiah ( Isaiah 7 : 10 – 16 ) and from the Gospel of Luke , the angel Gabriel announcing the birth of Jesus ( Luke 1 : 26 – 38 ) . The feast of the Annunciation fell on Palm Sunday in 1725 . The unknown librettist retained the first and the last stanza of the hymn , and paraphrased the other stanzas to recitatives and arias , using stanza 2 for the first recitative , stanza 3 for the first aria , stanza 4 and part of stanza 5 for the second recitative , and stanza 6 for the second aria . The hymn , expressing the longing for the arrival of the Saviour , can be connected to Jesus ' birth being announced to Mary . The theme of arrival was also fitting for Palm Sunday when the arrival of Jesus in Jerusalem is celebrated . The Bach scholar Alfred Dürr notes : " The librettist must be credited with the empathy he shows for that fervour which characterizes Nicolai 's poem and which has made his hymns into an enduring possession of the Protestant Church . " While the name of the librettist , a " poetically and theologically competent specialist " is not known , scholars have suggested Andreas Stübel ( 1653 – 1725 ) , a former headmaster of the Thomasschule . 
 Bach led the first performance of the cantata on 25 March 1725 which was in that year both the Annunciation and Palm Sunday . Annunciation was the only occasion for festive music during Lent when Leipzig observed tempus clausum ( silent time ) . Wie schön leuchtet der Morgenstern turned out to be the last chorale cantata Bach composed in his second cantata cycle . If Stübel was the librettist , his death in January 1725 explains that Bach lacked a competent collaborator . The composer returned to other texts for the remaining liturgical time of Easter , Pentecost and Trinity . The completion of the cycle of chorale cantatas meant so much to him , that he included the early chorale cantata for Easter Christ lag in Todes Banden , BWV 4 , and added a few chorale cantatas for occasions that were missing . 
 Wie schön leuchtet der Morgenstern was chosen by the Bach @-@ Gesellschaft to begin the first volume of Bach 's complete works , which the Bach @-@ Gesellschaft began in 1850 , a century after Bach 's death . It was later listed as BWV 1 in the Bach @-@ Werke @-@ Verzeichnis . 
 = = Scoring and structure = = 
 Bach structured the cantata in six movements . The text and tune of the hymn are kept in the outer choral movements , a chorale fantasia and a four @-@ part closing chorale , which frame a sequence of alternating recitatives and arias . Bach scored the work for three vocal soloists ( soprano ( S ) , tenor ( T ) and bass ( B ) ) , a four @-@ part choir , and a Baroque instrumental ensemble of two horns ( Co ) , two oboes da caccia ( Oc ) , two violins ( Vl ) , two obbligato violins ( Vs ) , viola ( Va ) and basso continuo . A festive scoring like this , including brass , was usually performed on holidays . The duration of the cantata is given as 25 minutes . 
 In the following table of the movements , the scoring follows the Neue Bach @-@ Ausgabe . The keys and time signatures are taken from Alfred Dürr , using the symbol for common time ( 4 / 4 ) . The continuo , playing throughout , is not shown . 
 = = Music = = 
 The scoring provides a rich orchestration , the sparkle of the morning star is illustrated by two solo violins , first in the first chorus , and reappearing with the other strings in the second aria . The sound of the oboe da caccia returns in the first aria . The horn sound returns in the closing chorale , with the second horn enriching the texture of the four @-@ part setting by an independent line . The scoring is reminiscent of Sie werden aus Saba alle kommen , BWV 65 , written for Epiphany . Bach would later use the pair of horns in Part IV of his Christmas Oratorio , dealing with the naming of Jesus as announced to Mary . These works are all set in F major , observed by the musicologist Julian Mincham to be a key of " personal and contemplative " joy , compared to the " rousing , communal , major , sharp @-@ key " joy of the opening chorus of the Christmas Oratorio , for example . 
 = = = 1 = = = 
 The cantus firmus , " Wie schön leuchtet der Morgenstern " ( How beautifully the morning star shines ) , in the chorale fantasia of the opening chorus is sung by the sopranos . The orchestra , with the two solo violins illustrating the sparkle of the morning star , plays <unk> and festively . Bach achieves " unusual animation " by setting the hymn not in common time but 12 / 8 . John Eliot Gardiner who conducted the Bach Cantata Pilgrimage in 2000 , notes that movement begins intimately with a phrase of the second solo violin , answered by other instruments together and echoed individually , preparing the entrance of the soprano . The lower counter the cantus firmus by a version of the theme heard at the beginning in the solo violin . In further lines , the lower voices even enter first in their counterpoint , preparing the chorale tune entry . One phrase stands out as composed in chordal <unk> : " <unk> , <unk> " ( loving , friendly ) , 
 = = = 2 = = = 
 The tenor expresses in secco recitative the belief " Du wahrer Gottes und Marien Sohn " ( You , very son of God and Mary ) . 
 = = = 3 = = = 
 In the first aria , the soprano renders " <unk> , ihr <unk> <unk> Flammen " ( Fill utterly , you divine celestial flames ) , accompanied by an obbligato oboe da caccia , an instrument in alto range . The instruments illustrates in coloraturas the celestial flames . 
 = = = 4 = = = 
 In another secco recitative , the bass contrasts " Ein <unk> Glanz , ein <unk> Licht <unk> meine Seele nicht " ( An earthly flash , a corporeal light does not stir my soul ) with heavenly light , illustrated by a melisma on both " <unk> " ( joyful radiance ) and " <unk> " ( refreshment ) . 
 = = = 5 = = = 
 The two solo violins return from the first movement , accompanying with the other strings the tenor in the second aria , an expression of thanks and praise , " Unser Mund und Ton der Saiten " ( Our mouths and the tones of strings ) . The song of praise is intensified by a dance @-@ like motion , called " graceful minuet pulse " by the Bach scholar Klaus Hofmann . The voice has to master coloraturas on the repeated word " Gesang " ( singing ) . 
 = = = 6 = = = 
 The closing chorale , " Wie bin ich doch so <unk> froh " ( How earnestly glad I am indeed ) , is embellished by an independent part of the second horn , while the other instruments double the voices . Thus , the last chorale cantata in the second cantata cycle reaches an " air of baroque festive splendour " . 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 The selection is taken from the listing by Aryeh Oron on the Bach @-@ Cantatas website . Choirs and orchestras are roughly marked as large by red background ; green background indicates vocalists with one voice per part ( OVPP ) and instrumental groups playing period instruments in historically informed performances . 
 = Day of Rage ( Bahrain ) = 
 Day of Rage ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> ) is the name given by protesters in Bahrain to 14 February 2011 , the first day of their national uprising . Inspired by the successful uprisings in Egypt and Tunisia , Bahraini youth organised protests using social media websites . They appealed to the Bahraini people " to take to the streets on Monday 14 February in a peaceful and orderly manner . " The day had a symbolic value being the ninth and tenth anniversaries of the Constitution of 2002 and the National Action Charter respectively . 
 Some opposition parties supported the protests ' plans , while others did not explicitly call for demonstration . However , they demanded deep reforms and changes similar to those by the youth . Before the start of protests , the government introduced a number of economic and political concessions . The protests started with a sit @-@ in in solidarity with the Egyptian Revolution of 2011 in the vicinity of the Egyptian embassy in the capital , Manama ten days before the ' Day of Rage ' . On the eve of 14 February , security forces dispersed hundreds of protesters south of Manama . 
 On 14 February , thousands of Bahrainis participated in 55 marches in 25 locations throughout Bahrain . Protests were peaceful and protesters demanded deep reforms . The earliest demonstration started at 5 : 30 a.m. in <unk> , the last just minutes before midnight in the vicinity of Salmaniya hospital heading to the Pearl Roundabout . The largest was in Sitra island . Security forces responded to protests by firing tear gas , rubber bullets , stun grenades and birdshot . More than 30 protesters were injured and one was killed by birdshot . The Bahraini Ministry of Interior said a number of security forces were injured after groups of protesters attacked them . 
 = = Background = = 
 Bahrain is a tiny island in the Persian Gulf that hosts the United States Naval Support Activity Bahrain , the home of the US Fifth Fleet ; the US Department of Defense considers the location critical for its ability to counter Iranian military power in the region . The Saudi Arabian government and other Gulf region governments strongly support the King of Bahrain . Although government officials and media often accuse the opposition of being influenced by Iran , a government @-@ appointed commission found no evidence supporting the claim . Iran has historically claimed Bahrain as a province , but the claim was dropped after a UN 1970 survey found that most Bahraini people preferred independence over Iranian control . 
 = = = Modern political history = = = 
 Bahrainis have protested sporadically throughout the last decades demanding social , economic and political reforms . In the 1950s , following sectarian clashes , the National Union Committee was formed by reformists ; it demanded an elected popular assembly and carried out protests and general strikes . In 1965 a month @-@ long uprising broke out after hundreds of workers at Bahrain Petroleum Company were laid off . Bahrain became independent from Britain in 1971 and the country had its first parliamentary election in 1973 . Two years later , the government proposed a law called the " State Security Law " giving police wide arresting powers and allowing individuals to be held in prison without trial for up to three years . The assembly rejected the law , prompting the late Amir to dissolve it and suspend the constitution . It was not until 2002 that Bahrain held any parliamentary elections , after protests and violence between 1994 and 2001 . 
 = = = Economy = = = 
 Despite its oil @-@ rich Gulf neighbors , Bahrain 's oil , discovered in 1932 , has " virtually dried up " making it poorer than other countries in its region . In recent decades , Bahrain has moved towards banking and tourism making it one of the most important financial hubs in the region ; it has since held some of the top international rankings in economic freedom and business @-@ friendly countries , making it the freest economy in the Middle East . However , Bahrainis suffer from relative poverty . Semi @-@ official studies found that the poverty threshold ( the minimum level of income deemed adequate in a given country . ) in the country in 1995 was <unk> 308 . The Bahrain Centre for Human Rights said that by 2007 it had increased to <unk> 400 at least , putting half of Bahrainis under the poverty line . In 2008 , the government rejected the UN 's conclusion that 2 % of Bahrainis lived in " slum @-@ like conditions " . Poor families receive monthly financial support . In 2007 , CNN produced a documentary titled " Poverty in Bahrain " , which was criticized by pro @-@ government newspaper , Gulf Daily News . Al Jazeera produced a similar documentary in 2010 . 
 The unemployment rate in Bahrain is among the highest in GCC countries . Sources close to the government estimated it between 3 @.@ 7 % and 5 @.@ 4 % , while other sources said it was as high as 15 % . Unemployed was especially widespread among youth and the Shia community . Bahrain also suffers from a " housing problem " with the number of housing applications reaching about 53 @,@ 000 in 2010 . These conditions prompted the Bahrain Youth Society for Human Rights to consider housing one of the most important problems in Bahrain . 
 = = = Human rights = = = 
 Human rights in Bahrain improved after the government introduced reform plans in 1999 – 2002 but declined again in subsequent years . Between 2007 and 2011 Bahrain 's international rankings fell 21 places from number 123 to 144 on the Democracy Index , as ranked by the Economist Intelligence Unit . The Freedom in the World index on political freedom classified Bahrain as " Not Free " in 2010 – 2011 . A Freedom House " Freedom on the Net " survey classified " Net status " as " Not free " and noted that more than 1 @,@ 000 websites were blocked in Bahrain . The Press Freedom Index ( by Reporters Without Borders ) declined significantly : in 2002 Bahrain was ranked number 67 and by 2010 it had fallen to number 144 . The Freedom of the Press report ( by Freedom House ) classified Bahrain in 2011 as " Not Free " . Human Rights Watch has described Bahrain 's record on human rights as " dismal " , and having " deteriorated sharply in the latter half of 2010 " . 
 = = = = Torture = = = = 
 During the period between 1975 and 1999 known as the " State Security Law Era " , the Bahraini government frequently used torture , which resulted in a number of deaths . After the Emir Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa succeeded his father Isa bin Salman Al Khalifa in 1999 , reports of torture declined dramatically and conditions of detention improved . However Royal Decree 56 of 2002 gave effective immunity to all those accused of torture during the uprising in the 1990s and before ( including notorious figures such as Ian Henderson and Adel <unk> . ) . Towards the end of 2007 the government began employing torture again and by 2010 its use had become common again . 
 = = = = Shia grievances = = = = 
 The Shia majority ruled by the Sunni Al khalifa family since the eighteenth century have long complained of what they call systemic discrimination . They are blocked from serving in important political and military posts and the government has reportedly naturalized Sunnis originally from Pakistan and Syria in what Shia say is an attempt to increase the percentage of Sunnis in the population . 
 According to Khalil al @-@ Marzooq of Al Wefaq , the number of those granted Bahraini nationality between 2001 and 2008 is 68 thousand . According to al @-@ Marzooq , this number was calculated using official estimates by subtracting the population in 2001 ( 405 @,@ 000 ) and natural increase ( 65 @,@ 000 ) from the population in 2008 ( 537 @,@ 000 ) . In a rally against " political naturalization " , Sunni opposition activist Ibrahim Sharif estimated that 100 @,@ 000 were naturalized by 2010 and thus comprised 20 % of Bahraini citizens . The government rejected accusations of undertaking any " sectarian naturalization policy " . Shia grievances were exacerbated when in 2006 Salah Al Bandar , then an adviser to the Cabinet Affairs Ministry , revealed an alleged political conspiracy aiming to disenfranchise and marginalize Shias , who comprise about 60 % of the population . 
 = = = = 2010 crackdown = = = = 
 In August 2010 , authorities launched a two @-@ month @-@ long crackdown , referred to as the Manama incident , arresting hundreds of opposition activists , most of whom were members of the Shia organizations Haq Movement and Al Wafa ' Islamic party , in addition to human rights activists . The arrestees were accused of forming a " terrorist network " aiming to overthrow the government . However , a month later Al Wefaq opposition party , which was not targeted by the crackdown , won a plurality in the parliamentary election . 
 = = Calls for a revolution = = 
 Inspired by the successful uprisings in Egypt and Tunisia , opposition activists began in January to post on a large scale to the social media websites Facebook and Twitter and online forums , and to send e @-@ mails and text messages with calls to stage major pro @-@ democracy protests . The Bahraini government blocked a Facebook page which had 14 @,@ 000 " likes " calling for a revolution and a " day of rage " on 14 February ; however the " likes " had risen to 22 @,@ 000 few days later . Another online group called " The Youth of the February 14th Revolution " described itself as " unaffiliated with any political movement or organisation " and rejected any " religious , sectarian or ideological bases " for their demands . They issued a statement listing a number of demands and steps it said were unavoidable in order to achieve " change and radical reforms " . 
 Bahraini youths described their plans as an appeal for Bahrainis " to take to the streets on Monday 14 February in a peaceful and orderly manner in order to rewrite the constitution and to establish a body with a full popular mandate to investigate and hold to account economic , political and social violations , including stolen public wealth , political naturalisation , arrests , torture and other oppressive security measures , [ and ] institutional and economic corruption . " One of the main demands was resignation of the king 's uncle , Prince Khalifa bin Salman Al Khalifa from his post as prime minister . He had been the unelected prime minister of Bahrain since 1971 , making him the world 's longest serving prime minister . 
 The day had a symbolic value ; it was the tenth anniversary of a referendum in favor of the National Action Charter which had promised to introduce democratic reforms following the 1990s uprising . It was also the ninth anniversary of the Constitution of 2002 , which had made opposition feel " betrayed " by the king . The Constitution had brought some promised reforms , such as an elected parliament ; however opposition activists said it went back on reform plans , giving the king the power to appoint half the parliamentary seats and withholding power from parliament to elect the prime minister . 
 Unregistered opposition parties such as Haq Movement and Bahrain Freedom Movement supported the plans . The National Democratic Action Society only announced a day before the protests that it supported " the principle of the right of the youth to demonstrate peacefully " . Other opposition groups including Al Wefaq , Bahrain 's main opposition party , did not explicitly call for or support protests ; however Al Wefaq leader Ali Salman did demand political reforms . 
 = = Events leading to the protests = = 
 A few weeks before the protests , the Cabinet of Bahrain made a number of concessions , including increasing social spending and offering to free some of the minors arrested in the Manama incident in August . On 4 February , several hundred Bahrainis gathered in front of the Egyptian embassy in Manama to express support for anti @-@ government protesters there . According to The Wall Street Journal , this was " one of the first such gatherings to be held in the oil @-@ rich Persian Gulf states . " At the gathering , Ibrahim Sharif , the secretary @-@ general of the National Democratic Action Society ( Wa 'ad ) , called for " local reform . " 
 On 11 February , hundreds of Bahrainis and Egyptians took to the streets near the Egyptian embassy in Manama to celebrate the fall of Egypt 's president Hosni Mubarak following the successful Egyptian Revolution of 2011 . Security forces reacted swiftly to contain the crowd by setting a number of roadblocks . In the <unk> preceding Friday prayer , Shiekh Isa Qassim , a leading Shia cleric , said " the winds of change in the Arab world [ are ] unstoppable " . He demanded an end to torture and discrimination , the release of political activists and a rewriting of the constitution . 
 Appearing on the state media , king Hamad announced that each family would be given 1 @,@ 000 Bahraini <unk> ( $ 2 @,@ 650 ) to celebrate the tenth anniversary of the National Action Charter referendum . Agence France @-@ Presse linked payments to the 14 February demonstration plans . 
 The next day , the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights sent an open letter to the king urging him to avoid a " worst @-@ case scenario " by introducing a wide range of reforms , including " releasing more than 450 detainees including [ Bahraini ] human rights defenders , religious figures and more than 110 children , <unk> [ ing ] the security apparatus and <unk> [ ing ] its official [ s ] responsible [ for ] violations " . At night , residents of Jidhafs held a public dinner banquet to celebrate the fall of Egypt 's president . 
 On 13 February , authorities set up a number of checkpoints and increased the presence of security forces in key locations such as shopping malls . Al Jazeera interpreted the move as " a clear warning against holding Monday 's [ 14 February ] rally " . At night , police fired tear gas and rubber bullets on a small group of youth who organized a protest in Karzakan after a wedding ceremony . According to a photographer working for the Associated Press , several people were injured and others suffered from the effects of tear gas . Bahrain 's Ministry of Interior said that about 100 individuals who gathered in an unauthorized rally in the village attacked security forces injuring three policemen and in response police fired two rubber bullets , one of which rebounded from the ground , injuring a protester . Small protests and clashes occurred in other locations as well , such as Sabah Al Salem , Sitra , Bani Jamra and <unk> , leading to minor injuries among both protesters and security forces . 
 = = 14 February = = 
 Over 6 @,@ 000 people participated in 55 demonstrations and political rallies in 25 different locations throughout Bahrain . Helicopters hovered over areas where marches were due to take place and the presence of security forces was heavy in a number of key locations such as the Central Business District , shopping malls and Bab Al Bahrain . The traffic directorate closed a number of roads such as those leading to Pearl Roundabout , Dana mall , Al Daih and parts of Budaiya highway in order to anticipate any non @-@ permitted protests . Throughout the day and especially in the evening , Internet speed was much slower than usual . According to <unk> Masr blog , " many people " linked this to government attempts to contain the protests . 
 The demonstrators demanded the release of detained protesters , socio @-@ economic and political reforms and constitutional monarchy . Protesters sought no permits , although it is required by Bahraini law . The Bahraini newspaper Al Wasat reported that protests were peaceful and that demonstrators did not throw stones at security forces or burn tires in streets as they used to in the previous protests . 
 The earliest demonstration was recorded at 05 : 30 in the mainly Shia village of <unk> , where 300 people are said to have participated . The rally was led by Shia political activist <unk> Hussain . Police dispersed this rally , resulting in some injuries , and the hospitalization of one demonstrator . Police continued to disperse rallies throughout the day with tear gas , rubber bullets , and shotguns , causing additional injuries , and hospitalizing three more demonstrators . 
 One major demonstration took place in the Shi 'a island of Sitra , where several thousand men , women , and children took to the streets . According to witnesses interviewed by Physicians for Human Rights , hundreds of fully armed riot police arrived on the scene and immediately began firing tear gas and sound grenades into the crowds . They then fired rubber bullets into the unarmed crowd , aiming at people in the front line who had sat down in the street in protest . 
 In <unk> , security forces fled the location after protesters approached them , leaving one of their vehicles behind . Protesters attached the flag of Bahrain to the vehicle instead of damaging or burning it . In <unk> , hundreds held maghrib prayer in the streets after staging a march . In Bilad Al <unk> , protesters held a sit @-@ in at afternoon and started marching at evening , after which security forces intervened to disperse them . In Karzakan , protesters staged a march that was joined by another march starting in <unk> and ended peacefully . In <unk> security forces fired tear gas on 100 protesters , breaking up their rally . 
 On its Twitter account , the Ministry of Interior said that six masked individuals participating in a march in Jidhafs attacked security forces . They wrote that police responded , injuring the legs and back of one of the attackers . 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 In the evening of 14 February , Ali Mushaima died from police shotgun wounds to his back at close range . The government says that Ali was part of a group of 800 protesters that attacked eight policemen with rocks and metal rods . The government asserts that the police exhausted their supply of tear gas and rubber bullets in a failed attempt to disperse the crowd , and resorted to the use of shotguns . Witnesses say that there were no demonstrations at the time Ali was shot . They say Ali was seen walking with a group of officers who were pointing their guns at him . As Ali walked away , he was shot in the back by one of the officers . The Ministry of Interior expressed its regret at the incident and announced that the death would be investigated . 
 Later , several hundred demonstrators congregated in the car park of the hospital where Ali was taken . They staged a protest outside the hospital heading to the Pearl Roundabout ; meanwhile another march was heading to the same location from King Faisal Highway . Security forces intervened , injuring some protesters and arresting 24 . By the end of the day , more than 30 protesters had been injured , mostly by birdshot and rubber bullets . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The following day another man , Fadhel Al @-@ Matrook , was killed by police during the funeral of Mushaima . Protesters then marched and occupied the Pearl Roundabout without police interference . Thousands continued camping at the site for another day . On 17 February , in what became known as Bloody Thursday , authorities launched a pre @-@ dawn raid and cleared the site , killing four protesters and injuring hundreds . Protesters took refuge in Salmaniya Medical Complex where many of them demanded the fall of the regime . Defying the government ban on gatherings , on the evening of 18 February , hundreds of protesters marched toward the Pearl Roundabout , now under the control of the army . When protesters neared the site , the army opened fire , killing Abdulredha Buhmaid and injuring dozens of others . 
 Troops withdrew from the Pearl Roundabout on 19 February , and protesters reestablished their camps there . The crown prince assured protesters that they would be allowed to camp at the roundabout and that he would lead a national dialogue . Protests involving up to one @-@ fifth of the population continued over the next month until the government called in Gulf Cooperation Council troops and police and declared a three @-@ month state of emergency . Despite the police crackdown that followed , smaller @-@ scale protests and clashes continued , mostly outside Manama 's business districts . By April 2012 , more than 80 people had died during the uprising . As of December 2012 , protests are ongoing . 
 = = Local and international reactions = = 
 In a rare national TV address on Tuesday , February 15 , King Hamad expressed regret , offered his " deep condolences " to the families of those killed and announced a ministerial probe into the events . He also promised reforms including a reduction in government restrictions of the Internet and other media . In reference to the Egyptian Revolution of 2011 , Hussain al @-@ <unk> , a member of Parliament , said on 15 February it was wrong for protesters to copy the events of other Arab countries , because the situation in Bahrain is different . The following day , Prime minister Khalifa ibn Salman Al Khalifa praised the king 's speech and shared his regret and condolences . 
 On the other hand , Al Wefaq , the country 's largest opposition party suspended their participation in the Parliament on 15 February and threatened to resign , in protest of what it called " the brutal practices of security forces " . The same day , other opposition parties protested what they called the government 's " excessive " reaction to protests , and the Progressive Democratic Tribune called for formation of a national body to unite Shia and Sunna like the National Union Committee had done in the 1950s . The Bahrain Human Rights Society criticized the government response to protests of 14th and 15th , accusing it of censorship and non @-@ compliance with international covenants that it had signed . 
 Internationally , Navi Pillay , the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on 15 February , called the government of Bahrain to stop what she called " the excessive use of force " against protesters and to release protest @-@ related prisoners . United States State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley said that the US was " very concerned by recent violence surrounding protests " of the 14th and 15th . In a 15 February appeal , Amnesty International called the Bahraini authorities to stop using what it called " excessive force " against protesters , to put all security forces ' members who had used excessive force on trial and " to respect and protect the right of freedom expression , movement and assembly in Bahrain " . 
 = Blue Ridge Road = 
 Blue Ridge Road is a 19 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 30 @.@ 9 km ) long roadway in Essex County , New York , in the United States . The road is designated as County Route 84 ( CR 84 ) from NY 28N in Newcomb to Interstate 87 ( I @-@ 87 ) in North Hudson , and as New York State Route 910K ( NY 910K ) between I @-@ 87 and U.S. Route 9 ( US 9 ) in North Hudson . The CR 84 portion is an 18 @-@ mile ( 29 km ) , two @-@ lane stretch of rural highway maintained by the Essex County Department of Public Works ' Highway Division while NY 910K is a 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) highway maintained by the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) . All of Blue Ridge Road has been designated as the " Blue Ridge Road Scenic Byway " by NYSDOT . 
 Blue Ridge Road was designated as part of NY 73 in the 1930 renumbering of state routes in New York . NY 73 was truncated to Schroon in the mid @-@ 1930s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Blue Ridge Road consists of Essex County 's CR 84 , which composes the bulk of the route , and NY 910K , which is a short , state @-@ maintained roadway connecting I @-@ 87 to US 9 . The entirety of Blue Ridge Road is designated as the " Blue Ridge Road Scenic Byway " , a New York State Scenic Byway , by NYSDOT . 
 = = = County Route 84 = = = 
 Blue Ridge Road begins at an intersection with NY 28N and CR 75 ( Eaton Lane ) in the area south of Tahawus ( pronounced " ta @-@ <unk> " ) . The road heads to the northeast , initially paralleling the Hudson River , then intersects with CR 25 ( Tahawus Road ) , which heads north to the hamlet of Tahawus . After that , the route diverges from the Hudson River , turning to the southeast and climbing slightly to the side of Pine Hill , before progressing downhill . At the base of the mountain , CR 84 crosses over Vanderwhacker Brook , which flows into nearby Vanderwhacker Pond . The road winds its way around several different mountain peaks , passing to the north of Cheney Pond . 
 After passing through the hamlet of Boreas River , CR 84 briefly follows Wolf Pond Brook , which eventually turns north for nearby Wolf Pond . The road continues eastward past Sand Pond and begins to descend , roughly following Sand Pond Brook . It passes along the base of Ragged Mountain , a high peak in the Adirondacks , after which the road runs along the edge of the valley of the stream known as " The Branch . " At the base of Three Brothers Mountain , CR 84 curves northeast before making a turn to the southeast , soon entering the hamlet of Blue Ridge . 
 With The Branch still paralleling to the south , CR 84 continues its eastward descent and eventually intersects with its first road in several miles , Lazy Street , which provides access to the creek . At the base of <unk> Mountain , Blue Ridge Road passes along the north shore of Palmer Pond , a small pond visible from the Adirondack Northway ( I @-@ 87 ) . Soon after , Blue Ridge Road intersects with the ramps leading to and from the Northway and the county @-@ maintained portion of Blue Ridge Road ends . 
 = = = NY 910K = = = 
 The eastern end of Blue Ridge Road , beginning at the ramps to and from the Adirondack Northway , is maintained by NYSDOT as NY 910K . The route heads eastward from the Northway ramps to nearby US 9 . On this 0 @.@ 72 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 16 km ) stretch , there is one intermediate intersection , this being with an unnamed roadway . The route ends at US 9 in the hamlet of North Hudson . 
 = = History = = 
 The entirety of Blue Ridge Road was designated as the westernmost portion of NY 73 in the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . NY 73 initially ran from NY 28N east to an intersection with US 9 in North Hudson , where NY 73 turned south to follow US 9 toward Schroon . The route was truncated c . 1936 to begin at US 9 in Schroon . NY 73 's former alignment along Blue Ridge Road was redesignated as CR 2B by 1969 . The section between the Northway and US 9 was later transferred to the state and assigned the NY 910K designation . On May 21 , 2009 , New York Governor David Paterson announced that stimulus money from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act would be used to reconstruct the CR 84 segment of the Blue Ridge Road , seeing it as a major connector from NY 28N to I @-@ 87 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Essex County . 
 = Another Suitcase in Another Hall = 
 " Another Suitcase in Another Hall " is a song recorded by Scottish singer Barbara Dickson , for the 1976 concept album , Evita , which contains songs from the musical of the same name . The musical was based on the life of Argentinian leader Eva Perón . Written by Tim Rice and Andrew Lloyd Webber , the song is presented during a sequence where Eva throws out her husband 's mistress on the streets . The latter sings the track , wondering about her future and coming to the conclusion that she would be fine . Dickson was enlisted by the songwriters to record the track after hearing her previous work . 
 Rice and Webber asked her to record the song using a higher than usual pitch , so that she sounded younger like her character . Featuring instrumentation from guitar , marimba , harp and keyboard , " Another Suitcase in Another Hall " finds Dickson singing in a soprano voice . Critically appreciated , the song was released as a single on 7 February 1977 , and reached number 18 on the UK Singles Chart . Dickson has stated that she did not like her recorded version of the track and employed a different arrangement during her future live renditions . 
 The song has been covered and performed many times by other artists , namely Elaine Paige , Marti Webb , Kimberley Walsh from British girl group Girls Aloud , as well as actress Samantha Barks . Another notable version was recorded by American singer Madonna who played the part of Eva for the 1996 film adaptation of the musical . It was released on 3 March 1997 , by Warner Bros. as the third and final single from the film 's soundtrack . Unlike the musical , in the film the track was sung by Madonna 's character instead of the mistress . Upon its release , the song garnered positive response from music critics and reached the top @-@ ten of the charts in Italy and the United Kingdom . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 " Another Suitcase in Another Hall " was written by Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice while they were developing the Evita for broadway in 1976 . Both were extremely intrigued by the stories surrounding the life of Eva Perón while researching about her during the mid @-@ 1970s . They came to know about her husband Juan Perón , and his affinity for young women , and Rice and Webber decided to use it as one of the backstories behind Eva and Juan 's rise to power . In the original musical , the song is performed by the character of Juan 's teenage mistress ( played by Siobhán McCarthy ) after she is " kicked out " by his future wife , Eva . According to director Michael Grandage , the story took the " edge off " a supposed fairy tale like interpretation of Eva and Juan , unveiling their ambitions and cut @-@ throat personality . From a production point @-@ of @-@ view , it also allowed Grandage to show ruthlessness of Eva , when Juan allows her to throw his " mistress " away . The girl is ultimately left on the streets with nowhere to go , and there she sings the song . 
 It is a particularly poignant melody that should play with an audience 's emotions . The mistress clearly knew what she was doing sleeping with an older man , and yet there is something expletive about it as well . Eva 's bitchiness should be enjoyed by an audience , but they should also be investing in the plight of a young girl 's eviction . The narrative of this section is so well structured that it is obvious the journey of the mistress is complete by her exit . This allows the audience to invest in a single moment while also learning more about Eva and Peron 's character as they move forward in the story . 
 " Another Suitcase in Another Hall " was first recorded by singer Barbara Dickson in 1976 for the Evita concept album that eventually became the stage musical ; Dickson did not appear in the musical itself . Rice and Webber had already enlisted actress Julie Covington to sing the part of Eva , hence they were on the look @-@ out for other supporting vocal personnel . They found about Dickson who had recently starred in the Willy Russell musical , John , Paul , George , Ringo ... and Bert , and had charted on the UK Singles Chart with her cover version of the David Whitfield and Frankie Laine song , " Answer Me " ( 1976 ) . Dickson and her manager , Bernard Theobald , had a discussion with Rice and Webber about starring in the musical , but her voice was declared " too delicate " for singing the numbers on Evita . So they offered her one song which was not sung by Eva 's character , and that was " Another Suitcase in Another Hall " . 
 = = Music composition = = 
 Dickson recalled that during the recording sessions , Webber asked her to sing in a higher range than her usual , since the " mistress " character was a teenager , and should have sounded younger . Before the sequence of the eviction of the mistress occurs in Act I of the musical , Eva 's character sings the song " Hello and goodbye " and then " Another Suitcase in Another Hall " begins . A soft strummed guitar in broken chord patterns heralds the introductory music . Dickson sings the opening verse , and the chorus which is repeated twice as she asks , " So , what happens now ? " and wonders about her immediate future , ultimately concluding that she would survive . For the second verse , the lyrics reflect on this recurring pattern of being evicted out of men 's lives , and the final verses have a more positive outlook toward 's the subject 's life . The song finishes with the mistress asking the question , " Where am I going to ? " as a male voice pacifies by saying , " Don 't ask , anymore " . In 2004 , author Rikky Rooksby released the book , The Complete Guide to the Music of Madonna , where he wrote his thoughts about the popularity of the song : 
 Eva is the center of attention [ in the song ] but the lyric does not allow a transfer of meaning outside of the context of her story . Part of the song 's popularity lies in the way it finds an image — the suitcase in the hall — to express the nomadic nature of modern civilization , the feeling of urban rootlessness that many people experience . The theme of constant moving strikes a resonant note . 
 " Another Suitcase in Another Hall " features instrumentation from guitar , marimba , harp and keyboard , with Dickson singing in a soprano voice . Author Mark Ross Clark noted in his book , The Broadway Song : A Singer 's Guide , that her vocals portrayed different kind of emotions , with standard pitch correction in the lower middle C. Her vocals contrast the lyrics with an " underlying coolness " , while the light voice enabled Dickson to sing the lines " So , what happens now ? " in sixteenth note , E ♭ major . The song is high @-@ pitched to make its syllables appear as difficult to sing . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 After the first single from the Evita album , " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " , achieved commercial success , " Another Suitcase in Another Hall " was released as the second single on 7 February 1977 . A reviewer from Melody Maker complimented the song , saying that without the context of Evita , the song was more acceptable and was " poignant and lovely . How lucky Lloyd Webber and Rice are to have Julie Covington and now Dickson , to add the flesh and bones to songs which might otherwise be wrecks of soppy melodrama . A smash hit . " It was Dickson 's second single to chart on the UK Singles Chart , following " Answer Me " in 1976 , and entered the chart at number 44 in its first week and peaked at number 18 in its fifth week . It was present for a total of seven weeks on the chart . 
 Due to the high @-@ pitch employed in the recording , Dickson reflected in later years that she " never liked the original [ track ] for that reason . The song has seasoned over the years with my singing of it . " Dickson believed that she did not sound like herself on the song . While performing it later point of time on her concerts , Dickson sang it in her actual tone , saying that although the track " might have been written for a teenage girl , but the experience of being abandoned by a man is one , women of all ages can relate to . I think you have to be honest with songs and with yourself . " The singer 's music director Ian Lynn arranged the track differently which she performs currently . 
