 = = Track listing = = 
 7 " Single , Company Sleeve 
 " Another Suitcase in Another Hall " ( Album version ) – 3 : 00 
 " Requiem For Evita " ( Choir and London Philharmonic Orchestra ) – 3 : 05 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Barbara Dickson – vocals 
 Tim Rice – writer 
 Andrew Lloyd Webber – writer , producer , orchestra 
 Nigel Wright – producer , mixing 
 Denis Blackham – mixing , mastering at Master Room Studios 
 Credits adapted from the single 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Other versions = = 
 English singer Elaine Paige recorded the song for her 1983 album Stages . Sarah Brightman , who was married to Webber from 1984 to 1990 , included the song on her album The Andrew Lloyd Webber Collection . Marti Webb 's version of the song was included in the 1995 album Music & Songs From Evita . English musician Hank Marvin included an instrumental version of the song on his 1997 tribute album Hank Marvin and the Shadows Play the Music of Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice . Kimberley Walsh , from British girl group Girls Aloud , covered the song for her debut studio album Centre Stage ( 2013 ) . Singer Hayley Westenra included the song on her 2000 album Walking in the Air . On the tribute show Andrew Lloyd Webber : 40 Musical Years , the song was performed by actress Samantha Barks . 
 = = Madonna version = = 
 = = = Background and development = = = 
 In 1996 , Madonna starred in the film adaptation of the musical , titled Evita , playing the role of Eva ; she had desired to play the part for a long time and even wrote to director Alan Parker , explaining how she would be perfect for the part . After securing the role , she underwent vocal training with coach Joan Layder since Evita required the actors to sing their own parts . Layder noted that the singer " had to use her voice in a way she 's never used it before . Evita is real musical theater — its operatic , in a sense . Madonna developed an upper register that she didn 't know she had . " Unlike the musical , in the film the song is performed by Eva after ending her relationship with Agustín Magaldi , deciding she wants to improve her life . The song was not promoted and only a video was created using footage and scenes from the film . 
 = = = Recording and composition = = = 
 Recording sessions for the film 's songs and soundtrack began in September 1995 , and took place at the CTS Studios in London with Madonna accompanied by co @-@ actors Antonio Banderas and Jonathan Pryce . However , trouble arose as Madonna was not comfortable with laying down a " guide vocal " simultaneously with an 84 piece orchestra inside the studio . She was used to singing over a pre @-@ recorded track and not have musicians listen to her . Also , unlike her previous soundtrack releases , she had little to no control over the project . An emergency meeting was held between Parker , Webber and Madonna where it was decided that the singer would record her part in a more contemporary studio while the orchestration would take place somewhere else . She also had alternate days off from the recording . 
 Madonna 's version of the song begins with the same soft strummed guitar in broken chords . Madonna sings in a breathy voice , giving her character more vulnerability . The first vocal entrance leads into an engaging melody with the opening phrase , " so what happens now ? " , being repeated twice . According to the sheet music published by Musicnotes.com , the song is set in common time , with a slow tempo of 50 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of C ♭ major , with Madonna 's vocals spanning from A3 to E ♭ 5 . The song has a sequence of C ♭ – F ♭ when Madonna sings the opening verse " I don 't expect my love affairs to last for long " . 
 = = = Release and reception = = = 
 The song was officially released as the soundtrack 's third single on 3 March 1997 . Originally , there were talks about releasing an Evita EP , containing remixed versions of " Buenos Aires " , " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " and " Another Suitcase in Another Hall " . As it was not given a commercial release in the United States , it was ineligible to enter the Billboard Hot 100 . In the United Kingdom , the song peaked at number 7 on the UK Singles Chart , the week of 29 March 1997 , and was present on the top 100 for a total of 8 weeks . According to the Official Charts Company , the single had sold 75 @,@ 233 copies in the United Kingdom as of August 2008 . In Italy , it reached the fourth position of the FIMI Singles Chart . The song also reached a peak of number 23 on the Irish Singles Chart , where it remained for 3 weeks . Elsewhere , it had a relatively poor chart performance ; in Sweden it peaked at number 60 , while in the Netherlands it peaked at number 91 . " Another Suitcase in Another Hall " was Madonna 's first single released in Australia to miss the ARIA top 100 . 
 AllMusic 's Jose F. Promis , wrote that " the song finds Madonna giving an understated and inspired performance [ ... ] One hopes that this overlooked gem might find its way onto future [ Madonna ] hits collections , because it is truly a wonderful song " . Author Thomas S. Hischak called it " plaintive " . Billboard 's Geoff Burpee called it " A sterling , intimate moment from the Evita soundtrack . Yes kids , she [ Madonna ] can sing " . Writing for Los Angeles Times , David Gritten opined Madonna 's voice sounded " pitch @-@ perfect and clear as a bell " . Greg <unk> , from the Hartford Courant , felt that " By giving her ' Another Suitcase ' with its heartbreaking ' Where am I going to ? ' refrain , Madonna adds a necessary , fragile vulnerability to her ambitious , <unk> to @-@ riches Eva Peron " . Neil Strauss from The Herald Journal , said that " Madonna radiates on ' Another Suitcase in Another Hall ' " . Peter Keough , from the Boston Phoenix , described the track as " a poignant , winsome exploration of pathos , defilement , and resolution sung by a young , struggling Eva forced into prostitution with a series of drab johns " . 
 = = = Track listing and formats = = = 
 = = = Credits and personnel = = = 
 Madonna – vocals , mixing 
 Tim Rice – writer 
 Andrew Lloyd Webber – writer , producer 
 Alan Parker – producer 
 Nigel Wright – producer , mixing 
 David Reitzas – mixing 
 John Mauceri – conductor 
 David Caddick and Mike Dixon – additional conductors 
 Credits adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 = Tao Li = 
 Tao Li ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> Lǐ ; born 10 January 1990 ) is a China @-@ born Singaporean competitive swimmer specializing in the backstroke and butterfly stroke . 
 A Singapore Sports School student , Tao has represented Singapore at the Southeast Asian Games ( SEA Games ) and Asian Games and holds several national records . She won four gold medals and a bronze at the 2005 SEA Games in the Philippines , and reached the finals of the women 's 50 metres , 100 metres and 200 metres butterfly events at the 2006 Commonwealth Games in Melbourne though she did not gain any medals . In December 2006 , Tao took a gold medal at the 50 metres butterfly in Doha 's 2006 Asian Games , beating China 's multi @-@ gold medallist Xu <unk> and breaking her own national record in the process . She became Singapore 's most medalled athlete at the 2007 SEA Games in Nakhon Ratchasima ( Korat ) , Thailand , winning four gold medals . Earlier in the year , she also became the first Singaporean female swimmer to reach a FINA World Aquatics Championships final , finishing seventh in the 50 metres butterfly . 
 Tao made her Olympic début for Singapore at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing . She qualified for the 100 metres finals , ranking fourth in the semifinals with a time of 57 @.@ 54 seconds and setting two Asian records in two days . She thus became the first Singaporean swimmer to enter an Olympic final . She emerged fifth at the women 's 100 metres butterfly finals with a time of 57 @.@ 99 seconds . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Tao Li was born on 10 January 1990 in Wuhan , Hubei , in the People 's Republic of China , the only child of Tao Ran and his wife Li Yan , who were both former provincial swimmers and are now swimming coaches . Her early years were spent in Wuhan , the capital of Hubei province . She started swimming at the age of five , and had started competitive swimming by the time she was ten . In her first contest she won two gold medals and broke two age records . On one occasion at a particular local meet that she was confident of winning , she had her parents attend . However , she lost and was so upset and worried about " losing face " that she asked her parents not to come for future competitions . While she has now overcome that fear , her parents still keep to the " tradition " of not attending her meets in order not to distract her . In 2002 , at the age of 13 years , Tao was brought to Singapore by her mother . It was difficult for her parents to decide to send her to Singapore , and her father was initially against the idea as at the time she was training with a provincial swimming team and earning a monthly salary of <unk> , and there was a good chance she might do well enough to join the Chinese national team . However , they decided to do so after she was deemed too short for the national team . As her mother was not earning much , she found covering Tao 's swimming expenses difficult . In addition , because Tao 's English was not good , she had to join a Primary 5 class in Queenstown Primary School though she was three years older than her classmates and found things tough @-@ going . However , she worked hard and took extra language lessons , and now converses fluently in English . 
 Tao became a Singapore citizen in August 2005 . She is a Secondary 3 student at the Singapore Sports School in 2008 , and is expected to continue her education there until she graduates with a diploma in sports science under an arrangement between the school and the Auckland University of Technology . She trains under the school 's swimming coach Peter Churchill . Previously at the Aquatic Performance Swim Club under former Olympian Ang Peng Siong from 2001 , following what was reported to be a contract dispute she started training in October 2006 with another former Olympian , David Lim , at <unk> Aquatic Club . 
 = = Career as national swimmer = = 
 Tao has represented Singapore at the Southeast Asian Games ( SEA Games ) and Asian Games . Following her success at the 1st Hong Kong Open Invitational Championships in 2005 at which she won four gold medals and was named most outstanding female swimmer , at the 23rd SEA Games held in the Philippines later that year , she won golds for the 100 metres backstroke , 200 metres butterfly , and 4 x 100 metres medley relay with teammates Ho Shu Yong , Nicolette Teo and Joscelin Yeo . 
 In March the following year , she won gold in the 50 metres butterfly at the Milo Asia Swimming Championships in Singapore , the Republic 's first top award at the competition . Between 16 and 21 March 2006 she took part in the 2006 Commonwealth Games in Melbourne , reaching the finals of the 50 metres , 100 metres and 200 metres butterfly , though she did not gain any medals . In December the same year , Tao won a gold medal at the 50 metres butterfly in Doha 's 2006 Asian Games , beating China 's multi @-@ gold medallist Xu <unk> and breaking her own national record in the process . She also won a bronze medal at the 100 metres butterfly earlier in the tournament , recording a national and Asian mark of 58 @.@ 96 seconds . 
 Tao became the first Singaporean female swimmer to reach a FINA World Aquatics Championships final . The 2007 World Aquatics Championships were held in Melbourne from 17 March to 1 April 2007 , and she finished seventh in the 50 metres butterfly . Later that year at the 2007 SEA Games in Nakhon Ratchasima ( Korat ) , Thailand , she was Singapore 's most medalled athlete at the Games , winning four gold medals in the 100 metres backstroke , 100 and 200 metres butterfly , and 4 x 100 metres medley relay . On 28 June 2008 , Tao was named Sportswoman of the Year in the Singapore Sports Awards given out by the Singapore National Olympic Council each year . She also won the award in 2007 . 
 In January 2008 , Tao became embroiled in controversy after the Singapore Swimming Association ( SSA ) introduced a 15 % levy on the cash awards given to swimmers , with about 6 % set aside for youth development . As part of the government 's Multi @-@ Million Dollar Award Programme ( MAP ) , she received S $ 23 @,@ 750 for winning three individual titles and one team gold at the 2007 SEA Games . She was therefore " taxed " S $ 3 @,@ 562 @.@ 50 , with S $ 1 @,@ 425 going to youth development . Unhappy with this , Tao said : " If they [ the SSA ] want to cultivate youth , they should find their own money , not pay using our awards . It 's through our hard work that we got the money . So , I don 't see the point that we should give the money to the youths . " She also said it had been her school and not the SSA which had borne the expense of her overseas training . The SSA said it was " very disappointed " with her comments , and pointed out that the association had spent " easily in excess of $ 20 @,@ 000 " in sending her for competitions abroad such as the World Championships , Hong Kong Open and Japan International , and a stint at the Australian Institute of Sport . SSA Vice @-@ President <unk> Jin Gee told the press , " Even with the Sports School funding it , it 's our taxpayers ' dollars going into her development . It doesn 't matter which avenue it comes from , it 's still Singapore 's support for her . " 
 = = = 2008 Summer Olympics = = = 
 Tao made her Olympic début for Singapore at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing , arriving ranked 26th out of 49 butterfly swimmers . On 9 August , the second day of the swimming competition , she qualified fourth fastest for the semifinals of the 100 metres butterfly after winning her heat with a personal best time of 57 @.@ 77 seconds . The following day she made it to the finals , shaving off 0 @.@ 23 seconds for another personal best time and new Asian record of 57 @.@ 54 seconds . She came fourth behind her role model , Australian swimmer Lisbeth Trickett , and the USA 's Christine Magnuson and Australia 's <unk> Schipper . She thus set two Asian records and the national record for the event , and became the eighth fastest butterfly swimmer in the world and first Singaporean swimmer to enter an Olympic final . On 11 August , she came fifth at the 100 metres butterfly finals with a time of 57 @.@ 99 seconds . The top three spots were taken by Trickett ( 56 @.@ 73 seconds ) , Magnuson ( 57 @.@ 10 seconds ) and Schipper ( 57 @.@ 25 seconds ) . Asked by The Straits Times about her performance , Tao said , " If I have given another personal best , it would not have gotten me a medal . The top three winners were just too good . I wanted to do my best and I pushed all the way and hoped for the best . " Given Tao 's age compared to those of the medallists , there are hopes that she will be able to improve her performance at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London . 
 On 12 August , Tao swam in the second heat of the 200 metres butterfly . She finished fifth ( 26th in a field of 34 ) and thus did not proceed to the semi @-@ finals , but her time of 2 minutes 12 @.@ 63 seconds was a new national record . Discussions have begun regarding plans for her future development . The Singapore Sports Council 's high performance chief <unk> Clews has said : " Money will not be a prohibitive factor in providing the support and necessary resources for Tao Li to reach her full potential ... with the 2012 Olympics as the target . " As Tao needs to gain more high @-@ level competing experience , there is also the issue of whether she should continue training in Singapore or head overseas , particularly to Australia or the US . 
 = = = Events between 2008 and 2012 = = = 
 On 1 November 2008 at the FINA / Arena Swimming World Cup in Singapore , Tao achieved gold in the 100 metres short @-@ course ( 25 metres ) butterfly , and the following evening a bronze in the 50 metres butterfly in a personal @-@ best time of 25 @.@ 93 seconds . She repeated her feat in the 100 metres butterfly at the Stockholm leg of the competition on 11 November , and in Berlin on 15 November when she set a competition record with a time of 56 @.@ 28 seconds . Tao was named the inaugural The Straits Times Athlete of the Year 2008 , and came second in Today newspaper 's 2008 list of athletes of the year . 
 Tao participated in the 25th Southeast Asian Games in Vientiane , Laos . On 10 December 2009 , she took the gold in the 200 metres backstroke in a time of 2 minutes 17 @.@ 12 seconds . Three days later , she was part of the winning 4 x 100 metres medley relay team with Roanne Ho , Shana Lim and <unk> Ting Wen , and on 14 December she broke her own 2005 Games record in the 200 metres butterfly in a time of 2 minutes 13 @.@ 49 seconds . As she chalked up five wins , including the 100 metres backstroke and butterfly events , these were her most successful Games to date . 
 On 18 November 2010 , Tao won Singapore 's first gold medal at the 2010 Asian Games in Guangzhou , China , in the 50 metres butterfly . Her time of 26 @.@ 10 seconds was a personal best as well as a national record . She had achieved silver in the 100 metres butterfly on 13 November . 
 = = = 2012 Summer Olympics = = = 
 Tao competed for Singapore at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London . In the women 's 100 metres butterfly she reached the semifinals held on 28 July , but with a time of 58 @.@ 18 seconds did not do well enough to join the eight swimmers who advanced to the finals with times below 58 seconds . The next day , in the women 's 100 metres backstroke , she bettered her national record with a time of 1 minute 1 @.@ 6 seconds but did not advance beyond the heats , ranking only 26th out of 45 swimmers . 
 = = Medals = = 
 = = National records = = 
 As of 30 July 2012 , Tao was the holder of the following Singapore records : 
 = = = Open = = = 
 Some of the above information was obtained from Singapore national records ( long @-@ course metres ) , Singapore Swimming Association , 8 June 2008 , archived from the original on 22 August 2008 , retrieved 11 August 2008 . 
 = = = Under 17 years of age = = = 
 The above information was obtained from Singapore national records ( long @-@ course metres ) , Singapore Swimming Association , 6 June 2008 , archived from the original on 2 August 2008 , retrieved 11 August 2008 . 
 = Harvey Littleton = 
 Harvey Littleton ( June 14 , 1922 – December 13 , 2013 ) was an American glass artist and educator . Born in Corning , New York , he grew up in the shadow of Corning Glassworks , where his father headed Research and Development during the 1930s . Expected by his father to enter the field of physics , Littleton instead chose a career in art , gaining recognition first as a ceramist and later as a glassblower and sculptor in glass . In the latter capacity he was very influential , organizing the first glassblowing seminar aimed at the studio artist in 1962 , on the grounds of the Toledo Museum of Art . His aim was to take the manufacture of glass out of its industrial setting and put it within the reach of the studio artist . 
 In his role as an educator , Littleton was an " ... outspoken and eloquent advocate of university education in the arts . " He organized the first hot glass program at an American university ( the University of Wisconsin – Madison ) and promoted the idea of glass as a course of study in university art departments in the Midwest and northeastern United States . Several of Littleton 's students went on to disseminate the study of glass art throughout the U.S. , including Marvin <unk> , who started a glass program at the University of California at Berkeley and Dale Chihuly , who developed the glass program at the Rhode Island School of Design and later was a founder of <unk> Glass School in Stanwood , Washington . 
 Littleton retired from teaching in 1976 to focus on his own art . Exploring the inherent qualities of the medium , he worked in series with simple forms to draw attention to the complex interplay of transparent glass with multiple overlays of thin color . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Harvey Kline Littleton was born in Corning , New York where his father , Dr. Jesse T. Littleton , Jr . , was Director of Research for Corning Glass Works . A physicist , Dr. Littleton is remembered today as the developer of Pyrex glassware . Harvey Littleton 's introduction to the world of glass began when he was six . On Saturdays his father would take Harvey off his mother 's hands for a few hours by bringing him to the laboratory . There he was turned over to the laboratory stockman who entertained him or , at least , kept the little boy out of trouble . At home , the properties of glass and its manufacture were frequent topics at the family dinner @-@ table . Dr. Littleton was fascinated by glass and believed that the material had almost unlimited uses . 
 = = Education = = 
 When he was eighteen , Harvey Littleton enrolled at the University of Michigan to study physics . His choice of major was influenced by his father , who wanted one of his children to follow him in his profession ( Littleton ’ s two elder brothers chose medicine and business as careers ; his sister was an industrial psychologist ) . According to Littleton , " I always thought I would be a physicist like my father " . 
 Littleton 's interest in art began in high school , where he took life drawing and sculpture classes . He also took a sculpture class during his freshman year at the University of Michigan . His growing preference for art eventually proved stronger than his respect for his father 's wishes . After three semesters of physics he transferred to Cranbrook Academy of Art for its 1941 spring semester . There he studied under sculptor Marshall Fredericks and worked part @-@ time as a studio assistant to Carl Milles . Dr. Littleton was not pleased by his son 's decision . Littleton enlisted his elder sister Martha 's aid in pleading his case to their father , and a compromise was reached . Littleton would return to the University of Michigan that fall , but not to physics . The study of fine art was not part of the compromise ; instead , Littleton agreed to major in industrial design . 
 During summer break in 1942 Littleton worked as a mold maker at Corning Glass Works in the Vycor multiform project laboratory . There he cast his first work in glass , an academic torso , in white Vycor . That fall Littleton was forced to delay his education for three years when he was drafted into the U.S. Army Signal Corps . He served in North Africa and Italy and , near the end of the war , received a commendation for his work in encoding . In early 1946 he was in England , waiting his turn to be shipped home . To fill the time he attended classes at the Brighton School of Art , where he modeled and fired a small clay torso that he carried home in his barracks bag . Once back in Corning , New York , Littleton cast the torso , again in Vycor , as a small edition . 
 He finished his degree in industrial design in 1947 at the University of Michigan . With his father 's encouragement Littleton submitted a proposal to Corning to create a workshop within the factory to research the aesthetic properties of industrial glass . The proposal was rejected and instead Littleton and two friends , Bill Lewis and <unk> Lahti , opened a design studio in Ann Arbor . 
 = = As a ceramist = = 
 In 1949 Littleton enrolled as a graduate student in ceramics at Cranbrook Academy of Art . That same year , he accepted a position teaching ceramics at the Toledo Museum of Art School of Design commuting between Toledo , Ohio and Bloomfield Hills weekly . For that portion of the week that Littleton was in Toledo , he stayed at the apartment of artist Hal <unk> . There , at one of <unk> 's Wednesday night poker games , Littleton met Dominick Labino , who would be important to the success of Littleton 's first glass workshop a dozen years later . 
 Littleton 's production as a potter focused on functional stoneware that he sold in Chicago @-@ area art fairs and in galleries from Chicago to New York City . His work was included in group shows in the United States , including " Designer Craftsmen U.S.A. , " sponsored by the American Craft Council in 1953 and the Ceramic National exhibition at the Syracuse Museum of Art in 1954 . His pottery gained international exposure in 1956 at the First International Exposition of Ceramics in Cannes , France . 
 While heading up the ceramics department at the University of Wisconsin , Madison , he designed a manually operated wheel called the " Littleton Kick Wheel " . These wheels were used by students in the ceramics lab at the UWM . 
 = = Research = = 
 After earning his master 's degree in ceramics , Littleton began teaching at the University of Wisconsin – Madison in 1951 . In 1957 a university research grant allowed him to visit Europe , where he studied the influence of Islamic culture on contemporary Spanish pottery . However , he first stopped in Paris to visit Jean Sala , who had been recommended to Littleton as an artist who worked alone in glass . 
 After four and a half months of research in Spain , Littleton visited the site of his war @-@ time service in Naples . He was surprised to find seven small glass factories there . On a later visit to the island of Murano , he visited more than fifty glass factories . He was fascinated by the little demonstration furnaces that some of the factories placed outside their walls . The furnaces would be staffed by a couple of the factory 's <unk> , who would perform their craft for tourists . Prior to this Littleton believed that glass could only be made in an industrial setting , by a team of workers . His Murano experience convinced him that a single artist could melt and work glass in a private studio . 
 Upon his return to his Verona , Wisconsin studio Littleton began melting small batches of glass in his ceramics kiln , using hand @-@ thrown stoneware bowls as crucibles . As a result of these experiments , the American Craft Council asked him to chair a panel on glass at its Third National Conference in 1958 . The panelists were glass artists and designers Michael and Frances Higgins and Earl McCutchen , who worked in laminated glass at the University of Georgia . Paul Perrot , director of the Corning Museum of Glass , was the fifth panelist . By the time the American Craft Council convened its fourth conference in 1961 , Littleton not only presented a paper on his own work in glass but also exhibited a sculpture made of three faceted pieces of cullet that he had melted , formed and carved in the previous year . After the conference , Littleton began applying for grants to get his vision of a hot glass studio program off the ground . 
 = = 1962 glass workshop = = 
 In March 1962 , Otto Wittmann , director of the Toledo Museum of Art , offered Littleton the use of a storage shed on the grounds of the museum for a one @-@ week glassblowing workshop . 
 According to former student and Littleton biographer Joan Falconer Byrd , " Littleton brought a small pot furnace he had built at his farm and hooked it up in the museum garage with the help of Norm Schulman , pottery instructor at the museum school . Dominick Labino , then director of research for Johns Manville Corporation ... volunteered a low @-@ melting glass formula . " 
 Because of a misreading of Labino 's formula , the first batch of glass was ruined . Labino himself oversaw the conversion of the pot furnace into a day tank , supplying it with low @-@ melting @-@ point glass marbles he had developed for use in the production of fiberglass . This glass proved easy to work for glass blowing , and the workshop participants experimented with it in shifts for the remainder of the week . On the final day of the workshop , Harvey <unk> , a retired glassblower from the Libbey glass plant in Toledo , presented an unexpected two @-@ hour demonstration of the craft . 
 The ten attendees at the March 1962 Toledo workshop included Littleton , Dominick Labino , Norm Schulman , Tom <unk> from the University of Iowa , Karl Martz from Indiana University , John Stephenson from the University of Michigan , William Pitney from Wayne State University , Clayton Bailey , Littleton 's Graduate Assistant from the University of Wisconsin , artist Dora Reynolds and Edith Franklin , one of Schulman 's ceramics students at the Toledo Museum of Art . A second , better advertised Toledo workshop that attracted more participants was held that June . Littleton , Labino , <unk> and Schulman shared teaching duties at the second workshop . 
 = = Glass at the University of Wisconsin = = 
 In the summer of 1962 Littleton once again traveled to Europe , this time to research how glass was taught in universities there . He found nothing that he could bring back to the U.S. to help him educate art students at the University of Wisconsin . At that time , European glass programs were geared solely toward industrial production . Students were not taught hands @-@ on techniques with the material ; the craft of working with hot glass was still taught at the factories , under the apprenticeship system . What Littleton did find in Europe was a kindred spirit in glass art , the German Erwin Eisch , who is recognized today as a founder of European studio glass . Eisch had set up a small work area in his family ’ s glass factory in <unk> for the production of his own glass art . Trained as a fine artist in the academies of Germany , he was largely self @-@ taught as a glass blower and at the time produced his work with the help of the factory ’ s craftsmen . 
 Through the fall 1962 and spring 1963 semesters , Littleton taught glass in a garage at his Verona farm to six students under an independent study program . By the following year he had secured University of Wisconsin funding to rent and equip an off @-@ campus glass department in Madison . Through the University ’ s glass program , Littleton would train many prominent glass artists , including Bill <unk> , Dale Chihuly , Marvin <unk> , Fritz Dreisbach , Sam Herman , Tom <unk> , Christopher Ries , Michael Taylor and Kent <unk> . 
 With the launching of the first college glass department Littleton said that he " ... became a kind of evangelist for the medium . " He gave lectures at university art departments throughout the midwest and northeast United States about the potential of glass as a medium for the studio artist . Littleton served as the chairman of the University of Wisconsin art department from 1964 – 1967 and from 1969 – 1971 . He retired from teaching in 1976 , and in 1977 was named professor emeritus . It was around this time that Littleton , in addition to his work in glass , began to develop the technique of <unk> — printmaking using glass plates . 
 = = " Technique is cheap " = = 
 In 1972 Littleton was at the Seventh National Sculpture Conference in Lawrence , Kansas when he uttered the words , " Technique is cheap . " The statement touched off a debate that still finds currency among glass artists : Should technique , or content , take precedence in glass art ? 
 This was a question that Littleton had evidently been thinking about for some time . In his 1971 book , Glassblowing : A Search for Form , he wrote : 
 " The method used by the contemporary artist is a constant probing and questioning of the standards of the past and the definitions of the present to find an opening for new form statements in the material and process . It is even said that this search is an end in itself . Although knowledge of chemistry or physics as they apply to glass will broaden the artist ’ s possibilities , it cannot create them . Tools can be made , furnaces and annealing ovens can be built cheaply . But it is through the insatiable , adventurous urge of the artist to discover the essence of glass that his own means of expression will emerge . " 
 The offhand phrase " technique is cheap " soon took on a life of its own . For some it was a rallying cry to discover the inherent possibilities of a " new " medium for the artist ; for others the statement expressed nothing more than arrogant disdain for the timeless value of craftsmanship . In a 2001 interview for the Smithsonian ’ s Archives of American Art , Littleton commented on what he termed the " misinterpretation " of the phrase : 
 " All I meant by that is that technique is available to everybody , that you can read technique , if you have any background . Technique in and of itself is nothing . But technique in the hands of a strong , creative person , like <unk> or Dante <unk> , takes on another dimension . " 
 Behind this point is another , as expressed by writer and curator William <unk> : " It might even be argued that Littleton sought long @-@ term to put the artist back in control of the factory , even as he sought to put the furnace into the artist ’ s studio . " 
 For Littleton , the epitome of technique vs. content was to be found in factory @-@ made art glass , where the division of labor was inflexible . Traditionally the art glass designer was a draftsman who made a conceptual drawing for a glass object , and then passed it along to industry craftsmen for execution . According to Littleton , the factory designer “ ... is frustrated by the peculiar misplacement of his skill , and his inclusion in a process where little experimentation or interference is permitted . As for the factory craftsman , his training under the apprenticeship system " limited him to one phase in the production of glass . This training could not prepare anyone to function as an independent artist , but only to serve as a cog in the industrial machinery . " 
 = = Work in glass = = 
 In 1962 Littleton ’ s first pieces in blown glass were , like his earlier works in pottery , functional forms : vases , bowls and paperweights . His breakthrough to non @-@ functional form came in 1963 when , with no purpose in mind , he remelted and finished a glass piece that he had earlier smashed in a fit of pique . The object lay in his studio for several weeks before he decided to grind the bottom . As Littleton recounts in his book Glassblowing : A Search for Form , he brought the object into the house where " it aroused such antipathy in my wife that I looked at it much more closely , finally deciding to send it to an exhibition . Its refusal there made me even more obstinate , and I took it to New York ... I later showed it to the curators of design at the Museum of Modern Art . They , perhaps relating it to some other neo @-@ Dada work in the museum , purchased it for the Design Collection . " This led to Littleton ’ s mid @-@ 1960s series of broken @-@ open forms , and " <unk> , " " <unk> " and " Exploded " forms . 
 These sculptures , especially the " <unk> , " or " <unk> , " forms were influenced by Littleton ’ s colleague Erwin Eisch , who visited and worked with Littleton in his Wisconsin studio for a month in late 1967 . Several weeks after Eisch ’ s departure , Littleton realized that he had unconsciously adopted his friend 's strongly personal figural style in his own work . Littleton reacted to this discovery by turning to simple , clean shapes in 1968 , forming tubes , rods and columns of glass that he cut and grouped together on bases of plate glass or steel . 
 Allowing the pull of gravity to stretch and bend hot glass while on the blowpipe or <unk> led Littleton to his " Folded Forms " and " Loops " series , which continued until 1979 . His " Eye " forms , also from the 1970s , take the form of concentric cups of various colors in diminishing sizes that nestle one inside the next . 
 Littleton explored cutting and slumping industrial glass , including plate and optic glass , beginning in 1970 . In sculptures such as Do Not <unk> and Distortion Box , slumped squares of glass are transfixed by a brass rod . In Rock Around the Clock , a bent piece of optic glass bar from Corning Glass Works in Danville , Virginia , can be set rocking on its bronze plate glass base with a touch of the hand . 
 Littleton incorporated optical lens blanks manufactured by Corning with his own hot @-@ worked glass . In each case he sandblasted and cut the optical disc draping , and in one case piercing , the disc with fluid , cased glass forms . These were followed , in 1978 , by Littleton ’ s Solid Geometry series , in which heavy cased glass forms were cut into trapezoidal , spheroid and ovoid shapes and highly polished . 
 Perhaps Littleton ’ s best known body of work is his " Topological Geometry " group of series , made between 1983 and 1989 . Included under this heading are his signature " Arc " forms and " Crowns , " as well as his late " Lyrical Movement " and " Implied Movement " sculptural groups . In 1989 chronic back problems forced Littleton to retire from working in hot glass . 
 = = Public collections = = 
 Littleton 's artwork is in the collections of museums worldwide , including the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the Museum of Modern Art in New York City ; Corning Museum of Glass , Detroit Institute of Arts , Indianapolis Museum of Art , Los Angeles County Museum of Art , Milwaukee Art Museum , Museum of Arts & Design , Museum of Fine Arts , Houston , Smithsonian Institution and the Toledo Museum of Art , among numerous others . Overseas his work is in <unk> <unk> in Denmark ; Museum <unk> in Zürich , Switzerland ; Museum <unk> van Beuningen in Rotterdam , Holland ; National Museum of Modern Art , Kyoto in Japan ; Hokkaido Museum of Modern Art in Sapporo , Japan ; the Victoria and Albert Museum in London ; <unk> <unk> ( Sammlung Wolfgang <unk> ) and the Decorative Arts Museums in Frankfurt , Hamburg , Prague and Vienna . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Littleton was married to Bess Tamura Littleton in 1947 . She predeceased him on October 8 , 2009 . The couple had four children : Carol L. Shay , Thomas Littleton , Maurine Littleton and John Littleton . All work in the field of glass art . Carol L. Shay is the curator at Littleton Studios ; Tom Littleton owns and manages Spruce Pine Batch Company , which supplies batch ( the dry ingredients of which glass is made ) to artists and art departments around the U.S. ; Maurine Littleton is the owner and director of Maurine Littleton Gallery which specializes in glass art , in Washington , DC . With his wife and collaborative partner , Kate Vogel , John Littleton is a glass artist in <unk> , North Carolina . 
 Harvey Littleton died on December 13 , 2013 , aged 91 at his home in Spruce Pine , North Carolina . 
 = Little owl = 
 The little owl ( Athene noctua ) is a bird that inhabits much of the temperate and warmer parts of Europe , Asia east to Korea , and north Africa . It was introduced into Britain at the end of the nineteenth century and into the South Island of New Zealand in the early twentieth century . 
 This owl is a member of the typical or true owl family , Strigidae , which contains most species of owl , the other grouping being the barn owls , Tytonidae . It is a small , cryptically coloured , mainly nocturnal species and is found in a range of habitats including farmland , woodland fringes , steppes and semi @-@ deserts . It feeds on insects , earthworms , other invertebrates and small vertebrates . Males hold territories which they defend against intruders . This owl is a cavity nester and a clutch of about four eggs is laid in spring . The female does the incubation and the male brings food to the nest , first for the female and later for the newly hatched young . As the chicks grow , both parents hunt and bring them food , and the chicks leave the nest at about seven weeks of age . 
 Being a common species with a wide range and large total population , the International Union for Conservation of Nature has assessed its conservation status as " least concern " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The little owl is a small owl with a flat @-@ topped head , a plump , compact body and a short tail . The facial disc is flattened above the eyes giving the bird a frowning expression . The plumage is greyish @-@ brown , spotted , streaked and barred with white . The underparts are pale and streaked with darker colour . It is usually 22 centimetres ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) in length with a wingspan of 56 centimetres ( 22 in ) for both sexes , and weighs about 180 grams ( 6 @.@ 3 oz ) . 
 The adult little owl of the most widespread form , the nominate A. n. noctua , is white @-@ speckled brown above , and brown @-@ streaked white below . It has a large head , long legs , and yellow eyes , and its white “ eyebrows ” give it a stern expression . Juveniles are duller , and lack the adult 's white crown spots . This species has a bounding flight like a woodpecker but the rounded wingtips and general appearance of the birds are quite different . 
 The call is a querulous <unk> , <unk> . Less frequently , various whistling or trilling calls are uttered . In the breeding season , other more modulated calls are made , and a pair may call in duet . Various yelping , chattering or barking sounds are made in the vicinity of the nest . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The distribution is widespread across Europe , Asia and North Africa . Its range in Eurasia extends from the Iberian Peninsula and Denmark eastwards to China and southwards to the Himalayas . In Africa it is present from Mauritania to Egypt , the Red Sea and Arabia . The bird has been introduced to New Zealand , and to the United Kingdom , where it has spread across much of England and the whole of Wales . 
 This is a sedentary species which is found in open countryside in a great range of habitats . These include agricultural land with hedgerows and trees , orchards , woodland verges , parks and gardens , as well as steppes and stony semi @-@ deserts . It is also present in treeless areas such as dunes , and in the vicinity of ruins , quarries and rocky outcrops . It sometimes ventures into villages and suburbs . In the United Kingdom it is chiefly a bird of the lowlands , and usually occurs below 500 m ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) . In continental Europe and Asia it may be found at much higher elevations ; one individual was recorded from 3 @,@ 600 m ( 12 @,@ 000 ft ) in Tibet . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 The owl usually perches in an elevated position ready to swoop down on any small creature it notices . It feeds on prey such as insects and earthworms , as well as small vertebrates including amphibians , reptiles , birds and mammals . It may pursue prey on the ground and it caches surplus food in holes or other hiding places . A study of the pellets of indigestible material that the birds regurgitate found mammals formed 20 to 50 % of the diet and insects 24 to 49 % . Mammals taken included mice , rats , voles , shrews , moles and rabbits . The birds were mostly taken during the breeding season and were often fledglings , and including the chicks of game birds . The insects included Diptera , Dermaptera , Coleoptera , Lepidoptera and Hymenoptera . Some vegetable matter ( up to 5 % ) was included in the diet and may have been ingested accidentally . 
 The little owl is territorial , the male normally remaining in one territory for life . However the boundaries may expand and contract , being largest in the courtship season in spring . The home range , in which the bird actually hunts for food , varies with the type of habitat and time of year . If a male intrudes into the territory of another , the occupier approaches and emits its territorial calls . If the intruder persists , the occupier flies at him aggressively . If this is unsuccessful , the occupier repeats the attack , this time trying to make contact with his claws . In retreat , an owl often drops to the ground and makes a low @-@ level escape . The territory is more actively defended against a strange male as compared to a known male from a neighbouring territory ; it has been shown that the little owl can recognise familiar birds by voice . 
 This owl becomes more vocal at night as the breeding season approaches in late spring . The nesting location varies with habitat , nests being found in holes in trees , in cliffs , quarries , walls , old buildings , river banks and rabbit burrows . A clutch of three to five eggs is laid ( occasionally two to eight ) . The eggs are broadly elliptical , white and without gloss ; they measure about 35 @.@ 5 by 29 @.@ 5 mm ( 1 @.@ 40 by 1 @.@ 16 in ) . They are incubated by the female who sometimes starts sitting after the first egg is laid . While she is incubating the eggs , the male brings food for her . The eggs hatch after twenty @-@ eight or twenty @-@ nine days . At first the chicks are brooded by the female and the male brings in food which she distributes to them . Later , both parents are involved in hunting and feeding them . The young leave the nest at about seven weeks , and can fly a week or two later . Usually there is a single brood but when food is abundant , there may be two . When the young disperse , they seldom travel more than about 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) . Pairs of birds often remain together all year round and the bond may last until one partner dies . 
 The little owl is partly diurnal and often perches boldly and prominently during the day . If living in an area with a large amount of human activity , little owls may grow used to humans and will remain on their perch , often in full view , while people are around . The little owl has a life expectancy of about sixteen years . However , many birds do not reach maturity ; severe winters can take their toll and some birds are killed by road vehicles at night , so the average lifespan may be in the order of three years . 
 = = Status = = 
 A. noctua has an extremely large range . It has been estimated that there are between 560 thousand and 1 @.@ 3 million breeding pairs in Europe , and as Europe equates to 25 to 49 % of the global range , the world population may be between five million and fifteen million birds . The population is believed to be stable , and for these reasons , the International Union for Conservation of Nature has assessed the bird 's conservation status as being of " least concern " . 
 = = In human culture = = 
 Owls have often been depicted from the Upper Palaeolithic onwards , in forms from statuettes and drawings to pottery and wooden posts , but in the main they are generic rather than identifiable to species . The little owl is , however , closely associated with the Greek goddess Athena and the Roman goddess Minerva , and hence represents wisdom and knowledge . A little owl with an olive branch appears on a Greek tetradrachm coin from 500 B.C. and in a 5th @-@ century B.C. bronze statue of Athena holding the bird in her hand . The call of a little owl was thought to have heralded the murder of Julius Caesar . The genus name , Athene commemorates the goddess , whose original role as a goddess of the night might explain the link to an owl . The species name noctua has , in effect , the same meaning , being the Latin name of an owl sacred to Minerva , Athena 's Roman counterpart . 
 In 1992 , the little owl appeared as a watermark on Jaap <unk> ’ s 100 guilder banknote for the Netherlands . 
 = Henry I of England = 
 Henry I ( c . 1068 – 1 December 1135 ) , also known as Henry Beauclerc , was King of England from 1100 to his death . Henry was the fourth son of William the Conqueror and was educated in Latin and the liberal arts . On William 's death in 1087 , Henry 's elder brothers Robert Curthose and William Rufus inherited Normandy and England , respectively , but Henry was left landless . Henry purchased the County of Cotentin in western Normandy from Robert , but William and Robert deposed him in 1091 . Henry gradually rebuilt his power base in the Cotentin and allied himself with William against Robert . Henry was present when William died in a hunting accident in 1100 , and he seized the English throne , promising at his coronation to correct many of William 's less popular policies . Henry married Matilda of Scotland but continued to have a large number of mistresses , by whom he had many illegitimate children . 
 Robert , who invaded in 1101 , disputed Henry 's control of England ; this military campaign ended in a negotiated settlement that confirmed Henry as king . The peace was short @-@ lived , and Henry invaded the Duchy of Normandy in 1105 and 1106 , finally defeating Robert at the Battle of Tinchebray . Henry kept Robert imprisoned for the rest of his life . Henry 's control of Normandy was challenged by Louis VI of France , Baldwin of Flanders and Fulk of Anjou , who promoted the rival claims of Robert 's son , William Clito , and supported a major rebellion in the Duchy between 1116 and 1119 . Following Henry 's victory at the Battle of <unk> , a favourable peace settlement was agreed with Louis in 1120 . 
 Considered by contemporaries to be a harsh but effective ruler , Henry skilfully manipulated the barons in England and Normandy . In England , he drew on the existing Anglo @-@ Saxon system of justice , local government and taxation , but also strengthened it with additional institutions , including the royal exchequer and itinerant justices . Normandy was also governed through a growing system of justices and an exchequer . Many of the officials who ran Henry 's system were " new men " of obscure backgrounds rather than from families of high status , who rose through the ranks as administrators . Henry encouraged ecclesiastical reform , but became embroiled in a serious dispute in 1101 with Archbishop Anselm of Canterbury , which was resolved through a compromise solution in 1105 . He supported the Cluniac order and played a major role in the selection of the senior clergy in England and Normandy . 
 Henry 's only legitimate son and heir , William Adelin , drowned in the White Ship disaster of 1120 , throwing the royal succession into doubt . Henry took a second wife , Adeliza , in the hope of having another son , but their marriage was childless . In response to this , Henry declared his daughter , Matilda , his heir and married her to Geoffrey of Anjou . The relationship between Henry and the couple became strained , and fighting broke out along the border with Anjou . Henry died on 1 December 1135 after a week of illness . Despite his plans for Matilda , the King was succeeded by his nephew , Stephen of Blois , resulting in a period of civil war known as the Anarchy . 
 = = Early life , 1068 – 1099 = = 
 = = = Childhood and appearance , 1068 – 86 = = = 
 Henry was probably born in England in 1068 , in either the summer or the last weeks of the year , possibly in the town of Selby in Yorkshire . His father was William , who had originally been the Duke of Normandy and then , following the invasion of 1066 , became the King of England , with lands stretching into Wales . The invasion had created an Anglo @-@ Norman elite , many with estates spread across both sides of the English Channel . These Anglo @-@ Norman barons typically had close links to the kingdom of France , which was then a loose collection of counties and smaller polities , under only the minimal control of the king . Henry 's mother , Matilda of Flanders , was the granddaughter of Robert II of France , and she probably named Henry after her uncle , King Henry I of France . 
 Henry was the youngest of William and Matilda 's four sons . Physically he resembled his older brothers Robert Curthose , Richard and William Rufus , being , as historian David Carpenter describes , " short , stocky and barrel @-@ chested , " with black hair . As a result of their age differences and Richard 's early death , Henry would have probably seen relatively little of his older brothers . He probably knew his sister , Adela , well , as the two were close in age . There is little documentary evidence for his early years ; historians Warren Hollister and Kathleen Thompson suggest he was brought up predominantly in England , while Judith Green argues he was initially brought up in the Duchy . He was probably educated by the Church , possibly by Bishop Osmund , the King 's chancellor , at Salisbury Cathedral ; it is uncertain if this indicated an intent by his parents for Henry to become a member of the clergy . It is also uncertain how far Henry 's education extended , but he was probably able to read Latin and had some background in the liberal arts . He was given military training by an instructor called Robert Achard , and Henry was knighted by his father on 24 May 1086 . 
 = = = Inheritance , 1087 – 88 = = = 
 In 1087 , William was fatally injured during a campaign in the Vexin . Henry joined his dying father near Rouen in September , where the King partitioned his possessions among his sons . The rules of succession in western Europe at the time were uncertain ; in some parts of France , primogeniture , in which the eldest son would inherit a title , was growing in popularity . In other parts of Europe , including Normandy and England , the tradition was for lands to be divided up , with the eldest son taking patrimonial lands – usually considered to be the most valuable – and younger sons given smaller , or more recently acquired , partitions or estates . 
 In dividing his lands , William appears to have followed the Norman tradition , distinguishing between Normandy , which he had inherited , and England , which he had acquired through war . William 's second son , Richard , had died in a hunting accident , leaving Henry and his two brothers to inherit William 's estate . Robert , the eldest , despite being in armed rebellion against his father at the time of his death , received Normandy . England was given to William Rufus , who was in favour with the dying king . Henry was given a large sum of money , usually reported as £ 5 @,@ 000 , with the expectation that he would also be given his mother 's modest set of lands in Buckinghamshire and Gloucestershire . William 's funeral at Caen was marred by angry complaints from a local man , and Henry may have been responsible for resolving the dispute by buying off the protester with silver . 
 Robert returned to Normandy , expecting to have been given both the Duchy and England , to find that William Rufus had crossed the Channel and been crowned king , as William II . The two brothers disagreed fundamentally over the inheritance , and Robert soon began to plan an invasion of England to seize the kingdom , helped by a rebellion by some of the leading nobles against William Rufus . Henry remained in Normandy and took up a role within Robert 's court , possibly either because he was unwilling to openly side with William Rufus , or because Robert might have taken the opportunity to confiscate Henry 's inherited money if he had tried to leave . William Rufus sequestered Henry 's new estates in England , leaving Henry landless . 
 In 1088 , Robert 's plans for the invasion of England began to falter , and he turned to Henry , proposing that his brother lend him some of his inheritance , which Henry refused . Henry and Robert then came to an alternative arrangement , in which Robert would make Henry the count of western Normandy , in exchange for £ 3 @,@ 000 . Henry 's lands were a new <unk> based around a delegation of the ducal authority in the Cotentin , but it extended across the <unk> , with control over the bishoprics of both . This also gave Henry influence over two major Norman leaders , Hugh d 'Avranches and Richard de Redvers , and the abbey of Mont Saint @-@ Michel , whose lands spread out further across the Duchy . Robert 's invasion force failed to leave Normandy , leaving William Rufus secure in England . 
 = = = Count of the Cotentin , 1088 – 90 = = = 
 Henry quickly established himself as count , building up a network of followers from western Normandy and eastern Brittany , whom historian John Le <unk> has characterised as " Henry 's gang " . His early supporters included Roger of Mandeville , Richard of Redvers , Richard d 'Avranches and Robert Fitzhamon , along with the churchman Roger of Salisbury . Robert attempted to go back on his deal with Henry and re @-@ appropriate the county , but Henry 's grip was already sufficiently firm to prevent this . Robert 's rule of the Duchy was chaotic , and parts of Henry 's lands became almost independent of central control from Rouen . 
 During this period , neither William nor Robert seems to have trusted Henry . Waiting until the rebellion against William Rufus was safely over , Henry returned to England in July 1088 . He met with the King but was unable to persuade him to grant him his mother 's estates , and travelled back to Normandy in the autumn . While he had been away , however , Odo , the Bishop of Bayeux , who regarded Henry as a potential competitor , had convinced Robert that Henry was conspiring against the duke with William Rufus . On landing , Odo seized Henry and imprisoned him in Neuilly @-@ la @-@ Forêt , and Robert took back the county of the Cotentin . Henry was held there over the winter , but in the spring of 1089 the senior elements of the Normandy nobility prevailed upon Robert to release him . 
 Although no longer formally the Count of Cotentin , Henry continued to control the west of Normandy . The struggle between Henry 's brothers continued . William Rufus continued to put down resistance to his rule in England , but began to build a number of alliances against Robert with barons in Normandy and neighbouring Ponthieu . Robert allied himself with Philip I of France . In late 1090 William Rufus encouraged Conan Pilatus , a powerful burgher in Rouen , to rebel against Robert ; Conan was supported by most of Rouen and made appeals to the neighbouring ducal garrisons to switch allegiance as well . 
 Robert issued an appeal for help to his barons , and Henry was the first to arrive in Rouen in November . Violence broke out , leading to savage , confused street fighting as both sides attempted to take control of the city . Robert and Henry left the castle to join the battle , but Robert then retreated , leaving Henry to continue the fighting . The battle turned in favour of the ducal forces and Henry took Conan prisoner . Henry was angry that Conan had turned against his feudal lord . He had him taken to the top of Rouen Castle and then , despite Conan 's offers to pay a huge ransom , threw him off the top of the castle to his death . Contemporaries considered Henry to have acted appropriately in making an example of Conan , and Henry became famous for his exploits in the battle . 
 = = = Fall and rise , 1091 – 99 = = = 
 In the aftermath , Robert forced Henry to leave Rouen , probably because Henry 's role in the fighting had been more prominent than his own , and possibly because Henry had asked to be formally reinstated as the count of the Cotentin . In early 1091 , William Rufus invaded Normandy with a sufficiently large army to bring Robert to the negotiating table . The two brothers signed a treaty at Rouen , granting William Rufus a range of lands and castles in Normandy . In return , William Rufus promised to support Robert 's attempts to regain control of the neighbouring county of Maine , once under Norman control , and help in regaining control over the Duchy , including Henry 's lands . They nominated each other as heirs to England and Normandy , excluding Henry from any succession while either one of them lived . 
 War now broke out between Henry and his brothers . Henry mobilised a mercenary army in the west of Normandy , but as William Rufus and Robert 's forces advanced , his network of baronial support melted away . Henry focused his remaining forces at Mont Saint @-@ Michel , where he was besieged , probably in March 1091 . The site was easy to defend , but lacked fresh water . The chronicler William of Malmesbury suggested that when Henry 's water ran short , Robert allowed his brother fresh supplies , leading to <unk> between Robert and William Rufus . The events of the final days of the siege are unclear : the besiegers had begun to argue about the future strategy for the campaign , but Henry then abandoned Mont Saint @-@ Michel , probably as part of a negotiated surrender . He left for Brittany and crossed over into France . 
 Henry 's next steps are not well documented ; one chronicler , Orderic Vitalis , suggests that he travelled in the French Vexin , along the Normandy border , for over a year with a small band of followers . By the end of the year , Robert and William Rufus had fallen out once again , and the Treaty of Rouen had been abandoned . In 1092 , Henry and his followers seized the Normandy town of Domfront . Domfront had previously been controlled by Robert of Bellême , but the inhabitants disliked his rule and invited Henry to take over the town , which he did in a bloodless coup . Over the next two years , Henry re @-@ established his network of supporters across western Normandy , forming what Judith Green terms a " court in waiting " . By 1094 , he was allocating lands and castles to his followers as if he were the Duke of Normandy . William Rufus began to support Henry with money , encouraging his campaign against Robert , and Henry used some of this to construct a substantial castle at Domfront . 
 William Rufus crossed into Normandy to take the war to Robert in 1094 , and when progress stalled , called upon Henry for assistance . Henry responded , but travelled to London instead of joining the main campaign further east in Normandy , possibly at the request of the King , who in any event abandoned the campaign and returned to England . Over the next few years , Henry appears to have strengthened his power base in western Normandy , visiting England occasionally to attend at William Rufus 's court . In 1095 Pope Urban II called the First Crusade , encouraging knights from across Europe to join . Robert joined the Crusade , borrowing money from William Rufus to do so , and granting the King temporary custody of his part of the Duchy in exchange . The King appeared confident of regaining the remainder of Normandy from Robert , and Henry appeared ever closer to William Rufus , the pair campaigning together in the Norman Vexin between 1097 and 1098 . 
 = = Early reign , 1100 – 06 = = 
 = = = Taking the throne , 1100 = = = 
 Henry became King of England following the death of William Rufus , who had been shot while hunting . On the afternoon of 2 August 1100 , the King had gone hunting in the New Forest , accompanied by a team of huntsmen and a number of the Norman nobility , including Henry . An arrow was fired , possibly by the baron Walter Tirel , which hit and killed William Rufus . Numerous conspiracy theories have been put forward suggesting that the King was killed deliberately ; most modern historians reject these , as hunting was a risky activity , and such accidents were common . Chaos broke out , and Tirel fled the scene for France , either because he had fired the fatal shot , or because he had been incorrectly accused and feared that he would be made a scapegoat for the King 's death . 
 Henry rode to Winchester , where an argument ensued as to who now had the best claim to the throne . William of Breteuil championed the rights of Robert , who was still abroad , returning from the Crusade , and to whom Henry and the barons had given homage in previous years . Henry argued that , unlike Robert , he had been born to a reigning king and queen , thereby giving him a claim under the right of <unk> . Tempers flared , but Henry , supported by Henry de Beaumont and Robert of Meulan , held sway and persuaded the barons to follow him . He occupied Winchester Castle and seized the royal treasury . 
 Henry was hastily crowned king in Westminster Abbey on 5 August by Maurice , the Bishop of London , as Anselm , the Archbishop of Canterbury , had been exiled by William Rufus , and Thomas , the Archbishop of York , was in the north of England at Ripon . In accordance with English tradition and in a bid to legitimise his rule , Henry issued a coronation charter laying out various commitments . The new king presented himself as having restored order to a trouble @-@ torn country . He announced that he would abandon William Rufus 's policies towards the Church , which had been seen as oppressive by the clergy ; he promised to prevent royal abuses of the barons ' property rights , and assured a return to the gentler customs of Edward the Confessor ; he asserted that he would " establish a firm peace " across England and ordered " that this peace shall henceforth be kept " . 
 In addition to his existing circle of supporters , many of whom were richly rewarded with new lands , Henry quickly co @-@ opted many of the existing administration into his new royal household . William Giffard , William Rufus 's chancellor , was made the Bishop of Winchester , and the prominent sheriffs Urse d 'Abetot , Haimo <unk> and Robert Fitzhamon continued to play a senior role in government . By contrast , the unpopular Ranulf Flambard , the Bishop of Durham and a key member of the previous regime , was imprisoned in the Tower of London and charged with corruption . The late king had left many church positions unfilled , and Henry set about nominating candidates to these , in an effort to build further support for his new government . The appointments needed to be consecrated , and Henry wrote to Anselm , apologising for having been crowned while the Archbishop was still in France and asking him to return at once . 
 = = = Marriage to Matilda , 1100 = = = 
 On 11 November 1100 Henry married Matilda , the daughter of Malcolm III of Scotland . Henry was now around 31 years old , but late marriages for noblemen were not unusual in the 11th century . The pair had probably first met earlier the previous decade , possibly being introduced through Bishop Osmund of Salisbury . Historian Warren Hollister argues that Henry and Matilda were emotionally close , but their union was also certainly politically motivated . Matilda had originally been named Edith , an Anglo @-@ Saxon name , and was a member of the West Saxon royal family , being the niece of Edgar the Ætheling , the great @-@ granddaughter of Edmund Ironside and a descendent of Alfred the Great . For Henry , marrying Matilda gave his reign increased legitimacy , and for Matilda , an ambitious woman , it was an opportunity for high status and power in England . 
 Matilda had been educated in a sequence of convents , however , and may well have taken the vows to formally become a nun , which formed an obstacle to the marriage progressing . She did not wish to be a nun and appealed to Anselm for permission to marry Henry , and the Archbishop established a council at Lambeth Palace to judge the issue . Despite some dissenting voices , the council concluded that although Matilda had lived in a convent , she had not actually become a nun and was therefore free to marry , a judgement that Anselm then affirmed , allowing the marriage to proceed . Matilda proved an effective queen for Henry , acting as a regent in England on occasion , addressing and presiding over councils , and extensively supporting the arts . The couple soon had two children , Matilda , born in 1102 , and William Adelin , born in 1103 ; it is possible that they also had a second son , Richard , who died young . Following the birth of these children , Matilda preferred to remain based in Westminster while Henry travelled across England and Normandy , either for religious reasons or because she enjoyed being involved in the machinery of royal governance . 
 Henry had a considerable sexual appetite and enjoyed a substantial number of sexual partners , resulting in a large number of illegitimate children , at least nine sons and 13 daughters , many of whom he appears to have recognised and supported . It was normal for unmarried Anglo @-@ Norman noblemen to have sexual relations with prostitutes and local women , and kings were also expected to have mistresses . Some of these relationships occurred before Henry was married , but many others took place after his marriage to Matilda . Henry had a wide range of mistresses from a range of backgrounds , and the relationships appear to have been conducted relatively openly . He may have chosen some of his noble mistresses for political purposes , but the evidence to support this theory is limited . 
 = = = Treaty of Alton , 1101 – 02 = = = 
 By early 1101 , Henry 's new regime was established and functioning , but many of the Anglo @-@ Norman elite still supported Robert , or would be prepared to switch sides if Henry 's elder brother appeared likely to gain power in England . In February , Flambard escaped from the Tower of London and crossed the Channel to Normandy , where he injected fresh direction and energy to Robert 's attempts to mobilise an invasion force . By July , Robert had formed an army and a fleet , ready to move against Henry in England . Raising the stakes in the conflict , Henry seized Flambard 's lands and , with the support of Anselm , Flambard was removed from his position as bishop . Henry held court in April and June , where the nobility renewed their oaths of allegiance to him , but their support still appeared partial and shaky . 
 With the invasion imminent , Henry mobilised his forces and fleet outside Pevensey , close to Robert 's anticipated landing site , training some of them personally in how to counter cavalry charges . Despite English levies and knights owing military service to the Church arriving in considerable numbers , many of his barons did not appear . Anselm intervened with some of the doubters , emphasising the religious importance of their loyalty to Henry . Robert unexpectedly landed further up the coast at Portsmouth on 20 July with a modest force of a few hundred men , but these were quickly joined by many of the barons in England . However , instead of marching into nearby Winchester and seizing Henry 's treasury , Robert paused , giving Henry time to march west and intercept the invasion force . 
 The two armies met at Alton where peace negotiations began , possibly initiated by either Henry or Robert , and probably supported by Flambard . The brothers then agreed to the Treaty of Alton , under which Robert released Henry from his oath of homage and recognised him as king ; Henry renounced his claims on western Normandy , except for Domfront , and agreed to pay Robert £ 2 @,@ 000 a year for life ; if either brother died without a male heir , the other would inherit his lands ; the barons whose lands had been seized by either the King or the Duke for supporting his rival would have them returned , and Flambard would be reinstated as bishop ; the two brothers would campaign together to defend their territories in Normandy . Robert remained in England for a few months more with Henry before returning to Normandy . 
 Despite the treaty , Henry set about inflicting severe penalties on the barons who had stood against him during the invasion . William de Warenne , the Earl of Surrey , was accused of fresh crimes , which were not covered by the Alton amnesty , and was banished from England . In 1102 Henry then turned against Robert of Bellême and his brothers , the most powerful of the barons , accusing him of 45 different offences . Robert escaped and took up arms against Henry . Henry besieged Robert 's castles at Arundel , Tickhill and Shrewsbury , pushing down into the south @-@ west to attack Bridgnorth . His power base in England broken , Robert accepted Henry 's offer of banishment and left the country for Normandy . 
 = = = Conquest of Normandy , 1103 – 06 = = = 
 Henry 's network of allies in Normandy became stronger during 1103 . Henry married Juliana , one of his illegitimate daughters , to Eustace of Breteuil , and another illegitimate daughter , Matilda , to Rotrou , the Count of Perche , on the Normandy border . Henry attempted to win over other members of the Normandy nobility and gave other English estates and lucrative offers to key Norman lords . Duke Robert continued to fight Robert of Bellême , but the Duke 's position worsened , until by 1104 , he had to ally himself formally with Bellême to survive . Arguing that Duke Robert had broken the terms of their treaty , Henry crossed over the Channel to Domfront , where he met with senior barons from across Normandy , eager to ally themselves with the King . Henry confronted his brother and accused him of siding with his enemies , before returning to England . 
 Normandy continued to disintegrate into chaos . In 1105 , Henry sent his friend Robert Fitzhamon and a force of knights into the Duchy , apparently to provoke a confrontation with Duke Robert . Fitzhamon was captured , and Henry used this as an excuse to invade , promising to restore peace and order . Henry had the support of most of the neighbouring counts around Normandy 's borders , and King Philip of France was persuaded to remain neutral . Henry occupied western Normandy , and advanced east on Bayeux , where Fitzhamon was held . The city refused to surrender , and Henry besieged it , burning it to the ground . Terrified of meeting the same fate , the town of Caen switched sides and surrendered , allowing Henry to advance on Falaise , which he took with some casualties . Henry 's campaign stalled , and the King instead began peace discussions with Robert . The negotiations were inconclusive and the fighting dragged on until Christmas , when Henry returned to England . 
 Henry invaded again in July 1106 , hoping to provoke a decisive battle . After some initial tactical successes , he turned south @-@ west towards the castle of Tinchebray . He besieged the castle and Duke Robert , supported by Robert of Bellême , advanced from Falaise to relieve it . After attempts at negotiation failed , the Battle of Tinchebray took place , probably on 28 September . The battle lasted around an hour , and began with a charge by Duke Robert 's cavalry ; the infantry and dismounted knights of both sides then joined the battle . Henry 's reserves , led by Elias , the Count of Maine and Alan , the Duke of Brittany , attacked the enemy 's flanks , routing first Bellême 's troops and then the bulk of the ducal forces . Duke Robert was taken prisoner , but Bellême escaped . 
 Henry mopped up the remaining resistance in Normandy , and Robert ordered his last garrisons to surrender . Reaching Rouen , Henry reaffirmed the laws and customs of Normandy and took homage from the leading barons and citizens . The lesser prisoners taken at Tinchebray were released , but Robert and several other leading nobles were imprisoned indefinitely . Henry 's nephew , Robert 's son William Clito , was only three years old and was released to the care of <unk> of Saint @-@ <unk> , a Norman baron . Henry reconciled himself with Robert of Bellême , who gave up the ducal lands he had seized and rejoined the royal court . Henry had no way of legally removing the Duchy from his brother Robert , and initially Henry avoided using the title " duke " at all , emphasising that , as the King of England , he was only acting as the guardian of the troubled Duchy . 
 = = Government , family and household = = 
 = = = Government , law and court = = = 
 Henry inherited the kingdom of England from William Rufus , giving him a claim of suzerainty over Wales and Scotland , and acquired the Duchy of Normandy , a complex entity with troubled borders . The borders between England and Scotland were still uncertain during Henry 's reign , with Anglo @-@ Norman influence pushing northwards through Cumbria , but Henry 's relationship with King David I of Scotland was generally good , partially due to Henry 's marriage to his sister . In Wales , Henry used his power to coerce and charm the indigenous Welsh princes , while Norman Marcher Lords pushed across the valleys of South Wales . Normandy was controlled via various interlocking networks of ducal , ecclesiastical and family contacts , backed by a growing string of important ducal castles along the borders . Alliances and relationships with neighbouring counties along the Norman border were particularly important to maintaining the stability of the Duchy . 
 Henry ruled through the various barons and lords in England and Normandy , whom he manipulated skilfully for political effect . Political friendships , termed amicitia in Latin , were important during the 12th century , and Henry maintained a wide range of these , mediating between his friends in various factions across his realm when necessary , and rewarding those who were loyal to him . Henry also had a reputation for punishing those barons who stood against him , and he maintained an effective network of informers and spies who reported to him on events . Henry was a harsh , firm ruler , but not excessively so by the standards of the day . Over time , he increased the degree of his control over the barons , removing his enemies and bolstering his friends until the " reconstructed baronage " , as historian Warren Hollister describes it , was predominantly loyal and dependent on the King . 
 Henry 's itinerant royal court comprised various parts . At the heart was Henry 's domestic household , called the domus ; a wider grouping was termed the familia regis , and formal gatherings of the court were termed curia . The domus was divided into several parts . The chapel , headed by the chancellor , looked after the royal documents , the chamber dealt with financial affairs and the master @-@ marshal was responsible for travel and accommodation . The familia regis included Henry 's mounted household troops , up to several hundred strong , who came from a wider range of social backgrounds , and could be deployed across England and Normandy as required . Initially Henry continued his father 's practice of regular crown @-@ wearing ceremonies at his curia , but they became less frequent as the years passed . Henry 's court was grand and ostentatious , financing the construction of large new buildings and castles with a range of precious gifts on display , including the King 's private menagerie of exotic animals , which he kept at Woodstock Palace . Despite being a lively community , Henry 's court was more tightly controlled than those of previous kings . Strict rules controlled personal behaviour and prohibited members of the court from pillaging neighbouring villages , as had been the norm under William Rufus . 
 Henry was responsible for a substantial expansion of the royal justice system . In England , Henry drew on the existing Anglo @-@ Saxon system of justice , local government and taxes , but strengthened it with additional central governmental institutions . Roger of Salisbury began to develop the royal exchequer after 1110 , using it to collect and audit revenues from the King 's sheriffs in the shires . Itinerant justices began to emerge under Henry , travelling around the country managing eyre courts , and many more laws were formally recorded . Henry gathered increasing revenue from the expansion of royal justice , both from fines and from fees . The first Pipe Roll that is known to have survived dates from 1130 , recording royal expenditures . Henry reformed the coinage in 1107 , 1108 and in 1125 , inflicting harsh corporal punishments to English coiners who had been found guilty of debasing the currency . In Normandy , Henry restored law and order after 1106 , operating through a body of Norman justices and an exchequer system similar to that in England . Norman institutions grew in scale and scope under Henry , although less quickly than in England . Many of the officials that ran Henry 's system were termed " new men " , relatively low @-@ born individuals who rose through the ranks as administrators , managing justice or the royal revenues . 
 = = = Relations with the church = = = 
 = = = = Church and the King = = = = 
 Henry 's ability to govern was intimately bound up with the Church , which formed the key to the administration of both England and Normandy , and this relationship changed considerably over the course of his reign . William the Conqueror had reformed the English Church with the support of his Archbishop of Canterbury , Lanfranc , who became a close colleague and advisor to the King . Under William Rufus this arrangement had collapsed , the King and Archbishop Anselm had become estranged and Anselm had gone into exile . Henry also believed in Church reform , but on taking power in England he became embroiled in the investiture controversy . 
 The argument concerned who should invest a new bishop with his staff and ring : traditionally , this had been carried out by the king in a symbolic demonstration of royal power , but Pope Urban II had condemned this practice in 1099 , arguing that only the papacy could carry out this task , and declaring that the clergy should not give homage to their local temporal rulers . Anselm returned to England from exile in 1100 having heard Urban 's pronouncement , and informed Henry that he would be complying with the Pope 's wishes . Henry was in a difficult position . On one hand , the symbolism and homage was important to him ; on the other hand , he needed Anselm 's support in his struggle with his brother Duke Robert . 
 Anselm stuck firmly to the letter of the papal decree , despite Henry 's attempts to persuade him to give way in return for a vague assurance of a future royal compromise . Matters escalated , with Anselm going back into exile and Henry confiscating the revenues of his estates . Anselm threatened excommunication , and in July 1105 the two men finally negotiated a solution . A distinction was drawn between the secular and ecclesiastical powers of the prelates , under which Henry gave up his right to invest his clergy , but retained the custom of requiring them to come and do homage for the temporalities , the landed properties they held in England . Despite this argument , the pair worked closely together , combining to deal with Duke Robert 's invasion of 1101 , for example , and holding major reforming councils in 1102 and 1108 . 
 A long @-@ running dispute between the Archbishops of Canterbury and York flared up under Anselm 's successor , Ralph d 'Escures . Canterbury , traditionally the senior of the two establishments , had long argued that the Archbishop of York should formally promise to obey their Archbishop , but York argued that the two episcopates were independent within the English Church and that no such promise was necessary . Henry supported the primacy of Canterbury , to ensure that England remained under a single ecclesiastical administration , but the Pope preferred the case of York . The matter was complicated by Henry 's personal friendship with Thurstan , the Archbishop of York , and the King 's desire that the case should not end up in a papal court , beyond royal control . Henry badly needed the support of the Papacy in his struggle with Louis of France , however , and therefore allowed Thurstan to attend the Council of Rheims in 1119 , where Thurstan was then consecrated by the Pope with no mention of any duty towards Canterbury . Henry believed that this went against assurances Thurstan had previously made and exiled him from England until the King and Archbishop came to a negotiated solution the following year . 
 Even after the investiture dispute , the King continued to play a major role in the selection of new English and Norman bishops and archbishops . Henry appointed many of his officials to bishoprics and , as historian Martin Brett suggests , " some of his officers could look forward to a mitre with all but absolute confidence " . Henry 's chancellors , and those of his queens , became bishops of Durham , Hereford , London , Lincoln , Winchester and Salisbury . Henry increasingly drew on a wider range of these bishops as advisors – particularly Roger of Salisbury – breaking with the earlier tradition of relying primarily on the Archbishop of Canterbury . The result was a cohesive body of administrators through which Henry could exercise careful influence , holding general councils to discuss key matters of policy . This stability shifted slightly after 1125 , when Henry began to inject a wider range of candidates into the senior positions of the Church , often with more reformist views , and the impact of this generation would be felt in the years after Henry 's death . 
 = = = = Personal beliefs and piety = = = = 
 Like other rulers of the period , Henry donated to the Church and patronised various religious communities , but contemporary chroniclers did not consider him an unusually pious king . His personal beliefs and piety may , however , have developed during the course of his life . Henry had always taken an interest in religion , but in his later years he may have become much more concerned about spiritual affairs . If so , the major shifts in his thinking would appear to have occurred after 1120 , when his son William Adelin died , and 1129 , when his daughter 's marriage teetered on the verge of collapse . 
 As a proponent of religious reform , Henry gave extensively to reformist groups within the Church . He was a keen supporter of the Cluniac order , probably for intellectual reasons . He donated money to the abbey at Cluny itself , and after 1120 gave generously to Reading Abbey , a Cluniac establishment . Construction on Reading began in 1121 , and Henry endowed it with rich lands and extensive privileges , making it a symbol of his dynastic lines . He also focused effort on promoting the conversion of communities of clerks into Augustinian canons , the foundation of leper hospitals , expanding the provision of nunneries , and the charismatic orders of the <unk> and Tironensians . He was an avid collector of relics , sending an embassy to Constantinople in 1118 to collect Byzantine items , some of which were donated to Reading Abbey . 
 = = Later reign , 1107 – 35 = = 
 = = = Continental and Welsh politics , 1108 – 14 = = = 
 Normandy faced an increased threat from France , Anjou and Flanders after 1108 . Louis VI succeeded to the French throne in 1108 and began to reassert central royal power . Louis demanded Henry give homage to him and that two disputed castles along the Normandy border be placed into the control of neutral castellans . Henry refused , and Louis responded by mobilising an army . After some arguments , the two kings negotiated a truce and retreated without fighting , leaving the underlying issues unresolved . Fulk V assumed power in Anjou in 1109 and began to rebuild Angevin authority . Fulk also inherited the county of Maine , but refused to recognise Henry as his feudal lord and instead allied himself with Louis . Robert II of Flanders also briefly joined the alliance , before his death in 1111 . 
 In 1108 , Henry betrothed his eight @-@ year @-@ old daughter , Matilda , to Henry V , the future Holy Roman Emperor . For King Henry , this was a prestigious match ; for Henry V , it was an opportunity to restore his financial situation and fund an expedition to Italy , as he received a dowry of £ 6 @,@ 666 from England and Normandy . Raising this money proved challenging , and required the implementation of a special " aid " , or tax , in England . Matilda was crowned Henry V 's queen in 1110 . 
 Henry responded to the French and Angevin threat by expanding his own network of supporters beyond the Norman borders . Some Norman barons deemed unreliable were arrested or dispossessed , and Henry used their forfeited estates to bribe his potential allies in the neighbouring territories , in particular Maine . Around 1110 , Henry attempted to arrest the young William Clito , but William 's mentors moved him to the safety of Flanders before he could be taken . At about this time , Henry probably began to style himself as the Duke of Normandy . Robert of Bellême turned against Henry once again , and when he appeared at Henry 's court in 1112 in a new role as a French ambassador , he was arrested and imprisoned . 
 Rebellions broke out in France and Anjou between 1111 and 1113 , and Henry crossed into Normandy to support his nephew , Count Theobald of Blois , who had sided against Louis in the uprising . In a bid to diplomatically isolate the French King , Henry betrothed his young son , William Adelin , to Fulk 's daughter Matilda , and married his illegitimate daughter Matilda to Conan III , the Duke of Brittany , creating alliances with Anjou and Brittany respectively . Louis backed down and in March 1113 met with Henry near Gisors to agree a peace settlement , giving Henry the disputed fortresses and confirming Henry 's overlordship of Maine , Bellême and Brittany . 
 Meanwhile , the situation in Wales was deteriorating . Henry had conducted a campaign in South Wales in 1108 , pushing out royal power in the region and colonising the area around Pembroke with Flemings . By 1114 , some of the resident Norman lords were under attack , while in Mid @-@ Wales , Owain ap Cadwgan blinded one of the political hostages he was holding , and in North Wales Gruffudd ap Cynan threatened the power of the Earl of Chester . Henry sent three armies into Wales that year , with Gilbert Fitz Richard leading a force from the south , Alexander , King of Scotland , pressing from the north and Henry himself advancing into Mid @-@ Wales . Owain and Gruffudd sued for peace , and Henry accepted a political compromise . Henry reinforced the Welsh Marches with his own appointees , strengthening the border territories . 
 = = = Rebellion , 1115 – 20 = = = 
 Concerned about the succession , Henry sought to persuade Louis VI to accept his son , William Adelin , as the legitimate future Duke of Normandy , in exchange for his son 's homage . Henry crossed into Normandy in 1115 and assembled the Norman barons to swear loyalty ; he also almost successfully negotiated a settlement with King Louis , affirming William 's right to the Duchy in exchange for a large sum of money , but the deal fell through and Louis , backed by his ally Baldwin of Flanders , instead declared that he considered William Clito the legitimate heir to the Duchy . 
 War broke out after Henry returned to Normandy with an army to support Theobald of Blois , who was under attack from Louis . Henry and Louis raided each other 's towns along the border , and a wider conflict then broke out , probably in 1116 . Henry was pushed onto the defensive as French , Flemish and Angevin forces began to pillage the Normandy countryside . Amaury III of Montfort and many other barons rose up against Henry , and there was an assassination plot from within his own household . Henry 's wife , Matilda , died in early 1118 , but the situation in Normandy was sufficiently pressing that Henry was unable to return to England for her funeral . 
 Henry responded by mounting campaigns against the rebel barons and deepening his alliance with Theobald . Baldwin of Flanders was wounded in battle and died in September 1118 , easing the pressure on Normandy from the north @-@ east . Henry attempted to crush a revolt in the city of Alençon , but was defeated by Fulk and the Angevin army . Forced to retreat from Alençon , Henry 's position deteriorated alarmingly , as his resources became overstretched and more barons abandoned his cause . Early in 1119 , Eustace of Breteuil and Henry 's daughter , Juliana , threatened to join the baronial revolt . Hostages were exchanged in a bid to avoid conflict , but relations broke down and both sides mutilated their captives . Henry attacked and took the town of Breteuil , despite Juliana 's attempt to kill her father with a crossbow . In the aftermath , Henry dispossessed the couple of almost all of their lands in Normandy . 
 Henry 's situation improved in May 1119 when he enticed Fulk to switch sides by finally agreeing to marry William Adelin to Fulk 's daughter , Matilda , and paying Fulk a large sum of money . Fulk left for the Levant , leaving the County of Maine in Henry 's care , and the King was free to focus on crushing his remaining enemies . During the summer Henry advanced into the Norman Vexin , where he encountered Louis 's army , resulting in the Battle of <unk> . Henry appears to have deployed scouts and then organised his troops into several carefully formed lines of dismounted knights . Unlike Henry 's forces , the French knights remained mounted ; they hastily charged the Anglo @-@ Norman positions , breaking through the first rank of the defences but then becoming entangled in Henry 's second line of knights . Surrounded , the French army began to collapse . In the melee , Henry was hit by a sword blow , but his armour protected him . Louis and William Clito escaped from the battle , leaving Henry to return to Rouen in triumph . 
 The war slowly petered out after this battle , and Louis took the dispute over Normandy to Pope Callixtus II 's council in Reims that October . Henry faced a number of French complaints concerning his acquisition and subsequent management of Normandy , and despite being defended by Geoffrey , the Archbishop of Rouen , Henry 's case was shouted down by the pro @-@ French elements of the council . Callixtus declined to support Louis , however , and merely advised the two rulers to seek peace . Amaury de Montfort came to terms with Henry , but Henry and William Clito failed to find a mutually satisfactory compromise . In June 1120 , Henry and Louis formally made peace on terms advantageous to the English King : William Adelin gave homage to Louis , and in return Louis confirmed William 's rights to the Duchy . 
 = = = Succession crisis , 1120 – 23 = = = 
 Henry 's succession plans were thrown into chaos by the sinking of the White Ship on 25 November 1120 . Henry had left the port of Barfleur for England in the early evening , leaving William Adelin and many of the younger members of the court to follow on that night in a separate vessel , the White Ship . Both the crew and passengers were drunk and , just outside the harbour , the ship hit a submerged rock . The ship sank , killing as many as 300 people , with only one survivor , a butcher from Rouen . Henry 's court was initially too scared to report William 's death to the King . When he was finally told , he collapsed with grief . 
 The disaster left Henry with no legitimate son , his various nephews now the closest male heirs . Henry announced he would take a new wife , Adeliza of Louvain , opening up the prospect of a new royal son , and the two were married at Windsor Castle in January 1121 . Henry appears to have chosen her because she was attractive and came from a prestigious noble line . Adela seems to have been fond of Henry and joined him in his travels , probably to maximise the chances of her conceiving a child . The White Ship disaster initiated fresh conflict in Wales , where the drowning of Richard , Earl of Chester , encouraged a rebellion led by Maredudd ap Bleddyn . Henry intervened in North Wales that summer with an army and , although the King was hit by a Welsh arrow , the campaign reaffirmed royal power across the region . 
 With William dead , Henry 's alliance with Anjou – which had been based on his son marrying Fulk 's daughter – began to disintegrate . Fulk returned from the Levant and demanded that Henry return Matilda and her dowry , a range of estates and fortifications in Maine . Matilda left for Anjou , but Henry argued that the dowry had in fact originally belonged to him before it came into the possession of Fulk , and so declined to hand the estates back to Anjou . Fulk married his daughter Sibylla to William Clito , and granted them Maine . Once again , conflict broke out , as Amaury de Montfort allied himself with Fulk and led a revolt along the Norman @-@ Anjou border in 1123 . Amaury was joined by several other Norman barons , headed by Waleran de Beaumont , one of the sons of Henry 's old ally , Robert of Meulan . 
 Henry dispatched Robert of Gloucester and Ranulf le Meschin to Normandy and then intervened himself in late 1123 . Henry began the process of besieging the rebel castles , before wintering in the Duchy . In the spring , campaigning began again . Ranulf received intelligence that the rebels were returning to one of their bases at <unk> , allowing him to ambush them en route at <unk> ; Waleran charged the royal forces , but his knights were cut down by Ranulf 's archers and the rebels were quickly overwhelmed . Waleran was captured , but Amaury escaped . Henry mopped up the remainder of the rebellion , blinding some of the rebel leaders – considered , at the time , a more merciful punishment than execution – and recovering the last rebel castles . Henry paid Pope Callixtus a large amount of money , in exchange for the Papacy annulling the marriage of William Clito and Sibylla on the grounds of consanguinity . 
 = = = Planning the succession , 1124 – 34 = = = 
 Henry and his new wife did not conceive any children , generating prurient speculation as to the possible explanation , and the future of the dynasty appeared at risk . Henry may have begun to look among his nephews for a possible heir . He may have considered Stephen of Blois as a possible option and , perhaps in preparation for this , he arranged a beneficial marriage for Stephen to a wealthy heiress , Matilda . Theobald of Blois , his close ally , may have also felt that he was in favour with Henry . William Clito , who was King Louis 's preferred choice , remained opposed to Henry and was therefore unsuitable . Henry may have also considered his own illegitimate son , Robert of Gloucester , as a possible candidate , but English tradition and custom would have looked unfavourably on this . 
 Henry 's plans shifted when the Empress Matilda 's husband , the Emperor Henry , died in 1125 . King Henry recalled his daughter to England the next year and declared that , should he die without a male heir , she was to be his rightful successor . The Anglo @-@ Norman barons were gathered together at Westminster on Christmas 1126 , where they swore to recognise Matilda and any future legitimate heir she might have . Putting forward a woman as a potential heir in this way was unusual : opposition to Matilda continued to exist within the English court , and Louis was vehemently opposed to her candidacy . 
 Fresh conflict broke out in 1127 , when Charles , the childless Count of Flanders , was murdered , creating a local succession crisis . Backed by King Louis , William Clito was chosen by the Flemings to become their new ruler . This development potentially threatened Normandy , and Henry began to finance a proxy war in Flanders , promoting the claims of William 's Flemish rivals . In an effort to disrupt the French alliance with William , Henry mounted an attack into France in 1128 , forcing Louis to cut his aid to William . William died unexpectedly in July , removing the last major challenger to Henry 's rule and bringing the war in Flanders to a halt . Without William , the baronial opposition in Normandy lacked a leader . A fresh peace was made with France , and the King was finally able to release the remaining prisoners from the revolt of 1123 , including Waleran of Meulan , who was rehabilitated into the royal court . 
 Meanwhile , Henry rebuilt his alliance with Fulk of Anjou , this time by marrying Matilda to Fulk 's eldest son , Geoffrey . The pair were betrothed in 1127 and married the following year . It is unknown whether Henry intended Geoffrey to have any future claim on England or Normandy , and he was probably keeping his son @-@ in @-@ law 's status deliberately uncertain . Similarly , although Matilda was granted a number of Normandy castles as part of her dowry , it was not specified when the couple would actually take possession of them . Fulk left Anjou for Jerusalem in 1129 , declaring Geoffrey the Count of Anjou and Maine . The marriage proved difficult , as the couple did not particularly like each other and the disputed castles proved a point of contention , resulting in Matilda returning to Normandy later that year . Henry appears to have blamed Geoffrey for the separation , but in 1131 the couple were reconciled . Much to the pleasure and relief of Henry , Matilda then gave birth to a sequence of two sons , Henry and Geoffrey , in 1133 and 1134 . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 = = = Death , 1135 = = = 
 Relations between Henry , Matilda , and Geoffrey became increasingly strained during the King 's final years . Matilda and Geoffrey suspected that they lacked genuine support in England . In 1135 they urged Henry to hand over the royal castles in Normandy to Matilda whilst he was still alive , and insisted that the Norman nobility swear immediate allegiance to her , thereby giving the couple a more powerful position after Henry 's death . Henry angrily declined to do so , probably out of concern that Geoffrey would try to seize power in Normandy . A fresh rebellion broke out amongst the barons in southern Normandy , led by William , the Count of Ponthieu , whereupon Geoffrey and Matilda intervened in support of the rebels . 
 Henry campaigned throughout the autumn , strengthening the southern frontier , and then travelled to Lyons @-@ la @-@ Forêt in November to enjoy some hunting , still apparently healthy . There Henry fell ill – according to the chronicler Henry of Huntingdon , he ate a number of lampreys against his physician 's advice – and his condition worsened over the course of a week . Once the condition appeared terminal , Henry gave confession and summoned Archbishop Hugh of Amiens , who was joined by Robert of Gloucester and other members of the court . In accordance with custom , preparations were made to settle Henry 's outstanding debts and to revoke outstanding sentences of forfeiture . The King died on 1 December 1135 , and his corpse was taken to Rouen accompanied by the barons , where it was embalmed ; his entrails were buried locally at Port @-@ du @-@ Salut Abbey , and the preserved body was taken on to England , where it was interred at Reading Abbey . 
 Despite Henry 's efforts , the succession was disputed . When news began to spread of the King 's death , Geoffrey and Matilda were in Anjou supporting the rebels in their campaign against the royal army , which included a number of Matilda 's supporters such as Robert of Gloucester . Many of these barons had taken an oath to stay in Normandy until the late king was properly buried , which prevented them from returning to England . The Norman nobility discussed declaring Theobald of Blois king . Theobald 's younger brother , Stephen of Blois , quickly crossed from Boulogne to England , however , accompanied by his military household . With the help of his brother , Henry of Blois , he seized power in England and was crowned king on 22 December . The Empress Matilda did not give up her claim to England and Normandy , leading to the prolonged civil war known as the Anarchy between 1135 and 1153 . 
 = = = Historiography = = = 
 Historians have drawn on a range of sources on Henry , including the accounts of chroniclers ; other documentary evidence , including early pipe rolls ; and surviving buildings and architecture . The three main chroniclers to describe the events of Henry 's life were William of Malmesbury , Orderic Vitalis , and Henry of Huntingdon , but each incorporated extensive social and moral commentary into their accounts and borrowed a range of literary devices and stereotypical events from other popular works . Other chroniclers include Eadmer , Hugh the Chanter , Abbot Suger , and the authors of the Welsh Brut . Not all royal documents from the period have survived , but there are a number of royal acts , charters , writs , and letters , along with some early financial records . Some of these have since been discovered to be forgeries , and others had been subsequently amended or tampered with . 
 Late medieval historians seized on the accounts of selected chroniclers regarding Henry 's education and gave him the title of Henry " Beauclerc " , a theme echoed in the analysis of Victorian and Edwardian historians such as Francis Palgrave and Henry Davis . The historian Charles David dismissed this argument in 1929 , showing the more extreme claims for Henry 's education to be without foundation . Modern histories of Henry commenced with Richard Southern 's work in the early 1960s , followed by extensive research during the rest of the 20th century into a wide number of themes from his reign in England , and a much more limited number of studies of his rule in Normandy . Only two major , modern biographies of Henry have been produced , Warren Hollister 's posthumous volume in 2001 , and Judith Green 's 2006 work . 
 Interpretation of Henry 's personality by historians has altered over time . Earlier historians such as Austin Poole and Richard Southern considered Henry as a cruel , draconian ruler . More recent historians , such as Hollister and Green , view his implementation of justice much more sympathetically , particularly when set against the standards of the day , but even Green has noted that Henry was " in many respects highly unpleasant " , and Alan Cooper has observed that many contemporary chroniclers were probably too scared of the King to voice much criticism . Historians have also debated the extent to which Henry 's administrative reforms genuinely constituted an introduction of what Hollister and John Baldwin have termed systematic , " administrative kingship " , or whether his outlook remained fundamentally traditional . 
 Henry 's burial at Reading Abbey is marked by a local cross , but Reading Abbey was slowly demolished during the Dissolution of the Monasteries in the 16th century . The exact location is uncertain , but the most likely location of the tomb itself is now in a built @-@ up area of central Reading , on the site of the former abbey choir . A plan to locate his remains was announced in March 2015 , with support from English Heritage and Philippa Langley , who aided with the successful exhumation of Richard III . 
 = = Family and children = = 
 = = = Legitimate = = = 
 Henry and his first wife , Matilda , had at least two legitimate children : 
 Matilda , born in 1102 , died 1167 . 
 William Adelin , born in 1103 , died 1120 . 
 Possibly Richard , who , if he existed , died young . 
 Henry and his second wife , Adeliza , had no children . 
 = = = Illegitimate = = = 
 Henry had a number of illegitimate children by various mistresses . 
 = = = = Sons = = = = 
 Robert of Gloucester , born in the 1090s . 
 Richard , born to <unk> , brought up by Robert Bloet , the Bishop of Lincoln . 
 Reginald de Dunstanville , Earl of Cornwall , born in the 1110s or early 1120s , possibly to Sibyl Corbet . 
 Robert the King 's son , born to Ede , daughter of <unk> . 
 Gilbert FitzRoy , possibly born to an unnamed sister or daughter of Walter of Gand . 
 William de Tracy , possibly born in the 1090s . 
 Henry the King 's son , possibly born to Nest ferch Rhys . 
 Fulk the King 's son , possibly born to <unk> . 
 William , the brother of Sybilla de Normandy , probably the brother of Reginald de Dunstanville . 
 = = = = Daughters = = = = 
 Matilda FitzRoy , Countess of Perche . 
 Matilda FitzRoy , Duchess of Brittany . 
 Juliane , wife of Eustace of Breteuil , possibly born to <unk> . 
 Mabel , wife of William <unk> . 
 Constance , <unk> of Beaumont @-@ sur @-@ Sarthe . 
 Aline , wife of Matthew de Montmorency . 
 Isabel , daughter of Isabel de Beaumont , Countess of Pembroke . 
 Sybilla de Normandy , Queen of Scotland , probably born before 1100 . 
 Matilda Fitzroy , Abbess of <unk> . 
 Gundrada de Dunstanville . 
 Possibly Rohese , wife of Henry de la <unk> . 
 Emma , wife of Guy of Laval . 
 Adeliza , the King 's daughter . 
 The wife of Fergus of Galloway . 
 Possibly Sibyl of Falaise . 
 = = Ancestors = = 
 = 1995 Pacific hurricane season = 
 The 1995 Pacific hurricane season was the least active Pacific hurricane season since 1979 . Of the eleven tropical cyclones that formed during the season , four affected land , with the most notable storm of the season being Hurricane Ismael , which killed at least 116 people in Mexico . The strongest hurricane in the season was Hurricane Juliette , which reached peak winds of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) , but did not significantly affect land . Hurricane Adolph was an early @-@ season Category 4 hurricane . Hurricane Henriette brushed the Baja California Peninsula in October . 
 The season officially started on May 15 , 1995 , in the Eastern Pacific , and on June 1 , 1995 , in the Central Pacific , and lasted until November 30 , 1995 . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the northeastern Pacific Ocean . The season saw eleven tropical cyclones form , of which ten became tropical storms . Seven of these storms attained hurricane status , three of them becoming major hurricanes . There were fewer tropical storms than the average of 16 , while the number of hurricanes and major hurricanes were slightly below average . The season marked the beginning of a multi @-@ decade period of low activity in the Eastern Pacific . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The seasonal activity during 1995 was below normal , and marked the first of several seasons with lower than normal activity , a trend that persists to this date . Four tropical cyclones affected Mexico : first , Hurricane Flossie passed within 75 miles ( 120 km ) of Baja California Peninsula , producing moderate winds and killing seven people . Afterwards , Tropical Storm Gil dropped heavy rainfall in Southern Mexico early in its life , though caused no damage . Hurricane Henriette later made landfall near Cabo San Lucas with winds of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) , resulting in moderate damage but no deaths . Finally , Ismael struck the state of Sinaloa as a minimal hurricane . Offshore , fishermen were caught off guard by the hurricane , causing 57 of them to drown . On land , Ismael destroyed thousands of houses , leaving 30 @,@ 000 homeless and killing another 59 . Both Hurricanes Flossie and Ismael also produced moisture and localized damage in the Southwestern United States . 
 Activity in the Central Pacific Ocean was below normal , as well . No tropical storms formed in the basin . For the first time in four years , Barbara was the only tropical cyclone to exist within the basin , but it formed in the Eastern Pacific . It entered as a weakening tropical storm , and quickly dissipated , without affecting land . It was the least activity in the basin since 1979 , when the basin was completely quiet , as no storms entered the basin that year . 
 = = Storms = = 
 Eleven Tropical Cyclones , including one Tropical Depression that failed to attain tropical storm status , developed in the Eastern Pacific Ocean in 1995 . 
 = = = Tropical Depression One @-@ E = = = 
 A westward @-@ moving tropical wave entered the Pacific Ocean in mid @-@ May . Convection within the disturbance became more concentrated and organized on May 19 while the wave was located a short distance south of the Gulf of Tehuantepec . The deep convection concentrated around a low @-@ level circulation with expanding outflow , and the system developed into Tropical Depression One @-@ E on May 21 , while located about 400 mi ( 645 km ) south of Manzanillo , Mexico . Initially the depression was forecast to strengthen to reach winds of 55 mph ( 90 km / h ) as it moved westward under the influence of a high @-@ pressure system to its north . Outflow increased as the storm moved through an area of warm waters and a favorable upper @-@ level environment , and two satellite classifications indicated the system was at tropical storm status around nine hours after forming . Despite the favorable environment and satellite classifications of tropical storm status , the depression failed to organize further . The convection and organization continued to decrease , and on May 23 the depression dissipated . 
 While it was developing , locally moderate to heavy rainfall fell across southern Mexico along the disturbance 's northern periphery , with rainfall totals peaking at 5 @.@ 18 inches ( 132 mm ) at <unk> / <unk> . 
 = = = Hurricane Adolph = = = 
 An area of disturbed weather associated with a tropical wave organized off the southwest coast of Mexico during the middle of June . Banding features developed as a circulation persisted on the northeast side of its deep convection , and the system developed into Tropical Depression Two @-@ E on June 15 . Under weak steering currents , the depression moved slowly northward , and with deep convection organizing near its center , the depression intensified to Tropical Storm Adolph on June 16 . Located in an area of warm waters , Adolph exhibited a well @-@ defined outflow pattern , and rapidly strengthened to attain hurricane status on June 17 as a banding @-@ type eye developed . Hurricane Adolph turned to the northwest and attained major hurricane status late that same day . The small eye of the hurricane continued to organize , as very deep convection surrounded the eyewall , and Adolph reached its peak intensity of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) on June 18 , making it a Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale . Shortly thereafter , the storm weakened , as the upper @-@ level environment became more hostile , and the system moved over progressively cooler waters . On June 19 , Adolph turned to the west , and degenerated back into a tropical storm later that day . On June 20 , the storm weakened to a tropical depression , and on June 21 , Adolph began to dissipate as its center became devoid of deep convection . 
 As Adolph moved north towards Mexico while about 290 mi ( 465 km ) off the coast , the Mexican government issued a tropical storm warning and a hurricane watch from Punta Tejupan to Cabo Corrientes . When the storm turned to the northwest and later to the west , the government discontinued the warnings as it was determined the storm would not be a threat to land . No damage or casualties were reported . 
 = = = Hurricane Barbara = = = 
 A few days later , on June 24 , another weak tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa . It moved steadily westward through the Atlantic Ocean without any development , and entered the eastern Pacific Ocean on July 5 . At this point , convection developed along the wave axis , and the system gradually organized . A circulation developed as it passed through an area of warm waters , and the system developed into Tropical Depression Three @-@ E on July 7 , while located about 600 miles ( 965 km ) south of Manzanillo , Colima . Although the outer rainbands warmed slightly in the hours after the formation , the convection near the center deepened further with favorable upper @-@ level outflow , and the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Barbara early on July 8 . Barbara steadily intensified , and following the development of a ragged eye that night , Barbara strengthened into a hurricane on July 9 , while located about 700 miles ( 1130 km ) south of the southern tip of Baja California Peninsula . 
 After moving into an area of light vertical shear and warm water temperatures , Barbara quickly intensified to reach major hurricane status on July 10 . The eye continued to become better organized , and Barbara attained winds of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) later on July 10 . After maintaining its intensity for 24 hours , increased wind shear from an upper @-@ tropospheric trough degraded the appearance of the deepest convection , and the eye became obscured from satellite images . After weakening to a 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) hurricane , Barbara maintained its intensity for 30 hours before moving into an area with very warm waters and a favorable upper @-@ level environment . On July 13 , the hurricane re @-@ organized , a distinct eye again developed , and Barbara strengthened to reach its peak intensity of 140 mph ( 225 km / h ) later that day . Barbara continued westward under the influence of a subtropical ridge to its north , and began to steadily weaken on July 14 as it moved into an area of cooler water temperatures . The hurricane degraded to a tropical storm on July 16 , and a day later it deteriorated to a tropical depression . As a depression with little to no convection near its center , Barbara continued west @-@ northwestward until dissipating on July 18 while located 720 mi ( 1160 km ) east @-@ southeast of Hilo , Hawaii . Barbara remained away from land for its entire lifetime , and it did not cause any damage or deaths . 
 = = = Hurricane Cosme = = = 
 As Barbara moved away from land , another area of disturbed weather moved off the coast of Central America on July 11 . Moving westward , this area slowly organized , and developed a low @-@ level circulation on July 15 . The convection developed into curved rainbands , and based on Dvorak classifications of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) , the National Hurricane Center estimated that the system developed into Tropical Depression Four @-@ E on July 17 , while located about 400 mi ( 645 km ) south @-@ southeast of the southern tip of Baja California Peninsula . As the depression was situated in an area with warm waters and moderate upper @-@ level outflow , the system was forecast to slowly intensify to a 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) tropical storm . Initially , the depression followed the forecasts , and it intensified into a tropical storm about 30 hours after developing , receiving the name " Cosme " . Cosme was expected to strengthen only slightly due to predicted cooler waters and increased shear . 
 On July 18 , contrary to the predictions , Cosme became much better organized , and well @-@ defined banding features were visible on satellite imagery . The storm continued to steadily intensify , and subsequent to the development of an eye , Cosme strengthened into a hurricane late on July 19 , while located 380 miles ( 615 km ) west @-@ southwest of the southern tip of Baja California Peninsula . After maintaining hurricane status for 18 hours , Cosme weakened back to a tropical storm on July 20 . Cooler water temperatures deteriorated the convection near the center , resulting in Cosme quickly weakening to a tropical depression on July 21 . After turning to the west @-@ southwest , Cosme dissipated on July 22 . Cosme never affected land , and as a result caused no damage or fatalities . However , the intensity of the storm is still uncertain ; late on July 18 , a ship 70 mi ( 110 km ) to the east of Cosme reported winds of 17 mph ( 27 km / h ) , despite that a normal 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) tropical storm would produce tropical storm force winds for locations within at least 70 mi ( 110 km ) of the center . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Dalila = = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on July 11 . It moved westward and quickly developed two areas of convection along the wave axis . One of the areas nearly developed into a tropical depression after moving northwestward , though it failed to organize further and dissipated . The southern area continued westward and ultimately entered the eastern Pacific Ocean on July 21 . Thunderstorms along the wave axis became more concentrated a few hundred miles south of the Gulf of Tehuantepec , and the system developed into Tropical Depression Five @-@ E on July 24 while located 500 mi ( 800 km ) southwest of Manzanillo , Mexico . 
 Located in an area of weak steering currents and easterly wind shear , the tropical depression drifted to the north @-@ northeast while the convection was displaced up to 70 mi ( 110 km ) west of the circulation . Slightly strengthening occurred , and on July 25 the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Dalila . The storm turned to the northwest , and later to the west @-@ northwest , and remained a minimal tropical storm until July 28 when a decrease in wind shear allowed Dalila to strengthen . A strong anticyclone developed to the north of the system , causing Dalila to accelerate to the northwest . Late on July 28 , Dalila reached a peak intensity of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) at a position 570 mi ( 915 km ) southwest of Cabo San Lucas . Tropical Storm Dalila slowly weakened after moving over progressively cooler water temperatures , and on August 1 it degenerated into a tropical depression . Dalila turned to the southwest after much of the convection waned , and the system dissipated on August 2 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Erick = = = 
 On July 17 a tropical wave exited the coast of Africa , and moved westward . An area of convection along the wave organized slightly on July 18 , though the next day the convection diminished . After moving through the Windward Islands on July 23 , deep convection again increased . The system failed to organize further , though convection continued to develop upon entering the eastern Pacific Ocean on July 27 . The cloudiness and thunderstorms became more consolidated off the coast of southern Mexico , and on July 31 Dvorak classifications began on the system . A circulation developed , and the system organized into Tropical Depression Six @-@ E on August 1 while located about 520 mi ( 835 km ) south of the southern tip of Baja California Peninsula . 
 Initially , the depression was a small system with moderate amounts of easterly wind shear . It organized slowly , and after moving to the southwest for 24 hours it turned to the northwest . Subsequent to an increase in convection over the center , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Erick on August 4 . Erick gradually strengthened as it moved to the west @-@ northwest , and reached peak winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) on August 5 while located about 720 miles ( 1160 km ) southwest of Cabo San Lucas . Operationally , the storm was forecast to continue to strengthen to reach hurricane status , though this did not occur . The mid @-@ level ridge which had been tracking Erick westward weakened , resulting in Erick to turn to the north over cooler waters . It quickly weakened to a tropical depression on August 6 , and after turning to an eastward drift Erick dissipated on August 8 while located 700 mi ( 1130 km ) west @-@ southwest of the southern tip of Baja California Peninsula . Erick never affected land . 
 = = = Hurricane Flossie = = = 
 A large circulation with an area of low pressure persisted in the tropical eastern Pacific Ocean in early August . The large circulation was well @-@ developed by August 7 , and the convection concentrated a few hundred miles southwest of Acapulco . Based on its organization , the National Hurricane Center designated the system Tropical Depression Seven @-@ E. On August 8 , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Flossie , based on ship reports . The storm paralleled the coast of Mexico as it moved northwestward , and after a decrease of wind shear Flossie developed very deep convection over its center . It intensified into a hurricane on August 10 , reaching peak winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) as an embedded warm spot appeared in the center of the storm . After maintaining its peak intensity for 18 hours and passing within 75 mi ( 121 km ) of Baja California Peninsula , Flossie weakened over cooler waters and degenerated to a tropical storm on August 12 . The storm continued to weaken , and early on August 14 Flossie dissipated . 
 The government of Mexico issued a tropical storm warning from Punta Tejupan to Cabo Corrientes early in its life , though it was discontinued shortly thereafter . Officials issued a tropical storm watch and later a warning for Baja California Sur south of La Paz , which was later extended from Loreto on the east coast to San Juanico on the west coast . The large circulation of Hurricane Flossie produced gusty winds along the west coast of Mexico and southern Baja California Peninsula . Cabo San Lucas reported a gust of 55 mph ( 90 km / h ) , and San José del Cabo recorded a gust of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) . The storm produced heavy rainfall , peaking at 9 @.@ 72 in ( 247 mm ) at San Felipe / Los Cabos . Seven people died in Mexico from the storm , including two that drowned in Cabo San Lucas . A monsoon surge moving around its eastern periphery produced heavy rainfall in the American Southwest . Flooding from the rainfall killed one person and left eleven motorists stranded . Thunderstorms in Tucson , Arizona , produced hurricane @-@ force wind gusts which caused widespread power outages and damage . Damage from the storm in Arizona totaled to $ 5 million ( 1995 USD ; $ 7 @.@ 76 million 2016 USD ) , although damage in Mexico , if any , is unknown . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Gil = = = 
 An area of disturbed weather , possibly related to a tropical wave , persisted and gradually organized in the Gulf of Tehuantepec . A circulation developed within its deep convection , and the system organized into Tropical Depression Seven @-@ E on August 19 while located about 115 mi ( 185 km ) southeast of Acapulco . Operationally , it was not until 15 hours later that the National Hurricane Center initiated advisories on the system . The depression moved westward and quickly intensified into a tropical storm . A nearby ship confirmed the existence of tropical storm force winds , and Gil reached winds of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) early on August 21 . With well @-@ defined outflow and continually developing convection , forecasters predicted Gil to strengthen more and attain hurricane status within two days of becoming a tropical storm . However , increased northeasterly wind shear initially prevented further strengthening . 
 On August 22 , the cloud pattern of Gil became better organized , though the low @-@ level circulation was located to the northeast of the deep convection due to the wind shear . The shear also limited outflow to the east , preventing further strengthening . Gradually the convection developed nearer to the center . After Gil turned to the northwest , the deep convection organized into a central dense overcast , and it strengthened to reach winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) on August 24 . Later that day the storm attained a peak strength of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) while located 380 mi ( 610 km ) southwest of the southern tip of Baja California Peninsula . After maintaining its peak strength for 30 hours , Gil moved over progressively cooler waters , and weakened to a tropical depression on August 26 . The depression drifted westward and later turned to the north , and dissipated on August 27 while located 670 mi ( 1075 km ) to the west of Cabo San Lucas . While located a short distance off of Mexico , Gil produced heavy rainfall near the coast . However , there were no reports of casualties or damages in association with the storm . 
 = = = Hurricane Henriette = = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on August 15 . It traversed westward and entered the eastern Pacific Ocean on August 29 . The system quickly developed deep convection and a low @-@ level circulation , and on September 1 it organized into Tropical Depression Nine @-@ E while located about 170 mi ( 270 km ) off the southwest coast of Mexico . Under favorable conditions , the depression slowly strengthened to become Tropical Storm Henriette on September 2 while located 220 mi ( 350 km ) west of Manzanillo . Henriette quickly organized and intensified into a hurricane on September 3 while located 135 mi ( 235 km ) west @-@ southwest of Puerto Vallarta in Jalisco . Late on September 3 , an eye began to form in the center of the deep convection as Henriette turned to the northwest . The eye became better defined the next day , and Henriette attained a peak intensity of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) as the northern portion of the eyewall moved over southern Baja California Peninsula . The hurricane quickly crossed the southern tip of Baja California Peninsula and re @-@ emerged into the Pacific Ocean . Convection gradually waned as the hurricane moved over progressively colder waters , and on September 6 Henriette weakened to a tropical depression . 
 On September 2 , a few hours after Henriette became a tropical storm , the government of Mexico issued tropical cyclone warnings and watches for Baja California Peninsula . The threat of Hurricane Henriette prompted a Carnival Cruise Line ship to alter their route . Winds of up to 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) in southern Baja California Sur left much of Cabo San Lucas without water or power . 2 @,@ 000 people were directly affected by the hurricane . A strong storm surge produced flooding and heavy road damage in the state . 800 people were forced from their homes , and crop damage was reported . No damage estimates are available , and no deaths were reported . 
 = = = Hurricane Ismael = = = 
 Hurricane Ismael developed from a persistent area of deep convection on September 12 , and steadily strengthened as it moved to the north @-@ northwest . Ismael attained hurricane status on September 14 while located 210 mi ( 340 km ) off the coast of Mexico . It continued to the north , and after passing a short distance east of Baja California Peninsula it made landfall on Topolobampo in the state of Sinaloa with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . Ismael rapidly weakened over land , and dissipated on September 16 over northwestern Mexico . The remnants entered the United States and extended eastward into the mid @-@ Atlantic states . 
 Offshore , Ismael produced waves of up to 30 ft ( 9 m ) in height . Hundreds of fishermen were unprepared by the hurricane , which was expected to move more slowly , and as a result 52 ships were wrecked , killing 57 fishermen . The hurricane destroyed thousands of houses , leaving 30 @,@ 000 people homeless . On land , Ismael caused 59 casualties in mainland Mexico and resulted in $ 26 million in damage ( 1995 USD ; $ 40 @.@ 4 million 2016 USD ) . Moisture from the storm extended into the United States , causing heavy rainfall and localized moderate damage in southeastern New Mexico . 
 = = = Hurricane Juliette = = = 
 Hurricane Juliette was the strongest and final hurricane of the season . It formed on September 16 from a tropical wave off the southwest coast of Mexico , and moved west @-@ northwest for the early part of its duration . Juliette was smaller than usual tropical cyclones , and as a result it intensified quickly , reaching hurricane status on September 18 and major hurricane status a day later . On September 20 , Juliette reached peak winds of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) , a Category 4 on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . It subsequently began a slow weakening trend and turned toward the northeast , briefly threatening the Baja California Peninsula . Instead , strong wind shear overcame the storm , and Juliette dissipated on September 26 without significantly affecting land . 
 = = Other storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Depression One @-@ W = = = 
 According to the Joint Typhoon Warning Center , on January 4 a tropical depression formed east of the International Dateline , and 3 days later it exited CPHC 's area of responsibility ; however , this storm wasn 't included into CPHC database . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Colleen = = = 
 According to the Joint Typhoon Warning Center and Japan Meteorological Agency , on November 10 a tropical depression formed east of the International Dateline , and soon it exited CPHC 's area of responsibility ; however , this storm wasn 't included into CPHC database . As it entered into western Pacific , it strengthened as a tropical storm and received the name Colleen . 
 = = Accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) ranking = = 
 The table on the right shows the accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) for each storm in the season . The total ACE for the 1995 season was 100 @.@ 2 x 104 kt2 . The ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the storm multiplied by the length of time it existed for , so hurricanes that lasted a long time have higher ACEs . Because several storms in the season were long @-@ lasting or intense , the ACE of the season was near normal . The 1995 season total was the lowest since 1981 , though due to a period of inactivity in the following years it has only been surpassed by four seasons . 
 Hurricane Barbara had the highest overall ACE of the season with a total of 29 @.@ 83 x 104 kt2 . 
 Source of data : Best track data from the National Hurricane Center 's Tropical Cyclone Reports . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms that formed in the northeast Pacific in 1995 . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . The names not retired from this list were used again in the 2001 season . This is the same list used for the 1989 season . The name Dalila was used for the first time in 1995 ; in the 1989 season , it was Dalilia , though an error in documents prior to the season changed it . The name change has remained . 
 For storms that form in the Central Pacific Hurricane Center 's area of responsibility , encompassing the area between 140 degrees west and the International Date Line , all names are used in a series of four rotating lists . The next four names that were slated for use in 1995 are shown below , however none of them were used . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 The World Meteorological Organization retired one name in the spring of 1996 : Ismael . It was originally replaced in the 2001 season by Israel , but for political reasons , due to its connection with Israel and the coincidence that the first name of 2001 was " Adolph " ( later retired for similar reasons ) , this was changed to Ivo after the season began , but before it reached the " I " storm . 
 = The Fame Ball Tour = 
 The Fame Ball Tour was the debut concert tour by American singer Lady Gaga , in support of her debut studio album The Fame ( 2008 ) . North American shows began in March , followed by dates in Oceania and a solo trek through Europe . Dates in Asia soon followed , as well as two performances at England 's V Festival and two shows in North America that had been postponed from April . Gaga described the tour as a traveling museum show incorporating artist Andy Warhol 's pop @-@ performance art concept . Tickets were distributed for charity also . Alternate versions of the show with minimal variations were planned by Gaga to accommodate different venues . 
 The show consisted of four segments , with each segment being followed by a video interlude to the next segment , and it ended with an encore . The set list consisted of songs from her debut album only . Gaga appeared on the stage in new costumes including an innovative dress made entirely of bubbles and premiered an unreleased song called " Future Love " . An alternate set list with minor changes were performed after the first North American leg of the tour . The show has received critical acclaim with critics complimenting her vocal clarity and fashion sense as well as her ability to pull off theatrics like a professional artist . 
 = = Background = = 
 The tour was officially announced on January 12 , 2009 through Gaga 's official MySpace page . It was her first headlining tour ; she has previously served as opening act for New Kids on the Block 's New Kids on the Block : Live tour , as well as The Pussycat Dolls ' Doll Domination Tour . Gaga stated , " I consider what I do to be more of an Andy Warhol concept : pop performance art , multimedia , fashion , technology , video , film . And it 's all coming together , and it 's going to be traveling museum show . " Gaga started planning for the show while on the tour with The Pussycat Dolls . In an interview with MTV News , she described the tour as , 
 " It 's not really a tour , it 's more of a traveling party . I want it to be an entire experience from [ the ] minute you walk in [ the ] front door to [ the ] minute I begin to sing . And when it 's all over , everyone 's going to press rewind and relive it again . [ ... ] It 's going to be as if you 're walking into New York circa 1974 : There 's an art installation in the lobby , a DJ spinning your favorite records in the main room , and then the most haunting performance that you 've ever seen on the stage . [ ... ] I 'm on the phone every minute of every day , talking to people , being creative , planning this Ball , and my tour manager is constantly saying , ' Come on , we have to go , we 've got to go right now , ' [ ... ] But to me , the Ball is so important . I want so much to make every depression dollar that everyone spends on my show worth it . And , yeah , I 'm paying a lot for it — out of my own pocket . But that 's OK . I just don 't care about money . " 
 Gaga prepared three versions of her show to cater to different sizes of the venues she played . In an interview with Billboard she said , 
 " I am so mental and sleepless and excited for this tour , [ ... ] This is so different than anything you 've seen from me in the past year . What 's fantastic about [ the show ] was I was able to plan it while I was on another tour that was on a much smaller scale , opening for the Dolls . This is going to be , like , the ultimate creative orgasm for me ' cause I 'm ready to move on . I 'm not restricted to a certain structure for my show anymore . No limitations . I 'm free . [ ... ] I want to have a clear schedule of the dimensions for each venue so that we can properly execute all the technology and visuals . I need to mentally prepare days in advance if things are going to be taken out ; otherwise , I won 't have a good show ... Every show 's gonna be an A show by the time I 'm done screaming at everyone – ' Hang it ! Hang everything ! Find a place to hang it ! ' That 's gonna be my motto . " 
 The set list consisted of songs from her debut album mainly , but some new songs like " Fashion " from the Confessions of a Shopaholic soundtrack were also considered . In May , during an interview with Edmonton Sun Gaga announced that the tour would continue through European festivals in summer . She also declared plans for a bigger North American tour including Canada . Gaga explained that the show is supposed to be much bigger than the previous version . She said , " Oh , you have no idea , [ ... ] The tour that we 're about to announce is such a dream that I have to pinch myself almost every day to remind myself that it 's happening . " 
 = = Concert synopsis = = 
 The show is mainly divided into four parts with the last part being the encore . The main show began with a video introduction called " The Heart " where Gaga appeared as alter @-@ ego Candy Warhol . She was shown dressing up and displayed the symbol of a pink heart on her T @-@ shirt and said " My name is Lady Gaga , and this is my Haus " . The video was projected on a giant screen in front of the stage . As the video approached towards the end , a countdown from ten to one happened , Gaga 's face was shown wearing the video sunglasses , and flames engulfed the screen as it dropped . Gaga appeared in the middle of the stage being surrounded by her dancers holding glass encrusted plates which camouflage them . She wore a futuristic black dress in geometric patterns with a triangular piece on her right breast and peplum . DJ Space Cowboy was present at a corner , playing the backing music . Gaga came out in the center as the plates rolled around and started singing " Paparazzi " . 
 The performance ends with continuous clicking of the camera . Gaga comes to the top of the pillar and sings a combination of " Starstruck " and " LoveGame " as she is joined by her dancers in tracks and jackets and hands Gaga her trademark disco stick . After " LoveGame " , she talks a monologue about the year " <unk> " . And says that " The kids came out of New York and shot the paparazzi . " followed by saying " It was a thousand years before when the monster first entered the city , vanished for our hearts and for our brains and for our faces ( referencing to the three video interludes of the tour ) " and " we knew we could co @-@ exist with this monster with our MUSIC ! ! ! With our art and with our fashion . My name is Lady Gaga . " and tells the crowd she feels " beautiful and dirty rich " and sang " Beautiful , Dirty , Rich " . This leads to the end of the first part wherein a video introduction called " The Brain " starts with Gaga appearing again as Candy Warhol and brushing her hair . After the video ends , Gaga appears on the stage in a black and white leotard with high @-@ pointed " puff " shoulders and lightning shaped symbols , while riding on a similarly colored vespa . She then starts singing " The Fame " . This is followed by a speech . Gaga said she 's been " travelling the whole world , but when I get back , I can still smell the stench of greed . " And then she performs " Money Honey " with the dancers who are wearing backpacks . " Eh , Eh ( Nothing Else I Can Say ) " starts immediately , accompanied by hand @-@ waving and Gaga wore a hat made of toppled dominoes . 
 Gaga then leaves the stage only to appear shortly after in a dress completely made of plastic bubbles . She sits in front of a glass piano and starts singing an acoustic version of " Poker Face " . She sometimes puts her leg on the piano and even plays it with her stilettos . And then , thanks the audience and surprises them by performing an unreleased and new song called " Future Love " whose lyrics referenced far @-@ off galaxies , mechanical hearts and constellations . She was surrounded by a glowing mannequin while singing the song . The stage had a blue setting with mechanical fog . Gaga left for a costume change as the third video interlude titled The Face starts . 
 After the video ended , she then came on the stage wearing a tutu shaped dress with pointed shoulder pads and peplum . Her dancers were clad in Louis Vuitton Steven Sprouse printed trousers which matched Gaga 's shoes . The backdrop changed to show blinking disco lights and Gaga stood in the center wearing her video sunglasses which display the line " Pop Music Will Never Be Low Brow " . A remix of the intro for " Just Dance " started and Gaga was joined by her dancers on stage . When the song shifts to the bridge , Gaga once again is handed her disco stick and performs the bridge with it . The ending shifts to a remixed version of the song . Then Gaga and the dancers , joined by DJ Space Cowboy or DJ Nicodemus , take a bow in front of the audience . Gaga comes back with her dance to perform the encore . The encore of the tour consisted of " Boys , Boys , Boys " and the original version of " Poker Face " . Gaga was dressed in a khaki leotard embellished with crystals . She wore an admiral 's cap and gloves on her hands , both were decorated with the word Gaga on them . 
 = = = Changes from Oceania shows = = = 
 Since the Fame Ball show in Auckland , New Zealand , Gaga performed a different setlist during the rest of the tour , involving outfit changes as well . " Paparazzi " , " LoveGame " , and " Beautiful , Dirty , Rich " were performed in a similar , this time tinfoil tutu with a triangular piece . " The Fame " and " Money Honey " was then followed by " Boys Boys Boys " – all three songs were performed in a glittering silver leotard with small pointy wings , riding a similarly colored vespa . " Just Dance " and " Eh , Eh ( Nothing Else I Can Say ) " were performed in the yellow dress from the American leg of the tour . After performing " Brown Eyes " ( replacing " Future Love " ) and " Poker Face " on the piano , Gaga closed the show with the album version of " Poker Face " , wearing a nude corseted leotard embellished with crystals . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Fame Ball Tour received acclaim from critics . Whitney Pastorek from Entertainment Weekly gave a mixed review of the concert saying , " Her onstage banter was at times a bit silly and the visuals occasionally lacking in coherent theme , but her voice was strong and refreshingly free of overbearing tracking vocals . For all her cocky bluster , perhaps the most undeniable aspect of Gaga 's talent is this : The girl can , and does , sing . " The show was described to be a " sartorial experimentation that it made Rocky Horror look like cotillion . One presumed the Lady approved – and somewhere , to be sure , Andy Warhol stirred in his grave . " 
 Sheri Linden from Yahoo ! gave a positive review of the concert saying " Gaga 's first theater tour is a hot ticket – and the Lady did not disappoint . Borrowing from Madonna , Grace Jones , David Bowie and Daryl Hannah 's " Blade Runner " replicant , Gaga put on a compelling show revolving around her mysterious persona , a trio of leather @-@ jacketed dancers , multiple costume changes and props and a lone DJ providing musical accompaniment . " Christopher Muther from The Boston Globe reviewed the concert in House of Blues and said " The combination of song and spectacle was crowd @-@ pleasing and exhilarating . Her club @-@ ready songs were delivered by a woman who is clearly studied , intelligent , and talented . " 
 Lynn <unk> from Ottawa Citizen gave a positive review of the concert at Bronson Centre in Ottawa and said , " Accompanied by a DJ who also played a funky electric guitar , the curvy dynamo ( Gaga and Space Cowboy ) fronted one of wildest spectacles ever mounted at Bronson Centre , an action @-@ packed circus of sound , lights , video images , fog and choreography . Though heavy on theatrics , there was no <unk> on the music . " She also commented on Gaga 's fashion sense and style in her costumes by saying , " In an hour , Gaga proved her star power by packing in all her hits , displaying influences that ranged from Motown to 80s pop , and exhibiting a fearless fashion sense in several costume changes , none of which covered her bum . " 
 Andy Downing from Chicago Tribune was impressed by the show at House of Blues and said " The work is paying off . Just weeks into her first nationwide headlining tour , the 22 @-@ year @-@ old New Yorker [ ... ] already commands the stage like a seasoned pro . " Jill Menze from Billboard also gave a positive review for the performance and complimented songs like " Just Dance " , LoveGame " , Poker Face " , " Boys , Boys , Boys " and the fame obsessed " Paparazzi " . The reviewer also said that " [ From ] her chart success , Lady Gaga has proven herself to be an of @-@ the @-@ moment pop sensation . Dig deeper , and it 's clear she 's versatile and talented enough to have staying power . " Mikel Wood from Rolling Stone also gave a positive review saying " The tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek tabloid @-@ victim shtick that provides some laughs on The Fame grew somewhat tiresome at the Wiltern , especially when the singer started spewing half @-@ baked media @-@ studies nonsense like , ' Some say Lady Gaga is a lie ' ... Fortunately , this is a woman who knows how to lighten a mood : Within 10 minutes or so , she 'd donned a flesh @-@ colored leotard and a bedazzled admiral 's cap and was rhyming ' boys in cars ' with ' buy us drinks in bars . " 
 On March 13 , 2009 Gaga was presented with a plaque from the Recording Industry Association of America by social blogger Perez Hilton commemorating three million sales of her debut single " Just Dance " , during her performance at the Wiltern Theatre . This show was also attended by rapper Kanye West . Craig Rosen from The Hollywood Reporter said that " Lady Gaga showed she 's a serious contender to Madonna 's crown Friday at the Wiltern . She might be a relative newcomer , but the artist born Stefani Joanne Germanotta commanded the stage with a royal air during her hourlong set , at times even sporting a glowing scepter . " 
 = = Opening acts = = 
 The White Tie Affair ( North America ) 
 Chester French ( North America ) 
 Cinema Bizarre ( North America ) 
 Gary Go ( Great Britain ) 
 = = Set list = = 
 " Paparazzi " ( contains elements of " Starstruck " ) 
 " LoveGame " ( contains elements of " Chew Fu <unk> Fix " remix ) 
 " Beautiful , Dirty , Rich " 
 " The Fame " 
 " Money Honey " 
 " Boys Boys Boys " 
 " Just Dance " 
 " Eh , Eh ( Nothing Else I Can Say ) " 
 " Starstruck " ( Intermission ) 
 " Brown Eyes " 
 " Poker Face " ( Piano Version ) 
 " Poker Face " 
 = = Tour dates = = 
 Cancellations 
 = = = Box office score data = = = 
 = The Exchange , Bristol = 
 The Exchange is a Grade I listed building built in 1741 – 43 by John Wood the Elder , on Corn Street , near the junction with Broad Street in Bristol , England . It was previously used as a corn and general trade exchange but is now used as offices and St Nicholas Market . 
 The Exchange underwent major building work in 1872 , including roofing over the courtyard , and again in the early 1900s when the City Valuer 's Department moved to the building . Since World War II the external clock tower has been removed and the roof lowered . 
 Outside the building are four bronze tables dating from the 16th and 17th centuries , known as " nails , " at which merchants carried out their business . At the front of the building is a clock showing both Greenwich Mean Time and " local time " . 
 = = History = = 
 The Exchange was built in 1741 – 43 by John Wood the Elder , with carvings by Thomas Paty . Wood was also the architect of the Liverpool Exchange , which was completed in 1754 and gutted by fire in 1795 . The London Exchange of Wood 's day was also destroyed by fire in 1838 . Bristol 's Exchange is therefore unique , the only surviving 18th @-@ century exchange building in England . 
 When finished in 1743 the Exchange , as planned , had " the outward appearance of one grand structure , ” and the much @-@ admired exterior remains today largely as built . The front of the building has Corinthian <unk> the centre and pilasters to the sides . A central semicircular @-@ arched doorway has cast @-@ iron lion @-@ head knockers . A frieze with human and animal heads symbolises trade , and a Royal Coat of Arms is displayed in the tympanum . The rear of the building is symmetrical with pedimented windows and semicircular ground @-@ floor arches . 
 Internally , however , it consisted of various spaces . On either side of the front entrance in Corn Street were a coffeehouse and tavern , each of four storeys . Above and below the main entrance were rooms designed as <unk> . In the centre of the Exchange was an open court , surrounded by a colonnade . At the back of the building was a two @-@ storey range , consisting of an arcade on the ground floor and a long first @-@ floor room . Facing All Saints Lane were two four @-@ storey houses for business or trades persons , and on the frontage to Exchange Avenue were a further three houses . Below these various elements were cellars . Those below the five houses were each separate ; the others were mostly interconnected . 
 In 1872 a major programme of building works was undertaken to a design by Edward Middleton Barry . This provided a roof over the central court of the Exchange and a new suite of offices on the first floor above the colonnades around the court . Other internal alterations appear to have been made in the late 19th century , possibly also by Barry in 1872 . This is uncertain as Barry 's plans are yet to be found . Further extensive alterations were made in the 1900s when the City Valuer 's Department moved to the Exchange in 1907 . These included the provision of a lift from the basement and cellars to the first floor and major alterations to the cellars under the central part of the Exchange . Since 1945 further alterations have included the replacement of the roof over the central court by a temporary roof at a lower level , the removal of the clock tower at the back of the building and the internal rebuilding of all four floors of the coffeehouse together with the corresponding floors over the main entrance . 
 Despite its name it was intended for merchants of all types , and a number directly involved in the Guinea and West Indian slave trade used it for business transactions . Inside the Corn Exchange the plasterwork in the main hall represents the four corners of the world , including Africa and America , the latter wearing a headdress of tobacco leaves . On the outside of the building are carvings of African , American , Asian and European figures and animals , again symbols of Bristol 's foreign trade including the Bristol slave trade . 
 During the mid- to late 1960s the Exchange was a popular concert venue . British Beat groups including The Rolling Stones , The Yardbirds , Cream , The Pretty Things and Spencer Davis all played several times in the main hall . A regular Tuesday night club called The Bristol Chinese R 'n'B and Jazz Club was also established which attracted American Blues singers including John Lee Hooker , Sonny Boy Williamson and Little Walter . 
 Today the Exchange is designated as a Grade I listed building . Always owned by the City of Bristol , the building has served a variety of purposes , currently housing offices of both the former City Valuer 's Department , Market Traders and the Joint Trade Unions Safety Office 
 = = Nails = = 
 Four bronze tables are located outside The Exchange on Corn Street , probably modelled after mobile tables which were taken to trade fairs and markets . Before the Corn Exchange was built in the 18th century , the tables — called nails — were located in the <unk> Walk . This covered area was along the south wall of All Saints Church , which remains as a narrow lane giving access to commercial premises . 
 The bronze nails , with their flat tops and raised edges which prevent coins from tumbling onto the pavement , were made as convenient tables at which merchants could carry out their business . The oldest pillar is undated , but experts say it is late Elizabethan . The second oldest was given by Bristol merchant Robert Kitchen , who died in 1594 . The two remaining nails are dated 1625 and 1631 . 
 The four nails were made at different times , and this is reflected in their varying designs . One of the nails bears the name John Barker on its rim . Barker was a wealthy merchant who owned houses and storehouses on the Quay , in Wine Street and in Small Street . He was mayor during the reign of Charles I and represented Bristol in the 1623 Parliament . 
 Deals could be closed by payment on the nails — the popularly supposed origin of the saying " pay on the nail " or " cash on the nail " . However , this origin of the term is disputed . 
 = = Clock = = 
 The clock was first installed in 1822 . A second minute hand was later added to show the time in London as well as the local time in Bristol ; the red minute hand shows Greenwich Mean Time and the black minute hand shows Bristol time . This became necessary following the arrival of the railways , which required a standardised time for timetabling around the country , known as railway time ; Bristol officially adopted railway time on 14 September 1852 . The city is 2º 35 ' west of Greenwich , so when it is noon in Bristol by old local time , it is just after 12 : 10 p.m. in London by standard time . 
 = Gyromitra caroliniana = 
 Gyromitra caroliniana , known commonly as the Carolina false morel or big red , is an ascomycete fungus of the genus Gyromitra , within the Pezizales group of fungi . It is found in hardwood forests of the southeastern United States , where it fruits in early spring soon after snowmelt . Although it is collected and eaten by some , there is some suggestion it may contain the toxic compound gyromitrin like its poisonous relative , the false morel G. esculenta , and for this reason it is usually not recommended for consumption . 
 The fruit body , or ascocarp , appears on the ground in woodland , and can grow to massive sizes . The heavily wrinkled cap is red @-@ brown in color , nearly spherical to roughly elliptical in shape , and typically measures 15 to 20 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 to 7 @.@ 9 in ) tall and 6 to 13 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 to 5 @.@ 1 in ) wide . The stipe is massive , up to 11 cm ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) thick , with a white felt @-@ like surface . The brittle flesh is densely packed into the cap in convoluted folds that form internal locules . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was originally named Morchella caroliniana by French botanist Louis Augustin Guillaume Bosc in 1811 , and later sanctioned under this name by Elias Fries in 1822 . It was transferred to Gyromitra by Fries in 1871 . Gyromitra caroliniana is the type species of subgenus <unk> of genus Gyromitra . This grouping comprises species that have , in maturity , coarsely reticulate ascospores ( i.e. , with a network of ridges on the surface ) with multiple blunt spines that originate from the reticulum on the spores . Other species in this subgenus include G. fastigiata and the central European species G. <unk> . In 1969 , Erich Heinz <unk> believed that the spore reticulation was sufficiently unique to be worthy of designation as a separate genus , and he described <unk> to contain G. caroliniana . Harri Harmaja disagreed , later placing <unk> in synonymy with Gyromitra . 
 In a 2009 review of the genus Gyromitra , authors van <unk> and Moreau say that Bosc 's original species description is ambiguous , leaving much room for interpretation , and they suggest that several reports of the species occurring in Europe should be referred to Gyromitra fastigiata . They point out that in 1970 , Estonian mycologist Ain <unk> considered Bosc 's Morchella caroliniana a nomen dubium , and Fries 's description as nomen <unk> , and advocated the abandonment of the specific epithet caroliniana . In the early 1970s , Kent McKnight redefined the taxon and selected a neotype , based on five specimens collected from Lorton , Virginia in 1942 . 
 The specific epithet refers to the Carolinas , where it was first collected scientifically . Common names include the " brown false morel " , " Carolina false morel " , " big red " , ( particularly in Missouri and Arkansas ) , or " river red " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap is roughly spherical to elliptical , and features a folded , crumpled , or corrugated surface that somewhat resembles the surface of a brain . It has areas of more or less symmetrical pits , or ribs arranged vertically . The cap margin is close to the stipe and sometimes adheres to it . The color is reddish to reddish @-@ brown , but becomes darker in weathered specimens ; the reverse side is whitish . Fruit bodies are typically 6 – 7 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 – 2 @.@ 8 in ) across but can grow to be much larger . Fred J. Seaver reported one specimen to have grown to a height of 10 @.@ 5 in ( 27 cm ) , but a more usual height range is 15 – 20 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 – 7 @.@ 9 in ) . The underside is whitish , but not readily visible . The stipe is short and stout , furrowed , typically 6 – 10 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) long by 4 – 6 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 2 @.@ 4 in ) wide but sometimes much larger , and usually thickest at the base . Pure white when young and with a felt @-@ like surface , it discolors in age or with handling . The upper portion of the stipe is usually branched , but the branches are hidden by the cap . The whitish flesh forms locules ( chambers ) and is densely packed in the stipe and cap , forming branches to the points of attachment . 
 The spores are narrowly elliptical , hyaline ( translucent ) , and apiculate ( with a sharply pointed tip ) , measuring 30 – 33 by 11 @.@ 5 – 14 μm . Spores usually have one large oil droplet and one or two smaller ones . Initially smooth , the spore surface becomes reticulate and coarse , developing small warts . The use of scanning electron microscopy has revealed up to 6 short <unk> ( the part of a spore that attaches to the sterigmata ) that originate from extensions of the reticulation . Asci ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are 320 – 420 by 18 @.@ 5 – 23 μm , and the paraphyses are 6 @.@ 5 – 5 @.@ 9 μm wide . 
 Although some guides indicate the species is edible with suitable preparation ( such as boiling ) , it is generally not recommended for consumption because of the risk of confusion with other toxic Gyromitra species that contain the compound gyromitrin . When boiled in water , or digested in the body , this compound is readily hydrolyzed to the toxic compound monomethylhydrazine — used as a propellant in some rocket fuels . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Gyromitra brunnea is similar in appearance to G. <unk> , and has an overlapping geographical range . G. brunnea is distinctly lobed , and lacks ribs and cross @-@ ribs . Consequently , " seams " can usually be found where the undersurface is exposed . In contrast , G. caroliniana is almost never lobed and thus lacks seams . Its tightly wrinkled and attached cap mostly hide the undersurface . G. <unk> has a more block @-@ like or square appearance , and its yellowish @-@ brown to reddish @-@ brown cap surface has fewer wrinkles , folds , and convolutions . G. fastigiata is a European species that resembles the North American G. brunnea . The common and widespread G. esculenta has a loosely lobed , irregularly shaped , <unk> cap . It has shorter spores measuring 21 – 25 by 12 – 13 μm . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The fungus fruits singly or in loose groups on the ground under hardwood trees , in rich humus . Common habitats include near stumps and other dead wood , particularly oak , and along river bottoms . In the southern states , it can appear as early as March , but elsewhere it typically fruits in April and May . The species has been used as an indicator signalling the start of " morel season " . Gyromitra species are " officially " considered saprobic , but exhibit some mycorrhizal tendencies , and may integrate both ecological lifestyles in their life cycle . 
 The range of G. caroliniana includes Oklahoma to the Carolinas and north to the Great Lakes . Erich <unk> reported the fungus in Thuringia and Austria , where he claimed it had previously often been misidentified with young forms of Gyromitra infula . A more recent revision disputes those claims , saying " Reports from Europe are unsubstantiated and are due to confusion with G. fastigiata and G. gigas " . The fruit bodies develop slowly , and specimens left until late in the season can grow up to five pounds or more . 
 = = = Cited literature = = = 
 Abbott SP , Currah RS ( 1997 ) . " The Helvellaceae : systematic revision and occurrence in northern and northwestern North America " . Mycotaxon 62 : 1 – 125 . 
 = Jenny ( Doctor Who ) = 
 Jenny , portrayed by Georgia Moffett , is a fictional character in the long @-@ running British science fiction television series Doctor Who . She appeared in the episode " The Doctor 's Daughter " , originally broadcast 10 May 2008 . Jenny is the daughter of the series protagonist the Doctor , a product of altered DNA extracted from a tissue sample from his hand . Jenny was introduced by writer Stephen Greenhorn . 
 Moffett herself is the real @-@ life daughter of the actor Peter Davison who portrayed the Doctor 's fifth incarnation from 1981 to 1984 . She was cast as Jenny after auditioning for a more minor part in the episode " The Unicorn and the Wasp " , and impressing the series producers . Following the broadcast of " The Doctor 's Daughter " , the character was generally well received by reviewers , with many speculating that Jenny would return to the franchise . Moffett also expressed an interest in this possibility . 
 = = Appearance = = 
 When the Doctor 's time travelling TARDIS is drawn to the planet <unk> , his DNA is used by warring human soldiers on the planet in a <unk> Machine , a device that instantly creates a fully grown and educated new person , and the Doctor recognises her as his " daughter " . Born a fighter , with combat skills and tactics automatically programmed , she is initially ideologically at odds with the Doctor 's pacifism , but after learning she has two hearts and is connected to the near @-@ extinct race of Time Lords , she begins to pattern her behaviour on that of her father . 
 Named " Jenny " by the Doctor 's companion Donna ( Catherine Tate ) as she is a " generated anomaly " , she is initially received with ambivalence by the Doctor , whom she reminds of the loss of his previous family . He eventually warms to her , however , and welcomes her aboard his crew as a companion . Just as peace appears to have been restored between the planet 's warring factions , Jenny is shot and apparently killed . The Doctor cradles her dying form in his arms , and is visibly distraught when she does not revive or regenerate from the wound . In the episode 's closing scenes after the Doctor leaves , Jenny revives , takes a small spaceship , and takes off into the unknown to become an explorer like her father . 
 In the accompanying Doctor Who Confidential episode , David Tennant ( who portrays the Doctor ) refers to her as " another member of that race , or something closely akin to it . " In the episode itself the Doctor says to Jenny , " You 're an echo , that 's all . A Time Lord is so much more . A sum of knowledge , a code , shared history , shared suffering " , but later accepts her as his daughter , saying " You 're going to be more than great ; you 're going to be amazing " . Jenny 's ' death ' is shown during " Journey 's End " when the Doctor recalls those who have died while helping him , as he did not know she revived . 
 = = Characterisation = = 
 = = = Character creation = = = 
 While it is well established within Doctor Who that the Doctor once had a family — his first incarnation having travelled with his granddaughter , Susan — this fact has been seldom referenced in the show . As executive producer Russell T Davies stated , when discussing the creation of Jenny as the Doctor 's newest family member : " In the current series once or twice we 've had fleeting little mentions , he said to Rose in the TARDIS in " Fear Her " that he 'd been a father once . And now obviously this story , it 's not a natural , biological daughter , you could argue , but this really brings him face to face with fatherhood . " 
 Regarding the creation of the character Jenny , series producer Phil Collinson explained , " It came out of a desire to keep pushing David , and keep taking him in new directions , and keep challenging him , really . To suddenly find himself with a member of family is kind of one of the biggest challenges you could give him , so I 'm chuffed we did it . " Tennant has agreed that giving the character a daughter was " an interesting , emotional , dramatic place for the character to go , " while the episode 's writer , Stephen Greenhorn , has spoken of the manner in which creating Jenny allowed the show to broach " aspects of the Doctor 's past life that we don 't often get to discuss , about his previous family that he had and lost in the Time War . " Steven Moffat suggested that the character lives in the episode 's conclusion . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Before being cast as Jenny , Georgia Moffett had previously auditioned for a smaller role in Doctor Who episode " The Unicorn and the Wasp " . Phil Collinson revealed that : " As soon as we saw her , we realised there was a much bigger and better part later on in the series ... so Georgia kindly waited until the time was right . " Coverage of her casting focused on the fact that Moffett is the daughter of Peter Davison , who played the Doctor 's fifth incarnation — as the Radio Times stated : " a Doctor 's daughter is playing the Doctor 's Daughter " . Moffett has described how , after Davison filmed the 2007 Children in Need segment " Time Crash " , in which the Fifth Doctor briefly returned to meet the Tenth Doctor , her father called her to inform her : " Right , now it 's your go . " Discussing Moffett 's casting as Jenny , both actors relayed their amusement at the character 's first line being " Hello , Dad , " with Davison describing his own daughter playing the Doctor 's daughter as " kind of surreal " . He has denied that there was any nepotism involved in the casting process , explaining , " She got it off her own bat . I would love to get another part in Doctor Who , I 'm certainly not going to get her one first . " Moffett has praised her character and the episode in which she appeared , asserting that : " If I 'd had to write my ideal part in an episode of Doctor Who it would have been that script . " She has also expressed a desire to return to the role , calling on the show 's producers to " Bring Jenny back . Please ! " 
 = = = Characteristics = = = 
 Over the course of the episode " The Doctor 's Daughter " , the character of Jenny undergoes marked change . Moffett explained : " She starts off not being particularly likeable but by the end she 's learned a lot from her experiences and from The Doctor . She becomes something that he 's very proud of . " Initially , Jenny is portrayed as an " action hero " character , described by series producer Phil Collinson as : " a warrior . [ ... ] She 's born to fight . She 's born to use weapons , she 's born to karate chop and kick her feet " , and by episode writer Stephen Greenhorn as : " a kind of manufactured soldier , with a kinda pre @-@ programming towards aggression and war . " Shortly after her creation within the episode , the character explains that she was born knowing just " How to fight , and how to die . " 
 Learning from the Doctor , Jenny begins to adapt her ideology . Moffett explained that her character : " begins to become much more like the Doctor , and much more like a Time [ lord ] , " describing the episode as " a journey , " over the course of which Jenny learns to use her fighting skills " in the right way , " developing morals as she grows on a personal level . Executive producer Russell T Davies has discussed the Doctor 's initial reluctance to accept Jenny as his daughter , explaining , " It 's awful for him in that this daughter is everything he wouldn 't be ; she 's a soldier , she 's got military protocols downloaded into her brain , she can fight , and she wants to fight , that 's the important thing , that she thinks killing is fine . " Greenhorn asserts that as the character develops , " You can see the <unk> in her . And you can see that actually , the reason he would warm to that is because he begins to recognise there are elements in her that are strong in him as well . " Concluding the character 's development over the course of the episode , Moffett surmised , " By the end of it , they 've both realised that they want to be a little bit more like the other one , and admire that in each other . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Martin Anderson of Den of Geek ! has suggested that the creation of a daughter character for the Doctor was a move designed to lay to rest decades long speculation that the Doctor himself might one day regenerate into a female form . He describes the act of reviving the character at the end of the episode as " a pretty cheap trick " , but asserts that ; " this is outshone by the big surprise at Jenny 's career @-@ choice at the conclusion of The Doctor 's Daughter . Wow . " Newsround 's <unk> <unk> opines that Moffett 's appearance as Jenny is " superb " , while Doctor Who producer Phil Collinson has hailed the introduction of Jenny as the Doctor 's daughter : " One of the best pre @-@ title sequences we 've ever had . " Despite reviewing the episode " The Doctor 's Daughter " poorly as a whole , Digital Spy 's Ben Rawson @-@ Jones argues that Jenny " deserved a stronger narrative context for her debut " , and that Georgia Moffett portrayed the character with " the right spirit , arrogance and compassion that befits a <unk> of the Time Lord . " 
 Ian Berriman , writing for SFX , is somewhat more critical of the character , stating : " we 're not given much time to get to know Jenny ( and you always suspect she 's a redshirt ) , so her " death " is not as affecting as it could have been . " The Stage 's Mark Wright is similarly critical of the character and her conception , writing : " I 'll admit to feeling cheated that she isn 't the real thing and it 's a bit of techno @-@ <unk> <unk> to give the Doctor something to emote against . I don 't quite buy the bond that springs up between the Doctor and Georgia Moffett 's Jenny ( a name she is given rather quickly ) . She is a genetically engineered soldier with military tactics and skills programmed in , and knows what to do with a gun , much to the Doctor 's horror . But why does he care , she isn 't really his daughter ? " 
 Anderson , Berriman , Wright , and The Times ' Andrew Billen all speculate that the character is likely to return to the series in the future , with Anderson assessing that the episode 's ending left " vast scope " for the return of the character in her own spin @-@ off : " Moffett herself has the obvious credentials due to her real @-@ life dad , and she 's certainly young , attractive and athletic enough to cross quite a few barriers in viewer demographics . " Billen adds : " If Jenny [ ... ] does not spin off into , at least , her own comic books , I shall be surprised . " 
 Georges Jeanty , artist of the comic series Buffy the Vampire Slayer Season Eight , felt that the character of Jenny was a homage to Joss Whedon 's influential character Buffy Summers ( Sarah Michelle Gellar ) , from Buffy the Vampire Slayer . Jeanty returned the favour by modelling Buffy 's outfit in Season Eight # 32 after Jenny 's outfit in " The Doctor 's Daughter " . 
 = 2011 NBA lockout = 
 The 2011 NBA lockout was the fourth lockout in the history of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . The owners began the work stoppage upon expiration of the 2005 collective bargaining agreement ( CBA ) . The 161 @-@ day lockout began on July 1 , 2011 and ended on December 8 , 2011 . It delayed the start of the 2011 – 12 regular season from November 1 to December 25 , and it reduced the regular season from 82 to 66 games . The previous lockout in 1998 – 99 had shortened the season to 50 games . During the lockout , teams could not trade , sign or contact players , and players could not access NBA team facilities , trainers , or staffs . 
 Negotiations between the owners , led by commissioner David Stern , and the players , led by director Billy Hunter and president Derek Fisher of the labor union National Basketball Players Association ( NBPA ) , began in early 2011 and continued through November . The main issues dividing both sides were the division of revenue and the structure of the salary cap and luxury tax . Owners proposed to reduce the players ’ share of basketball related income ( BRI ) from 57 % to 47 % , but the players countered with 53 % of BRI . Owners wanted to implement a hard salary cap and a harsher luxury tax , hoping to increase competition among teams , whereas players wanted to keep the current soft salary cap structure intact . 
 As both sides failed to reach an agreement , the NBA canceled the preseason and all games through December . On November 14 , the players dissolved the union , allowing them to file antitrust lawsuits against the league . On November 26 , both sides reached a tentative agreement to end the lockout . The new CBA calls for a revenue split of 49 @-@ to @-@ 51 @.@ 2 % and a flexible salary cap structure with harsher luxury tax . After the tentative deal was reached , owners allowed players to have voluntary workouts at team sites starting December 1 . After the deal was ratified on December 8 , training camps , trades and free agency began the next day . During the lockout , some players signed contracts to play in other countries , mostly in Europe and Asia , with most of them having the option to return upon the lockout 's conclusion . The lockout also affected the economy due largely to NBA cities losing revenue generated by games as well as television networks losing ratings and advertisement revenue . 
 = = Chronology = = 
 July 1 , 2011 : The lockout begins . 
 September 23 , 2011 : The NBA canceled training camp , which was to begin October 3 , and the first week of preseason games , which were to run October 9 through 15 . 
 October 4 , 2011 : The NBA canceled the remainder of the preseason . 
 October 10 , 2011 : The first two weeks of the regular season canceled . 
 October 28 , 2011 : All games through November 30 canceled . 
 November 14 , 2011 : The NBPA dissolves labor union into a trade association . 
 November 15 , 2011 : The NBA canceled all games through December 15 . Players filed antitrust lawsuits against the NBA in California and Minnesota federal courts . 
 November 26 , 2011 : The NBA owners and players reached a tentative agreement to end the lockout . 
 December 1 , 2011 : The NBPA re @-@ formed as a union . 
 December 8 , 2011 : The new CBA is ratified , officially ending the lockout . 
 December 25 , 2011 : NBA season begins . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the previous lockout , which shortened the 1998 – 99 season from 82 to 50 games , a six @-@ year deal between the owners , led by commissioner David Stern , and the players , led by director Billy Hunter and president Patrick Ewing of the labor union National Basketball Players Association ( NBPA ) , was reached . As the CBA was set to expire on June 30 , 2005 , the two sides began to negotiate in early 2005 . There were several issues obstructing the new agreement , which included adding an age limit for rookies , toughening the existing drug @-@ testing program and limiting the length of long @-@ term contracts . However , negotiations went smoothly and the two sides were able to reach a deal in June 2005 , avoiding the lockout . That deal guaranteed players 57 percent of basketball @-@ related income ( BRI ) and lasted for six years , until June 30 , 2011 . A year after signing the deal , eight owners signed a petition requesting Stern address the disparity between small @-@ market and large @-@ market teams . They wrote that " the hard truth is that our current economic system works only for larger @-@ market teams and a few teams that have extraordinary success ... The rest of us are looking at significant and unacceptable annual financial losses . " 
 Derek Fisher succeeded Ewing as NBPA president in 2006 . In early 2011 , negotiations on a new CBA began . The league claimed that it was losing $ 300 million a year ( 22 out of 30 teams were losing money last season ) and proposed to reduce 40 % of players ' salary ( about $ 800 million ) and institute a hard salary cap ( at $ 45 million per team ) as opposed to a soft cap ( at $ 58 million ) currently in use . The union disputed those figures and steadfastly opposed those changes . Hunter said that he was advising players to prepare for a lockout . In May 2011 , the NBPA filed a complaint with the National Labor Relations Board ( NLRB ) , accusing the league of negotiating in bad faith by failing to provide critical financial data to the union and repeatedly threatening to lock out players . The NBA quickly rejected the complaint , saying that the league complies fully with federal labor laws . The union also considered the option of decertification , which allows players to file an antitrust lawsuit against the NBA . 
 With time winding down , negotiations continued in May and June . On the salary cap , the owners , in their newest proposal , call for a system called the " flex cap " that limits payroll at $ 62 million but penalizes teams if the teams payroll exceeds the league 's average payroll of that season . The union argued that it is still a hard cap because the ceiling would kick in eventually . On salary reduction , players offered to cut $ 500 million over the next five years ( their share of BRI would be reduced from 57 to 54 @.@ 3 percent ) . The owners instead proposed to cut $ 2 billion over the next 10 years . 
 As a last @-@ ditch effort to avert a lockout , owners and players met again on June 30 , 2011 , to negotiate , but both sides failed to reach a resolution on key issues like salary cap and BRI splits . Both Stern and Hunter said that the two sides remained far apart . The owners demanded a larger share , claiming that they were losing money . The players , on the other hand , were willing to make concessions , but they refused to completely cave in to owners ' demands . Negotiations broke off , and the CBA expired at midnight . 
 = = Lockout = = 
 = = = Initial months = = = 
 The lockout was officially started by the owners on July 1 , 2011 , during which , teams could not trade , sign or contact players , and players could not access NBA team facilities , trainers or staffs . Negotiations resumed at an August 1 bargaining session , but it fell apart after three hours . On August 2 , 2011 , the NBA filed two unfair labor practice claims against the NBPA , one at the NLRB and another at a federal district court in New York . The league accused the players of being uncooperative in negotiations by threatening to dissolve their union and file antitrust lawsuits . Hunter , in a statement released by the union , called the lawsuits " without merit " and that the union would seek to dismiss it in court . On August 4 , Hunter said that he thought the entire 2011 – 12 season would likely be canceled . 
 The NBPA and the owners returned to negotiate again on August 31 with a sense of urgency . No specifics were disclosed although both sides hoped to meet again soon . " Everyone loses if we don 't reach an agreement , that 's something that I think has always been understood , " said union president Derek Fisher . " I will say we are not apart in terms of an agreed urgency on getting a deal done , " said NBA deputy commissioner Adam Silver . 
 The union and owners met again on September 13 but the negotiation soon collapsed . The salary cap structure remained the main source of disagreement . Owners wanted to create a hard cap for team payroll . The union wanted to keep the current structure intact , referring to it as a " blood issue " . Players were willing to cut salary only if owners agree to compromise on the salary cap . But owners were unwilling to concede , saying that there must be a system in place that allows all teams to compete . Five of the sports agents — Arn Tellem , Bill Duffy , Mark Bartelstein , Jeff Schwartz and Dan Fegan — who represent one @-@ third of NBA players spoke with each other about <unk> the union . They believed owners have most of the leverage in negotiation and viewed decertification as a way for players to take control . Hunter said however that players have not considered decertification at this point . 
 On September 15 , Fisher sent an email to 400 @-@ plus players asking for unity . In the email , he said that recent meetings were " effective " . He suggested that the failure of having a deal was not due to disagreement between players and owners , but due to disagreement among owners . Fisher also used the opportunity to counter agents ' suggestion of disbanding the union , saying that they were not making " a drastic move that leaves players without a union " . According to sources , there was indeed disagreement among the owners . Some thought players ' proposal of taking 52 % of BRI was fair , and were willing to compromise on things like tying players ' future earnings to NBA 's future revenue growth and maintaining current salary level . Cavaliers ' Dan Gilbert and Suns ' Robert Sarver were among the hardliners who oppose the deal while Knicks ' James Dolan and the Lakers ' Jerry Buss were among the group in favor of it . Stern denied that there was a rift among owners the following day , saying , " I don 't know what the basis of Derek 's belief is . " 
 = = = Cancellations = = = 
 On September 23 , 2011 , the NBA canceled training camp , which was to begin October 3 , and the first week of preseason games , which were to run October 9 through 15 . The incident marks only the second time in league history that games have been lost to a labor stoppage . Both the owners and the union had planned to meet on September 30 in New York and pledged to continue through the weekends if progress was being made . A source close to the situation leaked to ESPN that Stern plans to threaten the cancellation of the season if no deal is made , but the union sees this as a scare tactic and not a serious threat . Commentators speculated that Stern wants to put pressure on the players and prevent negotiation from dragging through the fall . The meeting on September 30 was tense as Dwyane Wade reportedly yelled at Stern after he pointed his finger at Wade . The players nearly stormed out , but they remained in the meeting only after Hunter asked them to . Stern also backed down from his earlier threat that he would cancel the season if there is no deal . 
 On October 4 , the NBA canceled the remainder of the preseason . Stern said the league would lose $ 200 million by canceling the preseason , and warned that the first two weeks of the season would be in jeopardy if no deal is reached by October 10 . The players proposed that they receive 53 % of BRI , while the owners countered with 47 % . The two sides then discussed a 50 – 50 split of BRI , with the owners offering the players 49 % of BRI with incentives that would raise the value to 51 % . The players countered by asking for 51 % , which would increase to 53 percent using those same incentives . It was rejected by the owners . Attempts for the sides to meet on October 7 failed . The union said the NBA demanded a 50 – 50 revenue split prior to the meeting , while the league refuted making any such demands . After talks on October 9 and 10 , the two sides were unable to reach a deal and Stern subsequently canceled the first two weeks of regular @-@ season games , which were originally scheduled to begin on November 1 . BRI remained the main issue , but other differences included luxury tax , player contract length , and the mid @-@ level exception . The owners proposed a $ 2 tax for every $ 1 that a team spends above the tax threshold for player salaries . The tax would rise to as high as $ 4 for every $ 1 above the limit for teams that are repeat offenders . The previous CBA in comparison called for a $ 1 tax for every $ 1 over the limit . The players refused to accept a hard salary cap , which they felt the more punitive luxury taxes would effectively create . Stern said the owners felt a harsher luxury tax would make the league more competitive . Wade countered that a small @-@ market team like the San Antonio Spurs had won multiple championships . Andrew Zimbalist , an economist at Smith College , said that " the statistical correlation between payroll and win percentage is practically nonexistent " in the NBA . ESPN.com concluded that a team 's draft efficiency accounted for 34 % of its winning percentage in the past decade , while payroll showed only a 7 % correlation . The New York Times noted that a fairer system was needed for the small @-@ market teams , but the league 's popularity historically relied on predictably successful teams with multiple superstars . 
 NBPA leaders met with around 30 players on October 14 and stressed unity . Washington Wizards player JaVale McGee left the meeting early and told reporters there were some players " saying that they 're ready to fold " , but the majority was united . McGee later denied mentioning that players were ready to fold , but his comment was recorded by reporters . Fisher said McGee had " no ability to make that statement " based on the limited time he spent at the meeting . 
 Owners and players met again on October 18 – 20 for 30 hours of talks over three days . They met before a federal mediator , George Cohen — the director of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service . Cohen tried unsuccessfully to resolve the 2011 NFL lockout . At the conclusion of the meetings , the sides remained split on the revenue split and the structure of the salary cap . The league proposed a 50 – 50 split of BRI , and the players proposed a range that would allow them as low as 50 % of BRI to a maximum of 53 % , depending on the league 's revenues . Gilbert told the players to trust that the salary cap issues could be resolved if they accepted the 50 – 50 proposal . Hunter responded , " I can 't trust your gut . I got to trust my own gut . " Silver and San Antonio Spurs owner Peter Holt told reporters that the players refused to negotiate after the 50 – 50 proposal . Fisher told the press " that you guys were lied to " by the owners . Hunter said the owners told them , " Take it or leave it . " Cohen decided that there was " no useful purpose " to continue mediation . Tentative agreements were reached on smaller issues , allowing a one @-@ time exemption for teams to waive players without counting against the salary cap , granting teams an annual exemption to waive players and <unk> the impact to the salary cap over multiple years , and a mid @-@ level exception of $ 5 million . 
 Hunter characterized the small @-@ market owners as being inflexible in negotiation . However , The New York Times wrote that the views of individual owners " cannot be easily categorized by market size , revenue , personal wealth or championship aspirations . " Dallas Mavericks owner Mark Cuban , whose team is in the fifth @-@ largest market and has one of the highest payrolls , and Portland Trail Blazers owner Paul Allen , the 23rd @-@ wealthiest person in America , are as interested as small @-@ market owners in changing the economy of the NBA in an effort to increase competition . While owners of profitable teams like Buss and Dolan are willing to accept modest changes to the CBA , they remain united with the small @-@ market teams based on concerns for the league 's long @-@ term health . 
 Despite the earlier cancellation announcement , the players and the league hoped that a full 82 @-@ game schedule could be salvaged if a deal is reached in time . On October 28 , Stern announced the cancellation of all games through November 30 after negotiations regarding division of revenue ended without an agreement . He said that Hunter was unwilling " to go a penny below 52 % " on BRI , while Hunter said , " We made a lot of concessions , but unfortunately at this time it 's not enough . " Stern indicated that an 82 @-@ game season was no longer possible . He added that tentative agreement was reached for maximum contract lengths of five years for players staying with their teams or four years when signing with another team . 
 Reports of division among players and owners surfaced . Jason Whitlock of <unk> wrote that Fisher was privately working with Stern on the 50 – 50 split and that Hunter confronted Fisher about the issue . Fisher and Stern denied a private meeting took place . In a letter to the players , Fisher called the reports " absurd " and demanded " a retraction for the libelous and defamatory stories " through his attorneys . Hunter said his " relationship with Derek is very good . There was no confrontation . " Fisher , as union president , is not empowered to make unilateral decisions for the union . While Fisher believed a 50 – 50 deal could be considered , Hunter maintained that the owners should never " make the same or more than the players . " Miami Heat owner Micky <unk> , one of the owners willing to settle with players , responded to a fan complaining about greedy owners and players on Twitter , saying that " You are barking at the wrong owner . " He was fined $ 500 @,@ 000 by Stern , five times larger than any previous amount against an owner for publicly commenting on the labor situation . Washington Wizards owner Ted Leonsis and Charlotte Bobcats owner Michael Jordan had been fined $ 100 @,@ 000 each for public comments on the lockout . Leonsis had commented about the owners ' desire for a hard salary cap , while Jordan told an Australian newspaper that the league 's business model was " broken " , citing the owners ' desire for revenue sharing . A group of 10 to 14 hardline owners , led by Jordan , wanted to cap the players ' share of BRI at 50 % and as low as 47 . During the labor dispute in 1998 , then @-@ player Jordan told Washington Wizards then @-@ owner Abe Pollin , " If you can ’ t make a profit , you should sell your team . " Whitlock called Jordan a " sellout " wanting " current players to pay for his incompetence . " He cited Jordan 's executive decisions to draft disappointing players Kwame Brown and Adam Morrison . 
 In early November , about 50 players renewed talks of union decertification if the union went lower than 52 @.@ 5 % of BRI or agreed to additional restrictions on contracts , salary @-@ cap exceptions , or free agency . <unk> would require that 30 % of the union — about 130 players — sign a petition , allowing an election under the auspices of the NLRB by all NBPA members to decertify with a simple majority . The NLRB traditionally does not consider a decertification petition while a charge is pending , such as the NBPA 's unfair labor practice charges filed in August . 
 The owners and players union met on November 6 , and they were joined again by federal mediator Cohen . The players proposed that they receive 51 % of BRI , with a 1 % portion taken out for retired players . The owners offered a " band " that would pay the players 49 to 51 % , depending on revenue growth . Jeff Kessler , the union ’ s attorney , said the league 's proposal was really 50 @.@ 2 % and called the possibility of reaching 51 % an " illusion . " The league also proposed restrictions for teams that pay the luxury tax , banning them from sign and trade deals and limiting their use of the mid @-@ level exception . They also proposed a " repeater tax " for teams that exceed the tax threshold thrice in a five @-@ year span . Stern issued an ultimatum , giving the players until November 9 to accept the deal before it is lowered to 47 % BRI and a flex salary cap . 
 On November 15 , the NBA canceled all games through December 15 . 
 = = = Dissolving the union = = = 
 The union rejected the offer on November 9 and asked for another bargaining session . The two sides met again as the deadline passed . After two days of negotiation , the owners put forth a revised final offer and said that they were done bargaining . If accepted by the players , Stern hoped to start a 72 @-@ game season in mid December . On November 14 , the union rejected the last offer and dissolved the union . The NBPA was converted into a trade association , enabling the players as individual employees to participate in a class action antitrust lawsuit against the league , calling the lockout an illegal group boycott . Attorney David Boies , who represented the NFL owners in their 2011 lockout , agreed to represent the players and join Keesler , who also represented the players in the NFL lockout . On November 15 , one group of NBA players ( including Carmelo Anthony , Chauncey Billups , Kawhi Leonard , and Leon <unk> ) filed an antitrust lawsuit against the NBA in a California federal court , while another ( including Anthony Tolliver , Ben Gordon , Caron Butler and Derrick Williams ) filed their own suit against the NBA in a Minnesota federal court . November 15 was also the day players were to receive their first paychecks if the season was played . 
 On November 21 , the California lawsuit was dropped in order to merge with the Minnesota lawsuit . Boies hoped that the move would speed up the process since the courts will likely merge the suits as they are similar complaints seeking the same outcome . The league has until December 5 to respond in court . 
 = = = Settlement = = = 
 On November 23 , the league and the players agreed to resume negotiating on November 25 . On November 26 , after 15 hours of talks , a tentative deal was reached . The NBPA re @-@ formed as a union on December 1 , receiving support from over 300 players , exceeding the requirement for at least 260 signatures . Signature cards were sent to the roughly 440 players on rosters at the end of the previous season , as well as to the 60 rookies drafted in 2011 and to players who signed at least two 10 @-@ day contracts . The re @-@ formation enabled further negotiations with the league on secondary issues such as the age limit for the NBA draft and rules on players being sent to and recalled from the NBA D @-@ League . The players and owners concluded their voting on the deal on December 8 , when the deal was ratified , and the lockout ended after 161 days . The owners approved the deal by a 25 – 5 vote , while 86 % of the more than 200 players who voted approved the deal . Miami Heat 's Micky <unk> and Dallas Mavericks ' Mark Cuban are the two owners who have publicly disclosed that they voted against the new CBA . 
 The players would receive 51 @.@ 2 % of BRI in 2011 – 12 , with a 49 @-@ to @-@ 51 band in subsequent years . Teams are allowed a one @-@ time amnesty exemption to waive one player and remove him from the team 's salary cap . The player could be claimed off waivers by the highest bidder ; the waiving team would be responsible for the remaining salary without it counting against their cap . In a rule dubbed the " Derrick Rose Rule " after the 2011 NBA Most Valuable Player Award winner , a player finishing his rookie contract could be re @-@ signed at up to 30 % of his team 's salary cap — an increase from the previous CBA 's 25 % — if he was either a two @-@ time All @-@ Star starter , twice voted All @-@ NBA Team , or won an MVP award . The maximum salary for a player otherwise would remain unchanged at 25 , 30 , or 35 % of the salary cap , depending on the player 's years of service . 
 = = = Racial comments = = = 
 Bryant Gumbel on his HBO Real Sports show in October likened Stern 's role in the lockout to a " modern plantation overseer , treating NBA men as if they were his boys ... keeping the hired hands in their place . " The NBA owners are predominantly white , while the players are mostly black . ESPN noted that William C. Rhoden in his book $ 40 Million Slaves had earlier dealt with the topic of players as " slaves " in spite of earning millions of dollars . Stern dismissed Gumbel 's comments as " an occupational hazard " of being the NBA commissioner . In early November , NBPA attorney Jeff Kessler criticized the owners ' " take it or leave it " bargaining approach : " instead of treating the players like partners , they ’ re treating them like plantation workers . " Hall of Famer Magic Johnson called the comments " ridiculous " and defended Stern 's record of promoting blacks . ESPN The Magazine said that the NBPA did not condone Kessler 's statements , and they had intentionally avoided getting involved with Gumbel 's earlier remarks . Kessler later apologized for his comments . 
 = = = Impact = = = 
 The revised season schedule with 16 fewer regular @-@ season games and a reduced pre @-@ season caused an estimated loss of $ 400 million for both the team owners and the players . According to CNBC , the average player lost $ 220 @,@ 000 after the first missed paycheck on November 15 . However , each player did receive $ 100 @,@ 000 from the NBA to compensate for salaries falling below the 57 % BRI level in 2010 – 11 . As of October 25 , an estimated 400 NBA jobs were lost due to layoffs and attrition since the lockout — around 200 in the league office and another 200 among the 30 teams . As the lockout dragged on toward the holiday season , many NBA arenas workers felt the effect . Many of them worked part @-@ time in order to supplement their income or to simply pay bills and they were unable to recover lost wages that resulted from cancelled games . 
 = = Players ' alternatives = = 
 = = = Going overseas = = = 
 The players union encouraged players to find work overseas , hoping owners would offer better deals if they saw players having more options . Josh Childress , who played for Greek team Olympiacos before returning to the NBA in 2010 , said he would not consider playing overseas during the lockout . He cited concerns with reliability of getting paid , differences in coaching styles , and lower standards of business travel compared to the NBA . The International Basketball Federation ( FIBA ) announced on July 29 that it would allow players under NBA contracts to play overseas , provided that the contracts they signed had opt @-@ out clauses that allowed players to return once the work stoppage ended . Stern said the league would allow players to play overseas , but he warned that it could divide the union and possibly jeopardize players ' contracts if they were seriously injured . Most leagues permitted the signing of locked @-@ out NBA players with the option of opting out ; the Chinese Basketball Association , however , only allowed its clubs to sign foreign free agents who could play for at least the entire season . Chinese nationals were exempt from this rule ; this allowed Yi Jianlian to return to the NBA upon the end of the lockout . 
 More than 90 players decided to sign with foreign teams during the lockout . The New York Times called the migration of players overseas " one of the most overblown stories of the lockout " with a majority of those signing being " rookies , middling veterans and fringe players . " Deron Williams was the only 2011 All @-@ Star going overseas , signing a one @-@ year contract for $ 5 million to play for Beşiktaş of the Turkish Basketball League . Former first overall draft pick Kenyon Martin , a free agent , signed a one @-@ year contract with the Xinjiang Flying Tigers of the Chinese Basketball Association that would make him the highest paid player in the league 's history at $ 500 @,@ 000 a month . Unlike players who signed more lucrative contracts overseas , three @-@ time NBA champion Tony Parker opted to play for the minimum wage of $ 2 @,@ 000 per month with ASVEL Basket , the French team he partly owns . Parker joined several foreign players , such as Leandro Barbosa , Boris Diaw , Rudy Fernández , Andrei Kirilenko and Mehmet <unk> , who opted to play in their home countries until the lockout ended . 
 An NBA player playing in Europe could earn as little as $ 50 @,@ 000 – $ 75 @,@ 000 per month , while the average NBA annual salary was $ 5 @.@ 8 million with the minimum around $ 500 @,@ 000 . The large contracts signed by Williams and Martin were extreme exceptions . In October after the cancellation of regular season games , it was not anticipated that many additional NBA players would be signed overseas ; leagues had started playing , their rosters were full , and new players could disrupt the teams . 
 = = = Other alternatives = = = 
 Many players opted to stay in the United States instead . The New York Times speculated that many Americans would have found it hard to leave and change their lifestyle . Some played in local pick @-@ up games , while others ranging from stars like Kevin Durant to players like <unk> Wright played in the more organized exhibition tournaments such as the Drew League in Los Angeles , the Melo League located in Baltimore and the Goodman League in Washington , D.C. An exhibition game between two of the leagues was played on August 20 , 2011 , with the Goodman League defeating the Drew League , 135 – 134 . Drew commissioner Dino Smiley said such pro – am games during the NBA off @-@ season were not new , but " the lockout has taken these games to a new level " . A tournament of NBA @-@ only players was held in September in Las Vegas , Nevada , featuring eight teams with seven to eight players each . Named the Impact Basketball Competitive Training Series , the league was dubbed by The New York Times as the " Lockout League " . 
 Training camp was not expected to be long if there ended up being a season . Some players organized workouts for their teams to build team chemistry . The NBPA announced it was setting up workout centers in Las Vegas , Los Angeles , Houston and possibly Miami for players to work out at the union 's expense . 
 The continuing lockout in October and the canceled preseason allowed Renaldo Balkman , José Juan Barea and Carlos Arroyo to play for Puerto Rico in the Pan American Games that month . Puerto Rico won the gold medal . 
 = = Outside impact = = 
 = = = Olympics = = = 
 Although the 2012 Olympic men 's basketball tournament was then more than a year away , qualifying tournaments in all five of FIBA 's continental zones were to be held in the Northern Hemisphere summer of 2011 ( the traditional basketball offseason throughout the world ) . The lockout resulted in the suspension of an agreement between the NBA and FIBA by which the NBA would take on most of the costs for insuring the value of its players ' contracts in the event they were injured during international competition . As a result , national federations that wish to have NBA players on their squads must now provide full coverage instead of supplemental insurance . 
 These costs are surprisingly high — one agent who represents an unnamed NBA player set to earn $ 10 million in the 2010 – 11 season said the player had received a $ 400 @,@ 000 quote to insure his contract for his national team 's FIBA qualifier . The Spanish Basketball Federation said that insuring all the NBA players on its national team for EuroBasket 2011 , which doubles as the European Olympic qualifiers , could cost as much as $ 5 @.@ 67 million . Basketball Australia announced that Andrew <unk> would not be available for the 2011 FIBA Oceania Championship ; his agent indicated that the final deal @-@ breaker was when insurers stated that they would not insure his remaining $ 39 million in NBA salary unless pre @-@ existing elbow , wrist , and back injuries were excluded from the policy . 
 The French , Russian and Argentine federations were able to insure their NBA players , and several other federations were also expected to be able to do so . Over 30 NBA players participated in EuroBasket 2011 , while Ben Gordon and Marcin <unk> opted out due to insurance concerns . 
 = = = Other sports = = = 
 A couple of weeks before the NBA season was originally scheduled to start , Reuters and Bloomberg Businessweek speculated on the prospect of increased interest in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) among NBA fans . The NHL had experienced steady growth since the 2005 – 06 season , and they again opened the 2011 – 12 season in early October to record crowds . Businessweek wrote , " Just maybe , the NBA ’ s sketchy situation is already having a positive effect on the NHL . " However several NHL teams ( nearly half of which do not have an NBA team in their market ) had no plans to market directly to NBA fans during the lockout . 
 The University of Texas at San Antonio ( <unk> ) , in its inaugural college football season , drew 40 @,@ 000 fans to its games in September . The San Antonio Business Journal speculated on <unk> 's opportunities to grow its fan base with the canceled NBA games in San Antonio . 
 Boston Herald speculated that NCAA college basketball would have higher television ratings and attendance during the lockout . However , Sporting News noted that " there was no obvious boost in popularity in the college game " during the previous lockout when college basketball attendance increased by an average of 21 people per game . 
 = = = NBA cities = = = 
 Mayors from 14 NBA cities wrote an open letter to NBA commissioner David Stern and NBPA chief Billy Hunter , requesting that they end the lockout based on " the perspective [ of city ] residents and the negative impact a canceled season might have on them , our cities , and our local economies . " TIME noted that arena workers would be affected by the cancellation of games . However , separate studies by University of Maryland , Baltimore County and Lake Forest College found no historic significant effect to the economies of cities with sports franchises affected by work stoppages . Explanations included consumer shifting of spending on sporting events to other forms of entertainment , reduced local government spending on crowd and traffic control , and higher productivity by the general workforce without the distraction of games . 
 = = = Other businesses = = = 
 It was estimated that a complete lockout had cost an upwards of $ 1 billion in lost television advertisement revenue . The lockout had dealt a sizable blow to the current licensed product market which was estimated at $ 2 @.@ 7 billion , and had created a big loss in television ratings for networks that cover NBA games such as the regional sports networks , TNT and ESPN . 
 = = <unk> season = = 
 The NBA revised the schedule to play two preseason games and a 66 @-@ game regular season schedule per team rather than the standard seven preseason games and an 82 @-@ game regular season schedule . Teams were allowed to contact players ' agents on November 30 . Players could begin working out voluntarily at team facilities with trainers on December 1 , but coaches and general managers were not allowed to observe the workouts nor could any drills be conducted . NBA teams began talking to free agents on December 5 , 2011 at 10 a.m. EST . Training camps and free agency started on December 9 with the regular season beginning on Christmas Day with five games , two more than the original schedule . ESPN / ABC analyst Jeff Van Gundy said about the NBA opening on Christmas Day : " It 's a different opening day than has ever happened in the past and Christmas Day games have always been a big day for the NBA . This unique situation combined with the unveiling of a championship banner for the Mavericks in a finals rematch , and then to see the Lakers and the debut of Mike Brown as head coach , those things are all going to be very compelling . " 
 The league built a new schedule from scratch based on available arena dates . In October , the league had allowed arenas in Los Angeles and Chicago to reassign NBA dates for other events . The number of games between conferences was affected as was the case in the 1999 lockout , when each team played only five or six <unk> games in a 50 @-@ game schedule . Normally , each team plays teams in the other conference twice each . Teams played 48 conference games and 18 non @-@ conference games in a 66 @-@ game schedule , compared to 52 conference games and 30 non @-@ conference games in a normal 82 @-@ game season . Teams played on average two more games per month and also played three @-@ consecutive games at least once in the season . In total , the league had 42 sets of back @-@ to @-@ back @-@ to @-@ back games , with 11 teams playing two such sets . The three @-@ game set , or " triple " , had not occurred since the shortened 1999 season , which featured 64 triples and <unk> play due to tired players . Before that , the last occurrence was two decades earlier . During the season , there were 29 occasions when teams played five games in six days . 
 With fewer off days during the season , the level of play was lower due to fatigue , and some older players rested to avoid burnout and recuperate from injuries . When the San Antonio Spurs rested Tim Duncan for a game in March at the end of a back @-@ to @-@ back @-@ to @-@ back , coach Gregg Popovich submitted the description of Duncan 's absence as " Old " . Nonetheless , some players still sustained injuries . In the 2012 playoffs , the Chicago Bulls were eliminated after losing Derrick Rose and Joakim Noah to injuries , and the New York Knicks lost to the Miami Heat while losing Baron Davis and Iman Shumpert to knee injuries . The Heat were not immune , losing Chris Bosh for most of the playoffs en route to their NBA championship . Stern initially said there was no connection between the injuries and the 66 @-@ game schedule compressed into 124 days ; however , he backed off those comments a week later , saying more research was needed . 
 = Jan Willem Spruyt = 
 Jan Willem Spruyt ( 4 July 1826 in <unk> , Netherlands – 8 September 1908 in Inanda , Natal ) , also known as Jan Willem Spruijt and Jan Willem Landskroon Spruijt ( birthname ) , was a South African civil servant , lawyer and statesman of Dutch descent . Spruyt was government secretary ( 1856 – 1862 ) and several times acting state president of the Orange Free State , and state secretary of the South African Republic ( 1866 – 1869 ) . 
 Spruyt grew up in the Netherlands , studied law , but did not complete his studies , and worked as a schoolteacher , before coming to South Africa . Here he practised as law agent in private practice in both Boer republics . Soon after his arrival he was also quickly enrolled in the administration of the Orange Free State , and attained a powerful position as government secretary . In this capacity he stood in for state president M.W. Pretorius several times in the period 1860 – 1862 . In the third quarter of the nineteenth century several many Afrikaner politicians and government officials served in both Boer republics . So did Spruyt , who finished his career as state secretary of the South African Republic . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and migration = = = 
 Spruyt was the son of Jacobus <unk> ( 1796 – 1839 ) , a Dutch medical doctor , and Antje Landskroon . Both the Spruyt and Landskroon families stood in a tradition of medical practice , and three of the four brothers Spruyt had were doctors in the Netherlands . Spruyt himself trained as a lawyer at Leiden University , but probably did not finish his studies . He went on to work as a schoolteacher in the village of <unk> in the north of the Netherlands . It was here that professor <unk> <unk> recruited him for South Africa in 1851 . <unk> was one of a group of Dutchmen , interested in the development of good education in the new Boer settlements in South Africa . As such , Spruyt was one of the many Dutch immigrants that settled in the new Boer republics around the middle of the nineteenth century . 
 Arriving in Delagoa Bay on a ship with J.A. <unk> as <unk> – he later became a well @-@ known figure in South Africa – and his two travel companions and fellow migrants , Hendrik van der Linden and <unk> <unk> , he travelled across the <unk> Mountains in an ox @-@ cart into the Transvaal . In March 1852 Spruyt was appointed schoolteacher in the town of Rustenburg . Because of disputes among the Dutchmen in the Transvaal , more specifically between Rev. Dirk van der Hoff and J.A. <unk> , who had now also settled there , Spruyt moved to the Orange Free State , where he established himself in Bloemfontein . 
 = = = Civil servant in the Orange Free State = = = 
 In Bloemfontein Spruyt worked as clerk of the <unk> ( 1854 – 1855 ) , and in that capacity he acted as secretary of the Volksraad on two occasions ( September 1854 and February 1855 ) , also filling in as Government Secretary . On the strength of his capacities Spruyt was appointed clerk to the State President in September 1855 . Soon after , during the illness of Government Secretary <unk> , Spruyt again took up that position . In October 1856 he was appointed to the vacancy and succeeded J. <unk> as Government Secretary of the Orange Free State . Spruyt was regarded by his colleagues as an accurate civil servant , but as a lesser politician and statesman , reason that he was not appointed Acting State President when State President Boshoff went on leave in 1858 . However , Boshoff trusted Spruyt fully , and he allowed him to represent the presidency in meetings of the Volksraad on several occasions in 1861 and 1862 . 
 Later Spruyt acted as State President during the absences of President Pretorius from Bloemfontein . Although general opinion had it that Spruyt was a man of lesser qualities , on his resignation he was praised by State President Pretorius as very loyal and accurate in his work . 
 As civil servant , Spruyt made an impact on the nascent state apparatus of the Orange Free State . He designed the coat of arms of the state , and laid the foundation of the model state the Orange Free State was to become in later years . Having worked in secretarial functions for the State President himself ( as clerk ) , but also as a servant of parliament , the government , and the State , Spruyt left a clear mark on the early administration and its organisation . Spruyt was also sensitive to good labour relations within the state apparatus , and propagated a rise in the officials ' salaries . In this he did not succeed , however , and eventually the matter of the salaries instigated his own resignation . Spruyt felt that his salary was insufficient to live on with a family , and tendered his resignation . 
 = = = Law agent , publisher , state secretary = = = 
 After his resignation he established himself as law agent ( <unk> ) in Bloemfontein , and acted as publisher of the Dutch language weekly paper De Tijd . <unk> <unk> en <unk> voor den Oranje @-@ Vrijstaat ( The Times . Political Newspaper and Advertiser for the Orange Free State ) , started by H.A.L. Hamelberg as a competitor to the English language newspaper The Friend . 
 In 1865 Spruyt was declared insolvent , and he subsequently moved back to the Transvaal . Here the government of the South African Republic appointed him State Secretary in November 1866 on the advice of State President Pretorius . This appointment lasted till 1869 . 
 In 1870 Spruyt returned to the Orange Free State and to private law practice . He established himself in <unk> , a territory conquered by the Orange Free State in the last Basotho War of 1867 . His insolvency kept following him , however , and as late as 1871 some of his possessions , including a building complex in Rustenburg , were publicly sold for a minute sum of money . 
 Efforts to regain a public position in the Orange Free State failed , and in 1888 Spruyt once more returned to the South African Republic . He was allowed to work as law agent in the lower courts , and – being well @-@ known and popular – set up a successful law practice . Until the end of his life he kept a healthy interest in the affairs of the state , especially in land cases . 
 In the last period of his life Spruyt lived in <unk> , Johannesburg . He died while on a visit to Natal , aged 82 . 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Spruyt married in Bloemfontein on 31 December 1856 with Elizabeth Emma Hanger ( 1826 – 1918 ) , originating from Peddie in the Cape Colony . The couple had five sons and five daughters , Emma , William , Gerard , Victor , Henrietta , George , Rudolf , Alicia , Elizabeth and Catherine . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 Anon . ( 19 January 1968 ) . " President Spruyt of the Orange Free State " . Carletonville Herald . 
 Muller , H.P.N. ( 1907 ) . Oude <unk> in den Oranje @-@ Vrystaat . Naar Mr. H.A.L. Hamelberg 's <unk> <unk> beschreven . Leiden : E.J. <unk> pp. <unk> . 
 van der <unk> , <unk> ( 1972 ) . " Spruijt , Jan Willem Landskroon " . Suid @-@ <unk> <unk> <unk> 2 . <unk> & <unk> p . 720 . 
 = And Then We Kiss = 
 " And Then We Kiss " is a song recorded by American singer Britney Spears for her fourth studio album , In the Zone ( 2003 ) . It was written by Spears , Mark Taylor and Paul Barry , while production was handled by Taylor . The song did not make the final track listing of In the Zone and was later remixed by Junkie XL for inclusion on Spears ' first remix album , B in the Mix : The Remixes ( 2005 ) . It was also included in the EP released to promote the remix album , called Key Cuts from Remixed . The remix was released as the promotional single from the album in Australia and New Zealand . The original version by Taylor leaked online in September 2011 . 
 The Junkie XL Remix of " And Then We Kiss " is an euro @-@ trance song with influences of techno and usage of dance @-@ rock guitars , synthesizers and symphonic strings . The lyrics speak about a kiss and the different sensations that a woman experiences , including trembling , crying and moaning . Junkie XL explained that he wanted to make the song a 2006 version of Depeche Mode 's " Enjoy the Silence " . The Junkie XL Remix of " And Then We Kiss " received mostly positive reviews from music critics , with some noticing its potential to be a radio or club hit . The song failed to appear on any major charts . However , it peaked at number fifteen on the US Billboard Hot Dance Airplay . The songs appears in Dance Dance Revolution Supernova 2 . 
 = = Background = = 
 " And Then We Kiss " was written by Spears , Mark Taylor and Paul Barry , while produced by Taylor . The song was recorded in the same sessions as " Breathe on Me " , and was originally intended for In the Zone ( 2003 ) . This version produced by Taylor features an electronica vibe reminiscent of Madonna 's Ray of Light ( 1998 ) , and contains a flamenco guitar with prominent lead vocals by Spears . " And Then We Kiss " was set to be included on a bonus disc of Britney & Kevin : Chaotic ( 2005 ) , but was left out for unknown reasons . 
 The song was remixed by Junkie XL and released on her remix album B in the Mix : The Remixes ( 2005 ) . In the album credits , both Taylor and Junkie XL were listed as producers of the song . All instruments , including guitar , bass guitar , synths and drums , were played by Junkie XL . Audio mastering was done by Chaz Harper at Battery Mastering . In September 2005 , it was announced by Billboard that the remix would serve as the music for the ad campaign behind Spears ' fragrance , Fantasy . The Junkie XL Remix was released as promotional single from B in the Mix : The Remixes on October 31 , 2005 in Australia and New Zealand , as " And Then We Kiss " . The version of the song produced by Taylor remained unreleased for years , until a new mix of the song labeled as the original version leaked online on September 2 , 2011 . After suggestions that it may be a fake , Taylor confirmed its authenticity to Bradley Stern of <unk> on September 5 , 2011 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " And Then We Kiss " is four minutes and twenty @-@ eight seconds long . It is an euro @-@ trance song with influences of techno and usage of synthesizers . The song blends dance @-@ rock guitars and symphonic strings and closes with an orchestral overtone . Its lyrics talk about a kiss and the different sensations that the protagonist experiences , including trembling , crying and moaning . At the beginning she sings the lines " Lying alone / touching my skin " which suggest that the whole song may actually be a fantasy . Spears 's vocals are much less prominent than on the original version . In an interview with About.com , Junkie XL said he wanted to turn the song " into a 2006 version of Enjoy the Silence with really electronic chunky beats and nice melodic guitar lines . Besides the fact that [ Britney ] ' s singing on it , it could be a track off my album because it 's the same vibe . I 'm really happy with the end result and so are they . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Junkie XL Remix of " And Then We Kiss " received mostly positive reviews from music critics . Jennifer Vineyard of MTV noted " And Then We Kiss " had " the potential to be a radio or club hit — if Jive were actively promoting [ B in the Mix ] " . Barry Walters of Rolling Stone said the remix " brings a simpatico blend of symphonic strings and dance @-@ rock guitars " in its melody , while Spence D. of IGN noted Junkie XL makes " the remix an understated swatch of atmospheric neo @-@ goth <unk> and staccato rhythms . " A reviewer of Yahoo ! Shopping considered the song " dreamy " . Kurt Kirton of About.com said that the remixes of " And Then We Kiss " , " Toxic " , " Touch of My Hand " , " Someday ( I Will Understand ) " and " ... Baby One More Time " " hold their own " ; Gregg Shapiro of the Bay Area Reporter , however , said " the many flaws in Spears ' reedy , cold and mechanical voice are brought to the forefront " in the remixes . MTV writer Bradley Stern praised Junkie XL , writing , " the sublime remix found producer Junkie XL taking the ( still ) unreleased studio version of " And Then We Kiss " [ ... ] and smoothing it over into one of Britney 's most lush , mature musical moments of all time . " 
 " And Then We Kiss " was not officially released as promotional single in the United States , therefore it was not eligible at the time to appear on Billboard 's Hot 100 . Even so , promotional vinyls were sent to radio stations , who started to play the song unofficially and it managed to garner enough airplay to appear on the Hot Dance Airplay chart of Billboard in early 2006 . It debuted at number 25 on the chart issue dated February 25 , 2006 , reaching a new position of 23 on the following issue . After five weeks on the chart , " And Then We Kiss " reached a peak of 15 , on the chart issue dated March 25 , 2006 . The song spent a total of eleven weeks on the chart , making its last appearance on the week of May 6 , 2006 . Despite being released in Australia and New Zealand , " And Then We Kiss " failed to appear on major charts of both countries . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " And Then We Kiss " – 4 : 28 
 12 " Vinyl 
 " And Then We Kiss " ( Junkie XL Remix ) – 4 : 28 
 " And Then We Kiss " ( Junkie XL Remix Instrumental ) – 4 : 28 
 " And Then We Kiss " ( Junkie XL Undressed Remix ) – 4 : 41 
 " And Then We Kiss " ( Junkie XL Undressed Remix Instrumental ) – 4 : 41 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Britney Spears — lead vocals , songwriting 
 Michael Taylor — songwriting 
 Paul Barry — songwriting 
 Mark Taylor — producer 
 Junkie XL — producer , remixer , all instruments 
 Chaz Harper — audio mastering 
 Source : 
 = = Charts = = 
 = 1882 Navy Midshipmen football team = 
 The 1882 Navy Midshipmen football team represented the United States Naval Academy in the 1882 college football season . The team was the second intercollegiate football squad to represent the United States Naval Academy , and the first since 1879 . The team was coached by player @-@ coach Vaulx Carter , and was entirely student @-@ operated . It was captained by squad member Alex Jackson . The team played just a single game , an 8 to 0 ( 8 – 0 ) shutout of Johns Hopkins , which was the school 's first ever win . The squad was entirely student operated , and was not supported by the Naval Academy 's faculty . The season would mark the beginning of eight season rivalry between the Midshipmen and Johns Hopkins . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 It is widely believed by football researchers that the playing of intercollegiate football began in November 1869 , when a player at Rutgers University challenged another player at the nearby College of New Jersey ( now Princeton ) . The contest more closely resembled soccer , with teams scoring by kicking the ball into the opponent 's net , and lacked a uniform rules structure . The game developed slowly ; the first rules were drafted in October 1873 , and only consisted of twelve guidelines . Even though the number of teams participating in the sport increased , the game was still effectively controlled by the College of New Jersey , who claimed eight national championships in ten years . Only Yale presented any form of challenge , claiming four national championships in the same time period . 
 The Naval Academy 's first ever football team was fielded in 1879 . The squad was entirely student @-@ operated , receiving no official support from Naval Academy officials . The team was entirely funded by its members and their fellow students . This would continue until 1892 , when that season 's team was led by coach Ben Crosby . The 1879 team participated in just one game , which resulted in a scoreless tie . It was played against the Baltimore Athletic Club , at most likely an unused drill field on the Naval Academy campus . Navy would not field a football team in 1880 or 1881 , likely due to the lack of support . 
 = = Schedule = = 
 = = Season summary = = 
 = = = Navy 8 , Johns Hopkins 0 = = = 
 The 1882 season began when second @-@ year cadet Vaulx Carter formed a team , which he led as both a player and the coach . Alex Jackson was appointed captain of the squad . Carter scheduled a single game for the season , which was played on Thanksgiving Day against the Baltimore @-@ based Clifton Football Club . The Clifton team was made up of players from Johns Hopkins University , who were unable to play for their school due to their administrator 's negative views towards the sport . Navy 's team itself played without official permission ; the first year the team received approval was in 1885 , when , according to Morris Allison Bealle , " some of the faculty actually gave in and admitted that football might , at that , be or become an interesting diversion " . 
 It snowed heavily before the game , to the point where players for both teams had to clear layers of snow off of the field , making large piles of snow along the sides of the playing ground . The field was 110 yards by 53 yards , with goalposts 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) apart and 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) high . The first half of the game went scoreless ; the Baltimore American reported that " the visitors pushed Navy every place but over the goal line in the first half " . During play , the ball was kicked over the seawall a number of times , once going so far out it had to be retrieved by boat before play could continue . The American described the second half in detail : 
 After ten minutes interval the ball was again put in play , this time being kicked off by the Cliftons . The rest period had apparently stiffened the Cliftons , for the Academy making a vigorous spurt got the ball thru them , and Street , following it up well , scored a touchdown for the Academy . 
 The try at goal failed , but the ball , instead of going to the Cliftons behind the line , fell into the field and into the hands of one of the Academy team . By a quick decisive run , he again got the ball over the Cliftons goal line and scored a touchdown . 
 Cadet George Washington Street , of Wisconsin , was identified as the first person ever to score a touchdown for the Naval Academy . The Baltimore Sun stated that William <unk> O 'Malley , of Pennsylvania , was the cadet who caught Street 's blocked kick and scored the second touchdown . The Sun also covered , in detail , the uniforms the squads wore ; Johns Hopkins sported blue , black , and white striped uniforms , while the Naval Academy wore maroon and white uniforms . Both teams also nailed strips of leather to the bottom of their shoes to help deal with slipping . 
 = = Players and coaching staff = = 
 = = = Players = = = 
 The 1882 Naval Academy team was made up of eleven players at five different positions . The squad consisted of four rushers , two ends , two tackles , two guards , and a center : 
 = = = Coaching staff = = = 
 Vaulx Carter took on coaching duties for the 1882 team . He was the academy 's first coach ; it was not until a decade later , in 1892 , when Ben Crosby was hired as the school 's next coach . The squad also appointed an official umpire , the only time it would ever do so . Its three staff members were : 
 = = Postseason and aftermath = = 
 The first postseason college football game would not be played until 1902 , with the Pasadena Tournament of Roses ' establishment of the east @-@ west tournament game , later known as the Rose Bowl . The Midshipmen would not participate in their first Rose Bowl until the 1923 season , when they went 5 – 1 – 2 and tied with the Washington Huskies 14 – 14 in the match . As a result of the lack of a competition , there were no postseason games played after the 1882 season . According to statistics compiled by the National Championship Foundation , Parke Davis , and the Billingsley college football research center , Yale was declared the 1882 season champion , giving them their eighth championship overall . 
 The Midshipmen 's win was the first in school history , and continued the team 's shutout streak . They would lose their only game in the 1883 season , ending the consecutive shutouts , and the Naval Academy would not get another shutout until the 1886 season , when they defeated Johns Hopkins 6 – 0 . The 1882 season also marked the start of an eight @-@ season long rivalry with Johns Hopkins , which Navy would win , five games to four . The team would not have another coach until the 1892 season , when Ben Crosby was hired to lead . Navy would finish the 1880s with four winning seasons , and an overall record of 14 – 12 – 2 . The squad would outscore their opponents 292 – 231 , and would finish the 19th century with an overall record of 54 – 19 – 3 . 
 = Aesthetics of Hate = 
 " Aesthetics of Hate " is a song by heavy metal band Machine Head from their sixth studio album The Blackening . Written by Machine Head vocalist and guitarist Robert Flynn , the song is a retaliation to an article written by William Grim . Grim wrote that late guitarist Dimebag Darrell was " an ignorant , barbaric , untalented possessor of a guitar " , among other comments which angered Flynn deeply enough to write the song . It was nominated for Best Metal Performance at the 50th Grammy Awards . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Aesthetics of Hate " was written by Machine Head vocalist and guitarist Robb Flynn . It was written as a retaliation to an article by William Grim for the web site Iconoclast . Titled " Aesthetics of Hate : R.I.P. Dimebag Abbott , & Good Riddance " , Grim wrote the article stating Darrell was " part of a generation that has confused sputum with art and involuntary reflex actions with emotion " , " an ignorant , barbaric , untalented possessor of a guitar " who looks " more simian than human " . 
 After reading the article , Flynn was furious and wrote " Aesthetics of Hate " as a condemnation of Grim 's article , and Dimebag detractors . He wrote a message on the band 's forum expressing his friendship with Darrell and spoke about Grim : 
 What would YOU know about love or values ? What would YOU know about giving to the world ? All that you know is teaching prejudice , and your heart is as black as the ' ignorant , filthy , and hideously ugly , heavy metal fans ' you try and paint in your twisted , fictitious ramblings . It 's because of people like YOU , that there are Nathan Gales in this world , NOT the <unk> and metal musicians who work to unite people through music . 
 = = Recording = = 
 In February 2005 , Machine Head had penned a rough version of " Aesthetics of Hate " . A 13 @-@ track November 2005 demo featured the song , although it contained what Flynn described as a " totally fucking lame ' Angel of Death ' rip off . I hated it every time we played it so I was glad to see that part go ! " The band entered Sharkbite Studios , in Oakland , California on August 21 , 2006 to begin recording . Production duties were handled by Flynn with assistance from Mark Keaton , and mixing by Colin Richardson . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Aesthetics of Hate " received positive reviews from music critics . Blabbermouth.net 's Don Kaye described the track as " literally breathtaking " and said that the song " channels its title emotion into a blazing volcano of pure speed and furious <unk> from Flynn and Phil Demmel . " Reviewing for France 's Hard ' N Heavy magazine , Anthrax 's Scott Ian felt that the song is " a riff @-@ o @-@ rama showing off Robb Flynn and Phil Demmel 's killer guitar work . " Thom Jurek of Allmusic felt " the intense dual arpeggios between both guitarists -- Flynn and Phil Demmel on ' Aesthetics of Hate ' ( as just one example ) are among the tightest ever " . However , J.D. Considine of Blender commented that the song " cuts from screaming guitars to an ominously whispered , ' May the hands of God strike them down ' . Without oversize hooks , calls for biblical vengeance just sound silly . " 
 " Aesthetics of Hate " received a nomination for Best Metal Performance at the 50th Grammy Awards . The ceremony took place on February 12 , 2008 , with Machine Head being beaten out by Slayer 's " Final Six " . Flynn commented on the nomination , " We are completely blown away , and honored by this . It 's incredible that the anger of this song has connected with so many people . It proves to Dimebag 's detractors the positive impact he had on his fans and fellow bands alike . " 
 On August 8 2008 , the song was confirmed to be as part of the " Roadrunner Records " pack in Rock Band . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Robb Flynn – lead vocals , guitar 
 Dave McClain – drums 
 Adam Duce – bass , backing vocals 
 Phil Demmel – guitar 
 = Captain Munnerlyn = 
 Captain Munnerlyn ( born April 10 , 1988 ) is an American football cornerback for the Minnesota Vikings of the National Football League ( NFL ) . He played college football at South Carolina for three years . He was drafted by the Carolina Panthers in the seventh round , 216th overall of the 2009 NFL Draft . 
 Munnerlyn played high school football at Murphy High School in Mobile , Alabama , where he was named All @-@ region three times . Following high school , he chose to play college football for the South Carolina Gamecocks after receiving scholarship offers from two other teams . As a freshman in 2006 , he played in 11 games and recorded a season high five tackles in two . In 2007 , Munnerlyn was both a nickel back and return specialist for the Gamecocks . Following the season he was named All – Southeastern Conference ( SEC ) . In 2008 , he was elevated to starting cornerback while also returning kicks and punts . Against Kentucky , he returned a kickoff 84 yards and a blocked field goal 81 yards . On the second day of the 2009 NFL Draft , Munnerlyn was selected by the Carolina Panthers in the seventh round ( 216th overall ) . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Munnerlyn was born three months premature and at birth weighed three pounds , eight ounces . He grew up in Happy Hills , which was a crime @-@ infested part of Mobile . While living there , he attended the Josephine Allen branch of Boys & Girls Clubs of South Alabama . 
 When he was growing up , his father was murdered and both of his brothers sold drugs . His oldest brother , Timothy , was convicted in 1996 of murder and was sentenced to life in prison . After the shooting , Munnerlyn 's mother converted to Christianity and he eventually did the same . Munnerlyn eventually said of the conversion and his mother 's prayers that he would stay out of trouble , " Without her prayers , I don 't think I could be here in the NFL right now " . 
 = = High school career = = 
 Munnerlyn attended Murphy High School in Mobile , Alabama , where he starred in both football and track . In football , he was a three @-@ time All @-@ region selection and participated in the Junior All – Star Game . He helped lead Murphy High to a 10 @-@ 2 record and a 6A Regional runner @-@ up finish his senior year , earning a spot on the Alabama Sports Writers Association All @-@ State team . He graduated from Murphy in 2006 . 
 During high school , Munnerlyn was also a standout track & field sprinter . He competed in the 100 @-@ meter dash and long jump at the 2004 Junior Olympics . In 2006 , he earned a second @-@ place finish in the long jump event at the AHSAA State T & F Meet , recording a career @-@ best leap of 6 @.@ 85 meters ( 22 ft , 4 @.@ 75 in ) . He clocked personal @-@ best times of 10 @.@ 53 seconds in the 100 @-@ meter dash and 22 @.@ 39 seconds in the 200 @-@ meter dash as a senior . 
 = = College career = = 
 After high school , Munnerlyn was recruited by South Carolina , West Virginia and Kansas State . He chose South Carolina on January 13 , 2006 . As a freshman , Munnerlyn was not redshirted and played in 12 games . He missed one game due to an infection in his forearm . For the season , he recorded 36 tackles with his season high of five coming against Tennessee and Houston . Munnerlyn also recorded two interceptions and five pass deflections . 
 In 2007 , as a sophomore , Munnerlyn split time at cornerback and kick returner and was called a " shut down corner " on Rivals.com. Against Vanderbilt , to whom South Carolina lost 17 – 6 , Munnerlyn returned a punt 46 yards and also forced a fumble . In the same game , South Carolina wide receiver Kenny McKinley fielded a punt and flipped it to Munnerlyn who gained eight yards . Following , the season he was named First – team All – SEC . 
 Head coach Steve Spurrier benched Munnerlyn for the first series against Ole Miss due to Munnerlyn missing class and team weightlifting sessions . Against Kentucky , Munnerlyn returned a kickoff 84 yards before being tackled on the 16 yard line . On the next play quarterback Stephen Garcia completed a touchdown pass to Kenny McKinley . In the same game , Munnerlyn returned a blocked field goal for an 81 yard touchdown . 
 He declared for the NFL Draft following the 2008 season . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ draft = = = 
 = = = Carolina Panthers = = = 
 Munnerlyn was drafted by the Carolina Panthers in the seventh round ( 216th overall ) of the 2009 NFL Draft . He called being drafted by the Panthers , " exciting , because I played college ball at South Carolina , and that 's only like an hour away . It was exciting to hear my name get called . I 'm ready for it , ready to take my game to the next level . " In the 2009 preseason , he was competing with wide receiver Ryne Robinson for the punt returner job . In the Panthers second preseason game against the Miami Dolphins , Munnerlyn returned a punt 58 yards and also fumbled one but recovered it , while Robinson fumbled a punt which the Dolphins recovered . 
 He eventually won the punt return job as well as the third cornerback job beating out C. J. Wilson and Sherrod Martin for the job by the end of September . On November 30 , Munnerlyn suffered a concussion against the New York Jets but said days later that he planned on playing in the next game despite the NFL 's changing of the concussion policy . Munnerlyn did not play the following week 's game but returned the next week against the New England Patriots . He completed the 2009 season playing in 15 games total as the Panthers finished 3rd in the NFC South with 8 wins and 8 losses . 
 For his second season , Munnerlyn moved up to starting right cornerback after Richard Marshall was not re @-@ signed . 
 = = = Minnesota Vikings = = = 
 March 13 , 2014 , Munnerlyn signed a three @-@ year , $ 14 @.@ 25 million contract with the Minnesota Vikings . Munnerlyn ended his first year with the Minnesota Vikings with 60 combined tackles , one fumble recovery , 2 interceptions and 4 pass deflections . Munnerlyn got his first pick of 2015 when he intercepted Matt Ryan in week 12 during a 20 @-@ 10 win . 
 = = Personal = = 
 When asked why his name is Captain , Munnerlyn said , " My <unk> promised my <unk> that she could name the last child . I was the boy of the family , and she named me Captain . Her great grandfather was named Captain , so I got named after my great @-@ great grandfather . My sisters and brothers have normal names . I got the odd name . In the beginning it was kind of rough . Kids used to tease me a little , but it fits my personality , because I feel like I 'm a leader . " Munnerlyn majored in criminal justice while at South Carolina . 
 Married June 25th 2016 
 = = Stats = = 
 = Politically Inept , with Homer Simpson = 
 " Politically Inept , with Homer Simpson " is the tenth episode of the twenty @-@ third season of the American animated sitcom The Simpsons . In the episode , Bart uploads a video on YouTube in which Homer rants about airlines ' horrible treatment of passengers . It quickly becomes popular and Homer is eventually given his own political cable news show . Homer wins support among average Americans and is chosen by the Republicans to pick their candidate for the next presidential election . He chooses Ted Nugent , but in the end , he realizes that he made the wrong decision and that everything he has said on his show is nonsense , so he admits on television that he is " full of crap " . 
 American musician and conservative political activist Ted Nugent made his second guest appearance on The Simpsons in this episode , which makes fun of his views on hunting and gun ownership . The episode has received generally positive reception from television critics and has been particularly praised for its satire of politics and cable news commentators . During its original broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on January 8 , 2012 , " Politically Inept , with Homer Simpson " was watched by about 5 @.@ 07 million people and received a 2 @.@ 3 Nielsen rating . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After a series of demeaning check @-@ in procedures , the Simpsons board an Air Springfield plane for their trip to the wedding of a relative in Montana . The pilot announces that owing to an unforeseen jailbreak the trip will be delayed . He tells the travelers that because the plane is still on the ground , he will turn off the ventilation system . However , all of the ethnic passengers on @-@ board are still allowed to eat their odd @-@ smelling food , and after several hours the rest of the passengers feel sick . The pilot makes another announcement that the plane is going to taxi back to the gate and remain there for an unknown amount of time , and that the passengers cannot get off . When Homer is banned from using the bathroom , his anger boils over and he rants about the airline 's horrible treatment of its passengers . Bart records a video of Homer running amok and then escapes from the plane via the wing . He uploads it on YouTube and it quickly becomes popular . 
 Homer is invited to speak his mind on a popular cable news show called Head Butt , on which host Nash Castor and commentator Adriatica Vel Johnson argue that he will soon be forgotten . However , Homer makes a convincing rant in which he tells the viewers that unlike television <unk> such as Nash and Adriatica , he speaks for the common man . When the show is over , the cable network executives give Homer his own television show called Gut Check with Homer Simpson , where he provides a mix of populist and conservative ideas . During one episode , he pours " gravy of freedom " over a steak shaped like America , using the gravy as a metaphor for the things that make the country great . He then encourages his viewers to " get on the boat " to protest about the bad things in society , and proceeds to place a gravy boat on his head . This wins Homer a huge base of support among average Americans , and soon the " gravy boat movement " becomes popular throughout the country . 
 When Homer is chosen by the Republicans to pick their candidate for the next presidential election , his lack of interest in the current candidates leads him to choose Ted Nugent . He invites Nugent for a visit to the Simpsons ' home , where Lisa complains that Homer has made the wrong pick since Nugent is " out of his mind " . Later that day , Homer has a dream in which James Madison shows him how ashamed past American presidents are of Homer . When he wakes up , he tells Lisa he will not be supporting Nugent for president anymore . He then sees a brochure on her dresser with a man posing as a president and offering help with fake dreams . Homer realizes the family faked his dream to convince him not to endorse Nugent . As a result , he angrily decides to go on television and express his support for Nugent . However , when he tries to bring out his ability to cry every time he discusses anything on television , he finds he cannot bring up those emotions because he does not truly believe in what he is saying . Homer announces on television that he " is full of crap " and reconciles with Lisa . As a result , Nugent is stripped of his position as the Republican presidential candidate . The episode ends as he sings a song about what his presidency would have been like . 
 = = Production and themes = = 
 The episode , titled " Politically Inept , with Homer Simpson " , was written by John Frink and directed by Mark Kirkland . American musician and conservative political activist Ted Nugent guest starred in the episode as himself , providing his voice for both speaking and singing parts . His song at the end of the episode is similar to his single " Cat Scratch Fever " . According to Noisecreep 's Kenneth Partridge , the episode makes fun of Nugent 's " blatantly pro @-@ gun , pro @-@ hunting , anti @-@ everything @-@ liberals @-@ hold @-@ dear persona " . The episode features , among other things , Nugent throwing a dead elk onto the dinner table at the Simpsons ' home , as well as using some of Bart 's school friends as arrows for his bow . Nugent had previously made a minor cameo in the season nineteen episode " I Don 't Wanna Know Why the Caged Bird Sings " ( 2007 ) . In that episode , his voice is heard in a phone call urging people to vote no on a proposition that would make crossbows illegal in public schools . He comments , " If we outlaw crossbows , who 's gonna protect our children from charging elk ? " 
 " Politically Inept , with Homer Simpson " satirizes the television industry . It parodies political television shows from cable news channels such as MSNBC , CNN , and Fox News Channel that are similar to Gut Check with Homer Simpson . In an article , Mediaite 's James <unk> commented that Homer 's personality as he hosts his show is a reference to conservative political commentator Glenn Beck 's " over @-@ the @-@ top persona " , and wrote that " In a spot @-@ on , cheeky parody of Beck , Homer ostentatiously sobs crocodile tears as he laments a high school in Nebraska replacing football with soccer as a team sport . " Adriatica Vel Johnson , the commentator on the political show that Homer first appears on , is a parody of commentator Arianna Huffington . 
 In addition , the episode satirizes American politics and includes several references to the 2012 Republican Party presidential primaries . For example , when Homer appears on Head Butt , the news ticker features headlines such as " Gingrich looks forward to winning ... his fourth wife " , " Rick Perry mistakenly signs order to execute himself " , and " Satan tweets support for Santorum " . At one point in the episode , the character Ned Flanders comments that he supports Nugent " as long as he isn ’ t a Mormon " , which is a reference to Mitt Romney . Hayden Childs of The A.V. Club wrote in a review that Homer 's political movement " is clearly a parody of the Tea Party " , noting that " as with the <unk> of the <unk> movement , people everywhere are moved to wear gravy boats on their heads [ in the episode ] . " Childs further mentioned that a follower of Homer holds a sign that references the Occupy movement , which he thought was " a token of the show ’ s desire to be an equal opportunity offender . " 
 = = Release = = 
 The episode originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 8 , 2012 . It was watched by approximately 5 @.@ 07 million people during this broadcast , and in the demographic for adults aged 18 – 49 , it received a 2 @.@ 3 Nielsen rating and a five percent share . The rating was a twenty @-@ three percent decrease from the previous episode , " Holidays of Future Passed " ; however , much of " Politically Inept , with Homer Simpson " faced strong competition from the end of a highly rated National Football League playoffs game on CBS . The episode became the second highest @-@ rated broadcast in Fox 's Animation Domination lineup for the night in terms of both total viewers and adults aged 18 – 49 , finishing higher than new episodes of American Dad ! and The Cleveland Show but lower than a new Family Guy episode . 
 Since airing , " Politically Inept , with Homer Simpson " has received generally positive reception from critics . Steve Newton of The Georgia Straight called it " one of the funniest Simpsons I 've seen in a while " , and David Crawford of Radio Times wrote that the satire " may not be subtle , but it is sharp and the jokes come tumbling one after another . " In an article about the episode , Mediaite 's James <unk> commented that " The Simpsons ' writers have outdone themselves tonight , with this no @-@ holds @-@ barred parody of the over @-@ the @-@ top <unk> shenanigans of some cable news personalities . " Hayden Childs of The A.V. Club thought it was a " solid episode " that peaked in the middle with the satire of politics . He had mixed feelings about the first part of the episode revolving around airline travel , criticizing the fluctuating quality of the jokes . He wrote that " writer John Frink is able to draw out some moderately amusing gags among a few stinkers . " Childs further criticized Nugent 's guest appearance in the third act , noting that it " falls flat when the show cannot decide how to mock [ Nugent ] without really offending him , " and the fake dream sequence , which he described as " unfunny and sitcommy " . He concluded that " The Simpsons has done plenty of political satire over the years and still may never improve over season six ’ s ' Sideshow Bob Roberts ' . The middle section of this episode had moments that were in the same league , though " . In February 2012 , " Politically Inept , with Homer Simpson " was listed by Matt Zoller Seitz of New York magazine as one of " Nine Latter @-@ Day Simpsons Episodes That Match Up to the Early Classics " . 
 = Silent Hill : Homecoming = 
 Silent Hill : Homecoming ( サイレントヒル <unk> , <unk> Hiru <unk> ) is a survival horror video game , the sixth installment in the Silent Hill series , developed by Double Helix Games . Homecoming follows the journey of Alex Shepherd , a soldier returning from war , to his hometown of Shepherd 's Glen , where he finds the town in disarray , and his younger brother missing . As he continues on his search to find his younger brother , he discovers more about the Order , a cult , as well as the town 's history , and his own past . 
 The game was released on September 30 , 2008 , in North America for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 , and the Microsoft Windows version was released for North , Central and South America on November 6 , 2008 , exclusively through Valve Corporation 's Steam digital content delivery service . All versions were simultaneously released in Europe , including a retail Microsoft Windows version , on February 27 , 2009 . The Japanese version was cancelled . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The player assumes the role of Alex Shepherd , a Special Forces soldier who returns home from an overseas tour of duty to find that his father and younger brother are missing , and that his mother has gone into catatonia . Alex begins to search for his brother , leading him to Silent Hill after searching his hometown of Shepherd 's Glen . 
 Overall gameplay is similar to past entries in the series . The player , as Alex , explores the various environments and locales , searching for clues to advance the plot , such as photographs , drawings and other items which are placed inside Alex 's journal , which the player may read at any time . To assist the player , Alex will turn his head towards items and clues to inform the player that the object may be picked up ; other recurring items include weapons and ammunition , which give off a glow as a visual cue to the player , and health drinks . Puzzle elements also play a part in the game , and Alex 's journal may be used to refer to photographs and other items that can help the player decipher such puzzles as keypad entries . For the first time in the series , the player may select responses when engaging in dialogue with other characters encountered in the game , which in turn may affect how the player sees the plot unfold . 
 In addition to exploration , combat is another major element to the gameplay , and the player must fight the various monsters that appear . In contrast to the more naïve everyman protagonists of previous games , combat in Homecoming takes into account Alex 's experience as a soldier . The player is able to perform light and heavy attacks , or mix them to perform combinations , and may also perform a variety of finishing moves to ensure that the monsters are dead , a gameplay mechanic first featured in a rudimentary form in Silent Hill : Origins . Attacking enemies also leaves wounds in them that match the motion carried out by Alex in inflicting the attack . In terms of controlling Alex , the player may also perform new maneuvers such as targeting the enemy before attacking them , dodging enemy attacks , and performing counter @-@ attacks . As well as melee weapons , pistols , rifles and shotguns are available as firearms , which can be upgraded to stronger versions later in the game : firearm handling is also rendered in a more realistic manner , with Alex having to shoulder long guns and suffering aim effects like recoil . In addition to the changes in combat , and unlike previous entries in the series , the player is also able to fully control and rotate the camera as they choose ; one analog stick controls player movement , and the other controls the camera . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At the start of the game , the player controls Alex through a nightmare concerning his younger brother , Josh , before Alex wakes up in the cab of a truck driven by Travis Grady , the protagonist from Silent Hill : Origins , who gives him a ride to his hometown of Shepherd 's Glen . The town , named for a distant ancestor who helped found it , is covered in fog and deserted . At home , he finds his mother in a catatonic state , murmuring about his father leaving to find Josh ; promising to find Josh , Alex leaves . 
