 Alex soon discovers that many more people have gone missing in Shepherd 's Glen since he left when he finds his childhood friend Elle Holloway pinning " missing " signs to a board outside the police department . As Alex explores the town , he witnesses the separate deaths of Mayor Bartlett and Dr. Fitch by monsters in the Otherworld , both of whom have a child who is missing . Back in Shepherd 's Glen , Alex allies himself with Deputy Wheeler in the police department . Alex eventually learns that his father was involved in the secrets of the town and had left to attempt to resolve the town 's problems , but before he is able to get answers from his mother at home , he is knocked unconscious when The Order — a religious cult from Silent Hill which has been taking people from the town — kidnaps his mother . 
 Alex , Elle , and Wheeler take a boat across Toluca Lake to find Alex 's father in Silent Hill but are intercepted by the Order . Elle and Wheeler are taken to Silent Hill 's penitentiary , where Alex attempts to rescue them . He finds his mother bound ; the player must make a decision regarding whether to kill her out of mercy or not , which will affect the outcome of the game . After rescuing Elle 's mother , Judge Holloway , and separating from Wheeler once more , Alex finds the Order 's church , where he listens to his father in the confessional ; the player may choose to forgive him , again affecting the outcome of the game . Alex later runs into his father , who reveals that Alex was never a soldier and has been in a mental hospital since " the accident " occurred . He begs forgiveness before he is killed by a monster called the Bogeyman ( Pyramid Head from Silent Hill 2 ) . 
 Continuing to the Order 's underground facility , Alex is captured by Judge Holloway , who reveals that everything that has happened is due to a broken pact . One hundred and fifty years ago , the four founding families broke away from Silent Hill 's Order to move to Shepherd 's Glen . They were allowed to do so on the condition that once every 50 years they would sacrifice one of their children in a preordained fashion . On this occasion , while Joey Bartlett , Scarlett Fitch and Nora Holloway were successfully sacrificed by their parents , the Shepherd sacrifice failed , and as a result , the Order had been reformed to try to appease their god . Judge Holloway tries to kill Alex , who kills her in self @-@ defense . Alex rescues Elle from the facility and , after finding Wheeler injured and allowing the player to choose whether to save him — once more affecting the game 's ending — continues on alone to find Josh . 
 Realizing he was the intended sacrifice , Alex experiences a flashback showing Josh 's true fate . When Alex was younger , he had taken Josh rowing out on the lake , where Josh showed Alex a ring , which his father had chosen to give to him instead of Alex . Out of jealousy , Alex struggled with Josh to try to take the ring , and as they fought Josh accidentally fell into the lake and drowned . His father retrieved the body and explained that Alex had " ruined it for all of us " , since he had chosen Alex , and not Josh ; unable to accept Josh 's death , Alex was then sent to the mental hospital , and with Josh instead of Alex sacrificed , the Order 's pact was broken . After fighting the final boss , the manifestation of Josh 's spirit , Alex finally has the chance to apologize and states that he never wanted Josh 's death . Alex leaves the family ring and their father 's angle @-@ head army flashlight on Josh 's body and exits the chamber . 
 There are five endings available , which depend on the player 's actions during the game , including whether the player kills Alex 's mother , forgives Alex 's father , and saves Deputy Wheeler . These range from the single positive ending to the game — where Alex comes to terms with his past actions and reunites with Elle to leave Shepherd 's Glen — to three other endings : Alex getting drowned by his father , waking up in the hospital and receiving a shock treatment , or being turned into a Bogeyman . There is also a joke ending , where both Alex and Elle are abducted by a UFO while Wheeler witnesses . In addition to these endings , if the player collects all of Josh 's pictures or clears the game on the " hard " difficulty , a first @-@ person post @-@ credits scene is played where Alex finds Josh sitting on the bottom bunk of his bed and Josh takes a picture of Alex with a camera . 
 = = Development = = 
 Chief designer of Silent Hill : Homecoming , Masashi <unk> , announced the game 's development in a 2004 interview with Eurogamer , in which he also debunked previous internet rumors that it was to be called Shadows of the Past . No information was initially imparted about the platform the game would appear on , other than it would be appearing on the next generation of consoles , which had yet to be released . Around two years later , an interview with composer Akira Yamaoka revealed more information ; he hinted that they had hoped to carry on " plans of the earlier Silent Hill platforms " , and that the team were creating a title with the idea of " fear in daylight " , with similar psychological roots to Silent Hill 2 . The suggestion that the story and gameplay would be more like that of the second entry in the series in the way the player is directed , and in the character 's behavior , was reaffirmed in a later interview , along with the idea of creating the game for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 platforms . 
 However , most of the ideas previously hinted at were not found in subsequent information releases . At E3 2007 , a new teaser trailer was displayed by Konami that revealed the title of the game to be Silent Hill V , and that the game would be released for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 . Further to this trailer , Konami executives also revealed that the developer would not in fact be Team Silent as in previous iterations , but that , like Silent Hill : Origins , it would be developed by a Western developer , The Collective . The Collective had merged with Backbone Entertainment in 2005 to form Foundation 9 Entertainment , and Foundation 9 then merged The Collective with Shiny Entertainment to create Double Helix Games . The team had been working on the production of Harker , another survival horror title , but this was placed on indefinite hiatus during Homecoming 's production . 
 Double Helix drew inspiration not only from past installments in the game series but also from the first Silent Hill movie adaptation ; this is most evident in the transition from the normal world to the Otherworld , whose " ripping " effect almost matches that found in the movie . Other similarities from the same source includes the reaction of nurses to light , the bug @-@ like creatures seen in the movie , and the Pyramid Head rendition , known as the " Bogeyman " in this game . Homages to previous games in the series include a reference to the long @-@ running joke of the lead character placing their hand in a toilet bowl to retrieve items . Lead designer Jason Allen described the intentions of the development team to be to maintain the depth of storytelling and atmosphere of the series whilst making combat more intuitive and less frustrating . The script , in @-@ game journal entries , and instruction manual were written by Patrick J. Doody and Chris <unk> , based on the story and the summary of events provided by lead designer Jason Allen , lead artist Brian Horton , and lead level designer Daniel Jacobs . 
 Despite the change in development team , Akira Yamaoka returned from past installments in the series to create both music and sound effects for the game . It was the first game in the series to use surround sound . Yamaoka wrote 70 minutes of music for the game , and insisted on working with Mary Elizabeth McGlynn to provide vocals , as fan reaction to her voice on previous Silent Hill titles has been favorable . Homecoming 's soundtrack was released on November 24 , 2008 . McGlynn provided vocals for four tracks . 
 = = = Censorship = = = 
 Homecoming had difficulties in passing censors in some countries before it could go on sale . The Australian classification board , the Office of Film and Literature Classification ( OFLC ) , refused to classify the game , due to " impact violence and excessive blood effects " . The objectionable scenes included various body parts being drilled into , as well as the bisection of a character by an enemy . This had the effect of banning the game for sale in the country , and representatives for publisher Atari mentioned that they would be asking Konami to tone down the violence to allow the game to receive the needed MA15 + rating for its sale to be permitted in early 2009 . 
 The German version of the game was also postponed to 2009 for cuts to be made to pass the German censors after the uncensored version was rejected by the Unterhaltungssoftware Selbstkontrolle . The game was re @-@ submitted after being altered in the same way as the Australian version and received the highest rating possible as a result ( <unk> ab 18 Jahren <unk> § 14 <unk> , meaning 18 + ) . 
 On November 19 , 2010 , the Amtsgericht Frankfurt am Main confiscated all Xbox 360 versions imported from the UK ( thus being uncensored ) for violation of § 131 StGB ( representation of violence ) , effectively banning it from sale within Germany . 
 = = Release = = 
 Homecoming was released in North America on September 30 , 2008 , for both PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 consoles . The PC version , which in North America , Central America and South America is only available via the Steam content delivery network , because it was intended to launch on the same date as the console versions , but was delayed , finally becoming available on Steam on November 6 , 2008 . A European release on all platforms was intended for the same month , but the title was delayed in the region to February 2009 . In contrast to the American regions , a PC retail release on DVD was made available in Europe . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Homecoming 's average at Metacritic is 71 out of 100 for the PS3 version , and 70 out of 100 for the Xbox 360 version . Aggregate site Game Rankings gave a 71 @.@ 96 % aggregate score for the Xbox 360 version , and a 71 @.@ 28 % for the PS3 version . As the second external developer working on a Silent Hill entry , and the first for a home console iteration , Double Helix were under scrutiny from reviewers and Silent Hill fans to see how a Western developer would handle the franchise ; many reviewers found the change in developer to be a positive move overall , while some , acknowledging faults in the final product , expressed interest in seeing further Silent Hill games from the same developer . In contrast , Zero Punctuation commented that the game was as an example of Japanese franchises being downgraded by Westernization , particularly in the different approaches taken to induce fear in the player . 
 Praise was given to the graphics and environments , described as " fantastic " , with Shepherd 's Glen in particular being " rendered brilliantly " , and " the upgraded visuals bestow a filmic quality to everything and the world 's eerie transformations look better than ever . " Surprise was expressed at the darkness of the game , with the flashlight seemingly having less effect than in previous games , and making some markers , such as doors , hard to spot . 
 The music , written by series regular Akira Yamaoka , and the ambient audio , were received well , being " atmospheric , moody and beautifully presented " ; combined with " an amazing score " , the audio goes " a long way toward establishing the expected Silent Hill mood " , though some concern was expressed that the music was " somewhat misplaced " and did not fit in so well . Voice acting , which has traditionally been seen as one of the series ' weaker points , was evaluated as better than the series ' usual attempts , but occasionally " flat " when more emotion was needed . 
 The game 's plot received a largely mixed reception . While some reviewers graded it positively , describing it as " intriguing and disturbing " , it was also noted that it " isn 't particularly original , and there are no great surprises " , even though it " still makes for a very involving journey into the macabre . " Several reviewers likened the story to a subplot of the main Silent Hill mythos which , while able to " stand on its own " , " barely mentions certain characters which fairly dominate the backstory of previous SH games . " Some critics expressed disappointment at the predictability of the main twist in the story regarding Alex 's predicament , while others found it " genuinely shocking " . Croshaw 's Zero Punctuation review was generally negative , stating that while the level design , story and combat were all competent , the game had little to do with what he liked about the Silent Hill series and would have been better served as a completely different franchise . 
 = Laevistrombus canarium = 
 Laevistrombus canarium ( commonly known as the dog conch or by its better @-@ known synonym , Strombus canarium ) is a species of edible sea snail , a marine gastropod mollusc in the family Strombidae ( true conches ) . Known from illustrations in books dating from the late 17th century , L. canarium is an Indo @-@ Pacific species occurring from India and Sri Lanka to Melanesia , Australia and southern Japan . The shell of adult individuals is coloured from light yellowish @-@ brown to golden to grey . It has a characteristic inflated body whorl , a flared , thick outer lip and a shallow stromboid notch . The shell is valued as an ornament , and because it is heavy and compact it is also often used as a sinker for fishing nets . 
 The external anatomy of the soft parts of this species is similar to that of other strombid snails . The animal has an elongate snout , thin eyestalks with well @-@ developed eyes and sensory tentacles , and a narrow , strong foot with a sickle @-@ shaped operculum . A molecular analysis conducted in 2006 based on DNA sequences of histone and mitochondrial genes demonstrated that Laevistrombus canarium , <unk> vittatus and <unk> epidromis are closely related species . The dog conch exhibits behaviours common among Strombidae , including burrowing and a characteristic leaping form of locomotion . The former behaviour , however , involves movement sequences unique to this species . 
 Laevistrombus canarium lives on muddy and sandy bottoms , grazing on algae and detritus . It is gonochoristic and sexually dimorphic , depending on internal fertilization for spawning . Larvae of this species spend several days as plankton , undergoing a series of transformations until they reach complete metamorphosis . The maximum life span is 2 to 2 @.@ 5 years . Predators of this snail include carnivorous gastropods such as cone snails and volutes . It is also a prey species for vertebrates including macaques , and also humans , who consume the soft parts in a wide variety of dishes . 
 The dog conch is an economically important species in the Indo @-@ West Pacific , and several studies indicate that it may be suffering population declines due to overfishing and overexploitation . <unk> and ecologists have recommended a reduction in its exploitation rate ; initiatives in Thailand are attempting to ensure the possibility of reproduction in young @-@ adult individuals and manage the natural populations in general . L. canarium demonstrates the imposex phenomenon , but is resistant to sterility caused by it ; therefore , it has been suggested that this species might be useful as a bioindicator for organotin pollution monitoring near Malaysian ports . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The first published depictions of the shell of this species appeared in 1681 in the earliest book solely about sea shells , <unk> mentis et oculi in <unk> animalium <unk> ( <unk> of the mind and the eye in the observation of shell @-@ bearing animals ) by Italian scholar Filippo <unk> . The species was shown in the 1742 Index <unk> <unk> , quae <unk> in Museo Nicolai Gualtieri ( List of the shells of shellfish which are preserved in the museum of Niccolò Gualtieri ) by Italian physician and malacologist Niccolò Gualtieri . In both books , the morphology of an adult shell was shown from different perspectives . 
 In 1758 , the dog conch was formally described and named Strombus canarium by Swedish naturalist and taxonomist Carl Linnaeus , who originated the system of binomial nomenclature . The specific name of this taxon , canarium , is derived from the Latin canis ( dog ) . The original description given by Linnaeus in his book , Systema Naturae , is in Latin : " S. <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> . " This can be translated as " Strombus with a shell having a <unk> , short , rounded lip , and a smooth spire " . Linnaeus did not mention a specific locality in his original description , giving only Eastern Asia as the area in which the species is found . 
 The taxon Laevistrombus was introduced in the literature as a subgenus of Strombus by <unk> Kira ( 1955 ) in the third printing of the 1st edition of Coloured Illustrations of the Shells of Japan . It comprised two species , Strombus ( Laevistrombus ) canarium and Strombus ( L. ) <unk> Lamarck , 1822 . No type specimen was designated , and Kira gave no formal description or statement of differentiation , as required by the ICZN code to validate the name . In a later version of the book , Laevistrombus was elevated to genus level , but a description was still lacking . Rüdiger Bieler and Richard Petit ( 1996 ) considered it a nomen nudum , and the authorship was transferred to Robert Tucker Abbott ( 1960 ) , who had provided a proper description and illustrations of Laevistrombus and specified a type species , Strombus canarium L. , in the first volume of his monograph Indo @-@ Pacific Mollusca . The currently accepted combination , Laevistrombus canarium , was proposed by Jack John Sepkoski Jr . ( 2002 ) , who elevated Laevistrombus to genus level based on palaeontological data . 
 The synonyms are other binomial names that were given over time to this taxon by authors who were unaware that the specimens they were describing belonged to a species already described by Linnaeus ; in some cases , local variations in colour and form may have misled these authors into thinking they had a different species . Strombus <unk> is a subsequent , changed spelling of Strombus vanikorensis by one of the original authors . There is some disagreement in the literature as to whether or not this taxon and the similar @-@ looking Laevistrombus turturella are actually separate species . Leo Man In ' T Veld and <unk> de Turck ( 1998 ) considered that L. canarium and L. turturella are distinct ( yet sympatric ) species , based mainly on the shell morphology and a radula comparison . However , when Zaidi Che Cob reviewed a number of Strombus species in 2009 , examining both shell characters and anatomical data including details of the genitalia , operculum and radula , he concluded that L. turturella was simply a morphotype , and therefore a synonym of L. canarium . 
 Laevistrombus canarium comprises at least two known subspecies ; one is the nominate subspecies Laevistrombus canarium canarium , and the other is Laevistrombus canarium <unk> . L. canarium <unk> distinguishes itself from the other subspecies by its solid white colour , the outline of the posterior canal and a more prominent posteriorly protruding outer lip . The presence of a freely protruding lip at the posterior portion of the columella is also a distinctive character . 
 = = Anatomy = = 
 = = = Shell description = = = 
 Laevistrombus canarium has a heavy shell with a rounded outline . The shell length of adult specimens is from 29 mm ( 1 @.@ 1 in ) to 71 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) . The outer surface of the shell is almost completely smooth , except for barely visible spiral lines and occasional varices on the spire . Unlike species in the genus Strombus , the stromboid notch on the outer lip is inconspicuous . When a normal adult dextral shell of this species is viewed ventrally ( with the anterior end pointing downwards ) , the stromboid notch can be observed to the right of the siphonal canal as a shallow , secondary anterior indentation in the lip . The siphonal canal itself is straight , short and ample ; the columella is smooth , without any folds . Adult specimens have a moderately flared , posteriorly protruding outer lip , which is considerably thickened and completely devoid of marginal spikes or plicae . The body whorl is roundly swollen at the shoulder , with a few anterior spiral grooves . The shell has a medium @-@ to @-@ high cone @-@ shaped spire , with at least five delicately furrowed whorls . 
 Shell colour is variable , from golden yellow to light yellowish @-@ brown to grey . The underside of the shell is rarely dark ; more frequently it is paler than the top , or totally white . In all cases , the shell aperture is white . Mature specimens sometimes have a metallic @-@ grey or golden @-@ brown gloss on the margin of the outer lip and the callus . A zigzag network of darker lines is sometimes present on the outside of the shell . The periostracum , a layer of protein ( conchiolin ) that is the outermost part of the shell surface , is yellowish @-@ brown . It is usually thick , reticulated ( net @-@ like ) and fimbriated ( fringed ) over the suture . The corneous operculum is dark brown , and its shape is fairly typical of the family Strombidae : a slightly bent sickle , with seven to eight weak lateral serrations . 
 = = = Soft parts = = = 
 Female individuals of Laevistrombus canarium are generally larger ( both shell and soft parts ) than male individuals , which is also the case in other strombid gastropods such as the spider conch ( <unk> <unk> ) and queen conch ( Lobatus gigas ) . The external anatomy of the soft parts of this species is similar to that of the other members of the family : the animal has a long extensible snout and thin eyestalks ( also known as ommatophores ) , with well @-@ developed lens eyes at the tips . Each eyestalk has a small sensory tentacle branching off near the end . The large foot of the animal is narrow and strong , able to perform the leaping form of locomotion that is also found in other species of Strombidae ( such as the queen conch ) . 
 = = Phylogeny = = 
 In 2006 , Latiolais and colleagues proposed a cladogram ( tree of descent ) that attempts to show the phylogenetic relationships of 34 species within the family Strombidae . The authors analysed 31 species in the genus Strombus ( including Strombus canarium ) and three species in the allied genus Lambis . The cladogram was based on DNA sequences of both nuclear histone H3 and mitochondrial cytochrome @-@ c oxidase I protein @-@ coding gene regions . In this proposed phylogeny Strombus canarium , Strombus vittatus ( a synonym for <unk> vittatus ) and Strombus epidromis ( <unk> epidromis ) are closely related , and appear to share a common ancestor . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Laevistrombus canarium is native to the coastal waters of the Indo @-@ Pacific region . Its westernmost distribution is India , including Andhra Pradesh , Tamil Nadu ( Gulf of Mannar , Tuticorin , Rameswaram ) and the Andamans . It occurs in Sri Lanka ( Eastern province , Trincomalee ) , Thailand , Borneo ( Brunei , Sabah ) , Indonesia ( Moluccas , <unk> ) and the Philippines ( Cebu Island , Polillo Islands , Palawan ) . It is also found further east in Melanesia , including <unk> <unk> Bay in New Guinea , Papua New Guinea , Malaita and Guadalcanal in the Solomon Islands , New Caledonia , <unk> Island in Fiji , and New Hebrides . The species is known to occur in Queensland , Australia and north to Vietnam , Taiwan and southern Japan . 
 Detailed information is available about its distribution in the Straits of Johor area and some other parts of Malaysia , where it has been reported from the Tanjung <unk> Shoal , <unk> Shoal , Tanjung Bin , Tanjung Surat and Pasir <unk> in the Johor Straits ; in Pulau Tinggi , Pulau Besar and Pulau Sibu , Port Dickson and Teluk Kemang in eastern Johor , and Negeri Sembilan , Pulau <unk> , Pulau Langkawi , Cape <unk> and <unk> in the western Johor Straits . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 Compared to other gastropods , Laevistrombus canarium has an unusual means of locomotion that is common only among the Strombidae . This curious series of maneuvers was originally described by American zoologist George Howard Parker in 1922 . The animal initially fixes the posterior end of the foot by thrusting the point of its sickle @-@ shaped operculum into the substrate . Then it extends its foot forward , lifting the shell and throws it ahead in a motion that has been described as " leaping " . 
 Burrowing behaviour , in which an individual sinks itself entirely ( or partially ) into the substrate , is frequent among strombid gastropods . The burrowing behaviour of L. canarium consists of a series of movements characteristic of the species . There are three consecutive movements : first is probing , where the animal pushes the anterior portion of the foot into the substrate to gain a hold ; next is shovelling , where it pushes the substrate with its long , extensible proboscis . Retraction is the final movement , where it moves the shell along an anterior @-@ posterior axis to settle the substrate around it . Once burrowed , part of the dorsal shell is usually still visible ( although the ventral surface and the animal 's soft parts are buried ) . 
 The escape response in gastropods — the perception of stimuli ( for example , the presence of a predator nearby ) and a subsequent escape motion — is a frequent target of behavioural studies . In gastropods the perception of environmental chemical stimuli originating , for example , from food or other organisms is possibly mediated by sensory organs such as the osphradium . In the case of L. canarium , the perception of a predator can occur through chemoreception or vision ( a well @-@ developed sense in strombid gastropods ) . The presence of a predator can significantly alter the movement pattern of L. canarium , inducing an increase in the frequency of leaps . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 The dog conch lives on muddy sand bottoms among algae and seagrass beds on insular and continental shores . It usually prefers major islands and continental coasts rather than the shores of small islands , although this is not an absolute rule . L. canarium prefers areas of mixed seagrasses ( with a predominance of Halophila ) , and also prefers sediment with high levels of organic matter . This conch avoids environments with a high density of <unk> <unk> , a large seagrass native to coastal waters of the Indo @-@ Pacific . The dog conch can be found in littoral and sublittoral zones , from shallow water to a depth of 55 m ( 180 ft ) . It is normally found in large colonies , and is usually abundant wherever it occurs . 
 During the 19th century , strombid gastropods were believed to be carnivores . This erroneous conception was based on the writings of French naturalist Jean Baptiste Lamarck , whose classification scheme grouped <unk> with carnivorous sea snails . Subsequent studies have refuted the concept , proving beyond doubt that strombid gastropods are herbivorous animals . In common with other Strombidae , Laevistrombus canarium is known to be a herbivore , feeding on algae and occasionally detritus . 
 Many carnivorous marine gastropods are known predators of L. canarium , including the volutes <unk> nobilis and Melo melo and the cone snail ( Conus textile ) . The dog conch is also preyed upon by vertebrates . These include the crab @-@ eating macaque , Macaca fascicularis , an opportunistic predator that scours intertidal environments . Humans are one of the dog conch 's main predators , subjecting the species to intensive fishing and exploitation . 
 = = = Life cycle = = = 
 Laevistrombus canarium is gonochoristic , which means that each individual animal is distinctly male or female . The breeding season starts in late November and continues until early March . After internal fertilization the female produces and spawns a long , gelatinous tubular structure containing multiple eggs . This structure then coils itself and compacts , forming a creamy @-@ white egg mass . Each egg mass may contain 50 @,@ 000 – 70 @,@ 000 eggs ; the females usually lay them on seagrass , where they remain attached . In about 110 – 130 hours the embryo of L. canarium grows from a single cell to a veliger ( a larval form common to marine and fresh @-@ water gastropod and bivalve mollusks ) and then hatches . The hatching process takes 12 – 15 hours . After hatching , the larvae can be assigned to four distinct developmental stages throughout their short planktonic life ( based on morphological features and other characteristics ) . Usually , larvae up to 3 days old are Stage I <unk> ; 4 – 8 @-@ day @-@ old larvae are Stage II ; 9 – 16 @-@ day @-@ old larvae are Stage III , and larvae from 17 days to metamorphosis are Stage IV . L. canarium larvae develop faster compared to other species in the same family , including the West Indian fighting conch ( Strombus <unk> ) and the milk conch ( Lobatus costatus ) . Larval development may be highly influenced by environmental conditions , such as temperature and the quality and availability of food . Metamorphosis in L. canarium can be recognised by loss of the larval velar lobes and the development of the typical leaping motion of juvenile true conches . 
 A study from 2008 indicates that sexual dimorphism occurs early during this species ' ontogeny . L. canarium males reach sexual maturity at a shorter shell length when compared to females . Individuals are considered to be adult by the time the outer lip of their shell is noticeably thickened and flared ; growth to adult size takes about a year . The maximum life span of the dog conch differs between sexes ; it is estimated at 2 and 2 @.@ 5 years for females and males , respectively . 
 = = Human uses and conservation measures = = 
 The English common name of L. canarium is " dog conch " ; in the Malay Peninsula , the species is known by the Malay common names siput <unk> and gong @-@ gong ; siput means " snail " , and <unk> is an <unk> word for a dog 's bark or howl . The flesh of the dog conch is edible . It is a staple food for locals living along the seashore , and is fished in many parts of southeast Asia . In India it has been reported that the meat of this species works well in a variety of common Indian seafood dishes : dog conch soups , cutlets , noodles , curry and chili . Despite their ornamental value , L. canarium shells are traditionally used by local fishermen as sinkers for fishing nets . Studies from 2008 to 2009 indicate that L. canarium has been overexploited and overfished in many areas ; <unk> and ecologists have recommended reducing exploitation rates to maintain its availability as a natural resource . Finding large dog @-@ conch individuals has become an increasingly difficult task in several regions where this species occurs . Initiatives in the Southern Thailand province of Phuket intend to increase depleted natural stocks of L. canarium by reintroducing cultured animals in local seagrass beds . Fishermen are encouraged not to collect younger , smaller individuals that have not yet reproduced . 
 <unk> has recently been detected in Laevistrombus canarium . <unk> is the development of male sex organs in female animals exposed to man @-@ made organic tin compounds , such as <unk> ( TBT ) . It has negative consequences for several species of sea snails , ranging from sterility in some individuals to the extinction of entire populations . Tin compounds are <unk> anti @-@ fouling agents mixed into paints to prevent marine encrustations on boats and ships . High concentrations of these compounds are commonly present in seawater near shipyards and docking areas , exposing nearby marine life to harmful effects . In a 2011 paper , Cob and colleagues found that imposex rates are high in dog conch populations near Malaysian ports ; however , the researchers could not detect any cases of sterility in affected females . The authors concluded that females of L. canarium often develop a penis when seawater contains organotin compounds , but the phenomenon does not cause sterility in this species . The ability of the dog conch to survive despite imposex makes this species a suitable local bioindicator for organotin pollution . 
 = Glacier National Park ( Canada ) = 
 Glacier National Park is one of seven national parks in British Columbia , and is part of a system of 43 parks and park reserves across Canada . Established in 1886 , the park encompasses 1 @,@ 349 km2 ( 521 sq mi ) , and includes a portion of the Columbia Mountains . It also contains the Rogers Pass National Historic Site . 
 The park 's history is closely tied to two primary Canadian transportation routes , the Canadian Pacific Railway ( CPR ) , completed in 1885 , and the Trans Canada Highway , completed in 1963 . The pass in the centre of the park eluded explorers until 1881 . The railway brought with it tourism , the establishment of Glacier National Park and the construction of a popular alpine hotel . The heavy winter snows and steep , avalanche @-@ prone valleys of the park have been a major obstacle to transportation , necessitating much railway engineering and avalanche control measures . 
 The park contains high peaks , large , active glaciers , and one of Canada 's largest cave systems . Its dense forests support populations of large mammals , birds , and alpine species . The region is noted for its heavy snowfall . The park has an extensive network of trails , three campgrounds , and four backcountry huts and cabins . Due to the major transportation routes that bisect it , Glacier National Park sees large numbers of visitors . 
 = = History = = 
 The Selkirk Mountains were first noted by Europeans when explorer David Thompson of the North West Company skirted around them on the Columbia River in 1811 . He named them Nelson 's Mountains , after Lord Horatio Nelson , but they were later renamed after an executive for the rival Hudson 's Bay Company , Lord Thomas Douglas Selkirk . 
 Finding a pass through the Selkirks became a priority after construction of the Canadian Pacific Railway began . Completion of the railway was a condition of the Colony of British Columbia upon entering Canadian Confederation in 1867 . In 1865 , CPR surveyor Walter Moberly led an expedition up the Illecillewaet River ( which he named , using the <unk> word for " swift water " ) . Despite recently discovering Eagle Pass through the nearby <unk> , Moberly failed to find a pass through the Selkirks after getting sidetracked in the Tangier Creek drainage . His party refused to explore further due to the lateness of the season , and Moberly was forced to retreat . 
 = = = Rogers Pass = = = 
 An expedition led by Major Albert Bowman Rogers up the Illecillewaet discovered a viable pass in 1881 . Rogers was awarded a five thousand dollar prize for locating a route through the mountains . By 1885 , the CPR had constructed a line through Rogers Pass and trains were traveling west to the Pacific for the first time in Canada . The federal government and the CPR quickly realized the tourism potential of the mountainous , heavily glaciated area . Following a trip by Prime Minister John A. Macdonald and his wife Agnes through the Rockies on the newly @-@ completed <unk> Railroad , he returned to Ottawa inspired , and led the creation of Glacier and Yoho National Parks , both established on October 10 , 1886 . They were the second and third national parks in the country , after Banff , a year earlier . 
 = = = Glacier House = = = 
 The grade of the railway approaching Rogers Pass was too steep to allow for dining cars on the trains , so the CPR built a hotel west of the pass in 1886 . This added to a collection of CPR @-@ owned hotels across Canada , including Mount Stephen House in Yoho National Park , built in the same year and with the same floor plan . Glacier House , located near the terminus of the Illecillewaet Glacier ( called the Great Glacier at the time ) , became a center for tourism , mountaineering , glaciology , and photography in the Selkirks . The hotel was expanded in 1905 and 1911 . It was considered one of western Canada 's premier tourist destinations at the turn of the twentieth century . 
 The hotel attracted <unk> from around the world . Due to its elevation , climbers could be in the high alpine within hours of leaving their room . In 1899 , the CPR contracted the services of several Swiss guides to assist the less mountain @-@ savvy tourists through the high country . Throughout the Glacier House period , many first ascents were made on peaks within the park . The hotel also attracted naturalists and scientists keen to study the mountain environment . Mary Vaux Walcott and her brothers , George and William Vaux , visited the area many times , and began the first scientific studies of the Illecillewaet Glacier . 
 = = = Mountaineering = = = 
 Glacier House is considered " the first center of alpinism " in North America by American Alpine Club historian William Lowell Putnam . It saw an influx of European and American professional climbers in its first two decades of operation . William Spotswood Green was the first European climber to make note of the excellent climbing possibilities of peaks near the CPR line . Green and Henry Swanzy made the first recorded ascents of major peaks in the summer of 1888 , climbing Mount Bonney and Green 's Peak . Harold Topham , a British climber , made many first ascents in 1890 including Mount Fox ; he later joined with Henry Forster , and two Swiss climbers , Emil Huber and Carl Sulzer to explore the southern peaks of the park . Huber and Sulzer also claimed the prized first ascent of the dramatic Mount Sir Donald . 
 Arthur Oliver Wheeler , a cartographer , climber , and founding member of the Alpine Club of Canada ( ACC ) , came to Glacier House in 1901 . This started a thirty @-@ year relationship with the northern Selkirks , which saw Wheeler map the region , publish large reference works on its geography , and explore much of the park 's terrain . An ACC hut near the Illecillewaet campground bears his name , as well as a peak and a pass . Professor Charles Ernest Fay , first president of the American Alpine Club , after visiting the park in the 1890s , publicized it in the club 's magazine . By the 1900s , almost all of the park 's prominent peaks had seen human tracks . 
 = = = Connaught Tunnel and the Trans Canada = = = 
 After its first winter in operation in 1886 , it became clear to the CPR that the heavy snows of Rogers Pass were going to be a serious challenge . Extensive snow sheds were built to shelter the rails from frequent avalanches . These wood sheds became a fire hazard in the summer months , so a separate summer track was built . In 1910 , while clearing one slide , another avalanche came down Avalanche Mountain , killing 62 men . More than half the workers killed in the slide were of Japanese descent . In all , two hundred railway employees were killed between 1886 and 1916 . In 1912 , the CPR admitted defeat and started the construction of an eight @-@ kilometer tunnel under the pass and Mount Macdonald . The Connaught Tunnel opened in 1916 . 
 The new tunnel bypassed Glacier House 's siding , and the resulting lack of rail passengers spelled the end for the once @-@ popular hotel . It was closed in 1925 , and torn down four years later . The park saw few visitors besides campers from the Alpine Club of Canada 's summer camps for the next thirty years . Until this point , automobile travelers crossing the Columbia Mountains had to use the circuitous " Big Bend Highway " , which followed the upper reaches of the Columbia River north in a large loop . With the planned inundation of much of that valley by hydro projects outlined in the Columbia River Treaty , a new highway route was needed . In 1963 , the Trans Canada Highway was built through Rogers Pass , bringing tourists back to the park in large numbers . Parks Canada built several new campgrounds and expanded the trail system . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The park covers the northern part of the Selkirk Mountains , a sub @-@ range of the Columbia Mountains . It contains numerous glaciers and large , swift waterways . The park is bisected by two major transportation routes , the Trans Canada Highway and the Canadian Pacific Railway . The nearest towns are Revelstoke to the west , and Golden to the east . The only settlement in the park is the complex at the Rogers Pass summit . 
 = = = Mountains = = = 
 The Columbia Mountains rise from the plateaus of the Central Interior and extend eastward to the Rocky Mountain Trench . Geologically distinct from the nearby Rockies , the range is divided into four sub @-@ ranges : the <unk> , <unk> , Selkirks , and the Purcells . Glacier encompasses a portion of the northern Selkirks and a narrow strip of the northern Purcells . The topography of the park varies between rounded mountains and ridges in the east , north , and west , and sharp , steep @-@ sided peaks in the central and southern regions . A.O. Wheeler measured many of the park 's mountains in 1901 and 1902 using a complex system of fixed points and photographs . In the early 20th century , the area was referred to as the " Canadian Alps " . Most names are from historical figures , including explorers , surveyors , mountaineers , and railway and Hudson 's Bay Company executives . 
 = = = = Major peaks and ranges = = = = 
 The highest point in the park is Mount Dawson , at 3 @,@ 377 metres ( 11 @,@ 079 ft ) . Peaks of the Hermit Range , the Bonney and Bostock Groups , the Van Horne Range , Purity Range , Dawson Range , and the precipitous Sir Donald Range all lie wholly or in part within the park . 
 = = = Glaciers = = = 
 The park has 131 glaciers over 0 @.@ 05 square kilometres ( 0 @.@ 019 sq mi ) in size , covering 133 square kilometres ( 51 sq mi ) of the park . Throughout its history , North America has seen cycles of glaciation , where ice sheets advanced and retreated across the terrain . The last glacial period ended about 12 @,@ 000 years ago , before which all but the highest peaks of the park were covered in ice . The movements of these rivers of ice formed the steep @-@ sided , U @-@ shaped valleys of the park . They also rounded the lesser peaks ; ranges in the west of the park show this effect . The glaciers in the park are on whole shrinking and retreating ; they are also some of the most studied glaciers in North America . 
 The glaciers of the park have been dramatically reduced in size in the late 20th and early 21st centuries . Precise measurements of glacial areas started with the Vaux family and A.O. Wheeler in the 1900s . Modern measurements using satellite imagery began with Simon <unk> 's work in the 1980s . Regular inventories of the parks glaciers have been performed since , with the latest collating data up to 2011 . The most recent inventory noted a reduction of 19 @.@ 4 square kilometres ( 7 @.@ 5 sq mi ) of glacial surface area from 2000 to 2011 . 
 Due to its location near the highway and railway , the Illecillewaet Glacier is the most visited and photographed . Formerly known as the Great Glacier , it was a major tourist attraction during the Glacier House period from 1886 to 1925 . The glacier 's terminus , formerly a short walk from the Glacier House site , has retreated far up the mountainside . The <unk> of the glacier spreads far to the south , also spawning the Geikie Glacier . Most of the large glacial features are south of the Trans @-@ Canada corridor . Other large features include the Deville , Dawson , Asulkan , Bishops , Black , Duncan , Grand , and Avalanche . The park 's glaciers have a variety of appearances , with high altitude features smooth and uniform , cracked and riddled with crevasses on the slopes , and black with debris on the valley bottoms . In summer , many of the glaciers take on a red tint ; this is the result of a variety of snow algae known as watermelon snow . 
 = = = Rivers = = = 
 All watercourses in the park are part of the Columbia River drainage basin . Park rivers are swift @-@ running and glacially @-@ fed , and have helped carve out the steep valleys and canyons . They carry much silt and rocky debris with them , and often have a milky white appearance . In the summer months , these rivers have noticeable diurnal cycles ; they run high in the afternoons as the snow and ice melt is at its peak , then drop considerably with lower nighttime temperatures . 
 The major rivers are the Illecillewaet , the Beaver , and the headwaters of the <unk> and Duncan Rivers . Large creeks and brooks include Mountain , Cougar ( which runs underground through the <unk> Caves ) , and Battle . The Beaver and Illecillewaet flood occasionally ; 1983 and 2012 saw flooding damage to the highway and railway . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The geology of the northern Selkirks reveals the tremendous tectonic changes that have shaped the terrain of western North America . Like much of British Columbia , the region was first studied by the prolific surveyor and geologist Dr. George Mercer Dawson in 1890 . Topographical maps were first produced by A.O. Wheeler in the early 1900s , and in the 1970s , Wheeler 's grandson , Dr. John Wheeler , conducted an extensive geological survey from land and air . 
 From Rogers Pass , layers of quartzite and slate are visible , revealing the fact that the range was part of a large , silty continental shelf 600 million years ago . 185 million years ago , successive plate movements from the west began to crumple and compress this material , driving some of it deep underground , and some into the heights of the Selkirks . Lime from coral and other organic life was compressed into limestone , which is seen in the Cougar Brook area . Veins of marble are present in the metamorphic rock of the high peaks . Although erosion and the effects of the glaciers are constantly grinding down the mountain peaks , the pressure of the underlying rock continues to drive them upward . Geologists have classed the rocks of the Columbia Mountains into groups , several of which appear in the northern Selkirks . The slates are in the <unk> Creek and <unk> groups , quartzite is in the Hamill group , limestone is part of the <unk> Formation , while the metamorphic rocks are classed in the Shuswap Metamorphic Complex . 
 = = = Caves = = = 
 The limestone strata in the park is subject to water erosion by Cougar Brook , a process that has formed the <unk> Caves . First discovered in 1907 , and originally named the Caves of Cheops , then <unk> Caves , this 6 @-@ kilometer ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) long cave system is one of the largest in Canada . The limestone is broken down and softened by carbonic acid in the brook 's water . The water also contains pulverised rock from glacial processes , which serve to further etch and cut new passages in the rock . The caves contain a large concentration of a rare substance known as <unk> - this is a suspension of calcium carbonate kept intact by bacteria . Due to its sensitive nature , and damage done to cave environments by early tourists , Parks Canada has closed the caves to the general public . Access by organized groups and experienced speleologists is allowed with a permit . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Glacier National Park covers a range of habitats , from lush temperate rainforest in the western valleys , to inhospitable <unk> and rock @-@ covered alpine areas , to drier fir and pine forests on the eastern boundary . Four of British Columbia 's biogeoclimatic zones are found within the park : Interior cedar / hemlock , Engelmann spruce / subalpine fir , Interior Douglas @-@ fir in the eastern extremities , and alpine tundra at high elevations . Parks Canada characterizes these zones as " rainforest , snow forest , and no forest " . Animal life in the park ranges from large mammals like caribou and grizzly bear to bird species such as Steller 's jay and the golden eagle . 
 = = = Flora = = = 
 The valleys on the western side of the park support dense wet forests , with a thick understory . The widest valleys , such as the Illecillewaet , contain a rare wetlands environment , featuring skunk cabbage and water hemlock . Outside of the wetlands , the lower valleys are covered by Western Red cedar , western white pine , western hemlock , Interior douglas fir , and white birch . Ground species include devil 's club , blueberries , liverwort , and fern species . 
 At middle elevations , the subalpine zone appears . This forest has Engelmann spruce , mountain hemlock , and subalpine fir . The understory is thick here with rhododendron and berry species , as well as deep beds of moss and lichens . At higher elevations , this forest opens up to meadows and slide chutes , which are covered in a lush growth of grasses , herbaceous shrubs , and alpine wildflowers . Parks botanists and others have identified 546 species of flowering plants in the park . Late July to mid @-@ September see an impressive display of alpine blooms . 
 The alpine meadows continue into the harsh alpine tundra zone , where poor soil , heavy snowfall , cold temperatures , and a very short growing season discourage all but the hardiest sedge grasses , heathers , and lichens . 
 = = = Fauna = = = 
 Glacier 's rich forests support a large wildlife population , which Parks staff monitor regularly . There are fifty @-@ three mammal species found within the park . Bears dominate the snow zone ; the berry @-@ rich avalanche slides provide an important food source for both black and grizzly species . They spend the winters in deep dens hibernating . Other predators include the wolverine , cougar , and lynx . 
 Mountain goats are the most common ungulates in Glacier National Park ; a 1985 study counted 300 in the high peaks and valleys of the park . Caribou migrate through certain park valleys , while elk , mule and white @-@ tail deer can be found throughout . The deep snows of winter drive most ungulates out of the park into the lower elevations of the nearby Rocky Mountain Trench and Columbia valleys . Moose are seen in the park on rare occasions . Several species of squirrels are found in the lower forests , and alpine mammals include pika , hoary marmots , and martens . 
 Glacier has 235 observed bird species , but the majority are migratory and only seen in the summer months . The 30 species who are year @-@ round residents include woodpeckers , golden eagles , owls , ravens , Steller 's jays , and golden @-@ crowned kinglets . Unpredictable explosions of pine siskins , sometimes reaching hundreds of thousands in number , will appear and stay year round , but be gone the next year . American dippers feed in the many waterfalls and cascades of the park . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Located within the Interior <unk> , precipitation is a major environmental factor in the area . The park straddles two prevalent weather systems , with warmer , wetter air from the Pacific meeting the colder , drier air of continental weather systems . The moist air is driven to higher elevations by the mass of the Columbia Mountains . The result is frequent rain and snowstorms , especially during winter months . The mean annual precipitation in subalpine areas is 1 @.@ 995 metres ( 6 ft 6 @.@ 5 in ) This contributes to the large icefields and glaciers that cover much of the park 's high elevations . Rogers Pass can receive up to 17 metres ( 56 ft ) of snow over the course of a winter . 
 The eastern edge of the park , along the Purcells , is in the rain shadow and is relatively drier . The area can see wide variations in temperature and weather due to the extreme topography . Winter temperatures in the Selkirks are moderate compared to similar elevations in the Rockies to the east , with summer average highs reaching the high teens Celsius . 
 = = = Avalanche control = = = 
 Maintaining the Trans Canada Highway through the snowy Rogers Pass is a constant battle . Parks Canada works with provincial highways crews and the Canadian Armed Forces to keep the highway open as much as possible . Parks staff play both a research and prevention role by monitoring snowpack levels and predicting avalanche probability , as well as working with the Canadian Forces to trigger controlled avalanches . The Royal Canadian Horse Artillery operate 105mm Howitzer cannons , based at circular gun positions along the highway . The highway is closed to traffic , shells are fired at trigger points identified by Parks forecasters , and smaller , more controlled avalanches are started . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Although the park sees over four million visitors each year , the majority are only passing through on the Trans @-@ Canada Highway . About 15 % stop to use park facilities . Of the visitors who experience the park from outside their vehicles , two @-@ thirds are from outside of Canada . There are 140 kilometers ( 87 mi ) of established hiking trails in the park . 
 The Parks Canada administration and Rogers Pass Discovery Centre are located at Rogers Pass . The interpretive program for Glacier and Mount Revelstoke National Parks is based at the centre . It includes a theatre , an exhibit hall with railway models , natural history displays and wildlife specimens , and a bookstore . 
 There are three campgrounds in the park . Illecillewaet is the largest , with two smaller campgrounds located at Loop Brook and Sir Donald . There are also five designated backcountry camping areas . Parks and the Alpine Club of Canada maintain four alpine huts and cabins for backcountry users . The Wheeler Hut is the oldest and largest , and is located near the Illecillewaet camping area . The Asulkan hut sits at 2 @,@ 100 metres ( 6 @,@ 900 ft ) on the Asulkan Pass , the Sapphire Col hut is a basic shelter near The Dome , and the Glacier Circle cabin in the Beaver River valley is a base for travelling in the southern areas of the park . None of the camping facilities in the park are maintained during winter months . 
 = Marcia Mitzman Gaven = 
 Marcia Mitzman Gaven ( born February 28 , 1959 ) is an award @-@ winning American actress from New York . Since studying at the High School of Performing Arts and the State University of New York at Purchase , she has appeared in many musicals during her career singing in both mezzo @-@ soprano and soprano roles . Her Broadway debut came in 1979 when she played Betty Rizzo in Grease , serving as the replacement for the original actress of the role . In the 1980s she appeared in the musicals The Rocky Horror Show , Oliver ! , Zorba , Nine , Anything Goes , Chess , and Welcome to the Club , and in the operas Brigadoon , South Pacific , and Sweeney Todd . 
 In 1992 , Gaven played the character Mrs. Walker in a new production called The Who 's Tommy at La Jolla Playhouse . The musical was a success , resulting in its move to Broadway in 1993 . Gaven was praised by critics for her performance and received a Tony Award nomination in the " Best Featured Actress in a Musical " category . She eventually had to leave The Who 's Tommy before its Broadway run ended because of an allergic reaction to a smoke effect used in the show . In 1995 , she won an Ovation Award and a Los Angeles Drama Critics Circle Award for her portrayal of Florence Vassy in Chess at Hudson Theatre . She was also awarded an Ovation Award for the role of Mother in the staging of the musical Ragtime at Shubert Theatre in 1997 . Gaven 's latest role in a musical was in a 2001 production of 1776 by UCLA 's Freud Playhouse . Since then she has appeared in concerts and fundraisers . 
 Gaven has also made guest star appearances in numerous television shows and films , playing both live @-@ action and animated roles . She voiced several characters in the animated series The Simpsons from 1999 until 2002 , including Maude Flanders , Helen Lovejoy , Miss Hoover , and others . She was hired after Maggie Roswell departed from the show , due to a pay dispute . She has not been heard on the show since Roswell 's return in 2002 . Gaven has also lent her voice to television and radio advertisements . She is currently married to Seth Gaven owner of AV Squad , a film marketing company . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Gaven was born as Marcia Mitzman on February 28 , 1959 in New York City , New York . She was raised with her two siblings in the village of Hastings @-@ on @-@ Hudson , New York by their mother Patricia Mitzman , who had previously had a career in art . Newt Mitzman , their father , directed television specials and commercials for a living . Gaven went to Hackley Elementary School in Tarrytown , New York when she was young . At that time she was certain that she wanted to work in show business . As the result of a lie , she was able to study at the High School of Performing Arts even though the school was only open to inhabitants of New York City . She then became a drama major at the State University of New York at Purchase , though she did not get a degree . She said in a 1987 interview with The New York Times that " they kicked me out because I missed a major rehearsal " , and she never applied for readmission since she had already made her first appearance on Broadway in Grease by then . While at Purchase , Gaven performed in student productions such as The Taming of the Shrew and Trumpets and Drums . 
 = = Career in theatre = = 
 Gaven has had a prominent career in musical theatre and has appeared in many rock musicals . She told <unk> in 1993 that she thinks those kinds of musicals are harder to sing in compared to standard musicals , and that " the nature of rock and roll is that it 's on the edge . It 's written to be done dangerously . You can 't be careful and do it at the same time . If you don 't do it dangerously , you run the risk of losing the impact . " During her career , Gaven has sung in both mezzo @-@ soprano and soprano roles , and has been cited for her belting . According to Alvin Klein , theatre critic for The New York Times , she " is categorically a mezzo soprano . " Gaven has also been noted for her strong voice , and was once told by a sound technician at An Evening Dinner Theater in Elmsford , New York that " We always turn off the mikes when you sing " because she did not need amplification . 
 = = = 1979 – 1989 = = = 
 In March 1979 , when Gaven was twenty years old , she served as the replacement actress for the character Betty Rizzo in the original Broadway production of Grease . This was her Broadway debut . In late 1980 , she was cast in the lead role of Janet in the musical The Rocky Horror Show that ran for six nights at Warner Theatre . It tells the story of a couple , Brad and Janet , who find themselves lost one night and end up in the laboratory of an alien doctor . The cast , including Gaven , was praised by critics . In 1984 , she played a Londoner in the revival of Oliver ! at Broadway and was the understudy for the major role of Nancy . That same year , in the Broadway revival of Zorba , Gaven played the role of The Widow who is eventually stoned to death by the townspeople after being held responsible for the suicide of a young boy who fell in love with her . She then portrayed the character Luisa , the wife of an Italian film director , in a production of Nine at An Evening Dinner Theater in 1985 . 
 Gaven starred in the New York City Opera 's Broadway revival of Brigadoon , in which she played Meg Brockie , at New York State Theater in 1986 . The story is about a mysterious Scottish village that appears for only one day every hundred years , and Meg is one of the villagers . According to Sy <unk> of the magazine The World & I , Gaven was " a huge crowd pleaser " in the role . She was also cast in the New York City Opera 's spring 1987 revival of South Pacific as the female lead character Nellie Forbush , a U.S. Navy nurse who works on a South Pacific island during World War II . This nine @-@ week run of South Pacific had an alternating cast and Nellie was also portrayed by Susan Bigelow . Later that year in July during the New York City Opera 's regular season , she appeared in the opera company 's Sweeney Todd as Mrs. Lovett , who makes and sells meat pies made from the victims of serial killer Sweeney Todd . 
 In Pioneer Theatre Company 's fall 1988 production of Anything Goes , Gaven played the lead role of nightclub singer Reno Sweeney . It is set on an ocean liner on which Reno helps the character Billy Crocker win the heart of the engaged Hope Harcourt who he has fallen in love with . While reviewing the musical for the Deseret News , Joseph Walker commented that Gaven " is sensational as Reno Sweeney , the saucy , sassy hoofer @-@ with @-@ a @-@ heart @-@ of @-@ gold . She has an arresting presence and a golden voice ; the whole show always seems better when she 's on stage . " At the end of 1988 , Gaven returned to the musical Oliver ! in a Theatre Under The Stars production in Houston , starring as Nancy . A critic for the Houston Chronicle commended her performance , writing that she " acts the compassionate Nancy with warmth and spirit , and sings in a strong voice full of character . " 
 Also in 1988 , Gaven played the part of the Russian chess player 's wife Svetlana in the short @-@ lived Broadway production of the musical Chess , for which she was praised by critics . The following year she appeared as Carol Bates in the Broadway musical Welcome to the Club . It revolves around four men who have been put in jail for not paying alimony . The musical shows why they ended up divorcing their wives , one of which is played by Gaven . Both Chess and Welcome to the Club were unsuccessful . John Simon criticized the latter musical in a New York Magazine review but praised Gaven 's performance , writing : " The cast ranges from the charmless to the hopeless [ ... ] in this mess . Only Marcia Mitzman manages to stand out from the crowd , and when she gets the right part in the right show , she 'll do just fine . " Associated Press drama critic Michael Kuchwara also wrote negatively about Welcome to the Club while giving praise to Gaven for projecting " a sympathy [ to her character ] that isn 't apparent in the book . " 
 = = = 1990 – 1995 = = = 
 In December 1990 , Gaven once again appeared as Nancy in a revival of Oliver ! — this time in a production at 5th Avenue Theatre in Seattle , Washington . A theatre critic for the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer noted that she " has the voice to anchor anything you 'd care to name , even the 5th Avenue Theatre . 5th Avenue performers often sound as if they were speaking and singing through a football stadium public address system . But Mitzman overpowers malevolent acoustics . " After Oliver ! , she appeared as Countess Charlotte Malcolm in Ahmanson Theatre 's production of A Little Night Music that was performed from April 18 to June 30 , 1991 at James A. Doolittle Theatre in Los Angeles , California . Gaven worked at 5th Avenue Theatre again in December 1991 in the musical Here 's Love . She portrayed the divorced Doris Walker , a single @-@ working mother of a girl who doubts the existence of Santa Claus . During spring 1992 , she played the love interest of a male songwriter and his best friend in the musical The Tin Pan Man ( set in 1905 ) at La <unk> Theatre for the Performing Arts . 
 Starting at the beginning of July 1992 , Gaven appeared in a new musical called The Who 's Tommy at La Jolla Playhouse in San Diego . It was based on the rock opera album Tommy by The Who . Gaven starred as Mrs. Walker , the mother of the boy Tommy who is traumatized when he sees his father murder Mrs. Walker 's new boyfriend . Tommy ultimately becomes non @-@ responsive , leading people to believe that he is deaf , mute , and blind , and his parents try to find a cure for his condition . Gaven later told <unk> that she initially did not want to do the musical , since she " had no idea how this could be staged as a theatrical piece . I hoped my agents wouldn 't call me and ask me to audition . " However , they did , and she was cast as Mrs. Walker after an audition in which she sang the song " Heaven Help My Heart " that she performed in Chess , also a rock musical . The Who 's Tommy was La Jolla Playhouse 's biggest success yet and as a result its run was lengthened by several weeks . Later that year , Gaven once again played Doris in Here 's Love — this time in a Theatre Under The Stars production . 
 In late 1992 it was announced that because of the success of The Who 's Tommy , it would be produced for Broadway and open in April 1993 . The production cost eight million dollars and it broke the box office record for the biggest non @-@ opening day with US $ 494 @,@ 897 earned on April 23 , 1993 at St. James Theatre ( where the musical opened on April 22 ) , beating Guys and Dolls ' 1992 record . Des McAnuff , who directed the musical at both La Jolla Playhouse and on Broadway , decided to bring many actors from the original cast with him despite weeks of auditions with thousands of actors trying out for the roles in front of him . The Broadway production featured some changes to the musical , such as a new song devoted to Tommy 's parents that Gaven thought " helps show their side of the story . " However , as she told The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune , the biggest difference was the increased amount of money she earned . Gaven was praised by critics for her portrayal of Mrs. Walker in the Broadway production , with one critic from The Miami Herald writing that her " alluring alto voice makes you wish Tommy 's mother had even more to sing . " 
 It was announced on May 10 , 1993 that The Who 's Tommy had received eleven Tony Award nominations , tying with Kiss of the Spider Woman for the most nominations that year . Gaven received a nomination in the " Best Featured Actress in a Musical " category . However , as the result of an allergic reaction , she could not perform in the musical some nights . When Daryl Miller interviewed Gaven in the Los Angeles Times in 1997 , he noted that " this was one of the biggest disappointments of her life , and clouds cross her face for the first time in the conversation . She glances across the room at the Tony citation — recognizing her nomination for best featured actress in a musical — as she describes how her throat became infected due to a reaction to the oil in a haze @-@ making compound that designers pump onstage to enhance lighting effects . She missed a lot of performances , and an untold number of Tony voters missed her performance . She can 't help but wonder how that affected the outcome . " At one point , Gaven 's understudy Alice Ripley took her place for eight consecutive weeks while Gaven recovered . Gaven eventually had to leave The Who 's Tommy some months after it opened because of her allergy . She also disliked the idea of performing in one musical for more than a year . 
 In late 1993 , she was cast in Pasadena Playhouse 's musical Sweet , Smart , Rodgers & Hart that featured music and lyrics previously written by Richard Rodgers and Lorenz Hart . It originally played from the middle of November to December 17 , 1993 , but was then extended for another run between January 6 and January 23 , 1994 . In July 1994 , Gaven played the role of the partly African @-@ American showboat actress Julie Dozier in Music Circus ' adaptation of Show Boat in California . In the spring of the following year , she reprised her part as the Countess in a production of A Little Night Music , also by Music Circus . Gaven returned to Chess in the summer of 1995 in small @-@ scale production at Hudson Theatre , this time as the lead character Florence Vassy . The story involves a romantic triangle between the two top players , an American and a Russian , in a world chess championship , and the woman Florence who manages one and falls in love with the other . Gaven received an Ovation Award ( Best Lead Actress in a Musical ) and a Los Angeles Drama Critics Circle Award ( Best Lead Performance ) for her work in the musical . 
 = = = 1996 – present = = = 
 On May 21 , 1996 , Gaven and seventeen other well @-@ known musical theatre artists appeared in the show Say It With Music at Carpenter Performing Arts Center . It was staged to raise proceeds for the Musical Theatre Group , which was described by John Woolard of the Press @-@ Telegram as " a new organization formed to help rejuvenate musical theater in Southern California . " The show was made up of singing and dancing numbers that had previously appeared in different Broadway musicals . From June to September 1997 , Gaven played the role of Mother in the Los Angeles production ( pre @-@ Broadway ) of the musical Ragtime at Shubert Theatre . She received her second Ovation Award ( Best Lead Actress in a Musical ) for this performance . The musical tells the story of three ethnic groups in the United States : White Anglo @-@ Saxon Protestants , African @-@ Americans in Harlem , and European immigrants . Gaven played the mother and matriarch of the Protestant family . Ragtime director Frank <unk> praised her in the Los Angeles Times for her " grace and beauty and magnificent voice " and her " extraordinarily keen intelligence — she 's a very deep reader of text , " and commented that " she seizes the stage with energy . " Many critics praised Gaven as well , though Laurie Winer of the Los Angeles Times wrote that she played Mother " valiantly but with a shade too much effort . " David Littlejohn of The Wall Street Journal cited her as " the best single performance in this production . " 
 In May of the following year , she appeared in California Musical Theatre 's production of Triumph of Love , a musical that had previously been staged on Broadway and is set in Sparta . It ran for six days at the Community Center Theater in Sacramento , California and featured Gaven in the role of the philosopher Hesione . In 2001 , Gaven reappeared as Julie Dozier in another adaptation of Show Boat by Music Circus . Davis Enterprise critic Bev Sykes wrote positively about her voice but criticized her performance for not being credible , writing : " Marcia Mitzman Gaven gives an uneven performance as Julie , a singer of mixed race who passes for white until she 's betrayed by a spurned suitor . She is re @-@ discovered in Act 2 , having fallen into decline . Though obviously under the influence of the liquor in the bottle she carries around before and after her delivery of the song ' He 's Just My Bill , ' the song itself is performed straight , with no hint of the ravages that alcohol have taken on her body and voice . " Later that same year she played the role of Abigail Adams in a production of 1776 by UCLA 's Freud Playhouse . 
 Gaven performed in a cabaret , called The Girly Show , at a fundraising gala for the Blank Theatre Company on August 15 , 2005 . It consisted of an all @-@ female cast singing songs by Michael John <unk> , with <unk> playing the piano . On December 15 , 2008 , celebrating the fifteenth anniversary of The Who 's Tommy , Gaven and the rest of the original Broadway cast reunited for a concert at August Wilson Theatre in New York City . This performance was a benefit for Broadway Cares / Equity Fights AIDS , the Broadway Dreams Foundation , and the Bachmann @-@ Strauss <unk> & Parkinson Foundation . 
 = = Career in television and film = = 
 Gaven has done much voice acting in her career , lending her voice to television and radio advertisements and playing animated characters in The Pink Panther ( 1993 ) , Red Planet ( 1994 ) , and Small Soldiers ( 1998 ) . Working with advertisements earned Gaven more money than playing theatre . " I can make in an hour what I make in a week doing theater , " she said in 1997 . Gaven has also made guest star appearances in live @-@ action television series such as The George Carlin Show ( 1994 ) , Ellen ( 1995 ) , Get Smart ( 1995 ) , The Drew Carey Show ( 1996 ) , Hangin ' with Mr. Cooper ( 1997 ) , Frasier ( 1998 ) , and Beverly Hills , 90210 ( 1998 ) . In addition , she had a minor role in the 2002 film Moonlight Mile . 
 When Maggie Roswell left the animated series The Simpsons in spring 1999 after a pay dispute with Fox Broadcasting Company , Gaven was hired to fill in for Roswell 's characters . These characters included Maude Flanders , Helen Lovejoy , Miss Hoover , and others . However , Maude Flanders was killed off in the 2000 episode " Alone Again , Natura @-@ Diddily " to open up new storylines for the show . Maggie Roswell returned to The Simpsons in 2002 after reaching a deal with Fox to record her lines from her home , and Gaven has not worked for the show since that year . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Gaven resided in Los Angeles from 1991 to 1993 , when she had to move to New York City to act in The Who 's Tommy . However , her stay in the city was short because of the allergic reaction and she moved back to Los Angeles . While performing in musicals , Gaven had to be protective of her vocal cords and this affected her personal life . She told Miller in 1997 that " you have to give up so much of your life " , and gave the example that when " somebody coughs behind me [ at the cinema ] I immediately say to my husband , ' We may have to move . ' " She also had to avoid shouting . Gaven is currently married to Seth Gaven who owns AV Squad , a film marketing company . 
 = = Acting credits = = 
 = = = Theatre = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = George Mason = 
 George Mason ( sometimes referred to as George Mason IV ) ( December 11 , 1725 – October 7 , 1792 ) was a Virginia planter , politician , and a delegate to the U.S. Constitutional Convention of 1787 , one of three men who refused to sign . His writings , including substantial portions of the Fairfax Resolves of 1774 , the Virginia Declaration of Rights of 1776 , and his Objections to this Constitution of Government ( 1787 ) in opposition to ratification of the constitution , have been a significant influence on political thought and events . The Virginia Declaration of Rights served as a basis for the United States Bill of Rights , of which he has been deemed the father . 
 Mason was born in 1725 , most likely in present @-@ day Fairfax County , Virginia . Mason 's father died when he was young , and his mother managed the family estates until he came of age . He married in 1750 , built Gunston Hall , and lived the life of a country squire , supervising his lands , family and slaves . Mason briefly served in the House of Burgesses and involved himself in community affairs , sometimes serving with his neighbor , George Washington . As tensions between Britain and the American colonies grew , Mason came to support the colonial side , and used his knowledge and experience to help the revolutionary cause , finding ways to work around the Stamp Act of 1765 and serving in the rebel Virginia Conventions of 1775 and 1776 . 
 Mason prepared the first draft of the Declaration of Rights in 1776 , and his words formed much of the text adopted by the final Virginia Convention . He also wrote a constitution for the state ; others who sought to have the convention adopt their ideas , like Thomas Jefferson , found Mason 's version could not be stopped . During the war , he was a member of the powerful lower house of the Virginia General Assembly , the House of Delegates , but to the irritation of Washington and others , refused to serve in the Continental Congress in Philadelphia , citing health and family commitments . 
 Named one of his state 's delegates to the Constitutional Convention , Mason traveled to Philadelphia , his only lengthy trip outside Virginia . Many clauses in the document bear his stamp , as he was active in the convention for months before deciding he could not sign it . He cited the lack of a bill of rights most prominently in his Objections , but also wanted an immediate end to the slave trade , which he opposed , and a supermajority for navigation acts , which might force exporters of tobacco to use more expensive American ships . Although he lost there , and again at the Virginia Ratifying Convention of 1788 , his prominent fight for a bill of rights led his fellow Virginian , James Madison , to introduce one during the First Congress in 1789 , and it was ratified in 1791 , a year before Mason died . Long obscure , Mason is today recognized for his contributions to the United States , and to Virginia . 
 = = Ancestry and early life = = 
 George Mason 's great @-@ grandfather , George Mason I , had been a Cavalier : militarily defeated in the English Civil War , some of them came to America in the 1640s and 1650s . He had been born in 1629 at Pershore , in the English county of Worcestershire . The immigrant George Mason settled in what is now Stafford County , Virginia , having obtained land as a reward for bringing his party to the colony . His son , George Mason II ( 1660 – 1726 ) , was the first to move to what in 1742 became Fairfax County , then at the frontier between English and Native American areas . George Mason III ( 1690 – 1735 ) , served in the House of Burgesses , and like his father was county lieutenant . George Mason IV 's mother , Ann Thomson Mason , was the daughter of a former Attorney General of Virginia who had immigrated from London , and was of a Yorkshire family . 
 The Masons lived in a colonial Virginia that had few roads , as most commerce was carried on Chesapeake Bay or through the waters of the Potomac , Rappahannock or other rivers . Most settlement took place near the rivers , through which planters could trade with the world . Thus , colonial Virginia initially developed few towns , since estates were largely self @-@ sufficient , and could get what they needed without the need to purchase locally . Even the capital , Williamsburg saw little activity when the legislature was not in session . Local politics was dominated by large landowners like the Masons . The Virginia economy rose and fell with tobacco , the main crop , which was mostly for export to Britain . 
 Into this world was born George Mason , fourth of that name , on December 11 , 1725 . He may have been born at his father 's plantation on Dogue 's Neck ( later Mason Neck ) , but this is uncertain as his parents also lived on their lands across the Potomac in Maryland . 
 On March 5 , 1735 , George Mason III died when his boat capsized while crossing the Potomac . His widow Ann would raise their son George ( then 9 ) and two younger siblings as co @-@ guardian with lawyer John Mercer . She selected property at Chopawamsic Creek ( today in Prince William County , Virginia ) as her dower house and there lived with her children and administered the lands that her elder son would control upon reaching his 21st birthday . 
 In 1736 , George began his education with a Mr. Williams , hired to teach him for the price of 1 @,@ 000 pounds ( 450 kg ) of tobacco per annum . George 's studies began at his mother 's house , but the following year , he was boarded out to a Mrs. Simpson in Maryland , with Williams continuing as teacher through 1739 . By 1740 , George Mason was again at Chopawamsic , under the tutelage of a Dr. Bridges . Mason 's biographers have speculated that this was Charles Bridges , who helped develop the schools run in Britain by the Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge , and who came to America in 1731 . In addition , Mason and his brother Thomson doubtlessly had the run of Mercer 's library , one of the largest in Virginia , and the conversations of Mercer and the book @-@ lovers who gathered around him were likely an education in themselves . 
 Mercer was a brilliant man of strong opinions , who expressed his views in ways that sometimes gave offense ; Mason proved similar in brilliance of mind and ability to anger . George Mason attained his majority in 1746 , and continued to reside at Chopawamsic with his siblings and mother . 
 = = Virginia landed gentleman = = 
 = = = Public figure = = = 
 The obligations and offices that came with being one of the largest local landowners descended on Mason as they had on his father and grandfather . In 1747 , he was named to the Fairfax County Court . He was elected as a vestryman for Truro Parish , and took a position among the officers of the county militia , eventually rising to the rank of colonel . In 1748 , he sought a seat in the House of Burgesses ; the process was controlled by more senior members of the court and he was not then successful ; he would win in 1758 . 
 The county court not only heard civil and criminal cases , but decided matters such as local taxes . Membership fell to most major landowners . Mason was a justice for much of the rest of his life , though he was excluded because of <unk> at court from 1752 to 1764 , and resigned in 1789 when continued service meant swearing to uphold a constitution he could not support . Even while a member , he often did not attend . Joseph <unk> , in a journal article on Mason 's court service , noted that he was often in poor health , and lived the furthest of any of the major <unk> from the Fairfax County courthouse , whether at its original site near today 's Tyson 's Corner or later in newly founded Alexandria . Robert Rutland , editor of Mason 's papers , considered court service a major influence on Mason 's later thinking and writing , but <unk> denied it , " if the Fairfax court provided a course for Mason 's early training , he chiefly distinguished himself by skipping classes . " 
 Alexandria was one of the towns founded or given corporate status in the mid @-@ 18th century that Mason had interests in ; he purchased three of the original lots along King and Royal Streets and became a municipal trustee in 1754 . He also served as a trustee of Dumfries , in Prince William County , and had business interests there and in Georgetown , on the Maryland side of the Potomac ( today in the District of Columbia ) . 
 = = = Squire of Gunston Hall = = = 
 On April 4 , 1750 , Mason married Ann <unk> , only child of William and Sarah <unk> of Charles County , Maryland . The Masons and <unk> had adjacent lands in Maryland , and had joined together in real estate transactions ; by his death in 1764 , William <unk> was one of the wealthiest men in Charles County . At the time of his marriage , Mason was living at Dogue 's Neck , though in which residence is uncertain . George and Ann Mason would have nine children who survived to adulthood . Ann Mason died in 1773 ; their marriage , judging by surviving accounts , was a happy one . 
 George Mason began to build his home , Gunston Hall , likely beginning in 1755 . The exterior , typical of local buildings of that time , was probably based on architectural books sent from Britain to America for the use of local builders ; one of these craftsmen , perhaps William Waite or James Wren , constructed Gunston Hall . Mason was proud of the gardens which still surround the house . There were outbuildings , including slave quarters , a schoolhouse , and kitchens , and beyond them four large plantations , forests , and the shops and other facilities that made Gunston Hall mostly self @-@ sufficient . 
 Mason avoided overdependence on tobacco as a source of income by leasing much of his land holdings to tenant farmers , and diversified his crops to grow wheat for export to the British West Indies as Virginia 's economy sank because of tobacco overproduction in the 1760s and 1770s . Mason was a pioneer in the Virginia wine industry , subscribing along with other Virginians such as Thomas Jefferson to Philip Mazzei 's scheme for growing wine grapes in America . 
 Mason sought to expand his land and wealth . He greatly expanded the boundaries of Gunston Hall estate , so that it occupied all of Dogue 's Neck , which became known as Mason 's Neck . One project that Mason was involved in for most of his adult life was the Ohio Company , in which he invested in 1749 and became treasurer in 1752 — an office he held forty years until his death in 1792 . The Ohio Company had secured a royal grant for 200 @,@ 000 acres ( 81 @,@ 000 ha ) to be surveyed near the forks of the Ohio River ( today the site of Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania ) . War , revolution , and competing claims from Pennsylvania eventually defeated the Ohio Company 's plans . Although the company failed , Mason acquired considerable Western lands independently . His defense against the Pennsylvania claims , Selections from the Virginia Charters ( 1772 ) , originally intended to promote the Ohio Company 's claims , was widely applauded as a defense of the rights of Americans against royal decrees . Involvement with the Ohio Company also brought Mason into contact with many prominent Virginians , including his Fairfax County neighbor , George Washington . 
 Mason and Washington were friends for many years until they finally broke over their differences regarding the federal constitution . Peter R. Henriques , in his journal article on their relationship , suggested that Mason cultivated the friendship more than Washington did , as Mason sent many more letters and gifts , and stayed more often at Washington 's plantation , though the last can be explained in part as Mount Vernon lay on the road from Gunston Hall to Alexandria . Henriques suggested that as Mason was older , intellectually superior , and the owner of a flourishing plantation as Washington struggled to establish Mount Vernon , it would not have been in the future president 's character to be close to Mason . Washington had a deep respect for Mason 's intellectual abilities , several times asking for his advice , and writing in 1777 when learning that Mason had taken charge of an issue before the General Assembly , " I know of no person better qualified ... than Colonel Mason , and shall be very happy to hear he has taken it in hand " . 
 Despite his involvement in western real estate schemes , Mason saw that land was being cleared and planted with tobacco faster than the market for it could expand , meaning that its price would drop even as more and more capital was tied up in land and slaves . Thus , although a major slaveholder , he opposed the slave system in Virginia . He believed that slave importation , together with the natural population increase , would result in a huge future slave population in Virginia ; a system of leased lands , though not as profitable as slave labor , would have " little Trouble & <unk> [ risk ] " . 
 = = Political thinker ( 1758 – 1775 ) = = 
 = = = From burgess to rebel = = = 
 Little is known of Mason 's political views prior to the 1760s , when he came to oppose British colonial policies . In 1758 , Mason successfully ran for the House of Burgesses when George William Fairfax , holder of one of Fairfax County 's two seats , chose not to seek re @-@ election . Also elected were Mason 's brother Thomson ( for Stafford County ) , George Washington ( for Frederick County where he was stationed as commander of Virginia 's militia as the French and Indian War continued ) and Richard Henry Lee , who would work closely with Mason through their careers . 
 When the house assembled , George Mason was initially appointed to a committee concerned with raising additional militia during that time of war . In 1759 , he was appointed to the powerful Committee on Privileges and Elections . He was also placed during the latter year on the Committee on Propositions and Grievances , which mostly considered local matters . Mason dealt with several local concerns , presenting a petition of Fairfax County planters against being assessed for a tobacco wharf at Alexandria , funds they felt should be raised through wharfage fees . He also played a major role as the Burgesses deliberated how to divide Prince William County as settlement expanded ; in March 1759 , Fauquier County was created by legislative act . In this , Mason opposed the interest of the family of Thomas , Lord Fairfax , who wanted existing counties expanded instead , including Fairfax . This difference may have contributed to Mason 's decision not to seek re @-@ election in 1761 . Mason biographer Jeff Broadwater noted that Mason 's committee assignments reflected the esteem his colleagues held him in , or at least the potential they saw . Broadwater did not find it surprising that Mason did not seek re @-@ election , as he did not attend the sessions between 1759 and 1761 . 
 Although the British were victorious over the French in the war , King George III 's government felt that the North American colonies were not paying their way , since little direct tax revenue from the colonies was received . The Sugar Act of 1764 had its greatest effect in New England and did not cause widespread objection . The Stamp Act the following year affected all 13 colonies , as it required revenue stamps to be used on papers required in trade and in the law . When word of passage of the Stamp Act reached Williamsburg , the House of Burgesses passed the Virginia Resolves , asserting that Virginians had the same rights as if they resided in Britain , and that they could only be taxed by themselves or their elected representatives . The Resolves were mostly written by a fiery @-@ spoken new member for Louisa County , Patrick Henry . 
 Mason slowly moved from being a peripheral figure towards the center of Virginia politics , but his published response to the Stamp Act , which he opposed , is most notable for the inclusion of his anti @-@ slavery views . George Washington or George William Fairfax , the burgesses for Fairfax County , may have asked Mason 's advice as to what steps to take in the crisis . Mason drafted an act to allow for one of the most common court action , replevin , to take place without the use of stamped paper , and sent it to George Washington , by then one of Fairfax County 's burgesses , to gain passage . This action contributed to a boycott of the stamps . With the courts and trade paralyzed , the British Parliament repealed the Stamp Act in 1766 , but continued to assert the right to tax the colonies . 
 Following the repeal , a committee of London merchants issued a public letter to Americans , warning them not to declare victory . Mason published a response in June 1766 , satirizing the British position , " We have , with infinite Difficulty & Fatigue got you excused this one Time ; do what your Papa and Mamma bid , & hasten to return your most grateful Acknowledgements for condescending to let you keep what is your own . " The Townshend Acts of 1767 were Britain 's next attempt to tax the colonies , placing duties on substances including lead and glass , and provoking calls from the northern colonies for a boycott of British goods . Virginia , more dependent on goods imported from Britain , was less enthusiastic , and , as local planters tended to receive goods at their river landings , a boycott would be difficult to enforce . In April 1769 , Washington sent a copy of a Philadelphia resolution to Mason , asking his advice on what action Virginia should take . It is unknown who adapted that text for use in Virginia ( Broadwater concluded it was Mason ) but Mason sent Washington a corrected draft on April 23 , 1769 . Washington took it to Williamsburg , but the governor , Lord Botetourt , dissolved the legislature because of the radical resolutions it were passing . The Burgesses adjourned to a nearby tavern , and there passed a non @-@ importation agreement based on Mason 's . 
 Although the resolution was not as strong as Mason had liked — he wanted Virginia to threaten to cut off tobacco — Mason worked in the following years for non @-@ importation . The repeal of most of the Townshend duties ( excepting that on tea ) made his task more difficult . In March 1773 , his wife Ann died of illness contracted after another pregnancy . Mason was the sole parent to nine children , and his commitments made him even more reluctant to accept political office that would take him from Gunston Hall . 
 In May 1774 , Mason was in Williamsburg on real estate business . Word had just arrived of the passage of the Intolerable Acts , as Americans dubbed the legislative response to the Boston Tea Party , and a group of lawmakers including Lee , Henry , and Jefferson asked Mason to join them in formulating a course of action . The Burgesses passed a resolution for a day of fasting and prayer to obtain divine intervention against " destruction of our Civil Rights " , but the governor , Lord Dunmore , dissolved the legislature rather than accept it . Mason may have helped write the resolution , and likely joined the members after the dissolution when they met at the Raleigh Tavern . 
 New elections had to be held for burgess and for delegate to the convention which had been called by the rump of the dissolved House of Burgesses , and Fairfax County 's were set for July 5 , 1774 . Washington planned to run for one seat , and tried to get Mason or Bryan Fairfax to seek the other , but both men declined . Although the poll was postponed to the 14th due to poor weather , Washington met that day with other local leaders ( including , likely , Mason ) in Alexandria and selected a committee to draft a set of resolutions , which Washington hoped would " define our Constitutional Rights " . The resulting Fairfax Resolves were largely drafted by Mason . He met with the newly elected Washington on July 17 at Mount Vernon , and stayed the night ; the two men rode together to Alexandria the following day . The 24 propositions that made up the Resolves protested loyalty to the British Crown , but denied the right of Parliament to legislate for colonies that had been settled at private expense and which had received charters from the monarch . The Resolves called for a continental congress . If Americans did not receive redress by November 1 , exports , including that of tobacco , would be cut off . The freeholders of Fairfax County approved the Resolves , appointing Mason and Washington to a special committee in the emergency . According to early Virginia historian Hugh Grigsby , at Alexandria , Mason " made his first great movement on the theatre of the Revolution " . 
 Washington took the Resolves to the Virginia Convention in Williamsburg , and although delegates made some changes , the adopted resolution closely tracks both the Fairfax Resolves , and the scheme for non @-@ exportation of tobacco Mason had proposed some years earlier . The convention elected delegates to the First Continental Congress in Philadelphia , including Lee , Washington , and Henry , and in October 1774 , Congress adopted a similar embargo . 
 Much of Mason 's efforts in 1774 and 1775 was in organizing a militia independent of the royal government . Washington by January 1775 was drilling a small force , and he and Mason purchased gunpowder for the company . Mason wrote in favor of annual election of militia officers in words that would later echo in the Virginia Declaration of Rights , " We came equal into this world , and equals shall we go out of it . All men are by nature born equally free and independent . " 
 Washington 's election as a delegate to the Second Continental Congress created a vacancy in Fairfax County 's delegation to the third Virginia Convention , and he wrote from Philadelphia in May 1775 , urging that it be filled . By this time , blood had been shed between colonial and Briton at the Battles of Lexington and Concord . Mason attempted to avoid election on the grounds of poor health and that he was needed to parent his motherless children . Nevertheless , he was elected and journeyed to Richmond , which , being further inland than Williamsburg , was deemed better protected from possible British attack . 
 When the Richmond convention began in July 1775 , Mason was assigned to crucial committees , including one attempting to raise an army to protect the colony . According to Robert A. Rutland , " Sick or healthy , Mason was needed for his ability . " Mason sponsored a non @-@ exportation measure ; it was passed by a large majority , though it had to be repealed later in the session to coordinate with one passed by Maryland . Despite pressure from many delegates , Mason refused to consider election as a delegate to the Continental Congress in place of Washington when the latter became commanding general of the Continental Army , but could not avoid election to the Committee of Safety , a powerful group that took over many functions in the governmental vacuum . When Mason proffered his resignation from this committee , it was refused . 
 = = = Declaration of Rights = = = 
 Illness forced Mason to absent himself from the Committee of Safety for several weeks in 1775 , and he did not attend the fourth convention , held in December 1775 and January 1776 . With independence from Britain widely accepted as necessary among prominent Virginians , the fifth convention , to meet in May 1776 at Williamsburg , would need to decide how Virginia would be administered henceforth , as the royal government was dead in all but name . Accordingly , the convention was seen as so important that Richard Henry Lee arranged for his temporary recall from Congress to be a part of the convention , and Jefferson tried but failed to arrange to leave Congress as well . Other notables elected to the convention were Henry , George Wythe , and a young delegate from Orange County , James Madison . Mason was elected for Fairfax County , though with great difficulty . 
 That convention , in May 1776 , unanimously instructed Jefferson and other Virginia delegates to Congress to seek " a clear and full Declaration of Independency " . At the same time , the convention resolved to pass a declaration of rights . Due to ill @-@ health , Mason did not arrive until May 18 , 1776 , after the vote , but was appointed to a committee led by Archibald Cary , which was to compose a declaration of rights and constitution . Mason was skeptical that the thirty @-@ person Cary Committee could collectively compose anything worthwhile , but was surprised at how quickly it moved — though his membership had a role in that speed . On May 24 , convention president Edmund Pendleton wrote to Jefferson about the committee 's deliberations , " as Colo . [ nel ] Mason seems to have the ascendancy in the great work , I have Sanguine hopes it will be framed so as to Answer it 's [ sic ] end , Prosperity to the Community and Security to Individuals " . 
 Mason , working in a room at the Raleigh Tavern , drafted a declaration of rights and plan of government , likely to prevent frivolous plans with no chance of adoption from being put forward . Edmund Randolph later recalled that Mason 's draft " swallowed up all the rest " . The Virginia Declaration of Rights and the 1776 Constitution of Virginia were joint works , but Mason was the main author . Mason likely worked closely with Thomas Ludwell Lee ; the earliest surviving draft shows the first ten articles in Mason 's handwriting , with the other two written by Lee . The draft for the Declaration of Rights drew on Magna Carta , the English Petition of Right of 1628 , and that nation 's 1689 Bill of Rights . Mason 's first article would be paraphrased by Jefferson soon after in drafting the American Declaration of Independence . 
 From the first article , cataloguing the rights of man , Mason derived the following articles , which make clear that the role of government is to secure and protect those rights , and if it fails to do so , the people have a right to amend or abolish it . Property could not be taken for public use without the owner 's consent , and a citizen could only be bound by a law accepted by that person or by elected representatives . If accused , a person had the right to a speedy and local trial , based on an accusation made known to him , with the right to call for evidence and witnesses in his favor . 
 When the convention began to debate the declaration , it quickly bogged down on the first sentence of Article 1 , which conservatives feared would imply that slaves were their masters ' equals . This was resolved by the convention adding the words " when they enter into a state of society " , thus excluding slaves . Mason spoke repeatedly in the five days of debate , using oratory one hearer described as " neither flowing nor smooth , but his language was strong , his manner most impressive , and strengthened by a bit of biting cynicism when provocation made it seasonable " . The Declaration of Rights was passed by the convention on June 12 , 1776 . 
 In later years , there was a flurry of contradictory statements from convention members ( including Mason ) about who composed which articles . Randolph credited Henry with Articles 15 and 16 , but the latter ( dealing with religious freedom ) , was written by Madison . Mason had imitated English law in drafting language requiring toleration of those of minority religions , but Madison insisted on full religious liberty , and Mason supported Madison 's amendment once made . 
 The committee draft , likely for the most part written by Mason , received wide publicity ( the final version much less so ) and Mason 's words " all men are born equally free and independent " were later reproduced in state constitutions from Pennsylvania to Montana ; Jefferson tweaked the prose and included the sentiments in the Declaration of Independence . In 1778 , Mason wrote that the Declaration of Rights " was closely imitated by the other United States " . This was true , as seven of the original states , and Vermont , joined Virginia in promulgating a bill of rights . Four in addition specified rights that were protected , within the body of their constitutions . Feelings were so strong in Massachusetts that voters there in 1778 rejected a constitution drafted by a convention , insisting that a bill of rights had to come first . 
 = = = Virginia constitution = = = 
 Even before the convention approved the Declaration of Rights , Mason was busy at work on a constitution for Virginia . He was not the only one occupying himself so ; Jefferson sent several versions from Philadelphia , one of which supplied the eventual constitution 's preamble . Essex County 's Meriwether Smith may have prepared a draft , but the text is unknown . As an original writing in Mason 's hand is not known , the extent to which the final draft was written by him is uncertain . Nevertheless , William Fleming on June 22 , 1776 , sent Jefferson a copy of the draft before the Cary Committee , telling him " the inclosed [ sic ] printed plan was drawn by Colo . G. Mason and by him laid before the committee " . 
 Mason had submitted his plan sometime between June 8 and 10 , 1776 . It named the new state the " Commonwealth of Virginia " , a name chosen pointedly by Mason to indicate that power stemmed from the people . The constitution provided for a popularly @-@ elected House of Delegates , chosen annually by men who owned or leased property , or who had fathered three or more Virginians . Most governmental power resided in the House of Delegates — the governor could not even veto a bill , and could only act as head of the state militia on the advice of his Council of State , whose members were elected by the legislature . The draft was considered by the committee , and it issued a report on June 24 , at which time Jefferson 's preamble and several amendments authored by him were included — George Wythe , who advocated for Jefferson 's draft before the committee , found discussion far enough advanced that members were only willing to yield to Jefferson on a few points . The entire convention considered the document between June 26 and 28 , and it was signed on the 29th . Richard Henry Lee wrote the day prior to the constitution 's passage by unanimous vote , " I have had the pleasure to see our new plan of Government go on well . This day will put a finishing hand to it . ' Tis very much of the democratic kind . " 
 When the convention chose Patrick Henry as Virginia 's first post @-@ independence governor , Mason led the committee of notables sent to inform Henry of his election . There was criticism of the constitution — Edmund Randolph later wrote that the document 's faults indicated that even such a great mind as Mason 's was not immune from " oversights and <unk> " : it did not have an amending process , and granted two delegates to each county regardless of population . The 1776 constitution remained in force until 1830 , when another convention replaced it . According to Henry C. <unk> in his journal article on Mason , " The Virginia Constitution of 1776 , whatever may have been the question raised long afterwards as to the contribution of other great leaders , stands , on the authority of Jefferson , Madison , and Randolph — to mention only the highest authority — as his creation . " 
 = = Wartime legislator = = 
 Mason devoted much effort , during the American Revolutionary War , to safeguarding Fairfax County and the rivers of Virginia , since the British several times raided areas along the Potomac . Control of the rivers and of Chesapeake Bay was urgent as Virginians tried to obtain hard currency by trading tobacco to the French and other European nations . The export of tobacco , generally via the West Indies , allowed Mason and others to obtain , via France and Holland , British @-@ made items such as cloth , clothing patterns , medicines , and hardware . 
 Mason served as a member of the House of Delegates from 1776 to 1781 , his longest continuous political service outside Fairfax County , which he represented in Richmond . The other Fairfax County seat turned over several times — Washington 's stepson Jackie Custis was elected late in the war — but Mason remained the county 's choice throughout . Nevertheless , Mason 's health often caused him to miss meetings of the legislature , or to arrive days or weeks late . Mason in 1777 was assigned to a committee to revise Virginia 's laws , with the expectation that he would take on the criminal code and land law . Mason served a few months on the committee before resigning on the ground he was not a lawyer ; most of the work fell to Jefferson ( returned from Philadelphia ) , Pendleton , and Wythe . Due to illness caused by a botched smallpox inoculation , Mason was forced to miss part of the legislature 's spring 1777 session ; in his absence delegates on May 22 elected him to the Continental Congress . Mason , who may have been angry that Lee had not been chosen , refused on the ground that he was needed at home , and did not feel he could resign from the General Assembly without permission from his constituents . Lee was elected in his place . 
 This did not end the desire of Virginians to send Mason to the Continental Congress . In 1779 , Lee resigned from Congress , expressing the hope that Mason , Wythe , or Jefferson would replace him in Philadelphia . General Washington was frustrated at the reluctance of many talented men to serve in Congress , writing to Benjamin Harrison that the states " should compel their ablest men to attend Congress ... Where is Mason , Wythe , Jefferson , Nicholas , Pendleton , Nelson ? " The general wrote to Mason directly , 
 Where are our men of abilities ? Why do they not come forth to serve their Country ? Let this voice my dear Sir call upon you — Jefferson & others — do not from a mistaken opinion that we are about to set down under our own Vine and our own fig tree let our heretofore noble struggle end in <unk> . 
 In spite of Washington 's pleas , Mason remained in Virginia , plagued by illness and heavily occupied , both on the Committee of Safety and elsewhere in defending the Fairfax County area . Most of the legislation Mason introduced in the House of Delegates was war related , often aimed at raising the men or money needed by Congress for Washington 's Continental Army . The new federal and state governments , short on cash , issued paper money . By 1777 , the value of Virginia 's paper money had dropped precipitously , and Mason developed a plan to redeem the notes with a tax on real estate . Due to illness , Mason was three weeks late in arriving at Richmond , to the frustration of Washington , who had faith in Mason 's knowledge of financial affairs . The general wrote to Custis , " It is much to be wished that a remedy could be applied to the depreciation of our Currency ... I know of no person better qualified to do this than Colonel Mason " . 
 Mason retained his interest in western affairs , hoping in vain to salvage the Ohio Company 's land grant . He , with Jefferson , were among the few delegates to be told of George Rogers Clark 's expedition to secure control of the lands north of the Ohio River . Mason and Jefferson secured legislation authorizing Governor Henry to defend against unspecified western enemies . The expedition was generally successful , and Mason received a report directly from Clark . Mason sought to remove differences between Virginia and other states , and although he felt the settlement of the boundary dispute with Pennsylvania , the Mason @-@ Dixon line ( not named for George Mason ) was unfavorable to Virginia , in 1780 he voted for it enthusiastically . Also in 1780 , Mason remarried , to Sarah Brent , from a nearby plantation , who had never been married and was 52 years old . It was a marriage of convenience , with the new bride able to take some of the burden of parenting Mason 's many children off his hands . 
 = = Peace ( 1781 – 1786 ) = = 
 By the signing of the 1783 Treaty of Paris , life along the Potomac had returned to normal . Among the visits between the elite that returned with peace was one by Madison to Gunston Hall in December 1783 , while returning from Congress in Philadelphia . The 1781 Articles of Confederation had tied the states in a loose bond , and Madison sought a sounder federal structure , seeking the proper balance between federal and state rights . He found Mason willing to consider a federal tax ; Madison had feared the subject might offend his host , and wrote to Jefferson of the evening 's conversation . The same month , Mason spent Christmas at Mount Vernon ( the only larger estate than his in Fairfax County ) . A fellow houseguest described Mason as " slight in figure , but not tall , and has a grand head and clear gray eyes " . Mason retained his political influence in Virginia , writing Patrick Henry , who had been elected to the House of Delegates , a letter filled with advice as that body 's 1783 session opened . 
 Mason scuttled efforts to elect him to the House of Delegates in 1784 , writing that sending him to Richmond would be " an oppressive and unjust invasion of my personal liberty " . His refusal disappointed Jefferson , who had hoped that the likelihood that the legislature would consider land legislation would attract Mason to Richmond . The legislature nevertheless appointed Mason a commissioner to negotiate with Maryland over navigation of the Potomac . Mason spent much time on this issue , and reached agreement with Maryland delegates at the meeting in March 1785 known as the Mount Vernon Conference . Although the meeting at Washington 's home came later to be seen as a first step towards the 1787 Constitutional Convention , Mason saw it simply as efforts by two states to resolve differences between them . Mason was appointed to the Annapolis Convention of 1786 , at which representatives of all the states were welcome , but like most delegates did not attend . The sparsely @-@ attended Annapolis meeting called for a conference to consider amendments to the Articles of Confederation . 
 To deter smuggling , Madison proposed a bill to make Norfolk the state 's only legal port of entry . Five other ports , including Alexandria , were eventually added , but the Port Act proved unpopular despite the support of Washington . Mason , an opponent of the act , accepted election to the House of Delegates in 1786 , and many believed his influence would prove decisive for the repeal effort . Due to illness , Mason did not come to Richmond during the initial session , though he sent a petition , as a private citizen , to the legislature . The Port Act survived , though additional harbors were added as legal entry points . 
 = = Constitutional convention ( 1787 ) = = 
 = = = Building a constitution = = = 
 Although the Annapolis Convention saw only about a dozen delegates attend , representing only five states , it called for a meeting to be held in Philadelphia in May 1787 , to devise amendments to the Articles of Confederation which would result in a more durable constitutional arrangement . Accordingly , in December 1786 , the Virginia General Assembly elected seven men as the commonwealth 's delegation : Washington , Mason , Henry , Randolph , Madison , Wythe , and John Blair . Henry declined appointment , and his place was given to Dr. James McClurg . Randolph , who had just been elected governor , sent three notifications of election to Mason , who accepted without any quibbles . The roads were difficult because of spring flooding , and Mason was the last Virginia delegate to arrive , on May 17 , three days after the convention 's scheduled opening . But it was not until May 25 that the convention formally opened , with the arrival of at least one delegate from ten of the twelve states which sent representatives ( Rhode Island sent no one ) . 
 The journey to Philadelphia was Mason 's first beyond Virginia and Maryland . According to Josephine T. Pacheco in her article about Mason 's role at Philadelphia , " since Virginia 's leaders regarded [ Mason ] as a wise , trustworthy man , it is not surprising that they chose him as a member of the Virginia delegation , though they must have been surprised when he accepted the appointment " . Broadwater suggested that Mason went to Philadelphia because he knew the federal congress needed additional power , and because he felt that body could act as a check on the powers of state legislatures . As the Virginians waited for the other delegates to arrive , they met each day and formulated what became known as the Virginia Plan . They also did some sightseeing , and were presented to Pennsylvania 's president , Benjamin Franklin . Within a week of arrival , Mason was bored with the social events to which the delegates were invited , " I begin to grow tired of the etiquette and nonsense so fashionable in this city " . 
 Going into the convention , Mason wanted to see a more powerful central government than under the Articles , but not one that would threaten local interests . He feared the more numerous Northern states would dominate the union , and would impose restrictions on trade that would harm Virginia , so he sought a supermajority requirement for navigation acts As was his constant objective , he sought to preserve the liberty he and other free white males enjoyed in Virginia , guarding against the tyranny he and others had decried under British rule . He also sought a balance of powers , seeking thereby to make a durable government ; according to historian Brent Tarter , " Mason designed his home [ Gunston Hall ] so that no misplaced window or missing support might spoil the effect or threaten to bring down the roof ; he tried to design institutions of government in the same way , so that wicked or unprincipled men could not knock loose any safeguards of liberty " . 
 Mason had hope , coming into the convention , that it would yield a result that he felt would strengthen the United States . Impressed by the quality of the delegates , Mason expected sound thinking from them , something he did not think he had often encountered in his political career . Still , he felt that the " hopes of all the Union centre [ sic ] in this Convention " , and wrote to his son George , " the revolt from Great Britain & the Formations of our new Government at that time , were nothing compared with the great Business now before us . " 
 Mason knew few of the delegates who were not from Virginia or Maryland , but his reputation preceded him . Once delegates representing sufficient states had arrived in Philadelphia by late May , the convention held closed sessions at the Pennsylvania State House ( today , Independence Hall ) . Washington was elected the convention 's president by unanimous vote , and his tremendous personal prestige as the victorious war general helped legitimize the convention , but also caused him to abstain from debate . Mason had no such need to remain silent , and only four or five delegates spoke as frequently as he did . Though he ended up not signing the constitution , according to Broadwater , Mason won as many convention debates as he lost . 
 In the early days of the convention , Mason supported much of the Virginia Plan , which was introduced by Randolph on May 29 . This plan would have a popularly @-@ elected lower house which would choose the members of the upper house from lists provided by the states . Most of the delegates had found the weak government under the Articles insufficient , and Randolph proposed that the new federal government should be supreme over the states . Mason agreed that the federal government should be more powerful than the states . 
 The Virginia Plan , if implemented , would base representation in both houses of the federal legislature on population . This was unsatisfactory to the smaller states . Delaware 's delegates had been instructed to seek an equal vote for each state , and this became the New Jersey Plan , introduced by that state 's governor , William Paterson . The divisions in the convention became apparent in late June , when by a narrow vote , the convention voted that representation in the lower house be based on population , but the motion of Connecticut 's Oliver Ellsworth for each state to have an equal vote in the upper house failed on a tie . With the convention deadlocked , on July 2 , 1787 , a Grand Committee was formed , with one member from each state , to seek a way out . Mason had not taken as strong a position on the legislature as had Madison , and he was appointed to the committee ; Mason and Benjamin Franklin were the most prominent members . The committee met over the convention 's July 4 recess , and proposed what became known as the Great Compromise : a House of Representatives based on population , in which money bills must originate , and a Senate with equal representation for each state . Records do not survive of Mason 's participation in that committee , but the clause requiring money bills to start in the House most likely came from him or was the price of his support , as he had inserted such a clause in the Virginia Constitution , and he defended that clause once convention debate resumed . According to Madison 's notes , Mason urged the convention to adopt the compromise : 
 However liable the Report [ of the Grand Committee ] might be to objections , he thought it preferable to an appeal to the world by the different sides , as had been talked of by some Gentlemen . It could not be more inconvenient to any gentleman to remain absent from his private affairs , than it was for him : but he would bury his bones in this city rather than expose his Country to the Consequences of a dissolution of the Convention without any thing being done . 
 = = = Road to dissent = = = 
 By mid @-@ July , as delegates began to move past the stalemate to a framework built upon the Great Compromise , Mason had considerable influence in the convention . North Carolina 's William Blount was unhappy that those from his state " were in Sentiment with Virginia who seemed to take the lead . Madison at their Head tho Randolph and Mason also great " . Mason had failed to carry his proposals that senators must own property and not be in debt to the United States , but successfully argued that the minimum age for service in Congress should be 25 , telling the convention that men younger than that were too immature . Mason was the first to propose that the national seat of government not be in a state capital lest the local legislature be too influential , voted against proposals to base representation on a state 's wealth or taxes paid , and supported regular reapportionment of the House of Representatives . 
 On August 6 , 1787 , the convention received a tentative draft written by a Committee of Detail chaired by South Carolina 's John Rutledge ; Randolph had represented Virginia . The draft was acceptable to Mason as a basis for discussion , containing such points important to him as the requirement that money bills originate in the House and not be amendable in the Senate . Nevertheless , Mason felt the upper house was too powerful , as it had the powers to make treaties , appoint Supreme Court justices , and adjudicate territorial disputes between the states . The draft lacked provision for a council of revision , something Mason and others considered a serious lack . 
 The convention spent several weeks in August in debating the powers of Congress . Although Mason was successful in some of his proposals , such as placing the state militias under federal regulation , and a ban on Congress passing an export tax , he lost on some that he deemed crucial . These losses included the convention deciding to allow importation of slaves to continue to at least 1800 ( later amended to 1808 ) and to allow a simple majority to pass navigation acts that might require Virginians to export their tobacco in American @-@ flagged ships , when it might be cheaper to use foreign @-@ flagged vessels . The convention also weakened the requirement that money bills begin in the House and not be subject to amendment in the Senate , eventually striking the latter clause after debate that stretched fitfully over weeks . Despite these defeats , Mason continued to work constructively to build a constitution , serving on another grand committee that considered customs duties and ports . 
 On August 31 , 1787 , Massachusetts ' Elbridge Gerry spoke against the document as a whole , as did Luther Martin of Maryland . When Gerry moved to postpone consideration of the final document , Mason seconded him , stating , according to Madison , that " he would sooner chop off his right hand than put it to the Constitution as it now stands " Still , Mason did not rule out signing it , saying that he wanted to see how certain matters still before the convention were settled before deciding a final position , whether to sign or ask for a second convention . As the final touches were made to the constitution , Mason and Gerry held meetings in the evening to discuss strategy , bringing in delegates representing states from Connecticut to Georgia . 
 Mason 's misgivings about the constitution were increased on September 12 , when Gerry proposed and Mason seconded that there be a committee appointed to write a bill of rights , to be part of the text of the constitution . Connecticut 's Roger Sherman noted that the state bills of rights would remain in force , to which Mason responded , " the Laws of the United States are to be paramount [ supreme ] to State Bills of Rights . " Although Massachusetts abstained in deference to Gerry , the Virginians showed no desire to conciliate Mason in their votes , as the motion failed with no states in favor and ten opposed . Also on September 12 , the Committee on Style , charged with making a polished final draft of the document , reported , and Mason began to list objections on his copy . On the 15th , as the convention continued a clause @-@ by @-@ clause consideration of the draft , Mason , Randolph and Gerry stated they would not sign the constitution . 
 On the 17th , members of the twelve delegations then present in Philadelphia signed the constitution , except for the three men who had stated they would not . As the document was sent to the Articles of Confederation 's Congress in New York , Mason sent a copy of his objections to Richard Henry Lee , a member of the Congress . 
 = = Ratification battle = = 
 Broadwater noted , " given the difficulty of the task he had set for himself , his stubborn independence , and his lack , by 1787 , of any concern for his own political future , it is not surprising that he left Philadelphia at odds with the great majority of his fellow delegates " . Madison recorded that Mason , believing that the convention had given his proposals short shrift in a hurry to complete its work , began his journey back to Virginia " in an exceeding ill humor " . Mason biographer Helen Hill Miller noted that before Mason returned to Gunston Hall , he was injured in body as well as spirit , due to an accident on the road . Word of Mason 's opposition stance had reached Fairfax County even before the convention ended ; most local sentiment was in favor of the document . Washington made a statement urging ratification , but otherwise remained silent , knowing he would almost certainly be the first president . Mason sent Washington a copy of his objections , but the general believed that the only choice was ratification or disaster . 
 The constitution was to be ratified by state conventions , with nine approvals necessary for it to come into force . In practice , opposition by large states such as New York or Virginia would make it hard for the new government to function . Mason remained a member of the House of Delegates , and in late October 1787 , the legislature called a convention for June 1788 ; in language crafted by John Marshall , it decreed that the Virginia Ratifying Convention would be allowed " free and ample discussion " . Mason was less influential in his final session in the House of Delegates because of his strong opposition to ratification , and his age ( 61 ) may also have caused him to be less effective . 
 As smaller states ratified the constitution in late 1787 and early 1788 , there was an immense quantity of pamphlets and other written matter for and against approval . Most prominent in support were the pamphlets later collected as The Federalist , written by Madison and two New Yorkers , Alexander Hamilton and John Jay ; Mason 's objections were widely cited by opponents . Mason had begun his Objections to this Constitution of Government in Philadelphia ; in October 1787 , it was published , though without his permission . Madison complained that Mason had gone beyond the reasons for opposing he had stated in convention , but Broadwater suggested the major difference was one of tone , since the written work dismissed as useless the constitution and the proposed federal government . Nevertheless , both Lee and Mason believed that if proper amendments were made , the constitution would be a fine instrument of governance . The Objections were widely cited in opposition to ratification , and Mason was criticized for placing his own name on it , at a time when political tracts were signed , if at all , with pen names such as Junius , so that the author 's reputation would not influence the debate . Despite this , Mason 's Objections were among the most influential Anti @-@ Federalist works , and its opening line , " There is no Declaration of Rights " , likely their most effective slogan . 
 Virginians were reluctant to believe that greatly respected figures such as Washington and Franklin would be complicit in setting up a tyrannical system . There were broad attacks on Mason ; the New Haven Gazette suggested that he had not done much for his country during the war , in marked contrast to Washington . Oliver Ellsworth blamed the Virginia opposition on the Lee family , who had long had tensions with the Washington family , and on " the madness of Mason " . Tarter , in his American National Biography article on Mason , wrote that " the rigidity of [ Mason 's ] views and his increasingly belligerent personality produced an intolerance and intemperance in his behavior that surprised and angered Madison , with whom he had worked closely at the beginning of the convention , and Washington , who privately condemned Mason 's actions during the ratification struggle . " 
 Mason faced difficulties in being elected to the ratifying convention from Fairfax County , since most freeholders there were Federalist , and he was at odds with many in Alexandria over local politics . The statute governing elections to the convention in Richmond allowed him to seek election elsewhere , and he campaigned for a seat from Stafford County , assuring electors that he did not seek disunion , but rather reform . He spoke against the unamended constitution in strong terms ; George Nicholas , a Federalist friend of Mason , believed that Mason felt he could lead Virginia to gain concessions from the other states , and that he was embittered by the continuing attacks on him . On March 10 , 1788 , Mason finished first in the polls in Stafford County , winning one of its two seats ; he apparently was the only person elected for a constituency in which he did not live . Voter turnout was low , as many in remote areas without newspapers knew little about the constitution . The Federalists were believed to have a slight advantage in elected delegates ; Mason thought that the convention would be unlikely to ratify the document without demanding amendments . 
 By the time the Richmond convention opened , Randolph had abandoned the Anti @-@ Federalist cause , which damaged efforts by Mason and Henry to co @-@ ordinate with their counterparts in New York . Mason moved that the convention consider the document clause by clause , which may have played into the hands of the Federalists , who feared what the outcome of an immediate vote might be , and who had more able leadership in Richmond , including Marshall and Madison . Nevertheless , Broadwater suggested that as most delegates had declared their views before the election , Mason 's motion made little difference . Henry , far more a foe of a strong federal government than was Mason , took the lead for his side in the debate . Mason spoke several times in the discussion , on topics ranging from the pardon power ( which he predicted the president would use corruptly ) to the federal judiciary , which he warned would lead to suits in the federal courts by citizens against states where they did not live . John Marshall , a future Chief Justice of the United States , downplayed the concern regarding the judiciary , but Mason would later be proved correct in the case of Chisholm v. Georgia ( 1793 ) , which led to the passage of the Eleventh Amendment . 
 The federalists initially did not have a majority , with the balance held by undeclared delegates , mainly from western Virginia ( today 's Kentucky ) . The Anti @-@ Federalists suffered repeated blows during the convention due to the defection of Randolph and as news came other states had ratified . Mason led a group of Anti @-@ Federalists which drafted amendments : even the Federalists were open to supporting them , though the constitution 's supporters wanted the document drafted in Philadelphia ratified first . 
 After some of the Kentuckians had declared for ratification , the convention considered a resolution to withhold ratification pending the approval of a declaration of rights . Supported by Mason but opposed by Madison , Light @-@ Horse Harry Lee , Marshall , Nicholas , Randolph and Bushrod Washington , the resolution failed , 88 — 80 . Mason then voted in the minority as Virginia ratified the constitution on June 25 , 1788 by a vote of 89 – 79 . Following the ratification vote , Mason served on a committee chaired by George Wythe , charged with compiling a final list of recommended amendments , and Mason 's draft was adopted , but for a few editorial changes . <unk> to the result , Mason prepared a fiery written argument , but some felt the tone too harsh and Mason agreed not to publish it . 
 = = Final years = = 
 Defeated at Richmond , Mason returned to Gunston Hall , where he devoted himself to family and local affairs , though still keeping up a vigorous correspondence with political leaders . He resigned from the Fairfax County Court after an act passed by the new Congress required officeholders to take an oath to support the constitution , and in 1790 declined a seat in the Senate which had been left vacant by William Grayson 's death , stating that his health would not permit him to serve , even if he had no other objection . The seat went to James Monroe , who had supported Mason 's Anti @-@ Federalist stance , and who had , in 1789 , lost to Madison for a seat in the House of Representatives . Judging by his correspondence , Mason softened his stance towards the new federal government , telling Monroe that the constitution " wisely & Properly directs " that ambassadors be confirmed by the Senate . Although Mason predicted that the amendments to be proposed to the states by the First Congress would be " Milk & Water Propositions " , he displayed " much Satisfaction " at what became the Bill of Rights ( ratified in 1791 ) and wrote that if his concerns about the federal courts and other matters were addressed , " I could cheerfully put my Hand & Heart to the new Government " . 
 Washington , who was in 1789 elected the first president , resented Mason 's strong stances against the ratification of the constitution , and these differences destroyed their friendship . Although some sources accept that Mason dined at Mount Vernon on November 2 , 1788 , Peter R. Henriques noted that Washington 's diary states that Mr. George Mason was the guest , and as Washington , elsewhere in his diary , always referred to his former colleague at Philadelphia as Colonel Mason , the visitor was likely George Mason V , the son . Mason always wrote positively of Washington , and the president said nothing publicly , but in a letter referred to Mason as a " quondam friend " who would not recant his position on the constitution because " pride on the one hand , and want of manly candour on the other , will not I am certain let him acknowledge error in his opinions respecting it [ the federal government ] though conviction should flash on his mind as strongly as a ray of light " . Rutland suggested that the two men were alike in their intolerance of opponents and suspicion of their motives . 
 Mason had long battled against Alexandria merchants who he felt unfairly dominated the county court , if only because they could more easily get to the courthouse . In 1789 , he drafted legislation to move the courthouse to the center of the county , though it did not pass in his lifetime . In 1798 , the legislature passed an authorizing act , and the courthouse opened in 1801 . Most of those at Gunston Hall , both family and slaves , fell ill during the summer of 1792 , experiencing chills and fever ; when those subsided , Mason caught a chest cold . When Jefferson visited Gunston Hall on October 1 , 1792 , he found Mason , long a martyr to gout , needing a crutch to walk , though still sound in mind and memory . Additional ailments , possibly pneumonia , set in . Less than a week after Jefferson 's visit , on October 7 , George Mason died at Gunston Hall , and was subsequently buried on the estate , within sight of the house he had built and of the Potomac River . 
 Although Mason 's death attracted little notice , aside from a few mentions in local newspapers , Jefferson mourned " a great loss " . Another future president , Monroe , stated that Mason 's " patriotic virtues thro [ ugh ] the revolution will ever be remembered by the citizens of this country " . 
 = = Views on slavery = = 
 Mason owned many slaves . In Fairfax County , only George Washington owned more , and Mason is not known to have freed any even in his will , in which his slaves were divided among his children . The childless Washington , in his will , ordered his slaves be freed after his wife 's death , and Jefferson manumitted a few slaves , mostly of the Hemings family . According to Broadwater , " In all likelihood , Mason believed , or convinced himself , that he had no options . Mason would have done nothing that might have compromised the financial futures of his nine children . " Peter Wallenstein , in his article about how writers have interpreted Mason , argued that he could have freed some slaves without harming his children 's future , if he had wanted to . 
 Mason 's biographers and interpreters have long differed about how to present his views on slavery @-@ related issues . A two @-@ volume biography ( 1892 ) by Kate Mason Rowland , who Broadwater noted was " a sympathetic white southerner writing during the heyday of Jim Crow " denied that Mason ( her ancestor ) was " an abolitionist in the modern sense of the term " . She noted that Mason " regretted " that there was slavery and was against the slave trade , but wanted slavery protected in the constitution . In 1919 , Robert C. Mason published a biography of his prominent ancestor and asserted that George Mason " agreed to free his own slaves and was the first known abolitionist " , refusing to sign the constitution , among other reasons because " as it stood then it did not abolish slavery or make preparation for its gradual extinction " . Rutland , writing in 1961 , asserted that in Mason 's final days , " only the coalition [ between New England and the Deep South at the Constitutional Convention ] in Philadelphia that had bargained away any hope of eliminating slavery left a residue of disgust . " Catherine Drinker Bowen , in her widely read 1966 account of the Constitutional Convention , Miracle at Philadelphia , contended that Mason believed slaves to be citizens and was " a fervent abolitionist before the word was coined " . 
 Others took a more nuanced view . Copland and <unk> deemed Mason 's views similar to other Virginians of his class : " Mason 's experience with slave labor made him hate slavery but his heavy investment in slave property made it difficult for him to divest himself of a system that he despised " . According to Wallenstein , " whatever his occasional rhetoric , George Mason was — if one must choose — proslavery , not antislavery . He acted in behalf of Virginia slaveholders , not Virginia slaves " . Broadwater noted , " Mason consistently voiced his disapproval of slavery . His 1787 attack on slavery echoes a similar speech to the Virginia Convention of 1776 . His conduct was another matter . " 
 According to Wallenstein , historians and other writers " have had great difficulty coming to grips with Mason in his historical context , and they have jumbled the story in related ways , misleading each other and following each other 's errors " . Some of this is due to conflation of Mason 's views on slavery with that of his desire to ban the African slave trade , which he unquestionably opposed and fought against . His record otherwise is mixed : Virginia banned the importation of slaves from abroad in 1778 , while Mason was in the House of Delegates . In 1782 , after he had returned to Gunston Hall , it enacted legislation that allowed manumission of adult slaves young enough to support themselves ( not older than 45 ) , but a proposal , supported by Mason , to require freed slaves to leave Virginia within a year or be sold at auction , was defeated . Broadwater asserted , " Mason must have shared the fears of Jefferson and countless other whites that whites and free blacks could not live together " . 
 The contradiction between wanting protection for slave property , while opposing the slave trade , was pointed out by delegates to the Richmond convention such as George Nicholas , a supporter of ratification . Mason stated of slavery , " it is far from being a desirable property . But it will involve us in great difficulties and <unk> to be now deprived of them . " 
 = = Sites and remembrance = = 
 There are sites remembering George Mason in Fairfax County . Gunston Hall , donated to the Commonwealth of Virginia by its last private owner , is now " dedicated to the study of George Mason , his home and garden , and life in 18th @-@ century Virginia " . George Mason University , with its main campus adjacent to the city of Fairfax , was formerly George Mason College of the University of Virginia from 1959 until it received its present name in 1972 . A major landmark on the Fairfax campus is a statue of George Mason by Wendy M. Ross , depicted as he presents his first draft of the Virginia Declaration of Rights . 
 The George Mason Memorial Bridge , part of the 14th Street Bridge , connects Northern Virginia to Washington , D.C. The George Mason Memorial in West Potomac Park in Washington , also with a statue by Ross , was dedicated on April 9 , 2002 . 
 Mason was honored in 1981 by the United States Postal Service with an 18 @-@ cent Great Americans series postage stamp . A bas @-@ relief of Mason appears in the Chamber of the U.S. House of Representatives as one of 23 honoring great lawmakers . Mason 's image is located above and to the right of the Speaker 's chair ; he and Jefferson are the only Americans recognized . 
 = = Legacy and historical view = = 
 According to Miller , " The succession of New World constitutions of which Virginia 's , with Mason as its chief architect , was the first , declared the source of political authority to be the people ... in addition to making clear what a government was entitled to do , most of them were prefaced by a list of individual rights of the citizens ... rights whose maintenance was government 's primary reason for being . Mason wrote the first of these lists . " Diane D. <unk> , in her article prepared for the bicentennial of the U.S. Bill of Rights , wrote that Mason " made the declaration of rights as his personal crusade " . Tarter deemed Mason " celebrated as a champion of constitutional order and one of the fathers of the Bill of Rights " . Justice Sandra Day O 'Connor agreed , " George Mason 's greatest contribution to present day Constitutional law was his influence on our Bill of Rights " . 
 Mason 's legacy extended overseas , doing so even in his lifetime , and though he never visited Europe , his ideals did . Lafayette 's " Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen " was written in the early days of the French Revolution under the influence of Jefferson , the U.S. Minister to France . According to historian R.R. Palmer , " there was in fact a remarkable parallel between the French Declaration and the Virginia Declaration of 1776 " . Another scholar , Richard Morris , concurred , deeming the resemblance between the two texts " too close to be coincidental " : " the Virginia statesman George Mason might well have instituted an action of plagiarism " . 
 Donald J. Senese , in the conclusion to the collection of essays on Mason published in 1989 , noted that several factors contributed to Mason 's obscurity in the century after his death . Older than many who served at Philadelphia and came into prominence with the new federal government , Mason died soon after the constitution came into force and displayed no ambition for federal office , declining a seat in the Senate . Mason left no extensive paper trail , no autobiography like Franklin , no diary like Washington or John Adams . Washington left papers collected into 100 volumes ; for Mason , with many documents lost to fire , there are only three . Mason fought on the side that failed , both at Philadelphia and Richmond , leaving him a loser in a history written by winners — even his speeches to the Constitutional Convention descend through the pen of Madison , a supporter of ratification . After the Richmond convention , he was , according to Senese , " a prophet without honor in his own country " . 
 The increased scrutiny of Mason which has accompanied his rise from obscurity has meant , according to Tarter , that " his role in the creation of some of the most important texts of American liberty is not as clear as it seems " . Rutland suggested that Mason showed only " belated concern over the personal rights of citizens " . Focusing on Mason 's dissent from the constitution , Miller pointed to the intersectional bargain struck over navigation acts and the slave trade , " Mason lost on both counts , and the double defeat was reflected in his attitude thereafter . " Wallenstein concluded , " the personal and economic interests of Mason 's home state took precedence over a bill of rights " . 
 Whatever his motivations , Mason proved a forceful advocate for a bill of rights whose Objections helped accomplish his aims . Rutland noted that " from the opening phrase of his Objections to the Bill of Rights that James Madison offered in Congress two years later , the line is so direct that we can say that Mason forced Madison 's hand . Federalist supporters of the Constitution could not overcome the protest caused by Mason 's phrase ' There is no declaration of rights ' . " O 'Connor wrote that though " Mason lost his battle against ratification ... [ but ] his ideals and political activities have significantly influenced our constitutional jurisprudence . " Wallenstein felt that there is much to be learned from Mason : 
 A provincial slaveholding tobacco planter took his turn as a revolutionary . In tune with some of the leading intellectual currents of the Western world , he played a central role in drafting a declaration of rights and the 1776 Virginia state constitution . For his own reasons , he fought against ratifying the handiwork of the 1787 Philadelphia convention ... Two centuries later , perhaps we can come to terms with his legacy — with how far we have come , how much we have gained , whether because of him or despite him , and , too , with how much we may have lost . Surely there is much of Mason that we cherish , wish to keep , and can readily celebrate . 
 = Wilson 's disease = 
 Wilson 's disease , also called Wilson disease or <unk> degeneration , is an autosomal recessive genetic disorder in which copper accumulates in tissues ; this manifests as neurological or psychiatric symptoms and liver disease . It is treated with medication that reduces copper absorption or removes the excess copper from the body , but occasionally a liver transplant is required . 
 The condition is due to mutations in the Wilson disease protein ( ATP7B ) gene . A single abnormal copy of the gene is present in 1 in 100 people , who do not develop any symptoms ( they are carriers ) . If a child inherits the gene from both parents , the child may develop Wilson 's disease . Symptoms usually appear between the ages of 6 and 20 years , but cases in much older people have been described . Wilson 's disease occurs in 1 to 4 per 100 @,@ 000 people . It is named after Samuel Alexander Kinnier Wilson ( 1878 – 1937 ) , the British neurologist who first described the condition in 1912 . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 The main sites of copper accumulation are the liver and the brain , and consequently liver disease and neuropsychiatric symptoms are the main features that lead to diagnosis . People with liver problems tend to come to medical attention earlier , generally as children or teenagers , than those with neurological and psychiatric symptoms , who tend to be in their twenties or older . Some are identified only because relatives have been diagnosed with Wilson 's disease ; many of these , when tested , turn out to have been experiencing symptoms of the condition but have not received a diagnosis . 
 = = = Liver disease = = = 
 Liver disease may present itself as tiredness , increased bleeding tendency or confusion ( due to hepatic encephalopathy ) and portal hypertension . The latter , a condition in which the pressure in the portal vein is markedly increased , leads to esophageal varices , blood vessels in the esophagus that may bleed in a life @-@ threatening fashion , as well as enlargement of the spleen ( <unk> ) and accumulation of fluid in the abdominal cavity ( ascites ) . On examination , signs of chronic liver disease such as spider <unk> ( small distended blood vessels , usually on the chest ) may be observed . Chronic active hepatitis has caused cirrhosis of the liver in most by the time they develop symptoms . While most people with cirrhosis have an increased risk of hepatocellular carcinoma ( liver cancer ) , this risk is relatively very low in Wilson 's disease . 
 About 5 % of all people are diagnosed only when they develop fulminant acute liver failure , often in the context of a hemolytic anemia ( anemia due to the destruction of red blood cells ) . This leads to abnormalities in protein production ( identified by deranged coagulation ) and metabolism by the liver . The deranged protein metabolism leads to the accumulation of waste products such as ammonia in the bloodstream . When these irritate the brain , the person develops hepatic encephalopathy ( confusion , coma , seizures and finally life @-@ threatening swelling of the brain ) . 
 = = = Neuropsychiatric symptoms = = = 
 About half the people with Wilson 's disease have neurological or psychiatric symptoms . Most initially have mild cognitive deterioration and clumsiness , as well as changes in behavior . Specific neurological symptoms usually then follow , often in the form of parkinsonism ( cogwheel rigidity , bradykinesia or slowed movements and a lack of balance are the most common parkinsonian features ) with or without a typical hand tremor , masked facial expressions , slurred speech , ataxia ( lack of coordination ) or dystonia ( twisting and repetitive movements of part of the body ) . Seizures and migraine appear to be more common in Wilson 's disease . A characteristic tremor described as " wing @-@ beating tremor " is encountered in many people with Wilson 's ; this is absent at rest but can be provoked by extending the arms . 
 Cognition can also be affected in Wilson 's disease . This comes in two , not mutually exclusive , categories : frontal lobe disorder ( may present as impulsivity , impaired judgement , promiscuity , apathy and executive dysfunction with poor planning and decision making ) and subcortical dementia ( may present as slow thinking , memory loss and executive dysfunction , without signs of aphasia , apraxia or agnosia ) . It is suggested that these cognitive involvements are related and closely linked to psychiatric manifestations of the disease . 
 Psychiatric problems due to Wilson 's disease may include behavioral changes , depression , anxiety and psychosis . Psychiatric symptoms are commonly seen in conjunction with neurological symptoms and are rarely manifested on their own . These symptoms are often poorly defined and can sometimes be attributed to other causes . Because of this , diagnosis of Wilson 's disease is rarely made when only psychiatric symptoms are present . 
 = = = Other organ systems = = = 
 Medical conditions have been linked with copper accumulation in Wilson 's disease : 
 Eyes : Kayser – Fleischer rings ( KF rings ) , a pathognomonic sign , may be visible in the cornea of the eyes , either directly or on slit lamp examination as deposits of copper in a ring around the cornea . They are due to copper deposition in Descemet 's membrane . They do not occur in all people with Wilson 's disease . Wilson 's disease is also associated with sunflower cataracts exhibited by brown or green pigmentation of the anterior and posterior lens capsule . Neither cause significant visual loss . KF rings occur in approximately 66 % of diagnosed cases ( more often in those with neurological symptoms rather than with liver problems ) . 
 Kidneys : renal tubular acidosis ( Type 2 ) , a disorder of bicarbonate handling by the proximal tubules leads to <unk> ( calcium accumulation in the kidneys ) , a weakening of bones ( due to calcium and phosphate loss ) , and occasionally <unk> ( loss of essential amino acids needed for protein synthesis ) . 
 Heart : cardiomyopathy ( weakness of the heart muscle ) is a rare but recognized problem in Wilson 's disease ; it may lead to heart failure ( fluid accumulation due to decreased pump function ) and cardiac arrhythmias ( episodes of irregular and / or abnormally fast or slow heart beat ) . 
 Hormones : hypoparathyroidism ( failure of the parathyroid glands leading to low calcium levels ) , infertility , and habitual abortion . 
 = = Genetics = = 
 The Wilson 's disease gene ( ATP7B ) has been mapped to chromosome 13 ( <unk> ) and is expressed primarily in the liver , kidney , and placenta . The gene codes for a P @-@ type ( cation transport enzyme ) ATPase that transports copper into bile and incorporates it into ceruloplasmin . Mutations can be detected in 90 % . Most ( 60 % ) are homozygous for ATP7B mutations ( two abnormal copies ) , and 30 % have only one abnormal copy . Ten percent have no detectable mutation . 
 Although 300 mutations of ATP7B have been described , in most populations the cases of Wilson 's disease are due to a small number of mutations specific for that population . For instance , in Western populations the <unk> mutation ( replacement of a histidine by a glutamine at position 1069 in the protein ) is present in 37 – 63 % of cases , while in China this mutation is very uncommon and <unk> ( arginine to leucine at 778 ) is found more often . Relatively little is known about the relative impact of various mutations , although the <unk> mutation seems to predict later onset and predominantly neurological problems , according to some studies . 
 A normal variation in the PRNP gene can modify the course of the disease by delaying the age of onset and affecting the type of symptoms that develop . This gene produces prion protein , which is active in the brain and other tissues and also appears to be involved in transporting copper . A role for the <unk> gene was initially suspected but could not be confirmed . 
 The condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern . In order to inherit it , both of the parents of an individual must carry an affected gene . Most have no family history of the condition . People with only one abnormal gene are called carriers ( heterozygotes ) and may have mild , but medically insignificant , abnormalities of copper metabolism . 
 Wilson 's disease is the most common of a group of hereditary diseases that cause copper overload in the liver . All can cause cirrhosis at a young age . The other members of the group are Indian childhood cirrhosis ( ICC ) , endemic Tyrolean infantile cirrhosis and idiopathic copper toxicosis . These are not related to ATP7B mutations : for example , ICC has been linked to mutations in the <unk> and the <unk> gene . 
 = = Pathophysiology = = 
 Copper is needed by the body for a number of functions , predominantly as a cofactor for a number of enzymes such as ceruloplasmin , cytochrome c oxidase , dopamine β @-@ hydroxylase , superoxide dismutase and tyrosinase . 
 Copper enters the body through the digestive tract . A transporter protein on the cells of the small bowel , copper membrane transporter 1 ( <unk> ; <unk> ) , carries copper inside the cells , where some is bound to metallothionein and part is carried by <unk> to an organelle known as the trans @-@ Golgi network . Here , in response to rising concentrations of copper , an enzyme called <unk> releases copper into the portal vein to the liver . Liver cells also carry the <unk> protein , and metallothionein and <unk> bind it inside the cell , but here it is ATP7B that links copper to ceruloplasmin and releases it into the bloodstream , as well as removing excess copper by secreting it into bile . Both functions of ATP7B are impaired in Wilson 's disease . Copper accumulates in the liver tissue ; ceruloplasmin is still secreted , but in a form that lacks copper ( termed <unk> ) and is rapidly degraded in the bloodstream . 
 When the amount of copper in the liver overwhelms the proteins that normally bind it , it causes oxidative damage through a process known as Fenton chemistry ; this damage eventually leads to chronic active hepatitis , fibrosis ( deposition of connective tissue ) and cirrhosis . The liver also releases copper into the bloodstream that is not bound to ceruloplasmin . This free copper precipitates throughout the body but particularly in the kidneys , eyes and brain . In the brain , most copper is deposited in the basal ganglia , particularly in the <unk> and globus pallidus ( together called the lenticular nucleus ) ; these areas normally participate in the coordination of movement as well as playing a significant role in neurocognitive processes such as the processing of stimuli and mood regulation . Damage to these areas , again by Fenton chemistry , produces the neuropsychiatric symptoms seen in Wilson 's disease . 
 It is not clear why Wilson 's disease causes hemolysis , but various lines of evidence suggest that a high level of free ( non @-@ ceruloplasmin bound ) copper has a direct effect on either oxidation of hemoglobin , inhibition of energy @-@ supplying enzymes in the red blood cell , or direct damage to the cell membrane . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 Wilson 's disease may be suspected on the basis of any of the symptoms mentioned above , or when a close relative has been found to have Wilson 's . Most have slightly abnormal liver function tests such as a raised aspartate transaminase , alanine transaminase and bilirubin level . If the liver damage is significant , albumin may be decreased due to an inability of damaged liver cells to produce this protein ; likewise , the prothrombin time ( a test of coagulation ) may be prolonged as the liver is unable to produce proteins known as clotting factors . Alkaline phosphatase levels are relatively low in those with Wilson 's @-@ related acute liver failure . If there are neurological symptoms , magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) of the brain is usually performed ; this shows <unk> in the part of the brain called the basal ganglia in the T2 setting . MRI may also demonstrate the characteristic " face of the giant panda " pattern . 
 There is no totally reliable test for Wilson 's disease , but levels of ceruloplasmin and copper in the blood , as well of the amount of copper excreted in urine during a 24 @-@ hour period , are together used to form an impression of the amount of copper in the body . The gold standard — or most ideal test — is a liver biopsy . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Levels of ceruloplasmin are abnormally low ( < 0 @.@ 2 g / L ) in 80 – 95 % of cases . It can , however , be present at normal levels in people with ongoing inflammation as it is an acute phase protein . Low ceruloplasmin is also found in Menkes disease and <unk> , which are related to , but much rarer than Wilson 's disease . 
 The combination of neurological symptoms , Kayser – Fleischer rings and a low ceruloplasmin level is considered sufficient for the diagnosis of Wilson 's disease . In many cases , however , further tests are needed . 
 = = = Serum and urine copper = = = 
 Serum copper is low , which may seem paradoxical given that Wilson 's disease is a disease of copper excess . However , 95 % of plasma copper is carried by <unk> which is often low in Wilson 's disease . Urine copper is elevated in Wilson 's disease and is collected for 24 hours in a bottle with a copper @-@ free liner . Levels above 100 μg / 24h ( 1 @.@ 6 μmol / 24h ) confirm Wilson 's disease , and levels above 40 μg / 24h ( 0 @.@ 6 μmol / 24h ) are strongly indicative . High urine copper levels are not unique to Wilson 's disease ; they are sometimes observed in autoimmune hepatitis and in <unk> ( any disease obstructing the flow of bile from the liver to the small bowel ) . 
 In children , the penicillamine test may be used . A 500 mg oral dose of penicillamine is administered , and urine collected for 24 hours . If this contains more than 1600 μg ( 25 μmol ) , it is a reliable indicator of Wilson 's disease . This test has not been validated in adults . 
 = = = Liver biopsy = = = 
 Once other investigations have indicated Wilson 's disease , the ideal test is the removal of a small amount of liver tissue through a liver biopsy . This is assessed microscopically for the degree of steatosis and cirrhosis , and <unk> and quantification of copper are used to measure the severity of the copper accumulation . A level of 250 μg of copper per gram of dried liver tissue confirms Wilson 's disease . Occasionally , lower levels of copper are found ; in that case , the combination of the biopsy findings with all other tests could still lead to a formal diagnosis of Wilson 's . 
 In the earlier stages of the disease , the biopsy typically shows steatosis ( deposition of fatty material ) , increased glycogen in the nucleus , and areas of necrosis ( cell death ) . In more advanced disease , the changes observed are quite similar to those seen in autoimmune hepatitis , such as infiltration by inflammatory cells , piecemeal necrosis and fibrosis ( scar tissue ) . In advanced disease , finally , cirrhosis is the main finding . In acute liver failure , degeneration of the liver cells and collapse of the liver tissue architecture is seen , typically on a background of cirrhotic changes . <unk> methods for detecting copper are inconsistent and unreliable , and taken alone are regarded as insufficient to establish a diagnosis . 
 = = = Genetic testing = = = 
 Mutation analysis of the ATP7B gene , as well as other genes linked to copper accumulation in the liver , may be performed . Once a mutation is confirmed , it is possible to screen family members for the disease as part of clinical genetics family counseling . Regional distributions of genes associated with Wilson 's disease are important to follow , as this can help clinicians design appropriate screening strategies . Since mutations of the WD gene vary between populations , research and genetic testing done in countries like the USA or United Kingdom can pose problems as they tend to have more mixed populations . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 = = = Dietary = = = 
 In general , a diet low in copper @-@ containing foods is recommended with the avoidance of mushrooms , nuts , chocolate , dried fruit , liver , and shellfish . 
 = = = Medication = = = 
 Medical treatments are available for Wilson 's disease . Some increase the removal of copper from the body , while others prevent the absorption of copper from the diet . 
 Generally , penicillamine is the first treatment used . This binds copper ( chelation ) and leads to excretion of copper in the urine . Hence , monitoring of the amount of copper in the urine can be done to ensure a sufficiently high dose is taken . <unk> is not without problems : about 20 % experience a side effect or complication of penicillamine treatment , such as drug @-@ induced lupus ( causing joint pains and a skin rash ) or myasthenia ( a nerve condition leading to muscle weakness ) . In those who presented with neurological symptoms , almost half experience a paradoxical worsening in their symptoms . While this phenomenon is observed in other treatments for Wilson 's , it is usually taken as an indication for discontinuing penicillamine and commencing second @-@ line treatment . Those intolerant to penicillamine may instead be commenced on trientine hydrochloride , which also has chelating properties . Some recommend trientine as first @-@ line treatment , but experience with penicillamine is more extensive . A further agent , under clinical investigation by Wilson Therapeutics , with known activity in Wilson 's disease is tetrathiomolybdate . This is regarded as experimental , though some studies have shown a beneficial effect . 
 Once all results have returned to normal , zinc ( usually in the form of a zinc acetate prescription called <unk> ) may be used instead of chelators to maintain stable copper levels in the body . Zinc stimulates metallothionein , a protein in gut cells that binds copper and prevents their absorption and transport to the liver . Zinc therapy is continued unless symptoms recur or if the urinary excretion of copper increases . 
 In rare cases where none of the oral treatments are effective , especially in severe neurological disease , dimercaprol ( British anti @-@ Lewisite ) is occasionally necessary . This treatment is injected intramuscularly ( into a muscle ) every few weeks and has unpleasant side effects such as pain . 
 People who are asymptomatic ( for instance , those diagnosed through family screening or only as a result of abnormal test results ) are generally treated , as the copper accumulation may cause long @-@ term damage in the future . It is unclear whether these people are best treated with penicillamine or zinc acetate . 
 = = = Physical and occupational therapies = = = 
 Physiotherapy and occupational therapy are beneficial for patients with the neurologic form of the disease . The copper chelating treatment may take up to six months to start working , and these therapies can assist in coping with ataxia , dystonia , and tremors , as well as preventing the development of contractures that can result from dystonia . 
 = = = Transplantation = = = 
 Liver transplantation is an effective cure for Wilson 's disease but is used only in particular scenarios because of the risks and complications associated with the procedure . It is used mainly in people with fulminant liver failure who fail to respond to medical treatment or in those with advanced chronic liver disease . Liver transplantation is avoided in severe neuropsychiatric illness , in which its benefit has not been demonstrated . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 Left untreated , Wilson 's disease tends to become progressively worse and is eventually fatal . With early detection and treatment , most of those affected can live relatively normal lives . Liver and neurologic damage that occurs prior to treatment may improve , but it is often permanent . 
 = = History = = 
 The disease bears the name of the British physician Samuel Alexander Kinnier Wilson ( 1878 – 1937 ) , a neurologist who described the condition , including the pathological changes in the brain and liver , in 1912 . Wilson 's work had been predated by , and drew on , reports from German neurologist Carl Westphal ( in 1883 ) , who termed it " <unk> " ; by the British neurologist William Gowers ( in 1888 ) ; and by Adolph <unk> ( in 1898 ) , who noted hepatic cirrhosis . <unk> John Nathaniel Cumings made the link with copper accumulation in both the liver and the brain in 1948 . The occurrence of hemolysis was noted in 1967 . 
 Cumings , and simultaneously the New Zealand neurologist Derek Denny @-@ Brown , working in the United States , first reported effective treatment with metal chelator British anti @-@ Lewisite in 1951 . This treatment had to be injected but was one of the first therapies available in the field of neurology , a field that classically was able to observe and diagnose but had few treatments to offer . The first effective oral chelation agent , penicillamine , was discovered in 1956 by British neurologist John Walshe . In 1982 , Walshe also introduced trientine , and was the first to develop tetrathiomolybdate for clinical use . Zinc acetate therapy initially made its appearance in the Netherlands , where physicians <unk> and <unk> used it in 1961 and in the 1970s , respectively , but it was further developed later by Brewer and colleagues at the University of Michigan . 
 The genetic basis of Wilson 's disease and linkage to ATP7B mutations was elucidated in the 1980s and 1990s by several research groups . 
 = = Other animals = = 
 Hereditary copper accumulation has been described in Bedlington Terriers , where it generally only affects the liver . It is due to mutations in the <unk> ( or <unk> ) gene . In non @-@ Wilsonian copper accumulation states ( such as Indian childhood cirrhosis ) , no <unk> mutations could be detected to explain their genetic origin . 
 = Pather Panchali = 
 Pather Panchali ( [ <unk> ̪ <unk> <unk> ] , English : Song of the Little Road ) is a 1955 Indian Bengali @-@ language drama film directed by Satyajit Ray and produced by the Government of West Bengal . It is based on Bibhutibhushan Bandyopadhyay 's 1929 Bengali novel of the same name and is Ray 's directorial debut . It features Subir Banerjee , Kanu Banerjee , Karuna Banerjee , Uma Dasgupta and Chunibala Devi . The first film in the Apu trilogy , Pather Panchali depicts the childhood of the protagonist Apu ( Subir Banerjee ) and his elder sister Durga ( Uma Dasgupta ) and the harsh village life of their poor family . 
 Production was interrupted because of funding problems and it took nearly three years for the film to be completed . The film was shot mainly on location , had a limited budget , featured mostly amateur actors , and was made by an inexperienced crew . The sitar player Ravi Shankar composed the film 's soundtrack and score using classical Indian ragas . Subrata Mitra was in charge of the cinematography while editing was handled by <unk> Dutta . Following its premiere on 3 May 1955 during an exhibition at New York 's Museum of Modern Art , Pather Panchali was released in Calcutta later the same year to an enthusiastic reception . A special screening was attended by the Chief Minister of West Bengal and the Prime Minister of India . Critics have praised its realism , humanity , and soul @-@ stirring quality while others have called its slow pace a drawback , and some have condemned it for romanticising poverty . Scholars have commented on the film 's lyrical quality and realism ( influenced by Italian neorealism ) , its portrayal of the poverty and small delights of daily life , and the use of what the author Darius Cooper has termed the " epiphany of wonder " , among other themes . 
 The tale of Apu 's life is continued in the two subsequent installments of Ray 's Apu trilogy : Aparajito ( The Unvanquished , 1956 ) and Apur Sansar ( The World of Apu , 1959 ) . Pather Panchali is described as a turning point in Indian cinema , as it was among the films that pioneered the Parallel Cinema movement , which espoused authenticity and social realism . The first film from independent India to attract major international critical attention , it won India 's National Film Award for Best Feature Film in 1955 , the Best Human Document award at the 1956 Cannes Film Festival , and several other awards , establishing Ray as one of the country 's most distinguished filmmakers . It is often featured in lists of the greatest films ever made . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Harihar Roy ( Kanu Banerjee ) earns a meagre living as a pujari ( priest ) in <unk> , rural Bengal , and dreams of a better career as a poet and playwright . His wife Sarbajaya ( Karuna Banerjee ) takes care of their children , Durga ( Uma Dasgupta ) and Apu ( Subir Banerjee ) , and Harihar 's elderly cousin , Indir Thakrun ( Chunibala Devi ) . Because of their limited resources , Sarbajaya resents having to share her home with the old and helpless cripple Indir . At times , Sarbajaya 's taunts become offensive , forcing Indir to take temporary refuge in the home of another relative . Durga is fond of Indir and often gives her fruit she has stolen from a wealthy neighbour 's orchard . One day , the neighbour 's wife accuses Durga of stealing a bead necklace ( which Durga denies ) and blames Sarbajaya for encouraging her tendency to steal . 
 As the elder sibling , Durga cares for Apu with motherly affection , but spares no opportunity to tease him . Together , they share the simple joys of life : sitting quietly under a tree , viewing pictures in a travelling vendor 's <unk> , running after the candy man who passes through the village , and watching a jatra ( folk theatre ) performed by a troupe of actors . Every evening they are delighted by the sound of a distant train 's whistle . One day , they run away from home to catch a glimpse of the train , only to discover Indir lying dead on their return . 
 Unable to earn a good living in the village , Harihar travels to the city to seek a better job . He promises Sarbajaya that he will return with money to repair their dilapidated house . During his absence , the family sinks deeper into poverty . Sarbajaya grows increasingly lonely and bitter . One day during the monsoon season , Durga plays in the downpour for too long , catches a cold and develops a high fever . Adequate medical care being unavailable , the fever becomes worse , and on a night of incessant rain and gusty winds , she dies . Harihar returns home and starts to show Sarbajaya the merchandise he has brought from the city . Sarbajaya , who remains silent , breaks down at the feet of her husband , and Harihar cries out in grief as he discovers that he has lost his daughter . The family decide to leave their ancestral home . As they start packing , Apu finds the necklace that Durga had earlier denied having stolen ; he throws it into a pond . Apu and his parents leave the village on an ox @-@ cart . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Kanu Banerjee as Harihar Roy 
 Karuna Banerjee as Sarbajaya Roy 
 Subir Banerjee as <unk> Roy ( Apu ) 
 <unk> Banerjee as Durga Roy ( child ) 
 Uma Dasgupta as Durga Roy ( teenager ) 
 Chunibala Devi as Indir Thakrun , the old aunt 
 Tulsi Chakraborty as Prasanna , school teacher 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Novel and title = = = 
 Bibhutibhushan Bandopadhyay 's novel Pather Panchali is a classic bildungsroman ( a type of coming @-@ of @-@ age story ) in the canon of Bengali literature . It first appeared as a serial in a Calcutta periodical in 1928 , and was published as a book the next year . The novel depicts a poor family 's struggle to survive in their rural ancestral home and the growing up of Apu , the son of the family . The later part of the novel , where Apu and his parents leave their village and settle in <unk> , formed the basis of Aparajito ( The Unvanquished , 1956 ) , the second film of the Apu trilogy . 
 Satyajit Ray , working as a graphic designer for Signet Press , created the illustrations for a new abridged edition of the book in 1944 . At that time , Ray read the unabridged novel ; Signet 's owner D. K. Gupta told Ray that the abridged version would make a great film . The idea appealed to Ray , and around 1946 – 47 , when he considered making a film , he turned to Pather Panchali because of certain qualities that " made it a great book : its humanism , its lyricism , and its ring of truth " . The author 's widow permitted Ray to make a film based on the novel ; the agreement was in principle only , and no financial arrangement was made . 
 The Bengali word path literally means path , and <unk> means " of the path " . The word <unk> refers to a type of narrative folk song that used to be performed in Bengal and was the forerunner of another type of folk performance , the jatra . English translations of the Bengali title include Song of the Little Road , The Lament of the Path , Song of the Road , and Song of the Open Road . 
 = = = Script = = = 
 Pather Panchali did not have a script ; it was made from Ray 's drawings and notes . Ray completed the first draft of the notes during his sea voyage to and from London in 1950 . Before principal photography began , he created a storyboard dealing with details and continuity . Years later , he donated those drawings and notes to Cinémathèque Française . 
 In Apur Panchali ( the Bengali translation of My Years with Apu : A Memoir , 1994 ) , Ray wrote that he had omitted many of the novel 's characters and that he had rearranged some of its sequences to make the narrative better as cinema . Changes include Indir 's death , which occurs early in the novel at a village shrine in the presence of adults , while in the film Apu and Durga find her corpse in the open . The scene of Apu and Durga running to catch a glimpse of the train is not in the novel , in which neither child sees the train , although they try . Durga 's fatal fever is attributed to a monsoon downpour in the film , but is unexplained in the novel . The ending of the film — the family 's departure from the village — is not the end of the novel . 
 Ray tried to extract a simple theme from the random sequences of significant and trivial episodes of the Pather Panchali novel , while preserving what W. Andrew Robinson describes as the " loitering impression " it creates . According to Ray , " the script had to retain some of the rambling quality of the novel because that in itself contained a clue to the feel of authenticity : life in a poor Bengali village does ramble . " For Robinson , Ray 's adaptation focuses mainly on Apu and his family , while Bandopadhyay 's original featured greater detail about village life in general . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Kanu Banerjee ( who plays Harihar ) was an established Bengali film actor . Karuna Banerjee ( Sarbajaya ) was an amateur actress from the Indian People 's Theatre Association , and the wife of Ray 's friend . Uma Dasgupta , who successfully auditioned for the part of Durga , also had prior theatre experience . For the role of Apu , Ray advertised in newspapers for boys of ages five to seven . None of the candidates who auditioned fulfilled Ray 's expectations , but his wife spotted a boy in their neighbourhood , and this boy , Subir Banerjee , was cast as Apu . ( The surname of three of the main actors happened to be Banerjee , but they were not related to each other ) . The hardest role to fill was the wizened old Indir . Ray eventually found Chunibala Devi , a retired stage actress living in one of Calcutta 's red @-@ light districts , as the ideal candidate . Several minor roles were played by the villagers of <unk> , where Pather Panchali was filmed . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Shooting started on 27 October 1952 . <unk> , a village near Calcutta , was selected in early 1953 as the main location for principal photography , and night scenes were shot in @-@ studio . The technical team included several first @-@ timers , including Ray himself and cinematographer Subrata Mitra , who had never operated a film camera . Art director Bansi Chandragupta had professional experience , having worked with Jean Renoir on The River . Both Mitra and Chandragupta went on to establish themselves as respected professionals . 
 Mitra had met Ray on the set of The River , where Mitra was allowed to observe the production , take photographs and make notes about lighting for personal reference . Having become friends , Mitra kept Ray informed about the production and showed his photographs . Ray was impressed enough by them to promise him an assistant 's position on Pather Panchali , and when production neared , invited him to shoot the film . As the 21 @-@ year @-@ old Mitra had no prior filmmaking experience , the choice was met with scepticism by those who knew of the production . Mitra himself later speculated that Ray was nervous about working with an established crew . 
 Funding was a problem from the outset . No producer was willing to finance the film , as it lacked stars , songs and action scenes . On learning of Ray 's plan , one producer , Mr Bhattacharya of Kalpana Movies , contacted Bandopadhyay 's widow to request the filming rights and get the film made by <unk> Bose , a well @-@ established director . The widow declined as she had already permitted Ray to make the film . The estimated budget for the production was ₹ 70 @,@ 000 ( about US $ 14 @,@ 613 in 1955 ) . One producer , Rana Dutta , gave money to continue shooting , but had to stop after some of his films flopped . 
 Ray thus had to borrow money to shoot enough footage to persuade prospective producers to finance the whole film . To raise funds , he continued to work as a graphic designer , pawned his life insurance policy and sold his collection of gramophone records . Production manager Anil Chowdhury convinced Ray 's wife , <unk> , to pawn her jewels . Ray still ran out of money partway through filming , which had to be suspended for nearly a year . Thereafter shooting was done only in intermittent bursts . Ray later admitted that the delays had made him tense and that three miracles saved the film : " One , Apu 's voice did not break . Two , Durga did not grow up . Three , Indir Thakrun did not die . " 
 Bidhan Chandra Roy , the Chief Minister of West Bengal , was requested by an influential friend of Ray 's mother to help the production . The Chief Minister obliged , and government officials saw the footage . The Home Publicity Department of the West Bengal government assessed the cost of backing the film and sanctioned a loan , given in installments , allowing Ray to finish production . The government misunderstood the nature of the film , believing it to be a documentary for rural uplift , and recorded the loan as being for " roads improvement " , a reference to the film 's title . 
 Monroe Wheeler , head of the department of exhibitions and publications at New York 's Museum of Modern Art ( MoMA ) , who was in Calcutta in 1954 , heard about the project and met Ray . He considered the incomplete footage to be of very high quality and encouraged Ray to finish the film so that it could be shown at a MoMA exhibition the following year . Six months later , American director John Huston visited India for some early location scouting for The Man Who Would Be King ( eventually made in 1975 ) . Wheeler had asked Huston to check the progress of Ray 's project . Huston saw excerpts of the unfinished film and recognised " the work of a great film @-@ maker " . Because of Huston 's positive feedback , MoMA helped Ray with additional money . 
 Including the delays and hiatuses in production , it took three years to complete the shooting of Pather Panchali . 
 = = Influences = = 
 The realist narrative style of Pather Panchali was influenced by Italian neorealism and the works of French director Jean Renoir . In 1949 Renoir came to Calcutta to shoot his film The River ( 1951 ) . Ray , a founding member of the Calcutta Film Society ( established in 1947 ) , helped him scout for locations in the countryside . When Ray told him about his longstanding wish to film Pather Panchali , Renoir encouraged him to proceed . In 1950 Ray was sent to London by his employer , the advertising agency D.J. Keymer , to work at their headquarters . During his six months in London , he watched about 100 films . Among these , Vittorio De Sica 's neorealist film Bicycle Thieves ( 1948 ) had a profound impact on him . In a 1982 lecture , Ray said that he had come out of the theatre determined to become a filmmaker . The film made him believe that it was possible to make realistic cinema that was shot on location with an amateur cast . 
 The international success of Akira Kurosawa 's Rashomon ( 1950 ) and Bimal Roy 's 1953 film Do <unk> <unk> ( which was shot partly on location and was about a peasant family ) led Ray to believe that Pather Panchali would find an international audience . Ray also had more indigenous influences , such as Bengali literature and the native Indian theatrical tradition , particularly the rasa theory of classical Sanskrit drama . Darius Cooper describes the complicated doctrine of rasa as " center [ ed ] predominantly on feelings experienced not only by the characters but also conveyed in a certain artistic way to the spectator " . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The soundtrack of the film was composed by the sitar player Ravi Shankar , who was at an early stage of his career , having debuted in 1939 . The background scores feature pieces based on several ragas of Indian classical music , played mostly on the sitar . The soundtrack , described in a 1995 issue of The Village Voice as " at once plaintive and exhilarating " , is featured in The Guardian 's 2007 list of 50 greatest film soundtracks . It has also been cited as an influence on The Beatles , specifically George Harrison . 
 Shankar saw about half the film in a roughly edited version before composing the background score , but he was already familiar with the story . According to Robinson , when Ray met Shankar the latter hummed a tune that was folk @-@ based but had " a certain sophistication " . This tune , usually played on a bamboo flute , became the main theme for the film . The majority of the score was composed within the duration of a single night , in a session that lasted for about eleven hours . Shankar also composed two solo sitar pieces — one based on the raga Desh ( traditionally associated with rain ) , and one sombre piece based on the raga Todi . He created a piece based on the raga <unk> , played on the tar shehnai , to accompany the scene in which Harihar learns of Durga 's death . The film 's cinematographer , Subrata Mitra , performed on the sitar for parts of the soundtrack . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Ray and his crew worked long hours on post @-@ production , managing to submit it just in time for Museum of Modern Art 's Textiles and Ornamental Arts of India exhibition of May 1955 . The film , billed as The Story of Apu and Durga , lacked subtitles . It was one of a series of six evening performances at MoMA , including the US debut of sarod player Ali Akbar Khan and the classical dancer Shanta Rao . Pather Panchali 's MoMA opening on 3 May was well received . Subsequently , the film had its domestic premiere at the annual meeting of the Advertising Club of Calcutta ; the response there was not positive , and Ray felt " extremely discouraged " . Before its theatrical release in Calcutta , Ray designed large posters , including a neon sign showing Apu and Durga running , which was strategically placed in a busy location in the city . Pather Panchali was released in a Calcutta cinema on 26 August 1955 and received a poor initial response . But because of word of mouth , the screenings started filling up within a week or two . It opened again at another cinema , where it ran for seven weeks . A delay in subtitling led to the postponement of the UK release until December 1957 . It went on to achieve great success in the US in 1958 , running for eight months at the Fifth Avenue Playhouse in New York . 
 In India the film 's reception was enthusiastic . The Times of India wrote , " It is absurd to compare it with any other Indian cinema ... Pather Panchali is pure cinema " . Chief Minister Roy arranged a special screening in Calcutta for Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru , who came out of the theatre impressed . Despite opposition from some within the governments of West Bengal and India because of its depiction of poverty , Pather Panchali was sent to the 1956 Cannes Film Festival with Nehru 's personal approval . It was screened towards the end of the festival , coinciding with a party given by the Japanese delegation , and only a small number of critics attended . Although some were initially unenthusiastic at the prospect of yet another Indian melodrama , the film critic Arturo <unk> found " the magic horse of poetry ... invading the screen " . Pather Panchali was subsequently named Best Human Document at the festival . 
 Lindsay Anderson commented after the Cannes screening that Pather Panchali had " the quality of ultimate unforgettable experience " . In subsequent years , critics have given positive reviews . A 1958 review in Time described Pather Panchali as " perhaps the finest piece of filmed folklore since Robert Flaherty 's <unk> of the North " . In her 1982 book 5001 Nights at the Movies , Pauline Kael wrote , " Beautiful , sometimes funny , and full of love , it brought a new vision of India to the screen " . Basil Wright considered it " a new and incontrovertible work of art " . James Berardinelli wrote in 1996 that the film " touches the souls and minds of viewers , transcending cultural and linguistic barriers " . In 2006 Philip French of The Observer called it " one of the greatest pictures ever made " . Twenty years after the release of Pather Panchali , Akira Kurosawa summarised the effect of the film as overwhelming and lauded its ability " to stir up deep passions " . 
 The reaction was not uniformly positive . On seeing the film , François Truffaut is reported to have said , " I don 't want to see a movie of peasants eating with their hands . " Bosley Crowther , the most influential critic of The New York Times , wrote in 1958 , " Any picture as loose in structure or as listless in tempo as this one is would barely pass as a ' rough cut ' with the editors in Hollywood " , even though he praised its gradually emerging poignancy and poetic quality . The Harvard Crimson argued in 1959 that its fragmentary nature " contributes to the film 's great weakness : its general diffuseness , its inability to command sustained attention . For Pather Panchali , remarkable as it may be , is something of a chore to sit through . " Early in 1980s , Ray was criticised by Nargis Dutt , parliamentarian and former actress , for " exporting poverty " . Darius Cooper writes that while many critics celebrated the Apu trilogy " as a eulogy of third @-@ world culture , others criticized it for what they took to be its romanticization of such a culture " . 
 = = = 1990s restoration = = = 
 In the 1990s , Merchant Ivory Productions , with assistance from the Academy Film Archive and Sony Pictures Classics , undertook a project to restore the prints . The restored prints , along with several other Ray films , were released in select US theatres . As of May 2016 , the film has a 97 % fresh rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on an aggregate of 39 reviews . The website 's critical consensus reads , " A film that requires and rewards patience in equal measure , Pather Panchali finds director Satyajit Ray delivering a classic with his debut . " Pather Panchali is available in DVD in Region 2 ( DVD region code ) PAL and Region 1 NTSC formats . Artificial Eye Entertainment is the distributor of Region 2 while Columbia Tri @-@ Star is the distributor of Region 1 format . 
 = = = 2015 restoration = = = 
 In 2013 , the video distribution company The Criterion Collection , in collaboration with the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences ’ Film Archive , began the restoration of the original negatives of the Apu trilogy , including Pather Panchali . These negatives had been severely damaged by a fire in London in 1993 , and all film cans and fragments belonging to the Ray films were sent to the Motion Picture Academy for storage , where they lay unseen for two decades . It was discovered upon reexamination that , although many parts of the films were indeed destroyed by fire or the effects of age , other parts were salvageable . The materials were shipped to a restoration laboratory in Bologna , Italy : L ’ Immagine Ritrovata . Over a thousand hours of labor by hand were expended in restoring and scanning the negatives and , in the end , about 40 percent of the Pather Panchali negative was restored . ( For those parts of the negative that were missing or unusable , duplicate negatives and fine @-@ grain masters from various commercial or archival sources were used . ) The Criterion Collection ’ s own lab then spent six months creating the digital version of all three films , at times choosing to preserve the distinctive look of the films even at the cost of retaining some imperfections . 
 On 4 May 2015 , the restored Pather Panchali premiered at the Museum of Modern Art , a little more than 60 years to the day after the film ’ s world premiere at the same venue . Several days later , all three films opened at New York ’ s Film Forum , where they were originally scheduled to run for three weeks . Because of overwhelming public demand – with one writer commenting that " audiences can ’ t seem to get enough " – the films were held over at that theater until June 30 . The trilogy was then sent to be exhibited in many other cities throughout the U.S. and Canada . The restoration work was widely acclaimed , with commentators calling the look of the restored films " gorgeous " , " pristine " and “ incredible ” . 
 = = Themes = = 
 In his 1958 New York Times review , Crowther writes that Pather Panchali delicately illustrates how " poverty does not always nullify love " and how even very poor people can enjoy the little pleasures of their world . Marie Seton describes how the film intersperses the depiction of poverty and the delights and pleasures of youth . She represents the bond between Durga and Indir , and their fate , as signifying a philosophical core : that both the young and the old die . Seton writes of the film 's " lyrical " qualities , noting especially the imagery immediately before the onset of monsoon . Robinson writes about a peculiar quality of " lyrical happiness " in the film , and states that Pather Panchali is " about unsophisticated people shot through with great sophistication , and without a trace of condescension or inflated sentiment " . 
 Darius Cooper discusses the use of different rasa in the film , observing Apu 's repeated " epiphany of wonder " , brought about not only by what the boy sees around him , but also when he uses his imagination to create another world . For Cooper , the immersive experience of the film corresponds to this epiphany of wonder . Stephen Teo uses the scene in which Apu and Durga discover railway tracks as an example of the gradual build @-@ up of epiphany and the resulting immersive experience . 
 Sharmishtha <unk> discusses the idea that the idyllic village life portrayed in Pather Panchali represents authentic Bengali village life , which disappeared during the upheavals of Partition in 1947 . She suggests that the film seeks to connect an idealised , pre @-@ partition past with the actual present of partitioned Bengal , and that it uses prototypes of rural Bengal to construct an image of the ideal village . In contrast to this idealism , <unk> Pati and <unk> Ganguly point out how Ray used eye @-@ level shots , natural lighting , long takes and other techniques to achieve realism . <unk> Biswas has written that Pather Panchali comes very close to the concept of Italian neorealism , as it has several passages with no dramatic development , even though the usual realities of life , such as the changing of seasons or the passing of a day , are concretely filmed . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 Pather Panchali has won many national and international awards . At India 's 3rd National Film Awards in 1955 , it was named Best Feature Film and Best Bengali Feature Film . The next year , it competed for the Palme d 'Or at Cannes , where it won Best Human Document and an <unk> Award – Special Mention . More awards from film festivals across the world followed : the Vatican Award ( Rome ) , the Golden <unk> ( Manila ) , and the Diploma of Merit ( Edinburgh ) in 1956 ; the Selznick Golden Laurel for Best Film ( Berlin ) , the Golden Gate for Best Director and Best Picture ( San Francisco ) in 1957 ; Best Film ( Vancouver ) , and the Critics ' Award for Best Film ( Stratford ) in 1958 . It also won several awards for best foreign @-@ language film : at the National Board of Review Awards 1958 ; at the Afro Arts Theater , New York , 1959 ; the Kinema <unk> Award in Japan , 1966 ; and the Bodil Award in Denmark , 1969 . In 1958 it had been nominated for Best Film at the 11th British Academy Film Awards . 
 Sight & Sound , the British Film Institute 's ( BFI ) magazine , has included Pather Panchali several times in its Critics ' Polls of the greatest @-@ ever films . In 1962 , it ranked 11th ; in 1992 , 6th ; and in 2002 , 22nd . The magazine ranked the film 42nd in its 2012 list of " Top 50 Greatest Films of All Time " . In 1998 , in a similar critics ' poll from Asian film magazine <unk> , Pather Panchali was ranked the second @-@ greatest film of all time . The Village Voice ranked the film at number 12 ( tied with The Godfather ) in its Top 250 " Best Films of the Century " list in 1999 , based on a poll of critics . 
 Pather Panchali was included in various other all @-@ time lists , including Time Out 's " Centenary Top One Hundred Films " in 1995 , the San Francisco Chronicle " Hot 100 Films From the Past " in 1997 , the Rolling Stone " 100 Maverick Movies of the Last 100 Years " in 1999 , " The New York Times Guide to the Best 1 @,@ 000 Movies Ever Made " in 2002 , the BFI Top Fifty " Must See " Children 's Films in 2005 , and BFI 's " Top 10 Indian Films " of all time . It was included in NDTV 's list of " India 's 20 greatest films " , and in 2013 in CNN @-@ IBN 's list of " 100 greatest Indian films of all time " . The Apu trilogy as a whole was included in film critic Roger Ebert 's list of " 100 Great Movies " in 2001 and in Time 's All @-@ Time 100 best movies list in 2005 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Pather Panchali was followed by two films that continued the tale of Apu 's life — Aparajito ( The Unvanquished ) in 1956 and Apur Sansar ( The World of Apu ) in 1959 . Together , the three films constitute the Apu trilogy . Aparajito portrays the adolescent Apu , his education in a rural school and a Calcutta college . Its central theme is the poignant relationship between a doting mother and her ambitious young son . Apur Sansar depicts Apu 's adult life , his reaction to his wife 's premature death , and his final bonding with his son whom he abandoned as an infant . The sequels also won many national and international awards . Ray did not initially plan to make a trilogy : he decided to make the third film only after being asked about the possibility of a trilogy at the 1957 Venice Film Festival , where Aparajito won the Golden Lion . Apur Panchali ( 2014 ) is a Bengali film directed by Kaushik Ganguly , which depicts the real @-@ life story of Subir <unk> , the actor who portrayed Apu in Pather Panchali . 
 Pather Panchali was the first film made in independent India to receive major critical attention internationally , placing India on the world cinema map . It was one of the first examples of Parallel Cinema , a new tradition of Indian film @-@ making in which authenticity and social realism were key themes , breaking the rule of the Indian film establishment . Although Pather Panchali was described as a turning point in Indian cinema , some commentators preferred the view that it refined a " realist textual principle " that was already there . In 1963 Time noted that thanks to Pather Panchali , Satyajit Ray was one of the " hardy little band of inspired pioneers " of a new cinematic movement that was enjoying a good number of imitators worldwide . The film has since been considered as a " global landmark " and " among the essential moviegoing experiences " . On 2 May 2013 , commemorating Ray 's birthday , the Indian version of the search engine Google displayed a doodle featuring the train sequence . 
 After Pather Panchali , Ray went on to make 36 more films , including feature films , documentaries and shorts . He worked on scripting , casting , scoring , cinematography , art direction and editing , as well as designing his own credit titles and publicity material . He developed a distinctive style of film @-@ making based , as was the case with Pather Panchali , on visual lyricism and strongly humanistic themes . Thus , Ray established himself as an internationally recognized auteur of cinema . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Iron Man 3 = 
 Iron Man 3 ( stylized onscreen as Iron Man Three ) is a 2013 American superhero film featuring the Marvel Comics character Iron Man , produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures.1 It is the sequel to 2008 's Iron Man and 2010 's Iron Man 2 , and the seventh film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe . Shane Black directed a screenplay he co @-@ wrote with Drew Pearce , which uses concepts from the " Extremis " story arc by Warren Ellis . The film stars Robert Downey Jr . , Gwyneth Paltrow , Don Cheadle , Guy Pearce , Rebecca Hall , Stephanie Szostak , James Badge Dale , Jon Favreau , and Ben Kingsley . In Iron Man 3 , Tony Stark deals with posttraumatic stress disorder caused by the events of The Avengers , while investigating the reemergence of the Ten Rings , led by the mysterious Mandarin and comes into a conflict with old enemy ; Aldrich Killian . 
 After the release of Iron Man 2 in May 2010 , Favreau , who served as director , decided not to return , and in February 2011 Black was hired to write and direct the film . Black and Pearce opted to make the script more character @-@ centric and focused on thriller elements . Throughout April and May 2012 , the film 's supporting cast was filled out , with Kingsley , Pearce , and Hall brought in to portray key roles . Filming began on May 23 , and lasted through December 17 , 2012 , primarily at EUE / Screen Gems Studios in Wilmington , North Carolina . Additional shooting took place at various locations around North Carolina , as well as Florida , China , and Los Angeles . The visual effects were handled by 17 companies , including Scanline VFX , Digital Domain , and Weta Digital . The film was converted to 3D in post @-@ production . 
 Iron Man 3 premiered at Le Grand Rex in Paris on April 14 , 2013 . It began its release on April 25 , 2013 , internationally , and debuted in the United States one week later on May 3 . The film received generally positive reviews and was commercially successful , grossing over $ 1 @.@ 2 billion worldwide , the second highest @-@ grossing film of 2013 overall , and the second @-@ highest @-@ grossing film at the domestic box office released in 2013 . It became the sixteenth film to gross over $ 1 billion and currently ranks as the 10th @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of all time , with its opening weekend ranked as the 12th @-@ highest @-@ grossing opening of all time . The film also received a nomination for Academy Award at the category of Best Visual Effects , and received another nomination for BAFTA Award at the same category . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Tony Stark recalls a New Years Eve party in 1999 where he meets scientist Maya Hansen , the inventor of Extremis , an experimental regenerative treatment intended to allow recovery from crippling injuries . Disabled scientist Aldrich Killian offers them a place in his company Advanced Idea Mechanics , but Stark rejects the offer , humiliating Killian . 
 Years later , six months after the Battle of New York , Stark 's experiences during the alien invasion are giving him panic attacks . Restless , he has built several dozen Iron Man suits , creating friction with his girlfriend Pepper Potts . Meanwhile , a string of bombings by a terrorist known only as the Mandarin has left intelligence agencies bewildered by a lack of forensic evidence . Stark 's security chief Happy Hogan is badly injured in a Mandarin attack , causing Stark to issue a televised threat to the Mandarin , who responds by destroying Stark 's home with helicopter gunships . Hansen , who came to warn Stark , survives the attack along with Potts . Stark escapes in an Iron Man suit , which his artificial intelligence J.A.R.V.I.S. pilots to rural Tennessee , following a flight plan from Stark 's investigation into the Mandarin . Stark 's experimental armor lacks sufficient power to return to California , and the world believes him dead . 
 Teaming with Harley , a precocious 10 @-@ year @-@ old boy , Stark investigates the remains of a local explosion bearing the hallmarks of a Mandarin attack . He discovers the " bombings " were triggered by soldiers subjected to Extremis , which at this stage of development caused certain subjects to explosively reject the treatment . After veterans started exploding , these explosions were falsely attributed to a terrorist plot in order to cover up Extremis 's flaws . Stark witnesses Extremis firsthand when Mandarin agents Brandt and Savin attack him . With Harley 's help , Stark traces the Mandarin to Miami and infiltrates his headquarters using improvised weapons . Inside he discovers the Mandarin is actually an English actor named Trevor Slattery , who says he is oblivious to the actions carried out in his image . Killian , who appropriated Hansen 's Extremis research as a cure for his own disability and expanded the program to include injured war veterans , reveals he is the real Mandarin , using Slattery as a cover . After capturing Stark , Killian shows him Potts ( whom he had kidnapped ) being subjected to Extremis , in order to gain Stark 's aid to fix Extremis 's flaws and thus save Potts . Killian kills Hansen when she has a change of heart and tries to stop him . 
 Killian has manipulated American intelligence agencies regarding the Mandarin 's location , luring James Rhodes – the former War Machine , now re @-@ branded as the Iron Patriot – into a trap to steal the armor . Stark escapes and reunites with Rhodes , discovering that Killian intends to attack President Ellis aboard Air Force One . Stark saves some surviving passengers and crew but cannot stop Killian from abducting Ellis and destroying Air Force One . They trace Killian to an impounded damaged oil tanker where Killian intends to kill Ellis on live television . The vice president will become a puppet leader , following Killian 's orders in exchange for Extremis to cure his young daughter 's disability . On the platform , Stark goes to save Potts , as Rhodes saves the president . Stark summons his Iron Man suits , controlled remotely by J.A.R.V.I.S. , to provide air support . Rhodes secures the president and takes him to safety , while Stark discovers Potts has survived the Extremis procedure . However , before he can save her , a rig collapses around them and she falls to her apparent death . Stark confronts Killian and traps him in an Iron Man suit that self @-@ destructs , but fails to kill him . Potts , whose Extremis powers allowed her to survive her fall , intervenes and kills Killian . After the battle , Stark orders J.A.R.V.I.S. to remotely destroy each Iron Man suit as a sign of his devotion to Potts , while the vice president and Slattery are arrested . With Stark 's help , Potts ' Extremis effects are stabilized , and Stark undergoes surgery to remove the shrapnel embedded near his heart . He pitches his obsolete chest arc reactor into the sea , musing he will always be Iron Man . 
 In a present day post @-@ credits scene , Stark wakes up Dr. Bruce Banner , who fell asleep listening to his story . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Robert Downey Jr. as Tony Stark / Iron Man : 
 A self @-@ described genius , billionaire , playboy , and philanthropist with mechanical suits of armor of his own invention . Stark now struggles to come to terms with his near @-@ death experience in The Avengers , suffering from anxiety attacks . On making a third Iron Man film , Downey said , " My sense of it is that we need to leave it all on the field — whatever that means in the end . You can pick several different points of departure for that . " On following up The Avengers , Downey said they " tried to be practical , in a post @-@ Avengers world . What are his challenges now ? What are some limitations that might be placed on him ? And what sort of threat would have him , as usual , ignore those limitations ? " Screenwriter Drew Pearce compared Tony to an American James Bond for both being " heroes with a sense of danger to them , and unpredictability " even if Stark was a " free agent " instead of an authority figure like Bond . He also likened Tony to the protagonists of 1970s films such as The French Connection , where " the idiosyncrasies of the heroes is what made them exciting . " 
 Gwyneth Paltrow as Virginia " Pepper " Potts : 
 Stark 's girlfriend , longtime associate , and the current CEO of Stark Industries . Paltrow says of her character 's relationship to Tony , " [ She still ] adores Tony , but she absolutely gets fed up with him . He gets caught in a feedback loop . " Kevin Feige comments on Pepper 's role in the film : " The love triangle in this movie is really between Tony , Pepper and the suits . Tony , Pepper and his obsession with those suits , and the obsession with technology . " Feige also states that the film uses the character to play with the damsel in distress trope , and posits the question , " Is Pepper in danger or is Pepper the savior ? " 
 Don Cheadle as Col. James " Rhodey " Rhodes / Iron Patriot : 
 Stark 's best friend , the liaison between Stark Industries and the U.S. Air Force in the department of acquisitions . Rhodes operates the redesigned / upgraded War Machine armor , taking on an American flag @-@ inspired color scheme similar to the Iron Patriot armor from the comics . Feige said of Rhodes and the armor , " The notion in the movie is that a red , white and blue suit is a bold statement , and it 's meant to be . With Rhodey , he 's very much the foil to Tony 's eccentricities , and in this one you get to see this and be reminded of the trust and friendship between them in that great Shane Black buddy @-@ cop fashion . " In the film , the president asks Rhodey to take up the moniker " Iron Patriot , " and don the red , white , and blue suit , in order to be the government 's " American hero " in response to the events in The Avengers . 
 Guy Pearce as Aldrich Killian : 
 The creator of the Extremis virus and the founder and owner of the science and development organisation Advanced Idea Mechanics , who adopts the mantle of the Mandarin as his own . Killian develops Extremis to cure his own debilitating disability ; in addition to his regenerative healing qualities , he has superhuman strength and the ability to generate extreme heat . Prolonged exposure to Extremis also grants him the ability to breathe fire . On taking the role , Pearce said , " I feel a little more experimental in what I 'll take on these days , but I still don 't know that I would want to play the superhero myself , since I 'm playing a different kind of character in this film ... The main difference was that , when I did The Time Machine , I was pretty much in all of it , so it was a really grueling experience . Prometheus and Iron Man are really kind of cameo stuff , so the experience of shooting them ... I mean , on some level , it 's tricky because you feel like a bit of an outsider . You don 't really live the experience that you do when you 're there all day every day with everybody . But at the same time , it can be more fun sometimes because you 're just working in concentrated spurts . " 
 Pearce described his character as a man " who came into this world with a number of physical disabilities . He 's never been able to accept those limitations though and has spent most of his life trying to overcome them in any way he can . His tenacity and blind determination in fighting for a better life are seen by some as irritating , as he often comes across as obnoxious . He just won 't accept the cards he was dealt , and being as intelligent as he is , has real drive to change and become a different person . " Shane Black specified , " Ultimately we do give you the Mandarin , the real guy , but it 's Guy Pearce in the end with the big dragon tattooed on his chest . " He elaborated , " Do they hand me a blank check and say , ' Go break something ! ' Or , ' Go violate some long @-@ standing comic book treaty that fans have supported for years ? ' No , but they 'll say : ' Let 's break something together . ' So it 's okay to come up with these crazy things , these far out ideas … and they 'll fly . It 's just that the Marvel guys have to be in the room . " 
 Rebecca Hall as Maya Hansen : 
 A geneticist whose work helped Killian to create Extremis . Hall said Hansen would be a " strong female character , " and described her decision to take the role , saying , " I decided to do Iron Man 3 because I 've never done the ' hurry up and wait ' movie before . Even the studio movies I 've done have been small studio movies , or indie films that we made on a wing and a prayer . I love those , but Iron Man is refreshing in a way because it 's something out of my realm of experiences . " 
 Stéphanie Szostak as Brandt : 
 A war veteran who becomes an assassin after her exposure to Extremis . Describing Brandt , Szostak says , " ... [ Extremis ] was a second chance at life . We talked about what you feel like and I think it almost makes you a fuller version of who you are , all your weakness and your qualities – just everything gets enhanced . I saw it as very freeing , almost you become your true @-@ self and your fantasy @-@ self all at once . " The writers originally envisioned Brandt as Killian 's main henchman , which would return throughout the movie to fight Tony , but eventually that role was reassigned to Eric Savin . 
 James Badge Dale as Savin : 
 Killian 's Extremis @-@ powered henchman . Dale stated that his character in the film was " loosely based on " the comic version of the character . According to Dale , " Ben Kingsley is the mouthpiece . Guy Pearce is the brain . I 'm the muscle . " 
 Jon Favreau as Happy Hogan : 
 Tony Stark 's former bodyguard and chauffeur , and now serves as Stark Industries head of security department . Favreau , who served as both actor and director on the previous two Iron Man films , said participating in the new film was " like [ being ] a proud grandfather who doesn 't have to change the diapers but gets to play with the baby . " 
 Ben Kingsley as Trevor Slattery : 
 A British actor with substance @-@ abuse problems whom Killian hired to portray the Mandarin , a terrorist persona in jammed television broadcasts , in which he is depicted as the leader of the international terrorist organization the Ten Rings . Kingsley was filming Ender 's Game when he was cast , and said that , " Quite soon I 'll be with everybody and we 'll be discussing the look and the feel and the direction of the character . It 's very early days yet , but I 'm so thrilled to be on board . " On his performance , Kingsley stated : " I wanted a voice that would disconcert a Western audience . I wanted a voice that would sound far more homegrown and familiar — a familiarity like a teacher 's voice or a preacher 's voice . The rhythms and tones of an earnest , almost benign , teacher — trying to educate people for their own good . " The Mandarin was initially set to appear in the first Iron Man film , but he was put off for a sequel as the filmmakers felt that he was " too ambitious for a first [ film ] . " 
 On the character , Feige stated , " The Mandarin is [ Iron Man 's ] most famous foe in the comics mainly because he 's been around the longest . If you look , there 's not necessarily a definitive Mandarin storyline in the comics . So it was really about having an idea . " Shane Black explains that Ben Kingsley 's Mandarin is not Chinese in the film as he is in the comics in order to avoid the Fu Manchu stereotype : " We 're not saying he 's Chinese , we 're saying he , in fact , draws a cloak around him of Chinese symbols and dragons because it represents his obsessions with Sun Tzu in various ancient arts of warfare that he studied . " The filmmakers also cited Colonel Kurtz from Apocalypse Now as an influence for the character . The videos where the Mandarin give historical background to the attacks expressed how it emerged as the product of " a think tank of people trying to create a modern terrorist . " Thus the Mandarin " represents every terrorist in a way , " from South American insurgency tactics to the videos of Osama bin Laden . 
 Paul Bettany reprises his role from previous films as J.A.R.V.I.S. , Stark 's AI system . Ty Simpkins portrays Harley Keener , a boy who becomes Stark 's sidekick , as part of a three @-@ picture deal with Marvel Studios . Ashley Hamilton portrays Taggart , one of the Extremis soldiers . William Sadler plays President Ellis , ( named after Warren Ellis , who wrote the " Extremis " comics arc that primary influenced the film 's story ) and Miguel Ferrer plays Vice President Rodriguez . Adam Pally plays Gary , a cameraman who helps Stark . Shaun Toub reprises his role as Yinsen from the first Iron Man film in a brief cameo , and Stan Lee makes a cameo appearance as a beauty pageant judge . Dale Dickey plays Mrs. Davis , mother of an Extremis subject that is framed as a terrorist . Wang <unk> briefly plays Dr. Wu in the general release version of the film . A cut of the film produced for release exclusively in China includes additional scenes featuring Wang and an appearance by Fan <unk> as one of his assistants . Mark Ruffalo makes an uncredited cameo appearance , reprising his role as Dr. Bruce Banner from The Avengers , in a post @-@ credits scene . Comedians Bill Maher and Joan Rivers and Fashion Police co @-@ host George <unk> have cameo appearances as themselves on their respective real @-@ world television programs , as do newscasters Josh Elliott , Megan Henderson , Pat Kiernan , and Thomas Roberts . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Following the release of Iron Man 2 , a conflict between Paramount Pictures , which had distribution rights to certain Marvel properties , and The Walt Disney Company , Marvel Entertainment 's new corporate parent , clouded the timing and the distribution arrangement of a possible third film . On October 18 , 2010 , The Walt Disney Studios agreed to pay Paramount at least $ 115 million for the worldwide distribution rights to Iron Man 3 , with Disney , Marvel , and Paramount announcing a May 3 , 2013 release date for the film . 
 Iron Man and Iron Man 2 director Jon Favreau said in December 2010 that he would not direct Iron Man 3 , opting to direct Magic Kingdom instead . He remained an executive producer of director Joss Whedon 's crossover film The Avengers and also served as an executive producer of Iron Man 3 . In February 2011 Shane Black entered final negotiations to direct and write the screenplay . In March it was announced that Black would have co @-@ writer Drew Pearce , who Marvel had originally hired for a Runaways script , work with him . Downey , who had previously starred in Black 's film Kiss Kiss Bang Bang , said , " Bringing in Shane Black to write and direct Iron Man 3 to me is basically the only transition from Favreau to a ' next thing ' that Favreau and the audience and Marvel and I could ever actually sign off on . " 
 = = = = Writing = = = = 
 Shane Black described his take on the film as not being " two men in iron suits fighting each other , " and more like a " Tom Clancy thriller , " with Iron Man fighting real @-@ world type villains . Drew Pearce added that they would avert magic and space , with Iron Man 3 being " a techno @-@ thriller set in a more real world than even The Avengers . " The duo spent some time discussing themes and images and ideas before starting the script . While writing , the focus was to avoid scenes of pure exposition , making every moment propel other narrative points forwards . Some elements from the comics were used even if in different connotations , such as making Rhodes wear Norman Osborn 's Iron Patriot armor , and naming some characters with names from unrelated people in the Marvel Universe , such as Eric Savin and Jack Taggart . 
 The film 's plot is influenced primarily from " Extremis , " the 2005 @-@ 2006 Iron Man comics storyline written by Warren Ellis . The first two acts would remain character @-@ centric , albeit in Shane Black 's words " more hectic , frenetic , and large scale " to fulfill its sequel obligations , with the third act going for more over @-@ the @-@ top action to what Drew Pearce described as " giving a sense of opera . " The middle act was compared to Sullivan 's Travels in having Tony meeting various people on his journey , and the writers made sure to not make the characters too similar . The initial draft had Maya Hansen herself leading the villainous operation , with the Mandarin and Killian emerging as antagonists in later versions of the script . During one of the writing sessions , Pearce suggested that the Mandarin was a fake , and Black agreed by going with making him an actor , which in turn Pearce detailed as an overacting British stage performer . Black explained : " Who would be fool enough to declare that is an international terrorist ? If you 're smart , whatever regime you 're part of , you 'd put a puppet committee and remain your house . " In turn Killian would hide Slattery in " his own frat house , in kind of a drug @-@ related house arrest " to keep the secret alive . 
 According to Black , the reveal of the actual villain being Hansen was " like Remington Steele , you think it ’ s the man but at the end , the woman has been running the whole show . " The role was eventually shifted to Killian because of objections by Marvel Entertainment executives , who were concerned with apparent merchandising losses that could come with having a female villain . The roles of several other major female characters were also made smaller in the final film compared to earlier drafts . 
 Both the opening and the ending of the film were reworked in various ways . First it would begin with a flashback to Tony 's childhood . Then like Iron Man it would begin in medias res , with Tony crashing in Tennessee before a voiceover that would lead to how he got there , until it got changed to the final version . For the climactic tanker battle , it was originally considered that Brandt would show up in the James Bond tradition of the henchman coming back for the heroes . Instead they chose to use Killian himself , and have Pepper , whom he abused earlier , cause his downfall as a way of poetic justice . The final dialogue was originally written as " I am Tony Stark " to be a response to the first film 's ending , but eventually it changed to " I am Iron Man " to enhance the mythical qualities . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 In September 2011 , Marvel Studios reached an agreement to shoot the film primarily out of EUE / Screen Gems Studios in Wilmington , North Carolina . Michigan was also in contention to land the production , but the Michigan Film Office could not match North Carolina 's tax incentives . In April 2012 , Ben Kingsley entered into negotiations to play a villain in Iron Man 3 . The film 's fake working title was revealed to be Caged Heat , and Marvel Studios worked with the <unk> B. Dahlquist Casting company to hire extras in the North Carolina area . The following week , producer Kevin Feige revealed that Iron Man 3 would begin shooting in North Carolina " in five weeks , " and said that it " is a full @-@ on Tony Stark @-@ centric movie ... very much inspired by the first half of Iron Man ... [ H ] e 's stripped of everything , he 's backed up against a wall , and he 's gotta use his intelligence to get out of it . He can 't call Thor , he can 't call Cap , he can 't call Nick Fury , and he can 't look for the Helicarrier in the sky . " A few days later , The Walt Disney Company China , Marvel Studios and DMG Entertainment announced an agreement to co @-@ produce Iron Man 3 in China . DMG partly financed , produced in China with Marvel , and handled co @-@ production matters . DMG also distributed the film in China in tandem with Disney . 
 The next week , Guy Pearce entered into final talks to play Aldrich Killian , a character who is featured in the " Extremis " comic book story arc . Chinese star Andy Lau became involved in negotiations to join the film , as a Chinese scientist and old friend of Stark 's who comes to his aid . Lau would later turn down the role , and Wang <unk> was cast instead . Jessica Chastain entered into discussions for a role in the film , but bowed out due to scheduling conflicts . In May , Rebecca Hall was cast in her place , and her role was described as " a scientist who plays a pivotal role in the creation of a nanotechnology , known as Extremis . " Over the next few weeks , James Badge Dale was cast as Eric Savin , Ashley Hamilton was cast as Firepower , and Favreau returned to reprise his role as Happy Hogan from the first two films . Stephanie Szostak and William Sadler were also cast in the film , with Sadler playing the President of the United States . Despite erroneous early reports that Cobie Smulders would reprise her role as Maria Hill from The Avengers in the film , Smulders wrote on her verified Twitter page that this was not so . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming began in Wilmington , North Carolina on May 23 , 2012 at EUE / Screen Gems Studios . Cinematographer John Toll opted to for the first time in his career work with digital cameras , as he found them more convenient for a visual effects @-@ heavy production . Toll shot the film primarily on the Arri Alexa camera . From June 4 through June 6 , 2012 , filming took place in Cary , North Carolina at the Epic Games headquarters and SAS Institute , with a large Christmas tree set up on the front lawn . A scene was also shot at the Wilmington International Airport . The Port of Wilmington served as a location for the oil tanker in the climactic battle , along with a soundstage recreation of the dock . The crumbling house itself was filmed in a hydraulic @-@ powered <unk> platform that could bend and split into two pieces . All the interior footage had practical effects , including debris and explosions , with computer graphics used only to add exteriors and Iron Man 's armor . 
 From July 19 to August 1 , 2012 , filming took place on Oak Island , North Carolina , to " film aerial drops over the Atlantic Ocean . " They were done for the scene where Iron Man rescues the people falling from the Air Force One over Miami , which were originally envisioned done with green screen effects , but were changed to using actual skydivers as second unit director Brian <unk> knew the Red Bull skydiving team . Computer graphics were only employed to add clouds , the destroyed plane and matte paintings of the Florida coastline in the background , replace a stand @-@ in with the Iron Man armor , and some digital compositing to combine different takes of the skydivers together . Filming took place in Rose Hill , North Carolina in early August 2012 , and the town 's name was incorporated into the script as the Tennessee city Stark visits . On August 14 , actress Dale Dickey said she had been cast in the film , and was currently shooting her scenes . The following day , production was halted when Downey suffered an ankle injury . During the break , Black and Pearce made more script revisions before shooting resumed by August 24 . 
 Cast and crew began arriving in Florida on October 1 , to shoot scenes on Dania Beach and around South Florida . That same day , Downey returned to the set after his ankle injury . In early October , scenes were shot at a replica of the Malibu restaurant Neptune 's Net , and filming took place on location at the Vizcaya Museum and Gardens . Scenes were shot during the daytime inside the Miami Beach Resort at Miami Beach on October 10 and 11 . The production returned to Wilmington in mid @-@ October for additional filming . On November 1 , scenes were shot at the Vizcaya Museum and Gardens . Filming in the United States wrapped on November 7 in Wilmington . 
 Filming began in Beijing , China on December 10 . Filming was scheduled to wrap a week later on December 17 , 2012 . The China filming did not include the main cast and crew . In January 2013 , it was reported that a film crew led by Shane Black would begin location scouting in Hyderabad , India and Bengaluru , India between January 20 and 24 . Also in January , Cheadle confirmed that reshooting was taking place in Manhattan Beach . Shooting also took place on the week of January 23 , 2013 at TCL Chinese Theatre in Hollywood . A major part of the content filmed in the reshoots regarded the Mandarin , with Drew Pearce saying that in early cuts , the character " didn 't feel real enough — there wasn 't a sense of him being [ part of ] the real world , mostly because he was just looking down a lens and threatening the world . " 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 Chris Townsend served as visual effects supervisor for the film , which featured over 2 @,@ 000 visual effects shots and was worked on by 17 studios , including Weta Digital , Digital Domain , Scanline VFX , Trixter , Framestore , Luma Pictures , Fuel VFX , Cantina Creative , Cinesite , The Embassy Visual Effects , Lola , Capital T , Prologue and Rise FX . Townsend said that from January 2013 through the end of filming in April , the collective crew had one day of downtime , otherwise working seven days a week and 14 to 18 hours a day . 
 Digital Domain , Scanline VFX and Trixter each worked on separate shots featuring the Mark 42 armor , working with different digital models . The studios shared some of their files to ensure consistency between the shots . For the Mark 42 and Iron Patriot armors , Legacy Effects constructed partial suits that were worn on set . Townsend explained that " Invariably we 'd shoot a soft @-@ suit with Robert then we 'd also put tracking markers on his trousers . He would also wear lifts in his shoes or be up in a box so he 'd be the correct height — Iron Man is 6 ' 5 " . During shooting we used multiple witness cams , Canon <unk> , and we had two or three running whenever there was an Iron Man or Extremis character . " The artists studied time lapse photography of decaying fruit and vegetables and actual phenomena such as the aurora borealis as reference for the effect of the glowing Extremis characters . 
 The film 's production was delayed following Downey 's leg injury , and for certain shots they were forced to create a double for Downey . Townsend explained that " The collective VFX [ supervisors ] and unit leads ran into a room as soon as the incident happened to try to ascertain what sequences could they shoot . " Certain shots were filmed with a body double on set , and Weta Digital created a digital body double for others . 
 A total of three hours and 15 minutes of footage were shot before editing , where it was brought down to 130 minutes ( 119 without the credits ) , marking the longest stand @-@ alone Iron Man film . Post @-@ production also had a 3D conversion and a digital remaster for the IMAX release . Todd @-@ AO mixed the sound in Dolby Atmos to enhance the immersive experience . 
 = = Music = = 
 In October 2012 , Brian Tyler signed on to score the film . According to Tyler , he was approached more for his " thematic " scores such as The Greatest Game Ever Played , Annapolis and Partition rather than his " modern " action scores such as The Fast and Furious films , with Kevin Feige asking a theme that was recognizable and featured those dramatic tones . To employ the " deeply thematic component with a strong melody , " the score employs mostly orchestra sounds . The main theme for Iron Man focuses on horns and trumpets , to be " both a march and anthem . " Tyler mentioned that John Williams ' work in Raiders of the Lost Ark was the first thing he thought as an influence , and the cue for the Well of Souls in Raiders influenced the Extremis motif , as Tyler felt it should enhance an spiritual side for having a " technology so advanced that nears magic . " Echoing the Mandarin 's amalgamated personality , his theme was religious music " that borrows from many cultures , " from " Monastic , Gothic , and Christian chants to music from the Middle @-@ East . " The score was recorded with the London Philharmonic Orchestra at Abbey Road Studios . Tyler is the third primary composer to score an Iron Man film , following Ramin Djawadi of Iron Man and John Debney of Iron Man 2 . 
 Along with Tyler 's soundtrack album , Hollywood Records released a concept album inspired by the film , Heroes Fall . It features twelve original alternative rock and indie rock songs , with only one appearing in the film itself , Awolnation 's " Some Kind of Joke . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Iron Man 3 was distributed worldwide by Walt Disney Studios Motion <unk> with the exception of China , where it was released by DMG Entertainment , and Germany and Austria , where it was released by Tele München Group . The Chinese version of the film offers specially prepared bonus footage made exclusively for the Chinese audience . This version features a four @-@ minute longer cut of the film , with a scene showing Dr. Wu on the phone with Iron Man visible on a television screen behind him , as well as a longer scene of Dr. Wu operating on Stark . The extra material also features product placement for various Chinese products . 
 The film 's premiere happened at Le Grand Rex in Paris , on April 14 , 2013 , with Robert Downey , Jr. and Gwyneth Paltrow in attendance . While the UK premiere of the film was originally set for April 17 , the funeral of former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher taking place in that date made the event be pushed to the following day . Downey , Ben Kingsley and Rebecca Hall were present for the advance screening at London 's Odeon Leicester Square . The El Capitan Theatre in Los Angeles hosted the United States premiere of Iron Man 3 on April 24 . The film opened in 46 countries through April 22 – 24 , with the United States release , in 4 @,@ 253 screens , happening one week later . Regal Cinemas , AMC Theatres and Carmike Cinemas put presale tickets on hold , two weeks before the US premiere . The cinemas were in a contract dispute with Disney , who wished to receive more of the ticket sale profit than they currently did , largely based on the projected premiere @-@ weekend intake Iron Man 3 was expected to have . Carmike was the first to come to terms with Disney . It was later reported that Cinemark Theatres had also stopped selling presale tickets , and Regal Cinemas had removed all marketing material for the film from its locations . On April 25 , 2013 , Regal , AMC and Disney ended their dispute , which allowed Regal and AMC to proceed with selling presale tickets again . 
 IMAX screenings began on April 25 , 2013 internationally and May 3 in the United States . The film was shown in the 4DX format , featuring strobe lights , tilting seats , blowing wind and fog and odor effects in selected countries . In Japan , the technology opened its first room at the <unk> World theatre in Nagoya , Japan with the release of the film . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 In July 2012 , at the San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , a new Iron Man armor from the movie , the Mark XLII , was on display on the convention floor , along with the Marks I @-@ VII from the first two Iron Man movies and The Avengers . A panel was held , during which Shane Black , Robert Downey , Jr . , Don Cheadle , Jon Favreau and Kevin Feige discussed making the film , and several minutes of footage from the movie were shown . The first television advertisement aired during Super Bowl XLVII on the CBS network in the United States . On March 25 , 2013 , Marvel and Disney revealed on the official Iron Man Facebook page , " Iron Man 3 : Armor <unk> , " to reveal suits Stark has made before the events of the film . In January 2013 , Marvel Comics released a two @-@ issue comic book prelude by writers Christos Gage and Will Corona Pilgrim with art by Steve Kurth and Drew Geraci . The story set between the second and third Iron Man films centers on War Machine , revealing why he was absent during the battle in New York of The Avengers . 
 Like with the first two films , Audi again provided product placement with various vehicles . Oracle also returned from Iron Man 2 , showcasing both the Oracle Cloud and the Oracle <unk> server . Verizon FiOS and TCL 's flat panel televisions and Alcatel One Touch smartphones are also featured in the film , and the Chinese cut also shows a <unk> crane and Yili milk . Promotional deals were arranged with Subway and the Schwan Food Company , and tie @-@ ins included Lego sets , Hasbro action figures , and a mobile phone game by Gameloft . 
 Disney also promoted the film at its domestic theme parks . Disneyland 's Innoventions attraction received a Stark Industries exhibit beginning April 13 , and Monorail Black of the Walt Disney World Monorail System was given an exterior Iron Man scheme . The exhibit , entitled Iron Man Tech Presented by Stark Industries , features the same armor display that was shown at the 2012 San Diego Comic @-@ Con , with the Marks I @-@ VII and the new Mark XLII . In addition , there is a simulator game , titled " Become Iron Man , " that uses Kinect @-@ like technology to allow the viewer to be encased in an animated Mark XLII armor and take part in a series of " tests , ” in which you fire <unk> rays and fly through Tony Stark 's workshop . The game is guided by J.A.R.V.I.S. , who is voiced again by Paul Bettany . The exhibit also has smaller displays that include helmets and chest pieces from the earlier films and the gauntlet and boot from an action sequence in Iron Man 3 . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Iron Man 3 was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment in digital download form on September 3 , 2013 . This was followed by the film 's release on Blu @-@ ray disc , 3D Blu @-@ ray , DVD , digital copy , and on demand on September 24 , 2013 . The home video release includes a Marvel One @-@ Shot short film titled Agent Carter starring Hayley Atwell as Peggy Carter from Captain America : The First Avenger . It debuted atop the DVD and Blu @-@ ray charts in the United States , and second in the rental charts behind World War Z. As of January 31 , 2014 , Iron Man 3 is the eighth best @-@ selling DVD of 2013 , earning more than $ 79 million in sales in the U.S. 
 The film was also collected in a 13 @-@ disc box set titled " Marvel Cinematic Universe : Phase Two Collection " , which includes all of the Phase Two films in the Marvel Cinematic Universe . It was released on December 8 , 2015 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Iron Man 3 grossed $ 409 million in North America and $ 806 @.@ 4 million in other countries for a worldwide total of $ 1 @.@ 2 billion . Worldwide , it is the 10th highest @-@ grossing film , the second highest @-@ grossing film of 2013 , the third @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of the Marvel Cinematic Universe ( behind Marvel 's The Avengers and Avengers : Age of Ultron ) , the highest @-@ grossing film of the Iron Man film series , the fifth highest @-@ grossing film distributed by Disney , and the highest @-@ grossing <unk> . It achieved the sixth @-@ largest worldwide opening weekend with $ 372 @.@ 5 million . On the weekend of May 3 – 5 , 2013 , the film set a record for the largest worldwide weekend in IMAX with $ 28 @.@ 6 million . On its 23rd day in theaters , Iron Man 3 became the sixth Disney film and the 16th film overall to reach $ 1 billion . It is the first Iron Man film to gross over $ 1 billion , the second Marvel film to do so after The Avengers , and the fourth @-@ fastest film to reach the milestone . As part of the earlier distribution agreement made with Disney in 2010 , Paramount Pictures received 9 % of the box office gross generated by Iron Man 3 . Deadline.com calculated the net profit of the film to be $ 391 @.@ 8 million , when factoring together all expenses and revenues for the film . 
 = = = = North America = = = = 
 Iron Man 3 is the 18th highest @-@ grossing film , the second highest @-@ grossing 2013 film , as well as the fourth highest @-@ grossing comic @-@ book and superhero film . By the end of its opening day , Iron Man 3 made $ 68 @.@ 9 million ( including $ 15 @.@ 6 million from late Thursday shows ) , achieving the seventh highest @-@ grossing opening day . By the end of its opening weekend , the film earned $ 174 @.@ 1 million , making it the fourth @-@ highest opening weekend of all time ( behind Jurassic World , The Avengers , and Avengers : Age of Ultron ) . Of the opening @-@ weekend audience , 55 % was over 25 years old , and 61 % were males , while only 45 % of the gross originated from 3 @-@ D screenings . Opening @-@ weekend earnings from IMAX amounted to $ 16 @.@ 5 million . It topped the box office during two consecutive weekends and achieved the fifth largest second @-@ weekend gross with $ 72 @.@ 5 million . 
 = = = = Outside North America = = = = 
 Iron Man 3 is the 10th @-@ highest @-@ grossing film , the second highest @-@ grossing 2013 film , the second @-@ highest @-@ grossing superhero and comic @-@ book film , and the fifth @-@ highest @-@ grossing film distributed by Disney . The film earned $ 13 @.@ 2 million on its opening day ( Wednesday , April 24 , 2013 ) from 12 countries . Through Sunday , April 28 , it earned a five @-@ day opening weekend of $ 198 @.@ 4 million from 42 countries . The film 's opening @-@ weekend gross included $ 7 @.@ 1 million from IMAX venues . It set opening @-@ day records in the Philippines ( surpassed by Man of Steel ) , Taiwan , Singapore , Vietnam , Malaysia , China , Ukraine , Russia and the CIS , both single and opening day records in Thailand and South Africa , as well as a single @-@ day record in Hong Kong . It also scored the second @-@ biggest opening day in Argentina ( only behind Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 ) . The film set opening @-@ weekend records in the Asia Pacific region , in Latin America , and in individual countries including Argentina ( first surpassed by Fast & Furious 6 , when including weekday previews ) , Ecuador , Hong Kong , Indonesia , Vietnam , Taiwan , the Philippines , Malaysia , Singapore , Thailand , South Africa , and the United Arab Emirates . It also achieved the second @-@ largest opening weekend in Mexico , Brazil , and Russia and the CIS . In India , it had the second @-@ best opening weekend for a Hollywood film after The Amazing Spider @-@ Man . IMAX opening @-@ weekend records were set in Taiwan , the Netherlands , Brazil , and the Philippines . It is the highest @-@ grossing film in Indonesia , Malaysia and Vietnam and the second highest @-@ grossing film in Singapore and the Philippines ( behind The Avengers ) . It topped the weekend box office outside North America three consecutive times . 
 In China , where part of the production took place , the film set a midnight @-@ showings record with $ 2 @.@ 1 million , as well as single @-@ day and opening @-@ day records with $ 21 @.@ 5 million ( on its opening day ) . Through its first Sunday , the film earned an opening @-@ weekend total of $ 64 @.@ 1 million , making China 's opening the largest for the film , followed by a $ 23 @.@ 1 million opening in Russia and the CIS , and a $ 21 @.@ 2 million opening in the UK , Ireland and Malta . With total earnings reaching $ 124 million , it was the highest @-@ grossing American film in China in 2013 , and the country is the film 's highest @-@ grossing market after North America , followed by South Korea ( $ 64 @.@ 2 million ) and the UK , Ireland and Malta ( $ 57 @.@ 1 million ) . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 79 % approval rating with an average rating of 7 / 10 based on 286 reviews . The website 's consensus reads , " With the help of its charismatic lead , some impressive action sequences , and even a few surprises , Iron Man 3 is a witty , entertaining adventure and a strong addition to the Marvel canon . " Metacritic gave a score of 62 out of 100 , based on 44 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . 
 In an early review by the trade magazine The Hollywood Reporter , Todd McCarthy said that , " After nearly crashing and burning on his last solo flight in 2010 , Iron Man returns refreshed and ready for action in this spirited third installment ... [ that ] benefits immeasurably from the irreverent quicksilver humor of co @-@ writer and director Shane Black . Calling the film " darker and more serious than its predecessors , " Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times credited Black for " chang [ ing ] this billion @-@ dollar @-@ plus franchise 's tone for the better while keeping the same actor as Tony Stark . ... There is quite a bit of Black 's trademark attitude and humor here as well , things like a throwaway reference to the sci @-@ fi classic Westworld and a goofy character who has Tony Stark 's likeness tattooed on his forearm . Black and company throw all kinds of stuff at the audience , and though it doesn 't all work , a lot of it does and the attempt to be different and create <unk> twists is always appreciated . " Rafer Guzman of Newsday characterized Iron Man as " the anti @-@ Batman , all zip and zingers . He 's also , suddenly , rather family @-@ friendly . Some of the movie 's best moments are shared by Stark and latchkey kid Harley ( Ty Simpkins ) , who mock their budding father @-@ son relationship while acting it out . " Psychology Today concluded that the film presented an accurate portrayal of Tony Stark 's posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms . 
 Nick De Semlyen of the UK film magazine Empire had criticisms , even while giving the film four of five stars . Finding it " a swinging caper with wit , balls , heart and exploding baubles , " he said the villainous " super @-@ soldiers who can regenerate body parts and survive astounding damage [ are ] visually interesting ... but their motivation is murky and unconvincing . " Likewise Joshua Rothkopf of Time Out New York bestowed 3 of 5 stars , saying , " Black has massively upped the verbal sparring and kept the broad inventiveness of comic @-@ book malleability in mind . ... The most wonderful of Black 's surprises harkens back to his ' 80s reputation for character revision and is simply too good to ruin here . " But , he asked , " [ W ] hy , finally , are we down at the docks — in the dark , no less — for one of those lumbering climaxes involving swinging shipping cranes ? The energy bleeds out of the film ; it 's as if the producers were scared the crowd would riot over not enough digital <unk> . " 
 Reacting more negatively , Stephen Whitty of The Star @-@ Ledger found the film " slickly enjoyable " for the visual effects , but said , " [ T ] here 's something empty about the film . Like Tony 's suits , it 's shiny and polished . But this time , there 's nobody inside ... This movie has neither the emotionalism of the first film , nor the flashy villains of the second ... Tony 's relationship with girlfriend Pepper Potts is in inexplicable jeopardy — and then simply fixes itself . A supposedly cute kid sidekick — a true sign of authorial desperation — is introduced , and then dropped . " Michael Phillips of the Chicago Tribune echoed this , saying , " [ I ] n a gleefully cynical bid for a preteen audience ( a few years too young for the violence in Iron Man 3 , I 'd say ) , Stark befriends a bullied 8 @-@ year @-@ old [ sic ] ( Ty Simpkins ) who becomes his tag @-@ along and sometime savior ... Stark no longer needs to be in the Iron Man suit . He 's able to operate the thing remotely when needed . The movie 's like that too . It 's decent superhero <unk> , but rather remote and vaguely secondhand . At this point , even with Black 's flashes of black humor , the machinery is more or less taking care of itself , offering roughly half of the genial wit and enjoyment of the first Iron Man . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Future = = 
 = = = Possible sequel = = = 
 In March 2013 , Black stated that Downey 's original contract with Marvel Studios , which expired after the release of Iron Man 3 , may be extended in order for the actor to appear in a second Avengers film and at least one more Iron Man film . He said : " There has been a lot of discussion about it : ' Is this the last Iron Man for Robert [ Downey , Jr . ] ? ' Something tells me that it will not be the case , and [ he ] will be seen in a fourth , or fifth . " In April 2013 , Cheadle stated that Iron Man 3 could be the final film in the series , saying , " The door is always left open in these kinds of movies especially when they do as well as they have done . I know there was talk of making sure we did this one right , and if it worked it could be the last one . There 's room for more to be done with these characters . We 're getting to a sweet spot with Tony and Rhodey , anyway . " In September 2014 , in regards to a fourth film , Downey said , " There isn 't one in the pipe ... No , there 's no plan for a fourth Iron Man . " Despite this , in April 2016 , Downey stated that he was open to reprising his role in a potential fourth Iron Man film , saying " I feel like I could do one more . " 
 = = = Marvel One @-@ Shot = = = 
 In February 2014 , Marvel released the One @-@ Shot film , All Hail the King , on Thor : The Dark World 's home media , featuring Kingsley reprising his role as Trevor Slattery , and continues Slattery 's story from the end of the film . 
 = Hipposideros besaoka = 
 Hipposideros besaoka is an extinct bat from Madagascar in the genus Hipposideros . It is known from numerous jaws and teeth , which were collected in a cave at Anjohibe in 1996 and described as a new species in 2007 . The site where H. besaoka was found is at most 10 @,@ 000 years old ; other parts of the cave have yielded H. commersoni , a living species of Hipposideros from Madagascar , and some material that is distinct from both species . H. besaoka was larger than H. commersoni , making it the largest insectivorous bat of Madagascar , and had broader molars and a more robust lower jaw . As usual in Hipposideros , the second upper premolar is small and displaced from the toothrow , and the second lower premolar is large . 
 = = Taxonomy and distribution = = 
 In 1996 , a team led by biologist David Burney collected breccias containing bats and other animals from the cave of Anjohibe in northwestern Madagascar . The bats in the sample were described by Karen Samonds ( previously Irwin ) in her 2006 Ph.D. dissertation and a 2007 paper . She found several living species in addition to two extinct ones , Triaenops goodmani and Hipposideros besaoka , that she described as new . Hipposideros , the genus to which H. besaoka is assigned , contains the living species Hipposideros commersoni from Madagascar , among many others . The specific name besaoka is the Malagasy for " big chin " . The material of H. besaoka is from locality TW @-@ 10 within the cave and is about 10 @,@ 000 years old or younger . A cladistic analysis using morphological data suggests that H. besaoka is most closely related to the mainland African H. gigas and H. vittatus , previously included in H. commersoni , and somewhat more distantly to H. commersoni itself . 
 Samonds also found Hipposideros material in other sites at Anjohibe , but did not assign it to H. besaoka . In Old SE , also at most 10 @,@ 000 years old , a single fourth upper premolar ( P4 ) was found with dimensions different from those seen in both H. commersoni and H. besaoka and lacking a cusp on the front lingual ( inner ) corner , present in both other species ; Samonds assigned this specimen to Hipposideros sp. cf . H. commersoni . In NCC @-@ 1 ( estimated 69 @,@ 600 to 86 @,@ 800 years old ) , a lower incisor and a third lower molar ( m3 ) were found ; these teeth resemble H. commersoni and are distinct from H. besaoka , so Samonds assigned them to the former species . Locality <unk> , which could not be dated , contained a few teeth and isolated jaws of Hipposideros . Some of these showed measurements distinct from both Hipposideros species , rendering the assignment of the material doubtful ; Samonds referred it to H. sp. cf . H. commersoni . 
 = = Description = = 
 Hipposideros besaoka is known from numerous jaw bones and isolated teeth . The material is identifiable as Hipposideros by the dental formula of 1 @.@ 1 @.@ 2 @.@ 32 @.@ 1 @.@ 2 @.@ 3 ( one incisor , one canine , two premolars , and three molars in the upper dentition on both the left and right ; two incisors , one canine , two premolars , and three molars in the lower dentition on the left and right ) ; the second upper premolar ( P2 ) is shifted out of the toothrow toward the side of the skull , so that the canine ( C1 ) and P4 touch or nearly touch ; and the second lower premolar ( p2 ) is large and has a broad , steep facet on the buccal ( outer ) side . Morphometric analysis shows that H. besaoka is significantly different from H. commersoni and falls outside the substantial variation within that species . In particular , the upper molars are broader and the mandible ( lower jaw ) is more robust . In bats , robust mandibles are often associated with a diet that includes hard objects . H. besaoka was the largest insectivorous bat of Madagascar , a position now filled by the smaller H. commersoni . 
 = = = Jaws = = = 
 The premaxillary bones each house a single incisor , which is located at the front tip . They end in a V shape at the front margin and in a narrow point at the back margin . Inside each premaxilla is a large opening , the anterior palatal foramen . The maxillary bone contains the other upper teeth . The mandible ranges from thin to robust and houses the lower teeth . 
 = = = Teeth = = = 
 The upper incisors are small and flat @-@ crowned and are weakly divided into two lobes . A single large cusp is present on C1 , with a smaller shelf at the back side . P2 is very small and P4 contains a high cusp at the front , a smaller cusp before it on the inner ( lingual ) side , and a shelf behind the high cusp . The length of P4 averages 2 @.@ 13 mm , with a standard deviation ( SD ) of 0 @.@ 104 mm , and width is 2 @.@ 52 mm with an SD of 0 @.@ 168 mm . On the first upper molar ( M1 ) , the <unk> , a basin between cusps at the front of the tooth , is closed . The second molar ( M2 ) is similar , but smaller and more squared . M3 is much smaller and has a reduced crown pattern resembling a W. 
 The two incisors on each side of the lower jaw are small and have three cusps . The lower canine ( c1 ) has one high and narrow cusp . The second lower premolar ( p2 ) is a large tooth with a high central cusp and high crests connecting this cusp to the front and back edges . A second , smaller cusp is present in the back crest . The fourth premolar ( p4 ) also has a high central cusp ; in addition , there are smaller roots before and behind it on the lingual side . This tooth has two roots . In the first lower molar ( m1 ) , a large tooth , the cusp complex at the front ( the trigonid ) is high and the one at the back ( the talonid ) is lower . Among the cusps of the trigonid , the protoconid is highest and the metaconid and paraconid are lower and about equally high . The cingula ( shelves ) at the front and the back are low . The second molar ( m2 ) is similar and only a trifle smaller , but m3 is much smaller and has a reduced talonid . Length of m3 averages 2 @.@ 37 mm ( SD 0 @.@ 098 mm ) and width 1 @.@ 76 mm ( SD 0 @.@ 076 mm ) . 
 = Ski flying = 
 Ski flying is an individual sport discipline derived from ski jumping , in which much greater distances can be achieved . It is a form of competitive Nordic skiing where athletes descend at very fast speeds along a specially built takeoff ramp using skis only ; jump from the end of it with as much power as they can generate ; then glide – or ' fly ' – as far as possible down a steeply sloped hill ; and ultimately land in a stable manner . Points are awarded for distance and stylistic merit by five judges , and events are sanctioned by the International Ski Federation ( FIS ) . 
 The rules and scoring in ski flying are mostly the same as they are in ski jumping , and events under the discipline are usually contested as part of the Ski Jumping World Cup season , but the hills ( of which there are only five , all in Europe ) are constructed to a different standard in order to enable jumps of up to two thirds longer in distance . There is also a stronger emphasis on aerodynamics and harnessing the wind , as well as an increased element of danger due to athletes flying much higher and faster than in ski jumping . 
 From its beginnings in the 1930s , ski flying has developed its own distinct history and given rise to all of the sport 's world records . The first hill intended specifically for ski flying was built in Slovenia in 1934 , after which both Germany and Austria built their own hills in 1950 . This was followed by Norway in 1966 , the United States in 1970 , and the Czech Republic in 1980 . In the 1960s to 1980s , a friendly rivalry between the European venues saw world records being set regularly , together with evolutions in technique to fly longer distances . 
 Ski flying remains very popular in Slovenia and Norway , where the most recent world records over the past two decades have been set in front of audiences numbering 30 @,@ 000 – 60 @,@ 000 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1930s – 40s = = = 
 = = = = Breaking the 100 metre barrier and the birth of ski flying = = = = 
 The origins of ski flying can be traced directly to 15 March 1936 in Planica , Slovenia ( then a part of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia ) , when 18 @-@ year @-@ old Austrian Josef " Sepp " Bradl became the first man in history to land a ski jump of over 100 metres ( 330 ft ) . His world record jump of 101 @.@ 5 m ( 333 ft ) was set at Bloudkova velikanka ( " Bloudek giant " ) , a new hill designed and completed in 1934 by engineers Stanko Bloudek and Ivan Rožman , together with <unk> <unk> . With jumps now in the triple digits , Bloudek enthused : " That was no longer ski jumping . That was ski flying ! " It was with these words that ski flying took on a life of its own . Such was the awe and disbelief at these massive jumps , the units of measurement were trivialised by the media , who suggested that the metre used in Yugoslavia was shorter than elsewhere in Europe . 
 Bradl later spoke fondly of the jump which made him an icon in the sport : 
 The air pushed violently against my chest ; I leaned right into it and let it carry me . I had only one wish : to fly as far as possible ! ... [ After landing the jump ] , many thousands of curious eyes looked up at the judges ' tower . I could hardly believe it when an additional ' 1' popped up on the scoreboard ! 
 = = = = Dispute between the FIS and Planica = = = = 
 In the early 1930s , prior to the construction of Bloudkova velikanka , the FIS had deemed ski jumping hills with a K @-@ point ( German : <unk> ) of 70 m ( 230 ft ) to be the absolute largest permissible . Athletes who chose to compete on hills with a K @-@ point of more than 80 m ( 260 ft ) were outright denied a licence to jump , and events allowing for distances beyond 90 m ( 300 ft ) were strongly discouraged – even denounced – on the grounds that they were unnecessarily dangerous and brought the sport into disrepute . Bloudek and his team nonetheless went ahead and flouted the rules in creating a so @-@ called " mammoth hill " specifically designed for previously unimaginable distances . Bloudkova velikanka originally had a K @-@ point of 90 m , by far the largest of any hill at the time , but was upgraded in less than two years to 106 m ( 348 ft ) in eager anticipation of the 100 + m jumps to come . In 1938 , exactly two years to the day of his milestone jump , Josef Bradl improved his world record by a wide margin to 107 m ( 351 ft ) . 
 After a period of wrangling and increasing public interest in the novelty of this new ' extreme ' form of ski jumping , the FIS relented . In 1938 , a decision was made at the fifteenth International Ski Congress in Helsinki , Finland to allow for " experimental " hill design , thereby officially recognising ski flying as a sanctioned discipline . Despite this reluctant recognition , the FIS still frowned upon the practice of aiming predominantly for long distances over style , and to this day refuse to publish lists of world records in an official capacity . Furthermore , the rules for ski flying would not be fully established until after World War II . 
 In 1941 , with the K @-@ point increased further to 120 m ( 390 ft ) , the world record was broken five times in Planica : it went from 108 m ( 354 ft ) to 118 m ( 387 ft ) in a single day , shared between four athletes . After World War II had passed , Fritz <unk> matched the K @-@ point with a jump of 120 m in 1948 . This marked the last time Planica would hold the world record for almost two decades , as emerging new hills would soon provide stern competition . 
 = = = 1950s – 60s = = = 
 = = = = New hills across Europe = = = = 
 A challenger to Planica arrived in 1949 with the construction of Heini @-@ Klopfer @-@ <unk> ( " Heini Klopfer ski flying hill " ) in Oberstdorf , West Germany . Designed by former ski jumper turned architect Heini Klopfer , as well as then @-@ active ski jumpers Toni <unk> and Sepp Weiler , the hill had a K @-@ point of 120 m to match that of Bloudkova velikanka . The FIS , still wary of the rising popularity of ski flying and wanting to keep it in check , refused to sanction the construction of the hill , having previously denounced the 1947 and 1948 events in Planica . 
 The stance of the FIS eased once again , as the inaugural event in Oberstdorf was given approval to be staged in 1950 . During this week @-@ long event , an estimated crowd of altogether 100 @,@ 000 witnessed the world record fall three times , with Dan <unk> claiming the final figure of 135 m ( 443 ft ) . Tauno <unk> eclipsed it the following year by jumping 139 m ( 456 ft ) , a world record which would stay in place for almost ten years until Jože <unk> jumped 141 m ( 463 ft ) in 1961 . The past two decades of Planica holding a near @-@ monopoly over the world record now seemed a distant memory , as it would instead be Oberstdorf 's turn to do exactly the same . 
 Also in 1950 , a ski flying hill was built at Kulm in <unk> / Bad <unk> , Austria . Peter Lesser first equalled the world record there in 1962 , improving it three years later to 145 m ( 476 ft ) . Another hill entered the scene in 1966 , when Vikersundbakken ( " Vikersund hill " ) in Vikersund , Norway was rebuilt to ski flying specifications , having originally opened as a ski jumping hill in 1936 . On this newly rebuilt hill the world record was first equalled , then broken twice to end up at 154 m ( 505 ft ) in 1967 . Although hills in Norway were still at the forefront of ski jumping , their prominence in ski flying was short @-@ lived , as it would be the last time Vikersund would hold a world record until four decades later . 
 Seeking to co @-@ operate on hill design and event organisation , the venues at Kulm , Oberstdorf and Planica formed the KOP working group in 1962 ( KOP being an abbreviation of Kulm / Oberstdorf / Planica ) . This group would go on to consult with the FIS in all aspects of ski flying , celebrating their 50th anniversary in 2012 . In 1953 , Kulm hosted the first International Ski Flying Week , which would be the premier event in ski flying until 1972 . 
 = = = = Breaking the 150 metre barrier = = = = 
 In 1967 , in Oberstdorf , Lars Grini became the first to reach 150 m ( 490 ft ) . Planica triumphantly reclaimed its world record in 1969 with a new hill named Velikanka bratov Gorišek ( " Giant by brothers Gorišek " ) . This was the brainchild of Slovenian brothers Janez and Vlado Gorišek , both engineers , who opted to design a new hill with a K @-@ point of 153 m ( 502 ft ) instead of enlarging the adjacent Bloudkova velikanka , which was showing signs of deterioration . Today , Janez is affectionately called the " father " of modern ski flying and a revered figure in Slovenia . Bloudkova velikanka was subsequently <unk> as a ski jumping hill . 
 At the opening event of Velikanka bratov Gorišek , five world records were set : Bjørn Wirkola and Jiří Raška traded it among themselves four times , until Manfred Wolf ended their run with a jump of 165 m ( 541 ft ) . It can be said that competition between hill locations , all vying for world record honours , truly began at this time . The 1960s remains the decade with the highest amount of world records since the advent of ski flying , with seventeen in total being set on the hills in Oberstdorf , Planica , Kulm and Vikersund . By contrast the 1950s had the fewest with four , all being set in Oberstdorf . 
 = = = 1970s = = = 
 = = = = Planica vs. Oberstdorf = = = = 
 The world record stayed in Planica for four years , during which the K @-@ point at Velikanka bratov Gorišek was upgraded to 165 m in time for the inaugural Ski Flying World Championships in 1972 , which eventually superseded International Ski Flying Week . This new event was sanctioned a year earlier by the FIS at their 28th International Ski Congress in Opatija , Croatia ( then a part of Yugoslavia ) . Much like in 1938 when the discipline received official recognition from the FIS , another milestone had been reached as ski flying was now granted its own world championship @-@ level event on par with the Ski Jumping World Championships , having spent almost four decades as a mere ' special attraction ' alongside its older and more prestigious sibling . 
 With no world records set at the 1972 event , the organisers in Oberstdorf got to work by upgrading their hill to a K @-@ point of 175 m ( 574 ft ) for the 1973 Ski Flying World Championships . Janez Gorišek was brought in to oversee the project following Heini Klopfer 's death in 1968 . With the gauntlet laid down , the results were showcased immediately when Heinz <unk> set a world record of 169 m ( 554 ft ) in Oberstdorf . Determined to claim the world record for himself , Walter Steiner – the reigning Ski Flying World Champion – jumped 175 m ( 574 ft ) and 179 m ( 587 ft ) but crashed heavily on both attempts , sustaining a concussion and a fractured rib . He would finish the event with a silver medal , behind winner Hans @-@ Georg <unk> . 
 A year later in Planica , in front of a 50 @,@ 000 @-@ strong crowd , Steiner finally achieved the world record he had been striving for , landing a jump of 169 m to equal that of <unk> in 1973 . Spectators were astonished and the event organisers momentarily bewildered , as Steiner had landed well beyond the markers used to indicate distance alongside the hill , which only went as far as the existing K @-@ point of 165 m . For the first time since their respective hills had been built , the competition was levelled between Oberstdorf and Planica . On the next day of the event in the latter , Steiner tried to go even further : he landed at 177 m ( 581 ft ) but fell down on what was almost flat ground , although this time he managed to walk away ( albeit on unsteady legs ) with only cuts to his face . 
 = = = = Safety issues arise = = = = 
 All these increasingly long distances came at a price , as illustrated by filmmaker Werner Herzog in his 1974 documentary The Great Ecstasy of <unk> Steiner . During both the aforementioned events in Oberstdorf and Planica , several athletes including Steiner had far exceeded the limits of the hill by simply ' running out of slope ' or ' out @-@ jumping ' the hill . Jumps were much further than in the 1950s , during which the old <unk> technique was still in use . The results were now potentially fatal each time : athletes were coming only metres away from landing on completely flat ground , or the equivalent of falling from a multi @-@ storey building . Furthermore , only a wool cap and goggles – or no headgear at all – were worn ; an antiquated feature left unchanged from the very earliest days of ski jumping more than 150 years prior . In 1979 , at their 32nd International Ski Congress in Nice , France , the FIS mandated helmets to be worn by athletes at all ski jumping and flying events . 
 In Herzog 's documentary , Steiner is shown to reflect with trepidation in Oberstdorf : 
 Ski flying has reached the point where it 's beginning to present real dangers . We 've just about reached the limit , I believe , as far as speed is concerned . ... Maybe I 'd prefer to turn back [ and ] go back to flying off <unk> or 130 @-@ metre hills , but it 's the thrill of flying so far that nevertheless gives me a kick . 
 Further down the hill and pointing to a wooden marker indicating Steiner 's failed efforts , Herzog explains solemnly : 
 This mark is , in fact , the point where ski flying starts to be inhuman . Walter Steiner was in very great danger . If he 'd flown 10 m ( 33 ft ) more , he 'd have landed down here on the flat . Just imagine , it 's like falling from a height of 110 m ( 360 ft ) onto a flat surface : to a certain death . 
 In Planica , Herzog quoted Steiner as having said that he felt like he was in an arena with 50 @,@ 000 people waiting to see him crash . On the third day of the event , while talking to journalists after a jump , Steiner appeared jaded at the organisers ' pressure on him to set more world records at the expense of his well @-@ being : " They let me jump too far four times . That shouldn 't happen . It 's scandalous of those Yugoslav judges up there who are responsible . " 
 The stalemate between the venues did not last long , as four world records were set in Oberstdorf within a span of four days in 1976 , bringing the official figure up to 176 m ( 577 ft ) set by Toni <unk> at the end of the event . Three years later , Planica drew level once again when Klaus Ostwald equalled the world record . Elsewhere , in the Western Hemisphere , the United States opened its own ski flying venue in 1970 : Copper Peak in Ironwood , Michigan had a K @-@ point of 145 m , therefore not designed for world record distances from the outset . It is the only ski flying hill to have been built outside of Europe . 
 = = = 1980s = = = 
 = = = = Harrachov joins in , Planica vs. Oberstdorf continues = = = = 
 Planica and Oberstdorf briefly had a new challenger when the <unk> <unk> hill in Harrachov , Czech Republic ( then a part of Czechoslovakia ) was opened in 1980 . For one year , all three venues shared the world record when Armin Kogler jumped 176 m at Harrachov 's opening event . He improved this to 180 m ( 590 ft ) in 1981 , this time in Oberstdorf . Notably , at the 1980 Harrachov event , 16 @-@ year @-@ old rookie Steve Collins won all three competitions with jumps consistently close to world record figures . At the 1983 Ski Flying World Championships , Pavel Ploc brought the world record back to Harrachov ( which had since been upgraded to K185 ) by jumping 181 m ( 594 ft ) ; this remains the last time a world record was set in Harrachov . 
 The issue of safety in ski flying became a serious talking point at the aforementioned 1983 event . In only a single day , the hill in Harrachov – a location named " Devil 's Mountain " – became notorious for causing violent accidents . Horst <unk> crashed and suffered a concussion , while Steinar Bråten and Jens Weißflog had their own crashes . Ploc also crashed heavily in 1980 and 1985 . All escaped serious injury , but it was a chilling precursor of more to come . 
 Over the next few years , the one @-@ upmanship continued as the world record was again traded between Planica and Oberstdorf . In 1984 , Matti Nykänen jumped 182 m ( 597 ft ) twice on the same day in Oberstdorf . By improving this to 185 m ( 607 ft ) the next day , Nykänen became the first athlete since Reidar Andersen in 1935 to set three world records in the space of 24 hours . It would be the end of an era as this was the last time a world record was set in Oberstdorf ; altogether twenty were set there . 
 In 1985 , to coincide with that year 's Ski Flying World Championships , Planica underwent another upgrade to increase the K @-@ point to 185 m . World records were again shattered as a result . Mike Holland first jumped 186 m ( 610 ft ) to become the first American world record holder since Henry Hall in 1921 . Nykänen would follow this up by landing a metre further . In the final round of that event , and in a show of dominance as he closed in on his second Ski Jumping World Cup title , Nykänen wowed the crowd with a jump of 191 m ( 627 ft ) to punctuate his title win and effectively bring the Planica – Oberstdorf rivalry to a close . 
 Mike Holland later described his own jump : 
 The world record jump was very smooth . It felt like I was lying on my stomach on a glass coffee table , watching a movie projected on a screen underneath the table . Although the flight was very smooth , it seemed like the movie projector was running the film faster than intended . 
 = = = = Safety issues reach their peak = = = = 
 The 1986 Ski Flying World Championships in Kulm highlighted the dangers of the sport in a most graphic way . In the second competition of the event , Andreas Felder equalled the world record to win the gold medal , ahead of Nykänen who won bronze . However , this was overshadowed by a series of horrific accidents which took place earlier . In treacherous crosswind conditions , Masahiro Akimoto lost control moments after takeoff , falling suddenly from a height of 9 m ( 30 ft ) onto his back . He suffered a fractured ankle in addition to chest and shoulder injuries . A few minutes later Rolf Åge Berg frighteningly lost control at the same height , at an estimated inrun speed of 112 kilometres per hour ( 70 mph ) , but was able to land safely on both skis . 
 Immediately afterwards , Ulf Findeisen fell out of the air on his jump , crashing down head @-@ first from 9 m and flipping head over heels repeatedly along the slope , only coming to a stop several seconds later . Al Trautwig , commentating for American TV network ABC , described Findeisen as looking " like a ragdoll " after the fall . Former ski jumper Jeff Hastings , co @-@ commentating , said : " I 'm feeling a little sick to my stomach , Al ... I can 't believe this . I 've never seen ski flying like this ... So many falls . " Findeisen was barely conscious and had to be stretchered away , later going into cardiac arrest but surviving . 
 In the next round of the competition , Berg attempted another jump but was not as fortunate this time : he fell out of the air , just as before , and crashed almost identically to Findeisen . One of Berg 's skis , which had come loose after impact and was still attached to his foot , <unk> around and hit him in the face – exposed due to his goggles detaching – as he was sliding to a stop . His injuries , including concussion and a broken ACL , were career @-@ ending . At this point , Trautwig began calling into question the nature of the sport : " Jeff , we talk about the fear and why the ski flyers are scared ... I 'm really starting to ask , why we 're here and why they 're doing it . " 
 Ski flying endured a tentative era beginning in 1987 , when Piotr Fijas set a world record of 194 m ( 636 ft ) in Planica . With height over the hills and inrun speeds at an all @-@ time high ( Pavel Ploc reached 115 @.@ 6 km / h ( 71 @.@ 8 mph ) off the table in Harrachov in 1983 ) , as well as distances approaching 200 m ( 660 ft ) , the FIS took a stance against record @-@ hunting for safety reasons . From Felder 's world record in 1986 onwards , the FIS implemented a rule in which distance points would not be awarded beyond 191 m ; the jump would still count , but no points further than that could be achieved . Per this rule , Fijas ' jump was officially scaled down to 191 m by the FIS , but the KOP group ( led by the organisers in Kulm , Oberstdorf and Planica ) independently recorded the actual figure . Neither Kulm nor Planica would hold a ski flying event for several years , leaving Oberstdorf and Vikersund to host the Ski Flying World Championships in 1988 and 1990 , respectively . At those events , world record distances and major incidents were avoided . 
 = = = 1990s = = = 
 = = = = New safety measures = = = = 
 The dangers of the sport were still on full display at the 1992 Ski Flying World Championships in Harrachov , where Andreas Goldberger suffered a similar crash to the ones which occurred in Kulm in 1986 . On the first day of the event , a few seconds into his jump , dangerous wind conditions forced Goldberger to lose control at a height of around 9 m and a speed of more than 107 @.@ 4 km / h ( 66 @.@ 7 mph ) , sending him plummeting face @-@ first onto the hill below . He was taken by helicopter to a hospital , having sustained a broken arm and collarbone . František <unk> also crashed , but was able to walk away with some help . 
 The second and final day was stopped and cancelled due to worsened weather , culminating in a high @-@ speed fall on the outrun by Christof Duffner after he landed an unofficial , world record @-@ equalling jump of 194 m . Goldberger 's efforts from earlier in the event were enough to earn him a silver medal behind eventual winner Noriaki Kasai , who became the first non @-@ European Ski Flying World Champion . Goldberger was able to return to top @-@ level competition within less than a year . 
 Protective wind nets by the side of the hill were later installed in Harrachov for 1996 to minimise the effects of crosswind , along with major reprofiling of the slope to comply with FIS safety regulations . This reprofiling – particularly at the hill 's highest point , known as the ' knoll ' – was critical in reducing the fearsome height reached by athletes after takeoff , estimated to be 15 – 18 m ( 49 – 59 ft ) in 1980 . Thanks to these modifications , athletes no longer jumped with as much height as before and no major accidents have occurred in Harrachov since 1992 . 
 Speaking about his experience at the 1983 Ski Flying World Championships in Harrachov , Mike Holland said : 
 Climbing over the knoll , I thought ' this is SO damned high , I shouldn 't be this high . ' Since I wasn 't ready for such height and speed , I threw out my arms at the end of the flight and let myself down 4 m ( 13 ft ) short of the world record . 
 = = = = Technique changes : parallel to V @-@ style = = = = 
 It was during this time that the entire sport of ski jumping underwent a significant transition in technique . Until the early 1990s nearly all athletes used the Däscher technique or parallel style , in which the skis were held close together and parallel to each other . This had been the norm since the 1950s , evolving into a modified variation in the 1980s with the skis pointed diagonally off to the side in a crude attempt to increase surface area . However , this came largely at the expense of stability and balance , akin to ' walking a tightrope ' in mid @-@ air and leaving athletes at the mercy of the elements . Akimoto , Findeisen , Berg and Goldberger 's accidents were all caused by unpredictable gusts of wind which made them lose control at the highest and fastest stage of their jumps , exacerbated by an outdated technique ill @-@ suited to the new extremes of ski flying , as well as the prevalence of older hills featuring very steep slopes . 
 In the late 1980s and early 1990s , Jan <unk> pioneered the V @-@ style : skis were instead spread outwards in an aerodynamic " V " shape , with the athlete 's body lying much flatter between them . This created more surface area and lift , instantly enabling distances of up to ten per cent further . It also had a favourable effect of granting more stability in the air , although the peak speed was some 10 km / h ( 6 @.@ 2 mph ) slower than the parallel style . At first this new technique was looked upon unfavourably by the judges , who made it an issue to downgrade style points for those who used it . Nevertheless , within a few years , with <unk> having won the 1988 – 89 Ski Jumping World Cup season and other athletes promptly adopting the technique , the judges ' stance quietly eased and the V @-@ style became the standard still used today . 
 The technique itself had a transitional period of its own , going from a narrower " V " in the early 1990s – retaining some features of the parallel style – to a much wider one at the end of the decade . Some athletes ( such as Tommy Ingebrigtsen ) preferred to cross the back of the skis to exaggerate the " V " angle , while others ( such as Kazuyoshi Funaki and Jakub Janda ) leaned even more forward so that their body lay almost flat between the skis ; both variations remain in use . The V @-@ style was still not immune to failure if the air pressure under one ski was lost , but the results were much less catastrophic than with the parallel style ; the latter had resulted in more head @-@ first landings , whereas the V @-@ style saw somewhat ' safer ' landings on the back or shoulders . 
 = = = = Breaking the 200 metre barrier = = = = 
 In 1994 , ski flying returned to a newly independent Slovenia , where the hill in Planica had been reprofiled with the aim of allowing for jumps of more than 200 m . The FIS was strongly against this and initially threatened to cancel the event on the grounds that its regulations on hill design had been violated . Negotiations between the organisers in Planica and the FIS managed to defuse the situation , allowing that year 's Ski Flying World Championships to take place . Before the event , Espen Bredesen said : " Of course I want to be the first [ to reach 200 m ] , but I think that 210 m ( 690 ft ) or 215 m ( 705 ft ) are also possible . " 
 With all athletes having switched to the V @-@ style , the sport was about to reach one of its biggest ever milestones . During the training round on the opening day of the event , Martin Höllwarth jumped 196 m ( 643 ft ) to edge the world record ever closer to 200 m . This was the first time a world record had been set using the V @-@ style , meaning Piotr Fijas ' was the last to use the parallel style . Andreas Goldberger then got tantalisingly close to the magic number when he landed at 202 m ( 663 ft ) but failed to maintain his balance as he squatted down and touched the snow with his hands , rendering his jump an unofficial world record . The official honours went to Toni Nieminen only a short time later , who cleanly landed a history @-@ making jump of 203 m ( 666 ft ) to claim both the world record and the achievement of being the first ever ski jumper to break the 200 m barrier . 
 On the next day during the second training round , Christof Duffner almost had his moment of glory when he jumped 207 m ( 679 ft ) , but fell upon landing just as he had done two years earlier in Harrachov . In that same training round , Espen Bredesen claimed the world record for himself with a clean jump of 209 m ( 686 ft ) . The restrictive rule concerning jumps beyond 191 m , in place since 1986 , was subsequently abolished by the FIS . However , as the rule was still in place at the time of Nieminen and Bredesen 's jumps , their additional distances were nullified . This handed Jaroslav <unk> the Ski Flying World Championship at the end of the event , which was shortened to only a single competition round due to strong winds forcing cancellation of the other . 
 In 2014 , Nieminen spoke about the jump that cemented his name in the history books : 
 It was the kind of jump in which , even when arriving [ at the bottom of the hill ] in the landing position and not knowing at all what lies ahead , I remember that my legs were trembling . That 's how terrified I was . ... Overcoming your own fears is the best feeling . The nature of the sport is that one has to challenge themselves . That 's why this jump has remained a highlight of my career . 
 = = = = Planica dominates = = = = 
 Beginning with Fijas 's world record in 1987 , Planica enjoyed a very long period of exclusivity . Much like in the 1930s and 1940s , no other hills would come close to reclaiming the accolade for 24 years , despite nearly all receiving K @-@ point upgrades to 185 m . Only Ironwood remained unchanged at <unk> , staging its last event to date in 1994 with a hill record of 158 m ( 518 ft ) shared between Werner Schuster and Mathias Wallner . Since then , the hill has served as a popular tourist attraction in which sightseers are able to access the top of the inrun via an elevator . In 2013 , following almost two decades of disuse as a sporting venue , it was announced that the hill at Copper Peak would be renovated as the world 's largest ski jumping hill , additionally capable of staging summer events . 
 With eight years between Fijas and Höllwarth 's world records , it was the longest drought of unbroken records since that of Tauno <unk> from 1951 was broken by Jože <unk> in 1961 . The margin between Höllwarth and Nieminen 's world records was 7 m ( 23 ft ) , the largest since Sepp Weiler and Dan <unk> in 1950 , which was 8 m ( 26 ft ) . In Planica the world record was broken a further four times in the 1990s , ending with Tommy Ingebrigtsen jumping 219 @.@ 5 m ( 720 ft ) in 1999 to send ski flying into the new millennium . 
 = = = 2000s – present = = = 
 Further changes in technique , equipment and hill profiles have seen the world record increase by almost 50 m ( 160 ft ) within 21 years . In 2000 , the world record in Planica was improved by 5 @.@ 5 m ( 18 ft ) , with jumps of 224 @.@ 5 m ( 737 ft ) by Thomas <unk> and 225 m ( 738 ft ) by Andreas Goldberger . The latter stood for three years until being equalled by Adam <unk> in 2003 , but his achievement was only temporary . On the same day , and in a span of the next four , Matti Hautamäki set three consecutive world records of 227 @.@ 5 m ( 746 ft ) , 228 @.@ 5 m ( 750 ft ) and 231 m ( 758 ft ) , much like Matti Nykänen had done in 1984 . When interviewed soon after the event , Hautamäki said that " The longer one stays in the air , the more fun it is . " 
 Before the 2004 Ski Flying World Championships , the hill was renamed to Letalnica bratov Gorišek ( " Flying hill by brothers Gorišek " ) . In 2005 , Planica continued its dominance of ski flying when the world record was shattered four times on the same day . Tommy Ingebrigtsen , Bjørn Einar Romøren and Matti Hautamäki all traded records , with Romøren emerging victorious with a jump of 239 m ( 784 ft ) to claim the final figure . Some minutes after that , having already captured his second consecutive Ski Jumping World Cup title , Janne Ahonen went for broke by stretching out a jump of 240 m ( 790 ft ) but fell from a dangerous height and landed hard on flat ground ; his world record was rendered unofficial . Ahonen half @-@ jokingly said in a 2009 interview that had he not brought his jump down earlier than intended , he would have reached 250 m ( 820 ft ) , at which point " I would be a dead man . [ laughs ] " In the aftermath of the event and following numerous near @-@ flat ground landings , it became clear that ski flying had once again outgrown an older hill – which last saw an upgrade twelve years prior – and needed enlarging in the years to come . 
 = = = = Hill renovations and breaking the 250 metre barrier = = = = 
 In 2005 , almost immediately after the Planica event , talks were under way to upgrade the hill in Vikersund . This became a reality in mid @-@ 2010 , when the FIS announced major rule changes at the 47th International Ski Congress in Antalya , Turkey to allow for even larger ski flying hills to be constructed . Vikersund was the first to undergo renovation to increase its K @-@ point from 185 m to 195 m ( 640 ft ) , making it the largest flying hill in the world and the only one equipped for floodlit night events . Janez Gorišek , known for his expertise in ski flying hill design , was the leader of this project . The new facility was given a rousing introduction at its opening event in 2011 , when Johan <unk> <unk> jumped 243 m ( 797 ft ) and 246 @.@ 5 m ( 809 ft ) , returning the world record to Vikersund for the first time since 1967 . This was a ' trial ' event staged before the 2012 Ski Flying World Championships , which went on to draw a crowd of 60 @,@ 000 . 
 Another modification in Vikersund ( this time to K200 ) resulted in the coveted 250 m barrier being reached in 2015 , with Peter Prevc landing a clean jump right on the mark to claim another historic milestone in the sport . Prevc 's glory was short @-@ lived when Anders Fannemel broke this figure only a day later , landing a jump of 251 @.@ 5 m ( 825 ft ) to set the current world record . At the same event , prior to Fannemel 's jump , Dmitry Vassiliev crashed hard at 254 m ( 833 ft ) after exceeding the hill size boundary in an almost identical way to Janne Ahonen in Planica a decade earlier ; this gave Vassiliev unofficially the furthest distance ever reached in ski flying to date . 
 Also in 2015 , both Kulm and Planica finished upgrading their hills from K185 to K200 . All three aforementioned hills – Planica , Kulm and Vikersund – are now equipped for jumps exceeding 240 m , as well as having improved facilities for athletes and spectators . Although the new hills are much larger than ever before , most of them feature longer and less steeply angled slopes , designed purely for the V @-@ style and with the knowledge of 80 years ' worth of world record progression . <unk> tables have also been placed further back from the knoll and flight curves made shallower in order to allow athletes to glide more efficiently along the contour of the slope . This has significantly reduced such precarious heights over the knoll as was the case in the early 1990s and prior : in that era , athletes who knew only of the parallel style would aim to jump in an upward trajectory off the table , reaching vast heights but at the expense of distance . Furthermore , rather than glide , they instead plummeted towards the slope . However , compared to Vikersund , Planica is still extremely steep in the flight phase . 
 Anticipating a renewed world record rivalry , organisers in Vikersund have welcomed the healthy competition with Planica . Regarding the new hill in Kulm , Andreas Goldberger remarked that world records should not be expected there because of its different design and shorter hill profile . Oberstdorf is scheduled to receive an upgrade from K185 to K200 in time for the 2017 World Cup season and 2018 Ski Flying World Championships , leaving Harrachov ( K185 ) as the only hill having not been renovated since the 1990s . 
 At the end of the 2015 World Cup season , FIS race director Walter Hofer commented that the world record had reached its limit on the newest hills , and that no further expansion to their size was expected in the near future . He also noted in 2011 that the FIS rules on hill sizes would likely remain unchanged for another decade . Despite this , Janez Gorišek is said to have made plans for a 300 m ( 980 ft ) hill in Planica , albeit put on hold until the FIS rules are again changed . Anders Fannemel has said he believes 252 m ( 827 ft ) is the limit in Vikersund , but that the world record can be broken again in Planica . 
 = = Differences to ski jumping = = 
 Unlike ski jumping , which can be contested in the summer on specially equipped hills , ski flying is strictly a winter sport and not part of the Winter Olympics ; no world records have therefore been set at the games . Also in contrast to ski jumping , athletes are not able to practice on ski flying hills out @-@ of @-@ season as they are used only for competition events . Among the Alpine countries , there is an unwritten gentlemen 's agreement forbidding athletes under the age of eighteen to participate in ski flying events . 
 Rather than being considered a separate sport on its own , ski flying is essentially an offshoot of ski jumping involving larger hills and longer distances . According to former US ski jumping coach Larry Stone , " It 's the same thing , just bigger . You 're going faster and flying higher . ... Basically , it 's just a real big jump . " Today , the term " ski flying " itself has evolved to be used only for jumps in the region of 170 m ( 560 ft ) or further , with 200 – 240 m ( 660 – 790 ft ) being the competitive standard . By comparison , the longest ever distance from a ski jumping hill is 152 m ( 499 ft ) , set at <unk> ( " <unk> hill " ) in <unk> , Germany . Distances of around 90 – 140 m ( 300 – 460 ft ) are the standard on most ski jumping hills . 
 = = = Hills = = = 
 The main difference between ski flying and ski jumping pertains to hill design , as mandated by the FIS . Historically , hills with a K @-@ point ( German : <unk> ) or main landing zone of more than 145 m ( 476 ft ) were classed as ski flying hills . As jumping distances increased by the decade , so did a small number of unique hills at locations seeking to outdo each other in a friendly rivalry for world record honours . Since 1980 , there have only been five of these hills in Europe and one in the US . 
 On all modern ski flying hills the K @-@ point is set between 185 – 200 m ( 607 – 656 ft ) , with a hill size of 205 – 225 m ( 673 – 738 ft ) ; far greater than the largest ski jumping hills , which only have K @-@ points of up to 125 – 130 m ( 410 – 427 ft ) and a hill size of 140 – 145 m ( 459 – 476 ft ) . The angle of the hill in the landing zone is between 33 @.@ 2 – 35 degrees . Seven ski flying hills in total were constructed between 1934 and 1980 . Six are currently active , but only five of them as flying hills : 
 There have been a number of proposed ski flying hills , most of which never reached the construction stage . Two were planned in Finland , in Kemijärvi and <unk> , but neither projects were realized after their inception in 2007 . In Norway , prior to the renovation of Vikersund , there were serious talks about constructing a new ski flying hill at Rødkleiva in Oslo . The most recent proposal has come from China , together with German architects Graft , who are in the development stages of a ski jumping and flying hill complex at the <unk> ski resort in the Changbai Mountains . 
 = = = Events = = = 
 The first Ski Flying World Championships were held in Planica in 1972 and have been staged biennially at all hills ( except Ironwood ) since 1988 . The event replaced various incarnations of International Ski Flying Week , which ran from 1953 to 1989 . Gold , silver and bronze medals are awarded after two competitions , with the total points winner receiving the title of Ski Flying World Champion . A team competition was introduced in 2004 , in which medals are also awarded . 
 Ski flying events outside of the World Championships are a regular feature on the Ski Jumping World Cup calendar , usually taking place on two or three hills only . Because athletes almost always participate in both disciplines , points scored in ski flying also count towards the Ski Jumping World Cup standings . Since 1991 , an additional title and trophy – the Ski Flying World Cup – has been awarded at the end of each season to the overall points winner of solely ski flying competitions , even if only one was contested . In contrast to the Ski Flying World Championships , the Ski Flying World Cup is a season @-@ long contest . The former can be considered equivalent to the Ski Jumping World Championships , in that both are one @-@ off events staged during the Ski Jumping World Cup season , but are isolated from it ; therefore , points from neither are included as part of the World Cup standings . 
 = = Rules and technique = = 
 Ski flyers take off at speeds of 98 – 109 km / h ( 61 – 68 mph ) , flying as high as 6 – 9 m ( 20 – 30 ft ) above the hill , accelerating to around 120 – 130 km / h ( 75 – 81 mph ) before landing , and spending up to nine seconds in the air ; all these figures are considerably less in ski jumping . David <unk> , longtime commentator for British Eurosport , once described the appearance of ski flying as that of " flying like a bird " . 
 = = = Event organisation = = = 
 The FIS ' race director ' and ' jury ' are a core team of personnel in charge of the entire event . Walter Hofer has been the FIS chief race director of ski flying and ski jumping events since 1992 . Miran Tepeš , himself a former ski jumper , is the assistant race director and second @-@ in @-@ command to Hofer . Spectators at the venue watching from large screen displays , as well as viewers watching on TV , are able to see on @-@ screen graphics provided by the FIS . These graphics , which have significantly evolved in detail over the decades , display a multitude of information : an athlete 's name and nationality , their photo , bib number , traffic light status , wind speed and direction , distance jumped , personal best distance , judges ' scores , points achieved , and competition rank . 
 = = = The inrun = = = 
 A ski jump or ski flight begins from the ' inrun ' , a ramp structure at the top of the hill in the form of a tower or set naturally against the hill formation . Access to this area is via ski lift or on foot . The inrun is 113 – 133 @.@ 8 m ( 371 – 439 ft ) in length , inclined at an angle of 35 – 39 degrees . Since the late 1980s , when the V @-@ style began enabling jumps dangerously close to flat ground , the full length of a ski flying inrun has never been used due to safety reasons . At the bottom of the inrun – specifically the very tip or edge of the structure – is the ' table ' , which is set at a height of 2 @.@ 42 – 4 @.@ 75 m ( 7 @.@ 9 – 15 @.@ 6 ft ) above the hill surface . Contrary to popular misconception , the table is actually declined downwards instead upwards , with the angle of decline set between 10 @.@ 5 – 11 @.@ 25 degrees . 
 = = = Pre @-@ takeoff phase = = = 
 Near the top of the inrun , there is a ' start gate ' – a metal or wooden beam – on which an athlete sits and awaits their signal to jump via a set of traffic lights ( green , yellow and red ) . These lights are operated directly by Miran Tepeš . An athlete may enter the gate when yellow is shown . If red is shown after this point , the wind conditions will have been deemed unfavourable for a safe jump : the athlete must then carefully exit the gate as they had entered it and await another opportunity to jump . Failure to dismount the gate within ten to fifteen seconds of being shown a red light , or jumping without having been given the signal to go , will disqualify the athlete . 
 Wind speed is measured in metres per second ( m / s ) in the form of head- , <unk> and crosswind components . In ski flying there are ten separate wind sectors that are measured along the hill , with five on each side ; in ski jumping there are seven or less sectors . A hard limit , or " corridor of tolerance " , of 3 m / s ( 9 @.@ 8 ft / s ) is permitted at any time : if this is exceeded , all pending jumps are halted until the wind settles to an acceptable level . Weather conditions must be optimal in order to jump competitively and safely , therefore they are actively monitored by the jury , who continuously collaborate with the race directors in making decisions on how an event will progress . The resulting delays may last anywhere from under a minute , to many minutes depending on how variable the conditions are observed to be . 
 The position of the start gate determines the inrun speed , creating a difference of as much as 10 km / h ( 6 @.@ 2 mph ) depending on whether the gate is set higher ( thereby lengthening the inrun ) or lower ( shortening the inrun ) ; the difference in height between individual gates is 0 @.@ 5 m ( 1 @.@ 6 ft ) . Based on the jury 's decision , the gate position – of which there are several available numbers – is subject to being adjusted accordingly , including between each jump . In especially tricky conditions , athletes may sometimes be forced to enter and exit the gate multiple times before they are permitted to jump . 
 If conditions are normal and a green light is shown , the athlete 's coach – who is situated in a coaches ' section lower down the inrun with a flag in hand – gives them the final signal to go . Once given this signal , the athlete must commit to their jump within ten seconds or else risk disqualification : they are not allowed to exit the gate from whence they came . To begin descending the inrun , they drop down from the gate to a crouching position , upon which speed is rapidly picked up within seconds via built @-@ in tracks into which the skis are slotted . This streamlined crouch minimises air resistance along the inrun , and a further effort is made to reduce friction by not allowing the skis to bump too much against the sides of the tracks . Speed is measured from the table using a speed gun . 
 No ski poles are used , and no assistance from others ( such as a push from the gate ) is allowed . In heavy snow conditions the tracks can become clogged up , which reduces inrun speed and may cause an unpredictable descent for athletes . Event personnel standing by the sides of the inrun are often assigned to use leaf blowers to prevent the tracks from clogging up with snow . 
 = = = Takeoff and transition phase = = = 
 Moments before being propelled off the table , the athlete undergoes a sudden increase in g @-@ force due to the curvature – or ' compression ' – of the bottom of the inrun . They then initiate a very powerful , explosive jump that requires great leg strength . At this very instant , they adopt their own unique aerodynamic flying position in what is called the ' transition ' ; all of this taking place in only a tenth of a second . Timing is crucial and there is very little margin for error at this phase : a jump that begins too early or late off the table can mean the difference between an excellent , average or poor effort . Each athlete has their own method of generating as much inrun speed as possible , depending on such intricacies as crouch depth , hip angle , arm placement , or how far the torso is positioned over the knees . Body weight is also a factor ( see power @-@ to @-@ weight ratio ) , which has led to some athletes ' health becoming an issue over the years . 
 The most challenging stage of the takeoff is carrying the speed from the decline of the inrun with sufficient height over the ' knoll ' , and achieving the correct trajectory down the slope . The knoll is the highest point of the hill itself , from which it begins to slope downwards ; on modern ski flying hills the table is placed considerably far back from the knoll , so as to reduce the steepness of the flight curve . A skilled athlete is able to aggressively ' snap ' into the transition so as to clear the knoll with ease , thereby allowing them to focus completely on using their specialised aerodynamic flying technique to maximise distance further down the hill . Athletes of the highest skill level can consistently compensate for any lack of inrun speed with perfect timing off the table and an excellent transition . 
 However , there is a fine line between aggressiveness and over @-@ aggressiveness at takeoff . One of the most common mistakes made by athletes , including those at world class level , is to raise the ski tips too much during the transition : this excessive angle of attack causes the skis to act more as a spoiler than an efficient aerodynamic device , resulting in more height than distance . In a well @-@ executed jump , athletes will spend several seconds longer in the air than in ski jumping – up to five seconds more – which requires a different level of skill in order to sustain flight for a longer period , and showcases how the role of aerodynamics is magnified in ski flying . Not all athletes who excel in ski jumping are able do so in ski flying ( see the section on specialists ) . 
 = = = Flight phase and equipment = = = 
 Once the athlete has taken flight , characteristics similar to that of a glider come into force . Ski flyers are able to cover such tremendous distances and land safely primarily due to the skis they use , which are substantially wider and longer than their cross @-@ country or Alpine skiing counterparts . Each ski is attached securely at the front of the boot ; the heel , under which there is a wedge , is then attached to the ski using a hinged binding peg with a maximum length of 7 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) , allowing the athlete to spread the skis wide apart and lean forward into their preferred aerodynamic position . Much like aircraft wings , the skis are flexible to an extent , resulting in them bending significantly upon takeoff . Maintaining stability in the air is paramount : a loss of balance or pressure under the skis can lead to disaster ( see the section on accidents ) . 
 <unk> use of headwind and thermal updrafts along various sections of the hill is used to generate additional lift , creating pressure under the oversized skis and enabling athletes to effectively ride on a ' cushion of air ' . A reasonable amount of headwind is favourable to a long jump as it has the effect of delaying the athlete 's descent back onto the hill , whereas a tailwind or no wind at all is considered highly unfavourable and tends to shorten a jump by pushing the athlete downwards towards the hill too early . In particular , the presence of a tailwind forms one of the most challenging aspects of clearing the knoll and achieving a competitive distance . Conversely , in ideal headwind conditions , an athlete can ' catch ' an updraft along the middle of the hill – which always involves some degree of luck – and use it to glide even further than normal , making for an impressive visual effect for spectators . 
 To further aid athletes in gliding as aerodynamically as possible , they wear a one @-@ piece fabric bodysuit more similar to a wingsuit than a ski suit . This bodysuit is loose @-@ fitting and generates yet more lift , but the amount of slack is stringently regulated by the FIS so as to not allow for excessive <unk> and thereby reducing its <unk> , <unk> or parachute @-@ like properties . In the early 2000s , bodysuits had reached exceptionally baggy proportions , resulting in humorous comparisons to flying squirrels . A ban on these baggy suits came into effect soon after , and today the level of slack for bodysuits is measured by FIS scrutineers before and after each jump : if the amount is exceeded , that athlete is disqualified due to an ' equipment violation ' . 
 = = = Landing phase and distance measurement = = = 
 The ultimate aim is to land on , or ideally surpass , a line marked across the hill called the ' K @-@ point ' , ' critical point ' , or ' calculation line ' . In order to attain the most points from the style judges , athletes strive for a ' Telemark ' landing : instead of landing with simply both feet together , one foot is placed clearly in front of the other ( without sliding , so as to ' cheat ' ) , both feet held no more than four ski widths ' apart , and the body held stable with a straight back and arms outstretched . This pose must be maintained until the ' outrun ' – a line at the very end of the hill , where the slope has fully flattened out – is reached . The exact placement of landing is measured between the athlete 's front and back feet . Failing to make a Telemark landing results in a loss of style points . Considerably more points are lost if a landing fails before the outrun line , such as falling over or touching the ground with any part of the body except the feet . 
 Distance is measured from the edge of the table to the placement of landing by increments of 0 @.@ 5 m . This is done using electronic and video monitoring systems together with event personnel assigned to observe jumps by the side of the hill , known as ' distance <unk> ' . If enough jumps are deemed to be too far beyond the hill size , or near the ' fall line ' ( determined by the jury ) – where the slope begins to flatten out – an immediate meeting is held between the jury and race director , which usually results in the start gate being lowered so as to check inrun speeds and therefore distances . For spectators and judges , increments of 5 m are clearly indicated by rows of fir across the hill ; a painted red line is used for the K @-@ point , and a dashed red line for the hill size . Both sides of the hill are also marked highly visible in red to indicate the ' landing zone ' , while the point beyond the hill size is marked in green on the sides . 
 = = Scoring and judging = = 
 = = = Distance points = = = 
 Ski flying uses the same points system as ski jumping , but with two differences . In ski jumping , an athlete who reaches the K @-@ point receives 60 points as a base mark for distance ; in ski flying it is 120 . For every metre beyond the K @-@ point , ' bonus points ' are awarded . In ski jumping , a metre has a value of 2 points for ' normal ' hills and 1 @.@ 8 points for ' large ' hills ; in ski flying , a metre is instead worth 1 @.@ 2 points . These bonus points are then added to those received from reaching the K @-@ point . Conversely , failing to reach the K @-@ point will result in a deduction of points from the base mark to the same aforementioned values . Examples : 
 If an athlete lands a jump of 190 m ( 620 ft ) on a ski flying hill with a K @-@ point of 185 m , they will receive 126 points : 120 for reaching the K @-@ point , plus 6 bonus points for 5 m ( 16 ft ) beyond that ( 5 × 1 @.@ 2 
 = 6 ) 
 If an athlete lands a jump of 187 @.@ 5 m ( 615 ft ) on a K200 hill , they will receive 105 points : from 120 which would have been the K @-@ point , their failure to reach it by 12 @.@ 5 m ( 41 ft ) results in minus 15 distance points ( 12 @.@ 5 × 1 @.@ 2 = 
 15 ) 
 = = = Style points = = = 
 Another crucial element of scoring are ' style points ' awarded by the judges . Five representatives are selected from different countries , who are situated in an observation tower by the side of the hill . They each award points up to 20 , in increments of 0 @.@ 5 , based on stylistic merit : 
 An athlete 's skis should be kept flat , steady and symmetrical during flight , avoiding excessive ' paddling ' or an inward cant 
 Good balance , an efficient body position and posture should be maintained with minimal arm movement 
 The landing should be in a Telemark manner 
 If a Telemark landing is not made , 2 style points are deducted 
 If a landing is made but fails before the outrun line , a maximum of 5 style points must be deducted 
 Notably , both the highest and lowest judges ' scores are omitted to cancel out any discrepancy , giving a maximum of 60 style points . A perfect jump on a K200 hill would therefore garner a minimum of 180 points ( 120 distance points + 60 style points ) or more , depending on bonus points . However , such a scenario is only an example and not representative of the highly variable nature of the sport . Gaining one or more scores of 20 is very rare , and five is extremely rare . Generally , a good to excellent jump can be expected to receive judges ' scores of 18 to 19 @.@ 5 . While a lower score for style puts an athlete at the risk of being less competitive , this may be mitigated or even nullified if they have attained substantial bonus points for distance . 
 = = Event details = = 
 A ski flying event consists of several preliminary stages , culminating in a competition ( s ) to decide a winner and subsequent order . Within an event there are up to three competitions – individual , and sometimes team – all taking place on separate days . These competitions are contested somewhat differently depending on whether an event is staged as part of the Ski Flying World Championships or Ski Flying World Cup . In both events , a ' training ' round takes place on the opening day , as well as a ' trial ' round before each competition ; these non @-@ scoring rounds are essentially practice or warm @-@ up sessions , and athlete participation is optional . 
 = = = Individual competitions = = = 
 = = = = Ski Flying World Championships = = = = 
 In this event there is a qualification round on the opening day , in which 40 to 70 athletes each jump once to ensure their place for the rest of the event 's two individual competitions . 40 of these places are available in the first competition ( compared to 50 in the similar Ski Jumping World Championships ) , which is narrowed down to 30 for the second competition . The order of jumps – or ' starting order ' – in the qualification round is based on the athletes ' current rank within the Ski Jumping World Cup standings in ascending order of points , with the leader ( who is assigned a distinctive yellow bib ) going last . A unique feature of the World Cup , which applies to all ski flying and ski jumping events , is that the top ten ranked athletes are in a ' pre @-@ qualified ' bracket : their place in the event is already secure , so their jump is entirely optional . 
 The competition itself is composed of two rounds . In round one , all 40 qualified athletes complete a single jump in the aforementioned World Cup order . After points for distance and style are achieved , only the top 30 scorers from the first round proceed to the second , while the rest are eliminated from the event . In round two , the starting order is instead based solely on the points gained in the first round : the lowest scoring athlete jumps first , while the leader has the very last jump of the competition . The athlete with the most points from both rounds wins that competition . For the second competition , the starting order for round one uses the results from the first competition – no longer based on World Cup ranking – with athletes again jumping in ascending order of points . After the second ( and final ) round , the athlete with the most points accumulated from both competitions is declared the Ski Flying World Champion . 
 = = = = Ski Flying World Cup = = = = 
 Events under the Ski Flying World Cup have several differences to the World Championships . Much like in the Ski Jumping World Cup , there are usually one or two individual competitions ( rarely three , as was the case in both Vikersund and Planica during the 2016 season ) , with a qualification round before each one . If there are two competitions , qualification for the second one takes place on the same day . The limit of 40 places per competition still applies ( unless a cancelled ski jumping competition is rescheduled to a flying hill ) , but unlike the Ski Flying World Championships , if an athlete fails to qualify for one competition they still have the opportunity to make a fresh start and qualify for the others . 
 Also unlike the World Championships , which uses in @-@ competition points throughout the event , the Ski Flying World Cup uses post @-@ competition points which mirror that of the Ski Jumping World Cup ( see scoring system ) . These points contribute towards both Ski Flying and Ski Jumping World Cup standings ; the former is effectively a ' mini season ' within the latter . If the very last competition of a World Cup season takes place on a ski flying hill , only 30 athletes will participate , with no elimination process after the first round . 
 To have a chance of winning a World Cup competition , two consistently good jumps must be made . If an athlete finds themselves in an uncompetitive position after the first round , their challenge in the second round is to make up ground through distance and style points , as well as attrition . For an athlete who had a poor jump in round one , it is possible for them to climb up the order in round two with an excellent jump , and if other competitors fall by the wayside . Conversely , a high @-@ scoring athlete may lose their advantage from round one if their second jump is not up to par . 
 = = = Cancellations = = = 
 A common situation in ski jumping , and especially ski flying due to the magnified risks overall , arises when unfavourable weather conditions cause a competition to be cut short or cancelled completely ; it is also not uncommon for an entire event to be cancelled . Reasons include strong winds , a lack of ( or too much ) snow , and poor visibility for athletes or judges . In the case of a shortened competition , the scores from the first round – if completed – are used to determine the final result . This is called a single @-@ round competition and still counts towards both the Ski Flying and Ski Jumping World Cup . For the World Championships , if one of the two competitions is cancelled , the final result will be based on the competition that took place . 
 = = = Team competitions = = = 
 As in ski jumping , team competitions are often included at ski flying events . These are contested as part of the World Cup , but points instead count towards a separate Nations Cup for teams ; athletes ' individual World Cup standings are unaffected . A national team is made up of four athletes selected by their head coach . There can be upwards of eight teams from different countries , providing they are able to field a full team of four . 
 Just like individual competitions , there are two rounds , but with a difference . Each round is divided into four rotations , in which a member of every team jumps once in the same order . Points are scored the same as they are in individual competitions ; however an athlete 's points for a jump are instead added to their team 's total tally . Teams are narrowed down to eight for the second round based on points scored , with the same four athletes jumping in their order of rotation as before . 
 In the very last rotation , the order of teams to jump switches to that of the points tally going in ; the athlete on the leading team jumps last . The winning team is the one with the most points at the end of the competition , after which the top three final teams ( or more in the event of a tie ) participate in a podium ceremony . 
 = = Specialists = = 
 A number of athletes have been regarded as ski flying specialists for their ability to consistently produce very long jumps and often world records . Those who are currently active with notable ski flying achievements include : 
 Anders Fannemel – current world record holder with 251 @.@ 5 m ; 15 jumps over 230 m ( 750 ft ) and 3 jumps over 240 m . 
 Peter Prevc – 2016 World Champion ; first to land a jump of 250 m ; current hill record holder in Kulm and on the Planica flying hill ; 33 jumps over 230 m and 12 jumps over 240 m , both by far the most of anyone . 
 Robert Kranjec – 2012 World Champion ; acknowledged as an expert in the discipline ; has scored 6 out of his 7 World Cup wins on ski flying hills ; 17 jumps over 230 m and 3 jumps over 240 m . 
 Noriaki Kasai – 1992 World Champion ; current Japanese national record holder with 240 @.@ 5 m ( 789 ft ) ; 9 jumps over 230 m and 2 jumps over 240 m . 
 Stefan Kraft – current Austrian national record holder with 246 @.@ 5 m ; 14 jumps over 230 m and 4 jumps over 240 m . 
 Jurij Tepeš – ski flying expert with 14 jumps over 230 m and 2 jumps over 240 m . 
 Gregor Schlierenzauer – 2008 World Champion and runner @-@ up in 2010 ; 11 jumps over 230 m and 2 jumps over 240 m . 
 Severin Freund – 2014 World Champion ; current German national record holder with 245 m ( 804 ft ) ; 9 jumps over 230 m . 
 Janne Ahonen – four @-@ time World Championship medallist ( silver in 1996 and 2004 ) ; first to unofficially land a jump of 240 m ; 2 jumps over 230 m . 
 Retired athletes who excelled at ski flying : 
 Matti Nykänen – only five @-@ time World Championship medallist ( gold in 1985 ) ; only male five @-@ time world record holder ; once described by American TV commentators as " perhaps the most talented ski flyer around " and " the best aviator out there today ; he knows how to fly . " 
 Matti Hautamäki – four @-@ time world record holder ; current hill record holder on the Harrachov flying hill , with 214 @.@ 5 m ( 704 ft ) ; two jumps over 230 m . 
 Martin Koch – ski flying expert with four jumps over 230 m and 2 jumps over 240 m ; scored 4 out of his 5 World Cup wins on flying hills . 
 Johan <unk> <unk> – two @-@ time world record holder ; five jumps over 230 m and 3 jumps over 240 m . 
 Bjørn Einar Romøren – two @-@ time world record holder ; four jumps over 230 m . 
 Tommy Ingebrigtsen – two @-@ time world record holder ; three jumps over 230 m . 
 Walter Steiner – 1972 and 1977 World Champion ; former world record holder . 
 Andreas Goldberger – 1996 World Champion and runner @-@ up in 1992 ; former world record holder ; first to unofficially land a jump of more than 200 m . 
 Sven Hannawald – 2000 and 2002 World Champion , runner @-@ up in 1998 . 
 Roar <unk> – 2004 and 2006 World Champion ; one jump over 230 m . 
 Mike Holland – last American ski jumper to hold a world record ; quoted as saying " Ski flying was my speciality . " 
 = = = Women in ski flying = = = 
 Women have also had a presence in ski flying . The women 's world record currently stands at 200 m , set in 2003 by Daniela <unk> @-@ Stolz in Kulm . At the same location , in 1997 , Eva <unk> set an unprecedented six world records for women ( an amount since unmatched by any woman or man ) in a span of five days , bringing her tally to a final figure of 167 m ( 548 ft ) . Despite these successes , women have yet to participate in ski flying at World Cup level . The first ever Ski Jumping World Cup season for women was held in 2011 / 12 , but as of yet no ski flying events have been sanctioned . Sarah Hendrickson and Sara Takanashi , both women 's World Cup champions , have expressed a desire to try ski flying . 
