 = = Slovenian presence = = 
 Ever since its inception in 1936 , ski flying has centred around Slovenia . The first ever recorded jumps of over 100 and 200 m , together with a total of 41 world records , have been set on two different hills in the Alpine valley of Planica : Bloudkova velikanka , which has since been re @-@ established as a ski jumping large hill , and its successor Letalnica bratov Gorišek , dubbed the " monster hill " . Since 1997 , with very few exceptions , the Ski Jumping World Cup has traditionally held its season finale in Planica . This takes place usually on Letalnica , but is occasionally moved to Bloudkova ( most recently in 2014 , during renovation at Letalnica ) . 
 Slovenian athletes have also been highly successful in Planica , albeit only recently . They have held a near @-@ lockout on the top spot since 2012 , when Robert Kranjec won the individual competition . In 2013 , Slovenia won the team competition with Kranjec , Jurij Tepeš , Peter Prevc and <unk> <unk> ; Tepeš also won the individual competition . The Slovenian team repeated their victory in 2015 with Kranjec , Tepeš , Prevc and <unk> <unk> , much to the delight of 30 @,@ 000 fans ; Prevc and Tepeš won the individual competitions , each gaining a highly rare five scores of 20 from the judges . Slovenian success continued in the 2016 event , with Kranjec winning one competition and Prevc two . The four @-@ day event drew a total of 110 @,@ 000 spectators . 
 = = Accidents = = 
 Due to the extreme speeds and heights involved , coupled with potentially hazardous and unpredictable wind conditions , ski flying has long had a reputation for being highly dangerous . It has been described as an extreme sport , and in terms such as " simply insane " and the " <unk> , even more dangerous , <unk> @-@ ridden cousin " of ski jumping . Indeed , many serious accidents ( known as " falls " or " crashes " ) have occurred throughout its history on almost every hill : 
 = = = Flat @-@ ground landings = = = 
 As jumps have increased in distance , occasionally the absolute hill limit – named the ' fall line ' – is exceeded . This is known as " landing on the flat " or " out @-@ jumping the hill " , which occurs when an athlete jumps too far beyond the safety of the slope and lands on flat ground : 
 = = Television coverage = = 
 As of 2015 : 
 Austria : ORF 
 Finland : MTV3 
 Germany : ZDF 
 Norway : NRK 
 Poland : TVP 
 Slovenia : RTV Slovenija 
 UK : British Eurosport 
 US : ABC ( 1970s – 80s ) 
 = = In other media = = 
 From 1970 to 1998 , Vinko <unk> 's crash in Oberstdorf was featured prominently on the opening montage of ABC 's Wide World of Sports in the United States 
 The career of Walter Steiner was documented in the 1974 film , The Great Ecstasy of <unk> Steiner , by filmmaker Werner Herzog 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Wendi Richter = 
 Wendi Richter ( born September 6 , 1961 ) is a retired American professional wrestler . She began her professional wrestling career in companies such as the National Wrestling Alliance , where she teamed with Joyce Grable , with whom she held the NWA Women 's World Tag Team Championship twice . In the 1980s , she joined the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) . She held the WWF Women 's Championship twice and feuded with The Fabulous Moolah over the title . She was also involved in a storyline with singer Cyndi Lauper called the " Rock ' n ' Wrestling Connection . " Richter , however , left the WWF after losing the championship in controversial fashion . She then worked in the World Wrestling Council and American Wrestling Association , where she held both companies ' women 's titles . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = Training ( 1979 @-@ 1983 ) = = = 
 Wendi Richter was trained at The Fabulous Moolah 's Lillian Ellison School of Professional Wrestling by <unk> Kai , Judy Martin and Joyce Grable and made her professional debut in 1979 . In early 1982 , Richter tag teamed with Moolah against Velvet McIntyre and Princess Victoria for three matches for the World Wide Wrestling Federation . Richter was later paired with Joyce Grable , with whom she also trained for six weeks , to form a tag team called The Texas Cowgirls . In late 1982 , they wrestled in a series of matches in Canada 's Stampede Wrestling against Velvet McIntyre and Judy Martin . She continued her feud with McIntyre in Bill Watts ' Mid @-@ South Wrestling Association , where she was defeated twice . Richter and Grable continued their rivalry with McIntyre and Martin into April 1983 in Verne Gagne 's American Wrestling Association . In May , the team reformed in Stampede Wrestling in matches against McIntyre and Penny Mitchell . The team also won the NWA Women 's World Tag Team Championship twice . 
 = = = World Wrestling Federation = = = 
 = = = = Rock ' n ' Wrestling = = = = 
 Richter returned stateside signing with the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) in late 1983 . In April 1984 , Richter teamed with Peggy Lee for a series of matches with old rivals Velvet McIntyre and Princess Victoria . WWF owner Vince McMahon brought in Cyndi Lauper for a feud with Lou Albano ( who had appeared as Lauper 's dad in her Girls Just Want to Have Fun music video ) . As a result , in a match , Albano seconded WWF Women 's Champion Fabulous Moolah , while Lauper was in the corner of Wendi Richter . Richter defeated Moolah at MTV 's The Brawl to End it All for the Women 's Championship on July 23 , 1984 , with Richter lifting her own shoulder off the canvas during a double @-@ pinfall situation while Moolah 's shoulders remained down . With the win , she ended what was billed as the longest championship reign in professional wrestling history ( Moolah 's 28 @-@ year reign as recognized by the WWF ; in reality she had lost the title several times between 1956 and 1978 , and Richter 's win had in reality only ended a nearly seven @-@ year reign by Moolah as champion ) . The broadcast of the women 's match earned MTV its largest ratings in history up to that point . This match was also the beginning of the " Rock ' n ' Wrestling Connection " , an era that combined both music and professional wrestling . Richter faced Moolah 's protégé , Leilani Kai , who defeated Richter for the title , in early 1985 at The War to Settle the Score . She regained the title at the first WrestleMania one month later . While wrestling for the WWF , Richter referred to herself as " 150 pounds of twisted steel and sex appeal " . Richter was also animated for a CBS Saturday morning cartoon , Hulk Hogan 's Rock ' n ' Wrestling . In addition , she appeared in Lauper 's music video for " She Bop " . 
 = = = = The Original Screwjob = = = = 
 In 1985 , after losing and then regaining the title from rival Leilani Kai at the inaugural WrestleMania , Richter was scheduled to defend her women 's title at Madison Square Garden on November 25 of that same year against a mysterious masked opponent known only as The Spider . During the match , The Spider broke from the pre @-@ scripted events and pinned Richter 's shoulders to the mat . The referee — who was in on the plan — delivered a swift three count , despite Richter kicking out after a count of one . Richter ignored the bell and continued to attack the Spider , unmasking the new champion to reveal that it was The Fabulous Moolah in disguise . 
 It was reported that the plan to rid Richter of the title was concocted by WWF Chairman Vince McMahon , who brought in Moolah after Richter refused to sign a new contract with the WWF . Richter , however , claims she was still under her original five @-@ year contract , but that she regularly had disagreements with McMahon about her compensation . She also claims that when she arrived at the arena that day , she was surprised to find Moolah backstage , as she never showed up to events at which she was not scheduled to wrestle . After the match , an infuriated Richter left the arena in her wrestling gear , took a cab to the airport , and booked herself on a flight out of New York . Afterward , she never spoke to Moolah again . 
 = = = Independent circuit ( 1987 @-@ 2005 ) = = = 
 Upon leaving the WWF , Richter wrestled in Puerto Rico , Japan , and throughout the United States in independent promotions . In Puerto Rico 's World Wrestling Council , she traded the WWC Women 's Championship with Monster Ripper , holding the belt twice : once in May 1987 and once in July 1987 . 
 Richter surfaced in the American Wrestling Association ( AWA ) in 1987 to challenge champion Madusa Miceli for the AWA Women 's Championship , winning the title in December 1988 . On December 13 , 1988 , she participated in a mixed tag team match at <unk> III with partners The Top Guns ( Ricky Rice and Derrick Dukes ) against Badd Company ( Paul Diamond and Pat Tanaka ) and Madusa Miceli . Richter 's team won the match when she pinned Miceli . 
 On January 29 , 2005 , Richter appeared at WrestleReunion in an eight @-@ woman tag team match ( teaming with Bambi , Malia Hosaka , and Jenny Taylor wrestling against Sherri Martel , Peggy Lee Leather , Krissy Vaine , and Amber O 'Neal . In August of that same year , Richter appeared at the second WrestleReunion event , WrestleReunion 2 , in a six @-@ person tag team match . 
 = = = Life after wrestling and WWE Hall of Fame ( 2005 @-@ present ) = = = 
 In the years after her retirement , Richter was uninvolved with wrestling . In a 2005 shoot interview , she expressed disgust towards the portrayal of women in the WWE product , and was still hurt over her WWF exit . In 2010 , Richter was offered induction in the WWE Hall of Fame Class of 2010 , which she accepted . She was inducted by Roddy Piper . In contrast of her shoot interviews , her speech spoke fondly of her wrestling career and how the WWE Divas thanked her for her influence . Richter 's speech ended joyfully , exclaiming " Girls Just Wanna Have Fun ! " 
 On the June 16 , 2012 episode of Raw , Richter appeared in a in @-@ ring segment along with Cyndi Lauper , Roddy Piper and then @-@ Diva 's Champion Layla as part of the " 1000th episode " buildup . Piper expressed his gratitude to Richter and Lauper for their " Rock ' N Wrestling " angle and presented Lauper with a gold record , with which she eventually hit Heath Slater , who at the time had a gimmick of insulting veteran Superstars before getting his comeuppance . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Wendi Richter grew up in Dallas , Texas , and before she entered the world of professional wrestling , she worked on her family 's ranch and took part in rodeo competitions . She attended Bossier High School , where she participated in volleyball , track , and cross @-@ country . She later majored in computer programming at Dallas 's <unk> 's Business College . In the 1980s , she moved to Crystal River , Florida . 
 After leaving the business , Richter worked as a real estate agent . She also returned to school for 13 years , earning a degree in physical therapy and a Master 's degree in occupational therapy . Aside from therapy , Richter competes in dog shows , including the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show . She was once married to Hugo Savinovich , an announcer for the WWF . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Sitout DDT 
 Signature moves 
 Powerbomb 
 Swinging arm wrench facebuster 
 Managers 
 Cyndi Lauper 
 Entrance music 
 " Girls Just Want to Have Fun " by Cyndi Lauper 
 " She Bop " by Cyndi Lauper 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 American Wrestling Association 
 AWA Women 's Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Cauliflower Alley Club 
 Other honoree ( 1993 ) 
 National Wrestling Alliance 
 NWA Women 's World Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) - with Joyce Grable 
 National Wrestling Federation 
 NWF Women 's Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame 
 Class of 2012 
 World Wrestling Council 
 WWC Women 's Championship ( 2 times ) 
 World Wrestling Federation / Entertainment 
 WWF Women 's Championship ( 2 times ) 
 WWE Hall of Fame ( Class of 2010 ) 
 Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards 
 Worst Match of the Year ( 1984 ) vs. The Fabulous Moolah on July 23 
 = James Crumley ( footballer ) = 
 James Brymer Crumley ( 17 July 1890 – 1981 ) , also known as Jamie , Jim or Jimmy Crumley , was a Scottish footballer who played as a goalkeeper . 
 A native of Dundee , Crumley began his football career with Junior club Harp , from where he moved into the senior ranks , spending the 1911 – 12 Scottish League season with Dundee Hibernian . He played in America for two seasons , then returned to Scotland where he kept goal for Central League team Arbroath before serving with the Royal Engineers during the First World War . He resumed his football career with a brief return to Dundee Hibs , then moved south of the border to play for Swansea Town , initially in the Southern League and then for three seasons in the English Football League . This was followed by a year with Bristol City , two seasons with Darlington , whom he helped gain promotion to the Second Division , and three years with Bournemouth & Boscombe Athletic where he finished his career . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Crumley was born in Dundee in 1890 , the son of William Ferguson Crumley , a tinsmith . His older brother , Bob Crumley , also played professionally as a goalkeeper , and was in the Dundee team that won the 1910 Scottish Cup Final , defeating Clyde after two replays . The passenger list when he sailed for America in 1912 listed his occupation as that of blacksmith . During the First World War , Crumley joined the Royal Engineers . By mid @-@ 1915 , he was a section corporal stationed near Dundee , and he went to reach the rank of sergeant and served in France . He was twice mentioned in despatches , and was wounded and affected by shell shock . 
 He married Eva Caroline <unk> at All Saints ' Church , <unk> , Nottinghamshire , in 1921 . In 1932 , while working as traffic manager for a lorry firm , Crumley suffered head injuries when the lorry he was travelling in struck a stationary vehicle ; his two colleagues were killed . At the time , he was living in the Kensington district of London . His death at the age of 90 was registered in the second quarter of 1981 in the Merton registration district , which covers the London Borough of Merton . 
 = = Football career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Crumley joined Dundee Hibernian from Junior club Harp in September 1911 . The Courier thought the club had " done a good stroke of business " in recruiting " without doubt one of the finest goalkeepers in the district " . He went straight into the team for the Second Division visit to Albion Rovers on 16 September , and missed only one match between then and the end of the season . He did not re @-@ sign for the new season , because he intended to go to America to play football , but before he left in October , he appeared for Vale of Atholl in the Qualifying Cup . 
 While in America he was reported to have played for a variety of clubs , including Paterson Rangers , IRT Strollers , for whom he appeared on the losing side in the ( New York ) Metropolitan League Cup , and New York Celtic . He was selected in goal for the New York State Amateur League representative eleven to face the National Association Football League on New Year 's Day 1914 ; his team lost 3 – 1 . In June of that year , he returned to Scotland on the SS California . The liner ran aground off the coast of Ireland with more than a thousand passengers aboard , all of whom had to be transferred to other vessels to complete their crossing . 
 Bob Crumley had captained Central League club Arbroath in the 1913 – 14 season , but when his work restricted his availability , he recommended the club try his brother instead . Crumley " worthily upheld his reputation " , appearing in 31 of the 32 matches played in all competitions . During the First World War , Crumley played for his regimental team , and for English clubs Nottingham Forest and Swindon Town , when his military duties allowed . 
 = = = Post @-@ war career = = = 
 Dundee Hibs had retained his registration ever since he left the club in 1912 , and he resumed playing for them in March 1919 . He signed on again for the 1919 – 20 Eastern League season , and his performances attracted attention from clubs outside Scotland . On 20 December 1919 , he signed for Swansea Town , then a Southern League club , for a fee reported to be over £ 200 . Crumley himself received a share of the fee as well as wages of £ 6 a week , and the Dundee People 's Journal wished him well : " A cheery personality in the pavilion and out of it , James Crumley deserves the best , for he 's a tip @-@ top player , and a ' sport ' in victory and defeat alike . " 
 He went straight into the first team for the Christmas fixtures against Bristol Rovers ; although Swansea conceded three goals in the away match , the Cambrian Daily Leader stated that " one could not improve on Crumley as a goalie . " The following March , he was selected to keep goal for a Southern League Welsh XI against their English counterparts . Swansea were elected to the Football League in 1920 , when a new Third Division was formed from the majority of the previous season 's Southern League First Division clubs . Crumley played early in the season , but did not keep his place . A year later , the Sunday Post suggested he had " improved wonderfully since the opening of last season " , but although he remained with Swansea until 1923 , he played mainly for the reserve team . 
 Crumley joined Bristol City , newly promoted to the Second Division for 1923 – 24 , as a backup to Frank Vallis . By 13 October , with Bristol City already bottom of the table and both Vallis and Robert Goddard already tried in goal , Crumley made his debut in a 1 – 1 draw with Southampton . According to the Western Daily Press , he had nothing to do , so " we [ had ] yet to learn ... how good he is when asked to meet League requirements " . He kept his place for the next match , a 1 – 0 defeat to Fulham , in which he exhibited a tendency to rush off his line when he should not , but that was his last appearance in the League side . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 When Andy Greig was released by Third Division North club Darlington in June 1924 for financial reasons , Crumley signed as his replacement ; his brother had kept goal for the club when they played in the North @-@ Eastern League before the war . Crumley was ever @-@ present as Darlington won the division and consequent promotion to the Second Division . Although the record @-@ breaking goalscoring of Davie Brown attracted most attention , Crumley 's contribution to his club 's success was generally appreciated . A profile in the Derby Daily Telegraph at the start of the new season described him as " not as tall as some goalkeepers , but his sense of anticipation is highly developed , while his judgment is good , hands safe , and his clearances pronounced . " Performances such as that in a draw with Chelsea in October 1925 , when " practically every report of the match , in which two goals were divided , declared Crumley as one of the best on the field " , led to speculation about his possible selection for the Scotland national team , yet two weeks after the Chelsea match , after 55 consecutive first @-@ team appearances , he was dropped to the reserves in favour of John Maughan . The two shared goalkeeping duties for the remainder of the season , Crumley making 24 league appearances . He was not included on Darlington 's retained list , and signed for Third Division South club Bournemouth & Boscombe Athletic . 
 Crumley began his Bournemouth career as reserve , but was in the first team by mid @-@ September . According to the Daily Express , it was due to Crumley 's " heroic efforts " that Coventry City 's score was restricted to six , but in October , he scored an own goal in a draw with Merthyr Town and then fumbled a cross to gift Exeter City a goal . He and Jock Robson each made 42 appearances in league matches over their first two seasons , after which Crumley was retained for 1928 – 29 but used mainly as backup for Peter <unk> . Crumley retired at the end of that season , having made 147 appearances over a nine @-@ year career in the English Football League . 
 = Maryland Route 213 = 
 Maryland Route 213 ( MD 213 ) is a 68 @.@ 25 @-@ mile ( 109 @.@ 84 km ) state highway located on the Eastern Shore of Maryland in the United States . The route runs from MD 662 in Wye Mills , Queen Anne 's County north to the Pennsylvania border in Cecil County , where it continues into that state as Pennsylvania Route 841 ( PA 841 ) . The route , which is a two @-@ lane undivided highway its entire length , passes through mostly rural areas as well as the communities of Centreville , Chestertown , Galena , Cecilton , Chesapeake City , and Elkton . MD 213 intersects many routes including U.S. Route 50 ( US 50 ) near Wye Mills , US 301 near Centreville , and US 40 in Elkton . It crosses over the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal in Chesapeake City on the Chesapeake City Bridge . MD 213 is designated by the state as the Chesapeake Country Scenic Byway between the southern terminus and Chesapeake City with the portion north of MD 18 in Centreville a National Scenic Byway . In addition , the route is also considered part of the Atlantic to Appalachians Scenic Byway between Chesapeake City and MD 273 in Fair Hill . 
 The route was initially designated as US 213 in 1926 when the U.S. Highway System was established , running from Ocean City west and north to US 40 in Elkton . The highway was rerouted to cross the Nanticoke River in Vienna by 1933 , with the former route between Mardela Springs and Eldorado becoming a part of MD 313 and the alignment between Eldorado and Rhodesdale becoming part of MD 14 . US 213 was rerouted to use the Emerson C. Harrington Bridge over the Choptank River in Cambridge in 1939 ; the former alignment between Vienna and Easton became MD 331 . Meanwhile , the road between Elkton and the Pennsylvania border became MD 280 . US 213 was moved to a bypass of Easton and straight alignment between Easton and Wye Mills in 1948 . A year later , the southern terminus was cut back to US 50 in Wye Mills , with an extended US 50 replacing US 213 between Wye Mills and Ocean City . In 1971 , US 213 and MD 280 were decommissioned and replaced with MD 213 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 213 is a part of the National Highway System as a principal arterial within the town of Elkton . 
 = = = Queen Anne 's County = = = 
 MD 213 begins at an intersection with MD 662 ( Wye Mills Road ) in Wye Mills , Queen Anne 's County , heading to the north on College Drive , a two @-@ lane undivided road . From the southern terminus , MD 213 is designated by the state as the Chesapeake Country Scenic Byway . The road heads into rural farmland , passing Chesapeake College on the left before intersecting US 50 ( Ocean Gateway ) . Past this intersection , MD 213 continues north on Centreville Road , passing more farms as well as some residences . The route continues into a mix of woods and farmland before intersecting the northern terminus of MD 309 ( Starr Road ) . A short distance later , the route interchanges with US 301 ( Blue Star Memorial Highway ) . 
 Past the US 301 interchange , MD 213 continues through more rural areas before entering Centreville , where it passes some residential and commercial areas . It intersects MD 18 ( 4H Park Road ) . At this intersection , MD 213 becomes a part of the National Scenic Byway portion of the Chesapeake Country Scenic Byway . Past MD 18 , the route continues into residential areas , eventually splitting into a one @-@ way pair with northbound MD 213 following Commerce Street and southbound MD 213 following Liberty Street . This pairing continues past residences before heading into the downtown area , where the road intersects MD 304 ( Water Street ) . Westbound MD 304 secretly joins northbound MD 213 for a concurrency that lasts until Broadway , where it continues to the west . 
 MD 213 leaves downtown Centreville past MD 304 . The one @-@ way pair ends and the route continues north on two @-@ lane undivided Liberty Street , passing by residences and some businesses . At the end of the one @-@ way pair , the route sees an average of 12 @,@ 912 vehicles daily . It intersects the western terminus of MD 305 ( Hope Road ) , and passes by more residences before becoming Church Hill Road , which heads north into a mix of woods and farms with some housing developments . It angles to the northeast and then north through more rural areas , consisting mostly of farm fields with some wooded areas and occasional residences . MD 213 continues in a northeast direction before reaching Church Hill . 
 Upon reaching Church Hill , the route intersects MD 19A ( South Main Street ) , which loops to the east of MD 213 to head into the town . Meanwhile , MD 213 bypasses Church Hill to the west , running through woodland , and intersects the western terminus of MD 300 ( Sudlersville Road ) . The route heads back into farmland and intersects MD 19 ( North Main Street ) , leaving the Church Hill area . MD 213 continues north through a mix of woods and farms . From here , the route turns northwest through more farmland before it passes some residences and businesses near the intersection with the western terminus of MD 544 ( <unk> Road ) . Past the MD 544 intersection , the road continues through rural areas , but residences and businesses start to increase . MD 213 passes through Kingstown before crossing the Chester River on a drawbridge . 
 = = = Kent County = = = 
 Upon crossing the Chester River , MD 213 enters Chestertown in Kent County , where the route heads northwest on Maple Avenue through residential areas . It intersects MD 289 ( Cross Street ) in the downtown area and turns north onto Washington Avenue at the intersection with Spring Avenue . Washington Avenue carries MD 213 north through residential neighborhoods and passes by Washington College . Past the college , the route continues past businesses and intersects MD 291 ( Morgnec Road ) . Past this intersection , MD 213 continues through residential and commercial areas . 
 The road leaves Chestertown and becomes Augustine Herman Highway , which is named for Czech surveyor Augustine Herman . The road heads into farmland with residences along the west side of the road . MD 213 intersects MD 297 ( <unk> Road ) and heads past more farm fields . The road turns northeast and intersects MD 561 ( Hassenger ’ s Corner Road ) . It continues through more rural areas , consisting mostly of farms with some wooded areas before reaching Kennedyville , where MD 213 passes residences . In Kennedyville , the road crosses over the Chestertown Branch of the Northern Line of the Maryland & Delaware Railroad . 
 Upon leaving Kennedyville , MD 213 continues back into agricultural areas . The route makes a turn to the east , with an old bypassed segment remaining as unsigned MD 855 . MD 213 intersects MD 298 ( <unk> Road ) and resumes northeast and east again . It intersects unsigned MD 449 ( Shallcross Wharf Road ) , which connects to MD 444 ( <unk> Park Road ) , which MD 213 intersects a short distance later . From here , the route continues east and northeast through more farmland before heading into a mix of farms and woods . The route enters Galena , where it becomes Cross Street . In the center of town , MD 213 meets MD 290 and MD 313 at the intersection with Main Street . Here , MD 290 and MD 313 continue south on Main Street , MD 290 continues east on Cross Street , and MD 213 makes a left turn to head north on Main Street . Main Street passes residences before leaving Galena , where the road becomes Augustine Herman Highway again . The road continues through a mix of farms and woods before reaching Georgetown , where the route passes some homes before crossing the Sassafras River on a drawbridge near a marina . 
 = = = Cecil County = = = 
 MD 213 enters Cecil County upon crossing the Sassafras River , where it continues north through wooded and agricultural areas with some residences . The route enters Cecilton , where it becomes Bohemia Avenue . In Cecilton , MD 213 passes residences and intersects MD 282 ( Main Street ) in the center of town . Upon leaving Cecilton , the name of the road becomes Augustine Herman Highway again . MD 213 passes through farmland , with intermittent woods and rural residences , before crossing over the Bohemia River . Past the Bohemia River , the road turns northeast through more rural areas before intersecting the western terminus of MD 310 ( <unk> Corner Road ) . Past MD 310 , the route continues through farms and woods with some residences and businesses before heading into the Chesapeake City area , where residences increase along the road . Upon reaching Chesapeake City , MD 213 features an interchange with MD 537 , which provides access to the southern portion of Chesapeake City as well as to MD 286 and MD 342 . 
 In Chesapeake City , the Chesapeake Country Scenic Byway ends and MD 213 continues north as a part of the Atlantic to Appalachians Scenic Byway which crosses the state of Maryland . Past this interchange , MD 213 passes over the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal on the Chesapeake City Bridge . Upon crossing the canal , the road intersects MD 285 ( Lock Street ) , which provides access to the northern portion of Chesapeake City . Past MD 285 , the route resumes through a mix of woodland and farmland , with residential areas increasing along the road . It approaches the Elkton area and heads through residential areas . 
 MD 213 enters Elkton at the intersection with US 40 ( Pulaski Highway ) . Past this intersection , the route heads northwest on Bridge Street , passing through commercial areas . The route intersects Main Street , which continues east of MD 213 as a one @-@ way street eastbound . Past Main Street , the road continues north and passes over Amtrak 's Northeast Corridor before intersecting MD 545 ( Elkton Boulevard ) . MD 213 continues past commercial areas to the west and residential areas to the east before its intersection with MD 279 ( Elkton Road / Newark Avenue ) . Past the MD 279 intersection , the route leaves Elkton and becomes Singerly Road , which continues past residences . MD 213 enters a mix of woods and farms and passes over Interstate 95 ( John F. Kennedy Memorial Highway ) and CSX 's Philadelphia Subdivision within a short distance of each other . It continues through a mix of farms and residences before the road reaches the Leeds roundabout with Leeds Road . Past the roundabout , the route resumes north , intersecting MD 273 ( Telegraph Road ) in Fair Hill west of the Fair Hill Training Center , where the Atlantic to Appalachians Scenic Byway leaves MD 213 and heads west along MD 273 . From here , MD 213 continues northwest and west as Lewisville Road through a mix of rural areas and residences before ending at the Pennsylvania border . Here , the road continues north as PA 841 into Lewisville , intersecting the southern terminus of PA 472 just north of the state line . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1911 , what would become US 213 was completed as a state highway between Hebron and Riverton via Mardela Springs , Easton and Longwoods , Centerville and Church Hill , and in the Chestertown area , while the present road between Elkton and Singerly was also built as a state highway . The portion of roads between Riverton and Sharptown , <unk> and Hurlock , Church Hill and southeast of Chestertown , northeast of Chestertown and northeast of Kennedyville , and Chesapeake City and Elkton were under contract to be built as state roads . At this time , a state highway was proposed along the segments between Ocean City and Berlin , Salisbury and Hebron , Sharptown and <unk> , Hurlock and Easton , Longwoods and Centreville , northeast of Kennedyville and Chesapeake City , and Elkton and Fair Hill . By 1915 , the entire length of road between Ocean City and Elkton was completed as a state highway . The state highway between Singerly and south of Fair Hill was finished by 1923 . The state highway was finished to Fair Hill by 1927 . 
 With the creation of the U.S. Highway System on November 11 , 1926 , US 213 was designated to run from the Atlantic Ocean in Ocean City west and north to US 40 in Elkton . The route headed west from Ocean City through Berlin and Salisbury ( where it intersected its parent route US 13 ) , before it turned northwest to Mardela Springs . Here , US 213 turned to the north and ran to Eldorado , where it continued northwest through Hurlock and Preston to Easton . From Easton , the route continued north to Wye Mills and followed the present alignment of MD 213 to Elkton . A new Dover Bridge over the Choptank River east of Easton , replacing a bridge built in the 19th century , was completed in 1932 . By 1933 , US 213 was rerouted to cross the Nanticoke River at Vienna instead of at Sharptown . The route headed west from Mardela Springs to Vienna , where it turned north to Rhodesdale . The former alignment of US 213 became a southern extension of MD 313 between Mardela Springs and Eldorado and an eastern extension of MD 14 between Rhodesdale and Eldorado . 
 In 1939 , US 213 was realigned to cross the Choptank River at Cambridge on the Emerson C. Harrington Bridge that opened in 1935 . The route replaced MD 344 between Vienna and Mount Holly , ran concurrent with MD 16 between Mount Holly and Cambridge , and turned north across the river to continue to Easton . The former routing of US 213 between Vienna and Easton became MD 331 . Also , US 213 was relocated to a new alignment to the north between West Ocean City and Ocean City . In 1939 , the road between US 40 and the northern terminus of US 213 in Elkton and the Pennsylvania border north of Fair Hill was designated MD 280 . The portion of MD 280 between Fair Hill and the Pennsylvania border was built as a state highway by 1933 . On July 28 , 1942 , the vertical lift bridge carrying US 213 over the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal , built in 1927 , was destroyed when the tanker Franz Klasen struck it . The destroyed bridge was replaced by the current Chesapeake City Bridge , which opened in 1949 . The approaches to the original bridge are now designated as MD 537 and a western extension of MD 285 . A portion of US 213 south of Easton was moved to a straight alignment by 1946 ; the former routing became MD 565 . By 1946 , work was underway for a bypass to the east of Easton along with a straight alignment between Easton and Wye Mills . US 213 was moved to this new alignment in 1948 , with the former alignment on Washington Street in Easton becoming an extended MD 333 in the southern part of the city and an extended MD 33 in the northern part the city , while MD 662 was designated on the original alignment between Easton and Wye Mills . 
 In 1949 , the southern terminus of US 213 was cut back to US 50 in Wye Mills , with the former route between Wye Mills and Ocean City becoming an extension of US 50 from Annapolis over the newly completed Chesapeake Bay Bridge . The former routing of US 213 between Wye Mills and Ocean City is now US 50 between Wye Mills and Vienna , Old Route 50 through Vienna , US 50 between Vienna and Salisbury , US 50 Bus. through Salisbury , MD 346 between Salisbury and east of Berlin , and US 50 between east of Berlin and Ocean City . On December 3 , 1971 , the American Association of State Highway Officials approved the elimination of the US 213 designation . US 213 along with MD 280 were replaced by MD 213 , which ran from MD 662 in Wye Mills north to the Pennsylvania border north of Fair Hill . In 1994 , the at @-@ grade intersection with US 301 was replaced with an interchange . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = = Auxiliary route = = 
 MD <unk> runs along the ramp from MD 537D to southbound MD 213 in Chesapeake City , Cecil County . The route is 0 @.@ 05 mi ( 0 @.@ 080 km ) long . 
 = Smilodon = 
 Smilodon / <unk> / , is an extinct genus of <unk> felid . It is perhaps one of the most famous prehistoric mammals , and the best known saber @-@ toothed cat . Although commonly known as the saber @-@ toothed tiger , it was not closely related to the tiger or other modern cats . Smilodon lived in the Americas during the Pleistocene epoch ( 2 @.@ 5 mya – 10 @,@ 000 years ago ) . The genus was named in 1842 , based on fossils from Brazil . Three species are recognized today : S. gracilis , S. fatalis and S. populator . The two latter species were probably descended from S. gracilis , which itself probably evolved from Megantereon . The largest collection of Smilodon fossils has been obtained from the Rancho La Brea Tar Pits in Los Angeles , California . 
 Overall , Smilodon was more robustly built than any extant cat , with particularly well @-@ developed forelimbs and exceptionally long upper canines . Its jaw had a bigger gape than that of modern cats and its upper canines were slender and fragile , being adapted for precision killing . S. gracilis was the smallest species at 55 to 100 kg ( 120 to 220 lb ) in weight . S. fatalis had a weight of 160 to 280 kg ( 350 to 620 lb ) and height of 100 cm ( 39 in ) . Both of these species are mainly known from North America , but remains from South America have also been attributed to them . S. populator from South America is perhaps the largest known felid at 220 to 400 kg ( 490 to 880 lb ) in weight and 120 cm ( 47 in ) in height . The coat pattern of Smilodon is unknown , but it has been artistically restored with plain or spotted patterns . 
 In North America , Smilodon hunted large herbivores such as bison and camels and it remained successful even when encountering new prey species in South America . Smilodon is thought to have killed its prey by holding it still with its forelimbs and biting it , but it is unclear in what manner the bite itself was delivered . Scientists debate whether Smilodon had a social or a solitary lifestyle ; analysis of modern predator behavior as well as of Smilodon 's fossil remains could be construed to lend support to either view . Smilodon probably lived in closed habitats such as forests and bush , which would have provided cover for ambushing prey . Smilodon died out at the same time that most North and South American megafauna disappeared , about 10 @,@ 000 years ago . Its reliance on large animals has been proposed as the cause of its extinction , along with climate change and competition with other species , but the exact cause is unknown . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 During the 1830s , Danish naturalist Peter Wilhelm Lund and his assistants collected fossils in the calcareous caves near the small town of Lagoa Santa , Minas Gerais , Brazil . Among the thousands of fossils found , he recognized a few isolated cheek teeth as belonging to a hyena , which he named Hyaena neogaea in 1839 . After more material was found ( including canine teeth and foot bones ) , Lund concluded the fossils instead belonged to a distinct genus of felid , though transitional to the hyenas . He stated it would have matched the largest modern predators in size , and was more robust than any modern cat . Lund originally wanted to name the new genus <unk> , but realizing this had recently become preoccupied by another prehistoric predator , he instead named it Smilodon populator in 1842 . He explained the Ancient Greek meaning of Smilodon as <unk> ( <unk> ) , a scalpel or two @-@ edged knife , and <unk> ( <unk> ) , tooth . This has also been translated as " tooth shaped like double @-@ edged knife " . He explained the species name populator as " the destroyer " , which has also been translated as " he who brings devastation " . By 1846 , Lund had acquired nearly every part of the skeleton ( from different individuals ) , and more specimens were found in neighboring countries by other collectors in the following years . Though some later authors used Lund 's original species name neogaea instead of populator , it is now considered an invalid nomen nudum ( " naked name " ) , as it was not accompanied with a proper description and no type specimens were designated . Some South American specimens have been referred to other genera , subgenera , species , and subspecies , such as <unk> <unk> , Smilodon ( <unk> ) <unk> , and S. <unk> , but these are now thought to be junior synonyms of S. populator . 
 Fossils of Smilodon were discovered in North America from the second half of the 19th century onwards . In 1869 , American paleontologist Joseph Leidy described a maxilla fragment with a molar , which had been discovered in a petroleum bed in Hardin County , Texas . He referred the specimen to the genus Felis ( which was then used for most cats , extant as well as extinct ) but found it distinct enough to be part of its own subgenus , as F. ( <unk> ) fatalis . The species name means " fate " or " destiny " , but it is thought Leidy intended it to mean " fatal " . In an 1880 article about extinct American cats , American paleontologist Edward Drinker Cope pointed out that the F. fatalis molar was identical to that of Smilodon , and he proposed the new combination S. fatalis . Most North American finds were scanty until excavations began in the La Brea Tar Pits in Los Angeles , where hundreds of individuals of S. fatalis have been found since 1875 . S. fatalis has junior synonyms such as S. <unk> , S. floridanus , and S. californicus . American paleontologist Annalisa Berta considered the holotype of S. fatalis too incomplete to be an adequate type specimen , and the species has at times been proposed to be a junior synonym of S. populator . Swedish paleontologists Björn Kurtén and Lars <unk> supported the distinctness of the two species in 1990 . 
 In his 1880 article about extinct cats , Cope also named a third species of Smilodon , S. gracilis . The species was based on a partial canine , which had been obtained in a cave near the Schuylkill River in Pennsylvania . Cope found the canine to be distinct from that of the other Smilodon species due to its smaller size and more compressed base . Its specific name refers to the species ' lighter build . This species is known from fewer and less complete remains than the other members of the genus . S. gracilis has at times been considered part of genera such as Megantereon and <unk> . S. populator , S. fatalis and S. gracilis are currently considered the only valid species of Smilodon , and features used to define most of their junior synonyms have been dismissed as variation between individuals of the same species ( intraspecific variation ) . One of the most famous of prehistoric mammals , Smilodon has often been featured in popular media and is the state fossil of California . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 Long the most completely known saber @-@ toothed cat , Smilodon is still one of the best @-@ known members of the group , to the point where the two concepts have been confused . The term " saber @-@ tooth " refers to an <unk> consisting of various groups of extinct predatory synapsids ( mammals and close relatives ) , which convergently evolved extremely long maxillary canines , as well as adaptations to the skull and skeleton related to their use . This includes members of <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ( e.g. <unk> ) , <unk> , <unk> , and Machairodontinae . Within the family Felidae ( true cats ) , members of the subfamily Machairodontinae are referred to as saber @-@ toothed cats , and this group is itself divided into three tribes : <unk> ( false saber @-@ <unk> ) , <unk> ( scimitar @-@ toothed cats ) , and <unk> ( dirk @-@ toothed cats ) , to which Smilodon belongs . Members of <unk> are defined by their long slender canines with fine to no serrations , whereas <unk> are typified by shorter , broad , and more flattened canines , with coarser serrations . Members of <unk> were less specialized and had shorter , less flattened canines , and are not recognized as members of Machairodontinae by some researchers . 
 The earliest felids are known from the Oligocene of Europe , such as <unk> , and the earliest one with saber @-@ tooth features is the Miocene genus <unk> . The skull and mandible morphology of the earliest saber @-@ toothed cats was similar to that of the modern clouded leopards ( Neofelis ) . The lineage further adapted to the precision killing of large animals by developing elongated canine teeth and wider gapes , in the process sacrificing high bite force . As their canines became longer , the bodies of the cats became more robust for immobilizing prey . In derived <unk> and <unk> , the lumbar region of the spine and the tail became shortened , as did the hind limbs . The earliest species of Smilodon is S. gracilis , which existed from 2 @.@ 5 million to 500 @,@ 000 years ago ( early Blancan to Irvingtonian ages ) and was the successor in North America of Megantereon , from which it probably evolved . Megantereon itself had entered North America from Eurasia during the Pliocene , along with Homotherium . S. gracilis reached the northern regions of South America in the Early Pleistocene as part of the Great American Interchange . The younger Smilodon species are probably derived from S. gracilis . S. fatalis existed 1 @.@ 6 million – 10 @,@ 000 years ago ( late Irvingtonian to Rancholabrean ages ) , and replaced S. gracilis in North America . S. populator existed 1 million – 10 @,@ 000 years ago ( <unk> to Lujanian ages ) ; it occurred in the eastern parts of South America . 
 Despite the colloquial name " saber @-@ toothed tiger " , Smilodon is not closely related to the modern tiger ( which belongs in the subfamily Pantherinae ) , or any other extant felid . An 1992 ancient DNA analysis suggested that Smilodon should be grouped with modern cats ( subfamilies Felinae and Pantherinae ) . However , a 2005 study found that Smilodon belonged to a separate lineage . A study published in 2006 confirmed this , showing that the Machairodontinae diverged early from the ancestors of modern cats and were not closely related to any living species . The following cladogram based on fossils and DNA analysis shows the placement of Smilodon among extinct and extant felids , after Rincón and colleagues , 2011 : 
 = = Description = = 
 Smilodon was around the size of modern big cats , but was more robustly built . It had a reduced lumbar region , high scapula , short tail , and broad limbs with relatively short feet . Smilodon is most famous for its relatively long canine teeth , which are the longest found in the saber @-@ toothed cats , at about 28 cm ( 11 in ) long in the largest species , S. populator . The canines were slender and had fine serrations on the front and back side . The skull was robustly proportioned and the muzzle was short and broad . The cheek bones ( <unk> ) were deep and widely arched , the sagittal crest was prominent , and the frontal region was slightly convex . The mandible had a flange on each side of the front . The upper incisors were large , sharp , and slanted forwards . There was a diastema ( gap ) between the incisors and molars of the mandible . The lower incisors were broad , recurved , and placed in a straight line across . The p3 premolar tooth of the mandible was present in most early specimens , but lost in later specimens ; it was only present in 6 % of the La Brea sample . There is some dispute over whether Smilodon was sexually dimorphic . Some studies of S. fatalis fossils have found little difference between the sexes . Conversely , a 2012 study found that , while fossils of S. fatalis show less variation in size among individuals than modern Panthera , they do appear to show the same difference between the sexes in some traits . 
 S. gracilis was the smallest species , estimated at 55 to 100 kg ( 120 to 220 lb ) in weight , about the size of a jaguar . It was similar to its predecessor Megantereon of the same size , but its dentition and skull were more advanced , approaching S. fatalis . S. fatalis was intermediate in size between S. gracilis and S. populator . It ranged from 160 to 280 kg ( 350 to 620 lb ) . and reached a shoulder height of 100 cm ( 39 in ) and body length of 175 cm ( 69 in ) . It was similar to a lion in dimensions , but was more robust and muscular , and therefore had a larger body mass . Its skull was also similar to that of Megantereon , though more massive and with larger canines . S. populator was perhaps the largest known felid , with a body mass range of 220 to 400 kg ( 490 to 880 lb ) , and one estimate suggesting up to 470 kg ( 1 @,@ 040 lb ) . It stood at a shoulder height of 120 cm ( 47 in ) . Compared to S. fatalis , S. populator was more robust and had a more elongated and narrow skull with a straighter upper profile , higher positioned nasal bones , a more vertical occiput , more massive metapodials and slightly longer forelimbs relative to hindlimbs . Large tracks from Argentina ( for which the <unk> name <unk> has been proposed ) have been attributed to S. populator , and measure 17 @.@ 6 cm ( 6 @.@ 9 in ) cm by 19 @.@ 2 cm ( 7 @.@ 6 in ) cm . This is larger than tracks of the Bengal tiger , to which the footprints have been compared . 
 Traditionally , saber @-@ toothed cats have been artistically restored with external features similar to those of extant felids , by artists such as Charles R. Knight in collaboration with various paleontologists in the early 20th century . In 1969 , paleontologist G. J. Miller instead proposed that Smilodon would have looked very different from a typical cat and similar to a bulldog , with a lower lip line ( to allow its mouth to open wide without tearing the facial tissues ) , a more retracted nose and lower @-@ placed ears . <unk> Mauricio Antón and coauthors disputed this in 1998 and maintained that the facial features of Smilodon were overall not very different from those of other cats . Antón noted that modern animals like the hippopotamus are able to achieve a wide gap without tearing tissue by the moderate folding of the orbicularis <unk> muscle , and such a muscle configuration exists in modern large felids . Antón stated that extant phylogenetic bracketing ( where the features of the closest extant relatives of a fossil taxon are used as reference ) is the most reliable way of restoring the life @-@ appearance of prehistoric animals , and the cat @-@ like Smilodon restorations by Knight are therefore still accurate . 
 Smilodon and other saber @-@ toothed cats have been reconstructed with both plain @-@ colored coats and with spotted patterns ( which appears to be the ancestral condition for feliforms ) , both of which are considered possible . Studies of modern cat species have found that species that live in the open tend to have uniform coats while those that live in more vegetated habitats have more markings . However , exceptions to both cases exist . Some coat features , such as the manes of male lions or the stripes of the tiger , are too unusual to predict from fossils . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 = = = Predatory behavior = = = 
 An apex predator , Smilodon primarily hunted large mammals . Isotopes preserved in the bones of S. fatalis in the La Brea Tar Pits reveal that ruminants like bison ( Bison antiquus , which was much larger than the modern American bison ) and camels ( Camelops ) were most commonly taken by the cats there . In addition , isotopes preserved in the tooth enamel of S. gracilis specimens from Florida show that this species fed on the peccary <unk> and the llama @-@ like <unk> . Isotopic studies of dire wolf ( Canis dirus ) and American lion ( Panthera leo atrox ) bones show an overlap with S. fatalis in prey , which suggests that they were competitors . The availability of prey in the Rancho La Brea area was likely comparable to modern East Africa . As Smilodon migrated to South America , its diet changed ; bison were absent , the horses and proboscideans were different , and native ungulates such as <unk> and <unk> were completely unfamiliar , yet S. populator thrived as well there as its relatives in North America . The differences between the North and South American species may be due to the difference in prey between the two continents . Smilodon probably avoided eating bone and would have left enough food for scavengers . Smilodon itself may have scavenged dire wolf kills . It has been suggested that Smilodon was a scavenger that mainly used its canines for display to assert dominance over carcasses , but this theory is not supported today and no modern terrestrial mammals are pure scavengers . 
 The brain of Smilodon had <unk> patterns similar to modern cats , which suggests an increased complexity of the regions that control the sense of hearing , sight , and coordination of the limbs . <unk> saber @-@ <unk> in general had relatively small eyes that were not as forward @-@ facing as those of modern cats , which have good binocular vision to help them move in trees . Smilodon was likely an ambush predator that concealed itself in dense vegetation . The heel bone of Smilodon was fairly long , which suggests it was a good jumper . Its well @-@ developed flexor and extensor muscles in its forearms probably enabled it to pull down , and securely hold down , large prey . Analysis of the cross @-@ sections of S. fatalis humeri indicated that they were strengthened by cortical thickening to such an extent that they would have been able to sustain greater loading than those of extant big cats , or of the extinct American lion . However , the thickening of S. fatalis femurs was within the range of extant felids . Its canines were fragile and could not have bitten into bone ; due to the risk of breaking , these cats had to subdue and restrain their prey with their powerful forelimbs before they could use their canine teeth , and likely used quick slashing or stabbing bites rather than the slow , suffocating bites typically used by modern cats . 
 Debate continues as to how Smilodon killed its prey . Traditionally , the most popular theory is that the cat delivered a deep stabbing bite or open @-@ jawed stabbing thrust to the throat , generally cutting through the jugular vein and / or the trachea and thus killing the prey very quickly . Another hypothesis suggests that Smilodon targeted the belly of its prey . This is disputed , however , as the curvature of their prey 's belly would likely have prevented the cat from getting a good bite or stab . In regard to how Smilodon delivered its bite , the " canine shear @-@ bite " hypothesis has been favored , where flexion of the neck and rotation of the skull assisted in biting the prey , but this may be mechanically impossible . The mandibular flanges may have helped resist bending forces when the mandible was pulled against the hide of a prey . The protruding incisors were arranged in an arch , and were used to hold the prey still and stabilize it while the canine bite was delivered . The contact surface between the canine crown and the gum was enlarged , which helped stabilize the tooth and helped the cat sense when the tooth had penetrated to its maximum extent . Since saber @-@ toothed cats generally had a relatively large infraorbital foramen ( opening ) in the skull , which housed nerves associated with the whiskers , it has been suggested the improved senses would have helped the cats ' precision when biting outside their field of vision , and thereby prevent breakage of the canines . The blade @-@ like carnassial teeth were used to cut skin to access the meat , and the reduced molars suggest that they were less adapted for crushing bones than modern cats . As the food of modern cats enters the mouth through the side while cutting with the carnassials , not the front between the canines , the animals do not need to gape widely , so the canines of Smilodon would likewise not have been a hindrance when feeding . 
 Despite being more powerfully built than other large cats , Smilodon had a weaker bite . Modern big cats have more pronounced zygomatic arches , while these were smaller in Smilodon , which restricted the thickness and therefore power of the temporalis muscles and thus reduced Smilodon 's bite force . Analysis of its narrow jaws indicates that it could produce a bite only a third as strong as that of a lion . There seems to be a general rule that the saber @-@ toothed cats with the largest canines had proportionally weaker bites . However , analyses of canine bending strength ( the ability of the canine teeth to resist bending forces without breaking ) and bite forces indicate that the saber @-@ toothed cats ' teeth were stronger relative to the bite force than those of modern big cats . In addition , Smilodon 's gape could have reached almost 120 degrees , while that of the modern lion reaches 65 degrees . This made the gape wide enough to allow Smilodon to grasp large prey despite the long canines . 
 = = = Natural traps = = = 
 Many Smilodon specimens have been excavated from asphalt seeps that acted as natural carnivore traps . Animals were accidentally trapped in the seeps and became bait for predators that came to scavenge , but these were then trapped themselves . The best @-@ known of such traps are at La Brea in Los Angeles , which have produced the largest sample of saber @-@ toothed cat fossils in the world . The sediments of the pits there were accumulated 40 @,@ 000 to 10 @,@ 000 years ago , in the Late Pleistocene . Though the trapped animals were buried quickly , predators often managed to remove limb bones from them , but they were themselves often trapped and then scavenged by other predators ; 90 % of the excavated bones belonged to predators . 
 The Talara Tar <unk> in Peru represent a similar scenario , and have also produced fossils of Smilodon . Unlike in La Brea , many of the bones were broken or show signs of weathering . This may have been because the layers were shallower , so the thrashing of trapped animals damaged the bones of previously trapped animals . Many of the carnivores at Talara were juveniles , possibly indicating that inexperienced and less fit animals had a greater chance of being trapped . Though Lund thought accumulations of Smilodon and herbivore fossils in the Lagoa Santa Caves were due to the cats using the caves as dens , these are probably the result of animals dying on the surface , and water currents subsequently dragging their bones to the floor of the cave , but some individuals may also have died after becoming lost in the caves . 
 = = = Social life = = = 
 Scientists debate whether Smilodon was social . One study of African predators found that social predators like lions and spotted hyenas respond more to the distress calls of prey than solitary species . Since S. fatalis fossils are common at the La Brea Tar Pits , and were likely attracted by the distress calls of stuck prey , this could mean that this species was social as well . One critical study claims that the study neglects other factors , such as body mass ( heavier animals are more likely to get stuck than lighter ones ) , intelligence ( some social animals , like the American lion , may have avoided the tar because they were better able to recognize the hazard ) , lack of visual and olfactory lures , the type of audio lure , and the length of the distress calls ( the actual distress calls of the trapped prey animals would have lasted longer than the calls used in the study ) . The author of that study ponders what predators would have responded if the recordings were played in India , where the otherwise solitary tigers are known to aggregate around a single carcass . The authors of the original study responded that though effects of the calls in the tar pits and the playback experiments would not be identical , this would not be enough to overturn their conclusions . In addition , they stated that weight and intelligence would not likely affect the results as lighter carnivores are far more numerous than heavy herbivores and the social ( and seemingly intelligent ) dire wolf is also found in the pits . 
 Another argument for sociality is based on the healed injuries in several Smilodon fossils , which would suggest that the animals needed others to provide it food . This argument has been questioned , as cats can recover quickly from even severe bone damage and an injured Smilodon could survive if it had access to water . The brain of Smilodon was relatively small compared to other cat species . Some researchers have argued that Smilodon 's brain would have been too small for it to have been a social animal . However , an analysis of brain size in living big cats found no correlation between brain size and sociality . Another argument against Smilodon being social is that being an ambush hunter in closed habitat would likely have made group @-@ living unnecessary , as in most modern cats . Yet it has also been proposed that being the largest predator in an environment comparable to the savanna of Africa , Smilodon may have had a social structure similar to modern lions , which possibly live in groups primarily to defend optimal territory from other lions ( lions are the only social big cats today ) . 
 Whether Smilodon was sexually dimorphic has implications for its reproductive behavior . Based on their conclusions that Smilodon fatalis had no sexual dimorphism , Van <unk> and Sacco ( 2002 ) suggested that , if the cats were social , they would likely have lived in monogamous pairs ( along with offspring ) with no intense competition among males for females . Likewise , <unk> @-@ Samuels and Binder ( 2010 ) concluded that aggression between males was less pronounced in S. fatalis than in the American lion . However , Christiansen and Harris ( 2012 ) found that , as S. fatalis did exhibit some sexual dimorphism , there would have been evolutionary selection for competition between males . The structure of the hyoid bones suggest that Smilodon communicated by roaring , like modern big cats . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Smilodon started developing its adult saber @-@ teeth when the animal turned one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years of age , shortly after the completion of the eruption of the cat 's baby teeth . Both baby and adult canines would be present side by side in the mouth for an 11 @-@ month period , and the muscles used in making the powerful bite were developed at about one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years old as well , eight months earlier than in a modern lion . After Smilodon turned 20 months of age , the infant teeth were shed while the adult canines grew in , a process that continued until the cats reached 3 years of age , later than for modern species of big cat . Juvenile and adolescent Smilodon specimens are extremely rare at Rancho La Brea , where the study was performed , indicating that they remained hidden or at denning sites during hunts , and depended on parental care while their canines were developing . The teeth of S. fatalis reached their full size in 18 months at a growth rate of 7 mm ( 0 @.@ 3 in ) per month . 
 = = = Paleopathology = = = 
 Several Smilodon fossils show signs of ankylosing spondylitis , hyperostosis and trauma ; some also had arthritis , which gave them fused vertebrae . One study of 1 @,@ 000 Smilodon skulls found that 30 % of them had eroded parietal bones , which is where the largest jaw muscles attach . They also showed signs of microfractures , and the weakening and thinning of bones possibly caused by mechanical stress from the constant need to make stabbing motions with the canines . Bony growths where the deltoid muscle inserted in the humerus is a common pathology for a La Brea specimen , which was probably due to repeated strain when Smilodon attempted to pull down prey with its forelimbs . <unk> injuries are also common , probably due to collision with prey . Some bones also show evidence of having been bitten by other Smilodon , with one skull showing an unhealed wound from a canine , seemingly fatal , and a scapula from the same site that had been pierced by a canine . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Smilodon lived during the Pleistocene epoch ( 2 @.@ 5 mya – 10 @,@ 000 years ago ) , and was perhaps the most recent of the saber @-@ toothed cats . Smilodon probably lived in a closed habitat such as forest or bush . Fossils of the genus have been found throughout the Americas . In North America , the varied habitat supported other saber @-@ toothed cats in addition to Smilodon , such as Homotherium and <unk> ; the habitat here varied from subtropical forests and savannah in the south , to treeless mammoth steppes in the north . Smilodon inhabited the temperate latitudes of North America , where the mosaic vegetation of woods , shrubs , and grasses in the southwest supported large herbivores such as horses , bison , antelope , deer , camels , mammoths , mastodons , and ground sloths . Other large carnivores include dire wolves and the American lion . 
 Smilodon gracilis entered South America during the early to middle Pleistocene , where it probably gave rise to S. populator , which lived in the eastern part of the continent . S. fatalis also entered western South America in the late Pleistocene . The American interchange resulted in a mix of native and invasive species sharing the prairies and woodlands in South America ; North American herbivores included proboscideans , horses , camelids and deer , South American herbivores included <unk> , <unk> , ground sloths , and <unk> . Native metatherian predators ( including the saber @-@ toothed <unk> ) had gone extinct by the Pliocene , and were replaced by North American carnivores such as canids , bears , and large cats . S. populator was very successful here , while Homotherium never became widespread . The extinction of the <unk> has been attributed to competition with Smilodon , but this is probably incorrect , as they seem to have disappeared before the arrival of the large cats . The <unk> " terror birds " may have dominated the large predator niche in South America until Smilodon arrived . In South America , S. populator preferred large prey from open habitats such as grassland and plains , based on evidence gathered from isotope ratios that determined the animal 's diet . In this way , the South American Smilodon species was probably similar to the modern lion . S. populator probably competed with the canid Protocyon there , but not with the jaguar , which fed primarily on smaller prey . 
 = = Extinction = = 
 Along with most of the Pleistocene megafauna , Smilodon became extinct 10 @,@ 000 years ago in the Quaternary extinction event . Its extinction has been linked to the decline and extinction of large herbivores , which were replaced by smaller and more agile ones like deer . Hence , Smilodon could have been too specialized at hunting large prey and may have been unable to adapt . However , a 2012 study of Smilodon tooth wear found no evidence that they were limited by food resources . Other explanations include climate change and competition with humans ( which entered the Americas around the time Smilodon disappeared ) , or a combination of several factors , all of which apply to the general Pleistocene extinction event , rather than specifically to the extinction of the saber @-@ toothed cats . 
 Some early writers theorized that the last saber @-@ toothed cats , Smilodon and Homotherium , became extinct through competition with the faster and more generalized felids that replaced them . It was even proposed that the saber @-@ toothed predators were inferior to modern cats , as the ever @-@ growing canines were thought to inhibit their owners from feeding properly . Yet fast felids such as the American lion and the American cheetah also became extinct during the Late Pleistocene . The fact that saber @-@ teeth evolved many times in unrelated lineages also attests to the success of this feature . 
 = Andy Hessenthaler = 
 Andrew " Andy " Hessenthaler ( born 17 August 1965 in Dartford , Kent ) is an English football manager and former player . He began his career in non @-@ league football and did not turn professional until he joined Watford at the age of 26 . In 1996 , Hessenthaler joined Gillingham and spent the next ten years at the club as player and later player @-@ manager , managing the club to its highest ever finish in the English football league system and becoming regarded as a legend of the Kent club . After leaving Gillingham , he had a short spell at Barnet before joining Dover Athletic in 2007 . In his two seasons in charge he led the club to successive championships , of Isthmian League Division One South and the Isthmian League Premier Division . After three years at Dover , he became manager at Gillingham for the second time , but his contract was terminated at the end of the 2011 – 12 season . He returned to the club as assistant manager in 2014 , before taking on a similar role at Leyton Orient the following year . In 2016 , he was appointed manager of the club . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Non @-@ league career = = = 
 As a teenager , Hessenthaler played for the youth team of his local club Dartford . He later joined Fawkham @-@ based amateur team Corinthian , but Charlton Athletic took him on in 1983 on a non @-@ contract trial basis . He failed to secure a contract with the club , however , and returned to playing on a part @-@ time basis while working as a builder . In 1986 , he was spotted by Dartford manager Peter Taylor while playing in a Kent Senior Cup match . Hessenthaler signed for his hometown club on a wage of £ 40 per week , the first regular income he had ever received for playing . 
 Hessenthaler spent four years at the club , during which time Dartford reached the semi @-@ finals of the FA Trophy on two occasions and finished twice as runners @-@ up in the Southern League . In 1990 , he was called up to the England National Game XI , the national team for semi @-@ professional players . Later that year , he moved on to Redbridge Forest , where he spent one season and helped the team win the Isthmian League championship . 
 = = = Watford = = = 
 On the recommendation of Peter Taylor , who was by now assistant manager of Watford , Hessenthaler was signed by the Hertfordshire club for a transfer fee of £ 65 @,@ 000 at the beginning of the 1991 – 92 season . He opted to make the move even though becoming a full @-@ time professional player would mean taking a drop in earnings compared to what he was making combining semi @-@ professional football with building work . His professional debut was against Blackburn Rovers at Ewood Park on 17 September 1991 , and , despite having made a move of four divisions up the English football league system , he immediately established himself as a regular at Vicarage Road , making 35 Football League appearances in his first season . In five seasons with the Hornets , he made 217 appearances in total , scoring 14 goals , and also served as the team 's captain . Watford fans voted Hessenthaler as runner @-@ up for the club 's Player of the Season award in four consecutive seasons between 1991 and 1995 , and fondly remember him for his workrate and all @-@ round ability . He was one of the club veterans selected to represent Watford in the 2006 London Masters football event , where he was named " Player of the Tournament " . 
 = = = Gillingham = = = 
 At the end of the 1995 – 96 season , shortly after Watford 's relegation from the First Division , Hessenthaler signed for Gillingham for £ 235 @,@ 000 , a record fee at the time for the club . He quickly became a key player at Priestfield Stadium . In the 1998 – 99 season , he returned to his best form , and he played in the Gills ' first ever match at Wembley Stadium . This match was the final of the play @-@ offs against Manchester City , which Gillingham lost after a penalty shoot @-@ out . Shortly afterwards , Gillingham manager Tony Pulis , who had signed Hessenthaler , was dismissed from his post . He was replaced by Peter Taylor , who appointed Hessenthaler as player @-@ coach . In his first season in this new role , he was once again a regular in the Gillingham team , making a total of 47 appearances as the club recorded its highest position to date in the English football league system and best ever run in the FA Cup . Although the cup run came to an end with a 5 – 0 defeat at the hands of Chelsea of the Premier League , Hessenthaler 's high @-@ energy performance prompted Chelsea chairman Ken Bates to joke that he had been keen to sign the player until he discovered to his surprise that he was 35 years old ( although Hessenthaler was in fact only 34 at the time ) . Gillingham once again qualified for the play @-@ off final , with Hessenthaler making his second appearance at Wembley as the Gills beat Wigan Athletic 3 – 2 after extra time to secure promotion to the Football League First Division for the first time in the club 's history . 
 = = = Player @-@ management = = = 
 Immediately after guiding Gillingham to promotion , Peter Taylor left to manage Leicester City , and Hessenthaler was appointed player @-@ manager . In his first season in charge , he guided the club to a thirteenth @-@ place finish while continuing to play regularly . A serious leg injury sustained in an FA Cup match against A.F.C. Bournemouth in January 2001 kept him out for the remainder of the season but did not prevent him being selected for the Football League 's Team of the Season . Despite many of the club 's rivals having greater budgets available with which to sign and pay players , the team finished the 2001 – 02 season in twelfth place and the following season in eleventh place in the First Division , Gillingham 's best ever finish in over seventy seasons in the Football League . During the 2003 – 04 season , however , the Gills ' fortunes declined , and the team only avoided relegation on goal difference after holding Stoke City to a draw in the last match of the season . As the team continued to struggle at the start of the following season , club owner Paul Scally reiterated his confidence in Hessenthaler but brought in former Swindon Town and Wycombe Wanderers manager John Gorman to assist him . The following month , with no significant improvement in the team 's fortunes , Hessenthaler tendered his resignation . 
 He remained at the club as a player but was rarely selected for the team , and in January 2005 , he went on loan to Hull City , where he was reunited once again with Peter Taylor . He made ten appearances for Hull , who gained promotion to the Football League Championship ( the new name for what had been previously been called the First Division ) , while Gillingham were relegated from the same division . He returned to the Gillingham team at the start of the 2005 – 06 season and made a further 17 appearances , the final one in a 3 – 0 home win against Port Vale on 10 December 2005 . At forty years and four months of age , he was the oldest player ever to represent the club . He rounded out his Gillingham career by returning to Priestfield Stadium for a testimonial match in July 2006 . He is widely regarded as a club legend by Gillingham fans , who in 2005 voted him the team 's best ever player in a local radio poll , and he was also named Gillingham 's greatest ever player by the Professional Footballers ' Association in November 2007 . 
 = = = Subsequent career = = = 
 On 19 January 2006 , Hessenthaler signed for League Two strugglers Barnet on a short @-@ term contract until the end of the season . Although he considered retiring at the end of the season , he was persuaded by manager Paul Fairclough to sign a new contract for a further year . In October 2006 , he was named in the League Two team of the week , but at the end of the 2006 – 07 season , Barnet announced that his contract would not be renewed . 
 Shortly after his departure from Barnet , Hessenthaler was appointed manager of Dover Athletic of the Isthmian League First Division South . In his first season in charge , he played regularly , making over 30 appearances as he led the team to the championship of the division and promotion to the Isthmian League Premier Division . The following season he led the team to a second consecutive championship as Dover won the Isthmian League Premier Division title to gain promotion to Conference South . In the 2009 – 10 season , Dover reached the play @-@ offs for promotion to the Conference National , but lost at the semi @-@ final stage to Woking . Hessenthaler , at the age of 44 , announced his retirement as a player after the match . 
 On 20 May 2010 , Hessenthaler resigned as Dover manager , and the following day , he became the manager of Gillingham , who had just been relegated to Football League Two , for the second time . His contract was terminated at the end of the 2011 – 12 season after the Gills narrowly missed out on the play @-@ offs for promotion to League One , although he was offered a seat on the board of directors and a " football development role " . He left the position of director of football at Gillingham in 2013 with a view to returning to management . In July 2014 he returned to Gillingham as assistant manager under manager Peter Taylor , and was appointed joint caretaker manager , along with Darren Hare , Steve Lovell and Mark Patterson , following the sacking of Taylor on 31 December 2014 . At the end of the 2014 – 15 season , Hessenthaler left the club to become assistant manager at Leyton Orient . In April 2016 , he was promoted to the position of manager when player @-@ manager Kevin Nolan was stripped of his managerial responsibilities . 
 = = Managerial statistics = = 
 As of 7 May 2016 
 ‡ : As part of a temporary management team along with Darren Hare , Steve Lovell and Mark Patterson . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Hessenthaler 's mother died in 1991 , shortly before his first professional match . His father was an aspiring footballer and was at one time on the books of Arsenal , but never played professionally . He is married to Nikki and has a daughter , Jasmine , and a son , Jake , who is a professional footballer and made his debut for Gillingham in December 2013 . His brother @-@ in @-@ law , Darren Hare , is the youth team manager at Gillingham . He is the director of a sports and social club in Gillingham . 
 In February 2012 , former player Mark McCammon began action against Gillingham at an employment tribunal alleging racial discrimination . During the tribunal McCammon claimed that Hessenthaler lost his temper with him after McCammon had accused him of being " racially intolerant " . The tribunal found that the club had indeed racially discriminated against McCammon . 
 = Yeardley Smith = 
 Yeardley Smith ( / <unk> / ; born Martha Maria Yeardley Smith ; July 3 , 1964 ) is an American actress , voice actress , writer , author , comedian , and painter . She is best known for her long @-@ running role as Lisa Simpson on the animated television series The Simpsons . 
 She was born in Paris and moved with her family to Washington , DC , in 1966 . As a child , Smith was often teased because of her voice . She became a professional actress in 1982 after graduating from drama school and moved to New York City in 1984 , where she appeared in the Broadway production of Tom Stoppard 's The Real Thing . She made her film debut in 1985 's Heaven Help Us , followed by roles in The Legend of Billie Jean and Maximum Overdrive . She moved to Los Angeles in 1986 and received a recurring role in the television series Brothers . In 1987 , she auditioned for a role in a series of animated shorts about the Simpson family on The Tracey Ullman Show . Smith intended to audition for the role of Bart Simpson , but the casting director felt her voice was too high , so she was assigned the role of Lisa , instead . She voiced Lisa for three seasons on The Tracey Ullman Show , and in 1989 , the shorts were spun off into their own half @-@ hour show , The Simpsons . For her work as the character , Smith received a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance in 1992 . 
 Alongside The Simpsons , Smith appeared in the sitcom Herman 's Head as Louise , and had recurring appearances as Marlene on Dharma & Greg and Penny in two episodes of Dead Like Me . She has appeared in several films , including City Slickers , Just Write , Toys and As Good as It Gets . In 2004 , Smith performed her own off @-@ Broadway one @-@ woman show entitled More at the Union Square Theatre in New York City . Aside from The Simpsons , Smith has recorded few voice @-@ over parts , only commercials and the film We 're Back ! A Dinosaur 's Story . Smith starred in and served as executive producer for the independent romantic comedy Waiting For Ophelia , which had its world premiere at the Phoenix Film Festival in April 2009 . 
 Smith was married to actor Christopher Grove from 1990 to 1992 and Daniel Erickson from 2002 to 2008 . She enjoys writing and painting . During the first season of Herman 's Head , Smith taught herself to paint by copying other artists . She released a children 's book titled I , Lorelei in 2009 and her story " The Race " was included in the book Just Humor Me . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Smith was born Martha Maria Yeardley Smith on July 3 , 1964 , in Paris . Her father , Joseph Smith , worked for United Press International in Paris and moved to Washington , DC , in 1966 , where he became The Washington Post 's first official obituary editor . Her mother , Martha Mayor , was a paper conservator for the Freer and Sackler Galleries at the Smithsonian Institution . Smith 's parents later divorced . Smith labeled her family " upper crust and reserved " . As a child , Smith was often teased because of her unusual voice . Smith has stated : " I 've sounded pretty much the same way since I was six . Maybe [ my voice is ] a little deeper now . " She made her acting debut in a sixth @-@ grade play . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Smith became a professional actress in 1982 after graduating from drama school . After appearances in a number of school plays , she joined the local Arena Stage theater group on an apprenticeship , featuring in their production of Peter Pan . She went on to star in several other plays in Washington . She moved to New York City in 1984 and appeared in the Broadway production of Tom Stoppard 's play The Real Thing alongside Jeremy Irons and Glenn Close . 
 Smith 's first film role came in Heaven Help Us ( 1985 ) . She then played Putter in The Legend of Billie Jean ( also 1985 ) . The film was a box office bomb and critically panned , although Smith " thought it would be the movie that launched my career . And then it was out at the box office about 10 days before it died . " When filming was over , she rejoined The Real Thing before being out of work for six months . Smith worried her career was over . However , the following year , she played Connie in Stephen King 's Maximum Overdrive ( 1986 ) , noting it was " truly a dreadful film , but I had a great part in it . " 
 Smith moved to Los Angeles in 1986 on the " semi @-@ promise " of a part in a TV film . After the audition , the role was given to another actress . Smith realized " that people don 't mean what they say . It 's not malicious . They just don 't realize how much impact they have on an impressionable actor – and all actors are impressionable . " From then on , she decided to " just sort of build a wall around myself , " to cope with the disappointment of not getting a part . In Los Angeles , Smith appeared in theatrical productions of Living on Salvation Street , for which she was paid $ 14 for each performance , Boys and Girls / Men and Women , and How the Other Half Loves , and played the recurring role of Louella Waters on the Showtime series Brothers . She appeared in the films The Legend of Billie Jean and Ginger Ale Afternoon ( 1989 ) as " trailer @-@ park girls " . She later spoke of her regrets of appearing in the latter in her one @-@ woman show More . 
 = = = The Simpsons = = = 
 Smith 's longest @-@ running role is voicing Lisa Simpson on The Simpsons . She has voiced Lisa since 1987 , beginning with The Simpsons shorts on The Tracey Ullman Show . Smith had initially been asked to audition for the role of Lisa 's brother Bart , but casting director Bonita Pietila thought her voice was too high . Smith later recalled " I always sounded too much like a girl , I read two lines as Bart and they said , ' Thanks for coming ! ' " Smith was given the role of Lisa , instead . She denies rumors that she almost turned down the role , though admits she had never planned a career in voice @-@ over work . Pietila stated that , having seen her in Living on Salvation Street , Smith was always her preferred choice . Smith lifts her voice up slightly to perform the role . Lisa is the only regular character voiced by Smith , although in some earlier episodes , she provided some of Maggie 's squeaks and occasional speaking parts . Smith has only voiced characters other than Lisa on very rare occasions , with those characters usually being some derivative of Lisa , such as Lisa Bella in " Last Tap Dance in Springfield " and Lisa , Jr. in " Missionary : Impossible " ( both from season 11 in 2000 ) . Smith spends two days a week recording the show . 
 Until 1998 , Smith was paid $ 30 @,@ 000 per episode . During a pay dispute in 1998 , Fox threatened to replace the six main voice actors with new actors , going as far as preparing to cast new voices . However , the dispute was soon resolved and she received $ 125 @,@ 000 per episode until 2004 , when the voice actors demanded that they be paid $ 360 @,@ 000 an episode . The issue was resolved a month later , and Smith earned $ 250 @,@ 000 per episode . After salary renegotiations in 2008 , the voice actors received about $ 400 @,@ 000 per episode . Three years later , with Fox threatening to cancel the series unless production costs were cut , Smith and the other cast members accepted a 25 % pay cut , down to just over $ 300 @,@ 000 per episode . 
 Despite her world @-@ famous role , Smith is rarely recognized in public , which she does not mind , saying , " it 's wonderful to be in the midst of all this hype about the show , and people enjoying the show so much , and to be totally a fly on the wall ; people never recognise me solely from my voice . " In a 2009 interview with The Guardian , she commented : " It 's the best job ever . I have nothing but gratitude for the amount of freedom The Simpsons has bought me in my life . " 
 Smith received a Primetime Emmy Award in 1992 , but felt it was not worth anything , saying " there 's part of me that feels it wasn 't even a real Emmy . " The Emmy for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance is a Creative Arts and not handed out during the primetime telecast and , prior to 2009 , was a juried award without nominations . However , Smith says " if I had to be associated with one character in fiction , I will always be thrilled that it was Lisa Simpson . " The show 's creator Matt Groening has called Smith very similar to Lisa : " Yeardley has strong moral views about her character . There are lines that are written for Lisa that Yeardley reads and says , ' No , I wouldn 't say that . ' " Writer Jay Kogen praised her performance on the show , particularly in the episode " Lisa 's Substitute " , as able " to move past comedy to something really strong and serious and dramatic . " 
 = = = Further career = = = 
 From 1991 to 1994 , alongside The Simpsons , Smith was one of the lead cast members in the sitcom Herman 's Head as Louise . Her other television roles include recurring appearances as Marlene on Dharma & Greg , and Penny in two episodes of Dead Like Me . Smith has also appeared in Phil of the Future and Teen Angel . Her one @-@ scene role as pregnant checkout girl Nancy in 1991 's City Slickers earned her " more attention than all [ her ] previous roles combined , " and taught her " that it 's far better to have small parts in big movies that everyone sees . " In 1997 , she appeared as Lulu the palm reader in the independent film Just Write . Her other roles include parts in Barry Levinson 's Toys and James L. Brooks ' As Good as It Gets . Brooks , who is also executive producer of The Simpsons , had cast Smith in his 1994 film I 'll Do Anything ( in one of the film 's musical numbers ) , but her part was cut . Aside from The Simpsons , Smith has recorded few voice @-@ over parts , only commercials and the film We 're Back ! A Dinosaur 's Story . She " had a voice @-@ over agent for about two years , and I used to go out [ on auditions ] all the time , but it never really came to anything . Everybody said , ' Oh Yeardley , you 'll clean up , ' and that was definitely not the case . " 
 In 2004 , Smith performed her own off @-@ Broadway one @-@ woman show entitled More at the Union Square Theatre in New York City . Directed by Judith Ivey , the play is about her mixed feelings over the success of The Simpsons , her parents , her relationships , and her struggles with bulimia . The New York Times critic Margo Jefferson called it an " appealing if overlong show " , adding that " The career narrative needed shortening . This would involve some editing and revising but wouldn 't taint the best parts of More . It is refreshing to hear a celebrity talk cleanly about being fame @-@ driven and about not getting the degree or the kind of fame you craved . It 's fun to watch a skilled actress use her craft to the full . " She would later perform the play for three weeks in Los Angeles the following year . 
 Smith starred in and served as executive producer for the independent romantic comedy Waiting for Ophelia , which was released in 2009 . She funded the film , which was written by Adam Carl and based on a stage play he wrote in 2003 . She said : " I loved it . I never get to play parts like that . I always play the friend of a friend , never the lead . And the script surprised me . " Carl stated it was very unlikely she would recoup her money , but Smith decided she " believe [ d ] in this project , and my expectations have already been fulfilled by making the movie " , and added : " You can support art even if it 's not going to make a zillion dollars . " It premiered on April 4 , 2009 at the Phoenix Film Festival . 
 In 2011 , Smith starred as Ms. Miller in the movie The Chaperone alongside Triple H and Ariel Winter . 
 In June 2016 , the Human Rights Campaign released a video in tribute to the victims of the 2016 Orlando gay nightclub shooting ; in the video , Smith and others told the stories of the people killed there . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Smith married English @-@ Canadian actor Christopher Grove in 1990 . They were divorced in 1992 , citing irreconcilable differences . She married Daniel Erickson in 2002 ; the marriage lasted for six years and Smith filed for divorce on May 21 , 2008 , citing once again irreconcilable differences . In a 1997 interview with The Daily <unk> , Smith stated " I am shy , but I have an extroverted persona which I can draw on when I need to , " and that she is a " private " actress . In 2009 , she commented , " People have said to me that I 'm unassuming . It 's true , I 'm the worst celebrity ever . But I 'm trying to become better . " Smith had bulimia since she was a teenager . She noted " It would make me high , I would feel endorphins and this great sense of victory . " 
 Smith enjoys writing and painting . During the first season of Herman 's Head , Smith taught herself to paint by copying other artists . The book Just Humor Me includes a story , " The Race " , written by Smith . She has written a children 's book , I , Lorelei , which was published by HarperCollins in February 2009 . 
 In 2011 , Smith launched a women 's shoe line called <unk> Vous . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 = = = Music videos = = = 
 = = = Theme park = = = 
 = Jason Dozzell = 
 Jason Irvin Winans Dozzell ( born 9 December 1967 ) is an English former professional footballer who made more than 500 Football League appearances for Ipswich Town , Tottenham Hotspur , Northampton Town and Colchester United . Dozzell holds the record for being the youngest goalscorer in the England 's top division after scoring for Ipswich Town against Coventry City in a First Division match on 4 February 1984 at the age of 16 years and 57 days ( the youngest goalscorer since the formation of the Premier League is Everton 's James Vaughan , aged 16 years 270 days ) . His son Andre also scored on his Ipswich debut aged 16 . 
 Dozzell has also managed two non @-@ League football clubs , both in the Eastern Counties Football League — Ipswich Wanderers and Leiston . As of October 2008 , he is not managing a club . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Born in Ipswich , Suffolk , in 1967 , Dozzell attended the local Chantry High School . He has supported local charities , including acting as a patron for " Operation Santa Claus " , run in conjunction with radio station SGR @-@ FM . He played for a " Town Legends " side against a Soccer AM team in 2005 to raise money for the Academy , where his son , Andre , was in the under @-@ 10s team . In 2007 , he was found guilty of driving with excess alcohol and was banned for three years . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Playing career = = = 
 Playing football for the Langham Lions in the Colchester Youth League , Dozzell was noted as a " prolific schoolboy scorer " , and was signed on schoolboy terms for Ipswich Town by Bobby Robson despite interest from West Ham United and Nottingham Forest . Selected for the senior squad by manager Bobby Ferguson , Dozzell made his debut for Ipswich Town in February 1984 , coming on as a substitute against Coventry City . Ipswich won the match 2 – 0 ; Dozzell scored late in the second half , becoming the youngest player , at 16 years and 57 days , to score in the old English Football League First Division . He went on to make four further appearances in the 1983 – 84 season . The following season Dozzell made twenty appearances , five of them from the bench , and scored four goals . In the 1985 – 86 season he became a regular starter for Ipswich , scoring five goals in 51 games , although the club were relegated to the Football League Second Division . His 1986 – 87 season saw him play in every game , making 42 league and 11 cup appearances and scoring a single goal . He was also selected for the England under @-@ 21 team , for whom he played nine times without scoring . 
 In the 1988 – 89 season , Dozzell finished as the club 's joint top @-@ scorer ( with John Wark and Dalian Atkinson ) , scoring 13 goals from 37 appearances . The following two seasons saw Dozzell as a regular starter for the team , with 18 goals from 88 appearances . His 16 goals in the 1991 – 92 season helped John Lyall 's Ipswich win the league title and secure promotion to the newly formed Premier League . He featured regularly the following season , scoring nine goals in 52 games and helping the club stave off relegation in their first season back in the top tier of English football . 
 In August 1993 , Dozzell was sold to Tottenham Hotspur for £ 1 @.@ 9 million ; in his first season , he made 32 appearances and scored eight goals . Dozzell suffered numerous injuries during his time at White Hart Lane , restricting the number of games in which he played . In the 1994 – 95 season , he managed just seven appearances and failed to score . He made a total of 99 league and cup appearances and scored 14 goals over his four seasons at the club . Dozzell made a brief return to Portman Road in 1997 , on loan for a month , and made ten appearances before signing for Northampton Town in 1997 . A season with The Cobblers saw him score four goals from 26 appearances and help the club to the play @-@ off final at Wembley Stadium . This was followed by a move to newly promoted Colchester United , initially on a monthly contract , where Dozzell made more than 100 appearances and scored 11 goals in three seasons . 
 Dozzell retired from professional football in 2001 as a result of persistent injuries , in particular an ongoing toe problem . However , he continued playing with non @-@ league clubs ; a brief spell with Canvey Island reunited him with former Colchester and Ipswich player Neil Gregory . Canvey Island released him and he moved on to an even shorter stay with Grays Athletic , who signed him alongside Carl <unk> . This was followed by a move back to Ipswich and into management . 
 = = = Managerial career = = = 
 Dozzell took his first step into management with Eastern Counties Football League club Ipswich Wanderers in 2003 . In his role as player @-@ manager , he moved to play in defence and secured an eighth @-@ place finish in the league during his first season with the club . The following season , he led them to the league title and promotion to the Eastern Counties League Premier Division . The 2005 – 06 season saw Dozzell lead the newly promoted club to seventh in the league , but despite ending the season with a record tally of points , he left the Wanderers , citing off @-@ pitch issues at the club . 
 Dozzell went on to manage Leiston , but he left in November 2007 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Ipswich Town 
 Football League Second Division Winner ( 1 ) : 1991 – 92 
 = HMS Queen Mary = 
 HMS Queen Mary was the last battlecruiser built by the Royal Navy before World War I. The sole member of her class , Queen Mary shared many features with the Lion @-@ class battlecruisers , including her eight 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 343 mm ) guns . She was completed in 1913 and participated in the Battle of Heligoland Bight as part of the Grand Fleet in 1914 . Like most of the modern British battlecruisers , she never left the North Sea during the war . As part of the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron , she attempted to intercept a German force that bombarded the North Sea coast of England in December 1914 , but was unsuccessful . She was refitting in early 1915 and missed the Battle of Dogger Bank in January , but participated in the largest fleet action of the war , the Battle of Jutland in mid @-@ 1916 . She was hit twice by the German battlecruiser Derfflinger during the early part of the battle and her magazines exploded shortly afterwards , sinking the ship . 
 Her wreck was discovered in 1991 and rests in pieces , some of which are upside down , on the floor of the North Sea . Queen Mary is designated as a protected place under the Protection of Military Remains Act 1986 as it is the grave of 1 @,@ 266 officers and men . 
 = = Design = = 
 Queen Mary was ordered , together with the four battleships of the King George V class , under the 1910 – 11 Naval Programme . As was the usual pattern of the time , only one battlecruiser was ordered per naval programme . She differed from her predecessors of the Lion class in the distribution of her secondary armament and armour and in the location of the officers ' quarters . Every capital ship since the design of the battleship HMS Dreadnought in 1905 had placed the officers ' quarters closer to their action stations amidships ; after complaints from the Fleet , Queen Mary was the first battlecruiser to restore the quarters to their traditional place in the stern . In addition , she was the first battlecruiser to mount a sternwalk . 
 Queen Mary , the only ship of her name ever to serve in the Royal Navy , was named for Mary of Teck , the wife of King George V. The Queen 's representative at the ship 's christening on 20 March 1912 was the wife of Viscount Allendale . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 Slightly larger than the preceding Lion @-@ class ships , Queen Mary had an overall length of 703 feet 6 inches ( 214 @.@ 4 m ) including her sternwalk , a beam of 89 feet 0 @.@ 5 inches ( 27 @.@ 1 m ) , and a draught of 32 feet 4 inches ( 9 @.@ 9 m ) at deep load . The ship normally displaced 26 @,@ 770 long tons ( 27 @,@ 200 t ) and 31 @,@ 650 long tons ( 32 @,@ 160 t ) at deep load , over 1 @,@ 000 long tons ( 1 @,@ 016 t ) more than the earlier ships . She had a metacentric height of 5 @.@ 92 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) at deep load . In peacetime the crew numbered 997 officers and enlisted men , but this increased to 1 @,@ 275 during wartime . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The ship had two paired sets of Parsons direct @-@ drive steam turbines housed in separate engine rooms . Each set consisted of a high @-@ pressure turbine driving an outboard propeller shaft and a low @-@ pressure turbine driving an inner shaft . A cruising stage was built into the casing of each high @-@ pressure turbine for economical steaming at low speeds . The turbines had a designed output of 75 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 56 @,@ 000 kW ) , 5 @,@ 000 shp ( 3 @,@ 700 kW ) more than her predecessors . On sea trials in May and June 1913 , Queen Mary achieved more than 83 @,@ 000 shp ( 62 @,@ 000 kW ) , although she barely exceeded her designed speed of 28 knots ( 52 km / h ; 32 mph ) . The steam plant consisted of 42 Yarrow large @-@ tube boilers arranged in seven boiler rooms . Maximum bunkerage was 3 @,@ 600 long tons ( 3 @,@ 660 t ) of coal and 1 @,@ 170 long tons ( 1 @,@ 190 t ) of fuel oil to be sprayed on the coal to increase its burn rate . Her range was 5 @,@ 610 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 390 km ; 6 @,@ 460 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Queen Mary mounted eight BL 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch Mk V guns in four twin hydraulically powered turrets , designated ' A ' , ' B ' , ' Q ' and ' X ' from bow to stern . The guns could be depressed to − 3 ° and elevated to 20 ° , although the director controlling the turrets was limited to 15 ° 21 ' until prisms were installed before the Battle of Jutland in May 1916 to allow full elevation . They fired 1 @,@ 250 @-@ pound ( 567 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 550 ft / s ( 780 m / s ) ; at 20 ° elevation , this provided a maximum range of 23 @,@ 820 yd ( 21 @,@ 781 m ) with armour @-@ piercing ( AP ) shells . The rate of fire of these guns was 1 @.@ 5 – 2 rounds per minute . Queen Mary carried a total of 880 rounds during wartime for 110 shells per gun . 
 Her secondary armament consisted of sixteen BL 4 @-@ inch Mk VII guns , most of which were mounted in casemates on the forecastle deck , unlike the arrangement in the Lion class . The guns could depress to − 7 ° and had a maximum elevation of 15 ° . They fired 31 @-@ pound ( 14 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 821 ft / s ( 860 m / s ) at a maximum range of 11 @,@ 400 yd ( 10 @,@ 400 m ) ; the ship carried 150 rounds per gun . 
 The ship was built without any anti @-@ aircraft guns , but two guns were fitted in October 1914 . One was a QF 6 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss gun and the other was a QF 3 @-@ inch 20 cwt , both on high @-@ angle mountings . The Hotchkiss fired a 6 @-@ pound ( 2 @.@ 7 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 773 ft / s ( 540 m / s ) . The three @-@ inch gun fired a 12 @.@ 5 @-@ pound ( 5 @.@ 7 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 604 ft / s ( 794 m / s ) with a maximum effective ceiling of 23 @,@ 000 ft ( 7 @,@ 010 m ) . 
 Two 21 @-@ inch ( 530 mm ) submerged torpedo tubes were fitted , one on each broadside . Fourteen Mk II * * * torpedoes were carried , each of which had a warhead of 400 pounds ( 181 kg ) of TNT . Their range was 4 @,@ 500 yards ( 4 @,@ 115 m ) at 45 knots ( 83 km / h ; 52 mph ) or 10 @,@ 000 yards ( 9 @,@ 144 m ) at 29 knots ( 54 km / h ; 33 mph ) . 
 = = = Fire @-@ control = = = 
 In February 1913 , the Admiralty bought five sets of fire @-@ control equipment from Arthur Pollen for comparative trials with the equipment designed by Commander Frederic Dreyer . One set was mounted in Queen Mary and consisted of a 9 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) Argo rangefinder located on top of the conning tower that fed range data into an Argo Clock Mk IV ( a mechanical fire @-@ control computer ) located in the transmitting station below the conning tower . The clock converted the information into range and deflection data for use by the guns . The target 's data was also graphically recorded on a plotting table to assist the gunnery officer in predicting the movement of the target . The aft torpedo director tower was the backup gunnery control position . All four turrets were provided with 9 @-@ foot rangefinders and ' B ' and ' X ' turrets were further outfitted to serve as auxiliary control positions . 
 Fire @-@ control technology advanced quickly during the years immediately preceding World War I , and the development of the director firing system was a major advance . This consisted of a fire @-@ control director mounted high in the ship which electrically provided elevation and training angles to the turrets via pointers , which the turret crewmen only had to follow . The guns were fired simultaneously , which aided in spotting the shell splashes and minimized the effects of the roll on the dispersion of the shells . Queen Mary received her director before the Battle of Jutland . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 The armour protection given to Queen Mary was similar to that of the Lions ; her waterline belt of Krupp cemented armour was also 9 inches ( 229 mm ) thick between ' B ' and ' X ' turrets . It thinned to 4 inches ( 102 mm ) inches towards the ships ' ends , but did not reach either the bow or the stern . In addition the ship was given an upper armour belt with a maximum thickness of six inches over the same length as the thickest part of the waterline armour , thinning to 5 inches ( 127 mm ) abreast the end turrets . Four @-@ inch transverse bulkheads closed off the ends of the armoured citadel . High @-@ tensile steel plating , cheaper than nickel @-@ steel , but equally as effective , was used for the protective decks . The lower armoured deck was generally only 1 inch ( 25 mm ) thick except outside the citadel where it was 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 64 mm ) . The upper armoured deck was situated at the top of the upper armour belt and was also only one inch thick . The forecastle deck ranged from 1 to 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 25 @.@ 4 to 38 @.@ 1 mm ) . 
 The gun turrets had nine @-@ inch fronts and sides , while their roofs were 2 @.@ 5 to 3 @.@ 25 inches ( 64 to 83 mm ) thick . The barbettes were protected by nine inches of armour above the deck , but it thinned to 8 inches ( 203 mm ) above the upper armour deck and 3 inches ( 76 mm ) below it . The forward 4 @-@ inch guns were protected by three @-@ inch sides and a two @-@ inch high @-@ tensile steel deck overhead . The conning tower sides were 10 inches ( 254 mm ) thick , with three @-@ inch roofs and communication tubes . Her aft torpedo director tower was protected by six @-@ inch walls and a three @-@ inch cast steel roof . High @-@ tensile steel torpedo bulkheads 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 64 mm ) thick were fitted abreast the magazines and shell rooms . Her funnel uptakes were protected by high @-@ tensile steel splinter armour 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) thick on the sides and one inch thick on the ends between the upper and forecastle decks . 
 = = Service = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ war career = = = 
 Queen Mary was laid down at Palmers Shipbuilding and Iron Company , Jarrow , on 6 March 1911 . She was launched on 20 March 1912 and was completed in August 1913 at a total cost of £ 2 @,@ 078 @,@ 491 ( including guns ) . The ship came under the command of Captain Reginald Hall on 1 July and was the last battlecruiser commissioned before the start of World War I , being commissioned on 4 September 1913 . Assigned to the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron ( BCS ) under the command of Rear Admiral David Beatty , Queen Mary and the rest of the 1st BCS made a port visit to Brest in February 1914 and the squadron visited Russia in June . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 = = = = Battle of Heligoland Bight = = = = 
 Queen Mary 's first action was as part of the battlecruiser force under the command of Beatty during the Battle of Heligoland Bight on 28 August 1914 . Beatty 's ships had originally been intended as distant support of the British cruisers and destroyers closer to the German coast in case the large ships of the High Seas Fleet sortied in response to the British attacks . They turned south at full speed at 11 : 35 when the British light forces failed to disengage on schedule , and the rising tide meant that German capital ships would be able to clear the bar at the mouth of the Jade Estuary . The brand @-@ new light cruiser HMS Arethusa had been crippled earlier in the battle and was under fire from the German light cruisers SMS Strassburg and SMS Cöln when Beatty 's battlecruisers loomed out of the mist at 12 : 37 . Strassburg was able to duck into the mists and evade fire , but Cöln remained visible and was quickly crippled by fire from the squadron . Beatty , however , was distracted from the task of finishing her off by the sudden appearance of the elderly light cruiser SMS Ariadne directly ahead of him . He turned in pursuit and reduced her to a flaming hulk in only three salvos at close range ( under 6000 yards or 5 @.@ 5 km ) . At 13 : 10 Beatty turned north and made a general signal to retire . Beatty 's main body encountered the crippled Cöln shortly after turning north , and she was sunk by two salvos from HMS Lion . 
 = = = = Raid on Scarborough = = = = 
 The Imperial German Navy had decided on a strategy of bombarding British towns on the North Sea coast in an attempt to draw out the Royal Navy and destroy elements of it in detail . An earlier Raid on Yarmouth on 3 November had been partially successful , but a larger @-@ scale operation was devised by Admiral Franz von Hipper afterwards . The fast battle @-@ cruisers were to conduct the bombardment , while the entire High Seas Fleet was to station itself east of Dogger Bank to provide cover for their return and to destroy any elements of the Royal Navy that responded to the raid . But what the Germans did not know was that the British were reading the German naval codes and were planning to catch the raiding force on its return journey , although they were not aware that the High Seas Fleet would be at sea as well . Beatty 's 1st BCS , now reduced to four ships , including Lion , together with the 2nd Battle Squadron with six dreadnoughts , was detached from the Grand Fleet in an attempt to intercept the Germans near Dogger Bank . By this time , Queen Mary was commanded by Captain C. I. Prowse . 
 Hipper set sail on 15 December 1914 for another such raid and successfully bombarded several English towns , but British destroyers escorting the 1st BCS had already encountered German destroyers of the High Seas Fleet at 05 : 15 and fought an inconclusive action with them . Vice Admiral Sir George Warrender , commanding the 2nd Battle Squadron , had received a signal at 5 : 40 that the destroyer HMS Lynx was engaging enemy destroyers although Beatty had not . The destroyer HMS Shark spotted the armoured cruiser SMS Roon and her escorts at about 07 : 00 , but could not transmit the message until 07 : 25 . Warrender received the signal , as did the battlecruiser HMS New Zealand , but Beatty did not , despite the fact that New Zealand had been specifically tasked to relay messages between the destroyers and Beatty . Warrender attempted to pass on Shark 's message to Beatty at 7 : 36 , but did not manage to make contact until 07 : 55 . Beatty reversed course when he got the message and dispatched New Zealand to search for Roon . She was being overhauled by New Zealand when Beatty received messages that Scarborough was being shelled at 09 : 00 . Beatty ordered New Zealand to rejoin the squadron and turned west for Scarborough . 
 The British forces split going around the shallow Southwest Patch of the Dogger Bank ; Beatty 's ships passed to the north , while Warrender passed to the south as they headed west to block the main route through the minefields defending the English coast . This left a 15 @-@ nautical @-@ mile ( 28 km ; 17 mi ) gap between them through which the German light forces began to move . At 12 : 25 , the light cruisers of the II Scouting Group began to pass the British forces searching for Hipper . The light cruiser HMS Southampton spotted the light cruiser SMS Stralsund and signalled a report to Beatty . At 12 : 30 Beatty turned his battlecruisers towards the German ships . Beatty presumed that the German cruisers were the advance screen for Hipper 's ships , however , those were some 50 km ( 31 mi ) behind . The 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron , which had been screening for Beatty 's ships , detached to pursue the German cruisers , but a misinterpreted signal from the British battlecruisers sent them back to their screening positions . This confusion allowed the German light cruisers to escape , and alerted Hipper to the location of the British battlecruisers . The German battlecruisers wheeled to the northeast of the British forces and made good their escape . 
 Queen Mary was refitting in January and February 1915 and did not participate in the Battle of Dogger Bank ; she received her main battery director in December 1915 . 
 = = = = Battle of Jutland = = = = 
 On 31 May 1916 Queen Mary put to sea with the rest of the Battlecruiser Fleet to intercept a sortie by the High Seas Fleet into the North Sea . The British were able to decode the German radio messages and left their bases before the Germans put to sea . Hipper 's battlecruisers spotted the Battlecruiser Fleet to their west at 15 : 20 , but Beatty 's ships did not spot the Germans to their east until 15 : 30 . Two minutes later , he ordered a course change to east south @-@ east to position himself astride the German 's line of retreat and called his ships ' crews to action stations . Hipper ordered his ships to turn to starboard , away from the British , almost 180 degrees , to assume a south @-@ easterly course , and reduced speed to 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) to allow three light cruisers of the 2nd Scouting Group to catch up . With this turn Hipper was falling back on the High Seas Fleet , then about 60 miles ( 97 km ) behind him . Around this time Beatty altered course to the east , as it was quickly apparent that he was still too far north to cut off Hipper . 
 This began what was to be called the " Run to the South " as Beatty changed course to steer east @-@ southeast at 15 : 45 , paralleling Hipper 's course , now that the range closed to under 18 @,@ 000 yards ( 16 @,@ 000 m ) . The Germans opened fire first at 15 : 48 , followed by the British . The British ships were still in the process of making their turn , as only the two leading ships , Lion and HMS Princess Royal , had steadied on their course when the Germans opened fire . The German fire was accurate from the beginning , but the British overestimated the range , as the German ships blended into the haze . Queen Mary opened fire about 15 : 50 on SMS Seydlitz , using only her forward turrets . By 15 : 54 the range was down to 12 @,@ 900 yards ( 11 @,@ 800 m ) , and Beatty ordered a course change two points to starboard to open up the range at 15 : 57 . During this period , Queen Mary made two hits on Seydlitz , at 15 : 55 and 15 : 57 , one of which caused a propellant fire that burnt out her aft superfiring turret . 
 The range had grown too far for accurate shooting , so Beatty altered course four points to port to close the range again between 16 : 12 and 16 : 15 . This manoeuvre exposed Lion to the fire of the German battlecruisers , and she was hit several times . The smoke and fumes from these hits caused SMS Derfflinger to lose sight of Lion , which had sheered out of line to starboard , and to switch her fire to Queen Mary , now visible to Derfflinger 's gunnery officer as the second ship in the British line and therefore assumed to be Princess Royal , at 16 : 16 . Queen Mary hit Seydlitz again at 16 : 17 and knocked out one gun of her secondary armament . In return , Queen Mary had been hit twice by Seydlitz before 16 : 21 with unknown effects , but the German battlecruiser hit the turret face of ' Q ' turret at that time and knocked out the right @-@ hand gun in the turret . By 16 : 25 the range was down to 14 @,@ 400 yards ( 13 @,@ 200 m ) , and Beatty turned two points to starboard to open the range again . This move came too late , however , for Queen Mary , as Derfflinger 's fire began to take effect , hitting her twice before 16 : 26 . One shell hit forward and detonated one or both of the forward magazines , which broke the ship in two near the foremast . Stationed inside ' Q ' turret , Midshipman Jocelyn Latham Storey survived and reported that there had been a large explosion forward which rocked the turret , breaking the left gun in half , the gun breech falling into the working chamber and the right gun coming off its trunnions . Cordite in the working chamber caught fire and produced poisonous fumes that asphyxiated some of the turret 's crew . It is doubtful that an explosion forward could have done this , so ' Q ' turret may have been struck by the second shell . A further explosion , possibly from shells breaking loose , shook the aft end of the ship as it began to roll over and sink . The battlecruiser behind her , HMS Tiger , was showered with debris from the explosion and forced to steer to port to avoid her remains . 1 @,@ 266 crewmen were lost ; eighteen survivors were picked up by the destroyers HMS Laurel , HMS Petard , and HMS Tipperary , and two by the Germans . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Queen Mary , along with the other Jutland wrecks , has been declared a protected place under the Protection of Military Remains Act 1986 to discourage further damage to the resting place of 1 @,@ 266 officers and men . Surveys of this site conducted by nautical archaeologist Innes McCartney in 2001 – 03 have shown the wreck is in three sections , with the two forward sections being heavily damaged and in pieces . Her aft end is upside down and relatively complete except for her propellers , which have been salvaged . Examination of the damage to the ship has suggested that the initial explosion was not in the magazine of ' A ' or ' B ' forward main turrets , but instead in the magazine of the forward 4 @-@ inch battery . An explosion of the quantity of cordite in the main magazine would have been sufficient to also ignite ' Q ' magazine , destroying much more of the ship . The explosion in the smaller magazine would have been sufficient to break the ship in two , the blast then spreading to the forward magazine and ripping apart the forward section . 
 = SM U @-@ 1 ( Austria @-@ Hungary ) = 
 SM U @-@ 1 or U @-@ I was the lead boat of her class of submarine or U @-@ boat built for and operated by the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy ( German : Kaiserliche und Königliche Kriegsmarine or K.u.K. Kriegsmarine ) . U @-@ 1 was designed by American Simon Lake 's Lake Torpedo Boat Company and built at the navy yard in Pola . She was one of two Lake @-@ designed submarines purchased as part of a competitive evaluation of foreign submarine designs . 
 U @-@ 1 was launched in February 1909 and was 100 feet ( 30 m ) long and displaced between 230 and 249 tonnes ( 254 and 274 short tons ) depending on whether surfaced or submerged . She was originally powered by gasoline engines for surface running , but during her trials , they were found to be incapable of reaching the contracted speed . U @-@ 1 was commissioned in April 1911 and served as a training boat through 1914 . 
 At the beginning of World War I , U @-@ 1 was in drydock awaiting new batteries and replacement diesel engines . U @-@ 1 returned to service as a training boat until October 1915 . From November she conducted reconnaissance cruises out of Trieste and Pola until she was declared obsolete in early 1918 . She continued to serve in a training role at the submarine base on Brioni , but was at Pola at the end of the war . She was awarded to Italy as a war reparation in 1920 and scrapped at Pola . U @-@ 1 did not sink any ships during the war . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 U @-@ 1 was built as part of a plan by the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy to competitively evaluate foreign submarine designs from Simon Lake , Germaniawerft , and John Philip Holland . The Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy ordered plans for U @-@ 1 ( and sister ship U @-@ 2 ) in 1906 from the Lake Torpedo Boat Company of Bridgeport , Connecticut . U @-@ 1 was built at the Pola Navy Yard and was launched on 10 February 1909 . 
 U @-@ 1 had several features typical of Lake 's designs , including a diving chamber under the bow and two variable pitch propellers . Lake 's design also called for two retractable wheels that allowed travel over the seabed . The design also placed the diving tanks above the waterline of the single , cylindrical hull , which necessitated a heavy ballast keel for vertical stability . This arrangement required mechanical pumping , a procedure that took 8 minutes . U @-@ 1 's propulsion system consisted of two gasoline engines for surface running and two electric motors for running while submerged . 
 The boat was 100 feet ( 30 m ) long by 15 feet 9 inches ( 4 @.@ 80 m ) abeam and had a draft of 12 feet 8 inches ( 3 @.@ 86 m ) . As designed , her displacement was 229 @.@ 7 long tons ( 233 @.@ 4 t ) surfaced and 248 @.@ 9 long tons ( 252 @.@ 9 t ) submerged . She was outfitted with three 45 @-@ centimeter ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes — two in the bow , one in the stern — and could carry up to five torpedoes , but typically carried three . U @-@ 1 was also armed with a 3 @.@ 7 @-@ centimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) deck gun . 
 = = Service career = = 
 Upon U @-@ 1 's completion , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy conducted trials of the submarine throughout most of 1910 . On 5 April both of U @-@ 1 's electric motors were damaged in a flooding incident during her trials . U @-@ 1 's gasoline engines were never able to meet the speed called for in the contract during the Navy evaluations , and were considered not suitable for wartime use . As a result , the Navy only paid for U @-@ 1 's hull and armament , and arranged a lease of the gasoline engines while replacement diesel engines were ordered from the Austrian firm Maschinenfabrik <unk> . Despite the engine problems , U @-@ 1 and her sister ship had the best performance in diving and steering amongst the U @-@ boats under evaluation by the Navy . 
 U @-@ 1 was commissioned into the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy on 15 April 1911 and served as a training boat — conducting up to ten training cruises per month — through 1914 . On 13 January 1914 , the submarine was accidentally rammed by the Austro @-@ Hungarian cruiser Sankt Georg in the Fasana Channel , which damaged the her periscope . At the outbreak of World War I , U @-@ 1 was in drydock awaiting the installation of new batteries and her new diesel engines . To accommodate the new engines , she was lengthened by about 11 inches ( 28 cm ) . The modifications and new engines lowered her surface displacement to 223 @.@ 0 tonnes ( 245 @.@ 8 short tons ) but increased her submerged displacement to 277 @.@ 5 tonnes ( 305 @.@ 9 short tons ) . 
 Upon completion in early 1915 , U @-@ 1 returned to training duties through 4 October . She was stationed at Trieste in early November and conducted reconnaissance cruises from that port through December 1917 , when she was assigned to the naval base at Pola . On 11 January 1918 , she was declared obsolete , but was retained as a training boat at the submarine base on Brioni . U @-@ 1 was at Pola at the war 's end , and was scrapped after her cession to Italy as a war reparation in 1920 . U @-@ 1 did not sink any ships during the war . 
 = James Whale = 
 James Whale ( 22 July 1889 – 29 May 1957 ) was an English film director , theatre director and actor . He is best remembered for his four classic horror films : Frankenstein ( 1931 ) , The Old Dark House ( 1932 ) , The Invisible Man ( 1933 ) and Bride of Frankenstein ( 1935 ) . Whale also directed films in other genres , including what is considered the definitive film version of the musical Show Boat ( 1936 ) . He became increasingly disenchanted with his association with horror , but many of his non @-@ horror films have fallen into obscurity . 
 Whale was born into a large family in Dudley , in the Black Country area of the English West Midlands . He discovered his artistic talent early on and studied art . With the outbreak of World War I , he enlisted in the British Army and became an officer . He was captured by the Germans and during his time as a prisoner of war he realized he was interested in drama . Following his release at the end of the war he became an actor , set designer and director . His success directing the 1928 play Journey 's End led to his move to the United States , first to direct the play on Broadway and then to Hollywood to direct motion pictures . He lived in Hollywood for the rest of his life , most of that time with his longtime companion , producer David Lewis . Apart from Journey 's End ( 1930 ) , which was released by Tiffany Films , and Hell 's Angels ( 1930 ) , released by United Artists , he directed a dozen films for Universal Studios between 1931 and 1937 , developing a style characterized by the influence of German Expressionism and a highly mobile camera . 
 At the height of his career as a director , Whale directed The Road Back ( 1937 ) , a sequel to All Quiet on the Western Front . Studio interference , possibly spurred by political pressure from Nazi Germany , led to the film 's being altered from Whale 's vision and The Road Back was a critical and commercial failure . A run of similar box @-@ office disappointments followed and , while he would make one final short film in 1950 , by 1941 his film directing career was over . He continued to direct for the stage and also rediscovered his love for painting and travel . His investments made him wealthy and he lived a comfortable retirement until suffering strokes in 1956 that robbed him of his vigor and left him in pain . He committed suicide on 29 May 1957 by drowning himself in his swimming pool . 
 Whale was openly gay throughout his career , something that was very unusual in the 1920s and 1930s . As knowledge of his sexual orientation has become more common , some of his films , Bride of Frankenstein in particular , have been interpreted as having a gay subtext and it has been claimed that his refusal to remain in the closet led to the end of his career . However , his associates dismissed the notions that his sexuality informed his work or that it cost him his career . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Whale was born in Dudley , England , the sixth of the seven children of William , a blast <unk> , and Sarah , a nurse . He attended Kates Hill Board School , followed by Bayliss Charity School and finally Dudley Blue Coat School . His attendance stopped in his teenage years because the cost would have been prohibitive and his labor was needed to help support the family . Thought not physically strong enough to follow his brothers into the local heavy industries , Whale started work as a cobbler , reclaiming the nails he recovered from replaced soles and selling them for scrap for extra money . He discovered he had some artistic ability and earned additional money lettering signs and price tags for his neighbors . Whale used his additional income to pay for evening classes at the Dudley School of Arts and Crafts . 
 World War I broke out in 1914 . Although Whale had little interest in the politics behind the war , he realized that conscription was inevitable so he enlisted in the Army . Considered because of his age a good candidate for officer training , Whale joined the Inns of Court Officer Training Corps in October 1915 and was stationed in Bristol . He was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Worcestershire Regiment in July 1916 . He was taken a prisoner of war on the Western Front in Flanders in August 1917 and was held at Holzminden prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camp , where he remained until December 1918 . While imprisoned , he became actively involved , as an actor , writer , producer , and set @-@ designer , in the amateur theatrical productions which took place in the camp , finding them " a source of great pleasure and amusement " . He also developed a talent for poker , and after the war he cashed in the chits and IOUs from his fellow prisoners to serve as a nest egg . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Theatre = = = 
 After the armistice he returned to Birmingham and tried to find work as a cartoonist . He sold two cartoons to the <unk> in 1919 but was unable to secure a permanent position . Later in 1919 Whale embarked on a professional stage career . Under the tutelage of actor @-@ manager Nigel Playfair , he worked as an actor , set designer and builder , " stage director " ( akin to a stage manager ) and director . In 1922 , while with Playfair , he met Doris <unk> . The two were considered a couple for some two years , despite Whale 's living as an openly gay man . The couple was reportedly engaged in 1924 but by 1925 the engagement was off . 
 In 1928 Whale was offered the opportunity to direct two private performances of R. C. Sherriff 's then @-@ unknown play Journey 's End for the Incorporated Stage Society , a theatre society that mounted private Sunday performances of plays . Set over a four @-@ day period in March 1918 in the trenches at Saint @-@ Quentin , France , Journey 's End gives a glimpse into the experiences of the officers of a British Army infantry company in World War I. The key conflict is between Captain Stanhope , the company commander , and Lieutenant Raleigh , the brother of Stanhope 's fiancée . Whale offered the part of Stanhope to the then @-@ barely known Laurence Olivier . Olivier initially declined the role , but after meeting the playwright agreed to take it on . Maurice Evans was cast as Raleigh . The play was well received and transferred to the Savoy Theatre in London 's West End , opening on 21 January 1929 . A young Colin Clive was now in the lead role , Olivier having accepted an offer to take the lead in a production of Beau Geste . The play was a tremendous success , with critics uniform and effusive in their praise and with audiences sometimes sitting in stunned silence following its conclusion only to burst into thunderous ovations . As Whale biographer James Curtis wrote , the play " managed to coalesce , at the right time and in the right manner , the impressions of a whole generation of men who were in the war and who had found it impossible , through words or deeds , to adequately express to their friends and families what the trenches had been like " . After three weeks at the Savoy , Journey 's End transferred to the Prince of Wales Theatre , where it ran for the next two years . 
 With the success of Journey 's End at home , Broadway producer Gilbert Miller acquired the rights to mount a New York production with an all @-@ British cast headed by Colin Keith @-@ Johnston as Stanhope and Derek Williams as Raleigh . Whale also directed this version , which premiered at Henry Miller 's Theatre on 22 March 1929 . The play ran for over a year and cemented its reputation as the greatest play about World War I. 
 = = = Early work in Hollywood = = = 
 The success of the various productions of Journey 's End brought Whale to the attention of film producers . Coming at a time when motion pictures were making the transition from silent to talking , producers were interested in hiring actors and directors with experience with dialogue . Whale traveled to Hollywood in 1929 and signed a contract with Paramount Pictures . He was assigned as " dialogue director " for a film called The Love Doctor ( 1929 ) . Whale completed work on the film in 15 days and his contract was allowed to expire . It was at around this time that he met David Lewis . 
 Whale was hired by independent film producer and aviation pioneer Howard Hughes , who planned to turn the previously silent Hughes production Hell 's Angels ( 1930 ) into a talkie . He directed the dialogue sequences . When his work for Hughes was completed , Whale headed to Chicago to direct another production of Journey 's End . 
 Having purchased the film rights to Journey 's End , British producers Michael Balcon and Thomas Welsh agreed that Whale 's experience directing the London and Broadway productions of the play made him the best choice to direct the film . The two partnered with a small American studio , Tiffany @-@ Stahl , to shoot the film in New York . Colin Clive reprised his role as Stanhope , and David Manners was cast as Raleigh . Filming got underway on 6 December 1929 and wrapped on 22 January 1930 . Journey 's End was released in Great Britain on 14 April and in the United States on 15 April . On both sides of the Atlantic the film was a tremendous critical and commercial success . 
 = = = With the <unk> at Universal = = = 
 Universal Studios signed Whale to a five @-@ year contract in 1931 and his first project was Waterloo Bridge . Based on the Broadway play by Robert E. Sherwood , the film stars Mae Clarke as Myra , a chorus girl in World War I London who becomes a prostitute . It too was a critical and popular success . At around this time , Whale and Lewis began living together . 
 In 1931 , Universal chief Carl Laemmle , Jr. offered Whale his choice of any property the studio owned . Whale chose Frankenstein , mostly because none of Universal 's other properties particularly interested him and he wanted to make something other than a war picture . While the novel itself was in the public domain , Universal owned the filming rights to a stage adaptation by Peggy <unk> . Whale cast Colin Clive as Henry Frankenstein and Mae Clarke as his fiancée Elizabeth . For the Monster , he turned to an unknown actor named Boris Karloff . Shooting began on 24 August 1931 and wrapped on 3 October . Previews were held 29 October , with wide release on 21 November . Frankenstein was an instant hit with critics and the public . The film received glowing reviews and shattered box office records across the United States , earning Universal $ 12 million on first release . 
 Next from Whale were The Impatient Maiden and The Old Dark House ( both 1932 ) . The Impatient Maiden made little impression but The Old Dark House is credited with reinventing the " dark house " subgenre of horror films . Thought lost for some years , a print was found by filmmaker Curtis Harrington in the Universal vaults in 1968 and restored by George Eastman House . 
 Whale 's next film was The Kiss Before the Mirror ( 1933 ) , a critical success but a box @-@ office failure . He returned to horror with The Invisible Man ( 1933 ) . Shot from a script approved by H. G. Wells , the film was a blended horror with humor and confounding visual effects . It was critically acclaimed , with The New York Times listing it as one of the ten best films of the year , and broke box @-@ office records in cities across America . So highly regarded was the film that France , which restricted the number of theatres in which undubbed American films could play , granted it a special waiver because of its " extraordinary artistic merit " . 
 Also in 1933 Whale directed the romantic comedy By Candlelight which gained good reviews and was a modest box office hit . In 1934 he directed One More River , an adaptation of the novel of the same name by John Galsworthy . The film tells the story of a woman desperate to escape her abusive marriage to a member of the British aristocracy . This was the first of Whale 's films for which Production Code Administration approval was required and Universal had a difficult time securing that approval because of the elements of sexual sadism implicit in the husband 's abusive behavior . 
 Bride of Frankenstein ( 1935 ) was Whale 's next project . He had resisted making a sequel to Frankenstein as he feared being pigeonholed as a horror director . Bride hearkened back to an episode from Mary Shelley 's original novel in which the Monster promises to leave Frankenstein and humanity alone if Frankenstein makes him a mate . He does , but the mate is repelled by the monster who then , setting Frankenstein and his wife free to live , chooses to destroy himself and his " bride . " The film was a critical and box office success , having earned some $ 2 million for Universal by 1943 . Lauded as " the finest of all gothic horror movies " , Bride is frequently hailed as Whale 's masterpiece . 
 With the success of Bride Laemmle was eager to put Whale to work on Dracula 's Daughter ( 1936 ) , the sequel to Universal 's first big horror hit of the sound era . Whale , wary of doing two horror films in a row and concerned that directing Dracula 's Daughter could interfere with his plans for the first all @-@ sound version of Show Boat , ( previously filmed as a part @-@ talkie by Harry A. Pollard ) , instead convinced Laemmle to buy the rights to a novel called The Hangover Murders . The novel is a comedy @-@ mystery in the style of The Thin Man , about a group of friends who were so drunk the night one of them was murdered that none can remember anything . Retitled Remember Last Night ? , the film was one of Whale 's personal favorites , but met with sharply divided reviews and commercial disinterest . 
 With the completion of Remember Last Night ? Whale immediately went to work on Show Boat ( 1936 ) . Whale gathered as many of those as he could who had been involved in one production or another of the musical , including Helen Morgan , Paul Robeson , Charles Winninger , Sammy White , conductor Victor <unk> , orchestrator Robert Russell Bennett , and , as Magnolia , Irene Dunne , who believed that Whale was the wrong director for the piece . The 1936 version of Show Boat , faithfully adapted from the original stage production , is believed to be the definitive film version of the musical by many critics. but became unavailable following the 1951 remake . Warner 's has remastered this version and is presently offering stamped DVDs for a limited time ; thereafter , this version will be available on a DVD @-@ on @-@ demand basis using DVD @-@ Rs . 
 This was the last of Whale 's films to be produced under the Laemmle family . The studio was now bankrupt , and the <unk> lost control to J. Cheever <unk> , head of the Standard Capital Corporation , and Charles R. Rogers , who was installed in Junior Laemmle 's old job . 
 = = = Career in decline = = = 
 Whale 's career went into sharp decline following the release of his next film , The Road Back ( 1937 ) . The sequel to Erich Maria <unk> 's All Quiet on the Western Front , which Universal had filmed in 1930 , the novel and film follow the lives of several young German men who have returned from the trenches of World War I and their struggles to re @-@ integrate into society . The Los Angeles consul for Nazi Germany , George Gyssling , learned that the film was in production . He protested to PCA enforcer Joseph Breen , arguing that the film gave an " untrue and distorted picture of the German people " . Gyssling eventually met Whale , but nothing came of it . Gyssling then sent letters to members of the cast , threatening that their participation in the film might lead to difficulties in obtaining German filming permits for them and for anyone associated in a film with them . While the low volume of business conducted by Universal in Germany made such threats largely hollow , the State Department , under pressure from the Hollywood Anti @-@ Nazi League and the Screen Actors Guild , stepped in and the German government backed down . Whale 's original cut of the film was given generally positive reviews , but sometime between preview screenings and the film 's general release , Rogers capitulated to the Germans , ordering that cuts be made and additional scenes be shot and inserted . Whale was furious , and the altered film was banned in Germany anyway . The Germans were successful in persuading China , Greece , Italy and Switzerland to ban the film as well . 
 Following the debacle of The Road Back , Charles Rogers tried to get out of his contract with Whale ; Whale refused . Rogers then assigned him to a string of B movies to run out his contractual obligation . Whale only made one additional successful feature film , The Man in the Iron Mask ( 1939 ) , before retiring from the film industry in 1941 . 
 = = Post @-@ film life = = 
 With his film career behind him , Whale found himself at a loose end . He was offered the occasional job , including the opportunity to direct Since You Went Away for David O. Selznick , but turned them down . Lewis , meanwhile , was busier than ever with his production duties and often worked late hours , leaving Whale lonely and bored . Lewis bought him a supply of paint and canvasses and Whale re @-@ discovered his love of painting . Eventually he built a large studio for himself . 
 With the outbreak of World War II , Whale volunteered his services to make a training film for the United States Army . He shot the film , called Personnel Placement in the Army , in February 1942 . Later that year , in association with actress Claire <unk> , he created the Brentwood Service Players . The Players took over a 100 – seat theatre . Sixty seats were provided free of charge to service personnel ; the remaining were sold to the public , with the box office proceeds donated to wartime charities . The group expanded to the Playtime Theatre during the summer , where a series of shows ran through October . 
 Whale returned to Broadway in 1944 to direct the psychological thriller Hand in Glove . It was his first return to Broadway since his failed One , Two , Three ! in 1930 . Hand in Glove would fare no better than his earlier play , running the same number of performances , 40 . 
 Whale directed his final film in 1950 , a short subject based on the William Saroyan one @-@ act play Hello Out There . The film , financed by supermarket heir Huntington Hartford , was the story of a man in a Texas jail falsely accused of rape and the woman who cleans the jail . Hartford intended for the short to be part of an anthology film along the lines of Quartet . However , attempts to find appropriate short fiction companion pieces to adapt were unsuccessful and Hello Out There was never commercially released . 
 Whale 's last professional engagement was directing Pagan in the Parlour , a farce about two New England spinster sisters who are visited by a Polynesian whom their father , when shipwrecked years earlier , had married . The production was mounted in Pasadena for two weeks in 1951 . Plans were made to take it to New York , but Whale suggested taking the play to London first . Before opening the play in England , Whale decided to tour the art museums of Europe . In France he renewed his acquaintanceship with Curtis Harrington , whom he had met in 1947 . While visiting Harrington in Paris , he went to some gay bars . At one he met a 25 @-@ year @-@ old bartender named Pierre Foegel , whom Harrington believed was nothing but " a hustler out for what he could get " . The 62 @-@ year @-@ old Whale was smitten with the younger man and hired him as his chauffeur . 
 A provincial tour of Pagan in the Parlour began in September 1952 and it appeared that the play would be a hit . However , Hermione Baddeley , starring in the play as the cannibal " <unk> @-@ ga " , was drinking heavily and began engaging in bizarre antics and disrupting performances . Because she had a run of the play contract she could not be replaced and so producers were forced to close the show . 
 Whale returned to California in November 1952 and advised David Lewis that he planned to bring Foegel over early the following year . Appalled , Lewis moved out of their home . While this ended their 23 @-@ year romantic relationship , the two men remained friends . Lewis bought a small house and dug a swimming pool , prompting Whale to have his own pool dug , although he did not himself swim in it . He began throwing all @-@ male swim parties and would watch the young men cavort in and around the pool . Foegel moved in with Whale in early 1953 and remained there for several months before returning to France . He returned in 1954 permanently , and Whale installed him as manager of a gas station that he owned . 
 Whale and Foegel settled into a quiet routine until the spring of 1956 , when Whale suffered a small stroke . A few months later he suffered a larger stroke and was hospitalized . While in the hospital he was treated for depression with shock treatments . 
 Upon his release , Whale hired one of the male nurses from the hospital to be his personal live @-@ in nurse . A jealous Foegel maneuvered the nurse out of the house and hired a female nurse as a non live @-@ in replacement . Whale suffered from mood swings and grew increasingly and frustratingly more dependent on others as his mental faculties were diminishing . 
 = = Death = = 
 Whale committed suicide by drowning himself in his swimming pool on 29 May 1957 at the age of 67 . He left a suicide note , which Lewis withheld until shortly before his own death decades later . Because the note was suppressed , the death was initially ruled accidental . The note read in part : 
 To ALL I LOVE , 
 Do not grieve for me . My nerves are all shot and for the last year I have been in agony day and night — except when I sleep with sleeping pills — and any peace I have by day is when I am drugged by pills . 
 I have had a wonderful life but it is over and my nerves get worse and I am afraid they will have to take me away . So please forgive me , all those I love and may God forgive me too , but I cannot bear the agony and it [ is ] best for everyone this way . The future is just old age and illness and pain . Goodbye and thank you for all your love . I must have peace and this is the only way . 
 Whale was cremated per his request and his ashes were interred in the <unk> of Memory at Forest Lawn Memorial Park , Glendale . Because of his habit of periodically revising his date of birth , his niche lists the incorrect date of 1893 . When his longtime companion David Lewis died in 1987 , his executor and Whale biographer James Curtis had his ashes interred in a niche across from Whale 's . 
 = = Sexual orientation = = 
 James Whale lived as an openly homosexual man throughout his career in the British theatre and in Hollywood , something that was virtually unheard of in the 1920s and 1930s . He and David Lewis lived together as a couple from around 1930 to 1952 . While he did not go out of his way to publicize his homosexuality , he did not do anything to conceal it either . As filmmaker Curtis Harrington , a friend and confidant of Whale 's , put it , " Not in the sense of screaming it from the rooftops or coming out . But yes , he was openly homosexual . Any sophisticated person who knew him knew he was gay . " While there have been suggestions that Whale 's career was terminated because of homophobia , and Whale was supposedly dubbed " The Queen of Hollywood " , Harrington states that " nobody made a thing out of it as far as I could perceive " . 
 With knowledge of his sexuality becoming more common beginning in the 1970s , some film historians and gay studies scholars have detected homosexual themes in Whale 's work , particularly in Bride of Frankenstein in which a number of the creative people associated with the cast , including Ernest Thesiger and Colin Clive , were alleged to be gay or bisexual . Scholars have identified a gay sensibility suffused through the film , especially a camp sensibility , particularly embodied in the character of Pretorius ( Thesiger ) and his relationship with Henry Frankenstein ( Clive ) . 
 Gay film historian Vito Russo , in considering Pretorius , stops short of identifying the character as gay , instead referring to him as " sissified " ( " sissy " itself being Hollywood code for " homosexual " ) . Pretorius serves as a " gay Mephistopheles " , a figure of seduction and temptation , going so far as to pull Frankenstein away from his bride on their wedding night to engage in the unnatural act of non @-@ procreative life . A novelisation of the film published in England made the implication clear , having Pretorius say to Frankenstein " ' Be fruitful and multiply . ' Let us obey the Biblical injunction : you of course , have the choice of natural means ; but as for me , I am afraid that there is no course open to me but the scientific way . " Russo goes so far as to suggest that Whale 's homosexuality is expressed in both Frankenstein and Bride as " a vision both films had of the monster as an antisocial figure in the same way that gay people were ' things ' that should not have happened " . 
 The Monster , whose affections for the male hermit and the female Bride he discusses with identical language ( " friend " ) , has been read as sexually " unsettled " and bisexual . Writes gender studies author Elizabeth Young : " He has no innate understanding that the male @-@ female bond he is to forge with the bride is assumed to be the primary one or that it carries a different sexual valence from his relationships with [ Pretorius and the hermit ] : all affective relationships are as easily ' friendships ' as ' marriages ' . " Indeed , his relationship with the hermit has been interpreted as a same @-@ sex marriage that heterosexual society will not tolerate : " No mistake — this is a marriage , and a viable one " , writes cultural critic Gary Morris for Bright Lights Film Journal . " But Whale reminds us quickly that society does not approve . The monster — the outsider — is driven from his scene of domestic pleasure by two gun @-@ toting rubes who happen upon this startling alliance and quickly , instinctively , proceed to destroy it . " The creation of the Bride scene has been called " Whale 's reminder to the audience — his Hollywood bosses , peers , and everyone watching — of the majesty and power of the homosexual creator " . 
 However , Harrington dismisses this as " a younger critic 's evaluation . All artists do work that comes out of the unconscious mind and later on you can analyze it and say the symbolism may mean something , but artists don 't think that way and I would bet my life that James Whale would never have had such concepts in mind . " Specifically in response to the " majesty and power " reading , Harrington states " My opinion is that 's just pure bullshit . That 's a critical interpretation that has nothing to do with the original inspiration . " He concludes , " I think the closest you can come to a homosexual metaphor in his films is to identify that certain sort of camp humor . " 
 Whale 's companion David Lewis stated flatly that Whale 's sexual orientation was " not germane " to his filmmaking . " Jimmy was first and foremost an artist , and his films represent the work of an artist — not a gay artist , but an artist . " Whale 's biographer Curtis rejects the notion that Whale would have identified with the Monster from a homosexual perspective , stating that if the highly class @-@ conscious Whale felt himself to be an antisocial figure , it would have been based not in his sexuality but in his origin in the lower classes . 
 = = Film style = = 
 Whale was heavily influenced by German Expressionism . He was a particular admirer of the films of Paul Leni , combining as they did elements of gothic horror and comedy . This influence was most evident in Bride of Frankenstein . Expressionist influence is also in evidence in Frankenstein , drawn in part from the work of Paul Wegener and his films The Golem ( 1915 ) and The Golem : How He Came into the World ( 1920 ) along with The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari ( 1920 ) from Robert Wiene , which Whale reportedly screened repeatedly while preparing to shoot Frankenstein . Frankenstein roughly alternates between distorted expressionistic shots and more conventional styles , with the character of Dr. Waldman serving as " a bridge between everyday and expressionist spaces " . Expressionist influence is also evident in the acting , costuming and the design of the Monster . Whale and makeup artist Jack Pierce may also have been influenced by the Bauhaus school of design . The expressionist influence lasted throughout Whale 's career , with Whale 's final film , Hello Out There , praised by Sight & Sound as " a virtuoso pattern of light and shade , a piece of fully blown expressionist filmmaking plonked down unceremoniously in the midst of neo @-@ realism 's heyday " . 
 Whale was known for his use of camera movement . He is credited with being the first director to use a 360 @-@ degree panning shot in a feature film , included in Frankenstein . Whale used a similar technique during the Ol ' Man River sequence in Show Boat , in which the camera tracked around Paul Robeson as he sang the song . ( The sequence also uses expressionist montages illustrating some of the lyrics . ) Often singled out for praise in Frankenstein is the series of shots used to introduce the Monster : " Nothing can ever quite efface the thrill of watching the successive views Whale 's mobile camera allows us of the lumbering figure " . These shots , starting with a medium shot and culminating in two close @-@ ups of the Monster 's face , were repeated by Whale to introduce Griffin in The Invisible Man and the abusive husband in One More River . Modified to a single cut rather than two , Whale uses the same technique in The Road Back to signal the instability of a returning World War I veteran . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Influential film critic Andrew Sarris , in his 1968 ranking of directors , lists Whale as " lightly likable " . Noting that Whale 's reputation has been subsumed by the " Karloff cult " , Sarris cites Bride of Frankenstein as the " true gem " of the Frankenstein series and concludes that Whale 's career " reflects the stylistic ambitions and dramatic disappointments of an expressionist in the studio @-@ controlled Hollywood of the thirties " . 
 Whale 's final months are the subject of the novel Father of Frankenstein ( 1995 ) by Christopher Bram . The novel focuses on the relationship between Whale and a fictional gardener named Clayton Boone . Father of Frankenstein served as the basis of the 1998 film Gods and Monsters with Ian McKellen as Whale and Brendan Fraser as Boone . McKellen was nominated for an Academy Award for his portrayal of Whale . Bram 's novel has also been adapted as a play which premiered in London at the Southwark Playhouse in February 2015 . 
 Only two of Whale 's films received any sort of Oscar recognition : The Man in the Iron Mask ( for its musical score ) , and Bride of Frankenstein ( for its sound recording ) . Neither film actually won ; in fact , no Whale film ever won an Oscar . 
 A memorial statue was erected for Whale in 2002 on the grounds of a new multiplex cinema in his home town of Dudley . The statue , by Charles <unk> , depicts a roll of film with the face of Frankenstein 's monster engraved into the frames , and the names of his most famous films etched into a cast concrete base in the shape of film canisters . 
 Horror in Hollywood : The James Whale Story , a retrospective of Whale 's artwork , opened at the Dudley Museum and Art Gallery in October 2012 and is scheduled to run through January 2013 . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Bringing Up Baby = 
 Bringing Up Baby is a 1938 American screwball comedy film directed by Howard Hawks , starring Katharine Hepburn and Cary Grant , and released by RKO Radio Pictures . The film tells the story of a paleontologist in a number of predicaments involving a scatterbrained woman and a leopard named Baby . The screenplay was adapted by Dudley Nichols and Hagar Wilde from a short story by Wilde which originally appeared in Collier 's Weekly magazine on April 10 , 1937 . 
 The script was written specifically for Hepburn , and was tailored to her personality . Filming began in September 1937 and wrapped in January 1938 ; it was over schedule and over budget . Production was frequently delayed due to uncontrollable laughing fits between Hepburn and Grant . Hepburn struggled with her comedic performance and was coached by her co @-@ star , vaudeville veteran Walter Catlett . A tame leopard was used during the shooting ; its trainer was off @-@ screen with a whip for all its scenes . 
 Although it has a reputation as a flop upon its release , Bringing up Baby was moderately successful in many cities and eventually made a small profit after its re @-@ release in the early 1940s . Shortly after the film 's premiere , Hepburn was infamously labeled box @-@ office poison by the Independent Theatre Owners of America and would not regain her success until The Philadelphia Story two years later . The film 's reputation began to grow during the 1950s , when it was shown on television . 
 Since then , the film has received acclaim from both critics and audience for its zany antics and pratfalls , absurd situations and misunderstandings , perfect sense of comic timing , completely screwball cast , series of lunatic and hare @-@ brained misadventures , disasters , light @-@ hearted surprises and romantic comedy . Nowadays , it is considered one of the greatest films ever made . 
 In 1972 director Peter Bogdanovich filmed a loose remake of the film entitled What 's Up , Doc ? In 1990 Bringing Up Baby was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry of the Library of Congress as " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " , and it has appeared on a number of greatest @-@ films lists , ranking at 88th on the American Film Institute 's 100 greatest American films of all time list . 
 = = Plot = = 
 David Huxley ( Cary Grant ) is a mild @-@ mannered paleontologist . For the past four years , he has been trying to assemble the skeleton of a Brontosaurus but is missing one bone : the " intercostal clavicle " . Adding to his stress is his impending marriage to the dour Alice Swallow ( Virginia Walker ) and the need to impress Elizabeth Random ( May Robson ) , who is considering a million @-@ dollar donation to his museum . 
 The day before his wedding , David meets Susan Vance ( Katharine Hepburn ) by chance on a golf course . She is a free @-@ spirited young lady , and ( unknown to him at first ) Mrs. Random 's niece . Susan 's brother , Mark , has sent her a tame leopard from Brazil named Baby ( Nissa ) to give to their aunt . ( The leopard is native to Africa and Asia but not to South America . ) Susan thinks David is a zoologist ( rather than a paleontologist ) , and persuades David to go to her country home in Connecticut to help bring up Baby ( which includes singing " I Can 't Give You Anything But Love " to soothe the leopard ) . Complications arise as Susan falls in love with David and tries to keep him at her house as long as possible to prevent his marriage . 
 David finally receives the intercostal clavicle , but Susan 's dog George ( Asta ) steals and buries it . Susan 's aunt , Elizabeth Random , arrives . The dowager is unaware of David 's identity , since Susan has introduced him as " Mr. Bone " . Baby and George run off , and Susan and David mistake a dangerous leopard who has escaped from a nearby circus ( also portrayed by Nissa ) for Baby . 
 They are jailed by a befuddled town policeman , Constable Slocum ( Walter Catlett ) , for breaking into the house of Dr. Fritz Lehman ( Fritz Feld ) ( where they had cornered the circus leopard ) . When Slocum does not believe their story , Susan tells him they are members of the " Leopard Gang " ; she calls herself " Swingin ' Door Susie " , and David " Jerry the Nipper " . David fails to convince the constable that Susan makes things up " from motion pictures she 's seen " . Eventually , Alexander Peabody ( George Irving ) shows up to verify everyone 's identity . Susan ( who has sneaked out a window ) unwittingly drags the irritated circus leopard into the jail ; David saves her , using a chair to shoo the big cat into a cell . 
 Several weeks later , Susan finds David ( who has been jilted by Alice because of her ) working on his brontosaurus reconstruction at the museum . After giving him the missing bone ( which she found by trailing George ) , she tells him she has persuaded her aunt to make the large donation . Against his advice , Susan climbs a tall ladder next to the dinosaur to be closer to him . When the ladder starts swaying from side to side dangerously , she climbs onto the skeleton . Before it collapses , David grabs her hand . Surveying the wreckage of his work , David gives up and admits that he cannot live without her . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development and writing = = = 
 In March 1937 Howard Hawks signed a contract at RKO for an adaptation of Rudyard Kipling 's " Gunga Din " , which had been in pre @-@ production since the previous fall . When RKO was unable to borrow Clark Gable , Spencer Tracy and Franchot Tone from Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer for the film and the adaptation of " Gunga Din " was delayed , Hawks began looking for a new project . In April 1937 he read a short story by Hagar Wilde in Collier 's magazine called " Bringing Up Baby " and immediately wanted to make a film from it , remembering that it made him laugh out loud . RKO bought the screen rights in June for $ 1 @,@ 004 , and Hawks worked briefly with Wilde on the film 's treatment . Wilde 's short story differed significantly from the film : David and Susan are engaged , he is not a scientist and there is no dinosaur , intercostal clavicle or museum . However , Susan gets a pet panther from her brother Mark to give to their Aunt Elizabeth ; David and Susan must capture the panther in the Connecticut wilderness with the help of Baby 's favorite song , " I Can 't Give You Anything but Love , Baby " . 
 Hawks then hired screenwriter Dudley Nichols , best known for his work with director John Ford , for the script ; Wilde would develop the characters and comedic elements of the script , while Nichols would take care of the story and structure . Hawks worked with the two writers during summer 1937 , and they came up with a 202 @-@ page script . Wilde and Nichols wrote several drafts together , beginning a romantic relationship and co @-@ authoring the Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers film Carefree a few months later . The Bringing Up Baby script underwent several changes , and at one point there was an elaborate pie fight , inspired by Mack Sennett films . Major Applegate had an assistant and food taster named Ali ( which was intended to be played by Mischa Auer ) , but this character was replaced with Aloysius Gogarty . The script 's final draft had several scenes in the middle of the film in which David and Susan declare their love for each other which Hawks cut during production . 
 Nichols was instructed to write the film for Hepburn , with whom he had worked on John Ford 's Mary of Scotland in 1936 . Barbara <unk> alleged that Ford had an affair with Hepburn , and claims that many of the characteristics of Susan and David were based on Hepburn and Ford . Nichols was in touch with Ford during the screenwriting , and the film included such members of the John Ford Stock Company as Ward Bond , Barry Fitzgerald , D 'Arcy Corrigan and associate producer Cliff Reid . John Ford was a friend of Hawks , and visited the set . The round glasses Grant wears in the film are reminiscent of Harold Lloyd and of Ford . 
 Filming was initially scheduled to begin on September 1 , 1937 and wrap on October 31 , but was delayed for several reasons . Production had to wait until mid @-@ September to clear the rights for " I Can 't Give You Anything but Love , Baby " for $ 1 @,@ 000 . In August Hawks hired gag writers Robert McGowan and Gertrude Purcell for uncredited script rewrites , and McGowan added a scene inspired by the comic strip Professor <unk> and his Dog in which a dog buries a rare dinosaur bone . RKO paid King Features $ 1 @,@ 000 to use the idea for the film on September 21 . 
 = = = = <unk> ad @-@ lib by Grant = = = = 
 It is debated by some whether Bringing Up Baby is the first fictional work ( apart from pornography ) to use the word " gay " in a homosexual context . In one scene , Cary Grant 's character is wearing a woman 's marabou @-@ trimmed <unk> ; when asked why , he replies exasperatedly " Because I just went gay all of a sudden ! " ( leaping into the air at the word " gay " ) . As the term " gay " did not become familiar to the general public until the Stonewall riots in 1969 , it is debated whether the word was used here in its original sense ( meaning " happy " ) or is an intentional , joking reference to homosexuality . 
 In the film , the line was an ad @-@ lib by Grant and not in any version of the original script . According to Vito Russo in The Celluloid Closet ( 1981 , revised 1987 ) , the script originally had Grant 's character say " I ... I suppose you think it 's odd , my wearing this . I realize it looks odd ... I don 't usually ... I mean , I don 't own one of these " . Russo suggests that this indicates that people in Hollywood ( at least in Grant 's circles ) were familiar with the slang connotations of the word ; however , neither Grant nor anyone involved in the film suggested this . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 After briefly considering Hawks ' cousin Carole Lombard for the role of Susan Vance , Katharine Hepburn was chosen to play the wealthy New Englander because of her background and similarities to the character . RKO agreed to the casting , but had reservations because of Hepburn 's salary and lack of box @-@ office success for several years . Producer Lou Lusty said , " You couldn 't even break even if a Hepburn show cost eight hundred grand . " At first , Hawks and producer Pandro S. Berman could not agree on who to cast in the role of David Huxley . Hawks initially wanted silent @-@ film comedian Harold Lloyd ; Berman rejected Lloyd and Ronald Colman , offering the role to Robert Montgomery , Fredric March and Ray Milland ( all of whom turned it down ) . 
 Hawks ' friend Howard Hughes finally suggested Cary Grant for the role . Grant had just finished shooting his breakthrough romantic comedy The Awful Truth , and Hawks may have seen a rough cut of the unreleased film . Grant then had a non @-@ exclusive , four @-@ picture deal with RKO for $ 50 @,@ 000 per film , and Grant 's manager used his casting in the film to renegotiate his contract , earning him $ 75 @,@ 000 plus the bonuses Hepburn was receiving . Grant was initially concerned about being able to play an intellectual character and took two weeks to accept the role , despite the new contract . Hawks built Grant 's confidence by promising to coach him throughout the film , instructing him to watch Harold Lloyd films for inspiration . Grant met with Howard Hughes throughout the film to discuss his character , which he said helped his performance . 
 Hawks obtained character actors Charlie Ruggles on loan from Paramount Pictures for Major Horace Applegate and Barry Fitzgerald on loan from The Mary Pickford Corporation to play gardener Aloysius Gogarty . Hawks cast Virginia Walker as Alice Swallow , David 's fiancée ; Walker was under contract to him and later married his brother William Hawks . As Hawks could not find a panther that would work for the film , Baby was changed to a leopard so they could cast the trained leopard Nissa , who had worked in films for eight years , making several B @-@ movies . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Shooting began September 23 , 1937 and was scheduled to end November 20 , 1937 on a budget of $ 767 @,@ 676 . Filming began in @-@ studio with the scenes in Susan 's apartment , moving to the Bel Air Country Club in early October for the golf @-@ course scenes . The production had a difficult start due to Hepburn 's struggles with her character and her comedic abilities . She frequently overacted , trying too hard to be funny , and Hawks asked vaudeville veteran Walter Catlett to help coach her . Catlett acted out scenes with Grant for Hepburn , showing her that he was funnier when he was serious . Hepburn understood , acted naturally and played herself for the rest of the shoot ; she was so impressed by Catlett 's talent and coaching ability that she insisted he play Constable Slocum in the film . 
 Most shooting was done at the Arthur Ranch in the San Francisco Valley , which was used as Aunt Elizabeth 's estate for interior and exterior scenes . Beginning at the Arthur Ranch shoot , Grant and Hepburn often ad @-@ libbed their dialogue and frequently delayed production by making each other laugh . The scene where Grant frantically asks Hepburn where his bone is was shot from 10 am until well after 4 pm because of the stars ' laughing fits . After one month of shooting Hawks was seven days behind schedule . During the filming , Hawks would refer to four different versions of the film 's script and make frequent changes to scenes and dialogue . His leisurely attitude on set and shutting down production to see a horse race contributed to the time it took to film , and he took twelve days to shoot the Westlake jail scene instead of the scheduled five . Hawks later facetiously blamed the setbacks on his two stars ' laughing fits and having to work with two animal actors . 
 The terrier George was played by Skippy , known as Asta in The Thin Man film series and co @-@ starring with Grant ( as Mr. Smith ) in The Awful Truth . The tame leopard Baby and the escaped circus leopard were both played by a trained leopard , Nissa . The big cat was supervised by its trainer , Olga Celeste , who stood by with a whip during shooting . At one point , when Hepburn spun around ( causing her skirt to twirl ) Nissa lunged at her and was subdued when Celeste cracked her whip . Hepburn wore heavy perfume to keep Nissa calm and was unafraid of the leopard , but Grant was terrified ; most scenes of the two interacting are done in close @-@ up with a stand @-@ in . Hepburn played upon this fear by throwing a toy leopard through the roof of Grant 's dressing room during production There were also several news reports about Hawks ' difficulty filming a live leopard , and some scenes required rear @-@ screen projection . 
 Hawks and Hepburn had a confrontation one day during shooting . While Hepburn was chatting with a crew member , Hawks yelled " Quiet ! " until the only person still talking was Hepburn . When Hepburn paused and realized that everyone was looking at her , she asked what was the matter ; Hawks asked her if she was finished imitating a parrot . Hepburn took Hawks aside , telling him never to talk to her like that again since she was old friends with most of the crew . When Hawks ( an older friend of the crew ) asked a lighting tech who he would rather drop a light on , Hepburn agreed to behave on set . A variation of this scene , with Grant yelling " Quiet ! " , was incorporated into the film . 
 The Westlake Street set was shot at 20th Century Fox Studios . Filming was eventually completed on January 6 , 1938 with the scenes outside Mr. Peabody 's house . RKO producers expressed concerns about the film 's delays and expense , coming 40 days over schedule and $ 330 @,@ 000 over budget , and also disliked Grant 's glasses and Hepburn 's hair . The film 's final cost was $ 1 @,@ 096 @,@ 796 @.@ 23 , primarily due to overtime clauses in Hawks ' , Grant 's and Hepburn 's contracts . The film 's cost for sets and props was only $ 5 @,@ 000 over budget , but all actors ( including Nissa and Skippy ) were paid approximately double their initial salaries . Hepburn 's salary rose from $ 72 @,@ 500 to $ 121 @,@ 680 @.@ 50 , Grant 's salary from $ 75 @,@ 000 to $ 123 @,@ 437 @.@ 50 and Hawks ' salary from $ 88 @,@ 046 @.@ 25 to $ 202 @,@ 500 . The director received an additional $ 40 @,@ 000 to terminate his RKO contract on March 21 , 1938 . 
 = = = Post @-@ production and previews = = = 
 Hawks ' editor , George <unk> , cut the film during production and the final prints were made a few days after shooting ended . The first cut of the film ( 10 @,@ 150 feet long ) was sent to the Hayes Office in mid @-@ January . Despite several double entendres and sexual references it passed the film , overlooking Grant saying he " went gay " or Hepburn 's reference to George urinating . The censor 's only objections were to the scene where Hepburn 's dress is torn , and references to politicians ( such as Al Smith and Jim Farley ) . 
 Like all Hawks ' comedies , the film is known for its fast pace ( despite being filmed primarily in long medium shots , with little cross @-@ cutting ) . Hawks told Peter Bogdanovich , " You get more pace if you pace the actors quickly within the frame rather than cross cutting fast " . 
 By February 18 , the film had been cut to 9 @,@ 204 feet . It had two advance previews in January 1938 , where it received either As or A @-@ pluses on audience @-@ feedback cards . Producer Pandro S. Berman wanted to cut five more minutes , but relented when Hawks , Grant and Cliff Reid objected . At the film 's second preview , the film received rave reviews and RKO expected a hit . The film 's musical score is minimal , primarily Grant and Hepburn singing " I Can 't Give You Anything But Love , Baby " . There is incidental music in the Ritz scene , and an arrangement of " I Can 't Give You Anything But Love , Baby " during the opening and closing credits by musical director Roy Webb . 
 = = Reception and box office = = 
 The film received good advance reviews ; Otis Ferguson of The New Republic thought the film very funny , praising Hawks ' direction . Variety praised the film , singling out Hawks ' pacing and direction , calling Hepburn 's performance " one of her most invigorating screen characterizations " and saying Grant " performs his role to the hilt " ; their only criticism was the length of the jail scene . Film Daily called it " literally a riot from beginning to end , with the laugh total heavy and the action fast . " Harrison 's Reports called the film " An excellent farce " with " many situations that provoke hearty laughter , " and John Mosher of The New Yorker wrote that both stars " manage to be funny " and that Hepburn had never " seemed so good @-@ natured . " However , Frank S. Nugent of the New York Times disliked the film , considering it derivative and cliché @-@ ridden , a rehash of dozens of other screwball comedies of the period . He labeled Hepburn 's performance " breathless , senseless , and terribly , terribly fatiguing " , and added , " If you 've never been to the movies , Bringing Up Baby will be new to you – a zany @-@ ridden product of the goofy @-@ farce school . But who hasn 't been to the movies ? " 
 Despite Bringing Up Baby 's reputation as a flop , it was successful in some parts of the U.S. The film premiered on February 16 , 1938 at the Golden Gate Theatre in San Francisco ( where it was a hit ) , and was also successful in Los Angeles , Portland , Denver , Cincinnati and Washington , D.C .. However , it was a financial disappointment in the Midwest , as well as most other cities in the country , including NYC ; to RKO 's chagrin , the film 's premiere in New York on March 3 , 1938 at Radio City Music Hall made only $ 70 @,@ 000 and it was pulled after one week in favor of Jezebel with Bette Davis . 
 During its first run , Bringing Up Baby made $ 715 @,@ 000 in the U.S. and $ 394 @,@ 000 in foreign markets for a total of $ 1 @,@ 109 @,@ 000 ; its reissue in 1940 and 1941 made an additional $ 95 @,@ 000 in the US and $ 55 @,@ 000 in foreign markets . Following its second run , the film made a profit of $ 163 @,@ 000 . Due to its perceived failure , Hawks was released early from his two @-@ film contract with RKO and Gunga Din was eventually directed by George Stevens . Hawks later said the film " had a great fault and I learned an awful lot from that . There were no normal people in it . Everyone you met was a screwball and since that time I learned my lesson and don 't intend ever again to make everybody crazy " . The director went on to work with RKO on three films over the next decade . Long before Bringing Up Baby 's release , Hepburn had been branded " box @-@ office poison " by Harry Brandt ( president of the Independent Theatre Owners of America ) and thus was allowed to buy out her RKO contract for $ 22 @,@ 000 . However , many critics marveled at her new skill at low comedy ; Life magazine called her " the surprise of the picture " . Hepburn 's former boyfriend Howard Hughes bought RKO in 1941 , and sold it in 1959 ; when he sold the company , Hughes retained the copyright to six films ( including Bringing Up Baby ) . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Bringing Up Baby was the second of four films starring Grant and Hepburn ; the others were Sylvia Scarlett ( 1935 ) , Holiday ( 1938 ) and The Philadelphia Story ( 1940 ) . The film 's concept was described by philosopher Stanley Cavell as a " definitive achievement in the history of the art of film . " Cavell noted that Bringing Up Baby was made in a tradition of romantic comedy with inspiration from ancient Rome and Shakespeare . Shakespeare 's Much Ado About Nothing and As You Like It have been cited in particular as an influence on the film and the screwball comedy in general , with their " haughty , self @-@ sufficient men , strong women and fierce combat of words and wit . " Hepburn 's character has been cited as an early example of the Manic Pixie Dream Girl film archetype . 
 The popularity of Bringing Up Baby has increased since it was shown on television during the 1950s , and by the 1960s film analysts ( including the writers at Cahiers du Cinema in France ) affirmed the film 's quality . In a rebuttal of fellow New York Times critic Nugent 's scathing review of the film at the time of release , A. O. Scott has said that you 'll " find yourself amazed at its freshness , its vigor , and its brilliance @-@ qualities undiminished after sixty @-@ five years , and likely to withstand repeated viewings . " Leonard Maltin stated that it is now " considered the definitive screwball comedy , and one of the fastest , funniest films ever made ; grand performances by all . " 
 Bringing Up Baby has been adapted several times . Hawks recycled the nightclub scene in which Hepburn 's dress is torn and Grant walks behind her in the 1964 comedy , Man 's Favorite Sport . Peter Bogdanovich 's 1972 film What 's Up , Doc ? , starring Barbra Streisand , was intended as an homage to the film , and has contributed to its reputation . In the commentary track for Bringing Up Baby , Bogdanovich discusses how the coat @-@ ripping scene in What 's Up , Doc ? was based on the scene in which Grant 's coat and Hepburn 's dress are torn in Bringing Up Baby . The 1987 film Who 's That Girl ? , starring Madonna , is also loosely based on Bringing Up Baby . 
 In 1990 ( the registry 's second year ) , Bringing Up Baby was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry of the Library of Congress as " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " . Entertainment Weekly voted the film 24th on its list of greatest films . In 2000 , readers of Total Film magazine voted it the 47th @-@ greatest comedy film of all time . Premiere ranked Cary Grant 's performance as Dr. David Huxley 68th on its list of 100 all @-@ time greatest performances , and ranked Susan Vance 21st on its list of 100 all @-@ time greatest movie characters . 
 The National Society of Film Critics also included Bringing Up Baby in their " 100 Essential Films " , considering it to be arguably the director 's best film . 
 = = = American Film Institute recognition = = = 
 1998 : AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies – # 97 
 2000 : AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Laughs – # 14 
 2002 : AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Passions – # 51 
 2005 : AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes : 
 Dr. David Huxley : " It isn 't that I don 't like you , Susan , because after all , in moments of quiet , I 'm strangely drawn toward you ; but , well , there haven 't been any quiet moments ! " – Nominated 
 2007 : AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies ( 10th Anniversary Edition ) – # 88 
 2008 : AFI 's 10 Top 10 : 
 Nominated Romantic Comedy Film 
 = L. Ron Hubbard = 
 Lafayette Ronald Hubbard ( March 13 , 1911 – January 24 , 1986 ) , better known as L. Ron Hubbard ( / <unk> <unk> <unk> / , <unk> @-@ ron @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> ) and often referred to by his initials , LRH , was an American author and the founder of the Church of Scientology . In 2014 , Hubbard was cited by the Smithsonian magazine as one of the 100 most significant Americans of all time , as one of the eleven religious figures on that list . After establishing a career as a writer , becoming best known for his science fiction and fantasy stories , he developed a system called Dianetics which was first expounded in book form in May 1950 . He subsequently developed his ideas into a wide @-@ ranging set of doctrines and practices as part of a new religious movement that he called Scientology . His writings became the guiding texts for the Church of Scientology and a number of affiliated organizations that address such diverse topics as business administration , literacy and drug rehabilitation . The Church 's dissemination of these materials led to Hubbard being listed by the Guinness Book of World Records as the most translated and published author in the world . 
 Although many aspects of Hubbard 's life story are disputed , there is general agreement about its basic outline . Born in Tilden , Nebraska , he spent much of his childhood in Helena , Montana . He traveled in Asia and the South Pacific in the late 1920s after his father , an officer in the United States Navy , was posted to the U.S. naval base on Guam . He attended George Washington University in Washington , D.C. at the start of the 1930s , before dropping out and beginning his career as a prolific writer of pulp fiction stories . He served briefly in the United States Marine Corps Reserve and was an officer in the United States Navy during World War II , briefly commanding two ships , the USS YP @-@ 422 and USS PC @-@ 815 . He was removed both times when his superiors found him incapable of command . The last few months of his active service were spent in a hospital , being treated for a duodenal ulcer . 
 After the war , Hubbard developed Dianetics , which he called " the modern science of mental health " . He founded Scientology in 1952 and oversaw the growth of the Church of Scientology into a worldwide organization . During the late 1960s and early 1970s , he spent much of his time at sea on his personal fleet of ships as " Commodore " of the Sea Organization , an elite inner group of Scientologists . His expedition came to an end when Britain , Greece , Spain , Portugal , and Venezuela all closed their ports to his fleet . At one point , a court in Australia revoked the Church 's status as a religion , though it was later reinstated . Hubbard returned to the United States in 1975 and went into seclusion in the California desert . In 1978 , a trial court in France convicted Hubbard of fraud in absentia . Others convictions from the same trial were reversed on appeal , but Hubbard died before the court considered his case . 
 In 1983 L. Ron Hubbard was named as an unindicted co @-@ conspirator in an international information infiltration and theft project called " Operation Snow White " . He spent the remaining years of his life on his ranch , the " Whispering Wind , " near Creston , California , where he died in 1986 . A small group of Scientology officials and physician Dr. Eugene <unk> attended to him before his death , for a number of ailments including chronic pancreatitis . In 1986 , he died in a 1982 Blue Bird motor home , which was situated on his property , at age 74 . 
 The Church of Scientology describes Hubbard in hagiographic terms , and he portrayed himself as a pioneering explorer , world traveler , and nuclear physicist with expertise in a wide range of disciplines , including photography , art , poetry , and philosophy . His critics , including his own son Ronald DeWolf , have characterized him as a liar , a charlatan , and mentally unstable , though DeWolf later repudiated those statements . Though many of Hubbard 's autobiographical statements have been found to be fictitious , the Church rejects any suggestion that its account of Hubbard 's life is not historical fact . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Lafayette Ronald Hubbard was born in 1911 , in Tilden , Nebraska . He was the only child of Ledora May ( née Waterbury ) , who had trained as a teacher , and Harry Ross Hubbard , a former United States Navy officer . After moving to Kalispell , Montana , they settled in Helena in 1913 . Hubbard 's father rejoined in the Navy in April 1917 , during World War I , while his mother May worked as a clerk for the state government . 
 Biographical accounts published by the Church of Scientology describe Hubbard as " a child prodigy of sorts " who rode a horse before he could walk and was able to read and write by the age of four . A Scientology profile says that he was brought up on his grandfather 's " large cattle ranch in Montana " where he spent his days " riding , breaking broncos , hunting coyote and taking his first steps as an explorer " . His grandfather is described as a " wealthy Western cattleman " from whom Hubbard " inherited his fortune and family interests in America , Southern Africa , etc . " Scientology claims that Hubbard became a " blood brother " of the Native American Blackfeet tribe at the age of six through his friendship with a Blackfeet medicine man . 
 However , contemporary records show that his grandfather , Lafayette Waterbury , was a veterinarian , not a rancher , and was not wealthy . Hubbard was actually raised in a townhouse in the center of Helena . According to his aunt , his family did not own a ranch but did own one cow and four or five horses on a few acres of land outside the city . Hubbard lived over a hundred miles from the Blackfeet reservation . While some sources support Scientology 's claim of Hubbard 's blood brotherhood , other sources say that the tribe did not practice blood brotherhood and no evidence has been found that he had ever been a Blackfeet blood brother . 
 During the 1920s the Hubbards repeatedly relocated around the United States and overseas . After Hubbard 's father Harry rejoined the Navy , his posting aboard the USS Oklahoma in 1921 required the family to relocate to the ship 's home ports , first San Diego , then Seattle . During a journey to Washington , D.C. in 1923 Hubbard learned of Freudian psychology from Commander Joseph " Snake " Thompson , a U.S. Navy psychoanalyst and medic . Scientology biographies describe this encounter as giving Hubbard training in a particular scientific approach to the mind , which he found unsatisfying . Hubbard was active in the Boy Scouts in Washington , D.C. and earned the rank of Eagle Scout in 1924 , two weeks after his 13th birthday . In his diary , Hubbard claimed he was the youngest Eagle Scout in the U.S. 
 The following year , Harry Ross Hubbard was posted to Puget Sound Naval Shipyard at Bremerton , Washington . His son was enrolled at Union High School , Bremerton , and later studied at Queen Anne High School in Seattle . In 1927 Hubbard 's father was sent to the U.S. Naval Station on Guam in the Mariana Islands of the South Pacific . Although Hubbard 's mother also went to Guam , Hubbard himself did not accompany them but was placed in his grandparents ' care in Helena , Montana to complete his schooling . 
 Between 1927 and 1929 Hubbard traveled to Japan , China , the Philippines and Guam . Scientology texts present this period in his life as a time when he was intensely curious for answers to human suffering and explored ancient Eastern philosophies for answers , but found them lacking . He is described as traveling to China " at a time when few Westerners could enter " and according to Scientology , spent his time questioning Buddhist lamas and meeting old Chinese magicians . According to church materials , his travels were funded by his " wealthy grandfather " . In the summer of 1927 , Hubbard took up teaching to the native Chamorros in Guam for several weeks . He returned to Asia in 1928 to stay longer . For fourteen months , he traveled around China and served as a helmsman and supercargo aboard a twin @-@ masted coastal schooner , returning to finish high school at Swavely Prep School in Virginia and Woodward school for Boys in Washington , D.C. 
 Hubbard 's unofficial biographers present a very different account of his travels in Asia . Hubbard 's diaries recorded two trips to the east coast of China . The first was made in the company of his mother while traveling from the United States to Guam in 1927 . It consisted of a brief stop @-@ over in a couple of Chinese ports before traveling on to Guam , where he stayed for six weeks before returning home . He recorded his impressions of the places he visited and disdained the poverty of the inhabitants of Japan and China , whom he described as " gooks " and " lazy [ and ] ignorant " . His second visit was a family holiday which took Hubbard and his parents to China via the Philippines in 1928 . 
 After his return to the United States in September 1927 , Hubbard enrolled at Helena High School , where he contributed to the school paper , but earned only poor grades . He abandoned school the following May and went back west to stay with his aunt and uncle in Seattle . He joined his parents in Guam in June 1928 . His mother took over his education in the hope of putting him forward for the entrance examination to the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis , Maryland . 
 Between October and December 1928 a number of naval families , including Hubbard 's , traveled from Guam to China aboard the cargo ship USS Gold Star . The ship stopped at Manila in the Philippines before traveling on to Qingdao ( Tsingtao ) in China . Hubbard and his parents made a side trip to Beijing before sailing on to Shanghai and Hong Kong , from where they returned to Guam . Scientology accounts say that Hubbard " made his way deep into Manchuria 's Western Hills and beyond — to break bread with Mongolian bandits , share campfires with Siberian shamans and befriend the last in the line of magicians from the court of Kublai Khan " . 
 However , Hubbard did not record these events in his diary . He remained unimpressed with China and the Chinese , writing : " A Chinaman can not live up to a thing , he always drags it down . " He characterized the sights of Beijing as " <unk> stations " for tourists and described the palaces of the Forbidden City as " very trashy @-@ looking " and " not worth mentioning " . He was impressed by the Great Wall of China near Beijing , but concluded of the Chinese : " They smell of all the baths they didn 't take . The trouble with China is , there are too many chinks here . " 
 Back on Guam , Hubbard spent much of his time writing dozens of short stories and essays and failed the Naval Academy entrance examination . In September 1929 Hubbard was enrolled at the Swavely Preparatory School in Manassas , Virginia , to prepare him for a second attempt at the examination . However , he was ruled out of consideration due to his near @-@ sightedness . He was instead sent to Woodward School for Boys in Washington , D.C. to qualify for admission to George Washington University . He successfully graduated from the school in June 1930 and entered the university the following September . 
 = = University and explorations = = 
 Hubbard studied civil engineering during his two years at George Washington University at the behest of his father , who " decreed that I should study engineering and mathematics " . While he did not graduate from George Washington , his time there subsequently became important because , as George Malko puts it , " many of his researches and published conclusions have been supported by his claims to be not only a graduate engineer , but ' a member of the first United States course in formal education in what is called today nuclear physics . ' " However , a Church of Scientology biography describes him as " never noted for being in class " and says that he " thoroughly detest [ ed ] his subjects " . He earned poor grades , was placed on probation in September 1931 and dropped out altogether in the fall of 1932 . 
 Scientology accounts say that he " studied nuclear physics at George Washington University in Washington , D.C. , before he started his studies about the mind , spirit and life " and Hubbard himself stated that he " set out to find out from nuclear physics a knowledge of the physical universe , something entirely lacking in Asian philosophy " . His university records indicate that his exposure to " nuclear physics " consisted of one class in " atomic and molecular phenomena " for which he earned an " F " grade . 
 Scientologists claim he was more interested in extracurricular activities , particularly writing and flying . According to church materials , " he earned his wings as a pioneering barnstormer at the dawn of American aviation " and was " recognized as one of the country 's most outstanding pilots . With virtually no training time , he takes up powered flight and <unk> throughout the Midwest . " His airman certificate , however , records that he qualified to fly only gliders rather than powered aircraft and gave up his certificate when he could not afford the renewal fee . 
 During Hubbard 's final semester he organized an expedition to the Caribbean for " fifty young gentleman rovers " aboard the schooner Doris Hamlin commencing in June 1932 . The aims of the " Caribbean Motion Picture Expedition " were stated as being to explore and film the pirate " strongholds and bivouacs of the Spanish Main " and to " collect whatever one collects for exhibits in museums " . It ran into trouble even before it left the port of Baltimore : Ten participants quit and storms blew the ship far off course to Bermuda . Eleven more members of the expedition quit there and more left when the ship arrived at Martinique . With the expedition running critically short of money , the ship 's owners ordered it to return to Baltimore . 
 Hubbard blamed the expedition 's problems on the captain : " the ship 's dour Captain Garfield proved himself far less than a Captain Courageous , requiring Ron Hubbard 's hand at both the helm and the charts . " Specimens and photographs collected by the expedition are said by Scientology accounts to have been acquired by the University of Michigan , the U.S. Hydrographic Office , an unspecified national museum and the New York Times , though none of those institutions have any record of this . Hubbard later wrote that the expedition " was a crazy idea at best , and I knew it , but I went ahead anyway , chartered a four @-@ masted schooner and embarked with some fifty luckless souls who haven 't stopped their cursings yet . " He called it " a two @-@ bit expedition and financial bust " , which resulted in some of its participants making legal claims against him for refunds . 
 After leaving university Hubbard traveled to Puerto Rico on what the Church of Scientology calls the " Puerto Rican Mineralogical Expedition " . Scientologists claim he " made the first complete mineralogical survey of Puerto Rico " as a means of " augmenting his [ father 's ] pay with a mining venture " , during which he " sluiced inland rivers and crisscrossed the island in search of elusive gold " as well as carrying out " much ethnological work amongst the interior villages and native <unk> " . Hubbard 's unofficial biographer Russell Miller writes that neither the United States Geological Survey nor the Puerto Rican Department of Natural Resources have any record of any such expedition . 
 According to Miller , Hubbard traveled to Puerto Rico in November 1932 after his father volunteered him for the Red Cross relief effort following the devastating 1932 San Ciprian hurricane . In a 1957 lecture Hubbard said that he had been " a field executive with the American Red Cross in the Puerto Rico hurricane disaster " . According to his own account , Hubbard spent much of his time prospecting unsuccessfully for gold . Towards the end of his stay on Puerto Rico he appears to have done some work for a Washington , D.C. firm called West Indies Minerals Incorporated , accompanying a surveyor in an investigation of a small property near the town of Luquillo , Puerto Rico . The survey was unsuccessful . A few years later , Hubbard wrote : 
 <unk> the thought that the Conquistadores might have left some gold behind , I determined to find it ... Gold prospecting in the wake of the Conquistadores , on the hunting grounds of the pirates in the islands which still reek of Columbus is romantic , and I do not begrudge the sweat which splashed in muddy rivers , and the bits of khaki which have probably blown away from the thorn bushes long ago ... 
 After a half year or more of intensive search , after wearing my palms thin wielding a sample pack , after assaying a few hundred sacks of ore , I came back , a failure . 
 = = Early literary career and Alaskan expedition = = 
 Hubbard became a well @-@ known and prolific writer for pulp fiction magazines during the 1930s . Scientology texts describe him as becoming " well established as an essayist " even before he had concluded college . Scientology claims he " solved his finances , and his desire to travel by writing anything that came to hand " and to have earned an " astronomical " rate of pay for the times . 
 His literary career began with contributions to the George Washington University student newspaper , The University Hatchet , as a reporter for a few months in 1931 . Six of his pieces were published commercially during 1932 to 1933 . The going rate for freelance writers at the time was only a cent a word , so Hubbard 's total earnings from these articles would have been less than $ 100 . The pulp magazine Thrilling Adventure became the first to publish one of his short stories , in February 1934 . Over the next six years , pulp magazines published around 140 of his short stories under a variety of pen names , including Winchester Remington Colt , Kurt von <unk> , René Lafayette , Joe Blitz and Legionnaire 148 . 
 Although he was best known for his fantasy and science fiction stories , Hubbard wrote in a wide variety of genres , including adventure fiction , aviation , travel , mysteries , westerns and even romance . Hubbard knew and associated with writers such as Isaac Asimov , Robert A. Heinlein , L. Sprague de Camp and A. E. van Vogt . His first full @-@ length novel , Buckskin Brigades , was published in 1937 . He became a " highly idiosyncratic " writer of science fiction after being taken under the wing of editor John W. Campbell , who published many of Hubbard 's short stories and also serialized a number of well @-@ received novelettes that Hubbard wrote for Campbell 's magazines Unknown and Astounding . These included Fear , Final Blackout and Typewriter in the Sky . Science fiction newsletter <unk> reported that Hubbard wrote “ over 100 @,@ 000 words a month ” during his peak . Martin Gardner asserted that his writing “ [ wa ] s done at lightning speed . ” 
 According to the Church of Scientology , Hubbard was " called to Hollywood " to work on film scripts in the mid @-@ 1930s , although Scientology accounts differ as to exactly when this was ( whether 1935 , 1936 or 1937 ) . He wrote the script for The Secret of Treasure Island , a 1938 Columbia Pictures movie serial . The Church of Scientology claims he also worked on the Columbia serials The Mysterious Pilot ( 1937 ) , The Great Adventures of Wild Bill Hickok ( 1938 ) and The Spider Returns ( 1941 ) , though his name does not appear on the credits . Hubbard also claimed to have written Dive Bomber ( 1941 ) , Cecil B. DeMille 's The Plainsman ( 1936 ) and John Ford 's Stagecoach ( 1939 ) . 
 Hubbard 's literary earnings helped him to support his new wife , Margaret " Polly " Grubb . She was already pregnant when they married on April 13 , 1933 , but had a miscarriage shortly afterwards ; a few months later , she became pregnant again . On May 7 , 1934 , she gave birth prematurely to a son who was named Lafayette Ronald Hubbard , Jr. and the nickname " His Nibs " , invariably shortened to " Nibs " . Their second child , Katherine May , was born on January 15 , 1936 . The Hubbards lived for a while in <unk> , Maryland , but were chronically short of money . 
 In the spring of 1936 they moved to Bremerton , Washington . They lived there for a time with Hubbard 's aunts and grandmother before finding a place of their own at nearby South Colby . According to one of his friends at the time , Robert MacDonald Ford , the Hubbards were " in fairly dire straits for money " but sustained themselves on the income from Hubbard 's writing . Hubbard spent an increasing amount of time in New York City , working out of a hotel room where his wife suspected him of carrying on affairs with other women . 
 Hubbard 's authorship in mid @-@ 1938 of a still @-@ unpublished manuscript called Excalibur is highlighted by the Church of Scientology as a key step in developing the principles of Scientology and Dianetics . The manuscript is said by Scientologists to have outlined " the basic principles of human existence " and to have been the culmination of twenty years of research into " twenty @-@ one races and cultures including Pacific Northwest Indian tribes , Philippine <unk> and , as he was wont to joke , the people of the Bronx " . 
 According to Arthur J. Cox , a contributor to John W. Campbell 's Astounding magazine , Hubbard told a 1948 convention of science fiction fans that Excalibur 's inspiration came during an operation in which he " died " for eight minutes . ( Gerry Armstrong , Hubbard 's archivist , explains this as a dental extraction performed under nitrous oxide , a chemical known for its hallucinogenic effects ) : 
 Hubbard realized that , while he was dead , he had received a tremendous inspiration , a great Message which he must impart to others . He sat at his typewriter for six days and nights and nothing came out . Then , Excalibur emerged . 
 Arthur J. Burks , the President of the American Fiction Guild , wrote that an excited Hubbard called him and said : " I want to see you right away . I have written THE book . " Hubbard believed that Excalibur would " revolutionize everything " and that " it was somewhat more important , and would have a greater impact upon people , than the Bible . " It proposed that all human behavior could be explained in terms of survival and that to understand survival was to understand life . As Hubbard biographer Jon Atack notes , " the notion that everything that exists is trying to survive became the basis of Dianetics and Scientology . " 
 According to Burks , Hubbard " was so sure he had something ' away out and beyond ' anything else that he had sent telegrams to several book publishers , telling them that he had written ' THE book ' and that they were to meet him at Penn Station , and he would discuss it with them and go with whomever gave him the best offer . " However , nobody bought the manuscript . Forrest J Ackerman , later Hubbard 's literary agent , recalled that Hubbard told him " whoever read it either went insane or committed suicide . And he said that the last time he had shown it to a publisher in New York , he walked into the office to find out what the reaction was , the publisher called for the reader , the reader came in with the manuscript , threw it on the table and threw himself out of the skyscraper window . " Hubbard 's failure to sell Excalibur depressed him ; he told his wife in an October 1938 letter : " Writing action pulp doesn 't have much agreement with what I want to do because it retards my progress by demanding incessant attention and , further , actually weakens my name . So you see I 've got to do something about it and at the same time strengthen the old financial position . " He went on : 
 Sooner or later Excalibur will be published and I may have a chance to get some name recognition out of it so as to pave the way to articles and comments which are my ideas of writing heaven ... Foolishly perhaps , but determined none the less , I have high hopes of smashing my name into history so violently that it will take a legendary form even if all books are destroyed . That goal is the real goal as far as I am concerned . 
 The manuscript later became part of Scientology mythology . An early 1950s Scientology publication offered signed " gold @-@ bound and locked " copies for the sum of $ 1 @,@ 500 apiece ( equivalent to about $ 29 @,@ 000 now ) . It warned that " four of the first fifteen people who read it went insane " and that it would be " [ r ] <unk> only on sworn statement not to permit other readers to read it . Contains data not to be released during Mr. Hubbard 's stay on earth . " 
 Hubbard joined The Explorers Club in February 1940 on the strength of his claimed explorations in the Caribbean and survey flights in the United States . He persuaded the club to let him carry its flag on an " Alaskan Radio @-@ Experimental Expedition " to update the U.S. Coast Pilot guide to the coastlines of Alaska and British Columbia and investigate new methods of radio position @-@ finding . The expedition consisted of Hubbard and his wife — the children were left at South Colby — aboard his ketch Magician . 
 Scientology accounts of the expedition describe " Hubbard 's <unk> of an especially treacherous Inside Passage , and his ethnological study of indigenous Aleuts and <unk> " and tell of how " along the way , he not only roped a Kodiak Bear , but braved seventy @-@ mile @-@ an @-@ hour winds and commensurate seas off the Aleutian Islands . " They are divided about how far Hubbard 's expedition actually traveled , whether 700 miles ( 1 @,@ 100 km ) or 2 @,@ 000 miles ( 3 @,@ 200 km ) . 
 Hubbard told The Seattle Star in a November 1940 letter that the expedition was plagued by problems and did not get any further than Ketchikan near the southern end of the Alaska Panhandle , far from the Aleutian Islands . Magician 's engine broke down only two days after setting off in July 1940 . The Hubbards reached Ketchikan on August 30 , 1940 , after many delays following repeated engine breakdowns . The Ketchikan Chronicle reported — making no mention of the expedition — that Hubbard 's purpose in coming to Alaska " was two @-@ fold , one to win a bet and another to gather material for a novel of Alaskan salmon fishing " . Having underestimated the cost of the trip , he did not have enough money to repair the broken engine . He raised money by writing stories and contributing to the local radio station and eventually earned enough to fix the engine , making it back to Puget Sound on December 27 , 1940 . 
 = = Military career = = 
 After returning from Alaska , Hubbard applied to join the United States Navy . His Congressman , Warren G. Magnuson , wrote to President Roosevelt to recommend Hubbard as " a gentleman of reputation " who was " a respected explorer " and had " marine masters papers for more types of vessels than any other man in the United States " . Hubbard was described as " a key figure " in writing organizations , " making him politically potent nationally " . The Congressman concluded : " Anything you can do for Mr Hubbard will be appreciated . " His friend Robert MacDonald Ford , by now a State Representative for Washington , sent a letter of recommendation describing Hubbard as " one of the most brilliant men I have ever known " . It called Hubbard " a powerful influence " in the Northwest and said that he was " well known in many parts of the world and has considerable influence in the Caribbean and Alaska " . The letter declared that " for courage and ability I cannot too strongly recommend him . " Ford later said that Hubbard had written the letter himself : " I don 't know why Ron wanted a letter . I just gave him a letter @-@ head and said , ' Hell , you 're the writer , you write it ! ' " 
 Hubbard was commissioned as a Lieutenant ( junior grade ) in the U.S. Naval Reserve on July 19 , 1941 . His military service forms a major element of his public persona as portrayed by Scientologists . The Church of Scientology presents him as a " much @-@ decorated war hero who commanded a corvette and during hostilities was crippled and wounded " . Scientology publications say he served as a " Commodore of Corvette squadrons " in " all five theaters of World War II " and was awarded " twenty @-@ one medals and palms " for his service . He was " severely wounded and was taken crippled and blinded " to a military hospital , where he " worked his way back to fitness , strength and full perception in less than two years , using only what he knew and could determine about Man and his relationship to the universe " . He said that he had seen combat repeatedly , telling A. E. van Vogt that he had once sailed his ship " right into the harbor of a Japanese occupied island in the Dutch East Indies . His attitude was that if you took your flag down the Japanese would not know one boat from another , so he tied up at the dock , went ashore and wandered around by himself for three days . " 
 According to The Los Angeles Times , Hubbard 's official Navy service records indicate that " his military performance was , at times , substandard " and he received only four campaign medals rather than twenty @-@ one . He was never recorded as being injured or wounded in combat and so never received a Purple Heart . Most of his military service was spent ashore in the continental United States on administrative or training duties . He served for a short time in Australia but was sent home after quarreling with his superiors . He briefly commanded two anti @-@ submarine vessels , the USS YP @-@ 422 and USS PC @-@ 815 , in coastal waters off Massachusetts , Oregon and California in 1942 and 1943 respectively . 
 After Hubbard reported that the PC @-@ 815 had attacked and crippled or sunk two Japanese submarines off Oregon in May 1943 , his claim was rejected by the commander of the Northwest Sea Frontier . Hubbard and Thomas Moulton , his second in command on the PC @-@ 815 , later said the Navy wanted to avoid panic on the mainland . A month later Hubbard unwittingly sailed the PC @-@ 815 into Mexican territorial waters and conducted gunnery practice off the Coronado Islands , in the belief that they were uninhabited and belonged to the United States . The Mexican government complained and Hubbard was relieved of command . A fitness report written after the incident rated Hubbard as unsuitable for independent duties and " lacking in the essential qualities of judgment , leadership and cooperation " . He served for a while as the Navigation and Training Officer for the USS Algol while it was based at Portland . A fitness report from this period recommended promotion , describing him as " a capable and energetic officer , [ but ] very temperamental " , and an " above average navigator " . However , he never held another such position and did not serve aboard another ship after the Algol . 
 Hubbard 's war service has great significance in the history and mythology of the Church of Scientology , as he is said to have cured himself through techniques that would later underpin Scientology and Dianetics . According to Moulton , Hubbard told him that he had been machine @-@ gunned in the back near the Dutch East Indies . Hubbard asserted that his eyes had been damaged as well , either " by the flash of a large @-@ caliber gun " or when he had " a bomb go off in my face " . Scientology texts say that he returned from the war " [ b ] <unk> with injured optic nerves , and lame with physical injuries to hip and back " and was twice pronounced dead . 
 His medical records state that he was hospitalized with an acute duodenal ulcer rather than a war injury . He told his doctors that he was suffering from lameness caused by a hip infection and he told Look magazine in December 1950 that he had suffered from " ulcers , conjunctivitis , deteriorating eyesight , bursitis and something wrong with my feet " . He was still complaining in 1951 of eye problems and stomach pains , which had given him " continuous trouble " for eight years , especially when " under nervous stress " . This came well after Hubbard had promised that Dianetics would provide " a cure for the very ailments that plagued the author himself then and throughout his life , including allergies , arthritis , ulcers and heart problems " . 
 The Church of Scientology says that Hubbard 's key breakthrough in the development of Dianetics was made at Oak Knoll Naval Hospital in Oakland , California . According to the Church , 
 In early 1945 , while recovering from war injuries at Oak Knoll Naval Hospital , Mr. Hubbard conducts a series of tests and experiments dealing with the endocrine system . He discovers that , contrary to long @-@ standing beliefs , function monitors structure . With this revolutionary advance , he begins to apply his theories to the field of the mind and thereby to improve the conditions of others . 
 An October 1945 Naval Board found that Hubbard was " considered physically qualified to perform duty ashore , preferably within the continental United States " . He was discharged from hospital on December 4 , 1945 , and transferred to inactive duty on February 17 , 1946 . He resigned his commission with effect from October 30 , 1950 . The Church of Scientology says he quit because the U.S. Navy " attempted to monopolize all his researches and force him to work on a project ' to make man more suggestible ' and when he was unwilling , tried to blackmail him by ordering him back to active duty to perform this function . Having many friends he was able to instantly resign from the Navy and escape this trap . " The Navy said in a statement in 1980 : " There is no evidence on record of an attempt to recall him to active duty . " 
 The Church disputes the official record of Hubbard 's naval career . It asserts that the records are incomplete and perhaps falsified " to conceal Hubbard 's secret activities as an intelligence officer " . In 1990 the Church provided the Los Angeles Times with a document that was said to be a copy of Hubbard 's official record of service . The U.S. Navy told the Times that " its contents are not supported by Hubbard 's personnel record . " The New Yorker reported in February 2011 that the Scientology document was considered by federal archivists to be a forgery . One author , Colonel L. Fletcher , retired US Air Force , speculated that Hubbard may have “ worked in intelligence at a deep level ” after examination of his naval records . <unk> wrote that Hubbard was awarded significant accolades such as the “ Unit Citation ” ( awarded by the United States president ) and the " Marine Medal " ( a rare award given to Navy line officers ) . 
 Nevertheless , the German Protestant theologian and history of religion scholar Marco Frenschkowski wrote in the Marburg Journal of Religion that the publicly available copies of Hubbard 's military records ( of which Frenschkowski has a complete collection ) are " much nearer " in his assessment to Hubbard 's statements about his military career than Miller 's Bare @-@ Faced Messiah . 
 = = Occult involvement in Pasadena = = 
 Hubbard 's life underwent a turbulent period immediately after the war . According to his own account , he " was abandoned by family and friends as a supposedly hopeless cripple and a probable burden upon them for the rest of my days " . His daughter Katherine presented a rather different version : his wife had refused to uproot their children from their home in Bremerton , Washington , to join him in California . Their marriage was by now in terminal difficulties and he chose to stay in California . 
 In August 1945 Hubbard moved into the Pasadena mansion of John " Jack " Whiteside Parsons . A leading rocket propulsion researcher at the California Institute of Technology and a founder of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory , Parsons led a double life as an avid occultist and Thelemite , follower of the English ceremonial magician Aleister Crowley and leader of a lodge of Crowley 's magical order , Ordo Templi Orientis ( OTO ) . He let rooms in the house only to tenants who he specified should be " atheists and those of a Bohemian disposition " . 
 Hubbard befriended Parsons and soon became sexually involved with Parsons 's 21 @-@ year @-@ old girlfriend , Sara " Betty " Northrup . Despite this Parsons was very impressed with Hubbard and reported to Crowley : 
 [ Hubbard ] is a gentleman ; he has red hair , green eyes , is honest and intelligent , and we have become great friends . He moved in with me about two months ago , and although Betty and I are still friendly , she has transferred her sexual affection to Ron . Although he has no formal training in Magick , he has an extraordinary amount of experience and understanding in the field . From some of his experiences I deduced that he is in direct touch with some higher intelligence , possibly his Guardian Angel . He describes his Angel as a beautiful winged woman with red hair whom he calls the Empress and who has guided him through his life and saved him many times . He is the most Thelemic person I have ever met and is in complete accord with our own principles . 
 Hubbard , whom Parsons referred to in writing as " Frater H " , became an enthusiastic collaborator in the Pasadena OTO . The two men collaborated on the " Babalon Working " , a sex magic ritual intended to summon an incarnation of Babalon , the supreme Thelemite Goddess . It was undertaken over several nights in February and March 1946 in order to summon an " elemental " who would participate in further sex magic . As Richard Metzger describes it , 
 Parsons used his " magical wand " to whip up a vortex of energy so the elemental would be summoned . Translated into plain English , Parsons jerked off in the name of spiritual advancement whilst Hubbard ( referred to as " The Scribe " in the diary of the event ) scanned the astral plane for signs and visions . 
 The " elemental " arrived a few days later in the form of Marjorie Cameron , who agreed to participate in Parsons ' rites . Soon afterwards , Parsons , Hubbard and Sara agreed to set up a business partnership , " Allied Enterprises " , in which they invested nearly their entire savings — the vast majority contributed by Parsons . The plan was for Hubbard and Sara to buy yachts in Miami and sail them to the West Coast to sell for a profit . Hubbard had a different idea ; he wrote to the U.S. Navy requesting permission to leave the country " to visit Central & South America & China " for the purposes of " collecting writing material " — in other words , undertaking a world cruise . Aleister Crowley strongly criticized Parsons 's actions , writing : " Suspect Ron playing confidence trick — Jack Parsons weak fool — obvious victim prowling swindlers . " Parsons attempted to recover his money by obtaining an injunction to prevent Hubbard and Sara leaving the country or disposing of the remnants of his assets . They attempted to sail anyway but were forced back to port by a storm . A week later , Allied Enterprises was dissolved . Parsons received only a $ 2 @,@ 900 promissory note from Hubbard and returned home " shattered " . He had to sell his mansion to developers soon afterwards to recoup his losses . 
 Hubbard 's fellow writers were well aware of what had happened between him and Parsons . L. Sprague de Camp wrote to Isaac Asimov on August 27 , 1946 , to tell him : 
 The more complete story of Hubbard is that he is now in <unk> living on his yacht with a man @-@ eating tigress named Betty @-@ alias @-@ Sarah , another of the same kind ... He will probably soon thereafter arrive in these parts with Betty @-@ Sarah , broke , working the poor @-@ wounded @-@ veteran racket for all its worth , and looking for another easy mark . Don 't say you haven 't been warned . Bob [ Robert Heinlein ] thinks Ron went to pieces morally as a result of the war . I think that 's fertilizer , that he always was that way , but when he wanted to conciliate or get something from somebody he could put on a good charm act . What the war did was to wear him down to where he no longer bothers with the act . 
 Scientology accounts do not mention Hubbard 's involvement in occultism . He is instead described as " continu [ ing ] to write to help support his research " during this period into " the development of a means to better the condition of man " . The Church of Scientology has nonetheless acknowledged Hubbard 's involvement with the OTO ; a 1969 statement , written by Hubbard himself , said : 
 Hubbard broke up black magic in America ... L. Ron Hubbard was still an officer of the U.S. Navy , because he was well known as a writer and a philosopher and had friends amongst the physicists , he was sent in to handle the situation . He went to live at the house and investigated the black magic rites and the general situation and found them very bad ... 
 Hubbard 's mission was successful far beyond anyone 's expectations . The house was torn down . Hubbard rescued a girl they were using . The black magic group was dispersed and destroyed and has never recovered . 
 The Church of Scientology says Hubbard was " sent in " by his fellow science fiction author Robert Heinlein , " who was running off @-@ book intelligence operations for naval intelligence at the time " . However , Heinlein 's authorized biographer has said that he looked into the matter at the suggestion of Scientologists but found nothing to corroborate claims that Heinlein had been involved , and his biography of Heinlein makes no mention of the matter . 
 On August 10 , 1946 , Hubbard bigamously married Sara , while still married to Polly . It was not until 1947 that his first wife learned that he had remarried . Hubbard agreed to divorce Polly in June that year and the marriage was dissolved shortly afterwards , with Polly given custody of the children . 
 = = Origins of Dianetics = = 
 After Hubbard 's wedding to Sara , the couple settled at Laguna Beach , California , where Hubbard took a short @-@ term job looking after a friend 's yacht before resuming his fiction writing to supplement the small disability allowance that he was receiving as a war veteran . Working from a trailer in a run @-@ down area of North Hollywood , Hubbard sold a number of science fiction stories that included his Ole Doc Methuselah series and the serialized novels The End Is Not Yet and To the Stars . However , he remained short of money and his son , L. Ron Hubbard Jr , testified later that Hubbard was dependent on his own father and Margaret 's parents for money and his writings , which he was paid at a penny per word , never garnered him any more than $ 10 @,@ 000 prior to the founding of Scientology . He repeatedly wrote to the Veterans Administration ( VA ) asking for an increase in his war pension . In October 1947 he wrote : 
 After trying and failing for two years to regain my equilibrium in civil life , I am utterly unable to approach anything like my own competence . My last physician informed me that it might be very helpful if I were to be examined and perhaps treated psychiatrically or even by a psychoanalyst . Toward the end of my service I avoided out of pride any mental examinations , hoping that time would balance a mind which I had every reason to suppose was seriously affected . I cannot account for nor rise above long periods of <unk> and suicidal inclinations , and have newly come to realize that I must first triumph above this before I can hope to rehabilitate myself at all . 
 The VA eventually did increase his pension , but his money problems continued . On August 31 , 1948 , he was arrested in San Luis Obispo , California , and subsequently pleaded guilty to a charge of petty theft , for which he was ordered to pay a $ 25 fine . According to the Church of Scientology , around this time he " accept [ ed ] an appointment as a Special Police Officer with the Los Angeles Police Department and us [ ed ] the position to study society 's criminal elements " and also " worked with neurotics from the Hollywood film community " . 
 In late 1948 Hubbard and Sara moved to Savannah , Georgia . Here , Scientology sources say , he " volunteer [ ed ] his time in hospitals and mental wards , saving the lives of patients with his counseling techniques " . Hubbard began to make the first public mentions of what was to become Dianetics . He wrote in January 1949 that he was working on a " book of psychology " about " the cause and cure of nervous tension " , which he was going to call The Dark Sword , Excalibur or Science of the Mind . In April 1949 , Hubbard wrote to several professional organizations to offer his research . None were interested , so he turned to his editor John W. Campbell , who was more receptive due to a long @-@ standing fascination with fringe psychologies and psychic powers ( " psionics " ) that " permeated both his fiction and non @-@ fiction " . 
 Campbell invited Hubbard and Sara to move into a cottage at Bay Head , New Jersey , not far from his own home at Plainfield . In July 1949 , Campbell recruited an acquaintance , Dr. Joseph Winter , to help develop Hubbard 's new therapy of " Dianetics " . Campbell told Winter : 
 With cooperation from some institutions , some psychiatrists , [ Hubbard ] has worked on all types of cases . Institutionalized schizophrenics , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , perverts , stuttering , neuroses — in all , nearly 1000 cases . But just a brief sampling of each type ; he doesn 't have proper statistics in the usual sense . But he has one statistic . He has cured every patient he worked with . He has cured ulcers , arthritis , asthma . 
 Hubbard collaborated with Campbell and Winter to refine his techniques , testing them on science fiction fans recruited by Campbell . The basic principle of Dianetics was that the brain recorded every experience and event in a person 's life , even when unconscious . Bad or painful experiences were stored as what he called " engrams " in a " reactive mind " . These could be triggered later in life , causing emotional and physical problems . By carrying out a process he called " auditing " , a person could be regressed through his engrams to re @-@ experiencing past experiences . This enabled engrams to be " cleared " . The subject , who would now be in a state of " Clear " , would have a perfectly functioning mind with an improved IQ and photographic memory . The " Clear " would be cured of physical ailments ranging from poor eyesight to the common cold , which Hubbard asserted were purely psychosomatic . 
 Winter submitted a paper on Dianetics to the Journal of the American Medical Association and the American Journal of Psychiatry but both journals rejected it . Hubbard and his collaborators decided to announce Dianetics in Campbell 's Astounding Science Fiction instead . In an editorial , Campbell said : " Its power is almost unbelievable ; it proves the mind not only can but does rule the body completely ; following the sharply defined basic laws set forth , physical ills such as ulcers , asthma and arthritis can be cured , as can all other psychosomatic ills . " The birth of Hubbard 's second daughter Alexis Valerie , delivered by Winter on March 8 , 1950 , came in the middle of the preparations to launch Dianetics . A " Hubbard Dianetic Research Foundation " was established in April 1950 in Elizabeth , New Jersey , with Hubbard , Sara , Winter and Campbell on the board of directors . 
 Hubbard described Dianetics as “ the hidden source of all psychosomatic ills and human aberration ” when he introduced Dianetics to the world in the 1950s . He further claimed that “ skills have been developed for their invariable cure . ” Dianetics was duly launched in Astounding 's May 1950 issue and on May 9 , Hubbard 's companion book Dianetics : The Modern Science of Mental Health was published by Hermitage House . Hubbard abandoned freelance writing in order to promote Dianetics , writing several books about it in the next decade , delivering an estimated 4 @,@ 000 lectures while founding Dianetics research organizations . The etymological origin of the word Dianetics are the words dia , meaning " through " and nous , meaning " soul . " Hubbard defined it as “ a spiritual healing technology ” and “ an organized science of thought . ” 
 = = From Dianetics to Scientology = = 
 Hubbard called Dianetics " a milestone for man comparable to his discovery of fire and superior to his invention of the wheel and the arch " . It was an immediate commercial success and sparked what Martin Gardner calls " a nationwide cult of incredible proportions " . By August 1950 , Hubbard 's book had sold 55 @,@ 000 copies , was selling at the rate of 4 @,@ 000 a week and was being translated into French , German and Japanese . Five hundred Dianetic auditing groups had been set up across the United States . 
 Dianetics was poorly received by the press and the scientific and medical professions . The American Psychological Association criticized Hubbard 's claims as " not supported by empirical evidence " . Scientific American said that Hubbard 's book contained " more promises and less evidence per page than any publication since the invention of printing " , while The New Republic called it a " bold and immodest mixture of complete nonsense and perfectly reasonable common sense , taken from long acknowledged findings and disguised and distorted by a crazy , newly invented terminology " . Some of Hubbard 's fellow science fiction writers also criticized it ; Isaac Asimov considered it " gibberish " while Jack Williamson called it " a lunatic revision of Freudian psychology " . 
 Several famous individuals became involved with Dianetics . Aldous Huxley received auditing from Hubbard himself ; the poet Jean Toomer and the science fiction writers Theodore Sturgeon and A. E. van Vogt became trained Dianetics auditors . Van Vogt temporarily abandoned writing and became the head of the newly established Los Angeles branch of the Hubbard Dianetic Research Foundation . Other branches were established in New York , Washington , D.C. , Chicago , and Honolulu . 
 Although Dianetics was not cheap , a great many people were nonetheless willing to pay ; van Vogt later recalled " doing little but tear open envelopes and pull out $ 500 checks from people who wanted to take an auditor 's course " . Financial controls were lax . Hubbard himself withdrew large sums with no explanation of what he was doing with it . On one occasion , van Vogt saw Hubbard taking a lump sum of $ 56 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 0 @.@ 5 million at 2010 prices ) out of the Los Angeles Foundation 's proceeds . One of Hubbard 's employees , Helen O 'Brien , commented that at the Elizabeth , N.J. branch of the Foundation , the books showed that " a month 's income of $ 90 @,@ 000 is listed , with only $ 20 @,@ 000 accounted for " . 
 Hubbard played a very active role in the Dianetics boom , writing , lecturing and training auditors . Many of those who knew him spoke of being impressed by his personal charisma . Jack Horner , who became a Dianetics auditor in 1950 , later said , " He was very impressive , dedicated and amusing . The man had tremendous charisma ; you just wanted to hear every word he had to say and listen for any pearl of wisdom . " Isaac Asimov recalled in his autobiography how , at a dinner party , he , Robert Heinlein , L. Sprague de Camp and their wives " all sat as quietly as pussycats and listened to Hubbard . He told tales with perfect aplomb and in complete paragraphs . " As Atack comments , he was " a charismatic figure who compelled the devotion of those around him " . Christopher Evans described the personal qualities that Hubbard brought to Dianetics and Scientology : 
 He undoubtedly has charisma , a magnetic lure of an indefinable kind which makes him the centre of attraction in any kind of gathering . He is also a compulsive talker and <unk> ... His restless energy keeps him on the go throughout a long day — he is a poor sleeper and rises very early — and provides part of the drive which has allowed him to found and propagate a major international organization . 
 Hubbard 's supporters soon began to have doubts about Dianetics . Winter became disillusioned and wrote that he had never seen a single convincing Clear : " I have seen some individuals who are supposed to have been ' clear , ' but their behavior does not conform to the definition of the state . Moreover , an individual supposed to have been ' clear ' has undergone a relapse into conduct which suggests an incipient psychosis . " He also deplored the Foundation 's omission of any serious scientific research . Dianetics lost public credibility in August 1950 when a presentation by Hubbard before an audience of 6 @,@ 000 at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles failed disastrously . He introduced a Clear named Sonya Bianca and told the audience that as a result of undergoing Dianetic therapy she now possessed perfect recall . However , Gardner writes , " in the demonstration that followed , she failed to remember a single formula in physics ( the subject in which she was majoring ) or the color of Hubbard 's tie when his back was turned . At this point , a large part of the audience got up and left . " 
 Hubbard also faced other practitioners moving into leadership positions within the Dianetics community . It was structured as an open , public practice in which others were free to pursue their own lines of research and claim that their approaches to auditing produced better results than Hubbard 's . The community rapidly splintered and its members mingled Hubbard 's ideas with a wide variety of esoteric and even occult practices . By late 1950 , the Elizabeth , N.J. Foundation was in financial crisis and the Los Angeles Foundation was more than $ 200 @,@ 000 in debt . Winter and Art <unk> , the publisher of Hubbard 's book , resigned under acrimonious circumstances . Campbell also resigned , criticizing Hubbard for being impossible to work with , and blamed him for the disorganization and financial ruin of the Foundations . By the summer of 1951 , the Elizabeth , N.J. Foundation and all of its branches had closed . 
 The collapse of Hubbard 's marriage to Sara created yet more problems . He had begun an affair with his 20 @-@ year @-@ old public relations assistant in late 1950 , while Sara started a relationship with Dianetics auditor Miles Hollister . Hubbard secretly denounced the couple to the FBI in March 1951 , portraying them in a letter as communist infiltrators . According to Hubbard , Sara was " currently intimate with [ communists ] but evidently under coercion . Drug addiction set in fall 1950 . Nothing of this known to me until a few weeks ago . " Hollister was described as having a " sharp chin , broad forehead , rather Slavic " . He was said to be the " center of most turbulence in our organization " and " active and dangerous " . The FBI did not take Hubbard seriously : an agent annotated his correspondence with the comment , " Appears mental . " 
 Three weeks later , Hubbard and two Foundation staff seized Sara and his year @-@ old daughter Alexis and forcibly took them to San Bernardino , California , where he attempted unsuccessfully to find a doctor to examine Sara and declare her insane . He let Sara go but took Alexis to Havana , Cuba . Sara filed a divorce suit on April 23 , 1951 , that accused him of marrying her bigamously and subjecting her to sleep deprivation , beatings , strangulation , kidnapping and exhortations to commit suicide . The case led to newspaper headlines such as " Ron Hubbard Insane , Says His Wife . " Sara finally secured the return of her daughter in June 1951 by agreeing to a settlement with her husband in which she signed a statement , written by him , declaring : 
 The things I have said about L. Ron Hubbard in courts and the public prints have been grossly exaggerated or entirely false . I have not at any time believed otherwise than that L. Ron Hubbard is a fine and brilliant man . 
 Dianetics appeared to be on the edge of total collapse . However , it was saved by Don Purcell , a millionaire businessman and <unk> who agreed to support a new Foundation in Wichita , Kansas . Their collaboration ended after less than a year when they fell out over the future direction of Dianetics . The Wichita Foundation became financially nonviable after a court ruled that it was liable for the unpaid debts of its defunct predecessor in Elizabeth , N.J. The ruling prompted Purcell and the other directors of the Wichita Foundation to file for voluntary bankruptcy in February 1952 . Hubbard resigned immediately and accused Purcell of having been bribed by the American Medical Association to destroy Dianetics . Hubbard established a " Hubbard College " on the other side of town where he continued to promote Dianetics while fighting Purcell in the courts over the Foundation 's intellectual property . 
 Only six weeks after setting up the Hubbard College and marrying a staff member , 18 @-@ year @-@ old Mary Sue Whipp , Hubbard closed it down and moved with his new bride to Phoenix , Arizona . He established a Hubbard Association of Scientologists International to promote his new " Science of Certainty " — Scientology . W. Vaughn <unk> , distinguished Professor and Chairman , Georgia Regents University , differentiates Scientology and Dianetics : Dianetics is all about releasing the mind from the “ distorting influence of engrams , ” and Scientology “ is the study and handling of the spirit in relation to itself , universes and other life . ” 
 = = Rise of Scientology = = 
 The Church of Scientology attributes its genesis to Hubbard 's discovery of " a new line of research " — " that man is most fundamentally a spiritual being " . Non @-@ Scientologist writers have suggested alternative motives : that he aimed " to reassert control over his creation " , that he believed " he was about to lose control of Dianetics " , or that he wanted to ensure " he would be able to stay in business even if the courts eventually awarded control of Dianetics and its valuable copyrights to ... the hated Don Purcell . " 
 Hubbard expanded upon the basics of Dianetics to construct a spiritually oriented ( though at this stage not religious ) doctrine based on the concept that the true self of a person was a thetan — an immortal , omniscient and potentially omnipotent entity . Hubbard taught that the thetans , having created the material universe , had forgotten their god @-@ like powers and become trapped in physical bodies . Scientology aimed to " rehabilitate " each person 's thetan to restore its original capacities and become once again an " Operating Thetan " . Hubbard insisted humanity was imperiled by the forces of " aberration " , which were the result of engrams carried by the immortal thetans for billions of years . 
 In 2012 , Ohio State University professor Hugh Urban asserted that Hubbard had adopted many of his theories from the early to mid 20th century astral projection pioneer Sylvan Muldoon stating that Hubbard 's description of <unk> the thetan is extremely similar if not identical to the descriptions of astral projection in occult literature popularized by Muldoon 's widely read Phenomena of Astral Projection ( 1951 ) ( co @-@ written with Hereward Carrington ) and that Muldoon 's description of the astral body as being connected to the physical body by a long thin , elastic cord is virtually identical to the one described in Hubbard 's " Excalibur " vision . 
 Hubbard introduced a device called an E @-@ meter that he presented as having , as Miller puts it , " an almost mystical power to reveal an individual 's innermost thoughts " . He promulgated Scientology through a series of lectures , bulletins and books such as A History of Man ( " a cold @-@ blooded and factual account of your last sixty trillion years " ) and Scientology : 8 @-@ 8008 ( " With this book , the ability to make one 's body old or young at will , the ability to heal the ill without physical contact , the ability to cure the insane and the incapacitated , is set forth for the physician , the layman , the mathematician and the physicist . " ) 
 Scientology was organized in a very different way from the decentralized Dianetics movement . The Hubbard Association of Scientologists ( HAS ) was the only official Scientology organization . Training procedures and doctrines were standardized and promoted through HAS publications , and administrators and auditors were not permitted to deviate from Hubbard 's approach . Branches or " <unk> " were organized as franchises , rather like a fast food restaurant chain . Each franchise holder was required to pay ten percent of income to Hubbard 's central organization . They were expected to find new recruits , known as " raw meat " , but were restricted to providing only basic services . <unk> higher @-@ level auditing was only provided by Hubbard 's central organization . 
 Although this model would eventually be extremely successful , Scientology was a very small @-@ scale movement at first . Hubbard started off with only a few dozen followers , generally dedicated <unk> ; a seventy @-@ hour series of lectures in Philadelphia in December 1952 was attended by just 38 people . Hubbard was joined in Phoenix by his 18 @-@ year @-@ old son Nibs , who had been unable to settle down in high school . Nibs had decided to become a Scientologist , moved into his father 's home and went on to become a Scientology staff member and " professor " . Hubbard also traveled to the United Kingdom to establish his control over a Dianetics group in London . It was very much a shoestring operation ; as Helen O 'Brien later recalled , " there was an atmosphere of extreme poverty and undertones of a grim conspiracy over all . At 163 Holland Park Avenue was an ill @-@ lit lecture room and a bare @-@ boarded and <unk> office some eight by ten feet — mainly infested by long haired men and short haired and tatty women . " On September 24 , 1952 , only a few weeks after arriving in London , Hubbard 's wife Mary Sue gave birth to her first child , a daughter whom they named Diana Meredith de Wolfe Hubbard . 
 In February 1953 , Hubbard acquired a doctorate from the unaccredited Sequoia University . According to a Scientology biography , this was " given in recognition of his outstanding work on Dianetics " and " as an inspiration to the many people ... who had been inspired by him to take up advanced studies in this field ... " The British government concluded in the 1970s that Sequoia University was a " degree mill " operated by Joseph Hough , a Los Angeles chiropractor . Miller cites a telegram sent by Hubbard on February 27 , 1953 , in which he instructed Scientologist Richard de Mille to procure him a Ph.D. from Hough urgently — " FOR GOSH <unk> <unk> . <unk> HERE <unk> <unk> ON IT . " Hough 's " university " was closed down by the Californian authorities in 1971 . British government officials noted in a report written in 1977 : " It has not and never had any authority whatsoever to issue diplomas or degrees and the dean is sought by the authorities ' for questioning ' . " 
 A few weeks after becoming " Dr. " Hubbard , he wrote to Helen O 'Brien — who had taken over the day @-@ to @-@ day management of Scientology in the United States — proposing that Scientology should be transformed into a religion . As membership declined and finances grew tighter , Hubbard had reversed the hostility to religion he voiced in Dianetics . His letter to O 'Brien discussed the legal and financial benefits of religious status . The idea may not have been new ; Hubbard has been quoted as telling a science fiction convention in 1948 : " Writing for a penny a word is ridiculous . If a man really wants to make a million dollars , the best way would be to start his own religion . " Scholar J. Gordon Melton notes , " There is no record of Hubbard having ever made this statement , though several of his science fiction colleagues have noted the broaching of the subject on one of their informal conversations . " The Church of Scientology has denied that Hubbard said this and insists that it is a misattributed quote that was said instead by George Orwell . Hubbard outlined plans for setting up a chain of " Spiritual Guidance Centers " charging customers $ 500 for twenty @-@ four hours of auditing ( " That is real money ... Charge enough and we 'd be swamped . " ) . He wrote : 
 I await your reaction on the religion angle . In my opinion , we couldn 't get worse public opinion than we have had or have less customers with what we 've got to sell . A religious charter would be necessary in Pennsylvania or NJ to make it stick . But I sure could make it stick . 
 O 'Brien was not enthusiastic and resigned the following September , worn out by work . She criticized Hubbard for creating " a temperate zone voodoo , in its inelasticity , unexplainable procedures , and mindless group euphoria " . He nonetheless pressed ahead and on December 18 , 1953 , he incorporated the Church of Scientology , Church of American Science and Church of Spiritual Engineering in Camden , New Jersey . Hubbard , his wife Mary Sue and his secretary John Galusha became the trustees of all three corporations . Hubbard later denied founding the Church of Scientology , and to this day , Scientologists maintain that the " founding church " was actually the Church of Scientology of California , established on February 18 , 1954 , by Scientologist Burton Farber . The reason for Scientology 's religious transformation was explained by officials of the HAS : 
 [ T ] here is little doubt but what [ sic ] this stroke will remove Scientology from the target area of overt and covert attacks by the medical profession , who see their pills , scalpels , and appendix @-@ studded incomes threatened ... [ Scientologists ] can avoid the recent fiasco in which a Pasadena practitioner is reported to have spent 10 days in that city 's torture chamber for " practicing medicine without a license . " 
 Scientology franchises became Churches of Scientology and some auditors began dressing as clergymen , complete with clerical collars . If they were arrested in the course of their activities , Hubbard advised , they should sue for massive damages for molesting " a Man of God going about his business " . A few years later he told Scientologists : " If attacked on some vulnerable point by anyone or anything or any organization , always find or manufacture enough threat against them to cause them to sue for peace ... Don 't ever defend , always attack . " Any individual breaking away from Scientology and setting up his own group was to be shut down : 
 The purpose of the suit is to harass and discourage rather than to win . The law can be used very easily to harass , and enough harassment on somebody who is simply on the thin edge anyway , well knowing that he is not authorized , will generally be sufficient to cause his professional decease . If possible , of course , ruin him utterly . 
 The 1950s saw Scientology growing steadily . Hubbard finally achieved victory over Don Purcell in 1954 when the latter , worn out by constant litigation , handed the copyrights of Dianetics back to Hubbard . Most of the formerly independent Scientology and Dianetics groups were either driven out of business or were absorbed into Hubbard 's organizations . Hubbard marketed Scientology through medical claims , such as attracting polio sufferers by presenting the Church of Scientology as a scientific research foundation investigating polio cases . One advertisement during this period stated : 
 Plagued by illness ? We 'll make you able to have good health . Get processed by the finest capable auditors in the world today [ ... ] Personally coached and monitored by L. Ron Hubbard . 
 Scientology became a highly profitable enterprise for Hubbard . He implemented a scheme under which he was paid a percentage of the Church of Scientology 's gross income and by 1957 he was being paid about $ 250 @,@ 000 annually — equivalent to $ 1 @.@ 9 million at 2010 prices . His family grew , too , with Mary Sue giving birth to three more children — Geoffrey Quentin <unk> on January 6 , 1954 ; Mary Suzette Rochelle on February 13 , 1955 ; and Arthur Ronald Conway on June 6 , 1958 . In the spring of 1959 , he used his new @-@ found wealth to purchase Saint Hill Manor , an 18th @-@ century country house in Sussex , formerly owned by Sawai Man Singh II , the Maharaja of Jaipur . The house became Hubbard 's permanent residence and an international training center for Scientologists . 
 = = Controversies and crises = = 
 By the start of the 1960s , Hubbard was the leader of a worldwide movement with thousands of followers . A decade later , however , he had left Saint Hill Manor and moved aboard his own private fleet of ships as the Church of Scientology faced worldwide controversy . 
 The Church of Scientology says that the problems of this period were due to " vicious , covert international attacks " by the United States government , " all of which were proven false and baseless , which were to last 27 years and finally culminated in the Government being sued for 750 million dollars for conspiracy . " Behind the attacks , stated Hubbard , lay a vast conspiracy of " psychiatric front groups " secretly controlling governments : " Every single lie , false charge and attack on Scientology has been traced directly to this group 's members . They have sought at great expense for nineteen years to crush and eradicate any new development in the field of the mind . They are actively preventing any effectiveness in this field . " 
 Hubbard believed that Scientology was being infiltrated by saboteurs and spies and introduced " security checking " to identify those he termed " potential trouble sources " and " suppressive persons " . Members of the Church of Scientology were interrogated with the aid of E @-@ meters and were asked questions such as " Have you ever practiced homosexuality ? " and " Have you ever had unkind thoughts about L. Ron Hubbard ? " For a time , Scientologists were even interrogated about crimes committed in past lives : " Have you ever destroyed a culture ? " " Did you come to Earth for evil purposes ? " " Have you ever zapped anyone ? " 
 He also sought to exert political influence , advising Scientologists to vote against Richard Nixon in the 1960 presidential election and establishing a Department of Government Affairs " to bring government and hostile philosophies or societies into a state of complete compliance with the goals of Scientology " . This , he said , " is done by high @-@ level ability to control and in its absence by a low @-@ level ability to overwhelm . Introvert such agencies . Control such agencies . " 
 The U.S. Government was already well aware of Hubbard 's activities . The FBI had a lengthy file on him , including a 1951 interview with an agent who considered him a " mental case " . Police forces in a number of jurisdictions began exchanging information about Scientology through the auspices of Interpol , which eventually led to prosecutions . In 1958 , the U.S. Internal Revenue Service withdrew the Washington , D.C. Church of Scientology 's tax exemption after it found that Hubbard and his family were profiting unreasonably from Scientology 's ostensibly non @-@ profit income . The Food and Drug Administration took action against Scientology 's medical claims , seizing thousands of pills being marketed as " radiation cures " as well as publications and E @-@ meters . The Church of Scientology was required to label them as being " ineffective in the diagnosis or treatment of disease " . 
 Following the FDA 's actions , Scientology attracted increasingly unfavorable publicity across the English @-@ speaking world . It faced particularly hostile scrutiny in Victoria , Australia , where it was accused of brainwashing , blackmail , extortion and damaging the mental health of its members . The Victorian state government established a Board of Inquiry into Scientology in November 1963 . Its report , published in October 1965 , condemned every aspect of Scientology and Hubbard himself . He was described as being of doubtful sanity , having a persecution complex and displaying strong indications of paranoid schizophrenia with delusions of grandeur . His writings were characterized as nonsensical , abounding in " self @-@ glorification and grandiosity , replete with histrionics and hysterical , <unk> outbursts " . Sociologist Roy Wallis comments that the report drastically changed public perceptions of Scientology : 
 The former conception of the movement as a relatively harmless , if cranky , health and self @-@ improvement cult , was transformed into one which portrayed it as evil , dangerous , a form of hypnosis ( with all the overtones of Svengali in the layman 's mind ) , and brainwashing . 
 The report led to Scientology being banned in Victoria , Western Australia and South Australia , and led to more negative publicity around the world . Newspapers and politicians in the UK pressed the British government for action against Scientology . In April 1966 , hoping to form a remote " safe haven " for Scientology , Hubbard traveled to the southern African country Rhodesia ( today Zimbabwe ) and looked into setting up a base there at a hotel on Lake Kariba . Despite his attempts to curry favour with the local government — he personally delivered champagne to Prime Minister Ian Smith 's house , but Smith refused to see him — Rhodesia promptly refused to renew Hubbard 's visa , compelling him to leave the country . In July 1968 , the British Minister of Health , Kenneth Robinson , announced that foreign Scientologists would no longer be permitted to enter the UK and Hubbard himself was excluded from the country as an " undesirable alien " . Further inquiries were launched in Canada , New Zealand and South Africa . 
 Hubbard took three major new initiatives in the face of these challenges . " Ethics Technology " was introduced to tighten internal discipline within Scientology . It required Scientologists to " disconnect " from any organization or individual — including family members — deemed to be disruptive or " suppressive " . According to church @-@ operated websites , “ A person who disconnects is simply exercising his right to communicate or not to communicate with a particular person . " Hubbard stated : “ Communication , however , is a two @-@ way flow . If one has the right to communicate , then one must also have the right to not receive communication from another . It is this latter corollary of the right to communicate that gives us our right to privacy . ” Scientologists were also required to write " Knowledge Reports " on each other , reporting transgressions or misapplications of Scientology methods . Hubbard promulgated a long list of punishable " Misdemeanors " , " Crimes " , and " High Crimes " . The " Fair Game " policy was introduced , which was applicable to anyone deemed an " enemy " of Scientology : " May be deprived of property or injured by any means by any Scientologist without any discipline of the Scientologist . May be tricked , sued or lied to or destroyed . " 
 At the start of March 1966 , Hubbard created the Guardian 's Office ( GO ) , a new agency within the Church of Scientology that was headed by his wife Mary Sue . It dealt with Scientology 's external affairs , including public relations , legal actions and the gathering of intelligence on perceived threats . As Scientology faced increasingly negative media attention , the GO retaliated with hundreds of writs for libel and slander ; it issued more than forty on a single day . Hubbard ordered his staff to find " lurid , blood sex crime actual evidence [ sic ] on [ Scientology 's ] attackers " . 
 Finally , at the end of 1966 , Hubbard acquired his own fleet of ships . He established the " Hubbard <unk> Company Ltd " which purchased three ships — the Enchanter , a forty @-@ ton schooner , the Avon River , an old trawler , and the Royal Scotman [ sic ] , a former Irish Sea cattle ferry that he made his home and flagship . The ships were crewed by the Sea Organization or Sea Org , a group of Scientologist volunteers , with the support of a couple of professional seamen . 
 = = Commodore of the Sea Org = = 
 After Hubbard created the Sea Org " fleet " in early 1967 it began an eight @-@ year voyage , sailing from port to port in the Mediterranean Sea and eastern North Atlantic . The fleet traveled as far as Corfu in the eastern Mediterranean and Dakar and the Azores in the Atlantic , but rarely stayed anywhere for longer than six weeks . Ken Urquhart , Hubbard 's personal assistant at the time , later recalled : 
 [ Hubbard ] said we had to keep moving because there were so many people after him . If they caught up with him they would cause him so much trouble that he would be unable to continue his work , Scientology would not get into the world and there would be social and economic chaos , if not a nuclear holocaust . 
 When Hubbard established the Sea Org he publicly declared that he had relinquished his management responsibilities . According to Miller , this was not true . He received daily telex messages from Scientology organizations around the world reporting their statistics and income . The Church of Scientology sent him $ 15 @,@ 000 a week and millions of dollars were transferred to his bank accounts in Switzerland and Liechtenstein . Couriers arrived regularly , conveying luxury food for Hubbard and his family or cash that had been smuggled from England to avoid currency export restrictions . 
 Along the way , Hubbard sought to establish a safe haven in " a friendly little country where Scientology would be allowed to prosper " , as Miller puts it . The fleet stayed at Corfu for several months in 1968 – 1969 . Hubbard renamed the ships after Greek gods — the Royal Scotman was rechristened Apollo — and he praised the recently established military dictatorship . The Sea Org was represented as " Professor Hubbard 's Philosophy School " in a telegram to the Greek government . In March 1969 , however , Hubbard and his ships were ordered to leave . In mid @-@ 1972 , Hubbard tried again in Morocco , establishing contacts with the country 's secret police and training senior policemen and intelligence agents in techniques for detecting subversives . The program ended in failure when it became caught up in internal Moroccan politics , and Hubbard left the country hastily in December 1972 . 
 At the same time , Hubbard was still developing Scientology 's doctrines . A Scientology biography states that " free of organizational duties and aided by the first Sea Org members , L. Ron Hubbard now had the time and facilities to confirm in the physical universe some of the events and places he had encountered in his journeys down the track of time . " In 1965 , he designated several existing Scientology courses as confidential , repackaging them as the first of the esoteric " OT levels " . Two years later he announced the release of OT3 , the " Wall of Fire " , revealing the secrets of an immense disaster that had occurred " on this planet , and on the other seventy @-@ five planets which form this Confederacy , seventy @-@ five million years ago " . Scientologists were required to undertake the first two OT levels before learning how Xenu , the leader of the Galactic Confederacy , had shipped billions of people to Earth and blown them up with hydrogen bombs , following which their traumatized spirits were stuck together at " implant stations " , brainwashed with false memories and eventually became contained within human beings . The discovery of OT3 was said to have taken a major physical toll on Hubbard , who announced that he had broken a knee , an arm , and his back during the course of his research . A year later , in 1968 , he unveiled OT levels 4 to 6 and began delivering OT training courses to Scientologists aboard the Royal Scotman . 
 Scientologists around the world were presented with a glamorous picture of life in the Sea Org and many applied to join Hubbard aboard the fleet . What they found was rather different from the image . Most of those joining had no nautical experience at all . Mechanical difficulties and blunders by the crews led to a series of embarrassing incidents and near @-@ disasters . Following one incident in which the rudder of the Royal Scotman was damaged during a storm , Hubbard ordered the ship 's entire crew to be reduced to a " condition of liability " and wear gray rags tied to their arms . The ship itself was treated the same way , with dirty tarpaulins tied around its funnel to symbolize its lower status . According to those aboard , conditions were appalling ; the crew was worked to the point of exhaustion , given meagre rations and forbidden to wash or change their clothes for several weeks . Hubbard maintained a harsh disciplinary regime aboard the fleet , punishing mistakes by confining people in the Royal Scotman 's bilge tanks without toilet facilities and with food provided in buckets . At other times erring crew members were thrown overboard with Hubbard looking on and , occasionally , filming . David Mayo , a Sea Org member at the time , later recalled : 
 We tried not to think too hard about his behavior . It was not rational much of the time , but to even consider such a thing was a discreditable thought and you couldn 't allow yourself to have a discreditable thought . One of the questions in a sec [ <unk> ] check was , " Have you ever had any unkind thoughts about LRH ? " and you could get into very serious trouble if you had . So you tried hard not to . 
 From about 1970 , Hubbard was attended aboard ship by the children of Sea Org members , organized as the Commodore 's Messenger Organization ( CMO ) . They were mainly young girls dressed in hot pants and halter tops , who were responsible for running errands for Hubbard such as lighting his cigarettes , dressing him or relaying his verbal commands to other members of the crew . In addition to his wife Mary Sue , he was accompanied by all four of his children by her , though not his first son Nibs , who had defected from Scientology in late 1959 . The younger Hubbards were all members of the Sea Org and shared its rigors , though Quentin Hubbard reportedly found it difficult to adjust and attempted suicide in mid @-@ 1974 . 
 = = Life in hiding = = 
 During the 1970s , Hubbard faced an increasing number of legal threats . French prosecutors charged him and the French Church of Scientology with fraud and customs violations in 1972 . He was advised that he was at risk of being extradited to France . Hubbard left the Sea Org fleet temporarily at the end of 1972 , living incognito in Queens , New York , until he returned to his flagship in September 1973 when the threat of extradition had abated . Scientology sources say that he carried out " a sociological study in and around New York City " . 
 Hubbard 's health deteriorated significantly during this period . A chain @-@ smoker , he also suffered from bursitis and excessive weight , and had a prominent growth on his forehead . He suffered serious injuries in a motorcycle accident in 1973 and had a heart attack in 1975 that required him to take anticoagulant drugs for the next year . In September 1978 , Hubbard had a pulmonary embolism , falling into a coma , but recovered . 
 He remained active in managing and developing Scientology , establishing the controversial Rehabilitation Project Force in 1974 and issuing policy and doctrinal bulletins . However , the Sea Org 's voyages were coming to an end . The Apollo was banned from several Spanish ports and was expelled from Curaçao in October 1975 . The Sea Org came to be suspected of being a CIA operation , leading to a riot in Funchal , Madeira , when the Apollo docked there . At the time , The Apollo Stars , a musical group founded by Hubbard and made up entirely of <unk> members of the Sea Org , was offering free on @-@ pier concerts in an attempt to promote Scientology , and the riot occurred at one of these events . Hubbard decided to relocate back to the United States to establish a " land base " for the Sea Org in Florida . The Church of Scientology attributes this decision to the activities on the Apollo having " outgrow [ n ] the ship 's capacity " . 
 In October 1975 , Hubbard moved into a hotel suite in Daytona Beach . The Fort Harrison Hotel in Clearwater , Florida , was secretly acquired as the location for the " land base " . On December 5 , 1975 , Hubbard and his wife Mary Sue moved into a condominium complex in nearby Dunedin . Their presence was meant to be a closely guarded secret but was accidentally compromised the following month . Hubbard immediately left Dunedin and moved to Georgetown , Washington , D.C. , accompanied by a handful of aides and messengers , but not his wife . Six months later , following another security alert in July 1976 , Hubbard moved to another safe house in Culver City , California . He lived there for only about three months , relocating in October to the more private confines of the Olive Tree Ranch near La Quinta . His second son Quentin committed suicide a few weeks later in Las Vegas . 
 Throughout this period , Hubbard was heavily involved in directing the activities of the Guardian 's Office ( GO ) , the legal bureau / intelligence agency that he had established in 1966 . He believed that Scientology was being attacked by an international Nazi conspiracy , which he termed the " <unk> Memorial " , through a network of drug companies , banks and psychiatrists in a bid to take over the world . In 1973 , he instigated the " Snow White Program " and directed the GO to remove negative reports about Scientology from government files and track down their sources . The GO was ordered to " get all false and secret files on Scientology , LRH ... that cannot be obtained legally , by all possible lines of approach ... i.e. , job penetration , janitor penetration , suitable guises utilizing covers . " His involvement in the GO 's operations was concealed through the use of codenames . The GO carried out covert campaigns on his behalf such as Operation Bulldozer Leak , intended " to effectively spread the rumor that will lead Government , media , and individual [ Suppressive Persons ] to conclude that LRH has no control of the C of S and no legal liability for Church activity " . He was kept informed of GO operations , such as the theft of medical records from a hospital , harassment of psychiatrists and infiltrations of organizations that had been critical of Scientology at various times , such as the Better Business Bureau , the American Medical Association , and American Psychiatric Association . 
 Members of the GO infiltrated and burglarized numerous government organizations , including the U.S. Department of Justice and the Internal Revenue Service . After two GO agents were caught in the Washington , D.C. headquarters of the IRS , the FBI carried out simultaneous raids on GO offices in Los Angeles and Washington , D.C. on July 7 , 1977 . They retrieved wiretap equipment , burglary tools and some 90 @,@ 000 pages of incriminating documents . Hubbard was not prosecuted , though he was labeled an " unindicted co @-@ conspirator " by government prosecutors . His wife Mary Sue was indicted and subsequently convicted of conspiracy . She was sent to a federal prison along with ten other Scientologists . 
 Hubbard 's troubles increased in February 1978 when a French court convicted him in absentia for obtaining money under false pretenses . He was sentenced to four years in prison and a <unk> ( $ 7 @,@ 000 ) fine . He went into hiding in April 1979 , moving to an apartment in Hemet , California , where his only contact with the outside world was via ten trusted Messengers . He cut contact with everyone else , even his wife , whom he saw for the last time in August 1979 . Hubbard faced a possible indictment for his role in Operation Freakout , the GO 's campaign against New York journalist Paulette Cooper , and in February 1980 he disappeared into deep cover in the company of two trusted Messengers , Pat and Anne Broeker . 
 For the first few years of the 1980s , Hubbard and the <unk> lived on the move , touring the Pacific Northwest in a recreational vehicle and living for a while in apartments in Newport Beach and Los Angeles . Hubbard used his time in hiding to write his first new works of science fiction for nearly thirty years — Battlefield Earth ( 1982 ) and Mission Earth , a ten @-@ volume series published between 1985 and 1987 . They received mixed responses ; as writer Jeff Walker puts it , they were " treated derisively by most critics but greatly admired by followers " . Hubbard also wrote and composed music for three of his albums , which were produced by the Church of Scientology . The book soundtrack Space Jazz was released in 1982 . Mission Earth and The Road to Freedom were released posthumously in 1986 . 
 In Hubbard 's absence , members of the Sea Org staged a takeover of the Church of Scientology and purged many veteran Scientologists . A young Messenger , David Miscavige , became Scientology 's de facto leader . Mary Sue Hubbard was forced to resign her position and her daughter Suzette became Miscavige 's personal maid . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 For the last two years of his life , Hubbard lived in a luxury Blue Bird motorhome on Whispering Winds , a 160 @-@ acre ranch near Creston , California . He remained in deep hiding while controversy raged in the outside world about whether he was still alive and if so , where . He spent his time " writing and researching " , according to a spokesperson , and pursued photography and music , overseeing construction work and checking on his animals . He repeatedly redesigned the property , spending millions of dollars remodeling the ranch house — which went virtually uninhabited — and building a quarter @-@ mile horse @-@ racing track with an observation tower , which reportedly was never used . 
 He was still closely involved in managing the Church of Scientology via secretly delivered orders and continued to receive large amounts of money , of which Forbes magazine estimated " at least $ 200 million [ was ] gathered in Hubbard 's name through 1982 . " In September 1985 , the IRS notified the Church that it was considering indicting Hubbard for tax fraud . 
 Hubbard suffered further ill @-@ health , including chronic pancreatitis , during his residence at Whispering Winds . He suffered a stroke on January 17 , 1986 , and died a week later . His body was cremated and the ashes were scattered at sea . Scientology leaders announced that his body had become an impediment to his work and that he had decided to " drop his body " to continue his research on another planet , having " learned how to do it without a body " . 
 Hubbard was survived by his wife Mary Sue and all of his children except his second son Quentin . His will provided a trust fund to support Mary Sue ; her children Arthur , Diana and Suzette ; and Katherine , the daughter of his first wife Polly . He disinherited two of his other children . L. Ron Hubbard , Jr. had become estranged , changed his name to " Ronald DeWolf " and , in 1982 , sued unsuccessfully for control of his father 's estate . Alexis Valerie , Hubbard 's daughter by his second wife Sara , had attempted to contact her father in 1971 . She was rebuffed with the implied claim that her real father was Jack Parsons rather than Hubbard , and that her mother had been a Nazi spy during the war . Both later accepted settlements when litigation was threatened . In 2001 , Diana and Suzette were reported to still be Church members , while Arthur had left and become an artist . Hubbard 's great @-@ grandson , Jamie DeWolf , is a noted slam poet . 
 The copyrights of his works and much of his estate and wealth were willed to the Church of Scientology . In a bulletin dated May 5 , 1980 , Hubbard told his followers to preserve his teachings until an eventual reincarnation when he would return " not as a religious leader but as a political one " . The Church of Spiritual Technology ( CST ) , a sister organization of the Church of Scientology , has engraved Hubbard 's entire corpus of Scientology and Dianetics texts on steel tablets stored in titanium containers . They are buried at the <unk> Base in a vault under a mountain near <unk> , New Mexico , on top of which the CST 's logo has been bulldozed on such a gigantic scale that it is visible from space . 
 Hubbard is the Guinness World Record holder for the most published author , with 1 @,@ 084 works , most translated book ( 70 languages for The Way to Happiness ) and most audiobooks ( 185 as of April 2009 ) . According to Galaxy Press , Hubbard 's Battlefield Earth has sold over 6 million copies and Mission Earth a further 7 million , with each of its ten volumes becoming New York Times bestsellers on their release ; however , the Los Angeles Times reported in 1990 that Hubbard 's followers had been buying large numbers of the books and re @-@ issuing them to stores , so as to boost sales figures . Opinions are divided about his literary legacy . Scientologists have written of their desire to " make Ron the most acclaimed and widely known author of all time " . The sociologist William Sims Bainbridge writes that even at his peak in the late 1930s Hubbard was regarded by readers of Astounding Science Fiction as merely " a passable , familiar author but not one of the best " , while by the late 1970s " the [ science fiction ] subculture wishes it could forget him " and fans gave him a worse rating than any other of the " Golden Age " writers . 
 Posthumously , the Los Angeles City Council named a part of the street close to the headquarters of Scientology in 1996 , as recognition of Hubbard . In 2011 , the West Valley City Council declared March 13 as L. Ron Hubbard Centennial <unk> April 2016 , the New Jersey State Board of Education approved Hubbard ’ s birthday as one of its religious holidays . 
 In 2004 , eighteen years after Hubbard 's death , the Church claimed eight million followers worldwide . According to religious scholar J. Gordon Melton , this is an overestimate , counting as Scientologists people who had merely bought a book . The City University of New York 's American Religious Identification Survey found that by 2009 only 25 @,@ 000 Americans identified as Scientologists . Hubbard 's presence still pervades Scientology . Every Church of Scientology maintains an office reserved for Hubbard , with a desk , chair and writing equipment , ready to be used . Lonnie D. <unk> notes that Hubbard was " the only source of the religion , and he has no successor " . Hubbard is referred to simply as " Source " within Scientology and the theological acceptability of any Scientology @-@ related activity is determined by how closely it adheres to Hubbard 's doctrines . Hubbard 's name and signature are official trademarks of the Religious Technology Center , established in 1982 to control and oversee the use of Hubbard 's works and Scientology 's trademarks and copyrights . The RTC is the central organization within Scientology 's complex corporate hierarchy and has put much effort into re @-@ checking the accuracy of all Scientology publications to " <unk> [ e ] the availability of the pure unadulterated writings of Mr. Hubbard to the coming generations " . 
 The Danish historian of religions Mikael Rothstein describes Scientology as " a movement focused on the figure of Hubbard " . He comments : " The fact that [ Hubbard 's ] life is mythologized is as obvious as in the cases of Jesus , Muhammad or Siddartha <unk> . This is how religion works . Scientology , however , rejects this analysis altogether , and goes to great lengths to defend every detail of Hubbard 's amazing and fantastic life as plain historical fact . " Hubbard is presented as " the master of a multitude of disciplines " who performed extraordinary feats as a photographer , composer , scientist , therapist , explorer , navigator , philosopher , poet , artist , humanitarian , adventurer , soldier , scout , musician and many other fields of endeavor . The Church of Scientology portrays Hubbard 's life and work as having proceeded seamlessly , " as if they were a continuous set of predetermined events and discoveries that unfolded through his lifelong research " even up to and beyond his death . 
 According to Rothstein 's assessment of Hubbard 's legacy , Scientology consciously aims to transfer the charismatic authority of Hubbard to institutionalize his authority over the organization , even after his death . Hubbard is presented as a virtually superhuman religious ideal just as Scientology itself is presented as the most important development in human history . As Rothstein puts it , " reverence for Scientology 's scripture is reverence for Hubbard , the man who in the Scientological perspective single @-@ handedly brought salvation to all human beings . " David G. Bromley of the University of Virginia comments that the real Hubbard has been transformed into a " prophetic persona " , " LRH " , which acts as the basis for his prophetic authority within Scientology and transcends his biographical history . According to Dorthe Refslund Christensen , Hubbard 's hagiography directly compares him with Buddha . Hubbard is viewed as having made eastern traditions more accessible by approaching them with a scientific attitude . " Hubbard is seen as the ultimate @-@ cross @-@ cultural savior ; he is thought to be able to release man from his miserable condition because he had the necessary background , and especially the right attitude . " 
 = = Biographies = = 
 Following Hubbard 's death , Bridge Publications has published several stand @-@ alone biographical accounts of his life . Marco Frenschkowski notes that " non @-@ Scientologist readers immediately recognize some parts of Hubbard 's life are here systematically left out : no information whatsoever is given about his private life ( his marriages , divorces , children ) , his legal affairs and so on . " The Church maintains an extensive website presenting the official version of Hubbard 's life . It also owns a number of properties dedicated to Hubbard including the Los Angeles @-@ based L. Ron Hubbard Life Exhibition ( a presentation of Hubbard 's life ) , the Author Services Center ( a presentation of Hubbard 's writings ) , and the L. Ron Hubbard House in Washington , D.C. 
 In late 2012 , Bridge published a comprehensive official biography of Hubbard , titled The L. Ron Hubbard Series : A Biographical Encyclopedia , written primarily by Dan Sherman , the official Hubbard biographer at the time . This most recent official Church of Scientology biography of Hubbard is a 17 volume series , with each volume focusing on a different aspect of Hubbard 's life , including his music , photography , geographic exploration , humanitarian work , and nautical career . It is advertised as a " <unk> Encyclopedia " and is primarily authored by the official biographer , Dan Sherman . 
 To date , there has not been a single volume comprehensive official biography published During his lifetime , a number of brief biographical sketches were also published in his Scientology books . The Church of Scientology issued " the only authorized LRH Biography " in October 1977 ( it has since been followed by the Sherman " <unk> Encyclopedia " ) . His life was illustrated in print in What Is Scientology ? , a glossy publication published in 1978 with paintings of Hubbard 's life contributed by his son Arthur . 
 In the late 1970s two men began to assemble a very different picture of Hubbard 's life . Michael Linn Shannon , a resident of Portland , Oregon , became interested in Hubbard 's life story after an encounter with a Scientology recruiter . Over the next four years he collected previously undisclosed records and documents . He intended to write an exposé of Hubbard and sent a copy of his findings and key records to a number of contacts but was unable to find a publisher . 
 Shannon 's findings were acquired by Gerry Armstrong , a Scientologist who had been appointed Hubbard 's official archivist . He had been given the job of assembling documents relating to Hubbard 's life for the purpose of helping Omar V. Garrison , a non @-@ Scientologist who had written two books sympathetic to Scientology , to write an official biography . However , the documents that he uncovered convinced both Armstrong and Garrison that Hubbard had systematically misrepresented his life . Garrison refused to write a " puff piece " and declared that he would not " repeat all the falsehoods they [ the Church of Scientology ] had perpetuated over the years " . He wrote a " warts and all " biography while Armstrong quit Scientology , taking five boxes of papers with him . The Church of Scientology and Mary Sue Hubbard sued for the return of the documents while settling out of court with Garrison , requiring him to turn over the nearly completed manuscript of the biography . In October 1984 Judge Paul G. Breckenridge ruled in Armstrong 's favor , saying : 
 The evidence portrays a man who has been virtually a pathological liar when it comes to his history , background and achievements . The writings and documents in evidence additionally reflect his egoism , greed , avarice , lust for power , and vindictiveness and aggressiveness against persons perceived by him to be disloyal or hostile . At the same time it appears that he is charismatic and highly capable of motivating , organizing , controlling , manipulating and inspiring his adherents . He has been referred to during the trial as a " genius , " a " revered person , " a man who was " viewed by his followers in awe . " Obviously , he is and has been a very complex person and that complexity is further reflected in his alter ego , the Church of Scientology . 
 In November 1987 , the British journalist and writer Russell Miller published Bare @-@ faced Messiah , the first full @-@ length biography of L. Ron Hubbard . He drew on Armstrong 's papers , official records and interviews with those who had known Hubbard including ex @-@ Scientologists and family members . The book was well @-@ received by reviewers but the Church of Scientology sought unsuccessfully to prohibit its publication on the grounds of copyright infringement . Other critical biographical accounts are found in Bent Corydon 's L. Ron Hubbard , Messiah or Madman ? ( 1987 ) and Jon Atack 's A Piece of Blue Sky ( 1990 ) . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Hubbard appears as a major character in Paul <unk> 's historical novel The Astounding , the Amazing , and the Unknown ( 2011 ) . 
 The title character in the 2012 film The Master drew comparisons with Hubbard . 
 = Cyclone Rosita = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Rosita was a tropical cyclone that affected northern Australia from 15 April through 21 April 2000 . Rosita was one of the most intense tropical cyclones to hit the west Kimberley coast in the last century . Crossing the coast as a Category 5 about 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) south of Broome on 20 April , Rosita caused severe damage in the Eco Beach resort and the vegetation around Broome . Its region of very destructive winds ( gusts exceeding 170 km / h ) passed south of Broome by only 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) . Cyclone Rosita was the first cyclone to directly hit Broome since Cyclone Lindsay in March 1985 . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A weak low in the Timor Sea formed on 14 April , initially moving west south @-@ west and turned southward during 16 April and 17 April . The low slowly strengthened and was named Rosita on 17 April , while located approximately 670 kilometres ( 420 mi ) to the north of Port Hedland at about 6 p.m. WST ( 1000 UTC ) . On the morning of 18 April , a ship reported a relatively high pressure of 997 hPa while passing very close to the centre of Cyclone Rosita , however , near @-@ storm @-@ force winds were reported . 
 Rosita then entered a very favourable environment which allowed rapid development to occur . On 19 April , Rosita turned to the east @-@ southeast and intensified rapidly to a Category 5 severe cyclone , with an estimated central pressure of 930 hPa . Wind gusts near the centre were estimated at about 290 km / h ( 180 mph ) . Rosita turned slightly to the southeast , crossing the coast at peak intensity , 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) south of Broome at around 1 a.m. WST on 20 April ( 1700 UTC 19 April ) . Cyclone Rosita was a small cyclone , but nevertheless was very intense and powerful . Its radius of gale @-@ force winds was just half the average for cyclones in Australia , and its core of very destructive winds extended just 25 kilometres ( 16 mi ) from its centre . This meant that Rosita ’ s region of very destructive winds missed Broome by only 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) to the south . Once over land , Rosita accelerated to speeds of up to 30 km / h ( 19 mph ) into the Great Sandy Desert , only weakening gradually . Rosita passed close to the community of Balgo at around 10 p.m. WST ( 1400 UTC ) on 20 April , about 700 kilometres ( 430 mi ) from the coast . Rosita was still estimated to be at Category 1 intensity when it passed near the community . Rosita ’ s remnants continued to bring flooding rains to central Australia . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 The Bureau of Meteorology predicted Rosita to hit near Broome at around midnight WST on 20 April ( 1600 UTC 19 April ) . Towns around the area were warned to prepare for one of the most powerful cyclones ever to threaten Australia . Very destructive winds with gusts to 260 km / h near the cyclone 's centre were expected . Residents of coastal towns were warned to expect dangerous storm tides – local emergency officials said an 8 metre ( 26 ft ) high tide was expected at that night . Tourists in the area were warned not to try to reach Broome . Chevron Australia said a tanker due to arrive on 18 April was asked to delay its arrival till 22 April because of the cyclone . Iron ore miners in Port Hedland and Dampier monitored Rosita 's approach . 
 Blue Alert warnings , which indicate that a cyclone may affect the warning area within 48 hours , were issued for Cyclone Rosita on the morning on 19 April . They were upgraded to a Yellow Alert – an indication that a cyclone appears inevitable to affect the warning area in 12 hours – at 1 pm , then to a Red Alert – meaning the cyclone is imminent – at 8 pm . In general , residents were well informed of the warnings through the radio . Residents from the low @-@ lying downtown areas evacuated to homes in more elevated locations . Two of the three available evacuation shelters were opened and co @-@ ordinated by the Department of Family and Children 's Services . 280 people took shelter in schools , while 78 residents from Bidyadanga were evacuated to Port Hedland or Broome . The people that stayed in the settlement sheltered in the church and family homes . Staff and guests at the Eco Beach tourist resort received warnings from Rosita early on 19 April and made a timely return to Broome before the cyclone hit . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The largest impact occurred near the core of very destructive winds about 40 km ( 25 mi ) south of Broome . The main homestead on the <unk> station , 28 km ( 17 mi ) to the south @-@ southeast of Broome , received only minor structural damage , however the station was in the region of the dangerous storm surge . Reports from the <unk> station , situated 2 @.@ 5 km ( 1 @.@ 6 mi ) inland from coastal mangroves , showed that the station ’ s front gate had debris laid up to the second shoreline , about a metre ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) above mean ground level . Another station homestead , 7 km ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) west , was covered by coastal dunes but escaped major damage to its structure . 
 The most severe structural damage occurred near Cape Villaret , 40 km ( 25 mi ) south @-@ southwest of Broome . The Eco @-@ beach tourist resort and the <unk> station were devastated . The area around the homestead was totally devastated . A caravan parked nearby was blown away and crumbled , and a semi trailer was blown to its side . The vegetation , which used to be very lush , was stripped of all leaves by the destructive winds which carried airborne salt and sand . The damage to the vegetation seemed to be worse than the tree damage seen in Exmouth caused by Cyclone Vance in March 1999 . About 60 km ( 37 mi ) of fencing was pushed over , all windmills were destroyed , and about 200 head of cattle were lost , mostly due to drowning from the storm surge . However , the path of destruction to the vegetation was estimated to be just 15 to 20 km wide , reflecting Rosita 's small size . 
 The Eco Beach tourist resort was only built to resist wind gusts of Category 3 strength . Only about 10 of the 40 accommodation huts were left standing . Some of the huts were removed from their concrete foundations , and were carried by the winds and smashed into other buildings . Showing how strong Rosita 's winds were , a sea container weighing 2 @.@ 5 tonnes ( 5500 lb ) and filled with 2 to 3 tonnes ( 4400 to 6600 lb ) of equipment was blown 700 m ( 0 @.@ 4 mile ) across sand dunes . The magnitude of the devastation to the vegetation in this area resembled a place being destroyed by bushfires . 
 In the town of Broome , the maximum wind gust recorded was 153 km / h ( 95 mph ) , recorded at the Broome aerodrome , as well as recording 163 @.@ 8 mm ( 6 @.@ 45 in ) of rain for the 24 hours up to 9 a.m. WST ( 0100 UTC ) on 20 April . Vegetation in this area were badly damaged , particularly the African Mahogany trees which were either snapped off or uprooted . Parts of Cable Beach were severely eroded . An area which used to be covered with sand was completely covered by rocks . The eastern side of Roebuck Bay had evidence of severe erosion of the coastal terrain . At Broome 's only banana plantation , almost all crops were completely lost , with 10 out of 18 @,@ 000 plants left surviving . Fortunately , most buildings in the town of Broome remained unharmed , although power supplies were cut to many parts of Broome for several days . The Broome power station was initially shut down at approximately midnight on 20 April amid fears of damage to the power reticulation infrastructure . 
 Some damages to trees and property were reported in the community of Balgo Hills , located in the Great Sandy Desert approximately 700 km ( 430 mi ) inland from the coast . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The extended period of power outage was a major problem for the residents in Broome . Residents had to wait for days for the power supply to be restored . As all of the distribution lines were above ground , Broome was particularly vulnerable to power outages during cyclones . Linesmen from Western Power were called in from afar to inspect all high voltage distribution lines before these could be re @-@ energised . Western Power inspectors were also flown in from around the state to commence disconnections of properties suspected to have suffered water intrusion . These properties had to be tested before having supply reconnected . The majority of residential properties had power restored back on 30 April , 11 days after Rosita struck . Television and radio were limited to transmissions from Perth , and this proved difficult to access information about any available supplies in the town . People had difficulties purchasing food and supplies because supermarkets were closed or had no power and there was no fresh produce arriving . However , power was restored a few days after the cyclone hit . There were only minor interruptions to the water and sewerage infrastructure . 
 The Western Australia State Emergency Service ( SES ) was responsible for responses relating to the damage from Rosita . SES workers worked to help the community recover , <unk> damaged roofs and clearing debris from roads and around houses where it limited access from residents . Most work involved clearing vegetation from power lines to enable Western Power to begin repairs . Volunteers from other Western Australian cities and towns such as Perth , Bunbury , Karratha , Derby and Tom Price had arrived to assist with requests for help . During the recovery period , the SES earned huge public respect , and residents were pleased with the quick response of the SES . 
 The damage from Rosita made a large impact on the tourist industry . The time of impact happened just before the Easter and ANZAC Day Holiday period . Easter is considered to be the beginning of the tourist season , so it is usually expected that there will be an increase of visitors into Broome at this time . Many visitors delayed or cancelled their trips , and some cut short their holiday . Car hire companies that had been booked out for the holiday period had people returning vehicles early . 
 The impact of Rosita has alerted residents to prepare for any cyclones that may threaten the town in the future . Many people were surprised that Cyclone Rosita was going to hit , as cyclones are rare in Broome , and many thought the cyclone season was already over . However , many residents also thought that the cyclone 's impact strengthened the community as a whole and " brought people closer together " . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 The name Rosita was removed from the official list of tropical cyclone names set out by the Tropical Cyclone Warning Centre in Perth . It was replaced with the name Robyn . 
 = Family Goy = 
 " Family Goy " is the second episode of the eighth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on October 4 , 2009 . The episode features Irish Catholic Peter after his wife , Lois , discovers that her mother is Jewish , and begins her struggle to adapt to her newfound heritage . Meanwhile , Peter begins to embrace his wife 's new religion , but after a spiritual visit from his deceased Irish Catholic stepfather , Francis , he becomes increasingly anti @-@ semitic towards Lois and the family 's religion . 
 First announced at the 2009 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , the episode was written by Mark Hentemann and directed by James Purdum . It received mixed reviews from critics for its storyline and cultural references , in addition to receiving criticism from the Parents Television Council . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 9 @.@ 66 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Jeff Bergman , Max Burkholder , Charles Durning , Ben Stein and Bill Woodson , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . " Family Goy " was released on DVD along with seven other episodes from the season on June 15 , 2010 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While at the Drunken Clam , Peter falls in love with a cardboard cutout of Kathy Ireland . He takes her home and has an ' affair ' with her . Soon he is caught by Lois who calls him an idiot . Peter introduces Kathy to the kids as their new mom , but after finding that Chris took her into his room , he angrily confronts her and ends up ripping her in half . He tearfully buries her in the yard and begs Lois for forgiveness . Lois forgives him and they have sex and Lois is shocked when Peter discovers a lump on her breast , causing her to go to the hospital the next day to have it tested for breast cancer . The test comes back negative , but while looking through her medical records , Dr Hartman discovers that Lois ' mother is a Jewish Holocaust survivor , making Lois and her children Jewish by heritage . Barbara confirms her heritage , and Carter admits he kept it a family secret so that they could join the country club . Despite not being Jewish himself , Peter takes to it eagerly , much to Lois ' frustration . That night , Peter is visited by the ghost of his adoptive father , Francis , who warns him that he will go to Hell for not being Catholic . The next day , Peter decides to re @-@ convert the family to Catholicism and becomes prejudiced against Lois ' heritage , becoming anti @-@ Semitic . 
 Taking advice from her mother not to let Peter suppress her identity , like her own husband did to her , Lois decides to hold a Passover Seder , which Peter tries to ruin so he can celebrate Easter . He shows up in an Easter bunny costume while drunk . Jesus appears and points out that Catholicism and Judaism are very similar . He then tells Peter that he should treat people of different faiths as fairly as he wants to be treated . Peter and Lois apologize to each other , but are at a loss for what religion they should follow . After being asked this by Peter , Jesus answers " Six of one , they 're all complete crap . " and then Brian ( offscreen ) chimes in from the other side of the room , responding " Thank you ! " 
 = = Production and development = = 
 First announced at the 2009 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International in San Diego , California on July 25 , 2009 , by future showrunner Mark Hentemann , the episode was directed by supervising director James Purdum , written by Hentemann , shortly after the conclusion of the seventh production season . 
 " Family Goy " , along with the seven other episodes from Family Guy 's eighth season , were released on a three @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on June 15 , 2010 . The sets included brief audio commentaries by Seth MacFarlane and various crew and cast members for several episodes , a collection of deleted scenes , a special mini @-@ feature which discussed the process behind animating " Road to the Multiverse " , and mini @-@ feature entitled Family Guy Karaoke . This episode uses a story element from " Death is a Bitch " , an episode written by Ricky Blitt , in which Lois discovers a lump on Peter 's breast , thinking it would be cancer , whereas the opposite occurred in this episode . 
 Actors Ben Stein and Charles Durning guest starred in the episode as Rabbi Goldberg and Francis Griffin , respectively . Rabbi Goldberg and Max Weinstein , two Jewish characters whom Lois and Peter seek advice from after discovering Lois 's heritage , made their second appearance in the series , having previously appeared in the third season episode " When You Wish Upon a Weinstein " , which was originally banned from airing on network television . However , Peter Riegert did not reprise his role of Max Weinstein . Instead , voice actor Jeff Bergman , notable for playing Fred Flintstone in the show , voices him . In addition to Stein , Durning , Bergman , and the regular cast , child actor Max Burkholder and voice actor William Woodson guest starred in the episode . Recurring guest voice actors Johnny Brennan , actor Ralph Garman , writer Mark Hentemann , writer Danny Smith , writer Alec Sulkin , and writer John Viener also made minor appearances . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 " Family Goy " contained various cultural references . The episode opens with a parody of the opening sequence of The All @-@ New Super Friends Hour , with the central characters of Family Guy replacing The All @-@ New Super Friends Hour 's main characters , except for Meg . When Peter first sees the Kathy Ireland cutout , he starts to sing the Billy Ocean song , " Suddenly " . As Lois collects the mail Peter attempts to shoot her , topless and armed with a sniper rifle , but instead hits the mailbox which is reminiscent of a scene in Schindler 's List of Amon Göth shooting down Jews in the Kraków @-@ Płaszów concentration camp in occupied Poland . Stewie 's prayer over the candles is a real prayer that women recite before a non @-@ Sabbath festival 's start , however , the prayer turns into a reference to the 1984 adventure film Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom where Indian priest Mola Ram takes out the heart of a man during a ritual . Peter references William Shakespeare 's play Macbeth , but the cutaway gag shows a battle in a spaceship , to which Peter admits that he is not very familiar with Shakespeare 's works . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Family Goy " was first broadcast in the United States and Canada on Fox on October 4 , 2009 . The episode was viewed by 9 @.@ 66 million people and received a 5 @.@ 4 / 8 Nielsen Rating , making " Family Goy " the ninth most @-@ watched show of the night it was broadcast . 
 The episode was met with mixed critical responses . Ahsan Haque of IGN praised the second half of the episode but felt that the Kathy Ireland plot was too long . In his review , he commented " It 's definitely meant for people who are open @-@ minded to this kind of humor , and can make sure they treat the subject matter purely as comedy and not any manner of social commentary or prejudice . Take away the slow start , and this episode managed to really deliver some memorable shocking comedy . " TV Guide critic Alex Rocha praised the show 's League of Justice opening sequence and the Kathy Ireland plot but reacted negatively to the second half of the episode , stating that he " dozed off " during the last fifteen minutes . TV Guide also listed the episode on the " TV hot list " of October 4 . The Toronto Star noted the episode was " worth watching " . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club gave the episode a negative review , giving it a C — grade and concluding that , " Overall , the episode was just an excuse to drag out a bunch of tired Jewish jokes and also have Peter briefly descend into anti @-@ Semitism " . Though he mostly disliked the episode , VanDerWerff praised Stewie 's part in the episode , as well as the Shakespeare cutaway gag and a cutaway that featured Peter getting into fight with a cat . Jewish Journal critic Adam Willis commented " My hope is that the series will roast the familiar Jewish themes introduced in “ Family Goy , ” rather than continuing on the Jews @-@ as @-@ targets route . The show has regularly featured some inspiring Jewish gags – both in good taste and bad . And while Hebrew community in @-@ jokes would be better received by Jewish viewers , the likely reality is the Holocaust humor will continue to dominate . " 
 Media watchdog group the Parents Television Council , a frequent critic of the show , named " Family Goy " its " Worst TV Show of the Week " for the week ending October 9 , 2009 , criticizing what it saw as an anti @-@ Semitic plot . 
 = Attack of Mark 's Clone = 
 " Attack of Mark 's Clone " is the sixth episode of the second season of the American animated television series Ugly Americans , which aired on Comedy Central in the United States on August 4 , 2011 . In the episode , Callie creates a clone of Mark that will guarantee the Department of Integration 's win in a bowling tournament , but the plan backfires when the clone frames her for murdering Twayne 's new assistant , Tad . 
 The episode was written by Adam Stein and series developer David M. Stern , and directed by Richard Ferguson @-@ Hull and series creator Devin Clark . The episode features guest performances by comedians Kate McKinnon and Jay <unk> . According to Nielsen Media Research , " Attack of Mark 's Clone " was watched by a season low of 730 @,@ 000 viewers in its original airing . The episode received positive reviews from critics , who deemed it solid . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Callie Maggotbone creates a clone of Mark Lilly to replace him in the Department of Integration 's ( D.O.I. ) bowling tournament , as the real Mark is a " terrible bowler " . The clone , who has blonde hair instead of brown , has a sadistic worldview and hides the real Mark in his closet . The following day , Twayne Boneraper hires a new assistant named Tad to do his dirty work . Tad 's first action is to reassign Callie , whom he thinks is a saboteur , to a useless department in sub @-@ basement 37 . Tad also cuts Mark 's department 's budget by 80 % , but is rather impressed by the Clone Mark 's attitude . The next day at his group therapy session with Mark 's students , Clone Mark turns it into a fight club to train them for the bowling tournament . Later , Clone Mark finds Callie 's diary at her apartment and finds out that she plans to murder him after the tournament and then get the real Mark back . Infuriated , he decides to murder Tad and frames Callie for the crime by using a trident from her apartment as the weapon and leaving it at the scene . Callie gets hauled in by Frank Grimes and his crew , but Grimes finds Mark 's behavior strange and decides to investigate further . 
 Grimes visits Callie at the prison , but she cannot reveal the truth because Clone Mark will kill the real Mark if she tells anyone that he framed her . Grimes goes to Mark 's apartment and discovers the real Mark tied up in his own closet . However , Clone Mark appears behind him and shoots him in both his legs . Grimes , as he tries to fire back , ends up blinding himself . Clone Mark has grown tired of bowling and decides to leave the city . The next day , the real Mark tries to free Callie from prison , but he must find evidence to prove her innocence . Mark finds his clone at a tropical island , where he confesses that he killed Tad . The clone is then gassed to death and his body is scrapped for parts , which gives Grimes new legs and eyes . At the bowling tournament , Mark wonders where his clone came from , and Callie says that he " will never know " . 
 = = Production = = 
 Initially titled " The Clone Wars " , the episode 's title was later changed to " Attack of Mark 's Clone " . Series developer David M. Stern wrote the episode with Adam Stein , and Richard Ferguson @-@ Hull and series creator Devin Clark directed it . Stein and Mick Kelly served as staff writers . In an interview with Kevin Fitzpatrick of UGO , Clark spoke of the episode and proclaimed that it was a " really fun opportunity " to see what Mark 's clone would be like , calling him an " Agro @-@ Mark " . He said that Matt Oberg , the voice of Mark , voiced the clone as a " much more gruff individual " . Clark elaborated , " It 's really funny . It 's like seeing Mark , since we kind of play him so neutered most of the time , it 's like seeing him as like this jerk , it 's hilarious , it 's a very funny story . " Executive producer Daniel Powell said that Clone Mark " glove slaps everyone [ and smokes ] a cigarette instead of putting it out before the office " . " Attack of Mark 's Clone " was the eighth episode to be produced for the second season . In addition to the regular cast , the episode features appearances by recurring guest voice actors Pete Holmes and Mike O 'Gorman . Comedians Kate McKinnon and Jay <unk> guest starred in the episode . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode originally aired on Comedy Central in the United States on August 4 , 2011 . The episode was viewed by an estimated 730 @,@ 000 viewers and received a 0 @.@ 3 rating among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 , according to Nielsen Media Research . This means that it was seen by 0 @.@ 3 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds . The episode marked a decrease in ratings from the previous episode , " The Ring of Powers " , which scored a 0 @.@ 4 rating and was watched by 870 @,@ 000 viewers . The total viewership for " Attack of Mark 's Clone " made it the season 's least watched episode . 
 Critical reception of the episode was positive . Charles Webb of MTV Geek favored it over season one episodes , which emphasized " generating a gag a minute within a paper @-@ thin plot " . Webb wrote , " The Ugly Americans team has been on a roll much of this season , going three for three with this episode , last week 's ' The Ring of Powers , ' and the previous week 's ' G.I. Twayne ' . " Ology writer Josh Harrison was also positive of the episode , rating it 7 @.@ 7 out of 10 and writing : " ' Attack of Mark 's Clone ' takes a pretty archetypal plotline — the evil duplicate — and translates it into the zany twisting storytelling we 've come to know and love . " Harrison praised the episode for giving viewers insight on the character Mark , and concluded : " This was a solid , if one @-@ note , episode of Ugly Americans . The ongoing jokes ... helped shore up the limited scope of the situation . " 
 = San Antonio Bay = 
 San Antonio Bay is a bay on the Texas Gulf coast situated between Matagorda and Aransas Bay . It consists mainly of the combined waters of the San Antonio and Guadalupe rivers , and is located at the mouth of the Guadalupe River , about 55 miles ( 89 km ) northeast of Corpus Christi and 130 miles ( 209 km ) southeast of San Antonio . It is protected from the Gulf of Mexico by Matagorda Island , leaving only relatively small and distant outlets to the Gulf for little mixing of bay and Gulf waters . The remoteness of the bay has prevented the establishment of major ports as seen on Aransas and Corpus Christi Bay , to the south . 
 The Aransas National Wildlife Refuge is found on the southwest portion of the bay . The diverse wildlife on these shores make up for the lack of a sizable human settlement . 
 = = History = = 
 The Karankawa Indians used the land near the Guadalupe River delta and San Antonio Bay for camping purposes . They also populated Matagorda Island on the opposite side of the bay . Captain Luis Cazorla of Presidio La Bahía crossed San Antonio Bay to visit the island in 1776 , and discovered that the Indians had killed the mates of a shipwrecked British trading vessel . For a short time , he convinced the Indian leaders not to kill shipwreck survivors on the island . An effort was made to convert the Indians with the establishment of Mission Refugio on San Antonio Bay in 1793 , after Fray José Francisco Garza found a shallow crossing that the Indians used to travel to the mainland . To prevent the Indians from using Matagorda Island as a hiding place to stage attacks , La Bahía commandant Juan Cortés burned and cut brush around the point of crossing . No permanent colony was ever established on the island . 
 After the arrival of white settlers to the <unk> of <unk> in the 19th century , the Karankawa began to commit offenses against the settlers , including the unsanctioned slaughter of their livestock . As a result , the settlers engaged the Indians at the 1852 Battle of Hynes Bay , near the San Antonio Bay extension of Hynes Bay . The Karankawa were swiftly defeated , and the survivors agreed to never return ; finding refuge across the Rio Grande in Tamaulipas . A few years later , the Hynes extension began to fill with mud , leaving it shallow and hard to navigate . Reports from <unk> suggest that alligators infested the bay , killing a few residents . 
 At the beginning of the 20th century , Preston R. Austin set out to build a new port on the western shore . He established the town of Austwell in 1911 , and quickly began dredging in 1914 to build a channel . In the early stages of development , the channel filled with mud and was abandoned . Meanwhile , on the eastern shore , the city of Seadrift , which had been established following the American Civil War , began to develop into a place of interest for fishing and shipping . The town , which was most likely named for floating debris swept ashore by the Guadalupe River , was incorporated in 1912 , and by 1914 had a population of 1 @,@ 250 . The growth subsided in 1919 , after a hurricane ravaged the area . In 1926 , only 321 lived in the town . The population slowly recovered , and had surpassed its original peak in 1990 , following a wave of Vietnamese refugees , who emigrated to the city after the Vietnam War . In 2000 , the city had 1 @,@ 352 residents . 
 = = Features = = 
 The land near the bay lies on the Texas Coastal Plain . It consists of grassy prairies , which support conifers and water @-@ tolerant hardwoods . Most of the surrounding land is used for agricultural purposes with the exception of Aransas National Wildlife Refuge , which is preserved for wildlife . 
 On average , the San Antonio Bay system is 2 meters ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) deep , and covers approximately 531 square kilometers ( 205 sq mi ) . The system is made up of the bay itself and its extensions . The main extensions include : Espiritu Santo Bay , to the bay 's east ; Hynes Bay , to the northwest , and Guadalupe Bay due north . 
 Every second , approximately 116 cubic meters ( 31 @,@ 000 U.S. gal ) of water flows into the bay . The exchange with the Gulf of Mexico occurs at Cedar Bayou and Pass Cavallo . As a result of the seawater exchange , the bay 's salinity is 13 parts per thousand ( ppt ) , compared to the seawater average of 35 ppt . There is very little seawater exchange , with most of the bay 's waters coming from the freshwater flows of the converged San Antonio and Guadalupe rivers . 
 = = Ecosystem = = 
 A wide variety of wildlife can be found in and around San Antonio Bay . According to Texas Parks and Wildlife , the following fish have been caught in the bay : palmetto bass , striped bass , hardhead catfish , black drum , red drum , crevalle jack , southern kingfish , ladyfish , <unk> flounder , pinfish , spotted seatrout , and the sheepshead . 
 The shores along the bay , specifically the Aransas National Wildlife Refuge , are home to countless birds including the endangered whooping crane , pelicans , herons , egrets , roseate spoonbills , shorebirds , ducks , and geese . American alligators , collared peccaries , feral hogs , coyotes , bobcats , raccoon and white @-@ tailed deer as well as clams and crabs are included among the bay 's diverse wildlife . Several pelicans that had been rescued and cleaned after the Deepwater Horizon oil spill , were brought to the shore of San Antonio Bay in June 2010 . 
 = = Industry = = 
 Nearly detached from the Gulf of Mexico by barrier islands , San Antonio Bay does not support a large shipping industry . The only port of merit on the bay is Seadrift , where a shipping channel has been dredged to the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway . Most inhabitants near the bay work at chemical , crab @-@ picking , and aluminum plants . 
 For centuries , oyster farming has been a mainstay of the surrounding economy . However , in December 2009 , commercial harvesting was suspended after the norovirus was discovered in several exported crops , resulting in a recall . 
 = The Sun Also Rises = 
 The Sun Also Rises is a 1926 novel written by American author Ernest Hemingway about a group of American and British expatriates who travel from Paris to the Festival of San Fermín in Pamplona to watch the running of the bulls and the bullfights . An early and enduring modernist novel , it received mixed reviews upon publication . Hemingway biographer Jeffrey Meyers writes that it is " recognized as Hemingway 's greatest work " , and Hemingway scholar Linda Wagner @-@ Martin calls it his most important novel . The novel was published in the United States in October 1926 by the publishing house Scribner 's . A year later , the London publishing house Jonathan Cape published the novel with the title of Fiesta . Since then it has been continuously in print . 
 Hemingway began writing the novel on his birthday ( 21 July ) in 1925 , finishing the draft manuscript barely two months later in September . After setting aside the manuscript for a short period , he worked on revisions during the winter of 1926 . The basis for the novel was Hemingway 's 1925 trip to Spain . The setting was unique and memorable , showing seedy café life in Paris , and the excitement of the Pamplona festival , with a middle section devoted to descriptions of a fishing trip in the Pyrenees . Hemingway 's sparse writing style , combined with his restrained use of description to convey characterizations and action , became known as demonstrating the Iceberg Theory . 
 The novel is a roman à clef ; the characters are based on real people of Hemingway 's circle , and the action is based on real events . In the novel , Hemingway presents his notion that the " Lost Generation " , considered to have been decadent , dissolute and irretrievably damaged by World War I , was resilient and strong . Additionally , Hemingway investigates the themes of love , death , renewal in nature , and the nature of masculinity . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the 1920s Hemingway lived in Paris , was foreign correspondent for the Toronto Star , and traveled to places such as Smyrna to report about the Greco – Turkish War . He wanted to use his journalism experience to write fiction , believing that a story could be based on real events when a writer distilled his own experiences in such a way that , according to biographer Jeffrey Meyers , " what he made up was truer than what he remembered " . 
 With his wife Hadley Richardson , Hemingway first visited the Festival of San Fermín in Pamplona , Spain , in 1923 , where he became fascinated by bullfighting . The couple returned to Pamplona in 1924 — enjoying the trip immensely — this time accompanied by Chink Dorman @-@ Smith , John Dos Passos , and Donald Ogden Stewart and his wife . The two returned a third time in June 1925 . That year , they brought with them a different group of American and British expatriates : Hemingway 's Michigan boyhood friend Bill Smith , Stewart , recently divorced Duff , Lady Twysden , her lover Pat Guthrie , and Harold Loeb . In Pamplona , the group quickly disintegrated . Hemingway , attracted to Duff , was jealous of Loeb , who had recently been on a romantic getaway with her ; by the end of the week the two men had a public fistfight . Against this background was the influence of the young matador from Ronda , Cayetano Ordóñez , whose brilliance in the bullring affected the spectators . Ordóñez honored Hemingway 's wife by presenting her , from the bullring , with the ear of a bull he killed . Outside of Pamplona , the fishing trip to the Irati River ( near <unk> in Navarre ) was marred by polluted water . 
 Hemingway had intended to write a nonfiction book about bullfighting , but then decided that the week 's experiences had presented him with enough material for a novel . A few days after the fiesta ended , on his birthday ( 21 July ) , he began writing what would eventually become The Sun Also Rises . By 17 August , with 14 chapters written and a working title of Fiesta chosen , Hemingway returned to Paris . He finished the draft on 21 September 1925 , writing a foreword the following weekend and changing the title to The Lost Generation . 
 A few months later , in December 1925 , Hemingway and his wife spent the winter in Schruns , Austria , where he began revising the manuscript extensively . Pauline Pfeiffer joined them in January , and — against Richardson 's advice — urged him to sign a contract with Scribner 's . Hemingway left Austria for a quick trip to New York to meet with the publishers , and on his return , during a stop in Paris , began an affair with Pauline . He returned to Schruns to finish the revisions in March . In June , he was in Pamplona with both Richardson and Pfeiffer . On their return to Paris , Richardson asked for a separation , and left for the south of France . In August , alone in Paris , Hemingway completed the proofs , dedicating the novel to his wife and son . After the publication of the book in October , Richardson asked for a divorce ; Hemingway subsequently gave her the book 's royalties . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Hemingway apparently maneuvered Boni & Liveright into terminating their contract so he could have The Sun Also Rises published by Scribner 's instead . In December 1925 he quickly wrote The Torrents of Spring — a satirical novella attacking Sherwood Anderson — and sent it to his publishers Boni & Liveright . His three @-@ book contract with them included a termination clause should they reject a single submission . <unk> by the satire against one of their most saleable authors , Boni & Liveright immediately rejected it and terminated the contract . Within weeks Hemingway signed a contract with Scribner 's , who agreed to publish The Torrents of Spring and all of his subsequent work . 
 Scribner 's published the novel on 22 October 1926 . Its first edition consisted of <unk> copies , selling at $ 2 @.@ 00 per copy . <unk> <unk> illustrated the dust jacket with a Hellenistic design of a seated , robed woman , her head bent to her shoulder , eyes closed , one hand holding an apple , her shoulders and a thigh exposed . Editor Maxwell Perkins intended " Cleon 's respectably sexy " design to attract " the feminine readers who control the destinies of so many novels " . Two months later the book was in a second printing with 7000 copies sold . Subsequent printings were ordered ; by 1928 , after the publication of Hemingway 's short story collection Men Without Women , the novel was in its eighth printing . In 1927 the novel was published in the UK by Jonathan Cape , titled Fiesta , without the two epigraphs . Two decades later , in 1947 , Scribner 's released three of Hemingway 's works as a boxed set , including The Sun Also Rises , A Farewell to Arms , and For Whom the Bell Tolls . 
 By 1983 , The Sun Also Rises had been in print continuously since its publication in 1926 , and was likely one of the most translated titles in the world . At that time Scribner 's began to print cheaper mass @-@ market paperbacks of the book , in addition to the more expensive trade paperbacks already in print . In the 1990s , British editions were titled Fiesta : The Sun Also Rises . In 2006 Simon & Schuster began to produce audiobook versions of Hemingway 's novels , including The Sun Also Rises . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 On the surface , the novel is a love story between the protagonist Jake Barnes — a man whose war wound has made him impotent — and the promiscuous divorcée usually identified as Lady Brett Ashley . ( Since the title belonged to her husband , she should actually have been addressed as Brett , Lady Ashley . ) Barnes is an expatriate American journalist living in Paris , while Brett is a twice @-@ divorced Englishwoman with bobbed hair and numerous love affairs , and embodies the new sexual freedom of the 1920s . Brett 's affair with Robert Cohn causes Jake to be upset and break off his friendship with Cohn ; her seduction of the 19 @-@ year @-@ old matador Romero causes Jake to lose his good reputation among the Spaniards in Pamplona . 
 Book One is set in the café society of young American expatriates in Paris . In the opening scenes , Jake plays tennis with his college friend Robert Cohn , picks up a prostitute ( Georgette ) , and runs into Brett and Count <unk> in a nightclub . Later , Brett tells Jake she loves him , but they both know that they have no chance at a stable relationship . 
 In Book Two , Jake is joined by Bill Gorton , recently arrived from New York , and Brett 's fiancé Mike Campbell , who arrives from Scotland . Jake and Bill travel south and meet Robert Cohn at Bayonne for a fishing trip in the hills northeast of Pamplona . Instead of fishing , Cohn stays in Pamplona to wait for the overdue Brett and Mike . Cohn had an affair with Brett a few weeks earlier and still feels possessive of her despite her engagement to Mike . After Jake and Bill enjoy five days of fishing the streams near <unk> , they rejoin the group in Pamplona . 
 All begin to drink heavily . Cohn is resented by the others , who taunt him with anti @-@ semitic remarks . During the fiesta the characters drink , eat , watch the running of the bulls , attend bullfights , and bicker with each other . Jake introduces Brett to the 19 @-@ year @-@ old matador Romero at the Hotel Montoya ; she is smitten with him and seduces him . The jealous tension among the men builds — Jake , Campbell , Cohn , and Romero each want Brett . Cohn , who had been a champion boxer in college , has a fistfight with Jake and Mike , and another with Romero , whom he beats up . Despite his injuries , Romero continues to perform brilliantly in the bullring . 
 Book Three shows the characters in the aftermath of the fiesta . Sober again , they leave Pamplona ; Bill returns to Paris , Mike stays in Bayonne , and Jake goes to San Sebastián on the northern coast of Spain . As Jake is about to return to Paris , he receives a telegram from Brett asking for help ; she had gone to Madrid with Romero . He finds her there in a cheap hotel , without money , and without Romero . She announces she has decided to go back to Mike . The novel ends with Jake and Brett in a taxi speaking of the things that might have been . 
 = = Major themes = = 
 = = = Paris and the Lost Generation = = = 
 The first book of The Sun Also Rises is set in mid @-@ 1920s Paris . Americans were drawn to Paris in the Roaring Twenties by the favorable exchange rate , with as many as 200 @,@ 000 English @-@ speaking expatriates living there . The Paris Tribune reported in 1925 that Paris had an American Hospital , an American Library , and an American Chamber of Commerce . Many American writers were disenchanted with the US , where they found less artistic freedom than in Europe . Hemingway had more artistic freedom in Paris than in the US at a period when Ulysses , written by his friend James Joyce , was banned and burned in New York . 
 The themes of The Sun Also Rises appear in its two epigraphs . The first is an allusion to the " Lost Generation , " a term coined by Gertrude Stein referring to the post @-@ war generation ; the other epigraph is a long quotation from Ecclesiastes : " What profit hath a man of all his labour which he <unk> under the sun ? One generation passeth away , and another generation cometh : but the earth abideth for ever . The sun also <unk> , and the sun goeth down , and <unk> to his place where he arose . " Hemingway told his editor Max Perkins that the book was not so much about a generation being lost , but that " the earth abideth forever . " He thought the characters in The Sun Also Rises may have been " battered " but were not lost . 
 Hemingway scholar Wagner @-@ Martin writes that Hemingway wanted the book to be about morality , which he emphasized by changing the working title from Fiesta to The Sun Also Rises . Wagner @-@ Martin claims that the book can be read either as a novel about bored expatriates or as a morality tale about a protagonist who searches for integrity in an immoral world . Months before Hemingway left for Pamplona , the press was depicting the Parisian Latin Quarter , where he lived , as decadent and depraved . He began writing the story of a matador corrupted by the influence of the Latin Quarter crowd ; he expanded it into a novel about Jake Barnes at risk of being corrupted by wealthy and inauthentic expatriates . 
 The characters form a group , sharing similar norms , and each greatly affected by the war . Hemingway captures the angst of the age and transcends the love story of Brett and Jake , although they are representative of the period : Brett is starved for reassurance and love and Jake is sexually maimed . His wound symbolizes the disability of the age , the disillusion , and the frustrations felt by an entire generation . 
 Hemingway thought he lost touch with American values while living in Paris , but his biographer Michael Reynolds claims the opposite , seeing evidence of the author 's midwestern American values in the novel . Hemingway admired hard work . He portrayed the matadors and the prostitutes , who work for a living , in a positive manner , but Brett , who prostitutes herself , is emblematic of " the rotten crowd " living on inherited money . It is Jake , the working journalist , who pays the bills again and again when those who can pay do not . Hemingway shows , through Jake 's actions , his disapproval of the people who did not pay up . Reynolds says that Hemingway shows the tragedy , not so much of the decadence of the Montparnasse crowd , but of the decline in American values of the period . As such , the author created an American hero who is impotent and powerless . Jake becomes the moral center of the story . He never considers himself part of the expatriate crowd because he is a working man ; to Jake a working man is genuine and authentic , and those who do not work for a living spend their lives posing . 
 = = = Women and love = = = 
 The twice @-@ divorced Brett Ashley represented the liberated New Woman ( in the 1920s , divorces were common and easy to be had in Paris ) . James Nagel writes that , in Brett , Hemingway created one of the more fascinating women in 20th @-@ century American literature . Sexually promiscuous , she is a denizen of Parisian nightlife and cafés . In Pamplona she sparks chaos : in her presence , the men drink too much and fight . She also seduces the young bullfighter Romero and becomes a Circe in the festival . Critics describe her variously as complicated , elusive , and enigmatic ; Donald Daiker writes that Hemingway " treats her with a delicate balance of sympathy and antipathy . " She is vulnerable , forgiving , independent — qualities that Hemingway juxtaposes with the other women in the book , who are either prostitutes or overbearing nags . 
 Nagel considers the novel a tragedy . Jake and Brett have a relationship that becomes destructive because their love cannot be consummated . Conflict over Brett destroys Jake 's friendship with Robert Cohn , and her behavior in Pamplona affects Jake 's hard @-@ won reputation among the Spaniards . Meyers sees Brett as a woman who wants sex without love while Jake can only give her love without sex . Although Brett sleeps with many men , it is Jake she loves . Dana Fore writes that Brett is willing to be with Jake in spite of his disability , in a " non @-@ traditional erotic relationship . " Other critics such as Leslie Fiedler and Nina <unk> see her as a supreme bitch ; Fiedler sees Brett as one of the " outstanding examples of Hemingway 's ' bitch women . ' " Jake becomes bitter about their relationship , as when he says , " Send a girl off with a man .... Now go and bring her back . And sign the wire with love . " 
 Critics interpret the Jake – Brett relationship in various ways . Daiker suggests that Brett 's behavior in Madrid — after Romero leaves and when Jake arrives at her summons — reflects her immorality . Scott Donaldson thinks Hemingway presents the Jake – Brett relationship in such a manner that Jake knew " that in having Brett for a friend ' he had been getting something for nothing ' and that sooner or later he would have to pay the bill . " Daiker notes that Brett relies on Jake to pay for her train fare from Madrid to San Sebastián , where she rejoins her fiancé Mike . In a piece Hemingway cut , he has Jake thinking , " you learned a lot about a woman by not sleeping with her . " By the end of the novel , although Jake loves Brett , he appears to undergo a transformation in Madrid when he begins to distance himself from her . Reynolds believes that Jake represents the " everyman , " and that in the course of the narrative he loses his honor , faith , and hope . He sees the novel as a morality play with Jake as the person who loses the most . 
 = = = The corrida , the fiesta , and nature = = = 
 In The Sun Also Rises , Hemingway contrasts Paris with Pamplona , and the frenzy of the fiesta with the tranquillity of the Spanish countryside . Spain was Hemingway 's favorite European country ; he considered it a healthy place , and the only country " that hasn 't been shot to pieces . " He was profoundly affected by the spectacle of bullfighting , writing , 
 It isn 't just brutal like they always told us . It 's a great tragedy — and the most beautiful thing I 've ever seen and takes more guts and skill and guts again than anything possibly could . It 's just like having a ringside seat at the war with nothing going to happen to you . 
 He demonstrated what he considered the purity in the culture of bullfighting — called afición — and presented it as an authentic way of life , contrasted against the inauthenticity of the Parisian bohemians . To be accepted as an aficionado was rare for a non @-@ Spaniard ; Jake goes through a difficult process to gain acceptance by the " fellowship of afición . " 
 The Hemingway scholar Allen Josephs thinks the novel is centered on the corrida ( the bullfighting ) , and how each character reacts to it . Brett seduces the young matador ; Cohn fails to understand and expects to be bored ; Jake understands fully because only he moves between the world of the inauthentic expatriates and the authentic Spaniards ; the hotel keeper Montoya is the keeper of the faith ; and Romero is the artist in the ring — he is both innocent and perfect , and the one who bravely faces death . The corrida is presented as an idealized drama in which the matador faces death , creating a moment of existentialism or nada ( nothingness ) , broken when he vanquishes death by killing the bull . 
 Hemingway presents matadors as heroic characters dancing in a bullring . He considered the bullring as war with precise rules , in contrast to the messiness of the real war that he , and by extension Jake , experienced . Critic <unk> <unk> notes that young Romero is the novel 's only honorable character . Hemingway named Romero after Pedro Romero , an 18th @-@ century bullfighter who killed thousands of bulls in the most difficult manner : having the bull impale itself on his sword as he stood perfectly still . Reynolds says Romero , who symbolizes the classically pure matador , is the " one idealized figure in the novel . " Josephs says that when Hemingway changed Romero 's name from <unk> and imbued him with the characteristics of the historical Romero , he also changed the scene in which Romero kills a bull to one of <unk> ( receiving the bull ) in homage to the historical namesake . 
 Before the group arrives in Pamplona , Jake and Bill take a fishing trip to the Irati River . As Harold Bloom points out , the scene serves as an interlude between the Paris and Pamplona sections , " an oasis that exists outside linear time . " More importantly , on another level it reflects " the mainstream of American fiction beginning with the Pilgrims seeking refuge from English oppression " — the prominent theme in American literature of escaping into the wilderness , as seen in Cooper , Hawthorne , Melville , Twain , and Thoreau . Fiedler calls the theme " The Sacred Land " ; he thinks the American West is evoked in The Sun Also Rises by the Pyrenees and given a symbolic nod with the name of the " Hotel Montana . " In Hemingway 's writing , nature is a place of refuge and rebirth , according to Stoltzfus , where the hunter or fisherman gains a moment of transcendence at the moment the prey is killed . Nature is the place where men act without women : men fish , men hunt , men find redemption . In nature Jake and Bill do not need to discuss the war because their war experience , paradoxically , is ever @-@ present . The nature scenes serve as counterpoint to the fiesta scenes . 
 All of the characters drink heavily during the fiesta and generally throughout the novel . In his essay " Alcoholism in Hemingway 's The Sun Also Rises , " <unk> <unk> says the main characters exhibit alcoholic tendencies such as depression , anxiety and sexual inadequacy . He writes that Jake 's self @-@ pity is symptomatic of an alcoholic , as is Brett 's out @-@ of @-@ control behavior . William Balassi thinks that Jake gets drunk to avoid his feelings for Brett , notably in the Madrid scenes at the end where he has three martinis before lunch and drinks three bottles of wine with lunch . Reynolds , however , believes the drinking is relevant as set against the historical context of Prohibition in the United States . The atmosphere of the fiesta lends itself to drunkenness , but the degree of revelry among the Americans also reflects a reaction against Prohibition . Bill , visiting from the US , drinks in Paris and in Spain . Jake is rarely drunk in Paris where he works but on vacation in Pamplona , he drinks constantly . Reynolds says that Prohibition split attitudes about morality , and in the novel Hemingway made clear his dislike of Prohibition . 
 = = = Masculinity and gender = = = 
 Critics have seen Jake as an ambiguous representative of Hemingway manliness . For example , in the bar scene in Paris , Jake is angry at some homosexual men . The critic Ira Elliot suggests that Hemingway viewed homosexuality as an inauthentic way of life , and that he aligns Jake with homosexual men because , like them , Jake does not have sex with women . Jake 's anger shows his self @-@ hatred at his inauthenticity and lack of masculinity . His sense of masculine identity is lost — he is less than a man . Elliot wonders if Jake 's wound perhaps signifies latent homosexuality , rather than only a loss of masculinity ; the emphasis in the novel , however , is on Jake 's interest in women . Hemingway 's writing has been called homophobic because of the language his characters use . For example , in the fishing scenes , Bill confesses his fondness for Jake but then goes on to say , " I couldn 't tell you that in New York . It 'd mean I was a faggot . " 
