 In contrast to Jake 's troubled masculinity , Romero represents an ideal masculine identity grounded in self @-@ assurance , bravery , competence , and uprightness . The <unk> note that Brett is attracted to Romero for these reasons , and they speculate that Jake might be trying to undermine Romero 's masculinity by bringing Brett to him and thus diminishing his ideal stature . 
 Critics have examined issues of gender misidentification that are prevalent in much of Hemingway 's work . He was interested in cross @-@ gender themes , as shown by his depictions of effeminate men and boyish women . In his fiction , a woman 's hair is often symbolically important and used to denote gender . Brett , with her short hair , is androgynous and compared to a boy — yet the ambiguity lies in the fact that she is described as a " damned fine @-@ looking woman . " While Jake is attracted to this ambiguity , Romero is repulsed by it . In keeping with his strict moral code he wants a feminine partner and rejects Brett , among other things , because she will not grow her hair . 
 = = = Anti @-@ semitism = = = 
 Hemingway has been called anti @-@ Semitic , most notably because of the characterization of Robert Cohn in the book . The other characters often refer to Cohn as a Jew , and once as a ' kike ' . Shunned by the other members of the group , Cohn is characterized as " different , " unable or unwilling to understand and participate in the fiesta . Cohn is never really part of the group — separated by his difference or his Jewish faith . Critic Susan Beegel goes so far as to claim , " Hemingway never lets the reader forget that Cohn is a Jew , not an unattractive character who happens to be a Jew but a character who is unattractive because he is a Jew . " Hemingway critic Josephine Knopf speculates that Hemingway might have wanted to depict Cohn as a " <unk> " ( or fool ) , but she points out that Cohn lacks the characteristics of a traditional <unk> . 
 Cohn is based on Harold Loeb , a fellow writer who rivaled Hemingway for the affections of Duff , Lady Twysden ( the real @-@ life inspiration for Brett ) . Biographer Michael Reynolds writes that in 1925 , Loeb should have declined Hemingway 's invitation to join them in Pamplona . Before the trip he was Duff 's lover and Hemingway 's friend ; during the fiasco of the fiesta , he lost Duff and Hemingway 's friendship . Hemingway used Loeb as the basis of a character remembered chiefly as a " rich Jew . " 
 = = Writing style = = 
 The novel is well known for its style , which is variously described as modern , hard @-@ boiled , or understated . As a novice writer and journalist in Paris , Hemingway turned to Ezra Pound — who had a reputation as " an unofficial minister of culture who acted as mid @-@ wife for new literary talent " — to mark and blue @-@ ink his short stories . From Pound , Hemingway learned to write in the modernist style : he used understatement , pared away sentimentalism , and presented images and scenes without explanations of meaning , most notably at the book 's conclusion , in which multiple future possibilities are left for Brett and Jake . The scholar Anders Hallengren writes that because Hemingway learned from Pound to " distrust adjectives , " he created a style " in accordance with the esthetics and ethics of raising the emotional temperature towards the level of universal truth by shutting the door on sentiment , on the subjective . " 
 F. Scott Fitzgerald told Hemingway to " let the book 's action play itself out among its characters . " Hemingway scholar Linda Wagner @-@ Martin writes that , in taking Fitzgerald 's advice , Hemingway produced a novel without a central narrator : " Hemingway 's book was a step ahead ; it was the modernist novel . " When Fitzgerald advised Hemingway to trim at least 2500 words from the opening sequence , which was 30 pages long , Hemingway wired the publishers telling them to cut the opening 30 pages altogether . The result was a novel without a focused starting point , which was seen as a modern perspective and critically well received . 
 Wagner @-@ Martin speculates that Hemingway may have wanted to have a weak or negative hero as defined by Edith Wharton , but he had no experience creating a hero or protagonist . At that point his fiction consisted of extremely short stories , not one of which featured a hero . The hero changed during the writing of The Sun Also Rises : first the matador was the hero , then Cohn was the hero , then Brett , and finally Hemingway realized " maybe there is not any hero at all . Maybe a story is better without any hero . " Balassi believes that in eliminating other characters as the protagonist , Hemingway brought Jake indirectly into the role of the novel 's hero . 
 As a roman à clef , the novel bases its characters on living people , causing scandal in the expatriate community . Hemingway biographer Carlos Baker writes that " word @-@ of @-@ mouth of the book " helped sales . Parisian expatriates gleefully tried to match the fictional characters to real identities . Moreover , he writes that Hemingway used prototypes easily found in the Latin Quarter on which to base his characters . The early draft identified the characters by their living counterparts ; Jake 's character was called Hem , and Brett 's was called Duff . 
 Although the novel is written in a journalistic style , Frederic Svoboda writes that the striking thing about the work is " how quickly it moves away from a simple recounting of events . " Jackson Benson believes that Hemingway used autobiographical details as framing devices for life in general . For example , Benson says that Hemingway drew out his experiences with " what @-@ if " scenarios : " what if I were wounded in such a way that I could not sleep at night ? What if I were wounded and made crazy , what would happen if I were sent back to the front ? " Hemingway believed that the writer could describe one thing while an entirely different thing occurs below the surface — an approach he called the iceberg theory , or the theory of omission . 
 Balassi says Hemingway applied the iceberg theory better in The Sun Also Rises than in any of his other works , by editing extraneous material or purposely leaving gaps in the story . He made editorial remarks in the manuscript that show he wanted to break from the stricture of Gertrude Stein 's advice to use " clear restrained writing . " In the earliest draft , the novel begins in Pamplona , but Hemingway moved the opening setting to Paris because he thought the Montparnasse life was necessary as a counterpoint to the later action in Spain . He wrote of Paris extensively , intending " not to be limited by the literary theories of others , [ but ] to write in his own way , and possibly , to fail . " He added metaphors for each character : Mike 's money problems , Brett 's association with the Circe myth , Robert 's association with the segregated steer . It wasn 't until the revision process that he pared down the story , taking out unnecessary explanations , minimizing descriptive passages , and stripping the dialogue , all of which created a " complex but tightly compressed story . " 
 Hemingway said that he learned what he needed as a foundation for his writing from the style sheet for The Kansas City Star , where he worked as cub reporter . The critic John Aldridge says that the minimalist style resulted from Hemingway 's belief that to write authentically , each word had to be carefully chosen for its simplicity and authenticity and carry a great deal of weight . Aldridge writes that Hemingway 's style " of a minimum of simple words that seemed to be squeezed onto the page against a great compulsion to be silent , creates the impression that those words — if only because there are so few of them — are sacramental . " In Paris Hemingway had been experimenting with the prosody of the King James Bible , reading aloud with his friend John Dos Passos . From the style of the biblical text , he learned to build his prose incrementally ; the action in the novel builds sentence by sentence , scene by scene and chapter by chapter . 
 The simplicity of his style is deceptive . Bloom writes that it is the effective use of parataxis that elevates Hemingway 's prose . Drawing on the Bible , Walt Whitman and Adventures of Huckleberry Finn , Hemingway wrote in deliberate understatement and he heavily incorporated parataxis , which in some cases almost becomes cinematic . His skeletal sentences were crafted in response to Henry James 's observation that World War I had " used up words , " explains Hemingway scholar Zoe Trodd , who writes that his style is similar to a " multi @-@ focal " photographic reality . The syntax , which lacks subordinating conjunctions , creates static sentences . The photographic " snapshot " style creates a collage of images . Hemingway omits internal punctuation ( colons , semicolons , dashes , parentheses ) in favor of short declarative sentences , which are meant to build , as events build , to create a sense of the whole . He also uses techniques analogous to cinema , such as cutting quickly from one scene to the next , or splicing one scene into another . Intentional omissions allow the reader to fill the gap as though responding to instructions from the author and create three @-@ dimensional prose . Biographer James Mellow writes that the bullfighting scenes are presented with a crispness and clarity that evoke the sense of a newsreel . 
 Hemingway also uses color and visual art techniques to convey emotional range in his descriptions of the Irati River . In Translating Modernism : Fitzgerald and Hemingway , Ronald Berman compares Hemingway 's treatment of landscape with that of the post @-@ Impressionist painter Paul Cézanne . During a 1949 interview , Hemingway told Lillian Ross that he learned from Cézanne how to " make a landscape . " In comparing writing to painting he told her , " This is what we try to do in writing , this and this , and woods , and the rocks we have to climb over . " The landscape is seen subjectively — the viewpoint of the observer is paramount . To Jake , landscape " meant a search for a solid form .... not existentially present in [ his ] life in Paris . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Hemingway 's first novel was arguably his best and most important and came to be seen as an iconic modernist novel , although Reynolds emphasizes that Hemingway was not philosophically a modernist . In the book , his characters epitomized the post @-@ war expatriate generation for future generations . He had received good reviews for his volume of short stories , In Our Time , of which Edmund Wilson wrote , " Hemingway 's prose was of the first distinction . " Wilson 's comments were enough to bring attention to the young writer . 
 Good reviews came in from many major publications . Conrad Aiken wrote in the New York Herald Tribune , " If there is a better dialogue to be written today I do not know where to find it " ; and Bruce Barton wrote in The Atlantic that Hemingway " writes as if he had never read anybody 's writing , as if he had fashioned the art of writing himself , " and that the characters " are amazingly real and alive . " Many reviewers , among them H.L. Mencken , praised Hemingway 's style , use of understatement , and tight writing . 
 Other critics , however , disliked the novel . The Nation 's critic believed Hemingway 's hard @-@ boiled style was better suited to the short stories published in In Our Time than his novel . Writing in the New Masses , Hemingway 's friend John Dos Passos asked : " What 's the matter with American writing these days ? .... The few <unk> young men of this lost generation will have to look for another way of finding themselves than the one indicated here . " Privately he wrote Hemingway an apology for the review . The reviewer for the Chicago Daily Tribune wrote of the novel , " The Sun Also Rises is the kind of book that makes this reviewer at least almost plain angry . " Some reviewers disliked the characters , among them the reviewer for The Dial , who thought the characters were shallow and vapid ; and The Nation and Atheneum deemed the characters boring and the novel unimportant . The reviewer for The Cincinnati Enquirer wrote of the book that it " begins nowhere and ends in nothing . " 
 Hemingway 's family hated it . His mother , Grace Hemingway , distressed that she could not face the criticism at her local book study class — where it was said that her son was " prostituting a great ability .... to the lowest uses " — expressed her displeasure in a letter to him : 
 The critics seem to be full of praise for your style and ability to draw word pictures but the decent ones always regret that you should use such great gifts in perpetuating the lives and habits of so degraded a strata of humanity .... It is a doubtful honor to produce one of the filthiest books of the year .... What is the matter ? Have you ceased to be interested in nobility , honor and fineness in life ? .... Surely you have other words in your vocabulary than " damn " and " bitch " — Every page fills me with a sick loathing . 
 Still , the book sold well , and young women began to emulate Brett while male students at Ivy League universities wanted to become " Hemingway heroes . " Scribner 's encouraged the publicity and allowed Hemingway to " become a minor American phenomenon " — a celebrity to the point that his divorce from Richardson and marriage to <unk> attracted media attention . 
 Reynolds believes The Sun Also Rises could only have been written in 1925 : it perfectly captured the period between World War I and the Great Depression , and immortalized a group of characters . In the years since its publication , the novel has been criticized for its anti @-@ Semitism , as expressed in the characterization of Robert Cohn . Reynolds explains that although the publishers complained to Hemingway about his description of bulls , they allowed his use of Jewish epithets , which showed the degree to which anti @-@ Semitism was accepted in the US after World War I. Cohn represented the Jewish establishment and contemporary readers would have understood this from his description . Hemingway clearly makes Cohn unlikeable not only as a character but as a character who is Jewish . Critics of the 1970s and 1980s considered Hemingway to be misogynistic and homophobic ; by the 1990s his work , including The Sun Also Rises , began to receive critical reconsideration by female scholars . 
 = = Legacy and adaptations = = 
 Hemingway 's work continued to be popular in the latter half of the century and after his suicide in 1961 . During the 1970s , The Sun Also Rises appealed to what Beegel calls the lost generation of the Vietnam era . Aldridge writes that The Sun Also Rises has kept its appeal because the novel is about being young . The characters live in the most beautiful city in the world , spend their days traveling , fishing , drinking , making love , and generally reveling in their youth . He believes the expatriate writers of the 1920s appeal for this reason , but that Hemingway was the most successful in capturing the time and the place in The Sun Also Rises . 
 Bloom says that some of the characters have not stood the test of time , writing that modern readers are uncomfortable with the anti @-@ semitic treatment of Cohn 's character and the romanticization of a bullfighter . Moreover , Brett and Mike belong uniquely to the Jazz Age and do not translate to the modern era . Bloom believes the novel is in the canon of American literature for its formal qualities : its prose and style . 
 The novel made Hemingway famous , inspired young women across America to wear short hair and sweater sets like the heroine 's — and to act like her too — and changed writing style in ways that could be seen in any American magazine published in the next twenty years . In many ways , the novel 's stripped @-@ down prose became a model for 20th @-@ century American writing . Nagel writes that " The Sun Also Rises was a dramatic literary event and its effects have not diminished over the years . " 
 The success of The Sun Also Rises guaranteed interest from Broadway and Hollywood . In 1927 two Broadway producers wanted to adapt the story for the stage but made no immediate offers . Hemingway considered marketing the story directly to Hollywood , telling his editor Max Perkins that he would not sell it for less than $ 30 @,@ 000 — money he wanted his estranged wife Hadley Richardson to have . Conrad Aiken thought the book was perfect for a film adaptation solely on the strength of dialogue . Hemingway would not see a stage or film adaption anytime soon : he sold the film rights to RKO Pictures in 1932 , but only in 1956 was the novel adapted to a film of the same name . Peter Viertel wrote the screenplay . Tyrone Power as Jake played the lead role opposite Ava Gardner as Brett and Errol Flynn as Mike . The royalties went to Richardson . It was again adapted into a film in 1984 . It was adapted into a one @-@ act opera in 2000 . 
 Hemingway wrote more books about bullfighting : Death in the Afternoon was published in 1932 and The Dangerous Summer was published posthumously in 1985 . His depictions of Pamplona , beginning with The Sun Also Rises , helped to popularize the annual running of the bulls at the Festival of St. Fermin . 
 = Fuck Them All = 
 " Fuck Them All " is a 2005 song recorded by French singer @-@ songwriter Mylène Farmer . Released on 14 March 2005 , it was the lead single from her sixth studio album , Avant que l 'ombre .... Like all tracks from the album , the lyrics were written by the singer with music composed by Laurent Boutonnat . " Fuck Them All " combines pop music elements with acoustic guitar , electronic beats and synths , with a musical bridge sung as a rap in English . As a result it is often compared to Madonna 's early 2000s songs . Using both crude and colorful lyrics , including sex and vulgarity , the song deals with the war between the sexes and was often considered a feminist plea in which women are presented as warriors . 
 The accompanying music video for the song , filmed by Agustí Villaronga in Romania over two days , shows Farmer portraying two women in a warehouse and many scarecrows made by Swiss artist Martial Leiter . Displaying many symbolic elements , it was the subject of many analyses on the Internet and in the press which generally praised its aesthetic qualities , but criticized for its lack of innovation . Farmer sang " Fuck Them All " during her 2006 series of concert at Bercy and the performance was released on the Avant que l 'ombre ... à Bercy DVD . 
 The song received a mixed critical reception from fans and the general public , reviews ranging from " unconvincing " and " vulgar " to " bold " and " catchy " . Despite this , the song was downloaded over 5 @,@ 000 times from official download platforms during its first week of release , and over one million times illegally . It met some success on the French and Belgian ( Wallonia ) charts , where it reached number two and eventually became the album 's best @-@ selling single . In France , it earned a silver disc for over 100 @,@ 000 units sold . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 On 16 December 2004 , Farmer gave a press conference to talk about her planned thirteen concerts at Paris @-@ Bercy in January 2006 and the release of her new album in March 2005 , but said nothing about the lead single of her next album . When this new single was announced in the media , persistent rumors claimed that the title would be " Aime " . In January 2005 , the exact title , " Fuck Them All " , was eventually presented as a strong possibility by the French magazine Voici , which also provided the theme of the song – the war of the sexes . As noted by author and expert of French charts <unk> Habib , the song title was in " the language of Shakespeare , which the singer had not used since her 1992 single " Beyond My Control " " . At the time , many fans , however , believed that this title was a joke or a rumor as it sounded too much like a direct provocation , even a scathing insult , which was rather unusual in Farmer 's career . As with other singles from Avant que l 'ombre ... , the lyrics were written by Mylène Farmer with the music composed by Laurent Boutonnat . 
 The single was played for the first time on 8 February 2005 on many radio stations , including NRJ which broadcast it every 30 minutes , preceded by a medley of Farmer 's previous hits . The song was announced with the comment : " This is the new sound of Mylène Farmer " . It was also the singer 's first song to be available as a digital download in February 2005 , and was also released as a single other two times : first , the CD single on 14 March 2005 , then the CD maxi and the vinyl , which contain the remixes , on 18 April 2005 . There were three official remix versions : ' mother f ... vocal mix ' and ' mother f ... dub mix ' , by Joachim Garraud , as well as ' the martyr 's remix ' , by Y @-@ Front , who had already remixed " Libertine " on the album <unk> . The photo for the cover was taken by Robin and shows Farmer sitting on the roof of a building near the Gare du Nord in Paris . An international CD maxi version was also released but under the title " F * * k Them All " to avoid censorship , with a sticker " Parental advisory – Explicit content " attached . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 This song is characterized by its music produced from synthetic keyboards , and has been criticized for its lack of innovation , its musical bridge containing vulgar lyrics ( with rap ) reminiscent of the Madonna 's song " American Life " , and choirs of children on guitar riffs which are actually the singer 's voice remixed . According to journalist Alice Novak , the song begins with " trippy and mysterious " notes played on keyboards , then continues with " fast and nervous " sounds on the drum machine ; the tone is " rather dark , hypnotic " , with an " swaying and repetitive " end which uses " the machinery of the lyrics of some rap groups " . Author Erwan Chuberre deemed the lyrics " easy , but deep " and contain an allusion to Farmer 's friend Marie Trintignant , who died in 2003 . 
 The song deals with a feminist theme of the war of the sexes . It is a " feminist plea about women 's place in history " with the title referring to the " cowardice of men " . In the song , Farmer " reverses the roles " , and " presents women as warriors " . In the first couplet , she evokes " the role of women in History " , recalling that " all the great men had on their side a woman to support , assist and advise them " . However , the singer said that " all this was done to the detriment of women and cites as example , Mary , Jesus Christ 's mother , a symbol of martyrdom and self @-@ sacrifice " . She denounces " the hypocrisy and the chatter of men who think only about power and sex " . In the refrain , she advises women to rebel by taking up arms . 
 In the lyrics , Farmer " is angry with men and the song is a form of feminist anthem " . According to Ouest @-@ France , the combination of an acoustic guitar , electronic beats and synths in the second part of the song , evoke very strongly what Madonna had produced in previous years , and the ethereal song is typical of Farmer . A rap interlude sung in English launches a few insults sometimes thrown at women , before the final refrain . To Marc Bitton of Public who wrote his article before the single release , " lyrics are both crude and colorful " , including " sex and vulgarity " , and said that the song was likely to be censored , which was , at his point of view , the real purpose of the singer . According to the psychologist Hugues Royer , the song is " an artistic utopia " and a call to feminists , including the novelist Catherine <unk> , but is not a " political project " . Novak said that lyrics surprised many fans , as although Farmer has always been a feminist , she had never expressed so direct a message on the subject . 
 = = Music video = = 
 Shot in Romania over two days , the video cost approximately 150 @,@ 000 euros . The scenario was written by Farmer and directed by Agustí Villaronga , then broadcast on television from 9 March 2005 . The video for " <unk> @-@ être toi " was originally intended to illustrate this song . The scarecrows which feature in the video were made by Swiss artist Martial Leiter . Farmer contacted him after seeing a documentary on France 3 about an open @-@ air exhibition of scarecrows which were an allegory of the human figure . Leiter explained that he was very surprised when he was contacted by the singer 's producers and that he was first hesitating , but finally agreed after a discussion with Farmer . He also stated that he was satisfied with the work and was happy to see that Farmer mentioned his name at the end of the video . Initially , Farmer wanted to use the scarecrows seen in the documentary , but Leiter refused to give her those from his exhibition , instead preferring to create some new scarecrows that were easier to break . In the music video , the scarecrows have a black bird skull and wear torn black veils that float in the wind . Several components often used in Farmer 's previous music videos appear in this one : snow , a horse , and some crows . The video and its making @-@ of were released as a DVD bonus available free with the second edition of the studio album . In the making @-@ of , Villaronga provides explanations about the video , while Farmer appears " distant and very professional " , according to Télé 2 <unk> . 
 The video starts showing a woman galloping through a snowy forest on horseback . She enters a warehouse where a cage surrounded by crows is suspended by chains . Nearby there is a trapped short @-@ haired woman with a flayed face and crow @-@ like eyes . The first woman stops under the cage and looks up at it . She casts a stone against a wall that reflects her like a mirror and the building collapses . In the snow , she finds a body — the second woman , inanimate and frozen — hidden under a blanket . She closes her eyes , plunges her hands into the body and pulls out a sword . Entering the forest , she sees numerous flying crows and ends up on a snowy plain on which there are erected many scarecrows . During the refrains , she uses her sword to destroy scarecrows , rip their sails and break the wooden crosses . <unk> ' eyes weep black blood that turns to crows . Then , it is shown how the other woman was killed : the big peaks which covered the ceiling of her cage had gradually collapsed on her . Finally , the living woman plants her sword in the snow , then disappears into the air . Farmer plays the role of both women . 
 The video received a mixed reception among the singer 's fans . Deemed as " gothic " by Jean @-@ Rémy Gaudin @-@ <unk> of Télé Star , the video has " undeniable aesthetic qualities " and allows " great freedom of interpretation " , according to author Erwan Chuberre . The French magazine Télé 7 Jours published several analyses proposed on the Internet , which gave mixed reviews , and provided results from a survey revealing that 54 % of respondents deemed the video as " pleasant " , while 36 % expressed total satisfaction . Reviewing the video in Elle magazine , the sociologist Divina Frau @-@ Meigs wrote : " This is a coherent video , with an echo of her previous provocations " , adding that Farmer 's sword is the symbol of the phallus , and desolate landscapes represent the impossible reconciliation of the sexes . According to Royer , the video shows a personal dimension in which Farmer " finally crushes her interior demons " and " wants to get rid of her trappings as a scapegoat " . Despite this , French daily newspaper France Soir deemed the video disappointing because of its lack of innovation . In contrast , the video was the number one choice of voters viewing the TV music program Les 100 <unk> clips du <unk> siècle ( The best videos of the twenty @-@ first century ) , aired on MCM on 25 February 2007 . 
 = = Promotion and live performances = = 
 The song has yet to be performed on television . Notwithstanding , Farmer performed it in 2006 on a series of concerts at Bercy . According to a description by author Julien Rigal on his website and in his book , Farmer performed the song with the seven dancers of Los <unk> and her female dancers dressed as Japanese . She asked the audience to shout the ' fuck them all ' of the refrain . The bridge of the stage was then lowered and Farmer finished the song on the central cross . She then presented the dancers and said goodnight to the audience . Farmer also sang " Fuck Them All " at the Stade de France in September 2009 , in a performance available on the corresponding DVD . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Fuck Them All " ' s music and lyrics received a mixed reception from fans and the general public . According to Société des auteurs , <unk> et <unk> de musique , the French musicians ' society , the song was downloaded over 5 @,@ 000 times from official websites during its first week of release , and over one million times illegally . French newspaper Ouest @-@ France gave a rather negative review of the song , saying " " Fuck Them All " is done to revive the provocative aura which is the singer 's business ( ... ) . [ The song ] amounts with a bit of confusion , between outrageously precious rhymes and vulgar slogans against male hegemony . ( ... ) With a hint of sulphur as a supplement , it is a choir of young boys who sings ' fuck them all ' in the chorus " . The single was deemed " unconvincing " in another article of the same newspaper . However , there were also more positive reviews . According to TV Magazine , the single is " catchy both through its provocative title and its quite blooming lyrics " . Despite being highly critical of the album Avant que l 'ombre ... , Swiss magazine L <unk> stated : " Very good time surprisingly succeeded , " Fuck Them All " furiously avenges all women sacrificed on the altar of male conquest " . As for Novak , " we can only applaud this bold choice " . The song and the remixes were rated at 2 @.@ 5 stars by Allmusic . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In France , released only as a CD single on 14 March 2005 , " Fuck Them All " entered the chart at number two five weeks later , after selling 26 @,@ 688 units , being unable to dislodge Ilona <unk> 's hit " Un Monde parfait " , which topped the chart that week . <unk> Habib , an expert on French charts , said : " For " Fuck Them All " , to succeed in persisting on the podium , it will have to count on a broader basis of support than that of her traditional fans , [ because they are ] sufficiently numerous to send the single of their idol in the top 10 in its first week of release , but not to retain it inside the following weeks , as the last superstar 's singles had regularly proved it , except " Les Mots " and " C 'est une belle journée " , which were general public hits " . In the following four weeks , the single dropped in the chart , then jumped from number 21 to number three on 3 April 2005 , selling 14 @,@ 701 units that week , through the releases of the CD maxi and vinyl . Then , the song started to fall again off the chart , remaining in the top 50 for 11 weeks and on the top 100 for 19 weeks . Certified Silver by the Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique on 25 May 2005 , " Fuck Them All " was the 70th best @-@ selling single of 2005 . 
 In Belgium , the single entered the Ultratop 50 Singles Chart on 24 March at number three , then moved up to peak at number two and spent a total of eight weeks in the top ten and 14 weeks on the chart . " Fuck Them All " was the 26th best selling single in 2005 . In Switzerland , the single debuted at its peak of number 14 on 27 March 2005 and immediately dropped , although as in France previously , it climbed again on 1 May thanks to CD maxi and vinyl 's sales , then began to drop again and remained on the chart for a total of 16 weeks , which was Farmer 's longest single chart trajectory on the Swiss Singles Chart at that time . The song began at a peak of number six on the chart edition of 2 April 2005 of the European Hot 100 Singles , then dropped . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 These are the formats and track listings of single releases of " Fuck Them All " : 
 CD single 
 CD maxi — <unk> 
 CD maxi — International 
 7 " maxi / 7 " maxi — Promo — Limited edition ( 500 ) 
 Digital download 
 7 " maxi — <unk> , promo - Limited edition ( 200 ) 
 CD single — Promo / CD single — Promo — Luxury envelope 
 DVD — Promo 
 = = Official versions = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 These are the credits and the personnel as they appear on the back of the single : 
 = = Charts and sales = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = All I Want Is You ( album ) = 
 All I Want Is You is the debut studio album by American R & B recording artist Miguel . After signing a record deal with the Jive Records label ByStorm Entertainment in 2007 , Miguel recorded the album with producers Dre & Vidal , <unk> , Happy Perez , State of Emergency , and Salaam Remi . It was shelved by Jive for two years after legal issues with Miguel 's former production company . 
 All I Want Is You was eventually released on November 30 , 2010 , selling poorly at first . With the help of its subsequent singles , the album became sleeper hit on the Billboard 200 and sold 404 @,@ 000 copies by September 2012 . It also received positive reviews ; critics found some of the music inconsistent but praised Miguel 's singing / songwriting abilities while drawing comparisons to American recording artist Prince . Miguel toured in promotion of the album as a supporting act for the singers Usher and Trey Songz . 
 = = Background and music = = 
 In 2007 , Miguel was signed Jive Records @-@ imprint label ByStorm Entertainment . He subsequently recorded All I Want Is You , but legal issues with his former production company prevented the album from being released for two years . Miguel continued working with various underground acts and writing songs for mainstream recording artists , including Johnson & Jonson , Asher Roth , <unk> , and Usher . Recording sessions for the album took place at Black Mango Studios in Van Nuys , California , Germano Studios in New York City , Glenwood Studios and Instrument Zoo in Miami , Florida , Studio 609 in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , and The Gym in Los Angeles , California . 
 According to Jason Newman from MTV Buzzworthy , All I Want Is You is " a diverse album rooted in R & B and hip @-@ hop , thoughtfully laced with elements of classic rock , funk and electro " . Marc Hogan from Spin said it featured neo soul music , while AllMusic critic David Jeffries described it as a " slick " and " sexy " synthesis of influences from Prince , Kanye West , and electro . " Girl Like You " and " Hard Way " feature aggressive hip hop beats , while " Pay Me " and " To the Moon " explore European electronic music and EDM , respectively . The album 's first half features two romantic songs , an interlude , a song about a prostitute , and another about a quickie . The closing track " My Piece " uses a " piece " - " peace " homonym . Jeffries said the album featured Miguel 's " sly sense of humor " . On " Sure Thing " , Miguel sang about loyalty in a passionate committed relationship . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 All I Want Is You was released by <unk> Entertainment and Jive , on November 30 , 2010 . It sold poorly at first ; in its first week , the album charted at number 109 on the Billboard 200 and sold 11 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . After falling off the chart for three weeks , it re @-@ entered and climbed the chart for 22 weeks , before peaking at number 37 on May 14 , 2011 . The album became a sleeper hit , and by September 2012 , it had sold 404 @,@ 000 copies , according to Nielsen SoundScan . 
 According to Miguel , Jive marketed him as a " typical R & B artist " during their promotion of All I Want Is You : " That album was a huge learning experience . I left the marketing of my album and me as an artist up to the discretion of the label ... I can 't really blame them for [ that ] , because that 's what they know . But that 's not what my lifestyle was . " Four singles were released from the album : the title track " All I Want Is You " , " Sure Thing " , " Quickie " , and " Girls Like You " . As the title track gradually received radio airplay , Miguel began touring as a supporting act for Usher and Trey Songz . By May 2011 , " All I Want Is You " and " Sure Thing " had reached a combined digital / mobile sales of over 825 @,@ 000 units . 
 In a review for About.com , Mark Edward Nero gave All I Want Is You three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of five stars and said Miguel " somehow managed to vocally glide across each " of the different styles he explored in music that was nonetheless rooted in R & B. He deemed the record imperfect but devoid of a poor song . B. Wright from Vibe found the music inconsistent and " schizophrenic " but praised Miguel 's singing and songwriting abilities while determining the record was " worth the purchase price " . In a three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half star review , Slant Magazine 's Matthew Cole said the second half of songs was " less stimulating " on an album that " blends slick , radio @-@ friendly R & B with Prince @-@ aping theatrics , both refracted around a sense of humor that , surreal and sexually unsubtle , would have to make [ Prince ] proud " . Cole also compared Miguel to singer Kelis , " whose work has an undeniably commercial cunning to it , but who never fails to imbue her pop confections with real personality " . 
 Reviewing All I Want Is You for MSN Music in 2012 , Christgau gave it a " B + " and believed Miguel " front @-@ loaded his Prince @-@ channeling debut " with " five hooky tracks " that were " followed by six pleasant tracks and capped by two hooky novelties " . He viewed the song " Teach Me " as " a treasure hidden in the middle " and " supplicant 's " song , " unprecedented " in " a genre that makes its nut promising untold pleasures " . He credited Miguel for " laying out the truth that , as Norman Mailer put it in one of the few useful sex tips in his orgasm @-@ mad canon , ' the man as lover is dependent upon the bounty of the woman . ' Who knows what pleases her ? She does , she alone , and Miguel craves to be let in on that shifting and enthralling secret . " He nonetheless critiqued that the song lacked a first @-@ rate hook that would have made it an R & B classic in the vein of Marvin Gaye 's " Sexual Healing " and " Use Me " by Bill Withers . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = The Thin Red Line ( 1998 film ) = 
 The Thin Red Line is a 1998 American ensemble epic war film written and directed by Terrence Malick . Based on the novel by James Jones , it tells a semi @-@ fictionalized version of the Battle of Mount Austen , which was part of the Guadalcanal Campaign in the Pacific Theater of World War II . It portrays soldiers of C Company , 1st Battalion , 27th Infantry Regiment , 25th Infantry Division , played by Sean Penn , Jim Caviezel , Nick Nolte , Elias Koteas and Ben Chaplin . Although the title may seem to refer to a line from Rudyard Kipling 's poem " Tommy " , from Barrack @-@ Room Ballads , in which he calls foot soldiers " the thin red line of heroes " , referring to the stand of the 93rd Regiment in the Battle of Balaclava of the Crimean War , it is in reality a quote from James Jones 's book which reads , " they discover the thin red line that divides the sane from the mad ... and the living from the dead ... " 
 The film marked Malick 's return to filmmaking after a 20 @-@ year absence . It stars Nick Nolte , Adrien Brody , George Clooney , John Cusack , Woody Harrelson , Elias Koteas , Jared Leto , John C. Reilly and John Travolta . Reportedly , the first assembled cut took seven months to edit and ran five hours . By the final cut , footage of the performances by Bill Pullman , Lukas Haas , and Mickey Rourke had been removed ( although one of Rourke 's scenes was included in the special features outtakes of the Criterion Blu @-@ ray and DVD release ) . The film was scored by Hans Zimmer , and shot by John Toll . Principal photography took place in New Zealand , and Australia in the state of Queensland . 
 The film grossed $ 98 million against its $ 52 million budget . Critical response was generally strong and the film was nominated for seven Academy Awards : Best Picture , Best Director , Best Adapted Screenplay , Best Cinematography , Best Film Editing , Best Original Score and Best Sound Mixing . It won the Golden Bear at the 1999 Berlin International Film Festival . Martin Scorsese ranked it as his second favorite film of the 1990s on At the Movies . Gene Siskel called it " the greatest contemporary war film I 've seen " . 
 A previous film adaptation of the novel was released in 1964 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 U.S. Army Private Witt goes AWOL from his unit and lives among the carefree Melanesian natives in the South Pacific . He is found and imprisoned on a troop carrier by his company First Sergeant , Welsh . The men of C Company , 1st Battalion , 27th Infantry Regiment , 25th Infantry Division have been brought to Guadalcanal as reinforcements in the campaign to secure Henderson Field and seize the island from the Japanese . As they wait in a Navy transport , they contemplate their lives and the invasion . Battalion commander Lieutenant Colonel Tall talks with Brigadier General Quintard about the invasion and its importance . 
 C Company lands on Guadalcanal unopposed and marches to the interior of the island , encountering natives and evidence of the Japanese presence . They arrive near Hill 210 , a key Japanese position . The Japanese have placed a bunker with machine guns at the top of the hill and any attempt to climb the hill will be cut down . 
 A brief shelling of the hill begins the next day at dawn . C Company attempts to capture the hill but is repelled by gunfire . Among the first killed is one of the platoon leaders , Second Lieutenant Whyte . During the battle , a squad led by Sergeant Keck hides behind a swell safe from enemy fire to wait for reinforcements . Keck reaches for a grenade but accidentally pulls the pin and dies in the process . Lieutenant Colonel Tall orders the company commander , Captain James Staros , to take the bunker by frontal assault , at whatever cost . Staros refuses and Tall decides to join Staros on the front line to see the situation . The Japanese resistance seems to have lessened , and Tall 's opinion of Staros seems to have been sealed . Private Witt , having been assigned <unk> as a stretcher bearer , asks to rejoin the company , and is allowed to do so . 
 A small detachment of men performs a reconnaissance mission on Tall 's orders to determine the strength of the Japanese bunker . Private Bell reports there are five machine guns in the bunker . He joins another small team of men ( including Witt ) , led by Captain John Gaff , on a flanking mission to take the bunker . The operation is a success and C Company overruns one of the last Japanese strongholds on the island . The Japanese they find are largely malnourished , dying and put up little resistance . 
 For their efforts the men are given a week 's leave : the airfield where they are based comes under enemy artillery bombardment ; Bell receives a letter from his wife informing him that she has fallen in love with someone else and wishes to divorce ; Captain Staros is relieved of his command by Lieutenant Colonel Tall , who deems him too soft for the pressures of combat and suggests that he apply for reassignment and become a lawyer in the JAG in Washington . He offers to arrange a Purple Heart for Staros , to avoid the unit 's name being stained by the having an officer removed from command . Witt comes across the locals and notices that they have grown distant and distrustful of him and quarrel regularly with one another . 
 The company is sent on patrol up a river but with the inexperienced 1st Lieutenant George Band at its head . As Japanese artillery fire falls close to their positions ; Band orders some men to scout upriver , with Witt volunteering to go along . They encounter an advancing Japanese column and are attacked . To buy time for Corporal Fife to go back and inform the rest of the unit , Witt draws away the Japanese but is then encircled by one of their squads , who demand that he surrender . He raises his rifle and is gunned down . The company is able to retreat safely , and Witt is later buried by Welsh and his squadmates . C Company receives a new commander , Captain <unk> and boards a waiting LCT , departing from the island . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Screenplay = = = 
 New York @-@ based producer Bobby Geisler first approached Malick in 1978 and asked him to direct a film adaptation of David Rabe 's play In the Boom Boom Room . Malick declined the offer , but instead discussed the idea of a film about the life of Joseph Merrick . Once word got out about David Lynch 's film of The Elephant Man , he shelved the idea . In 1988 , Geisler and John Roberdeau met with Malick in Paris about writing and directing a movie based on D. M. Thomas ' 1981 novel The White Hotel . Malick declined , but told them that he would be willing instead to write either an adaptation of Molière 's Tartuffe , or of James Jones ' The Thin Red Line . The producers chose the latter and paid Malick $ 250 @,@ 000 to write a screenplay . 
 Malick began adapting The Thin Red Line on January 1 , 1989 . Five months later , the producers received his first draft , which was 300 pages long . According to an article in Entertainment Weekly , they gained the director 's confidence by " catering to his every whim , " providing him with obscure research material , including a book titled Reptiles and Amphibians of Australia , an audiotape of Kodo : Heartbeat Drummers of Japan , information on the Navajo code talkers recruited by the United States Marine Corps to communicate in their native Navajo language to evade understanding by Japanese troops intercepting radio transmissions , making his travel plans , and helping the director and his wife Michele get a mortgage for their Paris apartment . 
 The producers spent a lot of time talking with Malick about his vision of the film . Geisler said , 
 " Malick 's Guadalcanal would be a Paradise Lost , an Eden , raped by the green poison , as Terry used to call it , of war . Much of the violence was to be portrayed indirectly . A soldier is shot , but rather than showing a <unk> bloody face we see a tree explode , the shredded vegetation , and a gorgeous bird with a broken wing flying out of a tree " . 
 Malick spent years working on other projects , including a stage production of <unk> the Bailiff and a script known as The English @-@ Speaker , spending $ 2 million of the producers ' money , half of which for writing . In 1990 , he met with James Jones ' widow Gloria and his daughter Kaylie about adapting The Thin Red Line into a film . By January 1995 , Geisler and Roberdeau were broke and pressured Malick to decide which one he would complete . They approached Malick 's former agent , Mike Medavoy , who was setting up his own production company , Phoenix Pictures , and he agreed to give them $ 100 @,@ 000 to start work on The Thin Red Line . Medavoy had a deal with Sony Pictures and Malick began scouting locations in Panama and Costa Rica before settling on the rain forests of northern Australia . In April 1997 , three months before filming , Sony pulled the plug while crews were building the sets in Queensland , because new studio chairman John Calley did not think Malick could make his movie with the proposed $ 52 million budget . Malick traveled to Los Angeles with Medavoy to pitch the project to various studios . 20th Century Fox agreed to put up $ 39 million of the budget with the stipulation that Malick cast five movie stars from a list of 10 who were interested . Pioneer Films , a Japanese company , contributed $ 8 million to the budget , and Phoenix added $ 3 million . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Casting for the film became a hot topic . When Sean Penn met Malick , he told him , " Give me a dollar and tell me where to show up " . Scripts were also sent to Robert De Niro , Robert Duvall and Tom Cruise . In 1995 , once word went out that Malick was making another movie after many years , numerous actors approached him , flooding the casting directors until they had to announce they wouldn 't be accepting more requests . Some A class actors for example , Brad Pitt , Al Pacino , Gary Oldman and George Clooney offered to work for a fraction and some even offered to work for free . Bruce Willis even went as far as offering to pay for first @-@ class tickets for the casting crew , to get a few lines for the movie . At Medavoy 's home in 1995 , Malick staged a reading with Martin Sheen delivering the screen directions , and Kevin Costner , Will Patton , Peter Berg , Lukas Haas and Dermot Mulroney playing the main roles . In June of that year , a five @-@ day workshop was scheduled at Medavoy 's with Brad Pitt dropping by , and culminating with Malick putting on the soundtrack of Where Eagles Dare and playing Japanese taiko drums . Malick met with an interested Johnny Depp about the project at the Book Soup Bistro on the Sunset Strip . 
 Edward Norton flew out to Austin and met Malick , who had been impressed by the actor 's screen test for Primal Fear . Matthew McConaughey reportedly took a day off filming A Time to Kill to see Malick . Others followed , including William Baldwin , Edward Burns , Josh Hartnett , Philip Seymour Hoffman , Stephen Dorff and Leonardo DiCaprio ; the latter flew up from the Mexico set of Romeo + Juliet to meet Malick at the American Airlines lounge in the Austin airport . Before the casting was finalized , Nicolas Cage had lunch with Malick in Hollywood in February 1996 . Malick went off to scout locations and tried calling Cage that summer only to find out that his phone number had been disconnected . Sizemore , however , was offered a more substantial role in Saving Private Ryan and , when he could not contact Malick for several days , decided to do Steven Spielberg 's film instead . Actors William Baldwin , Edward Burns , Josh Hartnett , Philip Seymour Hoffman , Stephen Dorff , Robert Redford , Leonardo DiCaprio , Bill Pullman , Gary Oldman , Mickey Rourke , Lukas Haas , and Viggo Mortensen filmed scenes for the movie , but were cut from the final film due to time <unk> . 
 James Caviezel , who was cast as Private Witt , credits Malick 's casting of him as the turning point in his career . Cinematographer John Toll began talking to Malick in August 1996 several times over the phone about the film . Toll met Malick in September of the same year and was asked to do the film in the beginning of 1997 . Malick and Toll began location scouting in February 1997 and started principal photography in June of that year . 
 = = = Principal photography = = = 
 Pre @-@ production went slowly . Weeks before filming began , Malick told Geisler and Roberdeau not to show up in Australia where the film was being made , ostensibly because George Stevens Jr. would be the on @-@ location producer supporting line producer Grant Hill . Malick told them that they had upset the studio for refusing to give up above @-@ the @-@ title production credit to Stevens . He did not tell them , however , that in 1996 he had a clause inserted in his contract barring the producers from the set . Geisler and Roberdeau were mystified about this behavior ; Geisler told Entertainment Weekly , " I didn 't think he was capable of betrayal of this magnitude " . 
 Malick and Toll shot for 100 days in Australia using Panavision cameras and lenses , 24 days in the Solomon Islands and three days in the United States . They scouted the historic battlefields on Guadalcanal and shot footage , but health concerns over malaria limited filming to daylight hours only . Logistics were also difficult to shoot the entire film there : As director of photography John Toll put it , " It 's still a bit difficult to get on and off the island , and we had some scenes that involved 200 or 300 extras . We would have had to bring everybody to Guadalcanal , and financially it just didn 't make sense " . The Thin Red Line was filmed predominantly in the Daintree Rainforest and on Bramston Beach , both in north Queensland , Australia . Filming also took place on Dancer Mountain , which had such rough terrain that trailers and production trucks could not make it up the hill . A base camp was set up at its base and roads carved out of the mountain . Transporting 250 actors and 200 crew members up the hill took two hours . Filming took place in the Pacific Ocean off the coast of Southern California near Santa Catalina Island . 
 Malick 's unconventional filming techniques included shooting part of a scene during a bright , sunny morning only to finish it weeks later at sunset . He made a habit of pointing the camera away during an action sequence and focus on a parrot , a tree branch or other fauna . Malick 's reputation and working methods commanded great respect among the actors , with both Woody Harrelson and John Savage staying on for an extra month after they finished all of their scenes just to watch him at work . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 In addition to the cast seen in the final cut of the film , Billy Bob Thornton , Jason Patric , Martin Sheen , Gary Oldman , Bill Pullman , Lukas Haas , Viggo Mortensen , and Mickey Rourke also performed , but their scenes were eventually cut . Editor Leslie Jones was on location for five months and rarely saw Malick , who left her to her own devices . After principal photography wrapped , she came back with a five @-@ hour first cut and spent seven months editing , with Thornton contributing three hours of narrative voice @-@ over material . It was at this point that editor Billy Weber came on board , and they spent 13 months in post @-@ production and the last four months mixing the film , using four Avid machines with a fifth added at one point . Malick edited the footage one reel at a time with the sound off while listening to a Green Day CD . There were no preview screenings but several in @-@ house ones , the largest of which was attended by 15 people for marketing executives . The editors faced the challenge of blending footage of veteran actors with less @-@ experienced ones , integrating the many cameos , and the voice @-@ overs . According to Jones , " Malick removed scenes with dialogue whenever possible , with the final film varying greatly from the original concept " . Four months after principal photography , Malick invited Toll to a rough @-@ cut screening of the film . In December 1998 , Toll did the first color correction at the lab prior to the film 's release in North America . 
 The editing also resulted in many of the well @-@ known cast members being on screen for only a brief period : for example , John Travolta and George Clooney 's appearances are little more than cameos , yet Clooney 's name appears prominently in the marketing of the movie . The unfinished film was screened for the New York press on December 1998 and Adrien Brody attended a screening to find that his originally significant role , " to carry the movie " , as he put it , had been reduced to two lines and approximately five minutes of screen time . On April 15 , 2001 , an interview with Brody revealed that he was still upset over the removal of his work . He expressed his opinions in an interview with the London newspaper The Independent : 
 I was so focused and professional , I gave everything to it , and then to not receive everything ... in terms of witnessing my own work . It was extremely unpleasant because I 'd already begun the press for a film that I wasn 't really in . Terry obviously changed the entire concept of the film . I had never experienced anything like that ... You know the expression ' Don 't believe the hype ' ? Well , you shouldn 't . 
 Malick was upset that the studio screened his unfinished version for critics and Penn ended up helping him in the editing room , shaping the final version . Malick spent three more months and cut 45 additional minutes from the film . The director refused to subject his film to test screenings before delivering his final cut . After Geisler and Roberdeau told their story to Vanity Fair magazine , Medavoy 's attorneys declared them in breach of contract and threatened to remove their names from the film unless they agreed to do no future interviews until after the Academy Awards . 
 = = Music = = 
 The film score was composed by Hans Zimmer , with additional music from John Powell . The album was nominated for Best Dramatic Score at the 71st Academy Awards . It was Hans Zimmer 's fifth Oscar nomination as a composer , but he lost out to Roberto Benigni 's Life is Beautiful ( music by Nicola <unk> ) . The album was released by RCA Victor and conducted by Gavin Greenaway . Among the music not written by Zimmer which appears in the film is In Paradisum from Requiem by Gabriel Fauré and the opening minutes of The Unanswered Question by Charles Ives . 
 Zimmer wrote several hours of music , and an abundance of different themes , before Malick started to shoot the film . The director played the music on the set , while filming , to get himself , and the rest of the crew and actors in the right frame of mind . The official soundtrack features tracks that were not used on the film and some tracks from the film are not found on the CD . The film features several pieces of Melanesian choral music sung by the Choir of All Saints in Honiara , only one of which is featured on the soundtrack . However , another soundtrack was released containing several tracks from the Choir , which has since gone out of circulation . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The Thin Red Line was given a limited release on December 25 , 1998 , in five theaters where it grossed $ 282 @,@ 534 on its opening weekend . The film was given a wide release on January 15 , 1999 , in 1 @,@ 528 theaters where it grossed $ 9 @.@ 7 million during its opening weekend . The film earned $ 98 @,@ 126 @,@ 565 at the worldwide box office . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The film has a rating of 78 % among all critics on Rotten Tomatoes and 78 metascore on Metacritic , indicating " generally favourable reviews " . 
 Gene Siskel described it as the " finest contemporary war film I 've seen , supplanting Steven Spielberg 's Saving Private Ryan from earlier this year , or even Oliver Stone 's Platoon from 1986 . " Roger Ebert was more subdued in his praise , giving it three stars , saying that it felt confused and unfinished . He wrote , " The movie 's schizophrenia keeps it from greatness ( this film has no firm idea of what it is about ) , but doesn 't make it bad . It is , in fact , sort of fascinating ... The battle scenes themselves are masterful , in creating a sense of the geography of a particular hill , the way it is defended by Japanese bunkers , the ways in which the American soldiers attempt to take it ... Actors like Sean Penn , John Cusack , Jim Caviezel and Ben Chaplin find the perfect tone for scenes of a few seconds or a minute , and then are dropped before a rhythm can be established " . 
 In his review for Time , Richard Corliss wrote , " Some films deal in plot truth ; this one expresses emotional truth , the heart 's search for saving wisdom , in some of the most luscious imagery since Malick 's last film , the 1978 Days of Heaven " . Mike Clark of USA Today gave the film four out of four stars . Writing in the Washington Post , Michael O 'Sullivan wrote , " The Thin Red Line is a movie about creation growing out of destruction , about love where you 'd least expect to find it and about angels – especially the fallen kind – who just happen to be men " . 
 Andrew Johnston of Time Out New York wrote : " Like Malick 's previous efforts - Badlands ( 1973 ) and Days of Heaven ( 1978 ) - Line is a film of incredible beauty . However , the atmosphere created by John Toll 's breathtaking cinematography and Hans Zimmer 's powerful score is occasionally compromised . The parade of cameos ( John Travolta , George Clooney , Woody Harrelson and John Cusack briefly appear ) is somewhat distracting , and the fact that Bell and Witt both have Appalachian accents sometimes makes the characters hard to differentiate . Yet , even though it 's confusing at times ( and perhaps a little long ) , Line is still a film of rare substance and power . " 
 Owen Gleiberman gave the film a " B- " in his review for Entertainment Weekly and wrote , " The Thin Red Line could , I think , turn out to be this season 's Beloved , a movie too <unk> high @-@ minded to connect with audiences " . In her review for The New York Times , Janet Maslin wrote , " The heart @-@ piercing moments that punctuate its rambling are glimpses of what a tighter film might have been " . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 The Thin Red Line was nominated for Academy Awards for Best Cinematography , Best Director , Best Film Editing , Best Original Score , Best Picture , Best Sound and Best Adapted Screenplay . It failed to win any of these awards . However , the film was awarded the Golden Bear for Best Film at the 49th Berlin International Film Festival in 1999 . The Thin Red Line was named Best Cinematography for 1998 by the National Society of Film Critics in 1998 . Time magazine ranked Malick 's film # 6 on their Best of 1998 Cinema list . Jonathan Rosenbaum , film critic for the Chicago Reader , ranked Malick 's film as his second favorite film of 1999 . Martin Scorsese ranked it as his second favorite film of the 1990s on Roger Ebert 's television show . 
 = = Home video = = 
 On September 28 , 2010 , The Criterion Collection released a special edition of The Thin Red Line on DVD and Blu @-@ ray with a new , restored 4K digital transfer , supervised and approved by Terrence Malick and cinematographer John Toll . The release was met with positive reviews . 
 = Augusto Roa Bastos = 
 Augusto Roa Bastos ( June 13 , 1917 – April 26 , 2005 ) was a Paraguayan novelist and short story writer . As a teenager he fought in the Chaco War between Paraguay and Bolivia , and he later worked as a journalist , screenwriter and professor . He is best known for his complex novel Yo el Supremo ( I , the Supreme ) and for winning the Premio Miguel de Cervantes in 1989 , Spanish literature 's most prestigious prize . Yo el Supremo explores the <unk> and inner thoughts of Dr. José Gaspar Rodríguez de Francia , who ruled Paraguay with an iron fist and no little eccentricity from 1814 until his death in 1840 . 
 Roa Bastos ' life and writing were marked by experience with dictatorial military regimes . In 1947 he was forced into exile in Argentina , and in 1976 he fled Buenos Aires for France in similar political circumstances . Most of Roa Bastos ' work was written in exile , but this did not deter him from fiercely tackling Paraguayan social and historical issues in his work . Writing in a Spanish that was at times heavily augmented by Guaraní words ( the major Paraguayan indigenous language ) , Roa Bastos incorporated Paraguayan myths and symbols into a Baroque style known as magical realism . He is considered a late @-@ comer to the Latin American Boom literary movement . Roa Bastos ' canon includes the novels Hijo de hombre ( 1960 ; Son of Man ) and El fiscal ( 1993 ; The Prosecutor ) , as well as numerous other novels , short stories , poems , and screenplays . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life ( 1917 – 1932 ) = = = 
 Roa Bastos was born in Asunción on June 13 , 1917 . He spent his childhood in <unk> , a provincial town in the Guaira region where his father was an administrator on a sugar plantation . It was here , some 200 kilometres ( 120 mi ) to the south of the Paraguayan capital of Asunción , that Roa Bastos learned to speak both Spanish and Guaraní , the language of Paraguay 's indigenous people . At the age of ten he was sent to school in Asunción where he stayed with his uncle , Hermenegildo Roa , the liberal bishop of Asunción . 
 His uncle 's extensive personal library provided the young Roa Bastos with his first exposure to the classical Spanish literature of the Baroque and Renaissance traditions that he would imitate in his early poetry throughout the 1930s and 1940s . In addition , his uncle 's emphasis on the mystical aspects of classic literature would have a profound Roa Bastos ' later writings . His experience of Guaraní social customs and language combined with the traditional Spanish education that he received in Asunción , created a cultural and linguistic duality that would manifest itself in much of Roa Bastos ' writing . His rural upbringing also exposed Roa Bastos to the exploitation and oppression of the indigenous and peasant peoples of Paraguay , which would become a prominent theme in his writing . 
 = = = War and writing ( 1932 – 1947 ) = = = 
 In 1932 the territorial Chaco War began between Paraguay and Bolivia and continued until 1935 . At some point , perhaps as late as 1934 , Roa Bastos joined the Paraguayan army as a medical auxiliary . The war would have a profound effect on the future writer who said : " when I left for that war I dreamed of purification in the fire of battles . " Instead of glory he found " maimed bodies " and " destruction " which left him to question " why two brother countries like Bolivia and Paraguay were massacring each other " , and as a consequence Roa Bastos became a pacifist . 
 Directly after the war he worked as a bank clerk and later as a journalist . During this time he began writing plays and poetry . In 1941 Roa Bastos won the Ateneo <unk> prize for <unk> Miranda , although the book was never published . In the early 1940s he spent significant time on the yerba mate plantations in northern Paraguay , an experience he would later draw upon in his first published novel , Hijo de hombre ( 1960 ; Son of Man ) . In 1942 he was appointed editorial secretary for the Asunción daily El País . 
 In 1944 the British Council awarded Roa Bastos a nine @-@ month fellowship for journalism in London . During this time he traveled extensively in Britain , France and Africa and witnessed the devastation of WWII first hand . He served as the El País war correspondent , notably conducting an interview with General Charles de Gaulle after the latter 's return to Paris in 1945 . Roa Bastos also broadcast Latin American programs at the invitation of the BBC and France 's Ministry of Information . 
 Throughout this eventful period in his life Roa Bastos continued to write and he was considered a poet of the Paraguayan vanguard . In 1942 he published a book of poems in the classic Spanish style , which he titled El <unk> De La Aurora ( The Dawn Nightingale ) , a work he later renounced . He also had plays successfully performed during the 1940s , though they were never published . Of his prolific poetry of the late 1940s only " El <unk> <unk> " ( 1960 ; " The Burning Orange Grove " ) was published . 
 = = = Exile in Argentina ( 1947 – 1976 ) = = = 
 During the 1947 Paraguayan Civil War , Roa Bastos was forced to flee to Buenos Aires , Argentina , because he had spoken out against President <unk> <unk> . About 500 @,@ 000 of his fellow Paraguayans left for Argentina at the same time . Roa Bastos remained in Argentina until just before the establishment of the military dictatorship there in 1976 , and he did not return permanently to Paraguay until 1989 . He found exile difficult , but his time in Buenos Aires was a prolific period . Roa Bastos said this in reference to his exile : 
 I can 't complain ... Exile brought out in me , in addition to a revulsion against violence and against depreciation of the human condition , a feeling for the universality of man . Exile lent me perspectives from which to know my own country from other people 's point of view , and from which to live for the enormity of its misfortune . 
 In 1953 the collection of 17 short stories El trueno entre las hojas ( 1953 ; Thunder Among the Leaves ) was published and circulated internationally , but it was not until the 1960 publication of the novel Hijo de hombre ( Son of Man ) that Roa Bastos won major critical and popular success . The novel draws on the oppressive history of Paraguay from the rule of Dr. Jose Gaspar de Francia in the early 19th century until the Chaco War in the 1930s . Its multiple narrative perspectives and historical and political themes anticipate his most famous work , Yo , el Supremo , written more than a decade later . Roa Bastos adapted Hijo de hombre into an award winning film in the same year as its publication . 
 Roa Bastos further established himself as a screenwriter with the screenplay of <unk> ( 1960 ) , directed by Lautaro <unk> and based on the memoirs of a country school teacher . In 1961 he once again collaborated with <unk> for Alias <unk> ( 1961 ) , which depicted the lives of urban petty criminals and became a major independent film of the nuevo cine movement . In 1974 Roa Bastos published his influential masterpiece Yo , el Supremo , the result of seven years ' work . When Jorge Rafael Videla 's military dictatorship came to power in 1976 , however , the book was banned in Argentina , and Roa Bastos was exiled once again , this time to Toulouse , France . 
 = = = France ( 1976 – 1989 ) = = = 
 In Toulouse Roa Bastos taught Guaraní and Spanish literature at the University of Toulouse . Although he had been allowed to visit Paraguay to work with a new generation of Paraguayan writers , starting in 1970 , he was again barred from entry in 1982 , for purportedly engaging in subversive activities . There is however , little evidence that he participated in sectarian politics of any kind . In France , Roa Bastos faced the second forced relocation of his life , but he also won a new readership for his work during this time . Helen Lane 's English translation of Yo , el Supremo , I , The Supreme , published in 1986 , was greeted with widespread acclaim in the English @-@ speaking world . However , in France , Roa Bastos ' writing focus was primarily academic , and his literary output did not match that of his time in Argentina . In 1985 Roa Bastos left his post at the University of Toulouse . Following the downfall of the oppressive Alfredo Stroessner regime in 1989 , Roa Bastos returned to Paraguay at the request of its new leader Andrés Rodríguez . 
 = = = Return to Paraguay and Cervantes Prize ( 1989 – 2005 ) = = = 
 Following the toppling of the Stroessner regime , Roa Bastos won the Premio Cervantes ( Cervantes Prize ) , awarded by the Spanish Royal Academy in partnership with the Spanish government , in recognition of his outstanding contributions to Spanish @-@ language literature . It was at this time that Roa Bastos began to travel frequently between Paraguay and France . In 1991 , representing Paraguay , Roa Bastos signed The Morelia Declaration " demanding the reversal of the ecological destruction of the planet . " It was at this time that Roa Bastos again became an active novelist and screenwriter . 
 In 1991 Roa Bastos adapted Yo , el Supremo for the screen . His first novel since Yo , el Supremo , Vigilia del <unk> ( 1992 ; Vigil of the Admiral ) was published in 1992 , and El fiscal ( 1993 ; The Prosecutor ) the following year . Although neither of his later novels had the impact of his earlier work , El fiscal is considered an important work . Roa Bastos died on April 26 , 2005 in Asunción from a heart attack . He was survived by his three children , his third wife , Iris Giménez , and a reputation as one of Latin American 's finest writers . 
 = = Major works = = 
 = = = Hijo de hombre = = = 
 Hijo de hombre ( 1960 ; Son of Man ) , Roa Bastos ' first published and award winning novel , represents his definitive break with poetry . It is seen as a refined " outgrowth " of his earlier works of short fiction such as El trueno entre las hojas ( 1953 ) , which also dealt with themes of political oppression and social struggle in Paraguay . This novel portrays the conflict between the governing élite and the oppressed masses in Paraguay from 1912 until just after the end of the Chaco War with Bolivia in 1936 . Like his later Yo , el Supremo , Hijo de hombre draws upon a series of Paraguayan legends and stories dating back to start of Dr. Francia 's dictatorship in 1814 . 
 Hijo de hombre builds upon a system of Christian metaphors as part of the Neobaroque concept of Magic Realism , in order to examine the pain of being Paraguayan . This novel contrasts two figures : Miguel Vera and Cristóbal Jara . Vera narrates the odd chapters , although he might also be the narrator of all nine chapters ( this is unclear ) . He is a well @-@ to @-@ do and educated romantic supporter of revolution , who is unable to take real action to support his ideals and in the end betrays them ( not unlike Judas ) . Jara , on the other hand , is an uneducated " son of man " who becomes a Christ @-@ like leader for Paraguayan people through action and strength of character . Although it was a massive critical success , Roa Bastos remained dissatisfied with the work for a number reasons . It was fourteen years before he published another novel . 
 = = = Yo , el Supremo = = = 
 Yo , el Supremo ( I , the Supreme ) is a fictionalized account of the 19th @-@ century Paraguayan dictator José Gaspar Rodríguez de Francia , who was also known as " Dr. Francia " . The book 's title derives from the fact that Francia referred to himself as " El Supremo " or " The Supreme . " The first in a long line of dictators , The Supreme was a severe , calculating despot . He ruled absolutely from 1814 until his death in 1840 , and is a unique figure in Latin American history . The goal of his rule mirrored that of the Jesuits who had ruled Paraguay for much of its history before him : to keep the Paraguayan people and their customs pure by protecting them from the corrupting influence of European and other outside forces . In Yo , el supremo , Roa Bastos is also fundamentally concerned with the power ( and the weakness ) of writing itself : its plot revolves around the dictator 's efforts to uncover who has been forging his signature on a series of <unk> discovered around the capital , and his relationship with his secretary , Patiño , to whom he dictates his thoughts and orders , but whom he never fully trusts . 
 The novel itself is " an exceptional cultural phenomenon . " It has been suggested that it " [ is ] more immediately and unanimously acclaimed than any novel since One Hundred Years of Solitude , [ and the ] strictly historical importance [ may ] be even greater than that of García Márquez 's fabulously successful creation . " Yo , el supremo has contributed widely to a number of different genres and styles . It belongs to the genre of <unk> de <unk> or dictator novels , and also to the Latin American Boom , a literary movement of the 1960s and 1970s . Yo , el supremo is also an important milestone in the evolution of the historical novel genre . " Yo , el supremo weaves a plethora of formats into a single work : history , novel , sociological essay , moral philosophy , biographical novel , revolutionary pamphlet , testimonial documentary , poetic prose , autobiographic confession , ideological debate over literary limits , and linguistic treatise on the limits of verbal expression . " 
 = = Precursors and influences = = 
 Ruy Díaz de Guzmán 's Anales del <unk> , <unk> y conquista del Río de la Plata , is considered one of the most important antecedents to Roa Bastos ' writings . Guzmán , a Paraguayan explorer of Guaraní and Spanish heritage , wrote extensively about the geography of Paraguay using mythical descriptions of the landscape and the Guaraní language . The most important precursor to Roa Bastos , however , is Rafael Barrett ( 1876 – 1910 ) , whose writings incorporated many of the important themes and writings styles that Roa Bastos would later master including : Spanish @-@ Guaraní bilingualism , magic realism , the revision of Paraguayan history , social literature , exploration of collective memory and the universe of poetic symbols . Barrett 's essay " Lo que son los <unk> " is a severe critique of the exploitation of workers on yerba mate tea plantations . Roa Bastos spent part of the early 1940s documenting this same issue and there is much speculation about the role of " Lo que son los <unk> " in the creation of his first major novel Hijo de hombre . The Uruguayan writer Horacio Quiroga is another important predecessor . 
 = = Style = = 
 Roa Bastos was an exponent of the Neobaroque style that brought Latin American literature to the fore internationally in the mid @-@ 20th century . Among others , the Chilean poet Pablo Neruda is also associated with this school of writing . The style uses a complex system of metaphors that are often very closely tied to the land , flora and culture of the particular writer , especially in the case of Roa Bastos . Magic realism is a Neobaroque concept that applies such systems of metaphor to otherwise realistic settings ( Yo , el Supremo being a notable example of the form ) . The Neobaroque style was used by many Paraguayan writers in exile after 1947 and until the 1980s . At the core of much of the work from this group are ideas of political freedom and the emancipation of their homeland . 
 Roa Bastos started out writing poetry in the Spanish Renaissance and Baroque traditions . Later he took on " a new sensibility " in response to the poetry of Valle @-@ <unk> , Juan Ramón Jiménez , and García Lorca . However , it is as a prose @-@ fiction writer Roa Bastos has built his considerable reputation , through his novels and numerous short stories . Roa Bastos ' novels blend the present and past by creating scenes with myths from pre @-@ colonial times and Christian legends , developing a special kind of Magic Realism , although there are significant stylistic variations between his major novels . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Paraguay : collective memory = = = 
 The majority of Roa Bastos ' work was written in exile owing to the oppressive political condition of his country , at a time when Paraguay was one of the least culturally , economically , and politically developed countries in Latin America . Thus , much of Roa Bastos ' important writing is an attempt to " capture the tragic essence , the ' inner weakness ' as well as the inner strength of his country 's people . " His work reveals an intense preoccupation not only with contemporary Paraguay but with its history , looking back to the beginning of the 19th century and the rule of Dr. Gaspar de Francia ( whose life is the focus of Yo , el Supremo ) . While key historical figures and events interest Roa Bastos , it is the impact of these " socio @-@ historical roots " on " the nature of the masses " that forms the central theme of his literary work . 
 His writing deploys symbols and multiple narratives that build on the collective memory of the Paraguayan people . Hijo de hombre , for example , constructs an " alternative history of popular movements " out of the people 's recollections and symbols . The intertextual novel Yo , el Supremo is particularly representative of this technique , both in its construction and narrative . In El Fiscal ( 1993 ) , a third novel about the abuses of political power — this time focusing on Stroessner 's régime — Roa Bastos again offers an alternative to the accepted versions of events in Paraguay and challenges " the intelligibility of history " . To this end he weaves elements of fantasy and metafiction into his narratives . 
 = = = Humanism and the engaged writer = = = 
 Roa Bastos believed that it was the role of the writer to directly engage in the interpretation of both contemporary and historical events . Rather than be the objective " chronicler " , he thought the writer should engage morally with the social problems depicted in the writing . According to Roa Bastos , ” literary activity has come to signify the necessity for facing up to a destiny , the will to enlist in the vital reality of a collectivity , in its true moral context and social structure , in the complex relationships of a contemporary reality – that is to say , by projecting themselves toward a universal world of man . ” Thus , one of the major themes in the writing of Roa Bastos is a deep and universal humanism , with a particular focus on suffering 
 Undoubtedly , Roa Bastos ' own experiences played a significant role in his emphasis on human suffering . As a young man he fought in the Chaco war between Bolivia and Paraguay , an event he portrayed in Hijo de hombre . Later he saw the devastation of WWII at first hand in Europe , the violent strife of 1947 in Paraguay , and the rise of the Argentinian military dictatorship in 1976 . His collection of short stories published in 1953 , El trueno <unk> las hojas , set the stage for Hijo de hombre and Yo , el Supremo with its dark portrayal of devastating political struggle and oppression . Two decades later , Yo , el Supremo was published , providing a prime example of Roa Bastos ' idea of the engaged writer . It offered an unflattering , fictionalized account of the final thoughts and ramblings of Paraguay 's first dictator , at a time when Paraguay was under the stranglehold of a regime that adopted many of the same policies of oppression and isolationism . Roa Bastos was not alone in using literature to engage in contemporary events during the Latin American Boom period . In the 1960s and 1970s , Gabriel Garcia Marquez and others adopted the same approach . Together , these writers created the Dictator novel genre . 
 = = = Bilingualism = = = 
 As is customary for most Paraguayans of peasant or working class origins , Roa Bastos learned to speak Spanish and Guaraní from birth . Both Spanish and Guaraní are the official languages of Paraguay ( the latter is primarily an oral language ) . Although Guaraní remains the " popular " language spoken at home and on the " street " , Spanish is the language of official business and of power . The preservation and widespread use of an indigenous language after centuries of European immigration is unique in Latin America , and Guarani remains a symbol of Paraguayan nationalism and an " important vehicle for interpreting the country 's reality " . This is the legacy of the Jesuits who ruled Paraguay in the 18th century and used Guarani ( instead of Spanish or Latin ) to spread Christianity throughout Paraguay . 
 While Roa Bastos wrote primarily in Spanish , the interplay between these two languages is an essential part of his style . His bilingualism gives Roa Bastos a much greater range of language to work with , but also creates tension between an internationally recognized language and one that is obscure and fiercely Paraguayan . Roa Bastos has described the relationship between the two languages as " an almost schizophrenic split not only on <unk> levels of the spoken language , but also and quite particularly in the literary language . " 
 = = Honors and Distinctions = = 
 Over the course of his career , Roa Bastos received a diversity of honors and distinctions . In 1941 he won the Ateneo <unk> Prize for his ( unpublished ) novel Fulgencio Miranda . This first award was followed by a British Council fellowship for journalism that enabled him to travel to Europe during World War II . In 1959 Roa Bastos won the Losada prize for his first published novel Hijo de hombre . The adaptation of this novel , for which he wrote the screenplay , won best film in the Spanish language and first prize of the Argentine Instituto de <unk> the following year . His most prestigious awards were a 1971 John Guggenheim Foundation Fellowship for creative writers , and in 1989 , the Cervantes Prize , an award given by the Spanish government for lifetime achievement , and Spanish language literature 's most prestigious prize . Roa Bastos donated most of his prize money to provide easier access to books in Paraguay . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The writing of Roa Bastos spans four countries , six decades , and countless genres . In his lifetime he made important contributions to Latin American Boom writing , to the related Dictator Novel , and to the Nuevo Cine film movement through screenplays like Alias <unk> ( 1961 ) . Roa Bastos ' influence can be found in the works of many foreign post @-@ boom writers , including <unk> <unk> , Isabel Allende , <unk> Zepeda , Antonio <unk> , Saul <unk> , and Luisa Valenzuela . The most important author to come out of Paraguay , he also remains highly influential for a new generation of Paraguayan authors . Roa Bastos ' relationship with his country , unbroken by over 40 years of exile , was considered so important that in 1989 he was invited back by Paraguay 's new president , Andrés Rodríguez , following the collapse of the Stroessner regime . 
 Even before Yo , el Supremo , Roa Bastos was considered part of " the pantheon of great writers " by some critics , due to Hijo de hombre . However , it was the former work that cemented his place as a significant literary figure . According to Juan Manuel Marcos , Yo , el Supremo " anticipates many of the post @-@ boom writing techniques " such as " the <unk> of historical discourse , <unk> , and parody " . Mexican literary great , Carlos Fuentes has called Yo , el Supremo one of the milestones in Latin American literature . While his reputation rests on his novels , Roa Bastos ' achievements in film , creative writing , and journalism add further substance to his legacy . 
 = = Published works = = 
 = = = Novels = = = 
 Hijo de hombre ( 1960 ; Son of Man ) 
 Yo , el Supremo ( 1974 ; I , the Supreme ) 
 Vigilia del Almirante ( 1992 ; Vigil of the Admiral ) 
 El fiscal ( 1993 ; The Prosecutor ) 
 <unk> ( 1994 ; <unk> ) 
 = = = Short fiction = = = 
 El trueno entre las hojas ( 1953 ; Thunder Among the Leaves ) 
 El <unk> ( 1966 ; Vacant Ground ) 
 Madera <unk> ( 1967 ; Burnt Wood ) 
 Los pies sobre el agua ( 1967 ; The Feet on the Water ) 
 <unk> ( 1969 ; Slaughter ) 
 Cuerpo <unk> y otros <unk> ( 1971 ; Present Body and other stories ) 
 El <unk> de fuego ( The Fire Chick ) ( 1974 ) 
 Los <unk> ( The Congresses ) ( 1974 ) 
 El <unk> ( The Sleepwalker ) ( 1976 ) 
 Lucha hasta el alba ( Struggle until Dawn ) ( 1979 ) 
 Los <unk> ( 1979 ; The Games ) 
 <unk> un <unk> , y otros <unk> ( 1984 ; To Tell a Tale and Other Stories ) 
 Madama Sui ( Madame Sui ) ( 1996 ) 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) ( 1996 ) 
 La tierra sin mal ( 1998 ; Land Without Evil ) 
 = = = Screenplays = = = 
 Thunder Among the Leaves ( 1958 ) 
 Hijo de hombre ( 1960 ) 
 <unk> ( 1960 ) 
 Alias <unk> ( 1961 ) 
 El <unk> presidente ( 1966 ) 
 Don segundo <unk> ( 1968 ) 
 Yo el Supremo ( 1991 ) 
 = = = Poetry = = = 
 El <unk> de la aurora , y otros <unk> ( 1942 ; The Dawn Nightingale , and other poems ) * Written in 1936 
 " El <unk> <unk> " ( 1960 ; " The Burning Orange Grove " ) * Written between 1947 and 1949 
 = = = Other writings = = = 
 <unk> Lopez ( 1976 ) 
 Imagen y <unk> de la <unk> <unk> actual ( 1979 ) 
 Lucha hasta el alba ( 1979 ) 
 Rafael Barrett y la <unk> <unk> a <unk> del <unk> ( 1981 ) 
 El <unk> del Paraguay da sus <unk> <unk> ( 1986 ) 
 Carta <unk> a mi pueblo ( 1986 ) 
 El <unk> <unk> : el <unk> y su <unk> ( 1990 ) 
 Mis <unk> sobre el <unk> y el <unk> de " Hijo de hombre " ( 1993 ) 
 = = = Compilations and anthologies = = = 
 Antología personal ( 1980 ; Personal Anthology ) 
 = = = Translations = = = 
 Hijo de hombre as Son of Man ( 1965 ) Rachel <unk> 
 Yo , el Supremo as I , The Supreme ( 1986 ) Helen Lane 
 = Who Made Huckabee ? = 
 Who Made Huckabee ? , also known as the Colbert / O 'Brien / Stewart feud , refers to a mock rivalry that occurred among late night talk show hosts Stephen Colbert , Conan O 'Brien and Jon Stewart in early 2008 , reportedly over who was responsible for then @-@ presidential candidate Mike Huckabee 's success in the presidential primaries . 
 In reality , however , the feud was concocted by the three comedians as a result of the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike . Without writers to fuel their banter , the three comedians staged a crossover / rivalry in order to fill airtime and garner more viewers during the ratings slump . Colbert made the claim that because of " the Colbert bump " in popularity which results from guest appearances on his show , he was responsible for recurring guest Huckabee 's success in the 2008 Iowa caucus . O 'Brien claimed he was responsible for cable personality Colbert 's success because he mentioned Colbert on Late Night with Conan O 'Brien , a broadcast network show , and by extension was behind the success of Huckabee . In response , Stewart claimed he was responsible for O 'Brien 's original success , since Stewart featured him on The Jon Stewart Show in the early 1990s . 
 As the feud escalated , O 'Brien , Colbert and Stewart each put forward increasingly farcical reasons he was responsible for Huckabee 's success , insulting their rivals in the process . This resulted in a three @-@ part comedic battle between the three faux @-@ pundits , with all three appearing on each other 's shows on the same night . The feud ended on Late Night with Conan O 'Brien with a tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek " all @-@ out brawl " between the three talk @-@ show hosts . 
 Reaction to the " feud " by both the public and the media was mostly positive . TV Squad 's Annie Wu wrote : " With the three hosts appearing on each other 's shows all on one night , it was special appearances galore . It became a clash of the Titans , a battle of epic proportions , a heaping helping of Monday fanservice . " Even so , the three comedians " shared a certain comedic sensibility " , and admitted that they had a good time while helping each other out . O 'Brien said : " It certainly helped that all three of us [ were ] in a period of our careers where we 're looking for content . " 
 = = The feud = = 
 = = = Beginning = = = 
 The 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America ( WGA ) strike , which began in November 2007 , all but crippled the United States ' entertainment industry . Virtually all scripted Hollywood shows were expected to shut down by the week of December 19 , 2007 . Hollywood journalist Nikki Finke reported , " CEOs are determined to write off not just the rest of this TV season ( including the Back 9 of scripted series ) , but also pilot season and the 2008 / 2009 schedule as well . Indeed , network orders for reality TV shows are pouring into the agencies right now . " 
 Of the " Big Four " networks — CBS , ABC , NBC and Fox — NBC had the most severe ad shortfall as its prime time ratings declined sharply ; none of its new shows achieved breakout success . Moreover , during 2007 , NBC saw its prime time 18 @-@ to @-@ 49 @-@ year @-@ old viewership drop by 11 % , CBS dropped the same demographic by 10 % , and ABC lost 5 % . 
 Although he is a WGA member who pledged support for the writers , O 'Brien announced that following the collapse of negotiations , Late Night with Conan O 'Brien would return to air on January 2 , 2008 , without writers , citing his non @-@ writing staff facing layoffs as the main reason . Later , Stewart and Colbert announced that their shows , The Daily Show and The Colbert Report , would also return without writers on January 7 , 2008 . To show respect to the picketing writers , The Daily Show was renamed , for the duration of the strike , A Daily Show with Jon Stewart . Similarly , The Colbert Report was rebranded as The Colbert Report ( with hard T 's ) for its first new episode since the strike began . On January 2 , 2008 , Late Night featured a small musical segment at the beginning of the show detailing O 'Brien 's newly grown beard in a similar show of support for the striking writers . 
 Huckabee generated a considerable following of young voters during his campaign , primarily because of his support of the Fair Tax as well as his concerns about global warming , education , and several other issues typically not referred to by Republicans . Most notable is the following Huckabee gathered among the younger crowd via the internet . Huck 's Army , an online grassroots coalition and volunteer think tank , is largely composed of younger , more technologically savvy adherents . So productive was this group that it received national media attention and was credited by Huckabee as " the secret weapon of our campaign " . 
 On January 4 , 2008 , O 'Brien attempted to take responsibility for Huckabee 's popularity among young voters by claiming that his show was the sole cause of Huckabee 's status in the votes , due to his use of " The Walker , Texas Ranger Lever " , which increased the popularity of actor and public Huckabee supporter Chuck Norris . O 'Brien reasoned that the popularity of Norris , fueled by the Late Night sketch , translated into support for Huckabee . Colbert later lashed out at O 'Brien on his own show on January 16 , 2008 , claiming that he himself was responsible for Huckabee 's success in the Iowa caucus thanks to his giving Huckabee " the Colbert bump , " a rise in popularity following an appearance on The Colbert Report . The exasperated Colbert ended his rant with this " threat " against O 'Brien : 
 " So back off of Mike Huckabee , or I will kick your ' translucent white ass ! You got that , Irish ? " 
 During the January 17 , 2008 , episode of Late Night , O 'Brien , in what he later described as " a heated moment " , called Colbert the " temporary host of The Colbert Report . " O 'Brien also refused to recant his statement concerning Huckabee , claiming that , just by mentioning Colbert on his network show , he was , in turn , " breathing life " into Colbert 's " basic cable " career . Therefore , according to his logic , " if Colbert made Huckabee , and Conan made Colbert , then Conan made Huckabee ! " 
 In response , during the January 29 , 2008 , episode of The Colbert Report , Colbert , persuaded by " the soundness of [ O 'Brien 's ] logic " , was prepared to concede . Before he could , however , Jon Stewart , Colbert 's former Daily Show colleague , appeared on the set and cautioned Colbert against doing so . Stewart exhibited a vintage VHS tape , which contained footage of him introducing O 'Brien on Stewart 's earlier MTV program , The Jon Stewart Show , in 1994 . Therefore , by his own logic : 
 " Colbert made Huckabee ... Conan made Colbert ... Jon Stewart made Conan ... Jon Stewart made Huckabee ! " 
 Colbert accepted this , as it kept Huckabee 's ' creation ' " in the family . " Stewart then jokingly said it was up to O 'Brien to respond , so that the three of them could " figure out a way to settle the matter that wastes time on all three of [ their ] shows " — an obvious allusion to the writers ' strike and the need to generate new material without said writers . Colbert ended the segment with the crack , " Ball 's in your court , Conan ! " 
 = = = Escalation = = = 
 Upon learning of Stewart 's involvement in the feud , O 'Brien used his February 1 , 2008 , episode to show a modified photo of himself as a doctor delivering both Colbert and Stewart as babies , after which he proceeded to make fun of their genitalia . O 'Brien continued the earlier chain of reasoning by arguing that by delivering Stewart and Colbert to the world , he deserved credit for any of their potential accomplishments , including Huckabee . O 'Brien then made the following statement : 
 " I think this ends the feud . But this is my warning — and this is not a threat , this is a promise ! If either Stewart or Colbert mentions this again in any way , I am going over to their tiny little studio , and I am kicking some Comedy Central ass ! " 
 This resulted in a three @-@ part comedic battle between the three faux @-@ pundits , with all three appearing on each other 's shows on February 4 , 2008 . It all began on the set of The Daily Show , when Colbert , to thunderous applause , interrupted the middle of a seemingly normal show to thank Stewart for settling the feud . Stewart at first responded happily to this , but then grew visibly frightened once Colbert informed him of O 'Brien 's response from a few days before . Colbert then began taunting O 'Brien , calling him " cheap " , " stupid " and " lazy " — much to Stewart 's chagrin , who begged Colbert to stop . It was too late , however , as O 'Brien , accompanied by thunderous applause , quickly walked in and furiously scolded the two for keeping the feud going . A seething Colbert , nonetheless , refused to back down , and even snarled at O 'Brien : " You want to tangle , Red ? " O 'Brien agreed , but as the two prepared to take the fight outside , Stewart reminded them that he had to finish his show . O 'Brien and Colbert agreed to wait outside , where they engaged in idle chit chat . 
 When Stewart finished , he went into the hall to find Colbert was gone to tape his show . On the set of The Colbert Report , Colbert was discussing John McCain 's rise in the polls , and joked that since the media had said that " a vote for Mike Huckabee is a vote for McCain " , and Colbert was Huckabee 's " running mate , " then Colbert , " by the transitive property of Huckabee " , was really McCain . He was soon interrupted by Stewart and O 'Brien , who had just left the set of The Daily Show to continue their fight . Stewart jokingly claimed that , since he had " made " both Colbert and O 'Brien , Stewart himself was McCain — clearly provoking O 'Brien . After some playful attacks , Colbert persuaded the two to wait outside until he finished taping his show . 
 But of course , by the time Colbert had finished , O 'Brien had gone off to tape his show . Too impatient , Colbert and Stewart then decided to walk across the hall and finally end the fight on O 'Brien 's set . However , the door supposedly leading to O 'Brien 's set was locked , leaving Colbert and Stewart no other choice but to use forced entry — via a bobby pin . A later interview with O 'Brien revealed further information of how Stewart and Colbert were able to slip through security : 
 " [ I ] t 's not that hard getting in the building , even though I probably shouldn 't say that . They made crude NBC passes out of clay and just walked right through . . <unk> said they were from the network affiliate in Ohio . " 
 = = = Ending = = = 
 On February 4 , 2008 , after O 'Brien 's monologue concerning his " feud " with Colbert and Stewart , the two strutted West Side Story @-@ Kick the Moon styles onto the set , accompanied by thunderous applause , and pulled O 'Brien backstage . Colbert , O 'Brien and Stewart then proceeded to fight it out to the tune of " <unk> " , a song by the English alternative rock band Arctic Monkeys . It was one fight scene cliche after the other , from slow motion punching to falling into cardboard boxes to rolling down a flight of stairs . What followed was " four punishing , uninterrupted minutes of Louisville Slugger <unk> , the gruesome torching of pasty comedian flesh , and a near @-@ beheading by the razor @-@ sharp blades of a pair of hockey skates " . The battle finally ended with a simultaneous freeze frame punch that turned into a parody of the end of Rocky III when the scene dissolved into a watercolor painting . Huckabee himself appeared , and declared : 
 After that , the bell sounded and the image of Huckabee morphed into yet another Rocky III @-@ style painting , marking the end of the feud . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 That same day , Colbert and Stewart issued the following joint statement : 
 " Conan 's claims on Mike Huckabee could not go unanswered . We just hope the kids out there learned that sometimes the best way to resolve a conflict is with violence . " 
 Meanwhile , as O 'Brien was recovering , he conducted an interview with the Associated Press , and explained that one of the reasons he took part in the feud was because , " [ Colbert ] had been leaving me threatening messages . He got to me . I have a temper . A famous temper . " 
 Later that same day , on The Daily Show , Stewart poked fun at the fight by calling it " the stupidest fucking thing anyone 's ever seen . " He then apologized to Colbert , in a conversation via satellite , for inadvertently smashing him over the head with a beer bottle during the brawl , amid the confusion . While Colbert accepted his apology , Stewart continued and asked why Colbert had initially responded by shoving a recycling bin over Stewart 's head and hitting him with a baseball bat . To which Colbert replied , " No , no , Jon — I shoved a recycling bin over your head and encouraged Conan to hit you with a baseball bat , " and , as usual , left Stewart confused . At the end of the segment , Stewart asked Colbert : " Did we win that [ fight ] , by the way ? " Colbert 's answer was , " I think America won , Jon . " 
 In the meantime , Huckabee won the first contest of " Super Tuesday " with 52 % of the West Virginia GOP state convention electorate to rival Mitt Romney 's 47 % . Backers of rival John McCain threw him their support to prevent Mitt Romney from capturing the winner @-@ take @-@ all GOP state convention vote . He also secured victories in Alabama , Arkansas , Georgia and Tennessee on Super Tuesday , bringing his delegate count up to 156 , a distant third compared to 689 for Republican Party front @-@ runner McCain and Romney 's 286 , according to the 2008 Republican presidential primaries and caucuses . 
 On February 7 , 2008 , Huckabee made a trip to New York to make yet another appearance on The Colbert Report , declaring he was still a viable candidate in the race . By the end of the segment , he was playing a game of air hockey with the host . 
 However , despite winning the Kansas Republican Caucuses and the Louisiana Republican Primary , Huckabee decided to end his bid for the GOP nomination , upon losing the Texas Republican Primary on March 4 , 2008 . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Reaction to the " feud " by both the public and the media was , and still is , nearly uniformly positive . Clips from the feud quickly became popular on the Internet , turning into viral videos that spread across numerous blogs in various forms , with the sites that offered the videos seeing vast increases in their traffic . The Huckabee brawl became " so popular that polls [ began ] popping up in pursuit of the public 's opinion to the question , ' Who made Huckabee ? ' . " TV Squad 's Annie Wu beamed : " With the three hosts appearing on each other 's shows all on one night , it was special appearances galore . It became a clash of the Titans , a battle of epic proportions , a heaping helping of Monday fanservice . " 
 Interestingly , upon returning to air on January 7 , 2008 , The Daily Show and The Colbert Report had increased ratings . As of the end of January 2008 , The Daily Show was up 17 percent for viewers between 18 @-@ 34 from January 2007 and up nine percent for 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds in the same period . The Colbert Report was up 21 percent for 18- to 34 @-@ year @-@ olds and 15 percent for 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds over the same time period . Late Night with Conan O 'Brien , however , remained at a normal level , with 2 @.@ 5 million viewers . One reason given for the increase in Daily Show and Colbert Report ratings was the current presidential election , allowing them a large amount of political humor to use . However , one journalist commented that the raise of ratings in these two shows without the writers " has to be a big PR setback for the WGA . " 
 In fact , not long after the " Who Made Huckabee ? " feud culminated , the writers ' strike officially ended on February 13 , 2008 , with the writers returning to work the following day , at which point the titles of The Daily Show and The Colbert Report were restored . 
 = = = Ironic subtext = = = 
 In contrast to the strained relationship depicted on @-@ camera among Colbert , O 'Brien and Stewart , the three are actually good friends and admire each other 's shows . O 'Brien admitted that , " the three of us have come along in the same comedic environment , " and that , while " our shows all probably have their distinct flavor , [ ... ] this happened because the three of us knew we would like doing this with each other . " The Associated Press noted : 
 " For anyone watching , it was clear the three hosts share a certain comedic sensibility . Such playfulness would seem impossible with other late @-@ night talk @-@ show hosts ; CBS ' David Letterman and NBC 's Jay Leno , for instance , have long had icy relations . " 
 This from TV Squad 's Annie Wu : 
 " I would also like to note that even those that haven 't found this fake feud particularly amusing must find a bit of sweetness in it . After all , these are hosts that have constantly expressed how lost they feel without their writers . There 's something wonderful in seeing three comedians doing each other a favor by creating some silly material and taking it this far , just to help fill time . This one dumb fight alone has taken up so many episodes . Bless their little late night hearts for helping each other out . " 
 In a similar fashion John Gillespie , of A Sensitivity to Things , found the brawl " inspiring , ' and stated : 
 " What is really great about this clip , the in @-@ joke that informs , underlines everything you see , is that these are three very famous people , working in exactly the same field , competing directly for television ratings and advertising dollars , who should supposedly have very large egos , making fun of all of that , and revealing — wait ... is that irony , on American TV ? — that they are probably very good friends , having a very good time . " 
 " My favorite comedy is comedy where nothing is achieved and there is no point , " O 'Brien said . " That this whole Huckabee fight turned into an insane Marx Brothers dance was fitting somehow [ ... ] The fight itself is three people with a box full of props playing for about an hour . " 
 = Santosh Subramaniam = 
 Santosh Subramaniam is a 2008 Indian Tamil @-@ language romantic comedy film directed by Mohan Raja and produced by <unk> S. <unk> . The film stars Jayam Ravi and Genelia D 'Souza in the lead roles , while Prakash Raj , Geetha and Sayaji Shinde play supporting roles . It is a remake of the Telugu film , Bommarillu ( 2006 ) . The film revolves around a father and son relationship ; the father dotes on his son , who resents the same . The son 's choices and his ambitions to achieve something in life are subdued by his father . 
 The film entered production in July 2007 and in addition to being shot in India , was also shot at the South Island of New Zealand . The film 's soundtrack was composed by Devi Sri Prasad , who retained the tunes he composed for Bommarillu . 
 Santosh Subramaniam was released on 11 April 2008 during the Tamil New Year festival . The film was positively received and commercially successful ; critics praised the performances of Ravi , D 'Souza and Prakash Raj . The film won the third prize for the Best Film at the Tamil Nadu State Film Awards of 2008 . It was nominated for four awards at the 56th Filmfare Awards South , including Best Film , Best Director , Best Actor and Best Actress , but did not win in any category . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Subramaniam is a rich business man managing his own construction company . He lives with his wife Shanthi and sons Sanjay and Santosh . Subramaniam cares for his family a lot and excessively dotes upon his children . Santosh , the younger son , does not like this as he wants to be independent free from his father ’ s guidance and control . But Santosh acts normal to avoid hurting his father . Santosh has in mind that both his career and wife should be of his choice only and not of his father . Subramaniam wants Santosh to assist him in managing the company but Santosh dreams of starting a new company on his own and does not prefer to work in his father ’ s company . Meanwhile , Subramaniam arranges Santosh ’ s wedding with Rajeshwari , daughter of his friend Ramamoorthy . Santosh is shocked as he has no other option rather than agreeing for this wedding . 
 One day , Santosh meets Hasini , a college student and is immediately attracted seeing her childish attitude and jovial nature . Santosh slowly befriends Hasini and both fall in love , but he does not have the courage to inform about his love to his father . Santhosh gets spotted along with Hasini by Subramaniam and now he reveals his love affair . Subramaniam is furious upon hearing this as Santosh is already engaged to Rajeshwari . Subramaniam asks Santosh to bring Hasini to his home and make her stay with them for a week so that he will make Santosh understand that Rajeshwari is the better bride for him . Santosh agrees , believing that Hasini will impress Subramaniam . Hasini lies to her father Govindan that she is going for a college trip and leaves for Santosh ’ s home . 
 Everyone at Subramaniam ’ s home view Hasini indifferently seeing her talkative nature compared to Subramaniam ’ s family members who are more mature and not so talkative , especially Subramaniam . Santosh asks Hasini to try impressing his family members , fearing Subramaniam might not accept for the wedding . Slowly , Hasini starts befriending Santhosh ’ s mother and sisters and gets close with them . Hasini informs them about Santosh ’ s behaviours such as alcohol consumption , going out at night to meet her , and also his plans of getting a bank loan to start his own company which were not known to Santhosh ’ s family before . 
 Santosh is shocked knowing that Hasini has revealed all his mischievous activities and berates her often for being childish . Hasini worries and decides to leave Santosh ’ s home even before the one week time given to her . She apologises to everyone in Santosh ’ s home and says that she is not the one fit for him and his family . Santosh is worried seeing this but has no option rather than staying calm as even Subramaniam did not like Hasini . 
 The next day , an argument erupts between Santosh and Subramaniam during which the former becomes emotional and shouts that he has lost so many small things in life because of Subramaniam . But he preferred to stay calm as he does not want to hurt his father . Subramaniam realises his mistake and apologises to everyone saying that he always wanted to take care of his family members so well but had never thought that they are sacrificing a lot to make him happy . 
 Santosh meets Rajeshwari and apologises to her . He also makes her understand his situation . Rajeshwari convinces Ramamoorthy that she will get even a better groom than Santosh . Meanwhile , Subramaniam goes to meet Hasini and apologises to her . Hasini says that her father is angry on her for lying and she will have to obey her father now . But Govindan does not like Santosh as he has seen him before drinking with his friends in road . Subramaniam says that he will send Santosh to Govindan ’ s home for a week so that he will better understand his character . After numerous incidents between Govindan and Santosh , the former finally agrees for Santosh and Hasini 's wedding . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Jayam Ravi as Santosh Subramaniam 
 Genelia D 'Souza as Hasini Govindan 
 Prakash Raj as Subramaniam , Santosh 's father 
 Sayaji Shinde as Govindan , Hasini 's father 
 Geetha as Lakshmi , Santosh 's mother 
 Sadagoppan Ramesh as Sanjay , Santosh 's elder brother 
 Kirat <unk> as Rajeswari , Santosh 's fiancé 
 Vijayakumar as Ramamoorthy , Rajeswari 's father 
 Santhanam as Srinivasan , Santosh 's friend 
 Premgi Amaren as Shekar , Santosh 's friend 
 M. S. Bhaskar as <unk> Perumal , Santosh 's college lecturer 
 Kausalya as Santosh 's sister 
 Satya Krishnan as Sanjay 's wife 
 Neelima Rani as Santhanam 's wife 
 Srinath as Guna , Santosh 's friend 
 <unk> as Bank Manager 
 Anu Hasan ( special appearance ) 
 = = Production = = 
 Despite early indications that the same team that worked on the 2006 Telugu film Bommarillu — including director K. Vijaya Bhaskar and producer Dil Raju — would remake the film in Tamil , the pair said they were not interested . Raju was willing to sell the remake rights and held twenty previews in Chennai for potential buyers . Editor Mohan , under his home company Jayam <unk> , outbid Prakash Raj , who wanted to remake the film with Vishal in the lead role . Others outbid included Vijay , Bhagyaraj for his daughter , Saranya , and A. M. Rathnam for his son Ravi Krishna . Mohan handed the director 's role to his first son Raja , and the lead role to his second son Jayam Ravi . The film would become Raja 's fourth consecutive remake of a Telugu film . Bhaskar stated that he chose not to work on Santosh Subramaniam because he had " invested too much time and energy in its original " . 
 Genelia D 'Souza was chosen to play the female lead Hasini , reprising her role from the original film . Prakash Raj , who also acted in the original film , was chosen to reprise his role as the protagonist 's father and Geetha was signed to play the character 's mother . Former cricketer Sadagoppan Ramesh made his acting debut in this film , playing Santosh 's elder brother , and Sayaji Shinde was signed to play Hasini 's father . Kirat <unk> was selected to play Santosh 's fiancée . Actors Kausalya , Santhanam , Premgi Amaren , Srinath and Sathyan , were also added to the cast . Anu Hasan makes a special appearance as a woman who Santosh converses with at the beginning , and end of the film . 
 Raja stated that the film would feature a " huge house " that was constructed at a cost of ₹ 5 million ( US $ 74 @,@ 000 ) and a bus with " state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art " facilities , which was bought for ₹ 1 million ( US $ 15 @,@ 000 ) , and that they would be memorable highlights of the film . Two songs were shot at the South Island of New Zealand . An advantage of shooting in New Zealand for the film 's crew was that they had 16 hours of sunlight on any given day . Some sequences were even shot around 9 : 30 pm under " blazing sunlight " . One song depicting the marriage of <unk> Amaran 's character was shot in several temples " in and around Kumbakonam " in Tamil Nadu . According to Raja , the film was inspired by his own life : " My friend took the essence of my story and made the Telugu blockbuster , which I then remade in Tamil " . 
 The film had its launch on 16 July 2007 with the attendance of all the lead actors . For the inauguration function , 300 invitations by word of mouth were made . The invitation for the launch featured many successful father @-@ son duos from various fields , such as Sivaji Ganesan and Prabhu , Sivakumar and Suriya , and Sathyaraj and <unk> . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 For the film 's music and soundtrack , Raja renewed his association with Devi Sri Prasad , who predominantly used his tracks from the original film . Siddharth , the lead actor in the original , sang one of the tracks from the film . The audio of the film was released on 23 March 2008 , three weeks before the film 's release . 
 The soundtrack received positive response . Behindwoods rated the album 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 , calling it " Overall , a lively album all set to become a chart buster . " Rediff rated the album 3 out of 5 , and stated that " listening to Santosh <unk> music really gives ' <unk> ' " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The satellite rights of the film were sold to Sun TV . Santosh Subramaniam was released on 11 April 2008 during the Tamil New Year festival . Despite being released during the season of the Indian Premier League , it took a big opening and enjoyed a theatrical run of 25 days due to positive critical reviews and favourable word of mouth . 
 The reception in the United Kingdom , comparatively for a Tamil film , was equally successful , entering the UK box office at number 40 . The film collected GB £ 10 @,@ 067 in its first week of opening and earned a cumulative gross of £ 24 @,@ 962 in its three @-@ week box office run . 
 Pavithra Srinivasan of Rediff gave the film a rating of two and a half out of five ; she called the film a " classy remake of the Telugu blockbuster Bommarillu ( Toy @-@ house ) , the movie is a love @-@ story but it strives to be something even more " . She stated that Ravi " performs with his usual flair " , D 'Souza 's character " appears a little too good to be true , at first . But her character grows on you " , and praised Prakash Raj 's performance , saying that the role " was a cakewalk " for him . Malathi Rangarajan of The Hindu praised the music , locations and the main cast 's performances , and wrote that in the film , " dull moments are rare , enjoyable ones aplenty " . IndiaGlitz said , " Hats off director Raja and <unk> Ravi for hitting the bull 's eye for the fourth time in a row . The duo continues from where they left in <unk> <unk> to provide a feel @-@ good light @-@ hearted family entertainer sure to be enjoyed with the family . " and concluded , " Santosh Subramaniam is no doubt a film that is sure to spread <unk> ( happiness ) to one and all . " 
 Sify said D 'Souza 's portrayal is " the soul of the film " and its " biggest strength " ; the reviewer called Ravi 's performance " mature " and Prakash Raj 's " outstanding " . Behindwoods gave the film three stars out of five and called it a " well made family entertainer " . The reviewer wrote , " watch Santosh Subramaniam for that ' feel good ' feeling , overlook minor glitches " , and said that Prakash Raj is " the real master " who " proves his class yet again " . <unk> Shankar of Oneindia said , " there are few minuses in the script but those are very minor and not affect the flow of the story " and concluded , " overall , Santosh Subramaniam is a promising entertainer that brings the first word of the title in every viewers mind for long time even after come out from the theatre " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = L.A. Noire = 
 L.A. Noire ( pronounced / <unk> / ) is a neo @-@ noir detective video game developed by Team Bondi and published by Rockstar Games . It was initially released for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 platforms on 17 May 2011 ; a Microsoft Windows port was later released on 8 November 2011 . L.A. Noire is set in Los Angeles in 1947 and challenges the player , controlling a Los Angeles Police Department ( LAPD ) officer , to solve a range of cases across five divisions . Players must investigate crime scenes for clues , follow up leads , and interrogate suspects , and the player 's success at these activities will impact how much of each case 's story is revealed . 
 The game draws heavily from both the plot and aesthetic elements of film noir - stylistic films made popular in the 1940s and 1950s that share similar visual styles and themes , including crime and moral ambiguity - along with drawing inspiration from real @-@ life crimes for its in @-@ game cases , based upon what was reported by the Los Angeles media in 1947 . The game uses a distinctive colour palette , but in homage to film noir it includes the option to play the game in black and white . Various plot elements reference the major themes of detective and mobster stories such as The Naked City , Chinatown , The Untouchables , The Black Dahlia , and L.A. Confidential . 
 L.A. Noire is notable for using Depth Analysis 's newly developed technology MotionScan , whereby the actors portraying the game 's characters were recorded by 32 surrounding cameras to capture facial expressions from every angle . The technology is central to the game 's interrogation mechanic , as players must use the suspects ' reactions to questioning to judge whether or not they are lying . L.A. Noire was the first video game to be shown at the Tribeca Film Festival . Upon release , the game received wide acclaim for its advances in storytelling and facial animation technology . As of February 2012 , both PC and console versions had shipped nearly 5 million copies combined . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 L.A. Noire is an action @-@ adventure neo @-@ noir crime game played from a third @-@ person perspective . Players complete cases — linear scenarios with set objectives — to progress through the story . The game also features a mode which allows players to freely roam the open world . In this mode , players can also engage in optional activities . The world features multiple landmarks , which are all based on real monuments from 1940s Los Angeles . 
 The game takes place in the city of Los Angeles , in the year 1947 , with players assuming the role of Los Angeles Police Department officer , and later detective , Cole Phelps . The game starts with Phelps as a uniformed patrolman , and follows his career as he advances through the police department bureaus ( desks ) of Traffic , Homicide , Vice and Arson . Each desk gives players a new partner who will help Phelps in his investigation of a number of cases based on a specific type of crime . The game assigns players with cases that they must solve . After each case , players receive a rating of 1 – 5 stars depending on their performance in both interrogations and searching for clues . In some cases , when searching an area for clues to the crime , players can also find newspapers . Besides reading the story , the newspapers give access to a short cinematic that either covers a part of the game 's overarching plot or a flashback to Phelps ' war memories . Near the end of the final desk , players assume control of private investigator Jack Kelso , who becomes the player character for most of the rest of the game ; although different in appearance and personality , he controls identically to Phelps . 
 The game blends investigative elements with fast @-@ paced action sequences , including chases , combat , interrogations and gunfights . Players use melee attacks and firearms to fight enemies , and may run , jump or use vehicles to navigate the world . In combat , auto @-@ aim and a cover system can be used as assistance against enemies . Should player characters take damage , the character 's health will gradually regenerate . Weapons can only be used in appropriate circumstances , such as during firefights . When driving vehicles , players have the option to skip directly to the destination by nominating their partner as the driver . Players can also ask the partner for directions . In addition to storyline cases , players may engage in an optional 40 side @-@ investigations , known as Street Crimes , that are not related to the case that they are working on . 
 Suspects and witnesses in a case can be interrogated for information , when the interviewee responds , players are given the option to either believe them , doubt them , or accuse them of lying . If players accuse them of lying , they must submit evidence to prove it . When interrogating two suspects at the police station , players may decide who to charge with the crime ; charging the wrong suspect affects players ' end rating . Players have the option to skip past an action sequence and continue through the narrative if they fail it three times . There is also a free roam mode called " The Streets of L.A. " , which is unlocked after each crime desk is completed , except for the Patrol desk . In this mode , the player and his partner are allowed to free roam the city of Los Angeles . The player can replay Street Crimes , find Golden Film Reels , discover Landmarks , collect Hidden Vehicles , find Badges or just cruise around and listen to the radio . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Following the end of World War II , Cole Phelps ( Aaron Staton ) , a decorated USMC veteran of the Pacific Campaign , returns to Los Angeles , California to live with his family while taking on work as a Patrol Officer of the LAPD . In 1947 , working with his partner , Officer Ralph Dunn ( Rodney Scott ) , Phelps successfully solves a major murder case and impresses his superiors , who make him into a police detective . Working alongside Stefan Bekowsky ( Sean McGowan ) in Traffic , and then <unk> " Rusty " Galloway ( Michael McGrady ) in Homicide , Phelps earns a reputation for solving difficult cases that eventually land him a promotion into Vice . During this time , he begins falling for German lounge singer Elsa <unk> ( Erika <unk> ) and soon has an affair with her . Unknown to him , Roy Earle ( Adam J. Harrington ) , his partner in Vice and a corrupt cop , uses this information to help several prominent figures in the city , including the Chief of Police , cover up a major scandal by making him a media scapegoat , in exchange for a place in a syndicate known as " The Suburban Redevelopment Fund " ( SRF ) - a development program that supplies homes for homecoming WWII veterans . When his adultery is exposed , Phelps becomes disgraced in the LAPD , while his wife ends their marriage . 
 Prior to his demotion to Arson , Phelps had found that several Marines of his former unit had been selling morphine <unk> stolen from the ship that had taken them home , the SS <unk> , which had later led to most being assassinated by mobsters working for Mickey Cohen ( Patrick Fischler ) , who controlled the drug trade and had resented the competition ; most of the stolen drugs remains unaccounted for by the time he is demoted . While investigating a pair of suspicious house fires with his partner in Arson , Herschel Biggs ( Keith Szarabajka ) , Phelps notes a connection between them and a recent housing development , known as " Elysian Fields " , but is warned by Earle to back off from tycoon developer , Leland Monroe ( John Noble ) . Seeking help to investigate the development , Phelps advises Elsa to refuse a life insurance payout in order to prompt his old comrade , Jack Kelso ( Gil McKinney ) , now an investigator for the California Fire & Life insurance company , to look into the matter . Kelso quickly discovers that the development is using unsuitable building materials , and after nearly being killed , becomes an investigator for the Assistant D.A. whereupon he soon learn that Monroe and his former employer , the owner of Fire & Life , are involved in the SRF syndicate . 
 Kelso and Phelps eventually learn from their investigations that the Fund is merely a front to conceal its true purpose - to defraud the US Federal Government . Run by several local businessmen , dignitaries , as well as Monroe and even the Chief of Police , the syndicate had learnt about the proposed route for the Whitnall Parkway through the Wilshire district of the city , and thus bought the land it would run through . Monroe then built communities of " matchstick " houses , while Fire & Life falsely claimed the land was a higher value , knowing that the government would pay whatever the land was worth in order to gain eminent domain over it . Further investigations reveals that Courtney Sheldon ( Chad Todhunter ) , a headstrong corpsman of Phelps and Kelso 's former unit , had been involved in the theft of the morphine , of which the remainder of it had been given to his mentor and pop @-@ psychiatrist , Harlan Fontaine ( Peter Blomquist ) , who sold it on to finance the Fund , while murdering Sheldon after he began questioning the syndicate 's plans . Following a shoot @-@ out at Monroe 's mansion , Kelso quickly learns that the SRF had used a former flamethrower operator from Phelps ' and Kelso 's unit , named Ira Hogeboom , to help them with their plans . Hogeboom , who was suffering from PTSD and schizophrenia after inadvertently killing a large number of civilians on Phelps ' orders during the Battle of Okinawa , had been unknowingly manipulated by Fontaine to torch the houses of holdouts who refused to sell out to the SRF , until eventually going insane after he inadvertently incinerates a house with an entire family inside . 
 After learning that Hogeboom had murdered Fontaine and kidnapped Elsa , Phelps and Kelso pursue him into the Los Angeles River Tunnels as a heavy rain begins , fighting their way through corrupt policemen and thugs trying to stop them from exposing the SRF scam . To help them , the Assistant D.A. brokers a deal with the Chief of Police to keep his corruption silent , in exchange for his testimony against the other Fund conspirators and a promise that no more police officers will pursue Phelps . Eventually the pair rescue Elsa , with Kelso killing Hogeboom to put him out of his mental anguish . With the water level rising , the group struggle to find a way out of the tunnels before soon using an open manhole to escape . Phelps quickly volunteers to lift Kelso up through the manhole , but upon realising he cannot escape the rising water , bids his comrade a final goodbye before the current sweeps him away . Whilst the SRF scam is exposed , several members escape justice to attend Phelps 's funeral , each delivering eulogies to his memory , much to the disgust of Elsa , who walks out in a huff as Earle gives his eulogy . As Biggs prepares to go after her , he remarks to Kelso that Phelps was never his friend , to which Kelso agrees but responds that he was never Phelps ' enemy . 
 An epilogue flashback scene soon reveals that Kelso had known about the stolen morphine and Sheldon 's involvement , after they and their other fellow Marines found the surplus supply on their ship home . However , Kelso refused to be involved in Sheldon 's scheme to sell the drugs along with the other Marines , telling them all that they will lose his respect for them as Marines if they go through with the drug profiting , setting in motion the events of the game . 
 = = Development = = 
 Team Bondi began to develop L.A. Noire following their founding in 2004 . Initially due to be published by Sony Computer Entertainment , the publishing rights were later handed over to Rockstar Games in September 2006 . Though Team Bondi oversaw development , the work was shared between Team Bondi and multiple Rockstar studios around the world . Unlike other games by Rockstar , which run on their proprietary Rockstar Advanced Game Engine , L.A. Noire uses a custom engine , which includes a combination of facial motion capture and animation software . The game is notable for being the first to use MotionScan , developed by Depth Analysis . MotionScan functions by recording actors with 32 surrounding cameras to capture facial expressions from every angle , resulting in a highly realistic recreation of a human face . The technology is central to the game 's interrogation mechanic , as players are required to use the suspects ' reactions to questioning to judge whether or not they are lying . Analyst estimations place the game 's combined development and marketing budget at more than US $ 50 million , which would make it one of the most expensive video games ever made . 
 The game is set in 1947 Los Angeles , and the open world was modelled accordingly . To model the city , the developers used aerial photographs taken by photographer Robert Spence . The team also used the photographs to create traffic patterns and public transport routes , as well as the location and condition of buildings . While striving to recreate an accurate model of 1947 Los Angeles , the team also took some artistic license , such as including the appearance of the film set for D. W. Griffith 's Intolerance ; the set had actually been dismantled in 1919 . In addition to recreating the city as it was in 1947 , all of the in @-@ game cases that the developers worked upon were each inspired in some part by the actual real @-@ life crimes that the city 's media reported on during that year . Each of the game 's cases features at least a few of the real @-@ life elements that were reported in newspaper articles of that time , with one example of a case that developers found inspiration for being the " Red Lipstick Murder " . The case , part of the game 's Homicide Desk , is based upon the facts and elements that were mentioned in articles about the real @-@ life , unsolved murder of Jeanne French , a woman who was found dead in exactly the same conditions as the victim of the in @-@ game case is found in , including the M.O. used on the victim , the state the body was left in , the lipstick message found on the body , and the initial suspect being the victim 's husband , yet the in @-@ game case differs from this in that it is closed by the main protagonist and not becoming a cold case towards the end of its investigation . 
 After a secretive audition process , Aaron Staton and Gil McKinney were selected to portray protagonists Cole Phelps and Jack Kelso , respectively . Their performances were mostly recorded using motion capture technology . 
 In October 2003 , Team Bondi announced their first project , for " a next @-@ generation Sony platform " . In 2004 , McNamara said that the project was wholly funded by Sony Computer Entertainment America . The title of the game was not revealed until 2005 , when they announced that L.A. Noire was to be released exclusively to the PlayStation 3 . In September 2006 , it was announced that Rockstar Games would be handling the publishing of the game . The debut trailer was released in November 2010 , followed by a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes development video the next month . The game missed its original projected " fiscal 2008 " release date , pushed back to September 2010 to allow for further polishing . This was later pushed to the first half of 2011 , and then narrowed down to March 2011 . Later , the final release date of 17 May 2011 was confirmed . To spur pre @-@ order game sales , Rockstar collaborated with several retail outlets to provide pre @-@ order bonuses . 
 = = = Music production = = = 
 L.A. Noire features an original score . The game 's score accompanies the gameplay , alerting players at specific times . Like other games published by Rockstar , L.A. Noire also contains licensed music tracks provided by an in @-@ game radio . Over thirty songs , from artists such as Billie Holiday , Louis Armstrong and Ella Fitzgerald , feature in the game . To work on the score , the team engaged Andrew Hale and Simon Hale , as well as Woody Jackson , who had previously collaborated with the team on Red Dead Redemption ( 2010 ) . Recorded at Abbey Road Studios , the score was inspired by orchestral scores from 1940s films . In addition to the original score and licensed tracks , the game also features original vocal recordings in order to create an authentic sound to suit the musical identity of the period . When The Real Tuesday Weld were commissioned to compose the original compositions , they sought vocals that could " evoke the period " , ultimately falling upon Claudia Brücken . Three vocal tracks were produced : " ( I Always Kill ) The Things I Love " , " Guilty " , and " Torched Song " . 
 The game 's score won the award for Best Original Score at the 2012 Bafta Video Games Awards . 
 = = = Additional content = = = 
 Several standalone cases , collectibles and challenges for the game were released as downloadable content in the months following its release . " The Naked City " , released on 31 May 2011 , is a standalone Administrative Vice case that follows the murder of a model . It is based on Jules Dassin 's 1948 film of the same name . " A Slip of the Tongue " , released on 31 May 2011 , is a Traffic case that focuses on a grand theft auto . " Nicholson <unk> " , released on 21 June 2011 , is an Arson case based on the 1947 explosion of the O 'Connor Electro @-@ <unk> company . " Reefer Madness " , released on 12 July 2011 , is a Vice case that leads the detectives to further conspiracies about illegal <unk> operations . " The Consul 's Car " , released on 26 July 2011 , is a Traffic case that follows a grand theft auto ; initially released exclusively for North American PlayStation 3 versions , " The Consul 's Car " was later made purchasable in Europe , and eventually included in The Complete Edition . All in @-@ game items initially available as pre @-@ order content were also made available as downloadable content on 31 May 2011 : two suits , the Broderick and the Sharpshooter ; two guns , the Nickel Plated Pistol and the Chicago Piano Gun ; and the Badge Pursuit Challenge , challenging players to collect badges placed around the game world . 
 On 28 September 2011 , Rockstar announced the PC version of the game , subtitled The Complete Edition , which was released on 8 November 2011 . It contained all downloadable content from the original versions . Enhancements include keyboard remapping and gamepad functionality , increased fidelity , graphical enhancements , and stereoscopic 3D support . The Complete Edition was made available for consoles shortly afterwards . 
 = = Reception = = 
 L.A. Noire received " generally favorable " reviews , according to video game review aggregator Metacritic . L.A. Noire has been widely praised for its advances in storytelling and facial animation technology . 
 The first review was published by UK newspaper The Guardian , which awarded the game a perfect score , and stated " Ever since it first worked out how to assemble pixels so that they resembled something more recognisable than aliens , the games industry has dreamed of creating one thing above all else – a game that is indistinguishable from a film , except that you can control the lead character . With L.A. Noire , it just might , finally , have found the embodiment of that particular holy grail . " 
 IGN gave the game 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 , stating " L.A. Noire may not reach the emotional heights of a game like Heavy Rain , but it 's something everyone must try out . It reaches high and almost succeeds as a brilliant new type of video game narrative . " GameTrailers gave the game a 9 @.@ 1 out of 10 , concluding that " L.A. Noire floors you out of the gate , loses some steam due to repetition , but eventually wins the day thanks to its subtlety , attention to detail , and stunning character interaction . " Gamespot 's Carolyn Petit awarded the game a 9 out of 10 , concluding that " L.A. Noire 's absorbing investigations and intoxicating sense of style make it an unforgettable journey through the seamy side of the City of Angels . " GameZone gave the game an 8 @.@ 5 / 10 , stating " The story is intriguing , albeit a little slow at first . L.A. Noire takes an old school approach toward its storytelling . It ’ s a much slower approach , similar to older movies , with a heavy emphasis on detail . It is that attention to detail that sets L.A. Noire apart from other games and makes it enjoyable to play . " 
 Edge praised the facial technology , and pointed out that while there are no other major aspects of the game that had not been done better elsewhere , the fact that Team Bondi had brought together such a wide range of game genres in such a stylish , atmospheric , and cohesive manner was an achievement that few developers had managed . Joystiq gave the game a score of 9 , and stated that " L.A. Noire may not always be ' fun ' in the traditional sense , but it 's also unsatisfied with being ' merely fun , ' and the result of that aspiration is something that no one who cares about video games should miss . " 
 Official PlayStation Magazine gave it 9 out of 10 , and stated that " In many ways , L.A. Noire is similar to an AMC series ... It 's a slow build , but once hooked , we couldn 't get enough of this provocative adventure , with its compelling characters and innovative gameplay . It 's not perfect , but it 's also unlike anything else on the PS3 right now . " Official Xbox Magazine gave it 8 out of 10 , and concluded with " Yes , it 's flawed , but L.A. Noire is an honest @-@ to @-@ goodness detective crime thriller – a genuine breath of fresh air that values narrative and story above all else in an age where scripted action sequences and online deathmatch rule the day . It 's the closest thing Xbox has to PlayStation 's unique adventurer Heavy Rain . " GamesMaster gave the game 92 % , and concluded that L.A. Noire is " Rockstar 's most mature take on open @-@ world fun to date , brought to life with incredible tech . " 
 Despite the overall positive reception , some reviewers thought that the game had too many redundancies in the cases and left too little control to the player , leading to the game being boring at times . Although 1UP gave it a perfect score , they also warned that the extended cut @-@ scenes in the game could make some players feel they lost control of the action . 
 Responding to criticism that accused the character 's bodies of being lifeless , despite the game 's use of motion capture , Brendan McNamara , the game 's director and writer , stated in an interview with Eurogamer , " People were saying people were dead from the neck down . That 's because we had all this animation in the neck and all this animation in the face , but the clothes don 't move . Once you get to the level that people can actually see that level of realism , then people expect to see clothes moving and the rest of the body moving in a way we can 't replicate in video games . " In the same interview McNamara also responded to queries about why Phelps sometimes responds with particularly aggressive lines of dialogue during interrogation scenes . " It 's funny . A lot of people say Aaron turns into a psycho . When we originally wrote the game the questions you asked were coax , force and lie . It was actually force because it was a more aggressive answer . That 's the way we recorded it . But when the game came out it was truth , doubt or lie . Everyone always says Aaron on the second question is a psycho . So that 's not his fault . " 
 At the BAFTA Video Game Awards 2012 , L.A. Noire won the award for Best Original Score , the game was also nominated in seven other categories . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 On the day of the game 's U.S. release , shares in Take @-@ Two Interactive , Rockstar Games ' parent company , closed up 7 @.@ 75 % on the day ; a three @-@ year high for the company . The rise was attributed to the positive reviews that L.A. Noire had been receiving . In the last available figures from February 2012 , the game had shipped almost 5 million copies . 
 According to NPD Group , L.A. Noire was the best @-@ selling game in the United States in May 2011 , at 899 @,@ 000 copies across the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 . 
 L.A. Noire went straight to top of the UK games chart and became the fastest selling new intellectual property in the UK ( a record it held until the 2014 release of Watch Dogs ) . It stayed top of the UK game chart for three weeks . In Australia , video game stores in major cities reported that the game was going out of stock after a week . L.A. Noire debuted in Japan for the week of 4 – 10 July and sold a combined 71 @,@ 057 units on PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 . The PlayStation 3 version topped the chart , with 58 @,@ 436 units sold , and the Xbox 360 version moved 12 @,@ 621 units . 
 = = Possible sequel = = 
 On 22 May 2011 , McNamara said that a sequel to L.A. Noire would take less than the five years it took to develop the first as the technology already exists . He also stated that they are considering using the MotionScan technology for full body performances rather than only faces . The same week , in an investor conference call , Take @-@ Two Interactive CEO Strauss Zelnick said that L.A. Noire was " a very successful release " and that they " have every reason to believe that L.A. Noire is another strong franchise for this company " . He reiterated that they " do see L.A. Noire as a powerful new franchise " . 
 During an investor call in November 2011 , Zelnick re @-@ iterated the importance of the game to Take @-@ Two , stating that the game " has become an important franchise for the company . " He announced that the game was Take @-@ Two 's " most successful new release " in the past fiscal year and has become a key property in its portfolio . Also in November 2011 , it was announced that McNamara 's next game would be titled Whore of the Orient , described as " one of the great untold stories of the 20th century " . It was to be published by <unk> Studios , but was confirmed to be cancelled in June 2016 . 
 On 13 February 2012 , Rockstar Games answered numerous fan questions about their games , including a question regarding the future of the L.A. Noire franchise . Rockstar said that they are " considering what the future may hold for L.A. Noire as a series " , adding that they " don 't always rush to make sequels " . They also announced that no further DLC or additional content would be developed for the current edition . In March 2013 , Karl Slatoff , chief operating officer of Take @-@ Two Interactive , revealed that the company has an " extensive pipeline of unannounced titles in development " and mentioned that the L.A. Noire franchise was important to the company . 
 = Episode 14 ( Twin Peaks ) = 
 " Episode 14 " , also known as " Lonely Souls " , is the seventh episode of the second season of the American mystery television series Twin Peaks . The episode was written by series co @-@ creator Mark Frost and directed by series co @-@ creator David Lynch . It features series regulars Kyle MacLachlan , Michael Ontkean , Ray Wise and Richard Beymer ; and guest stars Frank Silva as Killer Bob , Hank Worden as The Waiter , Julee Cruise as Singer , and David Lynch as Gordon Cole . 
 Twin Peaks centers on the investigation into the murder of schoolgirl Laura Palmer ( Sheryl Lee ) in the small rural town in Washington state after which the series is named . In this episode , during the ongoing investigation into Laura 's death , FBI special agent Dale Cooper ( MacLachlan ) and Sheriff Truman ( Ontkean ) continue to search for her killer , the demon Bob , who has possessed a human host . Aided by Mike ( Al Strobel ) , Cooper and Truman arrest Benjamin Horne ( Beymer ) , believing him to be inhabited by Bob . Later that night , Cooper is warned by The Giant ( Carel Struycken ) that " it is happening again " , while Bob 's real host , Leland Palmer ( Wise ) , murders Madeline Ferguson ( Lee ) . 
 " Episode 14 " was first broadcast on November 10 , 1990 , on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) and was watched by an audience of 17 @.@ 2 million households in the United States , about 20 percent of the available audience . The episode was well received , garnering positive reviews after its initial broadcast and in subsequent years , but it has been criticized for unduly prolonging the revelation of Laura 's killer . Academic readings of the entry have highlighted the theme of duality and use of cinematography in the revelation scene . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The small fictional town of Twin Peaks , Washington , has been shocked by the murder of schoolgirl Laura Palmer ( Sheryl Lee ) and the attempted murder of her friend Ronette Pulaski ( Phoebe Augustine ) . FBI special agent Dale Cooper ( Kyle MacLachlan ) has been sent to the town to investigate , and has come to the realization that the killer was possessed by a demonic entity — Killer Bob ( Frank Silva ) . Mike ( Al Strobel ) , a similar spirit , has spoken to Cooper and his FBI superior , Regional Bureau Chief Gordon Cole ( David Lynch ) , explaining the nature of their existence . 
 Meanwhile , Madeline " Maddy " Ferguson ( Lee ) , Laura 's cousin , has arrived in Twin Peaks from Missoula , Montana , and helps Laura 's friends Donna Hayward ( Lara Flynn Boyle ) and James Hurley ( James Marshall ) investigate the killing . Donna finds Harold Smith ( Lenny Von Dohlen ) , one of Laura 's friends to whom she had given a secret diary , and Donna and Maddy attempt to steal it from him . 
 = = = Events = = = 
 It is morning . Agent Cooper , Chief Gordon Cole , Sheriff Harry S. Truman ( Michael Ontkean ) , Deputy Andy Brennan ( Harry Goaz ) , Deputy Hawk ( Michael Horse ) , and Philip Gerard , who is possessed by Mike , are drinking coffee in the lobby of the Sheriff 's Station . Truman informs that preparations have been made for them at The Great Northern . Mike repeats his description of Bob 's current location . Truman tells Hawk to search Harold Smith 's apartment . Cooper tells Hawk to look for Laura Palmer 's secret diary . Cole bids all farewell and leaves for Bend , Oregon . 
 Cooper , Doctor Hayward ( Warren Frost ) , Brennan , and Gerard / Mike are in the lobby of The Great Northern hotel attempting to find Bob 's human host . The hotel is hosting a contingent of sailors who are bouncing rubber balls in the hotel lobby . Mike is seated while hotel guests are brought to him one by one for " inspection . " One after another , Mike turns each away . An angry Benjamin Horne ( Richard Beymer ) enters the lobby demanding to know what is going on . Just then , Gerard enters a fit and collapses while grasping at his missing arm . 
 Meanwhile , Deputy Hawk visits the residence of Harold Smith and finds him hanging dead amongst his orchids . Maddy announces to Laura 's parents Leland ( Ray Wise ) and Sarah Palmer ( Grace Zabriskie ) that she is leaving Twin Peaks to return to her home in Missoula , Montana . Cooper , Truman , and a police team arrive at Smith 's residence . They discover the torn @-@ up remains of Laura Palmer 's secret diary and a suicide note that reads , " J 'ai une âme solitaire . " Cooper translates , " I am a lonely soul . " 
 Elsewhere , Bobby Briggs ( Dana Ashbrook ) and Shelly Johnson ( Mädchen Amick ) discuss their financial concerns regarding Shelly 's catatonic husband Leo ( Eric Da Re ) . Audrey Horne ( Sherilyn Fenn ) confronts her father Ben over his ownership of the casino and brothel One Eyed Jacks . When Audrey asks him whether he killed Laura Palmer , he denies it but confesses that he and Laura had a sexual relationship and that he loved her . Later , Shelly arrives for work at the Double R Diner and informs Norma Jennings ( Peggy Lipton ) that she has to quit to care for Leo full @-@ time . Ed Hurley ( Everett McGill ) and his wife Nadine , who is experiencing amnesia and adrenaline @-@ induced strength , enter the diner . Nadine , believing she is eighteen years old and still in high school , speaks to Norma as though a stranger . Norma and Ed play along with Nadine 's psychosis . At the Johnson residence , Bobby Briggs and Mike Nelson ( Gary Hershberger ) break open the heel of Leo Johnson 's boot , discovering a microcassette hidden within . 
 Cooper examines the remains of Laura 's secret diary at the police station , finding repeated references to Bob , and mention of ongoing sexual abuse . Laura wrote that Bob was a friend of her father , and in another entry wrote , " Someday I 'm going to tell the world about Ben Horne . " Audrey then enters and tells Cooper about Ben and Laura 's affair . After she leaves , Cooper reminds Sheriff Truman of The Giant 's message , " Without chemicals , he points " . Cooper states that Mike manifests when his human host , Philip Gerard , is not medicated , and that Mike fainted that morning just as a certain person approached him . Cooper tells Sheriff Truman they need a warrant for the arrest of Benjamin Horne . 
 Later that evening , Benjamin Horne is meeting with Mr. Tojamura at The Great Northern . Mr. Tojamura gives Horne a check for $ 5 million to purchase the lands of the Packard Sawmill . Immediately after accepting this check , Sheriff Truman , Deputy Hawk , and Agent Cooper enter and arrest Horne for murder . Horne attempts to flee but is caught and handcuffed . At the Palmer home , Sarah Palmer crawls down the stairs , crying to Leland for help . A phonograph is spinning in the background , its needle skipping in the groove at the end of the record . 
 After jailing Horne at the Sheriff 's Station , Cooper and Truman encounter the Log Lady ( Catherine E. Coulson ) , who tells Cooper , " ... there are owls in The Roadhouse . " Cooper replies , " Something is happening , isn 't it , Margaret ? " The moon is full , partially obscured by a dark and cloudy sky . 
 At the Packard residence , Pete Martell ( Jack Nance ) is fixing himself a midnight snack . He encounters Mr. Tojamura in the dark , who roughly embraces and kisses him , causing Pete to drop and shatter his plate . In a high dudgeon , Pete orders Tojamura to leave . Tojamura reveals that he is in fact Catherine Martell ( Piper Laurie ) in disguise . The two embrace as Pete emotionally dissolves . 
 Sarah Palmer crawls into her living room . She sees a vision of a pale white horse then passes out . Leland Palmer is fixing his tie in the mirror , ignoring his wife . 
 Cooper , Truman , and The Log Lady visit The Roadhouse , which is filled with sailors . Donna and James are seated together discussing Harold 's death and Maddy 's departure from Twin Peaks . Bobby Briggs is seated at the bar next to the old waiter ( Hank Worden ) from The Great Northern . While a singer and band perform , Cooper has a vision of The Giant standing alone on stage . The Giant tells Cooper , " It is happening again . " He repeats this ominous warning . 
 At the Palmer home , Leland smiles at himself in the mirror . Bob stares back at him from the reflection and cackles madly . Maddy comes downstairs complaining of a burning smell and sees Sarah passed out on the floor . She sees Leland who is smiling at her , wearing latex gloves . Maddy then sees Bob appear in Leland 's place . She screams and attempts to flee . Leland chases Maddy up the stairs , drags her to the living room , strangles , punches , taunts , and chases her . He corners her and punches her until she is catatonic . He dances with and cries over her limp body , calling her " Laura . " He then screams , " Leland says you 're going back to Missoula , Montana ! " as he rams her head into a glass picture frame , the words " Missoula , Montana " written in the lower corner of the scenic picture . Maddy collapses , bloodied and dead . Leland places a cutout of the letter " O " under the nail of her left ring finger . 
 Cooper 's vision of The Giant ends , replaced by the singer and band . The old waiter walks over to Cooper and says , " I 'm so sorry . " Donna begins to cry . James comforts her as the band repeats a melancholy refrain . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Episode 14 " was written by series co @-@ creator Mark Frost , who had written six previous episodes and directed the first season finale , " Episode 7 " . Frost co @-@ wrote three further installments — " Episode 16 " , " Episode 26 " and " Episode 29 " . This episode was directed by Lynch , the fifth such episode of Twin Peaks ; he later directed " Episode 29 " , the series ' finale . It was rated TV @-@ 14 in the United States during initial rebroadcasts ; it was later re @-@ rated to TV @-@ PG . Lynch has later stated that he feels he was able to show more on screen in the episode than he expected the network 's standards and <unk> office to allow . He credits this to the unusual imagery used , adding " if it 's not quite standard it sneaks through , but it could be that the ' not quite standard ' things make it even more terrifying and disturbing " . 
 The cast of Twin Peaks did not know who would be revealed as Palmer 's killer for some time . Wise had hoped his character Leland would not be the eventual murderer ; as the parent of a young girl he was disturbed by the idea of portraying a man who had murdered his daughter . Wise was called to a meeting with Lynch , Frost , Sheryl Lee and Richard Beymer , during which Lynch told those assembled that Leland Palmer was the killer : while addressing Wise , Lynch said " Ray , it was you , it was always you " . However , Wise felt that the end result was " beautiful " , and that it left him and his character " satisfied and redeemed " . Before this meeting , the only people to know the killer 's identity were Frost , Lynch , and Lynch 's daughter Jennifer , who had been given the information so she could author the 1990 tie @-@ in novel The Secret Diary of Laura Palmer . 
 Lynch has mentioned that he tried to avoid thinking about the morality of the narrative , or how it would be received by censors or critics , feeling that if he allowed that worry to affect him it would ultimately drive him to create something that made him uncomfortable , preferring instead to simply produce the episode he wanted to and be prepared to defend it if necessary . He has also compared the search for Laura 's killer to the central narrative of the 1960s television series The Fugitive , which featured an ongoing search for a one @-@ armed man . Contrasting the two , Lynch stated " each week , you know , they [ the writers for The Fugitive ] hardly ever dealt with that . And that 's the beautiful thing . You keep wondering , ' When will he find this guy and set everything straight ? ' But then you knew it would be the end " . 
 = = = Cinematography = = = 
 The climactic murder of Madeline Ferguson in the episode features extensive use of jump cuts to portray Leland Palmer 's spirit possession , switching rapidly between actors Ray Wise and Frank Silva . The scene is unusually long for a murder on television , lasting over four minutes . Some of its elements , including the insertion of a paper letter under Ferguson 's fingernail and the use of jump cuts to events in the Roadhouse bar , are intended to echo similar aspects of " Pilot " . 
 Erica Sheen and Annette Davison , in their book The Cinema of David Lynch : American Dreams , Nightmare Visions , have drawn attention to the use of mise en scène early in the episode . A scene featuring Ferguson , Leland and Sarah Palmer sitting in the Palmers ' living room pans across the family 's " bric @-@ à @-@ brac " . This technique draws attention to the painting with which Ferguson will be assaulted , and it highlights the similarity between Ferguson and Palmer by focusing on " the famous homecoming queen shot " of Palmer while Ferguson 's face is visible . Sheen and Davison argued that the scene highlights the " emotional claustrophobia " felt by Ferguson , and that the set surrounding her was deliberately assembled to create this feeling . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The revelation scene , in which Bob is shown to have inhabited Leland Palmer , has been noted for its sense of duality , a common theme throughout Twin Peaks . In Full of Secrets : Critical Approaches to Twin Peaks , David Lavery wrote that upon The Giant 's appearance to Dale Cooper , " The Giant has transmuted the public place into something private " . Lavery added that the murder scene is " in the living room , the public within the private " . He summarised that the ambiguity between the public perception and the private perception — " the outer and the inner " — " reverberates " throughout the scene . In his view , Maddy Ferguson was Laura Palmer 's " double " and Leland is " doubled " by Bob . However , Lavery referred to the duality of Leland and Bob as a " subjective formation " and added that the use of jump cuts " could be Maddy 's view of Leland just as much as Leland 's view of himself " . 
 This scene has also been noted by critic Sue <unk> from the Journal of Film and Video as one of several in the series that suggest incest and necrophilia . She speculated that " Leland / Bob may have raped the dead or dying Maddie " , comparing this to the " <unk> fantasies " that Laura Palmer 's corpse evokes , and Ben Horne 's unwitting brush with incest when he encounters his daughter Audrey at a brothel . Earlier in the episode it is revealed that Laura had been subject to sexual abuse by BOB , and implicitly Leland , which was further explored in the 1992 prequel movie , Twin Peaks : Fire Walk with Me . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Episode 14 " first aired on the ABC network on November 10 , 1990 . The initial broadcast was viewed by 17 @.@ 2 million households in the United States , making it the fifty @-@ first most @-@ viewed broadcast episode for the week . These viewing figures represented 20 percent of the available audience and 10 @.@ 4 percent of all households in the country . This represented a significant rise in viewing figures compared to the preceding episode , " Episode 13 " , which was seen by 11 @.@ 3 million households . However , the following episode , " Episode 15 " , suffered a drop in viewing figures , attracting 13 @.@ 3 million households . 
 The episode was well received critically . Writing for the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , Richard Roeper noted that fans and critics had begun to lose interest in the series by this point , but felt that " even at its most strained and obtuse , [ Twin Peaks ] displays more imagination and effort than almost everything else in TV land " . He added that viewers may have been put off by the series ' frame of time , explaining that only two weeks of narrative time had elapsed since " Pilot " , a slow pace contrasted with the " fast @-@ forward , instant payoff philosophy of most television " . AllRovi 's Andrea LeVasseur described the installment as " pivotal " , noting that it " answers some of the series ' long @-@ running questions " . 
 Writing for The A.V. Club , Keith Phipps rated the episode an " A " , adding " it 's not like there 's any shortage of action " . He felt that the effects used in the episode were effective and frightening while still seeming low @-@ key . In his view , the episode 's blending of surrealism and horror was similar to scenes from Lynch 's 2001 film Mulholland Drive . Phipps described the climactic murder as " one of the most disturbing moments in the Lynch filmography " , adding that it was a recurring Lynchian theme to represent the end of innocence as an actual death . IGN 's Matt Fowler included the murder at number 16 in a list of the " Top 20 <unk> Moments on TV " , describing it as " nightmare fuel " . Fowler felt the depiction of the killing was " savage " and unusually long for a television scene ; however , he added that the rampant speculation as to the identity of the killer meant that whoever it was revealed to have been , it would be " somewhat expected " . 
 Keith Uhlich , writing for Slant Magazine , described the episode as " quintessential Lynch , perhaps his finest work " , noting that the climactic murder scene was more powerful because of its necessary use of implication and suggestion . However , Uhlich felt that the installment was " a tough act to follow " , arguing that the only subsequent installments that competed with it were the series ' finale and the 1992 psychological thriller film Twin Peaks : Fire Walk with Me , which is based on Twin Peaks . DVD Talk 's Jamie S. Rich described the installment as " a violent , disturbing revelation " . Rich felt that the entry 's supernatural elements assured the audience that there was " a grander scheme to the Laura Palmer story " , elevating the series ' long @-@ running murder plot beyond " just a random night partying with drug dealers gone wrong " . 
 = Tuition fees in the United Kingdom = 
 Tuition fees were first introduced across the entire United Kingdom in September 1998 under the Labour Government as a means of funding tuition to undergraduate and postgraduate certificate students at universities , with students being required to pay up to £ 1 @,@ 000 a year for tuition . However , as a result of the establishment of devolved national administrations for Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland , different arrangements now exist with regard to the charging of tuition fees in each of the countries of the United Kingdom . 
 = = History of Tuition Fees in the UK = = 
 In May 1996 , Conservative Prime Minister John Major commissioned an inquiry , led by Sir Ron Dearing , into the funding of British higher education over the next 20 years . It estimated additional funding of almost £ 2 billion would be needed for the period , including £ 350 million in 1998 @-@ 9 and £ 565 million in 1999 @-@ 2000 , in order to expand student enrolment , provide more support for part @-@ time students and ensure an adequate infrastructure . 
 In response , the Teaching and Higher Education Act 1998 was enacted on 16 July 1998 , part of which introduced tuition fees in all the countries of the United Kingdom . The act introduced a means @-@ tested method of payment for students based on the amount of money their families earned . Starting with 1999 @-@ 2000 , maintenance grants for living expenses would also be replaced with loans and paid back at a rate of 9 percent of a graduate 's income above £ 10 @,@ 000 . 
 Following devolution in 1999 , the newly devolved governments in Scotland and Wales brought in their own acts on tuition fees . The Scottish Parliament established , and later abolished a graduate endowment to replace the fees . Wales introduced maintenance grants of up to £ 1 @,@ 500 in 2002 , a value which has since risen to over £ 5000 . 
 In England , tuition fee caps rose with the Higher Education Act 2004 . Under the Act , universities in England could begin to charge variable fees of up to £ 3000 a year for students enrolling on courses as from the academic year of 2006 @-@ 07 or later . This was also introduced in Northern Ireland in 2006 @-@ 07 and introduced in Wales in 2007 @-@ 08 . In 2009 @-@ 10 the cap rose to £ <unk> a year to take account of inflation . Following the Browne Review in 2010 , the cap was controversially raised to £ 9 @,@ 000 a year , sparking large student protests in London . A <unk> review against the raised fees failed in 2012 , and so the new fee system came into use that September . 
 Further adjustments were put forth in the 2015 budget , with a proposed fee increase in line with inflation from the 2017 @-@ 18 academic year onwards , and the planned scrapping of maintenance grants from September 2016 . The changes were debated by the Third Delegated Legislation Committee in January 2016 , rather than in the Commons . The lack of a vote on the matter has drawn criticism , as by circumventing the Commons the measures " automatically become law " . 
 = = Current Systems = = 
 = = = England = = = 
 In England , tuition fees are capped at £ 9 @,@ 000 a year , with around 76 % of all institutions charging the full amount in 2015 @-@ 16 . The average fee for a three year course is currently £ 26 @,@ 000 in total . A loan of the same size is available for most universities , although students of private institutions are only eligible for £ 6 @,@ 000 a year loans . 
 From 2017 @-@ 18 onwards , the £ 9 @,@ 000 fee cap will rise with inflation . Maintenance grants are also available to current students in England , although these are scheduled to cease with the 2016 @-@ 17 academic year . Maintenance loans are available for living costs , and these are means tested . These loans are scheduled to increase in size for 2016 @-@ 17 , when the maintenance grant system is phased out . There will be a vote in the autumn to consider a further increase effective with the 2017 @-@ 18 year . Several universities have already advertised fees of £ 9 @,@ 250 for the year in anticipation of such a vote passing . 
 In the 2015 spending review , the government also proposed a freeze in the repayment threshold for tuition fee loans at £ 21 @,@ 000 ; a figure which was previously set to rise with average earnings . The changes , if passed , will affect all Plan 2 tuition fee loans , backdated to cover loans taken out from 2012 . 
 Many commentators suggested that the 2012 rise in tuition fees in England would put poorer students off applying to university . However , the gap between rich and poor students has slightly narrowed ( from 30 @.@ 5 % in 2010 to 29 @.@ 8 % in 2013 ) since the introduction of the higher fees . This may be because universities have used tuition fees to invest in bursaries and outreach schemes . In 2016 , The Guardian noted that the number of disadvantaged students applying to university had increased by 72 % from 2006 to 2015 , a bigger rise than in Scotland , Wales or Northern Ireland . It wrote that most of the gap between richer and poorer students tends to open up between Key Stage 1 and Key Stage 4 ( i.e. at secondary school ) , rather than when applying for university , and so the money raised from tuition fees should be spent there instead . 
 = = = Northern Ireland = = = 
 Tuition fees are currently capped at £ 3 @,@ 805 in Northern Ireland , with loans of the same size available from Student Finance NI . Loan repayments are made when income rises above £ 17 @,@ 335 a year , with graduates paying back a percentage of their earnings above this threshold . 
 = = = Scotland = = = 
 Tuition is handled by the Student Awards Agency Scotland ( <unk> ) , which does not charge fees to what it defines as " Young Students " . Young Students are defined as those under 25 , without children , marriage , civil partnership or cohabiting partner , who have not been outside of full time education for more than three years . Fees exist for those outside the young student definition , typically from £ 1 @,@ 200 to £ 1 @,@ 800 for undergraduate courses , dependent on year of application and type of qualification . Postgraduate fees can be up to £ 3 @,@ 400 . 
 The system , in place since 2007 when graduate endowments were abolished , has been met with praise . Labour 's education spokesperson Rhona <unk> however has criticised the Scottish system for failing to address student poverty . 
 = = = Wales = = = 
 Like their English counterparts , Welsh universities are able to charge up to £ 9 @,@ 000 a year in tuition fees . However , Welsh students can apply for fee grants of up to £ 5 @,@ 190 , in addition to a £ 3 @,@ 810 loan to cover these costs . This system also applies to Welsh students who study elsewhere in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Possible alternatives = = 
 There have been two main proposed alternative ways of funding university studies : from general taxation or by a graduate tax . 
 = = = Funding from general taxation = = = 
 Tuition is paid for by general taxation in Germany , although only 27 % of young people gain higher education qualification there , whereas in the UK the comparable figure is 48 % . Fully or partly funding universities from general taxation has been criticised as a ' tax cut for the rich and a tax rise for the poor ' because people would be taxed to pay for something that many would not derive a benefit from , while graduates generally earn more due to their qualifications and only have to pay them back . 
 Jeremy Corbyn , current Labour leader , has stated that he would remove tuition fees and instead fund higher education by increasing National Insurance and Corporation Tax . 
 = = = Graduate tax = = = 
 During the 2015 Labour leadership election , Andy Burnham said that he would introduce a graduate tax to replace fees . He was ultimately unsuccessful in his bid for leadership . A graduate tax has been criticised because there would be no way to recover the money from students who move to a different country , or foreign students who return home . 
 = Federal Reserve Bank Building ( Seattle ) = 
 The Federal Reserve Bank Building , also known as the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco , Seattle Branch , served as the offices of the Seattle branch of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco for over 50 years , from 1951 to 2008 . 
 The building site has been the subject of several recent redevelopment proposals , including a 2008 plan to demolish the building that was halted after a U.S. District Court ruling . After ownership of the Federal Reserve Bank Building was transferred to the General Services Administration in 2013 , it was auctioned to Martin Selig Real Estate in 2015 for $ 16 million ; the firm later announced plans to build a 48 @-@ story mixed @-@ use skyscraper atop the existing building , but scaled back the project to only 8 floors . 
 The building has been listed on the National Register of Historic Places since 2013 . 
 = = Architecture and design = = 
 The Federal Reserve Bank Building is located on a half @-@ block on the west side of 2nd Avenue between Madison Street and Spring Street . The Modernist building consists of six stories , four above street level and two below , and is composed of structural steel and reinforced concrete . The main facade , facing 2nd Avenue , is clad partially in light gray Indiana limestone ; the basement 's exterior walls are clad in reddish @-@ brown granite . A small plaza on 2nd Avenue in front of the building 's main entrance , setback from the street by 18 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) , features terraced planters finished with polished granite and serve as a plinth . 
 The two basement floors of the building , located below street level , housed a vault measuring 56 by 56 feet ( 17 m × 17 m ) , behind 30 @-@ inch @-@ thick ( 76 cm ) reinforced concrete walls and stainless steel doors in the southeast corner ; the 5 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 460 m2 ) vault used 335 tonnes ( 330 long tons ; 369 short tons ) of material during its construction and once included a circular staircase that was removed in 2005 . The basement floors also contained a small parking garage and secure truck lobby accessible via an alleyway , workspaces , and a shooting range for use by security personnel . The first floor features the only public spaces in the building , mainly the lobby and former teller stands , as well as the main entrance to 2nd Avenue ; a small rentable space on the first floor was formerly occupied by the Federal Bureau of Investigation in the 1950s and has remained unoccupied since 1990 . The upper floors of the building contained open offices and check processing areas , along with employee amenities such as a cafeteria and lounges . 
 The Federal Reserve Bank Building is one of the earliest surviving works of Seattle @-@ based architecture firm <unk> , founded in 1943 ; the lead architect of the project was William J. Bain , one of the firm 's founding partners . The building was built to withstand the impact of an atomic bomb and was later retrofitted to be resistant to strong earthquakes . Designed in the Modernist style by Bain , the building recalls the pre @-@ war Moderne style with its solid features and simple facade . The Federal Reserve Bank Building shares some features with the William Kenzo Nakamura United States Courthouse , another federal building in Seattle that was built a decade earlier . The bank building 's design has been described as one of " permanence and security " , with its " austerity and visual weight [ standing out ] among the many Modern skyscrapers in the surrounding financial district . " 
 = = History = = 
 The Seattle branch of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco was opened in 1917 and spent its first three decades in leased space at the Baillargeon Building in downtown Seattle . Plans for a permanent building for the Federal Reserve were drawn up in 1948 and approved for construction by the San Francisco board on February 28 , 1949 . The site at 2nd and Madison was chosen because of its proximity to the city 's financial district and would replace the bank @-@ owned Rialto Building , built in 1894 and formerly home to the Seattle Public Library as well one of the first Frederick and Nelson department stores . Designed by local architecture firm <unk> in the post @-@ war Modernist style , the six @-@ story , steel @-@ frame building would cost $ 2 @.@ 5 million ( equivalent to $ 24 @.@ 59 million in 2015 ) to construct . 
 The cornerstone of the building was laid on April 20 , 1950 , marking the beginning of nine months of construction by the <unk> Johnson Company . The Federal Reserve Bank Building opened on January 2 , 1951 , with the Federal Reserve sharing the new building with the Federal Bureau of Investigation . 
 The building underwent some minor alterations during its 50 years of use by the Federal Reserve , consisting mostly of routine maintenance and upgrades . In 1958 , the exterior was cleaned and waterproofed at the recommendation of architect William J. Bain , resulting in the discoloring of the limestone cladding . In the 1980s , the building 's roof and windows were replaced under the direction of HNTB . Portions of the building were renovated in the 1990s to add new employee amenities , including a cafeteria and conference room . 
 The 2001 Nisqually earthquake on February 28 , 2001 , caused minor damage to the structure that was lessened by a seismic retrofit completed in 1996 . After the September 11 , 2001 attacks , the building was closed to public access and several security features were added to the surrounding perimeter . 
 The Federal Reserve announced plans in 2004 to move its Seattle branch offices to the <unk> area of Renton on 11 acres ( 4 @.@ 5 ha ) formerly owned by Boeing . The Seattle building was closed on February 20 , 2008 , with Federal Reserve vice chairman Donald Kohn noting at the Renton facility 's dedication that the old building was " no longer adequate for efficient operations " and did not meet post @-@ 2001 security standards . Ownership of the building was transferred to the General Services Administration in April 2012 to prepare for a possible sale . 
 = = Proposed redevelopment = = 
 During development of the Seattle Monorail Project in the early 2000s , an elevated monorail station at Madison Street on 2nd Avenue was proposed in the plaza of the Federal Reserve Bank Building but was ultimately not built . 
 = = = Initial plan and lawsuit over preservation = = = 
 After the building was vacated in 2008 , the Tukwila @-@ based developer <unk> Corporation negotiated a deal with the Federal Reserve Bank to purchase the property for $ 19 @.@ 75 million . The sale was opposed by local preservationists , who formed the " Committee for the Preservation of the Seattle Federal Reserve Bank Building " and filed a suit against the Federal Reserve Bank in U.S. District Court on November 21 , 2008 to halt the proposed sale . Federal judge Robert S. <unk> ruled in favor of the preservationists group on March 19 , 2010 , finding that the Federal Reserve Bank had not followed proper federal disposal procedures for surplus property . 
 On February 4 , 2013 , the Federal Reserve Bank Building was placed on the National Register of Historic Places . In 2008 , the Federal Reserve Bank sought to designate the building as a Seattle city landmark , but were unable to gain approval from the City of Seattle Landmarks Preservation Board . A second attempt at the city landmark nomination , led by Martin Selig Real Estate , began in 2016 . 
 = = = Auction and skyscraper proposal = = = 
 The General Services Administration ( GSA ) attempted to dispose of the Federal Reserve Bank Building through its surplus federal property procedures , but by November 2014 received no compelling applications from government agencies and organizations with a public function . A public auction began on December 5 , 2014 , with a starting bid set at $ 5 million , and was initially set to end on January 28 , 2015 ; in late January , bids rose to near $ 10 million between the eight bidders and forced the auction 's deadline to be extended into the following month . Bidding closed on February 7 , 2015 , with a high bid of $ 16 million submitted by an undisclosed bidder . 
 In April 2015 , it was announced that the winning bidder of the auction was Martin Selig Real Estate . The firm announced plans to build a 31 @-@ story office tower , designed by Perkins and Will , and incorporating the existing building as the skyscraper 's podium with a 3 @-@ story winter garden separating the historic building from the addition . 
 One of the unsuccessful bids came from Seattle Public Schools , who had proposed renovating the building into an elementary school in 2014 , the first downtown school in 65 years . Initially , the district applied to the GSA in July 2014 through the United States Department of Education to acquire the property , but were rejected by the latter over the tentative nature of the application ; the school board later voted in November 2014 against submitting a second application over the $ 50 million cost and 3 @-@ year deadline for renovations . The district was , however , allowed to participate in the January 2015 auction and submitted an opening bid of $ 1 million ; Seattle Public Schools was the first bidder to drop out of the auction when the price passed the district 's final bid of $ 5 @.@ 8 million . 
 The Compass Housing Authority , a homeless advocacy group , also proposed renovating the building into a downtown homeless shelter and services center in 2014 , but were rejected by the United States Department of Health and Human Services over a lack of funding . 
 In December 2015 , Selig announced updated plans to include 12 additional stories of housing , bringing the total height of the skyscraper to 664 feet ( 202 m ) and 48 stories , which would make it the fifth @-@ tallest building in the city . The skyscraper is scheduled to begin construction in 2018 and open in 2020 . After the April 2015 purchase , Selig paid for the cleaning of the building 's exterior and plaza and some interior demolition of the first and fourth floors . 
 After the acquisition of Fernando Botero 's " Adam and Eve " , a pair of <unk> statues , by Martin Selig in early 2016 , it was announced that the 12 @.@ 5 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) " Adam " would be displayed on a pedestal in front of the Federal Reserve Bank Building . 
 In June 2016 , Selig announced that he would scale back plans after facing opposition from historic preservation groups over the alterations to the historic structure . The new proposed 8 @-@ story addition would have 125 @,@ 000 square feet ( 11 @,@ 600 m2 ) of office space and include a 2 @-@ story penthouse ; parts of the new structure would be illuminated at night . The addition is being designed by a team with William Bain Jr. and John Bain , the son and grandson , respectively , of original architect William Bain . 
 = Bereitet die Wege , bereitet die Bahn , BWV 132 = 
 Bereitet die Wege , bereitet die Bahn ( Prepare the paths , prepare the road ) , BWV 132 , is a church cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach . He composed it in Weimar in 1715 for the fourth Sunday in Advent and led the first performance on 22 December 1715 . 
 Bach had taken up regular cantata composition a year before when he was promoted to concertmaster at the Weimar court , writing one cantata per month to be performed in the Schlosskirche , the court chapel in the ducal Schloss . Bereitet die Wege , bereitet die Bahn was his first cantata for the fourth Sunday in Advent . The libretto by the court poet Salomo Franck is related to the day 's prescribed gospel reading , the testimony of John the Baptist . Franck derives from it thoughts about baptism as a preparation of the individual Christian who is addressed as a limb of Christ . 
 Bach structured the music in six movements of alternating arias and recitatives , and scored it for a small ensemble of four vocal parts , oboe , strings and continuo . The voices are combined only in the closing chorale , the fifth stanza of Elisabeth Cruciger 's hymn " Herr Christ , der einig Gotts Sohn " . The music of the chorale , which was possibly on a different sheet , is lost but can be replaced by a setting of the same stanza in a different cantata . In his composition , Bach follows Franck 's Baroque imagery closely , illustrating for example the baptismal water . 
 = = History and words = = 
 On 2 March 1714 Bach was appointed concertmaster of the Weimar court capelle of the co @-@ reigning dukes Wilhelm Ernst and Ernst August of Saxe @-@ Weimar . As concertmaster , he assumed the principal responsibility for composing new works , specifically cantatas for the Schlosskirche ( palace church ) , on a monthly schedule . He wrote this cantata for the fourth Sunday in Advent , dating it himself . 
 The prescribed readings for the Sunday were from the Epistle to the Philippians , " Rejoice in the Lord alway " ( Philippians 4 : 4 – 7 ) , and from the Gospel of John , the testimony of John the Baptist ( John 1 : 19 – 28 ) . The cantata text was written by the court poet Salomon Franck , published in the collection Evangelisches Andachts @-@ Opffer in 1715 . He included the fifth stanza of Elisabeth Cruciger hymn " Herr Christ , der einig Gotts Sohn " ( 1524 ) . Franck paraphrases in the first aria the passage from the Book of Isaiah which is quoted in the prescribed gospel , " Bereitet dem Herrn den Weg " ( Prepare the path for the Lord , Isaiah 40 : 3 – 4 ) . The same passage from Isaiah appears in the beginning of Handel 's Messiah . Franck also refers to the baptism as a way of preparation . The individual Christian is addressed as a limb of Christ . 
 Bach led the first performance of the cantata on 22 December 1715 in the ducal chapel . He could not revive the work in Leipzig because tempus clausum was observed there during Advent . 
 The cantata was first published in 1881 in the Bach Gesellschaft edition , edited by Wilhelm Rust . 
 = = Structure and scoring = = 
 Bach structured the cantata in six movements , alternating arias and recitatives , concluded by a chorale . As in several other cantatas on words by Franck , it is scored for a small ensemble of four vocal soloists ( soprano ( S ) , alto ( A ) , tenor ( T ) and bass ( B ) ) , oboe ( Ob ) , two violins ( Vl ) , viola ( Va ) , cello ( Vc ) and basso continuo ( Bc ) including bassoon . A choir is only needed for the chorale , if at all . The title of the autograph score reads : " <unk> 4 Adventus Xsti Concerto . / Bereitet die Wege , bereitet die Bahn . / â 9 . / 1 Hautbois . / 2 Violini / 1 Viola / Violoncello . / S : A : T : B : / col <unk> per l <unk> / di / <unk> " . The duration is given as 22 minutes . The music of the chorale is lost ; it may have been noted in a simple setting on a separate sheet , as in the similar case of Nur jedem das Seine , BWV 163 , composed four weeks earlier . For practical purposes the same verse , closing Ihr , die ihr euch von Christo <unk> , BWV 164 , in 1725 , may be used . 
 In the following table of the movements , the scoring follows the Neue Bach @-@ Ausgabe , and the abbreviations for voices and instruments the list of Bach cantatas . The keys and time signatures are taken from the Bach scholar Alfred Dürr , using the symbol for common time ( 4 / 4 ) . The instruments are shown separately for winds and strings , while the continuo , playing throughout , is not shown . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = 1 = = = 
 The first aria , " Bereitet die Wege , bereitet die Bahn ! " ( Prepare the paths , prepare the road ! ) , is in da capo form in a 6 / 8 time signature , accompanied by the full ensemble . The soprano renders her calls to prepare the ways in melismas of several measures of semiquavers . John Eliot Gardiner , who conducted the Bach Cantata Pilgrimage in 2000 , describes the character of the movement of " insouciant grace and fleet @-@ footed buoyancy befitting a slowish gigue or a French <unk> . " The oboe adds virtuoso figuration and trills , reminiscent of Bach 's secular music . The aria is concluded by rejoicing calls : " <unk> kömmt an " ( The Messiah arrives ) . 
 = = = 2 = = = 
 The tenor recitative , " Wer bist du ? Frage dein Gewissen " ( Who are you ? Ask your conscience ) , contains extended arioso passages , to stress " der Christen Kron und Ehre " ( the Christians ' crown and glory ) and " <unk> ab die <unk> <unk> " ( back the heavy stones of sin ) . The voice and the continuo are at times set in imitation , an image for the <unk> ( following ) , as they go together to express the unity achieved , on the words " daß er mit dir im Glauben sich <unk> " ( so that He may unite Himself to you in faith ) . 
 = = = 3 = = = 
 In the bass aria , " Wer bist du ? Frage dein Gewissen " ( Who are you ? Ask your conscience ) , the question " Wer bist du ? " ( Who are you ? ) , posed by the priests to St. John in the gospel , is given to the bass as the vox Christi , as if Jesus asked the listener this question . The cello often plays a " concertante role " . Its first motif expresses the question and is repeated throughout the movement , and the vocal line is derived from it . 
 = = = 4 = = = 
 The expressive declamation of the alto recitative , " Ich will , mein Gott , dir frei <unk> <unk> " ( I would freely confess to You , my God ) , is highlighted by chords in the strings . 
 = = = 5 = = = 
 A solo violin accents the alto aria , " Christi Glieder , ach <unk> " ( Christ 's members , ah , consider ) , possibly inspired by the words " Christus gab zum <unk> <unk> <unk> Purpur , weiße <unk> " ( Christ gave as new garments crimson robes , white silk ) . Gardiner interprets it as " the cleansing effect of baptismal water " . The musicologist Julian Mincham supports that , stating : " Bach seldom neglects opportunities of creating musical images of cleansing water when mention is made of the act of baptism . This is the starting point of his invention of the violin obbligato melody " . 
 = = = 6 = = = 
 The four @-@ part setting of the closing chorale , " Ertöt uns durch deine Güte " ( <unk> us through Your goodness ) , is lost , but can be taken from Ihr , die ihr euch von Christo <unk> , BWV 164 , transposed to A major . 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 The listing is taken from the selection on the Bach @-@ Cantatas website . Choirs are roughly marked as large ( by red background ) or one voice per part ( OVPP ) ( by green background ) ; a large orchestra is highlighted red , while instrumental groups playing period instruments in historically informed performances are highlighted green under the header Instr .. 
 = Bois Protat = 
 The woodblock fragment Bois Protat ( [ <unk> <unk> ] ( " Protat wood [ block ] " ) ; also Protat block or Protat woodblock , c . 1370 – 1380 ) is a fragmentary woodblock for printing , and the images on it are the oldest surviving woodcut images from the Western world . It is cut on both sides , with a scene from Christ 's crucifixion on the recto , and a kneeling angel from a presumed Annunciation scene on the verso . The crucifixion scene likely consisted of three or more blocks ; the surviving block fragment features Longinus the Roman centurion at the Crucifixion , shown speaking with a banderole , a mediaeval precursor to the modern speech balloon containing his words . 
 The Bois Protat 's name comes from the <unk> printer Jules Protat who acquired the block after its discovery in 1898 near La Ferté Abbey in Saône @-@ et @-@ Loire , France , where it was wedged under a stone floor . Because of such poor preservation , only a quarter of the block has survived , and only one side was able to withstand making prints at the time of discovery . It is kept in the Department of Prints and Photographs at the Bibliothèque nationale de France , the National Library of France in Paris . 
 = = Description = = 
 A 600 × 230 × 25 @-@ millimetre ( 24 × 9 × 1 in ) fragment remains of the Bois Protat , a walnut woodblock engraved on both sides for printing on cloth or paper . One side is a fragment of a Crucifixion scene . Part of the cross with the left arm of Christ is visible ; to the right two Roman soldiers and a centurion stand speaking . A <unk> , or speech scroll , emanates from the centurion 's mouth and contains the Latin text , " Vere filius Dei erat iste " ( " This was really the son of God " ) , as written in the Vulgate translation of Matthew 27 : 54 . On the reverse side remains a kneeling angel , probably part of an Annunciation scene . 
 Judging from the Crucifixion fragment , coming from a very commonly depicted scene , it is thought that only a quarter to a third of the original block remains . The surface of the complete scene is believed to have been about 100 by 60 centimetres ( 39 in × 24 in ) , which is larger than contemporary paper sizes , indicating it may have been intended for printing on cloth , as was already common with patterns for clothing textiles . It is usually thought that it was intended for printing cloth altar frontals or hangings . It is rare for such a block to be carved with images on both sides , and was likely not intended to be printed using a press , as that would have defaced one side . 
 = = Background = = 
 Relief printing , in the form of woodblocks , originated in China . The earliest examples were printed on cloth ; paper prints followed the invention of paper c . 105 CE . Most printed images were religious Buddhist scenes , and the method was also the method used for texts of all sorts . 
 The Bois Protat is the earliest surviving example of the 14th @-@ century arrival of woodblock printing in Europe . The technology did not become widespread until the 15th century , when paper became readily available . Prints tended to be religious ; they were more affordable to most people than devotional paintings , and often illustrated religious books . Playing cards and other secular prints were also popular . From the mid @-@ 15th century woodcuts were combined with Gutenberg 's moveable type ; particularly in Germany , woodcuts appeared by master artists such as Albrecht Dürer , and the form enjoyed a high level of artistry . 
 = = History = = 
 The Bois Protat was discovered in 1898 in France in a corner of masonry in a house in <unk> in the department of Saône @-@ et @-@ Loire , which had been a dependency of the Abbey of La Ferté until the abbey was destroyed in 1793 during the French Revolution . The board suffered from pressure and humidity , as it was wedged under pavement . 
 After its discovery the block was purchased by <unk> printer and collector Jules Protat ( 1852 – 1906 ) , and came to be called le bois Protat ( " the Protat block " ) . Jules Protat made some test prints on China paper , one of which he exhibited at the 1900 World 's Fair in Paris . The block is not in a state to withstand repeated printings , as three @-@ quarters of the original has been lost to damage from humidity and insects ; the reverse especially has not held up well , and is not in a condition suitable for making impressions . The curator of prints at the National Library of France Henri Bouchot published a study on the block in 1902 called Un <unk> de la <unk> sur bois ( " An Ancestor of Wood Engraving " ) . Though some contested his conclusions , Bouchot dated the work to the 14th century based on technical details such as the style of art , the Uncial script of the centurion 's speech , and the costumes and weapons of the centurion and soldiers . No historical impressions ( prints ) made from the block are known , but other early woodcuts have been attributed to the same artist . 
 For some time the Bois Protat remained in Protat 's family before it was entrusted to Bouchot . In 2001 it was donated to the National Library of France . 
 = Richard Montgomery = 
 Richard Montgomery ( December 2 , 1738 – December 31 , 1775 ) was an Irish @-@ born soldier who first served in the British Army . He later became a major general in the Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War , and he is most famous for leading the failed 1775 invasion of Canada . 
 Montgomery was born and raised in Ireland . In 1754 , he enrolled at Trinity College , Dublin , and two years later joined the British Army to fight in the French and Indian War . He steadily rose through the ranks , serving in North America and then the Caribbean . After the war he was stationed at Fort Detroit during Pontiac 's War , following which he returned to Britain for health reasons . In 1773 , Montgomery returned to the Thirteen Colonies , married Janet Livingston , and began farming . 
 When the American Revolutionary War broke out , Montgomery took up the Patriot cause , and was elected to the New York Provincial Congress in May 1775 . In June 1775 , he was commissioned as a brigadier general in the Continental Army . After Phillip Schuyler became too ill to lead the invasion of Canada , Montgomery took over . He captured Fort St. Johns and then Montreal in November 1775 , and then advanced to Quebec City , where he joined another force under the command of Benedict Arnold . On December 31 , he led an attack on the city , but was killed during the battle . The British found his body and gave it an honorable burial . It was moved to New York City in 1818 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Montgomery was born near Swords in the north of County Dublin in Ireland . He was born into an Ulster Scots gentry family from County Donegal . His father , Thomas Montgomery , was a former British Army officer and a Member of Parliament for the ' rotten borough ' of Lifford in East Donegal , which nonetheless returned two members to the Irish Parliament at College Green . He was a brother of Colonel Alexander Montgomery ( 1720 – 1800 ) and a cousin of Colonel Alexander Montgomery ( 1686 – 1729 ) , both Members of Parliament for County Donegal . Another first cousin was an M.P. for County Monaghan , also named Alexander Montgomery ( died 1785 ) . The <unk> were the East Donegal branch of the Clan Montgomery . 
 Richard Montgomery spent most of his childhood at Abbeville House in <unk> , near Swords , in County Dublin , where he learned to hunt , ride , shoot , and fence . Thomas Montgomery made sure that his sons received a good education ; Richard attended the school of the Rev. Saumarez Dubourdieu in <unk> , and learned French , Latin , and rhetoric . Richard Montgomery entered Trinity College in 1754 . 
 Despite his great love of knowledge , Montgomery did not receive a degree . He was urged by his father and his oldest brother Alexander to join the military , which he did on September 21 , 1756 . His father purchased an ensign 's commission for Montgomery , who joined the 17th Regiment of Foot . 
 = = Seven Years War = = 
 = = = North America = = = 
 On February 3 , 1757 , the 17th Foot was ordered to march from its garrison at Galway and prepare to be deployed overseas . On May 5 , Montgomery and the 17th Foot sailed from Cork for Halifax , Nova Scotia , arriving in July . The British had planned an attempt on Louisbourg but the operation was called off , and they sailed instead for winter quarters in New York . In 1758 , the 17th Foot was sent back to Halifax , once again with the goal of taking Louisbourg . 
 The British commanders , Jeffery Amherst and James Abercromby drew up a plan to assault the French at Louisbourg , which is located on the Atlantic coast of Cape Breton Island , north of Halifax . The French garrison consisted of only 800 men , while the British force had 13 @,@ 142 troops supported by 23 ships of the line and 13 frigates . On June 8 , 1758 , the attack on the fort began . Montgomery landed on the beach under heavy fire and ordered his troops to advance with fixed bayonets . The outer French defenses withdrew back toward the city . Montgomery 's unit and the rest of the British force chased the French back to a point just outside the Fort 's guns . At this point , the British prepared to besiege the city . Due to bad weather , artillery and other materials needed for the siege took several weeks to arrive onshore . Montgomery had his men dig entrenchments and build breastworks , also ordering his men stay alert to the possibility of a French attack . On July 9 , the French attempted a breakout , but it failed . On July 26 , following a series of actions resulting in the destruction of most their fleet , the French surrendered . General Amherst was impressed by Montgomery 's action during the siege , and promoted him to lieutenant . 
 On July 8 , 1758 , James Abercromby attacked Fort Carillon on Lake Champlain , but was repelled with heavy losses . In August , Montgomery and the 17th foot sailed to Boston , marched to join with Abercromby 's forces in Albany and then moved to Lake George . On November 9 , Abercromby was recalled ; Amherst replaced him as commander @-@ in @-@ chief . The British high command , for the 1759 campaign , developed a plan for a three @-@ pronged attack into Canada , in which forces including the 17th foot would assault Fort Carillon and also capture Fort St. Frédéric , near Crown Point , New York . Under Amherst 's command , Montgomery and the 17th Foot participated in the capture of Fort Carillon . While the army was gathering prior to the battle , Montgomery 's company was on guard duty ; he ordered his men to remain vigilant for French and Indian ambush parties . On May 9 his suspicions proved correct when 12 men from the 17th were attacked . Montgomery and the 17th met stiff resistance at first . Montgomery ordered that his men were not to fire at night , fearing they would shoot their comrades . On July 21 , the army began its movement toward Fort Carillon ; by the 26th they were in position outside the fort 's walls , from which the French had already withdrawn most of their forces to Fort St. Frédéric . That night , after some exchange of cannon fire during the day , the French blew up Carillon 's powder magazine , and Fort St. Frédéric the next day , and withdrew to the far end of Lake Champlain . 
 The 17th , which was placed under the command of Major General Robert Monckton late in 1759 , spent the winter on garrison duty in the Mohawk River valley . On May 15 , 1760 , Monckton named Montgomery as regimental adjutant , a position awarded by the commanding officer to the most promising lieutenant in the regiment . In August , the 17th Foot joined with the Lake Champlain Division , and set out from Crown Point to participate in a three @-@ pronged attack on Montreal . The 17th Foot captured the Île aux Noix and Fort Chambly before meeting with the two other divisions outside Montreal . The Marquis de Vaudreuil , Canada 's French governor , seeing that the city could not be defended , surrendered the city without a fight . With the fall of Montreal , all of Canada fell into British hands . In the summer of 1761 , Montgomery and the 17th Foot marched from Montreal to Staten Island . 
 = = = Caribbean = = = 
 After conquering Canada , the British government put together a plan to defeat the French in the West Indies . In November 1761 , Montgomery and the 17th set sail for Barbados , where they joined other units from North America . On January 5 , 1762 , the force left Barbados and headed towards the French island of Martinique , arriving there in mid @-@ January . The French , having received word of an impending attack , had built up their defenses . A beachhead was quickly established , and the main offensive began on January 24 . The French outer defenses were overrun and the survivors fled to the capital , Fort Royal . The British prepared to launch an assault on the fort , but the French , seeing the situation was hopeless , surrendered . On February 12 , the entire island surrendered . After the fall of Martinique , the rest of the French West Indies , Grenada , Saint Lucia , and Saint Vincent , fell to the British without a fight . On May 6 , 1762 , in reward for his actions in Martinique , Lieutenant Colonel John Campbell promoted Montgomery to captain and gave him command of one of the ten companies of the 17th Foot . 
 Spain entered the war in 1761 as an ally of France . The British high command believed that capturing Havana would destroy the lines of communication from Spain to its colonial empire . On June 6 , the assaulting British forces arrived seven miles off the shore of Havana . The 17th Foot , including Montgomery 's company , was to capture Moro Fort , the key to the Spanish defense of the city . British battleships bombarded the fort , silencing all but two Spanish guns . On July 30 , Montgomery and the 17th Foot stormed and captured the fort . In late August 1762 , Montgomery and the 17th Foot were sent to New York , where they remained for the rest of the war . The conflict was ended by the signing of the Treaty of Paris on February 10 , 1763 . 
 = = Pontiac 's War = = 
 Angered by the French surrender , and unhappy with British policies that affected them , an Ottawa chief named Pontiac organized 18 Native American tribes that attacked British military and civilian settlements beginning in April 1763 . The tribes captured eight British forts and forced the evacuation of two more . General Amherst ordered the 17th to Albany in June 1763 to assist in combating the outbreak of hostilities . 
 En route to Albany , the ship carrying Montgomery up the Hudson River ran aground near Clermont Manor , seat of the politically powerful Livingston family . While the ship was refloated , the <unk> played host to the officers who were aboard the vessel . Montgomery was at this time introduced to Robert Livingston 's 20 @-@ year @-@ old daughter Janet . While it has never transpired exactly what happened between them at this time , Janet noticed that the young Montgomery was not with the regiment ( having been given leave to return to England early ) when it returned to New York . 
 The 17th was first assigned to garrison duty at Fort Stanwix , where Montgomery remained until 1764 . In 1764 , Montgomery applied to Colonel Campbell and General Thomas Gage for leave to return to England , as his service in the Caribbean had taken a toll on his health . Gage granted the leave , directing Colonel Campbell to give it as soon as possible . Campbell , whose officer ranks had been depleted in the Caribbean campaign , would only grant the leave after the upcoming expedition . 
 The British in 1764 organized two expeditions to combat the Native uprising . Montgomery and the 17th were on one of these expeditions , commanded by John Bradstreet , that went to Fort Niagara in July , where they were stationed for one month , while Sir William Johnson organized and held a major conference with Natives from around the Great Lakes . The conference drew more than 2 @,@ 000 Natives ; Bradstreet 's forces stayed there as a deterrent to rumored Native attacks . They then marched to Fort Detroit , which had been subject to a surprise attack earlier , arriving in August . For several weeks , Montgomery stayed at the fort , helping to improve its defenses , and also gaining an understanding of how to interact with the Natives . In September , Bradstreet left Fort Detroit for Sandusky , to meet with the Shawnee and the Delaware ; while the 17th remained on garrison duty at Fort Detroit and Fort Michilimackinac , Montgomery , whose leave had been granted , accompanied him . On October 3 , Montgomery and several other officers met with Thomas King , an Oneida chief . King had accompanied a detachment of Bradstreet 's men on operations in Illinois ; he reported that the Natives were quite hostile there , and had recommended against military action against them . Two days later , at a larger conference with Bradstreet and Iroquois leaders , Bradstreet explained to them that the British would not be attacking the Shawnee and Delaware . Bradstreet then released Montgomery , who traveled first to Johnson Hall and then New York , where he delivered dispatches from Bradstreet to Gage before departing for England . 
 = = Recovery = = 
 In Britain , Montgomery recovered his health . He associated with Whig Members of Parliament , who generally supported the colonists in their demands for more political freedom . Montgomery became friends with several prominent Whigs , among them Isaac Barre , Edmund Burke , and Charles James Fox . While stationed in Britain , Montgomery spent much of his time discussing politics with these three men . He began to question the British Government 's policies . In 1768 , with the 17th Foot back in England , he began a recruitment drive ; before it began , his company was only 17 men . He also became engaged ; however , his fiancee proved to be untrue , and the engagement was broken . 
 After being passed over for promotion in 1771 , likely because of his political affiliations , he sold his commission for about £ 1 @,@ 500 and left the military in 1772 . He then bought scientific instruments ( microscopes , a barometer and hygrometer ) , surveying tools , and draftsmen 's tools , and sailed for America in July of that year . He had decided to never marry or take up arms again , and to become a gentleman farmer . 
 = = Settling in New York = = 
 He bought a farm at King 's Bridge , 13 miles north of New York City . While adjusting to his surroundings , Montgomery renewed his acquaintance with Janet Livingston , who later recounted that " politeness led him to make me a visit . " After receiving permission from her father , he and Janet were married on July 24 , 1773 . 
 After their marriage , Montgomery leased his farm to a tenant . His wife 's grandfather , Judge Beekman , gave them a cottage on the Post Road north of the Beekman Arms in Rhinebeck in which to reside . Montgomery bought some surrounding land and set to work fencing , ploughing fields , building a grain mill , and laying the foundation for a larger home called " Grasmere " , though it was yet to be completed at the time of his death and the tiny cottage was his only residence in Rhinebeck . He said that he was " Never so happy in all my life " , but followed that up by saying " This cannot last ; it cannot last . " Three months after their marriage , Janet told him of a dream she had in which Montgomery was killed in a duel by his brother . Montgomery replied by saying " I have always told you that my happiness is not lasting ... Let us enjoy it as long as we may and leave the rest to God . " 
 Because Montgomery was now tied to the Livingston family , who supported the Patriot cause , he began to turn against the British government , seeing himself as an American instead of an Englishman . He came to believe that the British government was being oppressive and was acting like a tyrannical parent @-@ state . 
 = = = New York Provincial Congress = = = 
 On May 16 , 1775 , Montgomery was elected as one of the ten deputies to represent Dutchess County in the New York Provincial Congress . Although Montgomery had only lived in New York for two years and had not sought political involvement , he was well known and respected in the area and he felt obliged to attend . He was reluctant to go , but nonetheless went to New York City , 80 miles south of Rhinebeck . 
 The first session began on May 22 . On May 26 , 97 delegates , including Montgomery , signed a resolution legitimizing its authority . Montgomery 's views were those of a moderate Patriot . He believed that the British Government was wrong , but hoped for an honorable reconciliation . Gradually , the faction of the Congress that remained loyal to the King lost its influence , with some not participating on a regular basis . Montgomery was selected to serve in a site selection committee to decide the placement of military defensive positions in New York , and was also involved in organizing the provincial militia and securing its supplies . 
 = = American Revolution = = 
 = = = Appointment = = = 
 After the appointment of George Washington as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the newly formed Continental Army on June 15 , 1775 , the Second Continental Congress asked the New York Provincial Government to select two men for service in the army . One would be a major general , the other a brigadier general . The assembly favored Philip Schuyler as the major general . Montgomery expressed concern over this , as he did not believe that Schuyler had enough combat experience for such an appointment . Montgomery wrote that " Phil Schuyler was mentioned to me ... His consequence in the province makes him a fit subject for an important trust – but has he strong nerves ? I could wish to have that point well ascertained with respect to any man so employed . " Although Montgomery knew he was under consideration for brigadier general , he did not publicly show any desire for the appointment . Nonetheless , Schuyler was appointed major general , and Montgomery brigadier general , on June 22 . Montgomery was ranked second in command of all the brigadier generals . In view of this appointment , he said , " The Congress having done me the honor of electing me brigadier @-@ general in their service , is an event which must put an end , for awhile , perhaps for ever , to the quiet scheme of life I had prescribed for myself ; for , though entirely unexpected and undesired by me , the will of an oppressed people , compelled to choose between liberty and slavery , must be obeyed . " 
 = = = Plan = = = 
 On June 25 , George Washington passed through New York City on his way to Boston . Washington assigned Montgomery as deputy commander under Schuyler . A few days later , Schuyler received orders from the Continental Congress to invade Canada . The idea was that the army was to invade Quebec , where the Hudson River and the northern lakes could supply the army . A force was quickly assembled at Fort Ticonderoga , and Schuyler left to take command of the army on July 4 . Montgomery stayed in Albany for several more weeks making the final arrangements for the invasion . His wife followed him as far north as Saratoga , where he told her " You shall never have cause to blush for your Montgomery . " 
 Through July and early August , Montgomery and Schuyler continued to organize their force , raising the men and materials needed for an invasion . While they organized , Washington decided to expand the invasion , ordering Benedict Arnold to lead another invasion force that would invade Quebec from Maine . It was to join with Schuyler 's army outside Quebec City , where they would launch a joint attack on to the city . 
 = = = Invasion of Canada = = = 
 In August , Schuyler left to meet with representatives of the Iroquois Confederacy in order to keep them neutral during the invasion , leaving Montgomery in command of the forces at Fort Ticonderoga . While Schuyler was away , Montgomery received intelligence that the British were building two gunboats on Lake Champlain , which , when complete , would give the British military access to the lake . Without asking permission from Schuyler , he moved 1 @,@ 200 men north on the schooner Liberty and the sloop Enterprise . Montgomery wrote a letter to Schuyler , explaining the situation . 
 Schuyler returned to Fort Ticonderoga on August 30 , ordered an additional 800 men to reinforce Montgomery , and then , despite being ill , set out to join Montgomery . He caught up with Montgomery on September 4 on Isle La Motte , where he assumed command and ordered the advance to continue to Île aux Noix , a small island in the Richelieu River . Schuyler , whose health was poor , drafted a proclamation in which he called the Canadians " Friends and Countrymen " , asking them to help expel the British from Canada . 
 On September 6 , Montgomery led a probing force to Fort St. Johns , the key to the British defense of Montreal . Montgomery led the main body of troops toward the fort through a marshy and heavily wooded area . A flanking party led by Captain Matthew Mead was ambushed by 100 Native Americans allied to the British . The party held its ground , forcing the ambushing Natives to fall back to the fort . Montgomery , fearing that the British force was larger than he had anticipated , called off operations for the rest of the day and withdrew his force to a spot beyond the range of the British guns . Believing that the fort could not be captured quickly , Schuyler recalled Montgomery 's force and fortified Île aux Noix . 
 Schuyler 's health declined , so Montgomery assumed command of the daily functions of the army . On September 10 , a larger force of 1 @,@ 700 men led by Montgomery moved toward the fort . In the swampy area around the fort , it was so dark that two parties of Americans ran into each other ; each feared the other to be the British , and both fled . Montgomery ran to intercept them and ended the flight . As they advanced toward the fort , the force came under British grapeshot fire . One party of Americans attacked the British breastworks , inflicting 2 casualties , after which they fell back . The next morning , Montgomery called a council of war , in which it was agreed to make another attack on the fort . However , word spread that a British warship was advancing up the river , and half the New England troops fled out of fright . Montgomery , believing his force could no longer take the fort , retreated back to Île aux Noix . Montgomery , furious at the flight of the New England troops , asked Schuyler to appoint a court @-@ martial board . Meanwhile , Schuyler 's health had not improved . He left for Ticonderoga on the 16th to recover , giving full control of the operation to Montgomery . 
 = = = Siege of St. Johns = = = 
 Outside of Fort Saint @-@ Jean ( Quebec ) , Montgomery continued to receive reinforcements . He granted leaves to commanders who he felt were not fit for their position . He said " I hope we shall have none left but fighting men on whom I can rely . " 
 On September 16 , Montgomery organized another expedition against the British fort . In total , he had 1 @,@ 400 men . He sent a naval component , with 1 schooner , 1 sloop , and 10 bateaux with 350 troops to counter any move by the British warship , Royal Savage . Montgomery took the rest of his force and sailed up the river , landing near St. Johns on September 17 . The British garrison was 725 men commanded by Major Charles Preston , who just 3 years earlier had been Montgomery 's superior officer in the British Army . 
 Montgomery and his troops spent the first night near the landing area , under light fire from the British guns . The next morning , he ordered Major Timothy Bedel to occupy a position north of the fort , but when Montgomery saw that his men were apprehensive , he chose to lead the mission himself . As Montgomery led his troops , they came upon a fight between British troops and another American party . Montgomery took command of the skirmish and forced the British party back into the fort . Montgomery sent Bedel with a force to entrench themselves about a mile north of the fort . Montgomery then put other troops around the fort and began a siege . 
 Preston and the British forces had many more guns and much more ammunition than the Americans and thus achieved a 10 @-@ to @-@ 1 firepower advantage for the first few weeks . Montgomery concentrated his forces on improving the siege works . Within several days they had erected 2 batteries under consistent fire from the fort . On September 22 , Montgomery was nearly killed while inspecting the breastworks when a cannonball from the fort shot past him , ripping his skirt and knocking him off the breastwork , although he landed on his feet . The troops observed that this " did not seem to hurt or frighten him . " 
 The Americans continued to receive armaments from Ticonderoga , with guns arriving on September 21 and also on October 5 . However , the artillery were positioned too far away to do much damage to the fort . With the arrival of the new guns , Montgomery planned to move the emphasis of the bombardment from the east side of the fort to the north side , where they would be closer . However , his officers unanimously rejected this plan , fearing that many men would desert due to the increased danger . Montgomery ordered that a new battery be built where the Royal Savage could be threatened . On October 14 , the battery was completed and then used to sink the British ship . 
 In mid @-@ October , James Livingston , an American expatriate living near Chambly ( and a relative of Montgomery 's wife Janet ) , suggested to Montgomery that he might have better success attacking Fort Chambly , which , about 10 miles downstream , was weaker than St. Jean . Montgomery approved of the idea and ordered 350 men to take Chambly . On the night of October 16 , two American guns were slipped past Fort St. Jean and moved towards Chambly . The next morning , these guns opened fire on Chambly . After two days of bombardment , holes were driven into the fort 's walls and the <unk> had been knocked down . The British commander surrendered the fort , along with 6 tons of gunpowder and 83 men . Montgomery sent the colors of the 7th Royal Fusiliers , who had been defending the fort , to Schuyler , the first standards of a British regiment captured in the war . Washington sent a letter of congratulations to Montgomery and commented that he hoped " that his next letter be dated from Montreal . " 
 The capture of Chambly improved morale in the ranks of Montgomery 's army , so much so that he went through with his plan to establish a battery north of Fort St. Jean , this time without opposition . While the Americans were constructing the batteries , the British heavily bombarded the American workers , but this resulted in few casualties . General Guy Carleton , commanding the British forces at Montreal , realized that the situation at Fort St. Jean was becoming desperate . He personally led a relief force at the end of October , but American forces successfully prevented it from crossing the Saint Lawrence River south of Montreal . 
 On November 1 , the new batteries erected north of the fort were complete . The Americans began to fire at the fort and continued to do so throughout the rest of the day . The British guns fired back , but were less effective . The American guns caused few casualties , but inflicted heavy structural damage inside of the fort . Morale in the besieged garrison fell as the bombardment ( and declining rations ) took their toll . At sundown , Montgomery ordered the firing to stop and sent a prisoner captured at Chambly inside with a letter asking for the garrison 's surrender . A messenger sent from Carleton to Preston was captured during the night , in which Carleton ordered that Preston continue to hold out . On November 2 , the British agreed to surrender with full military honors . They marched out of the fort on November 3 , and were sent into the colonies , where they were interned . The British had suffered 20 killed and 23 wounded , while the Americans had only five killed and six wounded throughout the siege . 
 = = = Montreal to Quebec = = = 
 Montgomery then turned the army toward Montreal . The march was difficult as there was snow , water , and ice on the ground and a winter storm struck several days after their departure . In an attempt to stop an escape of British troops from Montreal to Quebec , Montgomery sent a detachment to Sorel where the force briefly clashed with British troops . The British troops quickly withdrew to their vessels in the St. Lawrence River . When Montgomery and the main army reached the outskirts of the city , Montgomery sent a messenger in demanding the surrender of the city or they would suffer bombardment . While negotiations for the city 's surrender took place , Carleton fled down the St. Lawrence River in a small flotilla of ships . The city surrendered on November 13 , and Montgomery and his army marched into the city without a shot being fired . 
 On November 19 , the British flotilla was captured , but Carleton narrowly escaped and made his way to Quebec City . Montgomery 's kind treatment toward the captured British prisoners caused several officers to express their concern . Montgomery saw this as a challenge to his authority and this , along with the lack of discipline in the army , caused Montgomery to threaten resignation . Letters from Washington in which Washington also expressed his troubles with the discipline of troops convinced Montgomery to continue his command . 
 On November 28 , Montgomery and 300 men went aboard some of the captured ships and began to sail to Quebec City . On December 2 , Montgomery joined Benedict Arnold 's force at Pointe aux Trembles , 18 miles upriver from Quebec . On his arrival , Arnold turned over command of his forces to Montgomery . On December 3 , Montgomery gave Arnold 's men , who had marched through the Maine wilderness to Quebec City and suffered much hardship along the way , much @-@ needed supplies , including clothing and other winter supplies taken from the captured British ships . The next day , the army moved toward the city ; when they arrived , Montgomery ordered the city to be surrounded . On December 7 , Montgomery sent an ultimatum to Carleton , demanding the surrender of the city . Carleton burned the letter . Several days later , Montgomery sent a letter into the city appealing the merchants telling them that they had come to liberate the civilians of Quebec . However , Carleton discovered the plan and quickly had the messenger arrested . Montgomery , wanting his message to reach the inhabitants of the city , then sent the proclamation over the wall with bows and arrows . 
 = = = Attack and death = = = 
 Unknown to Montgomery , he was promoted to major general on December 9 for his victories at St. Johns and Montreal . After Montgomery was unable to convince Carleton to surrender , he placed several mortars a few hundred yards outside the walls of the city . The shelling of the city began on December 9 , but after several days it had failed to make a serious impact on the walls , the garrison , or the civilian population . With the shelling having little effect , Montgomery ordered the emplacement of another battery closer towards the city walls , on the Plains of Abraham , despite the fact it offered little natural cover from returning fire . On December 15 , the new batteries were ready and Montgomery sent a party of men under the flag of truce to ask for the city 's surrender . However , they were turned away . Montgomery then resumed firing on the city , but the effect was little better . When the new batteries were hit by more effective fire from the British , Montgomery ordered their evacuation . 
 As the bombardment of the city proved to be unsuccessful , Montgomery then began to plan for an assault . Montgomery was to assault the Lower Town district , the part of the city near the river shore , while Arnold was to attack and take the Cape Diamond Bastion , a strong part of the city walls on the highest point of the rocky promontory . Montgomery believed that they should attack during a stormy night , therefore the British would not be able to see them . On December 27 , the weather became stormy , and Montgomery ordered that the men prepare to attack . However , the storm soon subsided and Montgomery called off the attack . As Montgomery waited for a storm , he was forced to revise his plans , because a deserter communicated the original plan to the defenders . In the new plan , Montgomery would attack the Lower Town from the south and Arnold would attack the Lower Town from the north . After breaking through the walls , Montgomery and Arnold would meet up in the city and then attack and take the Upper Town , causing resistance to collapse . To increase their chance of surprise , Montgomery planned two feints . One detachment of troops ( the 1st Canadian Regiment under James Livingston ) would set fire to one of the gates while another ( under the command of Jacob Brown ) would engage the guard at Cape Diamond Bastion and fire rockets to signal the start of the attack . While the feints were conducted , artillery would fire into the city . Although Montgomery was reluctant to attack , enlistments for Arnold 's men were expiring on January 1 , and he was concerned about losing their services . 
 On the night of December 30 , a snowstorm struck . Montgomery issued the order to attack and the Americans began to move towards their designated positions . At 4 : 00 a.m. , Montgomery saw the rocket flares and began to move his men around the city towards the lower town . Although the rockets were to signal the attack , they also alerted the British of the impending attack , and the city 's defenders rushed to their posts . Montgomery personally led the march to the Lower Town , as they descended the steep slippery cliffs outside the city walls . At 6 : 00 a.m. , Montgomery 's force reached a palisade at the edge of the Lower Town , which they had to saw through . After they sawed through a second palisade , Montgomery led the advance party through the opening . Seeing a two @-@ story blockhouse down the street , Montgomery led the troops toward it , encouraging the men by drawing his sword and shouting , " Come on , my good soldiers , your General calls upon you to come on . " When the Americans were about 50 yards ( 46 m ) away , the British forces in the blockhouse ( 30 Canadian militia and some seamen ) , opened fire with cannon , musket , and grapeshot . Montgomery was killed with grapeshot through the head and both thighs . Also killed in the burst of gunfire were Captains John Macpherson and Jacob Cheesman . 
 With the death of Montgomery , his attack fell apart . Colonel Donald Campbell , the surviving officer , ordered a somewhat panicked retreat . Without Montgomery 's assistance , Arnold 's attack , after initial success , fell apart . Arnold was wounded in the leg , and a large number of his troops were captured , including Daniel Morgan . 
 = = = Funeral = = = 
 On 1 January 1776 , the British started collecting bodies of the deceased and soon found the body of a high @-@ ranking officer of the American colonial army . After being brought to General Carleton , an American prisoner confirmed that the body was that of Richard Montgomery . 
 Once Montgomery 's death was announced , Benedict Arnold assumed command of the American colonial forces . As Montgomery was a well @-@ respected man on both sides of the battlefield , Carleton ordered that he be buried with dignity , but not with too much fanfare . At sunset on 4 January 1776 , Montgomery 's remains were put to rest . During his burial , American prisoners acknowledged Montgomery as a " beloved general " with " heroic bravery " and " suavity of manners " who held the " confidence of the whole army . " 
 = = Mourning = = 
 Both Schuyler and Washington were devastated upon hearing of Montgomery 's death . Schuyler believed that without Montgomery , victory in Canada was not possible . He wrote to Congress and Washington that " My amiable friend , the gallant Montgomery , is no more ; the brave Arnold is wounded ; and we have met a severe check , in an unsuccessful attempt on Quebec , May Heaven be graciously pleased that the misfortune may terminate here . " Washington wrote to Schuyler , " In the death of this gentleman , America has sustained a heavy loss , as he had approved himself a steady friend to her rights and of ability to render her the most essential services . " Congress reacted to Montgomery 's death by trying to keep the loss as quiet as possible . They feared the news would lower the morale of the troops and civilians . 
 On January 25 , 1776 , Congress approved the establishment of a monument in memory of Montgomery . A state memorial service was also scheduled and carried out on February 19 , 1776 . Throughout the colonies , Montgomery was viewed as a hero , and Patriots tried to use his death to promote their cause in the war . Montgomery 's name was used very often in literature ; among the authors who used his name was Thomas Paine . 
 Montgomery was also mourned in Britain . Whigs attempted to use his death to show the failure of the British policies on the American Colonies . Prime Minister Lord Frederick North acknowledged Montgomery 's military ability but said " I cannot join in lamenting the death of Montgomery as a public loss . Curse on his virtues ! They 've undone his country . He was brave , he was able , he was humane , he was generous , but still , he was only a brave , able , humane , and generous rebel . " Newspapers in London paid tribute to Montgomery , with the Evening Post bordering its March 12 edition in black as a sign of mourning . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Janet would outlive Montgomery by 53 years . Janet always referred to him as " my general " or " my soldier " and guarded his reputation . After his death , Janet moved to the house near Rhinebeck on which Montgomery had begun work before the war . Janet remained interested in politics for the rest of the war and was always a harsh critic of Loyalists . After the war , former Continental Army general Horatio Gates proposed marriage to her , but she declined . In 1789 , Janet stopped in New York City on her way to visit some of Montgomery 's relatives in Ireland . She attended Washington 's inaugural ball , as he had just been sworn in as president , and also visited Washington and his family several times more . She sailed for Ireland soon after , and returned to America in 1790 after she had a falling out with her sister @-@ in @-@ law over British @-@ American politics . 
 In 1818 , Stephen van Rensselaer , Governor of New York , obtained permission for Montgomery 's remains to be moved from Quebec to New York . In June 1818 , Montgomery 's remains set off for New York City . On July 4 they arrived in Albany and took a boat down the Hudson to New York City . Janet stood out on her porch and watched the boat bring Montgomery 's remains down the river , fainting at the sight . When his remains arrived in New York City , 5 @,@ 000 people attended the procession . His remains were interred on July 8 , next to his monument at St. Paul 's Chapel in Manhattan , which had been completed in 1776 . Janet was pleased with the ceremony and wrote , " What more could I wish than the high honor that has been conferred on the ashes of my poor soldier . " 
 Years later , when Andrew Jackson was corresponding with Edward Livingston he wrote " Present me in the most respectful terms to your aged sister [ Janet ] . Says to her , if I ever should be within one hundred miles of her dwelling I will visit and have the high honor of shaking by the hand the revered relict of the patriotic <unk> . Montgomery , who will ever live in the hearts of his countrymen . " Three months after this letter , Janet died , on November 6 , 1824 . 
 = = Memorials = = 
 Montgomery 's home in Rhinebeck , New York , is now the General Montgomery House , a historic house museum moved from Montgomery Street to 77 Livingston Street . The oldest structure in the Village of Rhinebeck , the building is also used for monthly meetings of the Chancellor Livingston Chapter of the Daughters of the American Revolution . 
 The United States Navy has named a number of ships USS Montgomery over the years , including a frigate that was begun in 1776 , and burned before completion to prevent its capture by the British . 
 The liberty ship SS Richard Montgomery , built in 1943 , was sunk in 1944 in the Thames Estuary . Its cargo of 3 @,@ 173 tons of munitions continues to pose a threat to the local area . 
 In Philadelphia , there is a statue of Montgomery in Fairmount Park , near the Philadelphia Museum of Art . 
 = = = Places = = = 
 Fort Montgomery , a massive masonry fortification mounting 125 guns on Lake Champlain was named for the General . Its construction begun in 1844 , it was designed to guard the strategically important frontier between Canada and the United States ; only ruins remain today . 
 Montgomery has several places named after him . Counties named for him are to be found in North Carolina , Missouri , Arkansas , Illinois , Indiana , Kansas , Maryland , Ohio , Pennsylvania , New York , Georgia , Virginia , and Kentucky . Cities and towns named for him most notably include Montgomery , Alabama , that state 's capital and second largest city , as well as Montgomery , Minnesota and Montgomery , Vermont . There is a township in New Jersey , a village in New York , and a town in Massachusetts as well . 
 Richard Montgomery High School in Rockville , Maryland bears his name , itself located in the county named after him Montgomery County . Montgomery Place , a mansion in <unk> , New York , was constructed in 1803 and named in his honor by his widow . General Montgomery had planned it before his departure from Grassmere in 1775 , and construction was originally planned to start in 1776 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Montgomery is mentioned in a Fort Saint @-@ Jean plaque erected in 1926 by Historic Sites and Monuments Board of Canada at the Royal Military College Saint @-@ Jean . " Constructed in 1743 by M. de <unk> under orders from Governor la Galissonnière . This post was for all the military expeditions towards Lake Champlain . In August 31 , 1760 , Commandant de Roquemaure had it blown up in accordance with orders from the Governor de Vaudreuil in order to prevent its falling into the hands of the English . Rebuilt by Governor Carleton , in 1773 . During the same year , under the command of Major Charles Preston of the 26th Regiment , it withstood a 45 day siege by the American troops commanded by General Montgomery . " 
 = Surface weather analysis = 
 Surface weather analysis is a special type of weather map that provides a view of weather elements over a geographical area at a specified time based on information from ground @-@ based weather stations . 
 Weather maps are created by plotting or tracing the values of relevant quantities such as sea level pressure , temperature , and cloud cover onto a geographical map to help find synoptic scale features such as weather fronts . 
 The first weather maps in the 19th century were drawn well after the fact to help devise a theory on storm systems . After the advent of the telegraph , simultaneous surface weather observations became possible for the first time , and beginning in the late 1840s , the Smithsonian Institution became the first organization to draw real @-@ time surface analyses . Use of surface analyses began first in the United States , spreading worldwide during the 1870s . Use of the Norwegian cyclone model for frontal analysis began in the late 1910s across Europe , with its use finally spreading to the United States during World War II . 
 Surface weather analyses have special symbols that show frontal systems , cloud cover , precipitation , or other important information . For example , an H may represent high pressure , implying good and fair weather . An L , on the other hand , may represent low pressure , which frequently accompanies precipitation . Various symbols are used not just for frontal zones and other surface boundaries on weather maps , but also to depict the present weather at various locations on the weather map . Areas of precipitation help determine the frontal type and location . 
 = = History of surface analysis = = 
 The use of weather charts in a modern sense began in the middle portion of the 19th century in order to devise a theory on storm systems . The development of a telegraph network by 1845 made it possible to gather weather information from multiple distant locations quickly enough to preserve its value for real @-@ time applications . The Smithsonian Institution developed its network of observers over much of the central and eastern United States between the 1840s and 1860s once Joseph Henry took the helm . The U.S. Army Signal Corps inherited this network between 1870 and 1874 by an act of Congress , and expanded it to the west coast soon afterwards . 
 At first , all the data on the map was not taken from these analyses because of a lack of time standardization . The first attempts at time standardization took hold in Great Britain by 1855 . The entire United States did not finally come under the influence of time zones until 1905 , when Detroit finally established standard time . Other countries followed the lead of the United States in taking simultaneous weather observations , starting in 1873 . Other countries then began preparing surface analyses . The use of frontal zones on weather maps did not appear until the introduction of the Norwegian cyclone model in the late 1910s , despite Loomis ' earlier attempt at a similar notion in 1841 . Since the leading edge of air mass changes bore resemblance to the military fronts of World War I , the term " front " came into use to represent these lines . 
 Despite the introduction of the Norwegian cyclone model just after World War I , the United States did not formally analyze fronts on surface analyses until late 1942 , when the WBAN Analysis Center opened in downtown Washington , D.C .. The effort to automate map plotting began in the United States in 1969 , with the process complete in the 1970s . Hong Kong completed their process of automated surface plotting by 1987 . By 1999 , computer systems and software had finally become sophisticated enough to allow for the ability to underlay on the same workstation satellite imagery , radar imagery , and model @-@ derived fields such as atmospheric thickness and frontogenesis in combination with surface observations to make for the best possible surface analysis . In the United States , this development was achieved when Intergraph workstations were replaced by n @-@ AWIPS workstations . By 2001 , the various surface analyses done within the National Weather Service were combined into the Unified Surface Analysis , which is issued every six hours and combines the analyses of four different centers . Recent advances in both the fields of meteorology and geographic information systems have made it possible to devise finely tailored products that take us from the traditional weather map into an entirely new realm . Weather information can quickly be matched to relevant geographical detail . For instance , icing conditions can be mapped onto the road network . This will likely continue to lead to changes in the way surface analyses are created and displayed over the next several years . The <unk> project is an ongoing attempt to gather surface pressure data using smartphones . 
 = = Station model used on weather maps = = 
 When analyzing a weather map , a station model is plotted at each point of observation . Within the station model , the temperature , dewpoint , wind speed and direction , atmospheric pressure , pressure tendency , and ongoing weather are plotted . The circle in the middle represents cloud cover . If completely filled in , it is overcast . If conditions are completely clear , the circle is empty . If conditions are partly cloudy , the circle is partially filled in . Outside the United States , temperature and dewpoint are plotted in degrees Celsius . Each full flag on the Wind Barb represents 10 knots ( 19 km / h ) of wind , each half flag represents 5 knots ( 9 km / h ) . When winds reach 50 knots ( 93 km / h ) , a filled in triangle is used for each 50 knots ( 93 km / h ) of wind . In the United States , rainfall plotted in the corner of the station model are in English units , inches . The international standard rainfall measurement unit is the millimeter . Once a map has a field of station models plotted , the analyzing isobars ( lines of equal pressure ) , <unk> ( lines of equal pressure change ) , isotherms ( lines of equal temperature ) , and isotachs ( lines of equal wind speed ) can be easily accomplished . The abstract present weather symbols used on surface weather analyses for obstructions to visibility , precipitation , and thunderstorms were devised to take up the least room possible on weather maps . 
 = = Synoptic scale features = = 
 A synoptic scale feature is one whose dimensions are large in scale , more than several hundred kilometers in length . Migratory pressure systems and frontal zones exist on this scale . 
 = = = Pressure centers = = = 
 Centers of surface high- and low @-@ pressure areas are found within closed isobars on a surface weather analysis where they are the absolute maxima and minima in the pressure field , and can tell a user in a glance what the general weather is in their vicinity . Weather maps in English @-@ speaking countries will depict their highs as Hs and lows as Ls , while Spanish @-@ speaking countries will depict their highs as As and lows as Bs . 
 = = = = Low pressure = = = = 
 Low @-@ pressure systems , also known as cyclones , are located in minima in the pressure field . Rotation is inward and counterclockwise in the northern hemisphere as opposed to inward and clockwise in the southern hemisphere due to the Coriolis force . Weather is normally unsettled in the vicinity of a cyclone , with increased cloudiness , increased winds , increased temperatures , and upward motion in the atmosphere , which leads to an increased chance of precipitation . Polar lows can form over relatively mild ocean waters when cold air sweeps in from the ice cap , leading to upward motion and convection , usually in the form of snow . Tropical cyclones and winter storms are intense varieties of low pressure . Over land , thermal lows are indicative of hot weather during the summer . 
 = = = = High pressure = = = = 
 High @-@ pressure systems , also known as anticyclones , rotate outward and clockwise in the northern hemisphere as opposed to outward and counterclockwise in the southern hemisphere . Under surface highs , sinking motion leads to skies that are clearer , winds that are lighter , and there is a reduced chance of precipitation . There is normally a greater range between high and low temperature due to the drier air mass present . If high pressure persists , air pollution will build up due to pollutants trapped near the surface caused by the subsiding motion associated with the high . 
 = = = Fronts = = = 
 Fronts in meteorology are the leading edges of air masses with different density ( e.g. , air temperature and / or humidity ) . When a front passes over an area , it is marked by changes in temperature , moisture , wind speed and direction , atmospheric pressure , and often a change in the precipitation pattern . Cold fronts are closely associated with low pressure systems , normally lying at the leading edge of high @-@ pressure systems and , in the case of the polar front , at approximately the equatorward edge of the high @-@ level polar jet . Fronts are guided by winds aloft , but they normally move at lesser speeds . In the northern hemisphere , they usually travel from west to east ( though they can move in a north @-@ south direction as well ) . Movement is due to the pressure gradient force ( horizontal differences in atmospheric pressure ) and the Coriolis effect , caused by the Earth spinning about its axis . Frontal zones can be contorted by geographic features like mountains and large bodies of water . 
 = = = = Cold front = = = = 
 A cold front 's location is at the leading edge of the temperature drop @-@ off , which in an isotherm analysis shows up as the leading edge of the isotherm gradient , and it normally lies within a sharp surface trough . Cold fronts can move up to twice as fast as warm fronts and produce sharper changes in weather , since cold air is denser than warm air and rapidly replaces the warm air preceding the boundary . Cold fronts are typically accompanied by a narrow band of showers and thunderstorms . On weather maps , the surface position of the cold front is marked with the symbol of a blue line of triangles / spikes ( pips ) pointing in the direction of travel , and it is placed at the leading edge of the cooler air mass . 
 = = = = Warm front = = = = 
 Warm fronts are at the trailing edge of the temperature increase , which is located on the equatorward edge of the gradient in isotherms , and lie within broader troughs of low pressure than cold fronts . Warm fronts move more slowly than the cold front that usually follows because cold air is denser , and harder to displace from the Earth 's surface . This also forces temperature differences across warm fronts to be broader in scale . Clouds ahead of the warm front are mostly stratiform and rainfall gradually increases as the front approaches . Fog can also occur preceding a warm frontal passage . Clearing and warming is usually rapid after frontal passage . If the warm air mass is unstable , thunderstorms may be embedded among the stratiform clouds ahead of the front , and after frontal passage , thundershowers may continue . On weather maps , the surface location of a warm front is marked with a red line of half circles pointing in the direction of travel . 
 = = = = Occluded front = = = = 
 An occluded front is formed during the process of cyclogenesis when a cold front overtakes a warm front . The cold and warm fronts curve naturally poleward into the point of occlusion , which is also known as the triple point in meteorology . It lies within a sharp trough , but the air mass behind the boundary can be either warm or cold . In a cold occlusion , the air mass overtaking the warm front is cooler than the cool air ahead of the warm front , and plows under both air masses . In a warm occlusion , the air mass overtaking the warm front is not as cool as the cold air ahead of the warm front , and rides over the colder air mass while lifting the warm air . A wide variety of weather can be found along an occluded front , with thunderstorms possible , but usually their passage is associated with a drying of the air mass . Occluded fronts are indicated on a weather map by a purple line with alternating half @-@ circles and triangles pointing in direction of travel . Occluded fronts usually form around mature low pressure areas . 
 The trowal is the projection on the Earth 's surface of a tongue of warm air aloft , such as may be formed during the occlusion process of a depression . 
 = = = = Stationary fronts and shearlines = = = = 
 A stationary front is a non @-@ moving boundary between two different air masses , neither of which is strong enough to replace the other . They tend to remain in the same area for long periods of time , usually moving in waves . There is normally a broad temperature gradient behind the boundary with more widely spaced isotherm packing . A wide variety of weather can be found along a stationary front , but usually clouds and prolonged precipitation are found there . Stationary fronts will either dissipate after several days or devolve into shear lines , but can change into a cold or warm front if conditions aloft change . Stationary fronts are marked on weather maps with alternating red half @-@ circles and blue spikes pointing in opposite directions , indicating no significant movement . 
 When stationary fronts become smaller in scale , degenerating to a narrow zone where wind direction changes over a short distance , they become known as shear lines . If the shear line becomes active with thunderstorms , it may support formation of a tropical storm or a regeneration of the feature back into a stationary front . A shear line is depicted as a line of red dots and dashes . 
 = = Mesoscale features = = 
 Mesoscale features are smaller than synoptic scale systems like fronts , but larger than storm @-@ scale systems like thunderstorms . Horizontal dimensions generally range from over ten kilometres to several hundred kilometres . 
 = = = Dry line = = = 
 The dry line is the boundary between dry and moist air masses east of mountain ranges with similar orientation to the Rockies , depicted at the leading edge of the dew point , or moisture , gradient . Near the surface , warm moist air that is denser than dry air of greater temperature wedges under the drier air like a cold front . When the warm moist air wedged under the drier mass heats up it becomes less dense than the drier air above and it begins to rise and sometimes forms thunderstorms . At higher altitudes , the warm moist air is less dense than the cooler , drier air and the boundary slope reverses . In the vicinity of the reversal aloft , severe weather is possible , especially when a triple point is formed with a cold front . 
 During daylight hours , drier air from aloft drifts down to the surface , causing an apparent movement of the dryline eastward . At night , the boundary reverts to the west as there is no longer any sunshine to help mix the lower atmosphere . If enough moisture converges upon the dryline , it can be the focus of afternoon and evening thunderstorms . A dry line is depicted on United States surface analyses as a brown line with scallops , or bumps , facing into the moist sector . Dry lines are one of the few surface fronts where the special shapes along the drawn boundary do not necessarily reflect the boundary 's direction of motion . 
 = = = Outflow boundaries and squall lines = = = 
 Organized areas of thunderstorm activity not only reinforce pre @-@ existing frontal zones , but they can outrun cold fronts . This outrunning occurs in a pattern where the upper level jet splits into two streams . The resultant mesoscale convective system ( MCS ) forms at the point of the upper level split in the wind pattern in the area of best low @-@ level inflow . The convection then moves east and equatorward into the warm sector , parallel to low @-@ level thickness lines . When the convection is strong and linear or curved , the MCS is called a squall line , with the feature placed at the leading edge of the significant wind shift and pressure rise . Even weaker and less organized areas of thunderstorms will lead to locally cooler air and higher pressures , and outflow boundaries exist ahead of this type of activity , " SQLN " or " SQUALL LINE " , while outflow boundaries are depicted as troughs with a label of " OUTFLOW <unk> " or " OUTFLOW <unk> " . 
 = = = Sea and land breeze fronts = = = 
 Sea breeze fronts occur mainly on sunny days when the landmass warms up above the water temperature . Similar boundaries from downwind on lakes and rivers during the day , as well as offshore landmasses at night . Since the specific heat of water is so high , there is little diurnal change in bodies of water , even on the sunniest days . The water temperature varies less than 1 ° C ( 1 to 2 ° F ) . By contrast , the land , with a lower specific heat , can vary several degrees in a matter of hours . 
 During the afternoon , air pressure decreases over the land as temperature rises . The relatively cooler air over the sea rushes in to fill the gap . The result is a relatively cool onshore wind . This process usually reverses at night where the water temperature is higher relative to the landmass , leading to an offshore land breeze . However , if water temperatures are colder than the land at night , the sea breeze may continue , only somewhat abated . This is typically the case along the California coast , for example . 
 If enough moisture exists , thunderstorms can form along sea breeze fronts that then can send out outflow boundaries . This causes chaotic wind / pressure regimes if the steering flow is light . Like all other surface features , sea breeze fronts lie inside troughs of low pressure . 
 = Palmyra = 
 Palmyra ( / <unk> / ; Aramaic : <unk> <unk> ; Arabic : <unk> Tadmor ) is an ancient Semitic city in present @-@ day Homs Governorate , Syria . Archaeological finds date back to the Neolithic period , and the city was first documented in the early second millennium BC . Palmyra changed hands on a number of occasions between different empires before becoming a subject of the Roman Empire in the first century AD . 
 The city grew wealthy from trade caravans ; the Palmyrenes were renowned merchants who established colonies along the Silk Road and operated throughout the Roman Empire . Palmyra 's wealth enabled the construction of monumental projects , such as the Great Colonnade , the Temple of Bel , and the distinctive tower tombs . The Palmyrenes were a mix of Amorites , Arameans , and Arabs . The city 's social structure was tribal , and its inhabitants spoke Palmyrene ( a dialect of Aramaic ) ; Greek was used for commercial and diplomatic purposes . The culture of Palmyra was influenced by Greco @-@ Roman culture and produced distinctive art and architecture that combined eastern and western traditions . The city 's inhabitants worshiped local deities and Mesopotamian and Arab gods . 
 By the third century AD , Palmyra was a prosperous regional center reaching the apex of its power in the 260s , when Palmyrene King Odaenathus defeated Persian Emperor Shapur I. The king was succeeded by regent Queen Zenobia , who rebelled against Rome and established the Palmyrene Empire . In 273 , Roman emperor Aurelian destroyed the city , which was later restored by Diocletian at a reduced size . The Palmyrenes converted to Christianity during the fourth century and to Islam in the second half of the first millennium , after which the Palmyrene and Greek languages were replaced by Arabic . 
 Before 273 AD , Palmyra enjoyed autonomy and was attached to the Roman province of Syria , having its political organization influenced by the Greek city @-@ state model during the first two centuries AD . The city became a Roman colonia during the third century , leading to the incorporation of Roman governing institutions , before becoming a monarchy in 260 . Following its destruction in 273 , Palmyra became a minor center under the Byzantines and later empires . Its destruction by the <unk> in 1400 reduced it to a small village . Under French Mandatory rule in 1932 , the inhabitants were moved into the new village of Tadmur , and the ancient site became available for excavations . In 2015 , Palmyra came under the control of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant ( ISIL ) , which later destroyed a number of the site 's buildings . The city was retaken by the Syrian Army on 27 March 2016 . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The earliest @-@ attested native name of the city was the Semitic language term " Tadmor " , which first appeared in the early second millennium BC . The word 's etymology is vague ; the philologist Albert Schultens argued that it derived from the Semitic word for " dates " ( tamar ) , thus referring to the palm trees that surrounded the city . 
 The name " Palmyra " appeared during the early first century AD in the works of Pliny the Elder , and was used throughout the Greco @-@ Roman world . It is generally believed that " Palmyra " derives from " Tadmor " and two possibilities have been presented by linguists ; one view holds that Palmyra was an alteration of Tadmor . According to Schultens , the Romans altered the name from " Tadmor " to " <unk> " , and afterward to " <unk> " ( from the Latin word " palma " , meaning palm ) , in reference to the city 's palm trees . Then the name reached its final form " Palmyra " . Other philologists , such as Jean Starcky , consider Palmyra to be a translation of " Tadmor " ( assuming that it meant palm ) , which had derived from the Greek word for palm , " <unk> " . 
 The linguist Michael Patrick O 'Connor suggested that the names " Palmyra " and " Tadmor " originated in the Hurrian language . As evidence , he cited the <unk> of alterations to the theorized roots of both names ( represented in the addition of <unk> to tamar and <unk> to <unk> ) . According to this theory , " Tadmor " derives from the Hurrian word tad ( " to love " ) with the addition of the typical Hurrian mid vowel rising ( <unk> ) formant mar . Similarly , according to this theory , " Palmyra " derives from the Hurrian word pal ( " to know " ) using the same <unk> formant ( mar ) . 
 = = Location and city layout = = 
 Palmyra is 215 km ( 134 mi ) northeast of the Syrian capital , Damascus , in an oasis surrounded by palms ( of which twenty varieties have been reported ) . Two mountain ranges overlook the city ; the northern Palmyrene mountain belt from the north and the southern Palmyrene mountains from the southwest . In the south and the east Palmyra is exposed to the Syrian Desert . A small wadi ( al @-@ Qubur ) crosses the area , flowing from the western hills past the city before disappearing in the eastern gardens of the oasis . South of the wadi is a spring , Efqa . Pliny the Elder described the town in the 70s AD as famous for its desert location , the richness of its soil , and the springs surrounding it , which made agriculture and herding possible . 
 = = = Layout = = = 
 Palmyra began as a small settlement near the Efqa spring on the southern bank of Wadi al @-@ Qubur . The settlement , known as the Hellenistic settlement , had residences expanding to the wadi 's northern bank during the first century . Although the city 's walls originally enclosed an extensive area on both banks of the wadi , the walls rebuilt during Diocletian 's reign surrounded only the northern @-@ bank section . 
 Most of the city 's monumental projects were built on the wadi 's northern bank . Among them is the Temple of Bel , on a tell which was the site of an earlier temple ( known as the Hellenistic temple ) . However , excavation supports the theory that the tell was originally located on the southern bank , and the wadi was diverted south of the tell to incorporate the temple into Palmyra 's late first and early second century urban organization on the north bank . 
 Also north of the wadi was the Great Colonnade , Palmyra 's 1 @.@ 1 @-@ kilometre @-@ long ( 0 @.@ 68 mi ) main street , which extended from the Temple of Bel in the east , to the Funerary Temple <unk> in the city 's western part . It had a monumental arch in its eastern section , and a <unk> stands in the center . 
 The Baths of Diocletian , built on the ruins of an earlier building which might have been the royal palace , were on the left side of the colonnade . Nearby were the Temple of Baalshamin , residences , and the Byzantine churches , which include a 1 @,@ 500 @-@ year @-@ old church ( Palmyra 's fourth , and believed to be the largest ever discovered in Syria ) . The church columns were estimated to be 6 metres ( 20 ft ) tall , and its base measured 12 by 24 metres ( 39 by 79 ft ) . A small amphitheatre was found in the church 's courtyard . 
 The Temple of Nabu and the Roman theater were built on the colonnade 's southern side . Behind the theater were a small senate building and the large Agora , with the remains of a triclinium ( banquet room ) and the Tariff Court . A cross street at the western end of the colonnade leads to the Camp of Diocletian , built by <unk> Hierocles ( the Roman governor of Syria ) . Nearby are the Temple of Al @-@ lāt and the Damascus Gate . 
 = = People , language and society = = 
 At its height during the reign of Zenobia , Palmyra had more than 200 @,@ 000 residents . Its earliest known inhabitants were the Amorites in the early second millennium BC , and by the end of the millennium Arameans were mentioned as inhabiting the area . Arabs arrived in the city in the late first millennium BC ; the soldiers of the Palmyrene sheikh Zabdibel , who aided the Seleucids in the battle of Raphia ( 217 BC ) , were described as Arabs . The Arab newcomers were assimilated by the earlier inhabitants , used Palmyrene as a mother tongue , and formed a significant segment of the aristocracy . The city also had a Jewish community ; inscriptions in Palmyrene from the necropolis of Beit She <unk> in Lower Galilee confirm the burial of Palmyrene Jews . 
 Until the late third century AD , Palmyrenes spoke a dialect of Aramaic and used the Palmyrene alphabet . The use of Latin was minimal , but Greek was used by wealthier members of society for commercial and diplomatic purposes , and it became the dominant language during the Byzantine era . After the Arab conquest , Greek was replaced by Arabic , from which a Palmyrene dialect evolved . 
 Palmyra 's society was a mixture of the different peoples inhabiting the city , which is seen in Aramaic , Arabic and Amorite clan names . Palmyra was a tribal community but due to the lack of sources , an understanding of the nature of Palmyrene tribal structure is not possible . Thirty clans have been documented ; five of which were identified as tribes ( Phyle ( <unk> ) ) comprising several sub @-@ clans . By the time of Nero Palmyra had four tribes , each residing in an area of the city bearing its name . Three of the tribes were the <unk> , <unk> and Ma <unk> ; the fourth tribe is uncertain , but was probably the Mita . In time , the four tribes became highly civic and tribal lines blurred ; by the second century clan identity lost its importance , and it disappeared during the third century . During the Umayyad period Palmyra was mainly inhabited by the Kalb tribe . Benjamin of Tudela recorded the existence of 2 @,@ 000 Jews in the city during the twelfth century , Palmyra declined after its destruction by Timur in 1400 , and was a village of 6 @,@ 000 inhabitants at the beginning of the 20th century ; although surrounded by Bedouin , the villagers preserved their dialect . Palmyra maintained the life of a small settlement until its relocation in 1932 . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Palmyra had a distinctive culture , based on a local Semitic tradition , and influenced by Greece and Rome . To appear better integrated into the Roman Empire , some Palmyrenes adopted Greco @-@ Roman names , either alone or in addition to a second native name . The extent of Greek influence on Palmyra 's culture is debated . Scholars interpreted the Palmyrenes ' Greek practices differently ; many see those characters as a superficial layer over a local essence . Palmyra 's senate was an example ; although Palmyrene texts written in Greek described it as a " boule " ( a Greek institution ) , the senate was a gathering of non @-@ elected tribal elders ( a Near @-@ Eastern assembly tradition ) . Others view Palmyra 's culture as a fusion of local and Greco @-@ Roman traditions . 
 The culture of Persia influenced Palmyrene military tactics , dress and court ceremonies . Palmyra had no large libraries or publishing facilities , and it lacked an intellectual movement characteristic of other Eastern cities such as Edessa or Antioch . Although Zenobia opened her court to academics , the only notable scholar documented was Cassius Longinus . 
 Palmyra had a large agora . However , unlike the Greek <unk> ( public gathering places shared with public buildings ) , Palmyra 's agora resembled an Eastern caravanserai more than a hub of public life . The Palmyrenes buried their dead in elaborate family mausoleums , most with interior walls forming rows of burial chambers ( <unk> ) in which the dead , laying at full length , were placed . A relief of the person interred formed part of the wall 's decoration , acting as a headstone . <unk> appeared in the late second century and were used in some of the tombs . Many burial monuments contained fully dressed , bejeweled mummies , embalmed in a method similar to that used in Ancient Egypt . 
 = = = Art and architecture = = = 
 Although Palmyrene art was related to that of Greece , it had a distinctive style unique to the middle @-@ Euphrates region . Palmyrene art is well represented by the bust reliefs which seal the openings of its burial chambers . The reliefs emphasized clothing , jewelry and a frontal representation of the person depicted , characteristics which can be seen as a forerunner of Byzantine art . According to Michael <unk> , Palmyra 's art was influenced by Parthian art . However , the origin of frontality that characterized Palmyrene and Parthian arts is a controversial issue ; while Parthian origin has been suggested ( by Daniel Schlumberger ) , Michael Avi @-@ Yonah contends that it was a local Syrian tradition that influenced Parthian art . Little painting , and none of the bronze statues of prominent citizens ( which stood on brackets on the main columns of the Great Colonnade ) , have survived . A damaged frieze and other sculptures from the Temple of Bel , many removed to museums in Syria and abroad , suggest the city 's public monumental sculpture . 
 Many surviving funerary busts reached Western museums during the 19th century . Palmyra provided the most convenient Eastern examples bolstering an art @-@ history controversy at the turn of the 20th century : to what extent Eastern influence on Roman art replaced idealized classicism with frontal , hieratic and simplified figures ( as believed by Josef Strzygowski and others ) . This transition is seen as a response to cultural changes in the Western Roman Empire , rather than artistic influence from the East . Palmyrene bust reliefs , unlike Roman sculptures , are rudimentary portraits ; although many reflect high quality individuality , the majority vary little across figures of similar age and gender . 
 Like its art , Palmyra 's architecture was influenced by the Greco @-@ Roman style , while preserving local elements ( best seen in the Temple of Bel ) . Enclosed by a massive wall flanked with traditional Roman columns , Bel 's sanctuary plan was primarily Semitic . Similar to the Second Temple , the sanctuary consisted of a large courtyard with the deity 's main shrine off @-@ center against its entrance ( a plan preserving elements of the temples of Ebla and Ugarit ) . 
