 The sides of the circular turrets were 12 inches thick and they had 1 inch ( 25 mm ) thick roofs . The conning tower had 9 @-@ inch ( 23 cm ) walls . Turret hoists , <unk> and electrical leads were protected by armored tubes . The lateral hydraulic pipes that ran along the underside of the gun deck were initially unprotected , but armored tubes were installed to protect them during Texas 's 1902 refit . Along the center of the ship , they were one inch thick , but increased to two inches closer to the sides of the ship . 
 No light armor was fitted above the main belt or at either end of the ship . This made Texas highly vulnerable to rapid – fire guns using high – explosive shells . This was not considered a significant threat at the time Texas was designed but would become so within a few years . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Texas was authorized by the U.S. Congress on 3 August 1886 . The start of construction was delayed for nearly eight months over concerns about her stability and general characteristics . Her keel was laid down on 1 June 1889 , at Portsmouth , Virginia , by the Norfolk Navy Yard . She was launched on 28 June 1892 , sponsored by Miss Madge Houston Williams , granddaughter of Sam Houston ; and commissioned on 15 August 1895 , with Captain Henry Glass in command . 
 = = Service = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 When drydocked in the New York Navy Yard for the first time after her trials several structural flaws came to light . The floors had buckled their brackets and the cement near the keel had cracked . Her floor brackets were reinforced with 4 in × 4 in ( 10 cm × 10 cm ) angle iron and the cement was repaired . But this raised issues regarding her structural integrity so a Board of Survey in January 1896 was formed to evaluate her condition and suggest improvements . The Board determined that further strengthening of her hull was needed , but the exact measures taken are not known , although they would cost $ 39 @,@ 450 and take 100 working days . However , the Board wished to know what effect these changes would have on the draft , stability , and metacentric height of the Texas . The Board received a reply on 4 February that they would increase her displacement by 30 @.@ 99 long tons ( 31 @.@ 49 t ) , deepen her draft by less than 2 in ( 51 mm ) and raise her metacentric height to 2 @.@ 76 ft ( 0 @.@ 84 m ) . 
 The ship ran aground near Newport , Rhode Island in September 1896 . Operator error combined with signal failure were blamed . A few officers , including future Governor of Guam Alfred Walton Hinds , were publicly reprimanded . While under repairs in New York , the yoke that secured the main injection valve in the starboard engine room broke on 9 November 1896 . Water pressure unseated the valve and allowed the compartment to flood as the receiving pipe had earlier been removed for repair . Leaks in the watertight doors , <unk> and holes in the bulkheads for electrical cables allowed the flooding to spread to the other engine and boiler rooms , the coal bunkers adjacent to them , as well as most of the magazines and shell rooms . The ship settled to the bottom , but the water was so shallow as to aid salvage efforts . By the 11th most of the water had been pumped out , but she was still drawing too much water to enter the drydock . An estimated 300 short tons ( 270 t ) of coal would have to be removed to lighten Texas enough to enter the drydock . 
 After repairs Texas was assigned to the North Atlantic Squadron , and patrolled the Eastern Seaboard of the United States . In February 1897 , she left the Atlantic for a brief cruise to the Gulf coast ports of Galveston , Texas , and New Orleans . She arrived in Galveston , Texas on 16 February 1897 and anchored in 6 fathoms ( 36 ft ; 11 m ) of water . The local pilot assured her captain that this was the best berth in the harbor for a ship of Texas 's length . However a strong tide swung her around onto a mud bank and held there . She was not able to get herself off and even the assistance of the U.S. Revenue Steamer Galveston was to no effect . Late the next day she was hauled off by the use of her port anchor and a tug . These two incidents gave her a reputation as being a jinxed or unlucky ship and earned her the nickname " Old Hoodoo " . 
 She returned to the Eastern Seaboard in March 1897 and remained there until the beginning of 1898 . During this period , her bow and stern torpedo tubes were removed in June 1897 and additional telescopic sights were added to her turret roofs between 14 July and 12 August . At the beginning of 1898 , she visited Key West , Florida , and the Dry Tortugas en route to Galveston for a return visit , which she made in mid @-@ February . Returning to the Atlantic via the Dry Tortugas in March , she arrived in Hampton Roads on 24 March and resumed duty with the North Atlantic Squadron . 
 = = = Spanish – American War = = = 
 Early in the spring , war between the United States and Spain erupted over conditions in Cuba and the supposed Spanish destruction of the battleship Maine in Havana harbor in February 1898 . By 18 May , under the command of Captain J. W. Philip , Texas was at Key West , readying to prosecute that war . 
 On 21 May , the battleship arrived off Cienfuegos , Cuba , with the Flying Squadron to blockade the Cuban coast . After a return to Key West for coal , Texas arrived off Santiago de Cuba on 27 May . She patrolled off that port until 11 June , when she made a reconnaissance mission to Guantánamo Bay in support of the Marine landings there . The next day the Texas landed three field pieces and two <unk> Colt – Browning machine guns at the request of the Marine expeditionary commander , Lt. Col. Robert W. Huntington . For the next five weeks , the Texas patrolled between Santiago de Cuba and Guantánamo Bay . On 16 June , the warship joined the cruiser Marblehead for a bombardment of the fort on South Toro Cay in Guantánamo Bay . The two ships opened fire just after 14 : 00 and ceased fire about an hour and 16 minutes later , having reduced the fort to impotency . 
 On 3 July , she was steaming off Santiago de Cuba when the Spanish Fleet under Admiral Cervera attempted to escape past the American Fleet . Texas took four of the enemy ships under fire immediately . While the battleship 's main battery pounded the armored cruisers Vizcaya and Cristobal Colon , her secondary battery joined Iowa , Gloucester , and Indiana in battering two torpedo @-@ boat destroyers . 
 " The two Spanish destroyers fell out of the action quickly and beached themselves , damaged heavily . One by one , the larger enemy warships also succumbed to the combined fire of the American Fleet . Each , in turn , sheered off toward shore and beached herself . Thus , Texas and the other ships of the Flying Squadron annihilated the Spanish Fleet . " Texas was lightly damaged during the battle by a single 6 in ( 152 mm ) high explosive shell that hit her on the starboard side above the main deck , immediately forward of the ash hoist . Fragments from the shell badly damaged the ash hoist and destroyed the doors of both air shafts and the adjacent bulkheads . Splinters riddled much of the adjacent structure as well . 
 " The defeat of Cervera 's Fleet helped to seal the doom of Santiago de Cuba . The city fell to the besieging American forces on 17 July , just two weeks after the great American naval victory . The day after the surrender at Santiago , Spain sought peace through the good offices of the French government . Even before the peace protocol was signed in Washington , DC , on 12 August , American ships began returning home . Texas arrived in New York on 31 July . Captain Philip was promoted to Commodore on 10 August 1898 . " 
 " In late November , Texas moved south to Hampton Roads where she arrived on 2 December . The warship resumed her peacetime routine patrolling the Atlantic coast of the United States . Though her primary field of operations once again centered on the northeastern coast , she also made periodic visits to such places as San Juan , Puerto Rico , and Havana , Cuba , where her crew could view some of the results of their own ship 's efforts in the recent war . " 
 = = = Post @-@ war service = = = 
 Texas was decommissioned for a lengthy refit on 3 November 1900 at the Norfolk Navy Yard but was commissioned again on 3 November 1902 . During this refit , her funnel and topmasts were raised . Furthermore , the protection for her 12 in ( 300 mm ) ammunition hoists was doubled and her broadside torpedo tubes were removed . On one voyage to New Orleans , Louisiana in February 1904 , Texas could only make 13 @.@ 9 knots ( 25 @.@ 7 km / h ; 16 @.@ 0 mph ) under forced draft . During 1904 her armament was upgraded when she exchanged her four 6 in ( 150 mm ) / 30 cal guns for more powerful 35 @-@ caliber weapons and two one @-@ pounder guns were landed . She served as flagship for the Coast Squadron until 1905 , and remained assigned to it after its commander shifted his flag . 
 Texas was briefly decommissioned between 11 January 1908 and 1 September 1908 . By 1908 she had become the station ship at Charleston , South Carolina . By 1910 , she had lost her 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) revolving cannon and one more one @-@ pdr gun in exchange for two additional six @-@ pounder guns . Regarded as obsolete by 1911 , she was relegated for use as a gunnery target to allow the Navy to evaluate the effects of modern shells on armored and unarmored parts of the ship , the probabilities of underwater hits and their depths , the effects of shock loads on pipes , etc . , the flammability of the ship 's fittings and the direction in which shells were pointing when striking at long range . As part of this evaluation , she was fully fitted out and only items which normally would have been allowed to be removed before action and those items added to her for service as a station ship were removed . Dummies were also rigged to evaluate the effects of hits on the crew . It is uncertain if her ammunition and powder remained on board for the tests . Preparing Texas for these tests cost $ 29 @,@ 422 @.@ 70 . 
 = = = San Marcos = = = 
 " On 15 February 1911 , her name was changed to San Marcos to allow the name Texas to be assigned to Battleship No. 35 . " She was sunk in shallow water in Tangier Sound in Chesapeake Bay on 21 – 22 March 1911 by gunfire from the battleship New Hampshire . No detailed examination was made afterward , but it was noted that there were so many holes below the waterline that the water in the forward and rear compartments generally took on the motion of the outside water . The interior above the waterline was generally demolished . She was used as a target for a torpedo experiment on 6 April . " On 10 October 1911 , her name was struck from the Naval Vessel Register . " A cage mast , a duplicate of those used on the Florida @-@ class dreadnoughts , was built atop the San Marcos 's remains in 1912 and tested against 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) shells fired by the monitor Tallahassee from a range of 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) on 21 August 1912 . Although the mast had been knocked down by nine hits , it was considered to have withstood the fire exceedingly well . 
 San Marcos was used for gunnery practice throughout World War II , although generally as an anchor for a canvas target screen , but she was finally deemed a threat to navigation . Tons of explosives were used to demolish her upperworks and drive her hull deep into the mud ; by January 1959 , they were successful and she remains there today . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 Spanish Campaign Medal 
 Cuban Pacification Medal 
 = Eckwersheim derailment = 
 On 14 November 2015 , a TGV train derailed in Eckwersheim , Alsace , France , while performing commissioning trials on the second phase of the LGV Est high @-@ speed rail line , which was scheduled to open for commercial service five months later . The derailment resulted in 11 deaths among those aboard , while the 42 others aboard the train were injured . It was the first fatal derailment in the history of the TGV and the third derailment since the TGV entered commercial service in 1981 . 
 The test train was traveling eastbound on the southern track when it entered a curve at 265 km / h ( 165 mph ) — which was 89 km / h ( 55 mph ) above its assigned speed — causing the rear bogie of the lead power car to derail to the left ( outside of curve ) due to centrifugal forces . The lead power car separated from the rest of the train , and the rear of the lead power car struck the concrete parapet on the abutment to a bridge over the Marne – Rhine Canal . The power car slid along the left parapet of the bridge and overturned , sliding down the embankment and coming to a rest 150 metres ( 490 ft ) beyond the end of the bridge . Cars 2 – 7 derailed before the bridge and travelled off the embankment with enough speed to overshoot the canal and come to rest 80 – 130 m ( 260 – 430 ft ) beyond the beginning of the bridge . Cars 8 – 9 came to rest on the east bank of the canal and the rear power car ended up partially submerged in the canal . According to investigators , late braking , which led to the train entering the curve at excessive speed , was the immediate cause of the accident . Criminal and technical investigations are ongoing . French national rail operator SNCF suspended test trials at high speeds until the lessons learned from the investigation were integrated into testing process . The scheduled opening of the second phase of the LGV Est for commercial service was delayed three months , from 3 April 2016 to 3 July 2016 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The LGV Est <unk> ( often shortened to LGV Est ) is a high @-@ speed rail line connecting Paris and Strasbourg . Development has been divided into two phases . The first phase , from <unk> @-@ sur @-@ Marne near Paris , to Baudrecourt opened on 10 June 2007 . Construction on the 106 km ( 66 mi ) second phase , from Baudrecourt to Vendenheim , near Strasbourg , began in 2010 . The final weld of rails on the second phase occurred in March 2015 , marking the completion of the line , although some work remained . At the time of the derailment , the line was scheduled to open for commercial service on 3 April 2016 , following commissioning trials and training for operators . 
 The scheduled tests for the line consisted of four phases : 
 Factory testing of components of the line , completed in 2013 – 14 ; 
 On @-@ site testing of components and functioning of subsystems , completed in 2013 – 2014 ; 
 Static testing of subsystems with slow @-@ moving trains , completed from late 2014 to August 2015 ; 
 Dynamic testing of the line with trains operating at high speed , began in September 2015 and scheduled to have been completed in November 2015 . 
 A specialized test train , <unk> set 744 in a commemorative livery , arrived to conduct the fourth phase of testing , which began on 28 September 2015 . During this phase , more than 200 test runs would be performed on the line . The test runs would test ride smoothness , performance of the catenary , radio communications , and the signalling system . During some runs , the test train would operate at 10 % above the planned operational speeds for the line when it enters service . Some automated safety systems were disabled to allow the test train to operate beyond normal operating conditions . Orientation training for operators was scheduled to take place between January and March 2016 prior to the start of commercial service on the line , which was scheduled for 3 April 2016 at the time of the accident . In January 2016 , SNCF announced that the opening of the line would be delayed until to 3 July 2016 . 
 = = Accident = = 
 = = = Departure = = = 
 Tests scheduled for 11 and 14 November were to traverse each of the two tracks , in both directions of travel and at a test speed 10 % above the speed limit when the line is in commercial service . On the afternoon of 14 November , the test train was scheduled to depart Meuse TGV Station at 14 : 18 and arrive at Strasbourg Station at 15 : 17 . At 14 : 26 , authorization was given to begin the test and the test train left Meuse TGV Station two minutes later . During this test , the test train traveled eastbound on Track 2 , the southern track on the east @-@ west oriented LGV Est , in the direction opposite normal operation ( Strasbourg towards Paris ) . The Meuse @-@ Strasbourg run was the last series of tests on the line during the fourth phase of tests . 
 The train reached a maximum speed of 352 km / h ( 220 mph ) on sections where the speed limit will be 320 km / h ( 200 mph ) . As the train approached the flying junction in the commune of Vendenheim , it should have slowed from 352 to 176 km / h ( 220 to 110 mph ) before reaching Kilometer Point ( KP ) 403 @.@ 809 , where the speed limit for commercial service will be 160 km / h ( 100 mph ) . As the track begins a long , right @-@ hand curve into the flying junction , it is raised on an embankment , approximately 5 – 8 m ( 16 – 26 ft ) high , and crosses a bridge over the Marne – Rhine Canal . The flying junction marks the end of the LGV Est line , after which the train was to continue on an existing , non @-@ high @-@ speed rail line leading to Strasbourg Station . 
 = = = Derailment = = = 
 As the train entered the right @-@ hand curve into the flying junction , the rear bogie of the lead power car derailed to the left ( outside of the curve ) at 15 : 04 : 42 at approximately KP 404 @.@ 003 . Violent transverse movements at the rear of the lead power car caused it to separate from the rest of the train . The rear of the lead power car struck a concrete parapet ( KP 404 @.@ 209 ) on the leading abutment to the bridge over the Marne – Rhine Canal . The impact broke apart the lead power car and caused oil to leak from the lead power car 's transformer , which ignited and was spread across the bridge and canal banks . The rear bogie of the lead power car remained where it impacted the concrete parapet . The transformer of the lead power car landed on the east bank of the canal . The remainder of the lead power car slid along the left parapet of the bridge . At the end of the bridge , it overturned , slid down the embankment and came to a rest 150 metres ( 490 ft ) beyond the end of the bridge . 
 Cars 2 – 7 derailed before the bridge and traveled off the embankment with enough speed to overshoot the canal and come to rest 80 – 130 m ( 260 – 430 ft ) beyond the beginning of the bridge . Cars 8 – 9 came to rest on the east bank of the canal and the rear power car ended up partially submerged in the canal . 
 = = = Response and casualties = = = 
 At 15 : 05 , the train disappeared from the approach zone for the Vendenheim junction on the display being monitored by staff at the signalling control center . At 15 : 10 , the control center initiated emergency procedures for the loss of a train and closed the non @-@ high @-@ speed rail lines that pass through the Vendenheim junction . At approximately the same time , one of the companies involved in the construction of the line received a call from an employee aboard the train , who informed them of the derailment . Shortly before 17 : 45 , the local mass casualty plan was enacted . Emergency medical and fire rescue services along with 100 gendarmes responded to the incident . At its height , 104 engines from three <unk> responded to the incident — 65 from Bas @-@ Rhin and 39 from Moselle and Haut @-@ Rhin . Those with minor injuries were treated by responders from the French Red Cross , which operated at the school in Eckwersheim . The French Minister of Ecology , Sustainable Development and Energy , Ségolène Royal , and the Secretary of State for Transport , Alain <unk> , travelled to the site shortly after the crash . The president of SNCF , Guillaume Pepy , and the president of SNCF Réseau , Jacques Rapoport , also travelled to the site in the hours after the accident . 
 The train was carrying 53 persons , including four children , ages 10 – 15 , who were not officially authorized to be aboard . The derailment resulted in 11 deaths , which included four employees of SNCF , five technicians from the engineering firm responsible for the tests , and two guests . Ten died at the crash scene , one died the following evening , and one seriously injured person remained in hospital as of February 2016 . Among the dead was the director of the LGV Est line for SNCF Réseau , which owns France 's railroad infrastructure . Despite breaking in two pieces and the severe impact with the parapet , there were no deaths among the seven people in the front cab . The second @-@ to @-@ last car impacted the canal wall and was the car with the highest death toll . It was the first fatal derailment in the history of the TGV and the third derailment since the TGV entered commercial service in 1981 . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 Three investigations have been opened . The French Land Transport Accident Investigation Bureau ( BEA @-@ TT , Bureau d 'Enquêtes sur les Accidents de Transport <unk> ) is responsible for investigating rail accidents in France and will conduct a non @-@ judicial technical investigation . A criminal investigation and internal investigation by SNCF have also been opened . Among the subjects which SNCF will investigate is whether there was a dereliction of duties by an SNCF employee that resulted in the unauthorized children riding on the train . The president of SNCF has exclaimed : " This is not a practice that SNCF recognizes . A test train is a test train . " The derailment occurred the day after the November 2015 Paris attacks , initially sparking fears that the derailment was the work of terrorists . 
 On 19 November , SNCF announced the initial findings of their investigation . The train 's event recorder indicated that the train entered the curve at 265 km / h ( 165 mph ) and was travelling at 243 km / h ( 151 mph ) at the moment it derailed , which investigators have determined to be a result of centrifugal forces . The speed at the moment of derailment was 67 km / h ( 42 mph ) above the train 's assigned operating speed on the curve . According to the SNCF , the " immediate cause " of the accident was " a late braking sequence " ; the braking should have begun at least 1 km ( 1 @,@ 100 yd ) or 12 seconds earlier . The investigation has found no fault for the accident in the infrastructure , train , or member of the technical team . There were seven people in the driving cab at the time of the accident , all of whom survived . Investigators have suggested that this may have been a factor in the late braking . SNCF will begin disciplinary proceedings and take punitive measures against employees responsible for , among other things , the " reckless presence " of children on the test train , presence of seven people in the cab , the lack of rigor in creating lists of those onboard and controlling access to the train , and " without doubt " the human errors in the cab . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 SNCF held a minute of silence , for the victims , during the course of operations on Monday , 16 November . The following day , a memorial service was held in the church in <unk> , which was attended by SNCF President Guillaume Pepy . SNCF suspended all test trials at high speeds until the lessons learned from the investigation can be integrated into testing processes . The scheduled opening of the second phase of the LGV Est for commercial service has been delayed by three months , from 3 April 2016 to 3 July 2016 . Trains will operate on the single intact track until the damaged track is repaired , which will take 7 months once the judicial inquiry lifts its hold on the track . 
 = Oscar Taveras = 
 Oscar Francisco Taveras ( June 19 , 1992 – October 26 , 2014 ) was a Dominican – Canadian professional baseball outfielder who played one season for the St. Louis Cardinals of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . Known as " El Fenómeno " ( Spanish for " The Phenomenon " ) in the Dominican Republic , the Cardinals signed him at age 16 in 2008 as an international amateur free agent and he made his MLB debut in 2014 . Over six minor league seasons , he batted .321 with a .519 slugging percentage . He played all three outfield positions while spending most of the time in center field . 
 With prodigious batting skills , Taveras was a consensus top @-@ five minor league prospect in 2013 and 2014 . He elicited comparisons to former MLB outfielder and fellow Dominican Vladimir Guerrero – with a powerful and smooth , balanced stroke , Taveras successfully hit pitches well outside of the strike zone . Also similar to Guerrero , he possessed a strong and accurate throwing arm . The outfielder was the recipient of a litany of awards and won batting titles in two minor leagues , including hitting .386 for the Midwest League title in 2011 . The next year , he won the Texas League batting title and was the Texas League Player of the Year and Cardinals organization Player of the Year . 
 On May 31 , 2014 , Taveras homered in his major league debut against the San Francisco Giants and went on to hit .239 in 80 regular season games , playing mostly right field . He also hit a game @-@ tying home run in Game 2 of the 2014 National League Championship Series against the Giants . On October 26 , 2014 , he died in a car accident in the Dominican Republic shortly after the Cardinals were eliminated from the playoffs . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Originally from Puerto Plata , Dominican Republic , Oscar Taveras grew up in a town called Sosúa . He began taking interest in baseball early in life . According to his father , Francisco Taveras , about age 5 , he started to call himself " El Fenómeno , " which was Spanish for " The Phenomenon . " " He would say , ‘ I ’ m going to make you the happiest dad in the world . I want to be a star . I want to be a major leaguer . I ’ m the phenomenon . I ’ m the best , ’ " recounted his father . 
 Taveras ' father was an outfielder in the Milwaukee Brewers ' minor league system . Taveras lived in Montreal from ages 12 to 16 and obtained Canadian citizenship . Afterwards , he returned to the Dominican Republic ; had he stayed in Canada , he would have entered the draft after high school . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Minor leagues = = = 
 = = = = DSL Cardinals , Johnson City , and Quad Cities ( 2009 – 11 ) = = = = 
 The St. Louis Cardinals signed Taveras as an international amateur free agent on November 25 , 2008 for $ 145 @,@ 000 . They assigned him to the rookie league Dominican Summer League Cardinals the next season . Although he hit just .265 with one home run ( HR ) and 42 runs batted in ( RBI ) in 65 games , Taveras earned a promotion to the Johnson City Cardinals of the Rookie @-@ level Appalachian League in 2010 . The talent of whom scouts discovered in the Dominican Republic quickly actualized , as he hit .322 with eight HR and 43 RBI in 53 games . 
 Taveras earned another promotion to the Quad Cities River Bandits of the Class A Midwest League ( MWL ) in 2011 and spent the entire season there . From May 11 to June 11 , he was out of action due to a hamstring injury . Despite missing a full month , his hitting continued to improve by obtaining 33 multi @-@ hit games , 17 three @-@ hit contests and five four @-@ hit games . Further , he earned two MWL Player of the Week ( PoW ) awards . The first was for the week of July 17 , after batting .600 ( 15 hits in 25 at bats ) with five multi @-@ hit games , 10 runs scored and five RBI . 
 The second PoW award Taveras earned with the River Bandits was for the week ending August 28 . He batted <unk> ( 18 – 31 ) with another five multi @-@ hit games , two home runs and 11 RBI . That week , he also achieved three three @-@ hit games and two four @-@ hit games . After coming off the bench in the August 28 game against Burlington , he went 3 @-@ for @-@ 3 with a home run and missed hitting for the cycle by a double . For the season , Taveras batted .386 with a .444 on @-@ base percentage ( OBP ) , <unk> slugging percentage ( SLG ) , eight HR and 62 RBI in 78 games . He earned the Midwest League batting title with the highest average in the league since 1956 . He was actually 31 plate appearances short of qualifying ; however , his adjusted batting average after adding the hitless at @-@ bats still gave him the title . He was the first Cardinals minor leaguer to win the MWL batting title since Brendan Ryan in 2004 . 
 = = = = Springfield and Memphis ( 2012 – 14 ) = = = = 
 After winning the Midwest League batting title at age 19 , Taveras began to garner notice outside the Cardinals organization . Baseball America named him the Cardinals ' third @-@ best prospect prior to the 2012 season and ranked him 74th in all of baseball . The Cardinals assigned him to play for the Springfield Cardinals of the Class AA Texas League . There , he spent the entire season , playing 124 games , before participating in winter league play . 
 Taveras won his first of two Cardinals Minor League Player of the Month awards in 2012 for April after batting .340 ( 32 – 94 ) with six HR and 21 RBI . On June 4 , he achieved his first career five @-@ hit game against Corpus Christi with four runs scored . He earned PoW honors for the week ending June 10 – which included the five @-@ hit game – after batting .500 ( 14 – 28 ) with two home runs , four RBI and 11 runs scored . Taveras won his second organizational Player of the Month award of 2012 – and third of his career – for June after totaling a .347 average ( 34 – 98 ) , six HR and 19 RBI . Beginning June 8 , he amassed a 12 @-@ game hitting streak . 
 Selected to the Texas League All @-@ Star team , Taveras started in center field and batted fourth . His 3 @-@ for @-@ 4 , home run , double and two @-@ RBI effort helped earn him unanimous Most Valuable Player honors for the game . He also played in the Major League Baseball All @-@ Star Futures Game for the World squad . He started in right field and batted third , collecting one hit in three at @-@ bats . He ended the season with a 22 @-@ game on @-@ base streak that spanned from August 4 to September 3 . Taveras logged 43 multi @-@ hit games , including 12 three @-@ hit games , five four @-@ hit games and one five @-@ hit game . In his 124 total games , he played 93 in center field , 15 in right and one in left . He hit safely in 94 games and reached base in 107 . He batted .346 ( 47 of 136 ) with eight HR and 72 RBI with runners in scoring position ( RISP ) and .321 with RISP and two outs , including 17 RBI . He also hit .372 ( 73 of 196 ) with 12 HR and 49 RBI in the sixth inning and later . 
 Taveras ' season totals for 2012 included 23 HR , 94 RBI and a league @-@ leading .321 batting average , his second minor league batting title . In addition , he led the Texas League in extra base hits ( 67 ) , doubles ( 37 ) , total bases ( 273 ) and intentional walks ( 10 ) . He ranked second in hits ( 153 ) , RBI and slugging percentage ( <unk> ) , and tied for fourth both in home runs and triples ( 7 ) . In nine playoff games , he hit .235 with four doubles and two RBI as Springfield won the Texas League championship . Baseball America conferred the club with their Minor League Team of the Year award . Taveras was named the Texas League Player of the Year . 
 Further , Taveras led all Cardinals minor leaguers in hits , doubles , triples , home runs , RBI , SLG and on @-@ base plus slugging ( .953 ) , while also finishing in the top five in batting average and runs . He was named the Cardinals ' Minor League Player of the Year . He played another 39 games in the after @-@ season Dominican Professional Baseball League for the Águilas <unk> . He won the league Rookie of the Year award after batting .316 with five home runs and 17 RBI as the Águilas clinched the league 's best record . In a skills ( " Best Tools " ) survey , Baseball America found Taveras the " Best Hitter for Average . " 
 Entering the 2013 season , Baseball America ranked Taveras as the Cardinals ' best prospect and the third @-@ best prospect in all of baseball . MLB.com also ranked Taveras as the Cardinals ' number @-@ one prospect , and the number @-@ three prospect in its Top 50 Prospects . Prior to the 2013 World Baseball Classic , Taveras ' agent was approached about him playing for the Canadian national baseball team . The Cardinals promoted him to the Triple @-@ A Memphis Redbirds of the Pacific Coast League . 
 In each game from May 6 – 10 , Taveras collected at least one RBI . He batted .362 with 17 hits in 47 at bats for the month of May . However , injury obstructed his in @-@ game action . While sliding into second base in a May 12 game , his ankle caught and pronated awkwardly on the bag , resulting in a high @-@ ankle sprain . He played in just 15 games after that for the season and in 46 total . Surgery to correct the sprain , performed by Dr. Robert Anderson , ended his season in August . 
 For the season , Taveras rendered a .306 batting average with twelve doubles , five home runs and 32 RBI . It was the fourth consecutive season in which he batted at least .300 . Especially productive against right @-@ handed pitching , he forged a .366 batting average ( 37 @-@ for @-@ 101 ) with four HR and 24 RBI . Further , he generated three four @-@ hit games and 15 multi @-@ hit games while hitting safely in 31 overall . In 18 games , he provided at least one RBI , and in nine , recorded multiple runners driven in . In Baseball America 's " Best Tools " survey , he was rated the " Best Hitter for Average " in the Cardinals organization . The Cardinals added Taveras to their 40 @-@ man roster on November 20 , 2013 . 
 = = = St. Louis Cardinals ( 2014 ) = = = 
 Beginning in the 2014 season , MLB.com ranked Taveras as the second @-@ best prospect in all of MLB , behind only Byron Buxton of the Minnesota Twins organization . The Cardinals invited him to spring training . Although team officials believed that his ankle had fully healed in time for 2014 spring training , he hesitated to fully trust the ankle in performance . A hamstring injury followed , limiting him to just six at @-@ bats . The Cardinals optioned him to minor league camp on March 14 . 
 On May 30 , 2014 , the Cardinals called Taveras up to their MLB roster in one of the most anticipated promotions in all MLB . He became the first from Sosúa to reach the major leagues . At that point , he had been batting .325 with a .373 OBP and a .524 SLG at Memphis . Other totals included seven HR and 40 RBI in 49 games and 191 at @-@ bats . Taveras was held hitless in consecutive games just once . In his last ten games , he collected hits in all but one , batting .462 . During those same 10 games , he fashioned two three @-@ hit games and one four @-@ hit outing . In 209 plate appearances , he walked just 14 times , but also struck out just 25 for a 12 @.@ 1 % strikeout rate . 
 Making his MLB debut at Busch Stadium on the afternoon of Saturday , May 31 , against the San Francisco Giants , Taveras flied out in his first at bat . However , he launched his first hit and home run , which traveled 418 feet ( 127 m ) , in his next at bat . It occurred with one out in the bottom of the fifth inning against starting pitcher Yusmeiro Petit . He became the youngest to hit a home run in his major league debut for the Cardinals since Eddie Morgan in 1936 . It also started to rain , immediately forcing a 47 @-@ minute delay . The home run proved to be the game @-@ winning run as the Cardinals won , 2 – 0 . 
 Taveras hit his first MLB single the next day , June 1 . When Matt Adams came off the DL June 19 , Taveras ' 22nd birthday , the Cardinals optioned him back to Memphis after batting .189 with a .225 OBP and .297 SLG in 40 PA . Despite the low rate statistics , he showed a marked ability to get contact on MLB pitching . His contact rate of 92 @.@ 3 % on pitches outside of the strike zone surpassed the MLB average of 65 @.@ 7 % for all non @-@ pitchers . His miss rate of 2 @.@ 5 % on swinging strikes was significantly lower than the MLB average of 9 @.@ 1 % . 
 One month after his first call @-@ up , the Cardinals recalled Taveras on June 30 . He was batting .318 with a .502 SLG at Memphis . To allow him more playing opportunities , the Cardinals traded slumping incumbent right fielder Allen Craig to the Boston Red Sox on the July 31 non @-@ waiver trade deadline . His first career three @-@ hit game was on September 7 against the Milwaukee Brewers . That series , he played three of the four games , collecting five hits in eight at @-@ bats with a home run and four RBI . It was one of eight multi @-@ hit games on the year . Taveras finished the 2014 season with a batting average of .239 in 80 major league games . He appeared on the postseason roster for the Cardinals , playing exclusively as a pinch hitter , and collected three hits and two runs scored in seven total at bats . His postseason debut was in the National League Division Series against the Los Angeles Dodgers . One hit was a home run that tied the score in Game 2 of the National League Championship Series against the Giants , the only game the Cardinals won in the series ; as it turned out , it was the final hit in his career . His final tweet was " Thanks for all the fan support ! " on October 13 . 
 = = Skills profile = = 
 Regarded as a left @-@ handed hitting version of Vladimir Guerrero ( also a native of the Dominican Republic ) , one of Taveras ' prized skills was an ability that few possess to square the bat on – and effectively hit – pitches that are out of the strike zone , much as the case was with Guerrero . Because of his bat speed and the wide range of pitch locations of which he could hit , Taveras successfully unraveled what are termed as " pitcher 's pitches " , which helped contribute to his high batting average . An aggressive hitter , Taveras maintained control with his smooth swing . 
 With a wide batting stance and slight leg kick that " allows him to maintain both incredible balance and timing " , he shifted his weight on his left ( back ) leg " before connecting with the ball with an explosive , quick swing . " His combination of strong , quick hands and excellent hand @-@ eye coordination allowed him to assert considerable bat control to make constant , square contact with the incoming pitch . With an ability to drive the ball to all fields , his power ceiling was high , projected with 25 to 30 home runs in his peak . His preparation also received high marks . Through 2013 , Taveras ' career minor league batting average was .320 with 45 home runs and 275 RBIs in 374 games . 
 Although Taveras ' defensive skills were not as prodigious as his hitting abilities , he ran routes well and had solid instincts . Earlier in his professional career , he gained a reputation for concentrating too heavily on hitting at the expense of his fielding . However , Taveras worked to increase his abilities in the outfield . With a strong throwing arm , his defensive skills projected him to be a corner outfielder , particularly in right field . However , the Cardinals believed that Taveras showed the range and skill to be an effective center fielder so he began taking an apprenticeship to learn the position . 
 = = Death = = 
 On October 26 , 2014 , Taveras and his girlfriend , <unk> <unk> , both died in a car accident on the Sosúa @-@ Cabarete freeway in Puerto Plata , Dominican Republic , in which his red Chevrolet Camaro ran off the road and hit a tree . Taveras suffered multiple injuries and was pronounced dead while receiving care at Sosúa Cabarete Medical Center . <unk> suffered injuries to the head and to the chest . The accident occurred at 7 : 40 PM ET just before the start of Game 5 of the 2014 World Series . Cardinals chairman William DeWitt , Jr. issued the following statement : 
 We are all stunned and deeply saddened by the tragic loss of one of the youngest members of the Cardinals family . Oscar was an amazing talent with a bright future who was taken from us well before his time . Our thoughts and prayers are with his family and friends tonight . 
 Cardinals general manager John Mozeliak made a statement saying : 
 I simply can ’ t believe it . I first met Oscar when he was 16 years old and will forever remember him as a wonderful young man who was a gifted athlete with an infectious love for life who lived every day to the fullest . 
 Cardinals Manager Mike Matheny stated " there is not a more accurate word ( " love " ) for how a group of men share a deep and genuine concern for each other . We loved Oscar , and he loved us . That is what a team does . That is what a family does . " Commissioner of Baseball Bud Selig stated " With heavy hearts , tonight we play Game Five of the 2014 World Series in the memory of these two young people . " 
 = = = Aftermath and legacy = = = 
 <unk> on behalf of <unk> and Taveras were held for Game 6 of the World Series , including a moment of silence before the first pitch . Kansas City Royals starting pitcher Yordano Ventura wrote " R.I.P. <unk> # 18 " on his hat along with other tributes on his cleats and glove . His hat was turned in for display at the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum . On October 28 , the Cardinals left the right field lights on at Busch Stadium and released a Twitter photo of the scene the next day . 
 More than an estimated 5 @,@ 000 gathered for Taveras 's funeral in Sosúa , including about 40 who gathered on the rooftop of a cemetery church . Many of the mourners wore jerseys with " El Fenómeno " printed on their backs . " He was like Superman here . He was here to uplift kids and put the town on the map . He was the hope . " said teammate Carlos Martínez . Martínez requested to change his uniform number from 44 to 18 ( Taveras 's number ) to honor him in part because they were also friends . The team granted his request . 
 Taveras had left behind a one @-@ year @-@ old son , Oscar Yadier Taveras . Questions arose as to whether he was intoxicated in that fatal crash on the Sosúa @-@ Cabarete freeway . On November 11 , press releases confirmed that his blood alcohol content was 0 @.@ 287 , nearly six times the legal limit for the Dominican Republic . After the second alcohol @-@ related fatality to a Cardinals player in a decade — following that of Josh Hancock in 2007 , John Mozeliak lamented the circumstances of the player 's death . He declared that the team would take a greater role in educating young players to " avoid reckless actions . " 
 In January 2015 , DeWitt announced plans for the Cardinals to renovate a baseball field in Sosúa in Taveras 's honor , modeled after the Cardinals Care facilities in Greater St. Louis . The team would also wear black circular patches inscribed with OT ( Taveras 's initials ) inside a white circle on their jerseys . The patch will omit Taveras 's No. 18 because Martínez is already wearing it as his uniform number as a tribute . A large decal in his memorial was posted in the home team bullpen of Busch Stadium along with the ones of Hancock and former pitcher Darryl Kile , who died of coronary artery disease during the 2002 season while still active . 
 = = Awards = = 
 = Gasketball = 
 Gasketball is an action , sports video game for the iPad by Mikengreg , an independent development team of Michael Boxleiter and Greg Wohlwend . Players flick basketballs through 2D physics puzzles into the hoop in single @-@ player , local multiplayer , and asynchronous HORSE @-@ style online multiplayer modes . The game is free @-@ to @-@ play with in @-@ app purchases . Development began in mid 2011 following Mikengreg 's successful Solipskier . They were able to live off of the earnings for Gasketball 's two year development at their previous salary , which afforded them the stability to try new avenues and reject prototypes , though they worked 100 @-@ hour weeks . Towards the end of their development , they ran out of money and lived on the couches of friends . It was released on August 9 , 2012 , and the game did not reach their desired conversion rate at the time of launch . 
 The game received " generally favorable " reviews , according to video game review score aggregator Metacritic . Pocket Gamer gave the game their silver award , and Tim Rogers of Kotaku named Gasketball his 2012 game of the year , calling it " the beginning of the hardcore social game genre " . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Gasketball is a part @-@ basketball , part @-@ puzzler shot @-@ matching sports video game where players flick basketballs through 2D physics puzzles ( with flippers , portals , circular saw blades , and gravity switches ) into a basketball hoop . Some puzzles include banking the basketball shot off of multiple surfaces before making the basket . In the HORSE @-@ style games , the player must match the exact setup of the opponent 's shot , such as hitting the floor before entering the hoop . In the campaign , players get more points for making the shot without retrying , and have five attempts to make the hoop before moving to the next level shamefully . Players are awarded medals for the quality of their performance at the end of each chapter . Gold medals unlock new modes of play in the chapter . Every chapter has a unique theme , such as a construction site or outer space . 
 The game has local two @-@ player multiplayer with a divided iPad screen , and asynchronous online multiplayer where players construct levels for their opponents to complete . Players spin a wheel at the beginning of their turn to determine how many hazards they get to place via drag and drop . A few of the items are unlocked at first , and more are available with progress through the game or in @-@ app purchases . Gasketball uses a colorful palette and features a cranky robot , who provides a tutorial and resets the ball . It was released as free @-@ to @-@ play with the tutorial unlocked , and four to five chapters available as additional paid downloads . 
 = = Development = = 
 Gasketball was developed and produced by Mikengreg , an Iowa @-@ based two @-@ man team : Michael Boxleiter and Greg Wohlwend . After releasing their first game , the sport @-@ inspired Solipskier for iPhone and iPad , Boxleiter and Wohlwend lived off the profits for two years while working on Gasketball , paying themselves their same salaries from their Adobe Flash development days but having the security to try new ideas . Wohlwend made somewhat more income due to other collaborations , such as Puzzlejuice with Asher Vollmer , but shared his income with Boxleiter . Development began in mid 2011 . Even though Solipskier was successful , the duo did not have a following comparable to indie developers like Team Meat and thus did not feel pressured to meet high expectations . Instead , their pressure was internal . Wohlwend said he worked 100 @-@ hour weeks with no weekends or vacations while living off of the Solipskier funds . When they ran out of money , Boxleiter borrowed money from his parents , and eventually they both went homeless , living off of the couches of friends . 
 In making Gasketball , Boxleiter and Wohlwend felt that their game quality had been improving over time , though designing for a million @-@ person audience was " daunting " and Wohlwend questioned whether he could even recreate Solipskier 's success . The former game was designed in fits of creativity while the latter had no such moments , and took longer to produce . They discarded " everything " multiple times during their prototyping process with the understanding that anything less than what they wanted would lead to a subpar end result . Boxleiter had difficulty accepting praise towards the end of development , considering the weight of having to leave the industry if the many 100 @-@ hour weeks did not pan out in an accepted product . 
 Mikengreg first announced the game on March 1 , 2012 , and it was later released for iPad on August 9 , 2012 . Mikengreg decided to release the game as free @-@ to @-@ play for the base game with in @-@ app purchases for the extended content . Wohlwend saw that a quarter of the top grossing games on iOS used in @-@ app purchases ( albeit with predatory practices ) and felt that they could follow the model with a more ethical strategy : free to play , but pay once to unlock forever . Wohlwend later remarked that , " So far , humanity is proving to us that we can 't have it both ways . " They were told by friends that the purchase function was too hidden , which they later fixed . Journalists had noted the difficulty in purchasing the full version as well . Gasketball had been downloaded 200 @,@ 000 times in its August 2012 launch week and was briefly ranked near the top of an iTunes top downloads ranking , though it did not break the top 200 grossing chart . The game 's conversion rate from its free @-@ to @-@ play base package to the paid version was 0 @.@ 67 % — lower than their goal of at least 2 % of an estimated five million downloads . The paid addition includes 100 additional levels and 10 new objects . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received " generally favorable " reviews , according to video game review score aggregator Metacritic . Reviewers noted the game 's character and creative vision . Pocket Gamer gave the game their silver award . Gasketball was Tim Rogers of Kotaku 's 2012 game of the year . 
 Edge noted Mikengreg 's deft ability with simple sound effects , citing their previous work with Solipskier . They praised the " sweet and personable " art design and the mix of " freewheeling creativity with arcade precision " . Edge also praised the addition of the " decent " single @-@ player campaign alongside the multiplayer . Pocket Gamer 's Harry Slater called the single @-@ player " entertaining " but felt the asynchronous multiplayer was the highlight . TouchArcade 's Brad Nicholson called the game a cross between Amazing Alex and NBA Jam . While he found some puzzle designs imbalanced , Nicholson also felt that the interactions between the flipper and portal hazards were " surprisingly solid " and noted the game 's lighthearted " welcome playground sort of feel " even as the easy learning curve reached Rube Goldberg @-@ like complexity . Tim Rogers of Kotaku called Gasketball the " inverse Rube Goldberg " and " the beginning of the hardcore social game genre , of asynchronous gameplay as meaningful as FPS deathmatches " . 
 = National Industrial Recovery Act = 
 The National Industrial Recovery Act ( NIRA ) was a law passed by the United States Congress in 1933 to authorize the President to regulate industry in an attempt to raise prices after severe deflation and stimulate economic recovery . It also established a national public works program known as the Public Works Administration ( PWA , not to be confused with the WPA of 1935 ) . The National Recovery Administration ( NRA ) portion was widely hailed in 1933 , but by 1934 business ' opinion of the act had soured . By March 1934 the " NRA was engaged chiefly in drawing up these industrial codes for all industries to adopt . " However , the NIRA was declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court in 1935 and not replaced . 
 The legislation was enacted in June 1933 during the Great Depression in the United States as part of President Franklin D. Roosevelt 's New Deal legislative program . Section 7 ( a ) of the bill , which protected collective bargaining rights for unions , proved contentious ( especially in the Senate ) , but both chambers eventually passed the legislation . President Roosevelt signed the bill into law on June 16 , 1933 . The Act had two main sections ( or " titles " ) . Title I was devoted to industrial recovery , authorizing the promulgation of industrial codes of fair competition , guaranteed trade union rights , permitted the regulation of working standards , and regulated the price of certain refined petroleum products and their transportation . Title II established the Public Works Administration , outlined the projects and funding opportunities it could engage in . Title II also provided funding for the Act . 
 The Act was implemented by the NRA and the Public Works Administration ( PWA ) . Very large numbers of regulations were generated under the authority granted to the NRA by the Act , which led to a significant loss of political support for Roosevelt and the New Deal . The NIRA was set to expire in June 1935 , but in a major constitutional ruling the U.S. Supreme Court held Title I of the Act unconstitutional on May 27 , 1935 , in Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States , 295 U.S. 495 ( 1935 ) . The National Industrial Recovery Act is widely considered a policy failure , both in the 1930s and by historians today . Disputes over the reasons for this failure continue . Among the suggested causes are that the Act promoted economically harmful monopolies , that the Act lacked critical support from the business community , and that it was poorly administered . The Act encouraged union organizing , which led to significant labor unrest . The NIRA had no mechanisms for handling these problems , which led Congress to pass the National Labor Relations Act in 1935 . The Act was also a major force behind a major modification of the law criminalizing making false statements . 
 = = Background and enactment = = 
 The Depression began in the United States in October 1929 and grew steadily worse to its nadir in early 1933 . President Herbert Hoover feared that too much intervention or coercion by the government would destroy individuality and self @-@ reliance , which he considered to be important American values . His laissez @-@ faire views appeared to be shared by the Secretary of the Treasury Andrew W. Mellon . To combat with the growing economic decline , Hoover organized a number of voluntary measures with businesses , encouraged state and local government responses , and accelerated federal building projects . However his policies had little or no effect on economic recovery . Toward the end of his term , however , Hoover supported several legislative solutions which he felt might lift the country out of the depression . The final attempt of the Hoover administration to rescue the economy was the passage of the Emergency Relief and Construction Act ( which provided funds for public works programs ) and the Reconstruction Finance Corporation ( RFC ) ( which provided low @-@ interest loans to businesses ) . 
 Hoover was defeated for re @-@ election by Roosevelt in the 1932 presidential election . Roosevelt was convinced that federal activism was needed to reverse the country 's economic decline . In his first hundred days in office , the Congress enacted at Roosevelt 's request a series of bills designed to strengthen the banking system , including the Emergency Banking Act , the Glass – Steagall Act ( which created the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ) , and the 1933 Banking Act . The Congress also passed the Agricultural Adjustment Act to stabilize the nation 's agricultural industry . 
 = = = Enactment = = = 
 The National Industrial Recovery Act was enacted at the very end of the Hundred Days . Hugh S. Johnson , Raymond Moley , Donald <unk> , Rexford Tugwell , Jerome Frank , and Bernard Baruch — key Roosevelt advisors — believed that unrestrained competition had helped cause the Great Depression and that government had a critical role to play through national planning , limited regulation , the fostering of trade associations , support for " fair " trade practices , and support for " democratization of the workplace " ( a standard work week , shorter working hours , and better working conditions ) . Roosevelt himself , the former head of a trade association , believed that government promotion of " self @-@ organization " by trade associations was the least @-@ intrusive and yet most effective method for achieving national planning and economic improvement . Some work on an industrial relief bill had been done in the weeks following Roosevelt 's election , but much of this was in the nature of talk and the exchange of ideas rather than legislative research and drafting . The administration , preoccupied with banking and agriculture legislation , did not begin working on industrial relief legislation until early April 1933 . Congress , however , was moving on its own industrial legislation . In the Senate , Robert F. Wagner , Edward P. Costigan , and Robert M. La Follette , Jr. were promoting public works legislation , and Hugo Black was pushing short @-@ work @-@ week legislation . Motivated to work on his own industrial relief bill by these efforts , Roosevelt ordered Moley to work with these Senators ( and anyone else in government who seemed interested ) to craft a bill . 
 By May 1933 , two draft bills had emerged , a cautious and legalistic one by John Dickinson ( Under Secretary of Commerce ) and an ambitious one focusing on trade associations by Hugh Johnson . Many leading businessmen — including Gerard Swope ( head of General Electric ) , Charles M. Schwab ( chairman of Bethlehem Steel Corporation ) , E. H. Harriman ( chairman of the Union Pacific Railroad ) , and Henry I. Harriman , president of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce — helped draft the legislation . A two @-@ part bill , the first section promoting cooperative action among business to achieve fair competition and provide for national planning and a second section establishing a national public works program , was submitted to Congress on May 15 , 1933 . 
 The House of Representatives easily passed the bill in just seven days . The most contentious issue was the inclusion of Section 7 ( a ) , which protected collective bargaining rights for unions . Section 7 ( a ) was nearly passed into the bill , but Senator Wagner , Jerome Frank , and Leon Keyserling ( another Roosevelt aide ) worked to retain the section in order to win the support of the American labor movement . 
 The bill had a more difficult time in the Senate . The National Association of Manufacturers , Chamber of Commerce , and industrialist Henry Ford all opposed its passage . Senator Bennett Champ Clark introduced an amendment to emasculate Section 7 ( a ) , but Wagner and Senator George W. Norris led the successful opposition to the change . The bulk of the Senate debate , however , turned on the bill 's suspension of antitrust law . Senators William E. Borah , Burton K. Wheeler , and Hugo Black opposed any relaxation of the Sherman Antitrust Act , arguing that this would exacerbate existing severe economic inequality and concentrate wealth in the hands of the rich ( a severe problem which many economists at the time believed was one of the causes of the Great Depression ) . Wagner defended the bill , arguing that the bill 's promotion of codes of fair trade practices would help create progressive standards for wages , hours , and working conditions , and eliminate sweatshops and child labor . The Senate passed the amended legislation 57 @-@ to @-@ 24 on June 9 . 
 A House @-@ Senate conference committee met throughout the evening of June 9 and all day June 10 to reconcile the two versions of the bill , approving a final version on the afternoon of June 10 . The House approved the conference committee 's bill on the evening of June 10 . After extensive debate , the Senate approved the final bill , 46 @-@ to @-@ 39 , on June 13 . President Roosevelt signed the bill into law on June 16 , 1933 . 
 = = Structure of the Act = = 
 The National Industrial Recovery Act had two major titles . 
 Title I was devoted to industrial recovery . Title I , Section 2 empowered the President to establish executive branch agencies to carry out the purposes of the Act , and provided for a sunset provision nullifying the Act in two years . The heart of the Act was Title I , Section 3 , which permitted trade or industrial associations to seek presidential approval of codes of fair competition ( so long as such codes did not promote monopolies or provide unfair competition against small businesses ) and provided for enforcement of these codes . Title I , Section 5 exempted the codes from the federal antitrust laws . 
 Title I , Section 7 ( a ) guaranteed the right of workers to form unions and banned yellow @-@ dog contracts : 
 ... employees shall have the right to organize and bargain collectively through representatives of their own choosing , and shall be free from the interference restraint , or coercion of employers of labor , or their agents , in the designation of such representatives or in self @-@ organization or in other concerted activities for the purpose of collective bargaining or other mutual aid or protection ; [ and ] ( 2 ) that no employee and no one seeking employment shall be required as a condition of employment to join any company union or to refrain from joining , organizing , or assisting a labor organization of his own choosing ... . 
 Title I , Section 7 ( b ) permitted the establishment of standards regarding maximum hours of labor , minimum rates of pay , and working conditions in the industries covered by the codes , while Section 7 ( c ) authorized the President to impose such standards on codes when voluntary agreement could not be reached . Title I , Section 9 authorized the regulation of oil pipelines and prices for the transportation of all petroleum products by pipeline . Section 9 ( b ) permitted the executive to take over any oil pipeline company , subsidiary , or business if the parent company was found in violation of the Act . 
 Title II established the Public Works Administration . Title II , Section 201 established the agency and provided for a two @-@ year sunset provision . Section 202 outlines the types of public works which the new agency may seek to fund or build . Title II , Section 203 authorized the Public Works Administration to provide grants and / or loans to states and localities in order to more rapidly reduce unemployment as well as to use the power of eminent domain to seize land or materials to engage in public works . Title II , Section 204 explicitly provided $ 400 million for the construction of public highways , bridges , roads , railroad crossings , paths , and other transportation projects . 
 Title II , Section 208 authorized the president to expend up to $ 25 million to purchase farms for the purpose of relocating individuals living in overcrowded urban areas ( such as cities ) to these farms and allowing them to raise crops and earn a living there . 
 Title II , Sections 210 – 219 provided for revenues to fund the Act , and Section 220 appropriated money for the Act 's implementation . 
 Title III of the Act contained miscellaneous provisions , and transferred the authority to engage in public works from the Reconstruction Finance Corporation to the Public Works Administration . 
 = = Implementation = = 
 Implementation of the Act began immediately . Hugh Johnson spent most of May and June planning for implementation , and the National Recovery Administration ( NRA ) was established on June 20 , 1933 — a scant four days after the law 's enactment . Roosevelt angered Johnson by having him administer only the NRA , while the Public Works Administration ( PWA ) went to Harold L. Ickes . NRA and PWA reported to different cabinet agencies , making coordination difficult , and PWA money flowed so slowly into the economy that NRA proved to be the more important agency by far . 
 The premiere symbol of the NIRA was the Blue Eagle . 
 NIRA , as implemented by the NRA , became notorious for generating large numbers of regulations . The agency approved 557 basic and 189 supplemental industry codes in two years . Between 4 @,@ 000 and 5 @,@ 000 business practices were prohibited , some 3 @,@ 000 administrative orders running to over 10 @,@ 000 pages promulgated , and thousands of opinions and guides from national , regional , and local code boards interpreted and enforced the Act . 
 The backlash against the Act was so significant that it generated a large loss of political support for the New Deal and turned a number of Roosevelt 's closest aides against him . Roosevelt himself shifted his views on the best way to achieve economic recovery , and began a new legislative program ( known as the " Second New Deal " ) in 1935 . 
 Implementation of Section 7 ( a ) of the NIRA proved immensely problematic as well . The protections of the Act led to a massive wave of union organizing punctuated by employer and union violence , general strikes , and recognition strikes . At the outset , NRA Administrator Hugh Johnson naïvely believed that Section 7 ( a ) would be self @-@ enforcing , but he quickly learned otherwise . In addition , the National Labor Board was established under the auspices of the NRA to implement the collective bargaining provisions of the Act . The National Labor Board , too , proved to be ineffective , and on July 5 , 1935 , a new law — the National Labor Relations Act — superseded the NIRA and established a new , long @-@ lasting federal labor policy . 
 The leadership of the Public Works Authority was torn over the new agency 's mission . PWA could initiate its own construction projects , distribute money to other federal agencies to fund their construction projects , or make loans to states and localities to fund their construction projects . But many in the Roosevelt administration felt PWA should not spend money , for fear of worsening the federal deficit , and so funds flowed slowly . Furthermore , the very nature of construction ( planning , specifications , and blueprints ) also held up the disbursement of money . Harold Ickes , too , was determined to ensure that graft and corruption did not tarnish the agency 's reputation and lead to loss of political support in Congress , and so moved cautiously in spending the agency 's money . Although the U.S. Supreme Court would rule Title I of NIRA unconstitutional , the <unk> clause in the Act enabled the PWA to survive . Among the projects it funded between 1935 and 1939 are : the USS Yorktown ; USS Enterprise ; the 30th Street railroad station in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania ; the Triborough Bridge ; the port of Brownsville ; Grand Coulee Dam ; Boulder Dam ; Fort Peck Dam ; Bonneville Dam ; and the Overseas Highway connecting Key West , Florida , with the mainland . The agency survived until 1943 , when the Reorganization Act of 1939 consolidated most federal public works and work relief functions of the federal government into the new Federal Works Agency . 
 President Roosevelt sought re @-@ authorization of NIRA on February 20 , 1935 . But the backlash against the New Deal , coupled with continuing congressional concern over the Act 's suspension of antitrust law , left the President 's request politically dead . By May 1935 , the issue was moot as the U.S. Supreme Court had ruled Title I of NIRA unconstitutional . 
 = = Legal challenge and nullification = = 
 On April 13 , 1934 , the President had approved the " Code of Fair Competition for the Live Poultry Industry of the Metropolitan Area in and about the City of New York . " The goal of the code was to ensure that live poultry ( provided to kosher slaughterhouses for butchering and sale to observant Jews ) were fit for human consumption and to prevent the submission of false sales and price reports . The industry was almost entirely centered on New York City . Under the new poultry code , the Schechter brothers were indicted on 60 counts ( of which 27 were dismissed by the trial court ) , acquitted on 14 , and convicted in 19 . One of the counts on which they were convicted was for selling a diseased bird , leading Hugh Johnson to jokingly call the suit the " sick chicken case " . 
 Even before these legal aspects became widely known , a number of court challenges to the NIRA were winding their way through the courts . The constitutionality of the NIRA was tested in Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States , 295 U.S. 495 ( 1935 ) . Courts identified three problems with the NIRA : " ( i ) was the subject matter sought to be regulated by the power of congress ; ( ii ) if the regulations violated the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution ; and ( iii ) had Congress properly delegated its power to the executive . " 
 Although Roosevelt , most of his aides , Johnson , and the NRA staff felt the Act would survive a court test , the U.S. Department of Justice had on March 25 , 1935 , declined to appeal an appellate court ruling overturning the lumber industry code on the grounds that the case was not a good test of the NIRA 's constitutionality . The Justice Department 's action worried many in the administration . But on April 1 , 1935 the Second Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the constitutionality of the NIRA in the Schechter case . Although Donald <unk> and others felt the government 's case in Schechter was not a strong one , the <unk> were determined to appeal their conviction . So the government appealed first , and the Supreme Court heard oral argument on May 2 and 3 . 
 On May 27 , 1935 , Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes wrote for a unanimous Court in Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States that Title I of the National Industrial Recovery Act was unconstitutional . First , Hughes concluded that the law was void for vagueness because the critical term " fair competition " was nowhere defined in the Act . Second , Hughes found the Act 's delegation of authority to the executive branch unconstitutionally overbroad : 
 To summarize and conclude upon this point : Section 3 of the Recovery Act ( 15 <unk> 703 ) is without precedent . It supplies no standards for any trade , industry , or activity . It does not undertake to prescribe rules of conduct to be applied to particular states of fact determined by appropriate administrative procedure . Instead of prescribing rules of conduct , it authorizes the making of codes to prescribe them . For that legislative undertaking , section 3 sets up no standards , aside from the statement of the general aims of rehabilitation , correction , and expansion described in section 1 . In view of the scope of that broad declaration and of the nature of the few restrictions that are imposed , the discretion of the President in approving or prescribing codes , and thus enacting laws for the government of trade and industry throughout the country , is virtually unfettered . We think that the code @-@ making authority thus conferred is an unconstitutional delegation of legislative power . 
 Finally , in a very restrictive reading of what constituted interstate commerce , Hughes held that the " ' current ' or ' flow ' " of commerce involved was simply too minute to constitute interstate commerce , and subsequently Congress had no power under the Commerce Clause to enact legislation affecting such commercial transactions . The Court dismissed with a bare paragraph the government 's ability to regulate wages and hours . Although the government had argued that the national economic emergency required special consideration , Hughes disagreed . The dire economic circumstances the country faced did not justify the overly broad delegation or overreach of the Act , the majority concluded . " Extraordinary conditions may call for extraordinary remedies . But the argument necessarily stops short of an attempt to justify action which lies outside the sphere of constitutional authority . Extraordinary conditions do not create or enlarge constitutional power . " 
 Although the decision emasculated NIRA , it had little practical impact , as Congress was unlikely to have reauthorized the Act in any case . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 A key criticism of the Act at the time as well as more recently is that the NIRA endorsed monopolies , with the attendant economic problems associated with that type of market failure . Even the National Recovery Review Board , established by President Roosevelt in March 1934 to review the performance of the NRA , concluded that the Act hindered economic growth by promoting cartels and monopolies . One of the economic effects of monopoly and cartels is higher prices — this was seen as necessary because the severe deflation of 1929 @-@ 33 had depressed prices 20 % and more . There is anecdotal evidence that these higher prices led to some stability in industry . < ref = " Horwitz " / > But were these prices so high that economic recovery was inhibited ? A number of scholars answer in the affirmative . But other economists disagree , pointing to far more important monetary , budgetary , and tax policies as contributors to the continuation of the Great Depression . Others point out that the cartels created by the Act were inherently unstable ( as all cartels are ) , and that the effect on prices was minimal because the codes collapsed so quickly . 
 A second key criticism of the Act is that it lacked support from the business community , and thus was doomed to failure . Business support for national planning and government intervention was very strong in 1933 , but had collapsed by mid @-@ 1934 . Many studies conclude , however , that business support for NIRA was never uniform . Larger , older businesses embraced the legislation while smaller , newer ones ( more nimble in a highly competitive market and with less capital investment to lose if they failed ) did not . This is a classic problem of cartels , and thus NIRA codes failed as small business abandoned the cartels . Studies of the steel , automobile manufacturing , lumber , textile , and rubber industries and the level and source of support for the NIRA tend to support this conclusion . Without the support of industry , the Act could never have performed as it was intended . 
 A third major criticism of the Act is that it was poorly administered . The Act purposefully brought together competing interests ( labor and business , big business and small business , etc . ) in a coalition to support passage of the legislation , but these competing interests soon fought one another over the Act 's implementation . As a consequence , NRA collapsed due to failure of leadership and confusion about its goals . By the end of 1934 , NRA leaders had practically abandoned the progressive interventionist policy which motivated the Act 's passage , and were supporting free @-@ market philosophies — contributing to the collapse of almost all industry codes . 
 There are a wide range of additional critiques as well . One is that NIRA 's industry codes interfered with capital markets , inhibiting economic recovery . But more recent analyses conclude that NIRA had little effect on capital markets one way or the other . Another is that political uncertainty created by the NRA caused a drop in business confidence , inhibiting recovery . But at least one study has shown no effect whatsoever . 
 As noted above , Section 7 ( a ) led to significant increases in union organizing , as intended by the Act . But the enforcement of Section 7 ( a ) and its legal limitations led to clear failures . Although Section 7 ( a ) was not affected by the Supreme Court 's decision in Schechter v. Poultry , the failure of the section led directly to passage of the National Labor Relations Act in July 1935 . 
 Historian Alan Brinkley stated that by 1935 the NRA was a " woeful failure , even a political embarrassment . " Many liberals , probably including Roosevelt , were quietly relieved by its demise . However , New Dealers were worried by the Supreme Court 's strict interpretation of the interstate commerce clause and worried that other legislation was jeopardized . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 1934 , at the request of the Secretary Ickes , who wished to use the statute criminalizing making false statements to enforce Section 9 ( c ) of the NIRA against producers of " hot oil " , oil produced in violation of production restrictions established pursuant to the NIRA , Congress passed Pub.L. 73 – 394 , 48 Stat . 996 , enacted June 18 , 1934 , which amended the False Claims Act of 1863 to read : 
 … or whoever , for the purpose of obtaining or aiding to obtain the payment or approval of such claim , or for the purpose and with the intent of cheating and swindling or defrauding the Government of the United States , or any department thereof , or any corporation in which the United States of America is a stockholder , shall knowingly and willfully falsify or conceal or cover up by any trick , scheme , or device a material fact , or make or cause to be made any false or fraudulent statements or representations , or make or use or cause to be made or used any false bill , receipt , voucher , roll , account , claim , certificate , affidavit , or deposition , knowing the same to contain any fraudulent or fictitious statement or entry , in any matter within the jurisdiction of any department or agency of the United States or of any corporation in which the United States of America is a stockholder … 
 This form of the statute , in slightly modified form , still exists today at 18 U.S.C. § 1001 . 
 = Battle on Snowshoes ( 1757 ) = 
 The 1757 Battle on Snowshoes was a skirmish fought between Rogers ' Rangers and French and Indian troops during the French and Indian War on January 21 , 1757 . The battle was given this name because the British combatants were wearing snowshoes . 
 On January 21 , 1757 , Captain Robert Rogers and a band of his rangers were on a scouting expedition near Fort Carillon on Lake Champlain when they were ambushed by a mixed troop of French regulars , Canadien militiamen , and Indians . The fighting ended when darkness set in , with significant casualties on both sides . The French in their reports claimed the British had a distinct advantage due to their snowshoes . 
 = = Background = = 
 The French and Indian War broke out in 1754 between British and French colonists over territorial disputes along their colonial frontiers , and escalated the following year to include regular troops . By 1756 , the French had enjoyed successes in most of their frontier battles against the British . Their only notable failure occurred when the British stopped their southward advance from Lake Champlain in the 1755 Battle of Lake George . From bases at Fort St. Frédéric ( located at what is now Crown Point , New York ) and Fort Carillon ( known to the British as Fort Ticonderoga ) , the French and their Indian allies continued to scout and probe the British defenses on Lake George and the upper Hudson River . The British , who had fewer Indian allies , resorted to companies of rangers for their scouting and reconnaissance activities . The ranger companies were organized and directed by Robert Rogers , and eventually became known as Rogers ' Rangers . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 In the winter of 1757 , Rogers and several companies of his rangers were stationed at Fort William Henry at the southern end of Lake George and at Fort Edward on the upper Hudson . These forts were principally garrisoned by elements of the 44th and 48th Regiments , and formed the frontier between the British province of New York and the French province of Canada . 
 Captain Rogers led a scouting expedition from Fort Edward on January 15 , stopping at Fort William Henry to acquire provisions , snowshoes , and additional soldiers . The company left Fort William Henry on January 17 with 86 men , heading down the frozen Lake George . The next day twelve men turned back because of injuries . The remaining men continued north , reaching Lake Champlain at a point between Fort Carillon and Fort St. Frédéric on January 21 . They spotted a sled moving on the lake toward Fort St. Frédéric , so Rogers sent Lieutenant John Stark and some men to intercept it . However , more sleds were spotted , and Stark 's men were seen before they could retreat back into the woods . The sleds turned back toward Carillon . The British gave chase , but most of the French escaped . Rogers succeeded in taking seven prisoners . 
 Rogers learned from questioning the prisoners that a French and Indian war party had just arrived at Carillon , and that the two forts were garrisoned by a thousand regulars . Concerned that the escaped sleds would raise the alarm , Rogers immediately ordered a return to their last camp . His council disapproved of the return by the same route ( a violation of Rogers ' own ranging guidelines ) , but he overruled them , citing the need for speed and the deep snow . By early afternoon they had returned to their camp , rested , and were on their way south . 
 M. de <unk> , the leader of the supply convoy Rogers had intercepted , returned to Carillon and alerted Paul @-@ Louis de Lusignan , the fort 's commander . According to Lusignan 's report , he immediately sent out a party of about 90 regulars from the Languedoc regiment under the command of Capitaine de <unk> , accompanied by about 90 Canadian militia and Indians . The Indians were primarily Ottawa under the command of Charles Michel de Langlade , one of the French @-@ Indian leaders at Braddock 's defeat in 1755 . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Rogers ' men then walked into an ambush , according to his estimate , by " 250 French and Indians . " The British were fortunate that many of the French muskets misfired due to wet gunpowder , as the surprise was nearly complete . Lieutenant Stark , who was bringing up the rear of the ranger column , established a defensive line on a rise with some of his men , from which they gave covering fire as those in the front retreated to that position . As they retreated Rogers ordered his captives slain so that his men might move more freely . 
 The fight lasted several hours and ended only after sunset , when neither side could see the other . Rogers was injured twice during the battle , once to the head and once to the hand . The French reported that they were at a disadvantage , since they were without snowshoes and " floundering in snow up to their knees " . Once darkness set in , Rogers and his survivors retreated 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) to Lake George , where he sent Stark with two men to Fort William Henry for assistance . On January 23 , Rogers returned to Fort William Henry with 48 able @-@ bodied and six wounded soldiers . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Bougainville questioned some of the men captured during the battle . He learned from them the disposition of men and materials all the way from Albany to Fort William Henry . Other captured British ended up as slaves to the Indians . Thomas Brown , who published a pamphlet that vividly described his captivity , spent almost two years in slavery , traveling as far as the Mississippi River before reaching Albany in November 1758 . 
 A similar battle was fought the following year , in which Rogers was very nearly killed and his company was decimated . 
 = Don 't Say You Love Me ( M2M song ) = 
 " Don 't Say You Love Me " is the debut single by M2M , a Norwegian pop duo composed of singers Marion Raven and Marit Larsen . The song first appeared on Radio Disney before its official US radio and single release in October 1999 . It was released on the soundtrack to the film Pokémon : The First Movie in November 1999 and appears in the film 's closing credits . The song was featured on M2M 's debut album , Shades of Purple ( 2000 ) , and also appeared on their compilation album The Day You Went Away : The Best of M2M ( 2003 ) . 
 The song received positive reviews : Robert Christgau said it was one of the " impossibly touching " songs on Shades of Purple ; Chuck Taylor said it was " absolutely enchanting " and would appeal to both young and mature listeners . It reached number 2 in Norway , number 4 in both Australia and New Zealand , number 16 in the UK and number 21 on the US Billboard Hot 100 . It was certified gold in the US and Australia and remained M2M 's biggest hit . M2M performed the song on episodes of the TV series One World , Top of the Pops and Disney Channel in Concert . Two similar music videos were released for the song , with one showing clips from Pokémon : The First Movie . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 Marion Raven and Marit Larsen were 14 and 15 @-@ years @-@ old respectively when the tracks from their debut album Shades of Purple , including " Don 't Say You Love Me " , were recorded . They had previously released a children 's album , <unk> <unk> <unk> , under the band name Marit & Marion . That album was nominated for a Spellemannprisen award when they were both 12 years old . After taking some time off from recording music , the two began recording under the name M2M , which reflected the initials of both their first names . Atlantic Records received one of their demo recordings and signed them to a worldwide contract in 1998 . " Don 't Say You Love Me " was M2M 's debut single . 
 The song was written by Raven , Larsen , Peter Zizzo and Jimmy Bralower . It was produced by Zizzo and Bralower and was mixed by Tom Lord @-@ Alge . Lyrically , the song is about getting " the rules straight on a budding relationship . Slow down and don 't say you love me until you give me some time and get to know me . " There is a slight difference in lyrics between the version used in Pokémon : The First Movie version and the version released on Shades of Purple . The Shades of Purple version includes the line " then you start kissing me , what 's that about ? " In the Pokémon version , the lyric is " then you said you love me , what 's that about ? " When asked about the lyric change in an interview , M2M replied " the Pokémon people didn 't find it appropriate to have kissing in the lyrics , because it was for younger kids . We think [ the lyric change ] was stupid . The original version is on [ Shades of Purple ] , and that 's the one we wanted to go with . " M2M had not heard of Pokémon until the song was chosen for the soundtrack , as the franchise was not yet popular in Norway . 
 = = Release and appearances = = 
 " Don 't Say You Love Me " appeared in " The List " , an episode in the TV series Felicity that aired in the US on 3 October 1999 and reached an audience of 5 million people , helping to generate interest in the song . On October 10 it appeared in the Jack & Jill episode " Moving On " . The song was already being played on Radio Disney before it made its official US debut on 26 October 1999 . The single was released on both CD and Compact Cassette . Within a month , more than 100 US top @-@ 40 radio stations were playing the song ; by 10 November it was the sixth @-@ most requested song on New York radio stations . The song appeared during the closing credits of the film Pokémon : The First Movie and on the film 's soundtrack ; both the film and soundtrack were released in the US on 10 November 1999 . " Don 't Say You Love Me " was the debut single from the album . The single first entered the charts in the US on 20 November , by which time more than 400 @,@ 000 units had already been shipped to record stores . 
 Despite the success in the US , in November 1999 it was reported that the single would not be released in the duo 's home country of Norway until the following year , as Warner Music Norway wanted to wait until both the Pokémon film and soundtrack were released in Europe to capitalise on the exposure . The single was released in Norway on radio on 24 November , and by 11 January the single was on sale in Norway and 25 other countries in Europe , the Americas , Asia and Oceania . It was expected to be released in the remaining European countries by the end of the month , though European countries where the single had not yet been released were already playing the song on the radio . The song was popular in Southeast Asia , receiving heavy airplay in Korea , Indonesia , the Philippines , Thailand and Singapore . On 12 January it was featured in the episode of Beverly Hills , 90210 , " Tainted Love " . The song was released in Japan on 25 January , in Spain on 22 February , and in the UK on 20 March on East West Records . It appeared on Shades of Purple , which was released in Europe in mid @-@ February and the US on 7 March , and in 2003 it appeared on M2M 's ' best of ' album , The Day You Went Away : The Best of M2M . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Robert Christgau gave a positive review , calling the song one of the " impossibly touching " tracks on Shades of Purple that " sets the standard " for the rest of the album . Chuck Taylor from Billboard said the song would appeal to both the young and mature listeners as it " neatly walks the line between pure pop and the cusp of the adult top 40 " . He added the song was " Absolutely enchanting in its youthful vocal and meaty series of hooks " . Michael Paoletta , also from Billboard , called the song an " infectious pop rocker " adding " what 's most dazzling about the track is the vocal verve of the girls ' harmonizing . " Heather Phares from AllMusic referred to the song as " sweet yet down @-@ to @-@ earth pop " . Marius <unk> , the director of the Norwegian radio station NRK Petre , said " It 's a very well @-@ written , well @-@ produced pop song , they 're young and potentially the largest Norwegian pop success ever . The song is best suited to an audience aged 10 – 16 , but in my opinion it won 't scare away older listeners " . " Don 't Say You Love Me " was nominated for the year 's best song at the 2000 Spellemannprisen awards , though it lost to Propaganda by Briskeby . 
 In the US , " Don 't Say You Love Me " entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number 72 , later peaking at number 21 . It also reached number 40 on both the Latin Pop Airplay and Tropical Songs charts . The single sold 39 @,@ 000 copies in the week preceding November 27 , and had sold 580 @,@ 000 units by May 2000 . It reached number 1 in Thailand , number 2 in Norway and number 4 in both Australia and New Zealand . It made the top 10 in Finland and Indonesia , the top 20 in Canada , the UK , Sweden and the Netherlands , the top 40 in Italy and Belgium and the top 80 in Germany , France and Switzerland . It was certified gold in the US on 6 December 1999 and in Australia in 2000 . 
 " Don 't Say You Love Me " was M2M 's biggest hit and is their most recognisable song . While their next single , " Mirror Mirror " , was a top 40 single in Australia and Canada , and reached number 62 on the Billboard Hot 100 , " Don 't Say You Love Me " would remain M2M 's only top @-@ 40 hit in the US , and their only hit at all in many other countries . The song has been called a one @-@ hit wonder . While speaking favourably of the duo , in 2014 Abby <unk> from MTV ranked M2M and the song at number 2 on her list " 9 Girl Group One @-@ Hit Wonders You Need To Remember Right Now " . Jessica Booth from <unk> included the duo and song in her 2012 list " Flashback : 15 Old @-@ School Girl Singers We Miss " , calling the song " ridiculously catchy " . Kaitlin Cubria from <unk> listed the duo and song in her 2014 list of " 12 forgotten girl groups from the ' 90s / ' 00s that are worth your time . " In 2014 Nathan Jolly from MAX said it was " one of those few pop songs that is happiness incarnate despite being a ' back the fuck off , dude ' anthem " . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The video was directed by Nigel Dick and was filmed from 4 to 6 October 1999 at the Mission Tiki drive @-@ in theatre in Montclair , California . In the video , Raven sings the song while she is in a car with a boy , while Larsen sings and plays the guitar in front of another car . This footage is mixed with M2M singing together at the drive @-@ in , people dancing , the projectionist struggling with his malfunctioning equipment , and the concession stand worker who has an overflowing popcorn maker . When the popcorn stand explodes , M2M continue to perform surrounded by people as popcorn rains down . Air cannons were used to fire 200 garbage bin @-@ sized bags of popcorn into the air to create the raining popcorn effect . In the US the music video made its premiere on 24 October on The WB following that nights screening of 7th Heaven . It began airing on The Box and MuchMusic in early November 1999 and began airing on MTV on November 15 . 
 Two similar versions of the video were released . In one , clips from Pokémon : The First Movie are played on the screen at the drive in theatre . In the other version , fewer images of the screen are shown ; when they are seen the Pokémon images are replaced with either clips of Raven and Larsen singing the song or words such as " M2M " and " Intermission " . The Pokémon version of the video uses the censored lyrics , while the other one uses the album version of the song . The Pokémon version was included on the DVD of the film , while the other version was included on the bonus disc in The Day You Went Away : The Best of M2M . 
 = = Live performances and covers = = 
 To promote the single Raven and Larsen made a six @-@ stop tour of shopping malls in the Northeastern US between 21 August and 2 October ; it was their first tour under the name M2M . On 9 November 1999 , the day before Pokémon : The First Movie was released , M2M performed the song live at the Warner Bros. Studio Store on Fifth Avenue , Manhattan , in front of fans and a large media presence . To promote the single M2M also toured Singapore , Hong Kong and Japan before returning to Norway on 24 November . They performed the song on the episode " Band on the Run " of the TV series One World , which aired on 27 November , and on 31 March 2000 they performed it on Top of the Pops . M2M performed the song live at Walt Disney Worlds Epcot park on 12 February 2000 . This performance was recorded and appeared on an episode of Disney Channel in Concert on 29 April , which focused on both M2M and BBMak . As it was their biggest hit , " Don 't Say You Love Me " was a popular song during live performances . In December 2001 the song was performed as an encore , along with " Everything You Do " , in front of a crowd of 4 @,@ 000 at an M2M concert in Kuala Lumpur . 
 M2M disbanded in 2002 , after which Raven and Larsen both pursued solo careers ; Larsen is known for performing a country music version of the song during solo performances . The <unk> acoustic pop duo Krissy & Ericka covered the song on their 2009 self @-@ titled album . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 The European version of the single contained the B @-@ side track The Feeling is Gone , one of three tracks recorded for Shades of Purple which were left off the album . The standard US version featured the Pokémon : The First Movie instrumental score " Mewtwo Strikes Back Suite " as the B @-@ side . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Shane Morris = 
 Shane Ryan Morris ( born August 4 , 1994 ) is an American football quarterback for the Michigan Wolverines team where he is a redshirt junior for the 2016 team . He is a left @-@ handed quarterback known for his strong arm . He was a highly touted 5 @-@ star high school prospect from De La Salle Collegiate . Until he endured mononucleosis midway through his senior season . He played in the 2013 Under Armour All @-@ America Game . He serves as the backup quarterback for Michigan . He saw limited action as a freshman until starting in the 2013 Buffalo Wild Wings Bowl in place of starter Devin Gardner . At the beginning of the 2015 season after the graduation of Gardner , he lost a quarterback battle against Jake Rudock . He will again battle for the starting position for 2016 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Morris ' was born to Bruce and Jennifer Morris on August 4 , 1994 . Morris has two younger siblings , Brent and Gracie Morris , who quarterbacked the all @-@ boys De La Salle Collegiate , led the 2009 freshman team to the Catholic League championship before being called up to finish the season with the varsity team . When the starting quarterback was injured in the fourth quarter of the scoreless district final game against Grosse Pointe South High School , he was put in the game because the backup had a broken thumb . He led the team to victory in that game and 27 – 6 victory over Southfield High School in the Division 2 Michigan High School Athletic Association ( MHSAA ) regional playoff game before losing 12 – 3 to Inkster High School in the state semifinals . This was the second straight year that future teammate Gardner led Inkster to the state championships . 
 As a sophomore , he totaled 1 @,@ 152 yards and 14 touchdowns , while helping De La Salle achieve a 9 – 3 record in 2010 . He led the team to the MHSAA Division 2 quarterfinals where they lost to eventual state champion Farmington Hills Harrison 33 – 23 . He began getting scholarship offers starting with Cincinnati , but as a lifelong Michigan fan , he hoped for an offer from Michigan once they abandoned Rich Rodriguez ' spread offense and hired head coach Brady Hoke and offensive coordinator Al Borges . Before Michigan made him an offer on March 28 , 2011 , he also received offers from Bowling Green and Toledo . He gave Michigan a verbal commitment on May 10 , 2011 . He became Michigan 's first commit of the class of 2013 in order to eliminate recruiting distractions . Once he committed , he actively recruited prospects for the team . 
 He participated as one of the four quarterbacks in the July 2011 Gridiron Kings event at Disney World ( with the top 24 quarterbacks participating in the 2011 Elite 11 ) , but he was overshadowed by Matt Davis . As a junior in the fall of 2011 , he passed for 1 @,@ 684 yards and 19 touchdowns . He led the team to the 2011 Division 1 MHSAA state quarterfinals where they lost 9 – 6 to eventual state champions Cass Technical High School . Prior to his senior season , he was regarded as one of the best quarterback prospects produced by the state of Michigan , a state whose greatest quarterback products have been Gary Danielson , Earl Morrall , Craig Morton and James <unk> . From the start of ESPN 's rankings with the class of 2006 through the class of 2012 , no Michigan quarterback ever ranked in the top 100 . The closest were Rob Bolden ( 112th , 2010 ) and Gardner ( 128th , 2010 ) . Prior to his senior year , he was ranked as ESPN 's 37th best and Rivals.com 's 17th best prospect and rising in the national class of 2013 . Entering his senior season , he and Max Browne were the only two 5 @-@ star rated quarterbacks in the class of 2013 by Rivals.com. A few weeks into his senior season , he had risen to 26th at ESPN , but suffered season @-@ ending mononucleosis with five games remaining on the schedule . By the beginning of November , he was the top quarterback in the country according to some evaluators . He ended his high school career ranked 127th by ESPN and 81st by Rivals.com. 
 During the summer of 2012 , he was at first unable to qualify for the 2012 Elite 11 in his home region , but participated in a second regional contest and was named MVP , earning an invitation . Morris was described as having the strongest arm of the 25 quarterbacks at the Elite 11 finals , although he did not finish in the top 11 of the competition . On September 6 , 2012 , he was the first quarterback selected to participate in the January 4 , 2013 Under Armour All @-@ America Game for high school seniors . As he was attempting to regain momentum following his battle with mononucleosis , he was reported to have been unimpressive in the week of practice and in the game . In the game , he was notable for being the recipient of a vicious tackle by Matthew Thomas , who was the No. 1 ranked outside linebacker in the class of 2013 according to ESPN . The Detroit News named him as the top prospect in the state of Michigan on their 2013 Blue Chip List . 
 By January 2013 , Morris had been so inundated with media requests , that he chose to discontinue any direct media contact ( although he was an active social media participant ) until he arrived at Michigan . On February 7 , 2013 , Morris was the first player to commit in writing to Michigan on signing day with a 7 : 01 a.m submission of his National Letter of Intent . 
 = = College = = 
 = = = 2013 season = = = 
 After Denard Robinson left for the NFL , sophomore Russell Bellomy , the only scholarship quarterback on the roster other than Devin Gardner , endured a season @-@ ending anterior cruciate ligament injury . The injury left the team without a healthy backup who had ever taken an official snap . True freshman Morris competed with redshirt freshman walk @-@ on Brian Cleary for the backup role . On August 22 , 2013 as a true freshman , Morris was named backup quarterback to redshirt junior Gardner . He made his debut for the 2013 team in the season opener against Central Michigan . Passing for 59 yards on 4 @-@ for @-@ 6 passing , he was one of 11 true freshmen to play in the game for Michigan . Morris also played in the Michigan – Michigan State football rivalry on November 2 against the 2013 Michigan State Spartans , completing only one pass ( on three attempts ) for six yards . Gardner suffered a turf toe injury prior to the 2013 team 's 2013 Buffalo Wild Wings Bowl against Kansas State . With Gardner held out of practices , Morris got extensive work . Morris started in place of Gardner in the Buffalo Wild Wings Bowl , compiling 196 yards on 24 – 38 passing . 
 = = = 2014 season = = = 
 After Michigan began the season with a 2 – 2 record under senior starter Gardner and with head coach Hoke under pressure , Morris started in the September 27 Little Brown Jug rivalry game against Minnesota . Michigan lost the game 30 – 14 , earning its third loss earlier than it had ever done in the 135 year history of Michigan football . The 16 @-@ point loss was the largest loss to Minnesota since 1977 and the largest to Minnesota at home since 1962 . On September 30 , Michigan athletic director Dave Brandon revealed that Morris suffered a concussion during the game but still played after showing signs of a concussion . This revelation sparked calls for Brandon to be fired , including a protest on the Michigan campus . When Gardner was injured in week 7 ( October 11 ) against Penn State , Russell Bellomy and not Morris was the replacement , due to what was presumed to be lingering injuries ( high @-@ ankle sprain and / or concussion ) to Morris . 
 = = = 2015 season = = = 
 In the final days before the 2015 Michigan Wolverines football team began its season for new head coach Jim Harbaugh against Utah , Morris was in a quarterback battle with incoming graduate student transfer Jake Rudock , who had started the prior two seasons for Iowa . On Monday before the Thursday September 3 game , Harbaugh would not name his starter . Rudock started the game . After the second game , against Oregon State , there was controversy when Wilton Speight took the <unk> snaps during the 35 – 7 victory instead of Morris . Harbaugh explained that since Speight had already used his redshirt season and Morris had not , there was no reason for Morris to lose a season unless it was for meaningful snaps , but that Morris is the # 2 quarterback . When Rudock was sidelined in the third quarter with the team trailing in the October 31 , 2015 , Little Brown Jug rivalry game against Minnesota , Speight engineered the game @-@ winning drive via his first touchdown pass with less than five minutes remaining in the fourth quarter . Harbaugh explained that Speight had earned the backup role in practice in the preceding weeks . 
 = = = 2016 season = = = 
 2016 Spring practice began on February 29 with a highly anticipated quarterback battle between Morris , junior transfer and favorite John O 'Korn , Speight , true freshman Brandon Peters and redshirt freshman Alex <unk> . As Spring practice wound down in late March , Speight , O 'Korn and Morris seemed to be the leading three , but in that order . O 'Korn and Speight were the starters in the April 1 Spring game , while Morris lined up at wide receiver early and threw an interception for a touchdown as a quarterback . 
 = Evicted ! = 
 " Evicted ! " is the twelfth episode of the first season of the American animated television series Adventure Time . The episode was written and storyboarded by Bert Youn and Sean Jimenez , from a story by Adam Muto . It originally aired on Cartoon Network on March 18 , 2010 as a preview for the series ; it later officially aired on May 17 , 2010 . The episode guest stars Erik Estrada as King Worm . The episode marks the first appearance of Marceline the Vampire Queen ( voiced by Olivia Olson ) , who would go on to play a larger role in the series as a friend and companion to Finn and Jake . 
 The series follows the adventures of Finn ( voiced by Jeremy Shada ) , a human boy , and his best friend and adoptive brother Jake ( voiced by John DiMaggio ) , a dog with magical powers to change shape and grow and shrink at will . In this episode , Finn and Jake search the land of Ooo for a new home after Marceline claims the duo 's treehouse as her own . Finn and Jake search all of Ooo for a new home , before settling temporarily in a cave . After a final confrontation , Marceline relents and gives Finn and Jake their house back because she finds them entertaining . 
 The character of Marceline was present in the series ' pitch bible , but she had not yet appeared in an episode prior to " Evicted ! " . Olson was cast as the character after she initially read for the part of Princess Bubblegum ; she was later pleased with her casting , praising Marceline 's varied design . " Evicted ! " also features the first song that was produced for the series : " The House Hunting Song " . " Evicted ! " was watched by 1 @.@ 88 million people and received largely positive critical attention , with Cam Shea of IGN naming the episode the fourth best episode of Adventure Time 's first season , and Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club noting that the episode is an example of the emotional complexity of the series . " Evicted ! " also drastically increased Marceline 's popularity with fans of the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 During a rainy night , Jake tells Finn a story about a supposed vampire that used to live in their tree fort . Finn , scared by the sounds outside the house , goes downstairs to talk to Jake . Suddenly , their window is blown open and the lights go out . Finn and Jake soon discover that Marceline the Vampire Queen has snuck into their house . Both Finn and Jake are terrified that Marceline will kill them and drink their blood , but she reveals that she has no intentions of killing them , noting that she really only eats the color red . However , she explains that the tree house used to belong to her , and she promptly evicts them from their residence . 
 Finn and Jake then attempt to find new homes . Initially they are unable to find a suitable home until they stumble upon a cave . They clean up the cave and hold a house @-@ warming party , which Marceline crashes . She explains that the cave also belongs to her . Finn , having had enough starts a fight with Marceline , who grows into a huge demonic bat . After she seemingly kills Jake , Finn goes into a rage and violently punches Marceline , who promptly shape @-@ shifts into her regular form and then kisses Finn on the cheek , making him blush . Jake — who was able to use his shape @-@ shifting powers to save himself — runs over to Finn , and Marceline states that the fight they had was fun and that the two of them can have their old house back , as a gift . Once Finn and Jake return to their old abode , they are promptly hypnotized by King Worm ( voiced by Erik Estrada ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Evicted ! " was written and storyboarded by Bert Youn and Sean Jimenez , from a story developed by Adam Muto . The entry was directed by Larry Leichliter . The storyboard for the episode is substantially different from the finished episode . The dialogue between Finn and Jake near the beginning is longer , and the " House Hunting Song " is not found ; instead , a dialogue note merely reads , " montage music begins " , and the storyboard shows Finn and Jake looking for new houses , sans dialogue . <unk> changed scene included Finn and Jake 's encounter with the Ice King ( in the original version , Finn and Jake huddle in a group of penguins , which incites the Ice King 's anger ) , the manner in which Finn and Jake discover the cave ( Finn and Jake fall through the top and are nearly impaled by stalagmites ) , as well as the ending ( which originally featured Jake and Finn dealing with a werewolf ) 
 The aforementioned " House Hunting Song " was the first musical piece produced for " Adventure Time " . The song — which was originally called " Oh Marceline " — was sung by Ward and Olivia Olson . The lyrics were written by Ward , who recorded a rough demo of the song a cappella . Patrick McHale later re @-@ recorded the song with guitar , and Ward then recorded both a different , " high intensity " version and a more subdued variant . When the crew was deciding which version to use , Ward wanted to use McHale 's recording , but Derek Drymon urged Ward to use his own . McHale later posted his demo for the song through his official Twitter account . Ashley <unk> played all of the bass in the episode . According to series composer Casey James Basichis , she is " classically trained as a bassist and can do just about anything " . Ryan Conner recorded guitar feedback that Basichis later autotuned into melodies . 
 The episode marks the first appearance of Marceline , one of the main characters in Adventure Time . Although she did not appear in the series ' pilot , the groundwork for her design and character were present in the series pitch book , penned by Pendleton Ward . Marceline 's name is based on the name of a childhood friend of Ward 's friend , named Marie , whose middle name is Marceline . Ward described Marie as someone who likes the horror movie Psycho and wearing dark clothing . Ward purposely set out to make Marceline 's character complex , as he explained in an interview that " with the female characters it ’ s easy to either write them as clichés or write them as the extreme opposite of those clichés [ … ] I just try to make them have faults and strengths just like Finn and Jake have . " 
 Marceline is voiced by Olivia Olson ; she had originally auditioned for the role of Princess Bubblegum . After her initial audition , she was asked to read for the role of Marcelline , and was " definitely impressed by the character " after seeing design drawings . Olson is also the character 's singing voice . The artistic design for Marceline was created by Ward , with small changes and additions added by Phil Rynda , former lead character designer and prop designer for Adventure Time . Olson later related in an interview that she was impressed by her character because , " she has really cool style [ … ] I love what they come up with [ in ] every episode . " The episode also features the vocal talents of actor Erik Estrada as King Worm ; Estrada would reprise the role for the eponymous fourth season episode " King Worm " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Evicted ! " was previewed on Cartoon Network on March 18 , 2010 . The episode officially aired on May 17 , 2010 @.@ the episode was watched by 1 @.@ 88 viewers , and scored a 1 @.@ 2 / 2 percent Nielsen household rating . Nielsen ratings are audience measurement systems that determine the audience size and composition of television programming in the United States , which means that the episode was seen by 1 @.@ 2 percent of all households and 2 percent of all households watching television at the time of the episode 's airing . 
 Critical reception to " Evicted ! " was largely positive . Cam Shea of IGN named Marceline 's introduction in " Evicted ! " as the fourth best moment in the series ' first season . He wrote that " sure , in this episode she evicts Finn and Jake from their home ... but hey , this is the first time we meet her and she 's awesome . " He later wrote that " Marceline = best " . Marceline has gone on to be one of the most popular characters with the Adventure Time fan base , and after the release of " Evicted ! " her popularity grew enormously . Ward later noted that he felt " good about that . It 's nice " . Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club named the episode one of the ten additional installments of the series that illustrates that " emotional complexity " lies " beneath Adventure Time 's weirdness " . 
 In the Ancient Psychic Tandem <unk> podcast , Zack Smith and Supernatural writer and producer Jenny Klein review the episode . Both Smith and Klein expressed an appreciate for Marceline as well as her voice actress , with the former noting that , " it 's pretty hard to get past the awesomeness that is Olivia Olson . " Klein compared the relationship between Marceline and Finn in this episode to the interactions between Kim Kelly ( Busy Philipps ) and Sam Weir ( John Francis Daley ) , characters from the short @-@ lived sitcom Freaks and Geeks . Klein also commended the " House Hunting Song " , applauding the fact that it was sung by Pendleton Ward ; she argued that it was an example of the author speaking directly to the audience , akin to listening to an audiobook . 
 = = Media release = = 
 The episode first saw physical release as part of the 2011 Adventure Time : My Two Favorite People DVD , which included 12 episodes from the series ' first two seasons . It was later re @-@ released as part of the complete first season DVD in July 2012 . In addition , the 2014 limited edition 12 " vinyl record release Marceline the Vampire Queen – Rock the Nightosphere included " The House Hunting Song " alongside other songs sung by Marceline . 
 = Horse Protection Act of 1970 = 
 The Horse Protection Act of 1970 ( HPA ) ; ( codified 15 U.S.C. § § 1821 – 1831 ) is a United States federal law , under which the practice of soring is a crime punishable by both civil and criminal penalties , including fines and jail time . It is illegal to show a horse , enter it at a horse show , or to auction , sell , offer for sale , or transport a horse for any of these purposes if it has been sored . 
 Soring is the practice of applying irritants or blistering agents to the front feet or forelegs of a horse , making it pick its feet up higher in an exaggerated manner that creates the movement or " action " desired in the show ring . Soring is an act of animal cruelty that gives practitioners an unfair advantage over other competitors . The Horse Protection Act is enforced by the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service ( APHIS ) , a branch of the United States Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) . Although violations of the law are seen most often in the Tennessee Walking Horse industry , the Horse Protection Act covers all breeds . 
 Originally all inspectors were from APHIS , but a lack of funding led to a 1976 amendment to the act , which allows non @-@ USDA employees to be trained and certified as inspectors . This program has not always been successful , with some non @-@ USDA inspectors being more lenient on violators than others , and citations for violations tend to increase significantly when USDA inspectors are present at a show . Several methods are used to detect violations of the act , including observation , palpation and gas chromatography / mass spectrometry to identify chemicals on horses ' legs . Certain training techniques and topical anesthetics can be used to avoid detection by the first two methods . There have been a number of unsuccessful challenges to the act on the grounds on constitutionality , as well as challenges on varying other issues . In 2013 , an amendment to the act was proposed in the United States House of Representatives . The amendment would allow only USDA employees to perform inspections , toughen penalties for violations , and outlaw the use of action devices and " stacks " , or layers of pads attached to the bottom of the front hooves . 
 = = Background = = 
 Soring began in the 1950s with gaited horse trainers who were looking to improve their chances of winning at horse shows . To do this , they developed methods to enhance the desired high action gaits to levels greater than that produced by traditional training methods . Thus began the use of irritants , including chemicals and physical objects , or abusive shoeing and hoof @-@ trimming practices on the front legs . Attempting to relieve the pain in its legs , a sored horse lifts its front feet off the ground more quickly , creating a flashier gait . By the 1960s , soring had gained popularity , as horses so treated gained an edge in competition . However , public opposition to the practice also grew , and in 1966 , the American Horse Protection Association was created in part to address the issue of soring . In 1969 , Senator Joseph Tydings sponsored legislation to prohibit soring , leading to the passing of the Horse Protection Act in 1970 , amended in 1976 . While Tennessee Walking Horses , Racking Horses and other " high @-@ stepping breeds " are generally targeted by these abusive practices , the Horse Protection Act covers all breeds . 
 Soring is defined by the HPA with four meanings : 
 ( 3 ) ( A ) an irritating or blistering agent has been applied , internally or externally , by a person to any limb of a horse , 
 ( B ) any burn , cut , or laceration has been inflicted by a person on any limb of a horse , 
 ( C ) any tack , nail , screw , or chemical agent has been injected by a person into or used by a person on any limb of a horse , or 
 ( D ) any other substance or device has been used by a person on any limb of a horse or a person has engaged in a practice involving a horse , and , as a result of such application , infliction , injection , use , or practice , such horse suffers , or can reasonably be expected to suffer , physical pain or distress , inflammation , or lameness when walking . 
 = = Contents = = 
 The Horse Protection Act is found in Title 15 of the United States Code , which covers commerce and trade . Section ( § ) 1821 covers the definitions of the terms used in the act and § 1822 details the Congressional statement of findings . The requirements placed upon horse shows and exhibitions are covered in § 1823 . § 1824 covers the core provisions of the act , prohibiting the " shipping , transporting , moving , delivering , or receiving of any horse which is sore " as well as the actual showing , exhibition , entry into a show , sale , or auction of a sored horse , including offering a sored horse for sale , as well as outlining the responsibilities of show management and recordkeeping requirements . The export of horses is covered in § <unk> . § 1825 covers penalties for violations detailed previously in the act , which may be civil or criminal , with fines of up to $ 50 @,@ 000 and imprisonment of up to five years . § 1826 details the required notice of violations to the Attorney General of the United States . The utilization of USDA and state government staff is covered in § 1827 , as is non @-@ financial assistance to states . Rules and regulations pertaining to the act 's statutes are covered in § 1828 . § 1829 covers federal preemption of state laws , concurrent jurisdiction , and prohibitions on certain state actions . § 1830 is currently reserved for future use , and § 1831 details the authorization of appropriations for expenses related to the enforcement of the provisions of the act . 
 = = Implementation = = 
 As originally enacted , the Horse Protection Act was to be enforced by Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service ( APHIS ) , a branch of the USDA . However , a lack of staff and funding meant little success , leading to the 1976 amendment to the act . With this amendment , Congress created a Designated Qualified Person ( DQP ) program . This program allows non @-@ USDA employees from within the equine community to take training and certification programs run by Horse Industry Organizations ( HIOs ) and supervised by the USDA ; after completing the training , they may complete inspections for violations of the HPA at public events . The USDA is then able to double check the work of DQP participants by making random inspections at a small number of shows . One member of the Tennessee Walking Horse world states that this creates " the potential for a " fox guarding the chicken coop " situation " , as if the HIO is not fully interested in preventing or detecting the practice of soring , the DQPs may not be fully trained or may deliberately overlook instances of soring . When APHIS inspectors are present at horse shows , the number of citations for violations increases significantly . Competitors and trainers at shows , viewing themselves as unjustly persecuted , have been known to leave when they find APHIS inspectors present , rather than allowing the inspectors to see their horses . In June 2012 , the USDA published a new rule requiring violations found by HIOs to have penalties assessed at a rate equal to or exceeding those given by APHIS inspectors . Previously , HIOs were allowed to set their own penalty rates , resulting in some organizations acting leniently towards violators of the HPA . 
 For the first decades following passage of the act , foreign substances applied to the legs , including chemicals , were detected by feel , sight or smell . Since 2006 , the USDA has used gas chromatography / mass spectrometry to identify chemicals found on horses ' legs at events . Samples of suspicious substances are swabbed at the show , and sent to a laboratory for analysis ; owners and trainers are later informed of the results . However , this method is only used by APHIS veterinary medical officers at present . 
 Soring can be also detected by observing the horse for lameness , assessing its stance and <unk> the lower legs . Some trainers evaded detection from inspectors by training horses not to react to the pain that palpation may cause , often by severely punishing the horse for flinching after the sored area is touched . The practice is called " stewarding " , in reference to the horse show steward . Others use topical anesthetics , such as lidocaine and benzocaine , which are timed to wear off before the horse goes into the show ring . Use of chemicals can be completely avoided if pressure shoeing is also used . This process involves placing some type of hard foreign object ( such as a small piece of wood , stone , hard acrylic , or sharp object such as a tack or nail ) against the sole of the horse 's foot before applying the horseshoe and pads . It can also be done by trimming down the horse 's hoof to its sensitive structures , then shoeing . Either method causes pain when the horse places its foot on the ground . 
 = = Impact = = 
 There have been a number of challenges to the Horse Protection Act on the grounds of constitutionality , mainly regarding due process and equal protection , none of which were successful . Courts have also ruled on other issues with regard to the act , including whether knowledge of soring or intent to sore is required in order to prove a violation of the act , and courts have repeatedly held that it is not . The issue of digital palpation , one of the main methods used by inspectors to find and verify soreness , has been contested in several courts , and is the only issue that has had courts come to varying conclusions on its legitimacy . The majority of courts with appeals rising to the Circuit Court level , have held that palpation is a legitimate method for identifying soreness , and that soreness found through palpation is grounds for penalties under the Horse Protection Act . However , in a decision promulgated by the Fifth Circuit Court , it was found that soreness found through digital palpation alone was not sufficient evidence upon which to base penalties . 
 The largest association in the United States for equine veterinarians , the American Association of Equine Practitioners ( AAEP ) , called the practice of soring " one of the most significant welfare issues affecting any equine breed or discipline " after releasing a white paper on the subject in 2008 . The organization pointed out that despite over three decades of work , the HPA law had failed to prevent sored horses from being trained , shown , and sold . The AAEP blamed this failure on what they called the " woefully inadequate " level of funding for enforcement , which the law caps at $ 500 @,@ 000 annually . The federal Office of Inspector General found in 2010 that the self @-@ enforcement system of HIOs and DQPs was inadequate for eliminating the practice of soring . This led to the June 2012 strengthening of penalty systems . 
 In 2010 , the Friends of Sound Horses launched a website containing the names of the over 8 @,@ 700 people who had received suspensions from the horse showing and training world under the Horse Protection Act between 1986 and 2010 . This list was developed as part of the USDA Horse Protection Operating Plan for 2007 – 2009 , and supported by most of the USDA @-@ certified HIOs . Despite the work being done to dissuade trainers from soring horses , APHIS inspectors found hundreds of violations in the course of their work during the 2012 year . 
 = = = Proposed amendments = = = 
 Since the 1976 amendment , there have been several other proposed changes to the act , all unsuccessful so far . In 2005 , HR 503 , titled the " Horse Slaughter Prohibition Bill " , was introduced by U.S. Representative John E. Sweeney ( R @-@ NY ) . The bill would have made major changes to the focus of the Horse Protection Act , by prohibiting the " shipping , transporting , moving , delivering , receiving , possessing , purchasing , selling , or donation of horses and other equines to be slaughtered for human consumption . " It passed the House of Representatives in 2006 , but died in the Senate . 
 In September 2012 , U.S. Representatives Ed Whitfield , a Republican from Kentucky , and Steve Cohen , a Democrat from Tennessee , proposed HR <unk> , titled the " Horse Protection Act Amendments of 2012 " . That bill died in committee . A similar bill , HR 1518 , titled the " Prevent All Soring Tactics Act " was introduced on April 11 , 2013 . If passed , the bill , nearly identical to HR <unk> , would amend the Horse Protection Act of 1970 to increase fines to $ 5 @,@ 000 , increase prison time to three years , and increase other penalties . It would also mandate the USDA to assign a licensed inspector if a show management indicates its intent to hire one , currently a voluntary practice . The bill would prohibit the use of " action devices " and " stacks " . Action devices are weights attached around the pasterns of horses , and if attached so that they move , they can rub or irritate sored areas and thus further enhance gaits . Stacks are layers of pads attached to the bottom of the front hooves between the horseshoe and the hoof , which increase the lift of the foot and the impact with the ground by adding height and weight to horses ' front feet . The final change would be to increase penalties for violations of the act . The bill was assigned to the House Committee on Energy and Commerce . Both bills have been opposed by some organizations within the Tennessee Walking Horse industry . The President and executive committee of the Tennessee Walking Horse Breeders ' and Exhibitors ' Association ( TWHBEA ) voted to support this legislation , but the full board of directors chose not to . The initial bill was supported by several outside organizations , including the AAEP , the American Veterinary Medical Association ( <unk> ) and the Humane Society of the United States ( HSUS ) . 
 = Kampung Boy ( TV series ) = 
 Kampung Boy is a Malaysian animated television series first broadcast in 1997 . It is about the adventures of a young boy , Mat , and his life in a kampung ( village ) . The series is adapted from the best @-@ selling graphical novel The Kampung Boy , an autobiography of local cartoonist Lat . Comprising 26 episodes — one of which won an Annecy Award — the series was first shown on Malaysian satellite television network Astro before being distributed to 60 other countries such as Canada and Germany . 
 A main theme of Kampung Boy is the contrast between the traditional rural way of life and the modern urban lifestyle . The series promotes the village lifestyle as an environment that is fun and conducive to the development of a healthy and intelligent child . It raises the issue of modernization , proposing that new values and technologies should be carefully examined by a society before being accepted . 
 Lat 's animation has won praises for its technical work and refreshing content , although questions have been raised by Southeast Asian audiences over its similarities with Western animation and its deviations from the local style of spoken English . Malaysian animation critics held up Kampung Boy as the standard to which their country 's animators should aspire , and academics in cultural studies regarded the series as a method of using modern technologies and cultural practices to preserve Malaysian history . 
 = = Origins = = 
 In 1979 , the autobiographical graphic novel The Kampung Boy was published . The story of a young Malay boy 's childhood in a kampung ( village ) proved to be a commercial and critical success , establishing its author — Lat — as the " most renowned cartoonist in Malaysia " . The Kampung Boy 's success prompted Lat to consider using other media to reach out to the masses . 
 The seeds for the animated adaptation of The Kampung Boy were sown in 1993 in a conversation between Lat and Ananda Krishman , founder of Measat Broadcast Network Systems . Western and Japanese cartoons flooded the local television channels during the 1990s , and Lat decried those productions for violence and jokes that he considered unsuitable for Malaysia and its youths . Recognising that the younger generation preferred colourful animations over static black and white drawings , Lat was keen for a local animated series to promote local values among Malaysian children . After Krishman 's company offered Lat financial support to start an animation project , the cartoonist began plans to adapt his trademark comic to the television screen . 
 = = Production = = 
 Lat imagined several stories that he wished to see in animated form , and then looked abroad for help producing them . Lacewood Studio in Ottawa , Canada , was in charge of animating the pilot episode . World Sports and Entertainment of Los Angeles was involved as well ; Norman Singer organised the production and Gerald Tripp helped Lat to write the script . <unk> Production was responsible for animating another five episodes . However , Krishman and Lat were disappointed with the results , which had taken two years of work to produce . They thought the pilot was " slow @-@ moving " . Lat believed Lacewood had accommodated him too often during the production , accepting his input without question . They failed to inform him that although a slow pace worked for static cartoon drawings , a good animation was often " lively , fast @-@ moving , full of action and fantasy " . 
 In 1995 , Lat and Krishman engaged Matinee Entertainment to complete the project , and Lat started to fly back and forth between Kuala Lumpur and Los Angeles to work closely with Matinee 's employees . His experience with Matinee 's team of writers and animators was positive ; they were more proactive than Lacewood 's , brainstorming his ideas and turning them into viable scripts and storyboards . Director Frank Saperstein performed the final edit , polishing up the scripts . Lat , however , had the final say with regards to cultural depictions , overriding several suggestions such as characters kissing in front of others and the use of Western street slang , as these were unpalatable to the Malaysian public . He also enforced accuracy in the depictions of objects such as bullock carts , noting that the American artists thought Malaysian carts were identical to their Mexican counterparts . 
 The storyboards were translated into animations by Philippine Animation Studios Incorporated in Manila . Lat again took several trips , this time to the Philippines , to advise the animators and ensure that everything was depicted accurately . Once the animation had been completed , the prints were sent to Vietnam for processing . Finally , the films were delivered to Krishman 's studio in Kuala Lumpur for voice recording in English and Bahasa Malaysia . Like Lat , Saperstein flew back and forth among the involved countries to coordinate efforts and make sure production standards never dropped . Saperstein 's efforts for his first 12 episodes were enough to convince Lat to continue working with Matinee for the project . 
 The entire project took four years to complete ; each episode cost approximately 350 @,@ 000 United States dollars ( approximately 1 million Malaysian ringgit ) , partly funded by Measat , and took four to five months to produce . The pilot was shown over TV1 on 10 February 1997 , and the series began its broadcast over Astro Ria two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years later . Kinder Channel ( Germany ) and Teletoon ( Canada ) broadcast the series after buying the rights through London @-@ based distributor <unk> , and the series has been broadcast in more than 60 countries since its first airing in Malaysia . Measat expected to recover their investment in approximately 10 years . Although Kampung Boy originated in Malaysia , most of its production took place abroad . It was local in concept , but could be construed as a foreign production in terms of animation . This led to laments that had Malaysian studios been hired to participate in animation work , the country 's industry would have benefited by learning from foreign animation expertise and methodology . 
 = = Characters = = 
 The protagonist of the series is a nine @-@ year @-@ old boy named Mat , who typically wears a sarong <unk> and a white singlet . Sporting a broad nose , small eyes , and untidy black hair , the short and rounded boy resembles his creator , Lat , as a child . Mat has a younger sister , Ana , and they live in a house with their father and mother , Yap and Yah , respectively . Their nuclear family structure is predominant in the village . Yap 's mother , <unk> , does not live with them but is often seen in their house . Also frequently appearing are Mat 's buddies , Bo and Tak , whose names are components of the Malay word <unk> ( bald ) . The two are styled after comic characters of traditional wayang kulit ( shadow play ) ; Bo is the more intelligent of the pair , while Tak has a tendency to be a show @-@ off . Other supporting characters include Normah ( a girl formerly from the city ) and Mrs Hew ( Mat 's teacher ) . 
 The Malay and English voices of the characters were dubbed by Malaysian voice actors . Child actors were employed for the younger roles ; however , Mat , Ana , Bo , and Tak were voiced by actors who were in their early twenties . Certain actors had the task of voicing multiple roles ; for example , the voice director was responsible for speaking the roles of Mrs Hew and Yah . Initially , voice talents were hired in Los Angeles to dub the English version , but they " kept slipping into a Jamaican accent " . Although this soundtrack was not used in the series , the producers felt it was too funny to waste and included it in The Making of Kampung Boy , which was broadcast a week before the start of the series . 
 = = Setting = = 
 Whereas Kampung Boy the comic book was based on life in the 1950s , its animation spin @-@ off was set in the 1990s . Although the scenery and details are exaggerated , the animation is accurate in its depiction of the Malaysian village and the life of its inhabitants . Dr Rohani Hashim , of Universiti Sains Malaysia 's School of Communication , called the series a " detailed recreation of a rural Malay childhood " . The layout of Mat 's village and the style of its houses are patterned after those in the rural areas of Perak , Malaysia — clusters of houses line a river , which provides water for the villagers ' needs . The children play in the surrounding jungle , while the adults toil in the fields and commute to the city to work . 
 Saperstein directed the use of warm and soft colours in the series ; this colour scheme was modelled after that of Winnie the Pooh , bestowing a " soft , cuddly feel " , according to Far Eastern Economic Review journalist S. <unk> , to the animation . Much of the show 's visuals followed Lat 's art style . Outlines are drawn in bold manner , making objects stand out from the background — an effect particularly aided by the rich use of brown , green , and yellow as the primary colours . The last two colours are heavily used in the depictions of nature , contrasting well with each other and separating the background from the middle ground . Aside from being the main colour for the houses , brown is used as the skin tone of the characters . Drawn with " short and round shapes " , Mat and his fellow Malays are highlighted with bright colours . 
 = = Themes and hallmarks = = 
 Kampung Boy 's episodes follow a structure reminiscent of Hollywood cartoons . Each episode contains two separate stories whose themes interweave each other as the show switches between scenes of the two stories . By the end of the episode , the two threads are resolved by a common idea . Generally , one story focuses on the kampung children , and the other on the adults . The creators of Kampung Boy refrained from copying ideas commonly found in Western and Japanese cartoons . Other Malaysian animations produced since the 1990s have not been as meticulously faithful to portraying images and themes familiar to the locals — for example , Sang <unk> 's ( 1996 ) protagonist bears a striking resemblance to Doraemon , and the bear and bee in <unk> dan <unk> ( 2002 ) play out antics similar to those of Tom and Jerry . Lat 's close involvement with the project kept its portrayals faithful to Malaysian culture . Kampung life in the animation features " true @-@ blue Malaysian elements " such as supernatural superstitions ( <unk> or female vampires ) , monkeys trained to pluck coconuts , and traditions that are forgotten in the transition from rural to urban living . 
 The cartoon series explores ideas through the activities of the characters , especially their interactions with one another . Rohani classified the genre of the show as comedy drama . According to her , the main theme in Kampung Boy is nostalgia , carrying Lat 's intention to portray rural childhood as a " much more interesting and creative " experience than growing up in an urban environment . Several episodes champion the kampung way of life . In " Orang Bandar <unk> " ( " The City People Come to the Kampung " ) , Mat and his friends defeat a city football ( soccer ) team because of their toughness bred from doing hard work in the village . " <unk> <unk> <unk> " ( " Smart Like a Flying Fox " ) suggests that the unpolluted environment of the kampung promotes the upbringing of a healthier and more intelligent child . Normah arrives from the city in " Mat Main Wayang " ( " The Shadow Knows " ) , and although she disdains the kampung initially , she is won over by the villagers ' tenderness toward her . 
 The intrusion of modern technology and attitudes into this idyllic kampung way of life is also a main topic in the series . Several episodes introduce electrical appliances and ideas associated with urban lifestyles to the villagers . For example , the convenience of motor cars versus the traditional use of bullock carts is debated by the characters in " Naik <unk> " ( " Dad 's Driving Test " ) . Despite the show 's support of the kampung lifestyle , it portrays aspects of modern living in a positive light as well . <unk> , an old woman , is depicted as a capable modern woman , proficient in driving a van and fixing televisions . The city is characterized as a gateway to a range of cultures and ideas that are not found in a Malaysian rural village , as illustrated in the encounter and formation of a friendship between Mat and a Chinese boy in " Naik <unk> " . 
 The series also explores changes in Malaysian rural society that had taken place during the 1950s to 1990s . For example , through flashbacks , " Yah , <unk> Kami ! " ( " Gone With <unk> " ) displays traditional marriage customs that are no longer practiced by urban dwellers . Family ties are shown to be strong in the rural community — family members show close attention and concern to one another . Conversely , those who immersed themselves in city life are depicted to have lost their communal bonds . Although Mat 's family is depicted to follow the rules of the Malay patriarchal society , modern values are in its portrayal . Yap does not leave the responsibilities of child @-@ rearing all to Yah ; he takes care of Ana while she watches over Mat . Although the series presents the female characters as housewives , it makes the point in " Nasib Si Gadis Desa " ( " It 's a Girl 's Life " ) that the traditional family role of the Malay woman is as equal and valuable as the man 's . The episode also mentions the achievements of women in careers such as space exploration and science . 
 Overall , Rohani said that Lat 's cartoon series was subtly recording a story of " rapidly vanishing Malay tradition and innocence " , while advising viewers to consider the societal changes around them . According to her , the cartoonist 's concern was to inspire the audience to consider the pace of urbanisation and to realise that the adoption or rejection of new values is a common decision by them . The show , in her opinion , suggests that changes should be carefully examined and adopted only if beneficial to the society . Furthermore , the adoption of new ideas and culture should be a gradual process , and the changes tailored accordingly to the society . 
 = = Reception , legacy , and achievements = = 
 Kampung Boy was submitted to the 1999 Annecy International Animated Film Festival in France . One of its episodes , " Oh , Tok ! " , won the Best Animation for a television series of 13 minutes and more . The episode was about a spooky banyan tree that became the object of Mat 's fear . Because of the local contents in the animation and the nostalgic appeal of the kampung lifestyle , Malaysian comics scholar Muliyadi <unk> expected success for Kampung Boy in his country . 
 The 26 @-@ episode series was popular with the young and received positive reviews for technical details and content . It has also attracted criticism for similarities to United States cartoon series The Simpsons ; audiences noticed that Mat 's Malaysian family was similar in several ways to Bart Simpson 's dysfunctional American family . Similarly , some critics pointed out that the English spoken in Kampung Boy is substantially different from Malaysian English , which is heavily influenced by British English ; reporter Daryl Goh perceived an American accent to the English @-@ language voices . Lat explained that the producers had to tone down the use of " traditional Malay customs , locales and language " to market the series to a wider global audience . Rohani found the decision " regrettable " ; it made the animation less than an authentic Malay product . 
 The animation was regarded by Dr Paulette <unk> , of Bond University 's School of Humanities and Social Sciences , as a cultural artefact : a reminder and preservation of a country 's old way of life , created and produced by an international team , and displayed via modern technologies to the world . According to Rohani , Kampung Boy was a record of Malay traditions and transitions experienced by the rural community during the 1950s to 1990s . Among the several Malaysian animations that used local settings , Lat 's series was in veteran film director Hassan Abdul <unk> 's view the best in portraying the country 's culture and traditions ; Hassan also said that the success in marketing the series overseas made Kampung Boy the benchmark for Malaysia 's animation industry . 
 = 2007 Navy vs. North Texas football game = 
 The 2007 Navy vs. North Texas football game was a regular @-@ season college football game between the Navy Midshipmen and the North Texas Mean Green , played on November 10 , 2007 at Fouts Field in Denton , Texas . The game holds the record for the most combined points scored in a National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) Division I Football Bowl Subdivision ( FBS ) regulation game with 136 total points . 
 The mid @-@ season , non @-@ conference game was the first meeting between the two teams ; both came into the game with highly rated offenses and poorly rated defenses . Before the game the Midshipmen had a 5 – 4 record , most recently defeating the Notre Dame Fighting Irish to break a streak of 43 consecutive losses to that team . Another win would qualify them for a bowl game . The Mean Green held a 1 – 7 record , and could not become bowl eligible by winning its remaining games , but the team 's offense had improved over the course of the season . 
 During the first quarter of the game , the Mean Green led the Midshipmen by as much as 18 points . In the second quarter the teams combined to score 63 points , setting records for most points scored in a quarter and a half . The Midshipmen rallied around a strong rushing offense to take the lead at the beginning of the third quarter , and the Mean Green 's offensive momentum sputtered during the second half . Navy held the lead for the remainder of the game . 
 With the win the Midshipmen improved to 6 – 4 , making the team bowl @-@ eligible for the fifth straight year . After finishing the regular season with a record of 8 – 4 they played in the 2007 Poinsettia Bowl , losing to the Utah Utes . The loss against Navy gave the Mean Green a 1 – 8 record , and the team eventually finished with a 2 – 10 record for the season . 
 = = Pre @-@ game buildup = = 
 = = = Navy = = = 
 The Midshipmen , using a triple option offensive scheme under head coach Paul Johnson , had gained the most rushing yards of any team in the nation and had a record of 4 – 4 through the first eight games of the season . In their ninth game the team defeated the Notre Dame Fighting Irish in triple overtime , ending a 43 @-@ year losing streak in the Notre Dame – Navy rivalry and improving the team 's record to 5 – 4 . With three games remaining in the season , Navy needed to win at least one more to become bowl eligible . Sponsors had arranged for Navy ( which was unaffiliated with any college football conference ) to play in the Poinsettia Bowl if they won six games . The Midshipmen defense allowed an average of 38 @.@ 8 points per game . 
 = = = North Texas = = = 
 Using a spread offense scheme implemented by first @-@ year head coach Todd Dodge , the Mean Green experienced some offensive success ; however , defensive woes led to a 1 – 7 record through the first eight games of the season . In a rivalry game against SMU on September 8 Mean Green quarterback Daniel Meager threw for over 600 yards ( one of the top 20 single @-@ game performances in FBS history ) , but defensive errors and an interception returned for a touchdown during the fourth quarter led to another loss . After losing to the Arkansas Razorbacks 66 – 7 , Dodge replaced Meager with redshirt freshman Giovanni Vizza . After four games as a starter , Vizza had set a new passing record for freshmen at North Texas . Coming into the game , the Mean Green ranked 12th nationally in passing offense . Dodge 's defensive squad , however , continued to struggle ; the team had allowed an average of 209 yards of rushing per game , ranking 107th in the nation in rushing defense . It also ranked 119th in scoring defense , allowing opponents to score an average of 46 @.@ 5 points per game . Coming off a bye week , the team entered the game with a 1 – 7 record . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 The game was scheduled to begin at 3 p.m. Central Time at Fouts Field in Denton , Texas . Before the opening kickoff , the Green Brigade Marching Band performed " My Country , ' Tis of Thee " and " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " . At the conclusion of the national anthem , four United States Navy F / A @-@ 18 Hornet aircraft performed a flyover past the stadium . 
 = = = First quarter = = = 
 Although the Mean Green had not scored on its first possession in its previous eight games , the team scored on its opening drive against the Midshipmen when wide receiver Casey Fitzgerald caught a nine @-@ yard touchdown pass from quarterback Giovanni Vizza . The Mean Green recovered an onside kick on the ensuing kickoff and scored another touchdown on the following drive . After the Midshipmen kicked a field goal on their first possession , North Texas added another touchdown , giving them a 21 – 3 lead . Navy scored a touchdown with seven seconds remaining in the quarter . The period ended with the Mean Green ahead , 21 – 10 . 
 = = = Second quarter = = = 
 After Navy forced North Texas to begin the second quarter with a punt , Midshipmen running back Eric <unk> fumbled the ball on the second play of the next drive and the Mean Green recovered . The next eight possessions – four from each team – resulted in touchdowns . Four of the drives took less than a minute of game time to reach the end zone , and a fifth took barely over a minute . In the final two minutes of the half the Midshipmen forced the Mean Green to punt after three plays , and Navy quarterback <unk> @-@ Noa <unk> @-@ <unk> threw a 47 @-@ yard pass to running back Reggie Campbell . The Midshipmen ran for another touchdown on the next play . North Texas got the ball back with seven seconds left in the half , but chose not to attempt to score again . At the end of the first half , the Mean Green led the Midshipmen 49 – 45 . 
 = = = Third quarter = = = 
 Navy began the third quarter with a 9 @-@ play , 60 @-@ yard touchdown drive composed completely of runs . This gave them their first lead of the game at 51 – 49 ( the extra point attempt was blocked ) . On the next North Texas drive , Midshipmen outside linebacker Ram Vela intercepted Giovanni Vizza 's pass at the Midshipmen 20 @-@ yard line . Three plays later , Navy running back <unk> Singleton ran 65 yards for another touchdown , making the score 58 – 49 . The Mean Green responded with a 7 @-@ play , 59 @-@ yard drive , which ended with another Vizza touchdown pass to Casey Fitzgerald . On the next play from scrimmage , <unk> ran 49 yards . Two plays later he ran for another touchdown , bringing the score to 65 – 56 at the end of the third quarter . 
 = = = Fourth quarter = = = 
 The next Mean Green drive ended in another interception , this time by Midshipmen linebacker Matt <unk> . After the ensuing drive stalled at midfield , the Midshipmen downed a punt at the North Texas two @-@ yard line . Two plays later the Mean Green were called for holding in the end zone , giving Navy a safety . Campbell returned the ensuing free kick for a touchdown , giving the Midshipmen a 74 – 56 lead . Running back Micah Mosley scored another touchdown for the Mean Green , but their two @-@ point conversion attempt failed , leaving them down 74 – 62 . The Mean Green attempted another onside kick , but Navy recovered . One first down was enough to enable the Midshipmen to run out the clock for the win . 
 = = = Scoring summary = = = 
 Source : 
 = = Final statistics = = 
 With a combined 136 total points scored between both teams , the game set an NCAA Division I FBS record for most points scored in a regulation @-@ length game ( breaking the previous record of 133 points set when the San Jose State Spartans defeated the Rice Owls 70 – 63 in 2004 ) . The 63 combined points in the second quarter and 94 points scored in the first half set NCAA records . The game capped off a <unk> period during which four of the five highest @-@ scoring college football games were played . Giovanni Vizza 's eight touchdown passes – equaling the total from his previous four games – set an NCAA record for most touchdown passes by a freshman in a single game . The Midshipmen set a school record by running for 572 yards ( with 8 rushing touchdowns ) in the game , and tied another school record by scoring at least 30 points for an eighth consecutive game . 
 = = Post @-@ game effects = = 
 During a post @-@ game press conference Midshipmen head coach Paul Johnson described the game as " bizarre " , while defensive coordinator Buddy Green criticized his team 's defensive performance : " ... it was awful . Awful . Just awful . I can 't be any clearer than that . " The win guaranteed the Midshipmen a spot in the 2007 Poinsettia Bowl , held in San Diego , California on December 20 , 2007 ; Navy lost the game to the Utah Utes , 35 – 32 . It was the fifth straight bowl game for Navy . 
 The loss dropped the Mean Green to 1 – 8 , and the team finished the season with a 2 – 10 record . Mean Green coach Todd Dodge expressed astonishment at a post @-@ game press conference , saying " I have never been a part of a game quite like this . " The team finished the season averaging an FBS @-@ worst 45 @.@ 1 points allowed per game . After the final game of the season , Dodge fired defensive coordinator Ron Mendoza , who was replaced by Gary DeLoach . In the 2008 season the Mean Green would again finish at the bottom of the defensive rankings , allowing an average of 47 @.@ 6 points per game . 
 = HD 154672 = 
 HD 154672 is a yellow subgiant ( spectral type G3 IV ) . It is about 65 parsecs away from the Sun that is larger than , but of a similar mass to , the Sun . However , HD 154672 is much older . The star is very metal @-@ rich , which is one of the reasons why it was targeted for a planet search by the N2K Consortium , which discovered the gas giant planet HD 154672 b using Doppler Spectroscopy ; the discovery was reported in October 2008 . The N2K collaboration chose HD 154672 primarily because it aimed to discover the correlation between a star 's metallicity and the mass of orbiting planets . 
 HD 154672 was targeted by the Magellan Telescopes . It is the host of the first planet discovered from the telescopes by N2K . 
 = = Observational history = = 
 HD 154672 was first targeted for a planet search in 2004 by the N2K Consortium , a collaboration of astronomers hoping to take radial velocity measurements of previously <unk> stars using Doppler spectroscopy ; however , HD 154672 had been previously targeted by a series of surveys , and was previously included in the Henry Draper catalog and the catalog of the European Space Agency 's Hipparcos satellite . 
 N2K deliberately biased its search towards closely orbiting Jupiter @-@ size planets ( Hot Jupiters ) in the orbit of metal @-@ rich stars , as the consortium hoped to discover how the mass of a planet relates to its host star 's metal content . Initially , HD 154672 was noted as a host to a short @-@ orbit Hot Jupiter , although additional observations revealed that the prospective planetary body had a longer orbit than previously expected , as revealed by the Magellan Telescopes at Chile 's Las Campanas Observatory . 
 Use of the Magellan Clay telescope 's Magellan Inamori Kyocera Echelle spectrograph ( MIKE ) helped collect sixteen radial velocity measurements for HD 154672 ; a team of American astronomers and one from the Vatican City used these measurements to confirm the existence of planet HD 154672 b and to determine its mass . 
 The discovery of HD 154672 's planet was reported in the Astronomical Journal on October 7 , 2008 along with a planet in the orbit of HD 205739 . 
 = = Host star = = 
 HD 154672 is a sunlike G @-@ type star that has a mass of 1 @.@ 06 times that of the Sun and a radius that is 1 @.@ 27 times that of the Sun . Thus , it is slightly larger than the Sun , although it has a similar mass . The star has an effective temperature of <unk> K , slightly cooler than the Sun ; however , it is far richer in iron , with a measured metallicity of [ Fe / H ] = 0 @.@ 26 . This means that the star has 1 @.@ 82 times more iron than the Sun does . HD 154672 is far older than the Sun , as its estimated <unk> age is estimated at 9 @.@ 28 billion years . HD 154672 's spectrum suggests that the star 's chromosphere ( its outer layer ) is not active . 
 HD 154672 is located 65 @.@ 8 parsecs ( 214 @.@ 6 light years ) away from Earth . It has an apparent magnitude ( V ) of 8 @.@ 22 , making the star too dim to see from Earth with the naked eye . The star is slightly dimmer than planet Neptune as perceived with the naked eye , which has an apparent magnitude of 7 @.@ 78 at its brightest . The star 's actual brightness is measured with an absolute magnitude of 4 @.@ 12 , similar to that of the Sun . 
 = = Planetary system = = 
 HD 154672 b is a Hot Jupiter , as it is a closely orbiting planet with a high mass . Specifically , HD 154672 has a mass that is 5 @.@ 02 times greater than Jupiter 's mass . It also orbits at a distance of 0 @.@ 6 AU , or about 60 % of the mean distance between the Earth and Sun . This orbit is completed every 163 @.@ 91 days . 
 HD 154672 b has an orbital eccentricity of 0 @.@ 61 , denoting a very elliptical orbit . The planet 's discoverers noted that if water existed in the planet 's atmosphere , it might change from a liquid state to a gaseous state as the planet swings closer to its host star , increasing its temperature . 
 = Homer 's Odyssey ( The Simpsons ) = 
 " Homer 's Odyssey " is the third episode of the first season of The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 21 , 1990 . In this episode Homer becomes a crusader for citizen safety in Springfield , and is promoted to his current position as Nuclear Safety Inspector for the entire power plant . It was written by Jay Kogen and Wallace Wolodarsky and was the first Simpsons script to be completed , although it was the third episode produced . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Mrs. Krabappel takes Bart 's class on a field trip to the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant , where everybody watches as Homer crashes an electric cart into a cooling vent and is fired . Homer searches for a new job without success . Feeling like a failure , he writes a suicide note to his family and decides to end his life by attaching a boulder to himself and jumping off a bridge . 
 Lisa finds Homer 's note and alerts the family . They hurry to the bridge to save him , but they are almost run over by a speeding truck . Homer pulls them to safety just in time , and he is suddenly filled with a new reason to live : to place a stop sign at the dangerous intersection . After successfully petitioning the city council , Homer embarks on a public safety crusade that involves placing speed bumps and warning signs throughout the town . 
 Unsatisfied with his own efforts , Homer takes on the biggest danger in Springfield , the nuclear power plant . After Homer rallies people to his cause , Mr. Burns decides to end the furor he is creating by offering him a new position as the plant safety inspector , along with a higher salary . Homer , torn between his principles and his livelihood , tearfully tells his followers that they must fight their battles alone from this point on and takes the job . 
 = = Production = = 
 Waylon Smithers made his first appearance in this episode , although he can be heard over a speaker in The Simpsons series premiere " Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire " . In his first visual appearance , he was mistakenly animated with the wrong color and was made an African American by <unk> <unk> , the color stylist . David Silverman has claimed that Smithers was always intended to be " Mr. Burns ' white sycophant , " and the staff thought it " would be a bad idea to have a black sub @-@ <unk> character " and so switched him to his intended color for his next episode . Smithers ' skin tone was later explained as an " extreme tan " . 
 Blinky the Three @-@ Eyed Fish makes a brief cameo in this episode ; he later becomes of importance in episode four of the second season , " Two Cars in Every Garage and Three Eyes on Every Fish " . Also notable is that Marge was originally called Juliette in this script as a homage to Romeo and Juliet . Homer 's middle initial , J , is mentioned for the first time in this episode . According to Matt Groening , it was a reference to Bullwinkle J. Moose . Additionally , the following characters made their first appearances in this episode : Otto Mann , Chief Wiggum , Jasper Beardley , Sam & Larry , Mr. & Mrs. Winfield and Sherri and Terri . 
 The episode 's title comes from the Greek epic poem Odyssey , traditionally attributed to the legendary poet Homer . On the bus , Bart sings " John Henry was a Steel Driving Man " , an American folk @-@ song about a 19th @-@ century hero of the working @-@ class , building railroads across the West Virginia mountains . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Homer 's Odyssey " finished twenty @-@ eight in ratings for the week of January 15 – 21 , 1990 , with a Nielsen rating of 14 @.@ 9 , equivalent to approximately 13 @.@ 7 million viewing households . It was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , beating Married ... with Children . 
 Since airing , the episode has received mixed reviews from television critics . Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide stated that " the story rather fizzles out at the end , but there are many good moments , especially in the power plant . " Colin Jacobson at DVD Movie Guide said in a review that the episode is " possibly the best of the [ first six ] shows " and further commented that the episode " suffers a little from an odd tone , as the characters hadn ’ t become settled . Still , it seems surprisingly clever and witty " 
 In September 2001 , in an DVD review of the first season , David B. Grelck gave the episode a rating of ½ / 5 and calls it " the first season at its worst " and continues that it was " notable for introducing Mr. Burns and ( a strangely African @-@ American ) Smithers , but otherwise boring and preachy . " 
 = = Home release = = 
 The episode was released first on home video in the United Kingdom , as part of a VHS release titled The Simpsons Collection , in which it was paired with the sixth episode of the season , " Moaning Lisa " . In the United Kingdom , it was once re released as part of VHS boxed set of the complete first season , released in November 1999 . 
 In the United States , the episode would finally see the home video release as a part of The Simpsons Season One DVD set , which was released on September 25 , 2001 . Groening , Archer , Kogen , and Wolodarsky participated in the DVD 's audio commentary . A digital edition of the series ' first season was published December 20 , 2010 in the United States containing the episode , through Amazon Video and iTunes . 
 = German destroyer Z15 Erich Steinbrinck = 
 Z15 Erich Steinbrinck was a Type 1934A @-@ class destroyer built for Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine in the mid @-@ 1930s . The ship was named after the First World War German naval officer Erich Steinbrinck . At the beginning of World War II on 1 September 1939 , the ship was initially deployed to blockade the Polish coast , but she was quickly transferred to the North Sea to lay defensive minefields . In late 1939 and 1940 the ship laid multiple offensive minefields off the English coast that claimed 24 merchant ships and a destroyer . Steinbrinck was under repair for most of the Norwegian Campaign of early 1940 and was transferred to France later that year . 
 After a lengthy refit in Germany , she returned to France in early 1941 where she escorted returning warships , commerce raiders , and supply ships through the Bay of Biscay for several months . After her refit was completed , Steinbrinck was transferred to Northern Norway in 1942 where she participated in several minor operations before she was damaged running aground and forced to return to Germany for repairs . The ship returned to Norway in mid @-@ 1943 where she escorted German capital ships as they moved between Norway and Germany and participated in the German attack ( Operation Zitronella ) on the Norwegian island of Spitzbergen , well north of the Arctic Circle . Steinbrinck was ordered home in November to begin a lengthy refit , during which she was badly damaged by Allied bombs , and was unserviceable for the rest of the war . She was turned over to the Soviet Union after the war as war reparations and only served a few years before she was converted into a training ship and then a barracks ship before being sold for scrap in 1958 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Erich Steinbrinck had an overall length of 119 meters ( 390 ft 5 in ) and was 114 meters ( 374 ft ) long at the waterline . The ship had a beam of 11 @.@ 30 meters ( 37 ft 1 in ) , and a maximum draft of 4 @.@ 23 meters ( 13 ft 11 in ) . She displaced 2 @,@ 239 long tons ( 2 @,@ 275 t ) at standard and 3 @,@ 165 long tons ( 3 @,@ 216 t ) at deep load . The Wagner geared steam turbines were designed to produce 70 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 51 @,@ 485 kW ; 69 @,@ 042 shp ) which would propel the ship at 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam was provided to the turbines by six high @-@ pressure Benson boilers with superheaters . Erich Steinbrinck carried a maximum of 752 metric tons ( 740 long tons ) of fuel oil which was intended to give a range of 4 @,@ 400 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 100 km ; 5 @,@ 100 mi ) at 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) , but the ship proved top @-@ heavy in service and 30 % of the fuel had to be retained as ballast low in the ship . The effective range proved to be only 1 @,@ 530 nmi ( 2 @,@ 830 km ; 1 @,@ 760 mi ) at 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . The ship 's crew consisted of 10 officers and 315 sailors . 
 Erich Steinbrinck carried five 12 @.@ 7 cm SK C / 34 guns in single mounts with gun shields , two each superimposed , fore and aft . The fifth gun was carried on top of the rear deckhouse . Her anti @-@ aircraft armament consisted of four 3 @.@ 7 cm SK C / 30 guns in two twin mounts abreast the rear funnel and six 2 cm C / 30 guns in single mounts . The ship carried eight above @-@ water 53 @.@ 3 @-@ centimeter ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes in two power @-@ operated mounts . A pair of reload torpedoes were provided for each mount . Four depth charge throwers were mounted on the sides of the rear deckhouse and they were supplemented by six racks for individual depth charges on the sides of the stern . Sufficient depth charges were carried for either two or four patterns of sixteen charges each . Mine rails could be fitted on the rear deck that had a maximum capacity of sixty mines . ' GHG ' ( Gruppenhorchgerät ) passive hydrophones were fitted to detect submarines and an active sonar system was installed by the end of 1940 . 
 During the war the ship 's light anti @-@ aircraft armament was augmented several times . In 1941 , improved 2 cm C / 38 guns replaced the original C / 30 guns and three additional guns were added . The two guns on the aft shelter deck were replaced at some point by a single 2 cm quadruple Flakvierling mount , probably in 1942 . Sometime in 1944 – 45 , Steinbrinck received the " Barbara " anti @-@ aircraft refit in which all of her existing 3 @.@ 7 cm and most of her 2 cm guns were replaced . She retained her Flakvierling mount and the remainder of her anti @-@ aircraft armament now consisted of seven twin 3 @.@ 7 cm SK M / 42 mounts and four twin 2 cm mounts on the forecastle and side of the bridge . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Erich Steinbrinck , named after the commander of the torpedo boat SMS V @-@ 29 killed during the Battle of Jutland in 1916 , was ordered on 19 January 1935 from Blohm & Voss . She was laid down at their shipyard in Hamburg on 30 May 1935 as yard number <unk> , launched on 24 September 1936 and completed on 31 May 1938 . She was commissioned under the command of Korvettenkapitän Rolf Johannesson , later promoted to Fregattenkapitän , who commanded her until January 1942 . The ship participated in the August 1938 Fleet Review as part of the 3rd Destroyer Division . She participated in the Spring fleet exercise in the western Mediterranean and made several visits to Spanish and Moroccan ports in April and May 1939 . 
 When World War II began , Erich Steinbrinck was initially deployed in the Baltic to operate against the Polish Navy and to enforce a blockade of Poland , but she was soon transferred to the German Bight where she joined her sister ships in laying defensive minefields . She also patrolled the Skagerrak to inspect neutral shipping for contraband goods in October . On the night of 18 / 19 November , Steinbrinck was Commander ( Fregattenkapitän ) Erich Bey 's flagship for an offensive minelaying mission off the British coast when she led her sister ships Friedrich Eckoldt and Hans Lody to the Humber Estuary that claimed seven ships of 38 @,@ 710 gross register tons ( GRT ) , including the Polish ocean liner M / S Piłsudski . 
 On the night of 12 / 13 December , German destroyers sortied to lay minefields off the British coast . Under the command of Commodore ( Kommodore ) Friedrich Bonte in his flagship Hermann Künne , Steinbrinck , Bruno Heinemann , Richard Beitzen , and Friedrich Ihn laid 240 mines off the mouth of the River Tyne , where the navigation lights were still lit . The British were unaware of the minefield 's existence and lost eleven ships totaling 18 @,@ 979 GRT . The destroyers were later ordered to escort the crippled light cruisers Leipzig and Nürnberg which had been torpedoed by the submarine HMS Salmon while covering the destroyers ' withdrawal . Ihn and Steinbrinck had machinery problems en route and were forced to return to port before they reached the cruisers . Steinbrinck and her sisters Friedrich Eckoldt and Ihn sortied again on the night of 18 December , but the British had turned off the navigation lights off <unk> and the German were forced to abandon the attempt because they could not locate themselves precisely enough to lay the minefield in the proper position . 
 = = = 1940 – 41 = = = 
 Another minefield of 170 magnetic mines was laid by Steinbrinck , Ihn and Eckoldt on the night of 6 – 7 January 1940 off the Thames Estuary . The destroyer HMS Grenville and six merchant ships totalling 21 @,@ 617 GRT were lost to this minefield as well and another ship was damaged as well . The ship was under repairs during Operation Weserübung in April and did not leave the dockyard until May when she began working up as part of the 5th Destroyer Flotilla . Her work up was cut short to escort the battleships Scharnhorst and Gneisenau , as well as the heavy cruiser Admiral Hipper participating in Operation Juno , a planned attack on Harstad , Norway , to relieve pressure on the German garrison at Narvik . The ships sortied on 8 June and sank the troop transport Orama , the oil tanker Oil Pioneer and the minesweeping trawler Juniper en route . The German commander , Admiral Wilhelm Marschall , then ordered the Admiral Hipper and all four destroyers to Trondheim because of the heavy weather , where they arrived in the morning of 9 June . The two battleships continued the sortie and sank the aircraft carrier Glorious and her two escorting destroyers , although Scharnhorst was badly damaged by a torpedo from the destroyer Acasta in the engagement . The battleship was escorted home by the destroyers Steinbrinck , Lody and Hermann Schoemann for repairs . Steinbrinck and Lody then returned to Trondheim to escort Gneisenau home , after she been torpedoed by a British submarine . 
 The flotilla laid defensive minefields in the North Sea in August and early September before it was transferred to the Atlantic Coast of France in mid @-@ September . Now based at Brest the flotilla laid a minefield in Falmouth Bay during the night of 28 / 29 September . Five ships totalling only 2 @,@ 026 GRT were sunk by this minefield . Led by Captain ( Kapitän zur See ) Erich Bey , Steinbrinck and four other destroyers sortied for the Southwest Approaches on 17 October and were intercepted by a British force of two light cruisers and five destroyers . The British opened fire at extreme range and were forced to disengage in the face of long @-@ range torpedo volleys and attacks by Luftwaffe bombers without having hit any of the German ships . Steinbrinck returned home on 7 November for a refit in Stettin . 
 Her refit was completed in late January 1941 , but she was trapped by thick ice so that she could not reach Gotenhafen to work up until mid @-@ February . Steinbrinck returned to France in April where she was based at La Pallice . There she was primarily occupied with escorting returning commerce raiders , warships and supply ships through the Bay of Biscay to bases in France . These included the raider Thor on 22 April , the supply ship Nordland , and the fleet oiler Ermland in late May . The heavy cruiser Prinz Eugen was escorted to Brest in early June after separating from the battleship Bismarck during Operation Rheinübung . By the late summer , Steinbrinck was well overdue for a refit and was suffering from boiler problems but her refit was postponed to allow her to escort the raider Orion on 21 August . Her departure was delayed when she ran aground at the beginning of the next month and she did not depart for Germany until 6 September . 
 = = = 1942 – 43 = = = 
 Steinbrinck only briefly operated in northern Norway where she participated in Operation Wunderland in August , where she and her sisters Eckoldt and Beitzen escorted the pocket battleship Admiral Scheer at the beginning and end of its mission to attack Soviet shipping in the Kara Sea . They also escorted the minelayer Ulm as it departed to lay a minefield off Cape Zhelaniya in mid @-@ August . Steinbrinck ran aground at the beginning of September and was sent home after temporary repairs were made at Trondheim . The ship returned to Norway in January 1943 where she was slightly damaged by a practice torpedo fired by the submarine U @-@ 703 . In early March she escorted Scharnhorst through the Skaggerak to Trondheim in heavy weather that washed two men overboard . By mid @-@ month , Steinbrinck was the flagship of Captain ( Kapitän zur See ) , commander of the 5th Destroyer Flotilla . 
 In September the ship participated in Operation Zitronella , ferrying troops of the 349th Grenadier Regiment to destroy Norwegian facilities on the island of Spitzbergen , together with the battleships Tirpitz and Scharnhorst , escorted by eight other destroyers . After unloading her troops , she bombarded targets on the island until her fire main broke from the shock of shooting and partially flooded one of her compartments . While successful , the operation was primarily intended to boost the morale of the ships stationed in the Arctic when fuel shortages limited their activities and the Allies reestablished the bases five weeks later . Steinbrinck and two other destroyers escorted the pocket battleship Lützow back to Germany in September and returned to Narvik . On 25 November she was ordered to return to Germany for an overhaul , but accidentally collided with a small Norwegian steamer en route later that night . The collision severely damaged her bow and she had to sail slowly to Trondheim for emergency repairs lest the forward bulkhead collapse . The ship then received temporary repairs in Oslo before departing for Germany on 18 December . 
 = = = 1944 – 45 = = = 
 After her refit was completed on 18 January 1944 , Steinbrinck and her sister Theodor Riedel spent the first half of the year laying minefields at the entrance to the Skaggerak and escorting convoys to and from Norway . On 3 May the ship passed through the Kiel Canal en route to Hamburg for a lengthy refit . While in the dockyard , she was struck by a bomb in the diesel generator room on 18 June . Despite the extent of the damage , the dockyard reported that her refit would be completed as scheduled on 20 November . On 4 November another bomb detonated alongside Steinbrinck and caused extensive flooding and shock damage from the explosion . The ship was patched up and towed to Wesermünde for more thorough repairs , but her completion was seriously delayed . By 1 April 1945 , only a single engine was operable and the Kriegsmarine made the decision to strip her crew for combat duties ashore after she was moved to Cuxhaven . She was still there in May when the Germans surrendered . 
 = = = Post @-@ war = = = 
 The ship was moved to Wilhelmshaven over the summer under British control while the division of the surviving warships was decided among the victorious Allies . While this was being argued the ships were overhauled with a small maintenance crew aboard to preserve their value . The Allied Tripartite Commission allocated Steinbrinck to the Soviet Union at the end of 1945 and she sailed for Libau on 2 January 1946 . She was commissioned into the Soviet Navy under the name <unk> ( Russian : <unk> ) and assigned to the Soviet 4th Fleet , based at Rostock , through 1948 . Renamed <unk> @-@ 2 , she served as a barracks ship until 19 February 1958 , when she was struck from the list . On 18 April 1958 , she was sold for scrap and broken up afterwards . 
 = Battle of Warsaw ( 1831 ) = 
 The Battle of Warsaw was fought in September 1831 between Imperial Russia and Poland . After a two @-@ day assault on the city 's western fortifications , the Polish defences collapsed and the city was evacuated . It was the largest battle and the final episode of the Polish – Russian War of 1830 – 31 , a conflict that became better known as the November Uprising . 
 After almost a year of heavy fighting , a large Russian force crossed the Vistula and besieged the capital of Poland on 20 August . Although the siege was partially lifted soon afterwards and a successful sortie allowed a communication route between the city and the rest of Poland , a large Russian force remained on the left bank of the Vistula and continued to threaten the city . Russian commander Ivan Paskevich counted on Polish surrender as his Polish counterpart , Jan Krukowiecki , was known to be a member of the moderate political forces , willing to negotiate with Russian tsar Nicholas I , who had been deposed from the Polish throne in January 1831 by the Sejm ( Polish parliament ) . When a less conciliatory faction gained power in Warsaw and the Russian offer of surrender was refused , Paskevich ordered his forces to launch an assault against Warsaw 's western defences . 
 The assault started on 6 September 1831 . Russian forces surprised the Poles by attacking the strongest Polish position in the suburb of Wola . Despite staunch defence of some of the ramparts , especially Fort 54 and Fort 56 , after the first day the outer line of Polish defences had been breached by Russian infantry and artillery . The following day fights resumed , but this time Russian artillery was close enough to shell the western boroughs of the city itself . Although losses were similar on both sides , Polish authorities decided not to risk another Massacre of Praga and ordered the evacuation of the city . On 8 September 1831 Warsaw lay in Russian hands , and the remainder of the Polish Army retreated to Modlin . The November Uprising ended soon afterwards , with the remnants of the Polish Army crossing the borders of Prussia and Austria , to avoid being captured by the Russians . 
 In the 19th century the fight for Warsaw became one of the icons of Polish culture , described by , among others , Polish romantic poets Adam Mickiewicz and Juliusz Słowacki . It was also the main inspiration behind Chopin 's Revolutionary Étude , initially called the Étude on the Bombardment of Warsaw . The fall of Warsaw also garnered sympathy for the Poles and their quest for independence . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1830 a series of revolutions struck Europe : the July Revolution in France , the Belgian Revolution and smaller revolts in Italy threatened to overthrow the framework of European politics established at the Congress of Vienna . As the Russian tsars were among the strongest advocates of that status quo , the uprising in Poland and the ousting of the tsar as the king of Poland by the Sejm and Senate of Poland on 25 January 1831 were considered a serious irritant . Russia could not send its armies to Belgium or France before the rebellion in Poland was quelled . For that reason the capture of Warsaw was Russia 's main target in the war from the start of hostilities . 
 In the course of the uprising , the army of Russia unsuccessfully tried to capture the capital of Poland on two occasions . First in February 1831 , forces under Field Marshal Hans Karl von Diebitsch stormed the eastern suburb of Praga . After a bloody battle at <unk> , the Polish Army successfully retreated to Warsaw , and the capital remained in Polish hands . 
 Unable to capture Warsaw by a frontal assault , von Diebitsch devised a plan to outflank it and enter the city from the west . In early 1831 he sent his forces upstream on the Vistula , where the Russian divisions were to cross the river and head back north , towards Warsaw . The new plan was thwarted by the Polish defence in three successive battles around Wawer , <unk> Wielkie and <unk> . The Russians withdrew towards Siedlce , where von Diebitsch fell ill and died of cholera . 
 The successor of von Diebitsch as Commander in Chief of Russian forces in Poland , Count Ivan Paskevich , decided to wait for the Polish forces on other fronts to be defeated before he resumed his march on Warsaw . In June 1831 General Antoni <unk> 's attack on Wilno failed , and his corps was forced to cross the border with Prussia to avoid complete destruction . Only a small detachment under General Henryk Dembiński managed to rejoin the main Polish force . This secured Paskevich 's northern flank and allowed his forces to devise a new plan of attack . Instead of attacking the city directly and risking yet another defeat , he intended to surround Warsaw , cut it off from other Polish @-@ controlled areas , and force it into submission . 
 Between 17 and 21 July 1831 he crossed the Vistula near Osiek with his main force , and moved towards Warsaw through <unk> and Łowicz . Meanwhile , other Russian forces from other theatres were also directed towards the city . General Gregor von Rosen 's Corps ( 12 @,@ 000 men and 34 guns ) marched almost unopposed from Brześć Litewski and reached Praga on 10 August . General Theodor von Rüdiger 's corps ( 12 @,@ 000 men and 42 guns ) crossed the Upper Vistula at <unk> on 7 August and captured Radom . 
 The new Commander in Chief of the Polish Army , Jan Zygmunt Skrzynecki , was also hesitant to fight a major battle . Instead , he ordered Warsaw to be fortified and allowed the Russians to cross the Vistula unopposed . In his opinion , the war could only be won diplomatically , by interventions of the United Kingdom , Austria and France . Should those fail , Skrzynecki believed Warsaw would hold out at least several weeks under a siege , after which the main bulk of the Polish Army would still be intact to fight a decisive battle against the Russians , who by then would be cut off from their rear by the Vistula . On 10 August 1831 Skrzynecki was forced to resign and was replaced by Henryk Dembiński , the military governor of Warsaw . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Battlefield = = = 
 In the late 18th century and early 19th century Warsaw grew quickly . As Poland was going through a period of turmoil and constant devastating wars , it lacked modern permanent fortifications . To make up for it , three lines of earthworks , ramparts and palisades were constructed on both sides of the Vistula . The earthworks , usually several metres high and constructed mostly of sand and clay , were reinforced with gabions and surrounded by a dry moat , a stockade and a line of <unk> de loup . 
 The inner , third line ran approximately along the former Lubomirski Ramparts , demolished only a couple of years before . It was a continuous line of earthworks 3 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) high , strengthened by numerous forts and fortified houses . 
 The second line of defences consisted of forts 400 to 600 metres ( 1 @,@ 300 to 2 @,@ 000 ft ) in front of the inner line of defences . The strongest forts were along the road towards Kalisz . 
 The first , outer line of defences consisted of smaller forts and ramparts running along a semi @-@ circular line from <unk> , through Rakowiec , Wola and <unk> to the banks of the Vistula . The fortified outposts of the outer line were 1 @.@ 5 to 3 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 93 to 1 @.@ 86 mi ) in front of the third line . Their purpose was to withstand the initial attacks and divide the attacking Russian forces into smaller groups . There were five large groups of earthworks in the outer line : 
 Królikarnia ( Forts 44 and 45 ) 
 Rakowiec ( Forts 48 to 53 ) 
 Wola ( Fort 56 ) 
 <unk> ( Forts 61 and 62 ) 
 Marymont Forest ( Fort 66 ) 
 The space between the large fortifications was covered by a series of smaller redans ( chevron @-@ shaped forts ) and <unk> ( trapezoidal forts ) . The strongest fortification in the outer line of defences was Fort 56 in the suburb of Wola , built around the St Lawrence 's Church . It was supported by Lunette 57 in front of it , and two forts ( 54 and 55 ) to the south of it . The headquarters was in Fort 73 between Rakowiec and the Jerozolimskie Gate . 
 Polish headquarters decided to man the outer line of defences , the furthest from the densely populated areas . The reason was that in the 1830s 53 percent of buildings ( out of 3148 houses in Warsaw ) were made of wood and a fire could easily destroy the city . In case the enemy broke through all three lines of defences , the city centre was also fortified with 30 barricades , embrasures cut through the walls of several buildings and mines hidden beneath major street crossings . 
 = = = Opposing forces = = = 
 = = = = Russian Army = = = = 
 By 20 August 1831 Warsaw was almost entirely encircled by the Russians . Count Paskevich had at his disposal a formidable force . His main force on the left bank of the Vistula consisted of between 54 @,@ 000 and 55 @,@ 000 soldiers , supported by 324 guns of various calibres . A further 7000 soldiers and 20 guns guarded the river crossings . The II Corps under General Cyprian von Kreutz ( 21 @,@ 000 soldiers , 90 guns ) was heading towards the city from Osiek while von Rüdiger 's corps was tied down around Radom , fighting a large Polish corps under General Samuel Różycki . 
 By 5 September 1831 the main Russian force rose to 78 @,@ 500 men at arms , including 2000 sappers , 54 @,@ 000 infantry , and 17 @,@ 200 cavalry . Russian artillery outnumbered the Polish and had 382 cannons and 8 mortars operated by 7 @,@ 300 men . The forces assaulting Warsaw were divided as follows : 
 I Infantry Corps ( General Peter von der Pahlen ) – 11 @,@ 300 infantry , 424 cavalry , 66 cannons and 4 mortars 
 Cavalry Division ( Prince Stepan Khilkov ) – 2700 cavalry , 847 Cossacks , 10 cannons 
 II Infantry Corps ( General Cyprian Kreutz ) – 11 @,@ 200 infantry , 1110 cavalry , 68 cannons and 4 mortars 
 Cavalry Division ( General Georg Nostitz ) – 2100 cavalry , 16 cannons 
 Infantry Division ( General Nikolai Muraviev ) – 3100 infantry , 16 cannons 
 Corps of Imperial Guard ( in reserve , Grand Duke Michael Pavlovich ) – 15 @,@ 700 infantry , 56 cannons 
 Grenadier Corps ( General Ivan <unk> ) – 11 @,@ 000 infantry , 40 cannons 
 Cavalry Corps ( General Jan de Witte ) – 8500 cavalry , 40 cannons 
 artillery reserve – 60 cannons 
 2nd Light Division ( General Karl Gustav von Strandmann ) – 1400 infantry , 484 cavalry , 875 Cossacks and 6 cannons 
 The Russian force was superior , but faced severe logistical problems . Count Paskevich 's army was too big to sustain on food confiscated from captured lands . It relied on provisions transported from Russia , either directly through Polish territory or through – theoretically neutral – Prussia . The epidemic of cholera brought to Poland and East Prussia by Russian soldiers forced the Prussian authorities to close their borders to Russian transports . To avoid starving his army , Paskevich ordered two permanent bridges built across the Vistula , in Góra and Podgórze . Only the latter one had been completed by the start of the Russian assault of Warsaw . 
 = = = = Polish Army = = = = 
 The Polish Army in early September 1831 had around 62 @,@ 000 men . The garrison of Warsaw numbered 31 @,@ 100 infantry and 3 @,@ 800 cavalry . It was divided into the following units : 
 I Corps ( General Jan Nepomucen Umiński ) – 18 @,@ 100 infantry , 1 @,@ 400 cavalry , 34 guns 
 Reserve Corps ( General Henryk Dembiński ) – 11 @,@ 500 infantry , 1 @,@ 700 cavalry , 12 guns 
 Garrison of Warsaw and Praga – 1 @,@ 361 infantry , 524 cavalry 
 The artillery included 228 pieces of artillery of all types and 21 Congreve rocket batteries , manned by <unk> soldiers of the regular army and 200 members of the National Guard . 
 The crew was insufficient to man all the defences , and some forts had to be abandoned . The Engineering Committee predicted that Warsaw 's fortifications would require at least 60 @,@ 000 troops to be fully manned . There were 15 @,@ 000 able @-@ bodied members of the Security Guard ( Straż Bezpieczeństwa ) , the National Guard ( Gwardia Narodowa ) and the Jewish City Guard ( Gwardia <unk> <unk> ) militias willing to join the fight , but the army refused to provide them with arms for fear of losing control over the unruly plebeians . 
 The city was home to over 175 @,@ 000 civilians and refugees , and the defenders were low on food supplies . Ammunition supplies were excellent and would " allow the Polish Army to fight not one , but three major battles " . The Warsaw Arsenal alone stored 3 million rifle rounds and 60 @,@ 000 cannon shots , 200 shots per cannon . 
 The cholera epidemic struck Warsaw between 16 May and 20 August ; 4 @,@ 734 people fell ill and 2 @,@ 524 died . On 15 August a riot broke out in the city , with up to 3 @,@ 000 civilians and soldiers killing suspected spies and traitors . Between 36 and 60 people were killed . Order was restored , but the situation in the besieged city remained fragile . 
 = = = = Training , equipment and morale = = = = 
 Both sides were trained in a similar manner and used similar equipment . The standard rifle for both sides was the Model 1808 flintlock musket ( a copy of the Charleville musket ) and its modification , the Model 1826 Musket , with effective range not exceeding 250 metres ( 820 ft ) . Some units of the Polish infantry were still armed with hunting rifles or war scythes , but contrary to common misconception the scythe @-@ wielding <unk> were but a small minority of Polish forces . The artillery used by both sides was mostly 6 @-@ pounder and 12 @-@ pounder <unk> ; heavier artillery included 20 @-@ pounders ( " half @-@ pood " ) and 10 @-@ pounders ( " quarter @-@ pood " ) cannons . Apart from Russian @-@ made artillery , both sides also used to a lesser extent foreign guns . The forces of both sides were a mixture of old , battle @-@ hardened soldiers trained in regular units before the war , and new , unproven recruits . 
 The Polish Army was made up primarily of volunteers and organised along the lines of Napoleon Bonaparte 's army , which meant that there was no corporal punishment in the military handbooks and the soldiers were highly motivated . The good morale of the first months of the uprising was long gone by the early days of September . A long string of defeats , partial victories , and retreats coupled with high command 's indecisiveness and frequent changes in command structure ( between 12 and 20 August the post of Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief changed hands four times ) meant that the soldiers ' morale was low . Also , most of the generals in Warsaw lacked faith in the aims of the uprising set by the more liberal @-@ minded members of Sejm and instead were " only doing their job " , hoping the status quo would return as soon as the tsar was forced to stand by his promises . The generals supporting continued fighting ( Jan Nepomucen Umiński , Henryk Dembiński , Józef Bem , and Kazimierz Małachowski ) were in charge in early September , but they were outnumbered by generals who were willing to sign an armistice with the Russians , even against the will of the Sejm . 
 By contrast the Russian forces ' morale was extremely high . The Russian commanders had ample experience in siege operations ; Paskevich himself had captured at least six fortified cities in his career , including the capture of <unk> and Abbas @-@ Abbad Fortress in the Russo @-@ Persian War of 1826 and the battle of <unk> and siege of Kars during the Russo @-@ Turkish War of 1828 . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Initial clashes = = = 
 Facing logistical problems , the new Polish Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief Jan Krukowiecki , who had replaced Dembiński in mid @-@ August , ordered a sortie on the right bank . Like his predecessor , Krukowiecki was a conservative and believed the main aim of the November Uprising was the return of the status quo ante with the tsars of Russia as kings of Poland , but respecting the constitution and Polish laws . Unlike Skrzynecki , he believed foreign intervention to be unrealistic , and wanted to force the Russians to return to peace talks by defeating the Russian forces , breaking the siege or defeating the assault attempts . 
 According to the new strategy , the forces under Girolamo Ramorino and Tomasz Łubieński were to leave the city and stay on the right bank of the Vistula , harass the Russian forces under von Rosen and von Rüdiger , capture the river crossings at Osiek , provide the city with supplies , and force Paskevich to divert some of his forces to fight them . Both forces left the city between 16 and 20 August 1831 . Tomasz Łubieński 's Corps headed towards Płock , broke the encirclement , and delivered much @-@ needed supplies to Warsaw . His forces also broke the northern line of communications between Paskevich 's forces and East Prussia . Girolamo Ramorino 's II Corps in Podlasie defeated von Rosen 's Corps in several clashes , including the battles of <unk> and <unk> . Ramorino 's indecisiveness and disregard for orders allowed the defeated and numerically inferior Russians to retreat towards Brześć Litewski and avoid complete destruction . 
 The departure of regular units under Ramorino and Łubieński depleted the forces of the defenders , further weakening the crew manning the first line of defence . The garrison dropped to 28 @,@ 000 regular soldiers and 10 @,@ 000 fresh troops , poorly trained and often armed only with scythes . 
 Having defeated von Rosen at <unk> on 29 August , Ramorino 's forces were ordered to return to Siedlce , but Ramorino disregarded that order and followed von Rosen towards Brześć . The order to return through <unk> to Siedlce was repeated on 4 September . From there , a forced march could allow the II Corps to cross the Vistula to the south of Warsaw and attack Paskevich from the rear , or rejoin the bulk of the Polish Army defending Warsaw . The repeated order was also ignored . A large part of the Polish forces , composed mostly of seasoned soldiers , high in morale thanks to recent victories , was wandering aimlessly through Podlasie , only a couple of days ' march from Warsaw . Instead of coming to the aid of Warsaw or following the fleeing forces of von Rosen , Ramorino waited in Podlasie for a week , and then headed south , away from the enemy . 
 On 4 September Paskevich sent an envoy to Warsaw requesting surrender and promising revision of the constitution . Only three out of ten members of the Diplomatic Commission voted in favour of further negotiations , and on 5 September the Russian commander was informed that the only acceptable solution had already been made known in the declaration of the Sejm . The Poles requested that all lands taken by Russia in the partitions of Poland be restored , and that the deposition of Nicholas I as the king of Poland ( of 25 January 1831 ) still be valid . 
 On the eve of the battle , the Russian Army moved from its positions in villages surrounding Warsaw , ( <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Raszyn ) closer to Polish positions . The Guards started moving towards <unk> Wielkie . The grenadiers , Cavalry Corps and the I Infantry Corps moved to the road to Kalisz near <unk> , and the II Infantry Corps moved to <unk> . An infantry division under Muraviev occupied the fields between Okęcie and Rakowiec , and Cavalry Division of Nostitz moved to <unk> . To complete the encirclement , the 2nd Light Division under von Strandmann took positions near <unk> on the road towards Lublin , while Stepan Khilkov 's Cavalry Division moved to <unk> . The supply trains and reserves were left in <unk> . 
 = = = Battle plans = = = 
 Although initially Paskevich opposed the idea of an all @-@ out assault of the city , the actions of Ramorino and Łubieński forced his hand . His force was low on provisions and supplies : by early September the main Russian force had only 5 days ' worth of food and horse fodder . On 28 August Paskevich accepted some of his generals ' advice , and ordered preparations for a general attack . After several days of quarrels within the Russian staff , it was decided on 4 September that the main thrust should be aimed at the strongest Polish positions behind the suburb of Wola . The assault was to focus on the central rampart in Wola , Fort 56 , and the surrounding fortifications . The Russian I Infantry Corps was to storm Fort 57 and continue towards Forts 56 and 58 . The II Infantry Corps was to focus on nearby Forts 54 and 55 . Other sectors of the front were to be only lightly pressed by diversionary attacks . Paskevich probably did not want to enter Warsaw , and counted on the Polish defenders to abandon the city or surrender once the outer ring of defences was pierced and the city centre was threatened with fire . 
 The Polish plan was based on fixed defence of the front line , with the forces under Umiński and Dembiński behind the second line of defences and acting as a mobile reserve , together with divisional artillery and cavalry . Umiński 's Corps was to cover the southern sector of the front , a line of approximately 7 @.@ 1 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 4 mi ) from road to Puławy , through the road towards Kraków , to the line connecting Fort 18 and Fort 74 . Forces under Dembiński were to defend the western and northern sector , along a line of 9 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 0 mi ) running from Redoubt 54 to the suburb of Marymont . Most of the Polish forces were in the southern part of the city , as the Polish headquarters incorrectly assumed that the Russians would attack the weakest part of the defences , around Królikarnia , the suburbs of Mokotów and <unk> . 
 = = = 6 September = = = 
 Already before the battle Paskevich achieved devastating numerical superiority on the western front . The first Russian line facing Wola had 30 @,@ 200 soldiers , 144 pieces of artillery and eight mortars ; the second line was formed by 39 @,@ 200 soldiers and 196 pieces of artillery . Facing them were 5 @,@ 300 infantry , 65 cannons and 1 @,@ 100 cavalry under Dembiński , with another 4 @,@ 800 soldiers in reserve . 
 At 2 : 00 Polish observation posts on the Holy Trinity Church and the Astronomical Observatory at Ujazdów Avenue spotted enemy movements and sounded the alarm . The attack started around 4 : 00 , and within an hour Polish forts 54 and 57 opened fire on approaching Russians . Around 5 : 00 , eighty @-@ six guns of the I Infantry Corps started shelling Polish positions around Wola from a distance of 600 metres ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) , and the battle started . 
 Fort 56 consisted of three wings , each surrounded by its own earthwork , stockades and a moat . Partially obscured by the trees of Brühl 's Garden , the central wing was further reinforced by the St. Laurence 's Church and the surrounding monastery . The fort , commanded by General Józef Sowiński , was manned by two battalions of the 8th Regiment of Line Infantry ( 1 @,@ 200 men ) , with 40 sappers , 13 cannons , two Congreve rocket launchers , and a small detachment from the 14th Regiment of Line Infantry ( 170 men ) . Directly in front of it , on a hill overlooking the battlefield , lay the smaller , irregularly @-@ shaped Fort 57 manned by 300 men under Maj. Józef <unk> , armed with four pieces of artillery and two Congreve rocket launchers . To the north lay Fort 59 ( 4 cannons , 400 men under Maj. Józef <unk> ) , while to the south Fort 54 ( up to 350 men under Maj. Ignacy <unk> and 6 guns under Lt. Julian Konstanty Ordon ) . Even though the remaining forts of Wola ( Forts 55 , 58 , 60 and 61 ) were deprived of their garrisons to strengthen the defence , the most important Polish positions were still severely undermanned . 
 Further to the south , near Rakowiec , lay a group of forts of the outer line . All had already been abandoned by the Poles in early September , and were captured by Russian infantry under General Muraviev without a fight . Forces under General von Strandmann captured <unk> and started attacking Forts 44 , 45 and the fortifications around Królikarnia . Although von Strandmann 's unit did not have a clear numerical superiority ( 2 @,@ 900 Russians with six guns against 1 @,@ 700 Poles with six guns ) , they quickly pushed back the Polish defenders . Soon dense black powder smoke covered the battlefield . Unable to determine the direction of Russian attacks , the Polish commanders believed that the aim of the main thrust would be delivered against the positions at Królikarnia . 
 The first to realise the mistake was General Dembiński , the commanding officer of the Reserve Corps tasked with defending the western sector . He immediately asked for reinforcements , but was denied by General Krukowiecki . Forced to fight alone , Dembiński did not reinforce the first line with his reserve 3rd Infantry Division and instead sent forward only a token force : half a battalion to man Fort 58 and support Fort 57 . To make things worse for the Poles , General Umiński , the commanding officer of the southern sector , focused entirely on the skirmishes around Królikarnia and did not notice what was happening in Wola . Around 7 : 00 he reinforced Królikarnia with almost six battalions of infantry ( ca . 2 @,@ 800 men ) and three guns . Forts 54 and 55 received no reinforcements . 
 = = = = Fort 54 = = = = 
 Meanwhile , the outer earthworks protecting the forts around Wola were being destroyed by Russian artillery . From 6 : 00 , 108 pieces of Russian artillery were focused on forts 54 , 55 and 57 . Fort 54 held out and losses among the infantry were low , but the artillery of the isolated outposts was forced to hide behind the ramparts . Forts 59 and 61 could not support their neighbours as their crews fought their own artillery duel with horse artillery of Khilkov 's Cavalry Division , which suffered heavy casualties . 
 Out of 32 pieces of artillery held in reserve by Dembiński , only four were moved forward to Fort 58 . Around 6 : 30 , nine more guns joined the artillery duel around Wola , but their support was too weak and came too late . At that time two large assault columns were formed by Russian II Infantry Corps . The first , under General Nikolai Sulima , advanced on Fort 54 with <unk> 's Brigade ( 2 @,@ 500 men ) in the first line . The second , commanded by General Friedrich Caspar von Geismar , headed for Fort 55 . As soon as von Geismar realised that the redoubt was empty , he ordered 1 @,@ 500 men under Col. Pavel Liprandi to join the attack on Fort 54 instead . Despite serious losses , three battalions of <unk> 's Brigade reached the stockade surrounding the earthworks and started clearing obstacles . 
 Because of the smoke the commanders of the second line of Polish outposts could not see the approaching Russians and did not open fire . Contrary to the battle plan , the second line did not send reinforcements to the first . This was particularly important in the case of Forts 54 and 56 , as they had to face the enemy alone , without the support of Forts 21 , 22 and 23 behind them . The most important positions in the suburb of Wola received only token reinforcements from the main reserve and were forced to fight in isolation . 
 The Polish defenders of Fort 54 fired incessantly , but by then the Russian horse artillery had clear line of sight onto the top of the rampart . For unknown reasons the Poles did not use the grenades prepared for defence in close quarters . When the breach was completed , two Russian regiments ( 13th ' <unk> ' and 14th ' <unk> ' ) charged into the gap . Other Russian soldiers stormed the earthwork itself , using bayonets as steps to climb onto the parapet . After several salvoes , Polish infantry retreated to within the fort , to fire at Russian soldiers appearing on top of the rampart . The first to cross the obstacles was Pavel Liprandi with his men . With 10 : 1 Russian superiority , the bayonet fight was short , and between 60 and 80 surviving Poles were taken prisoner in a matter of minutes . Soon afterwards the gunpowder magazine was set on fire and exploded , killing over 100 Russians , among them the commanding officer of the 13th Regiment , Col. Ivan <unk> . The explosion was fictionalised and immortalised in Adam Mickiewicz 's poem Reduta Ordona ( Ordon 's Redoubt ) . Altogether the Russian losses during the storming of Fort 54 were between 500 and 600 killed . The dead were buried in a mass grave in a shell @-@ hole , which later became the nucleus of the Orthodox Cemetery in Warsaw . 
 Expecting a Polish counter @-@ attack , Russian engineers started to repair Forts 54 and 55 . Initially only Polish artillery from forts 73 , 21 , 22 and 23 responded with fire , while Dembiński 's reserves remained passive . Seeing no activity on Polish side , Russian II Infantry Corps ' artillery started supporting its neighbours of the I Infantry Corps . Russian artillery suffered some losses , but its superiority was evident . Batteries of the I Corps approached Fort 57 to within 300 metres ( 980 ft ) , which forced the Polish artillery to be dismantled and withdrawn from the fort . Around 8 : 00 two columns of the I Corps ( under Alexander von Lüders and Ivan Nabokov ) assaulted the fort . Elements of four Russian regiments ( 3rd and 4th Marine Regiments , 7th ' <unk> ' Infantry Regiment and <unk> Regiment ) stormed the fort from three sides , hoping a three @-@ hour artillery barrage had destroyed the obstacles and palisade guarding the entry to Polish positions . The stockade was almost intact and Russian forces suffered considerable losses , both from small @-@ arms fire and from artillery of the 2nd line . The officers ordered a retreat , but the soldiers disregarded the order and continued to assault the fort on their own . Several assaults were repelled with heavy Russian losses . Despite the losses , Russian infantry entered the fort and captured it in a close quarters fight , without a shot fired . Only about 80 Poles were taken captive , and four managed to retreat to the Polish lines with their wounded commanding officer ; the remainder fought on and were killed almost to the last man . As the recently captured fort was well within the range of Polish artillery , the Russians withdrew and started hiding behind it . 
 = = = = Fort 56 = = = = 
 Despite the loss of forts 54 , 55 and 57 , Krukowiecki was still convinced that the attack on Wola was a diversion , and refused to grant General Dembiński more reinforcements . Only General Ludwik Bogusławski , commanding officer of the 3rd Infantry Division , disregarded his orders and sent a single battalion of the 10th Line Infantry Regiment to Fort 56 as reinforcements . The battalion was led by Col. Piotr Wysocki , the officer who started the entire November Uprising . Dembiński abandoned Fort 58 . Its artillery , along with 12 cannons and six rocket launchers from his reserves , was ordered to take positions between the first and second lines of defence , in front of Forts 21 , 22 and 23 . Around 9 : 00 , when Russian forces were preparing to push further into the second line of Polish defences , Brigadier Józef Bem arrived to Wola with his 12 cannon and positioned them not far from the recently @-@ lost Fort 54 , right on the flank of Kreutz 's infantry and Russian artillery shelling Fort 56 . Eight more guns and four rocket launchers arrived to the northern flank of Wola and joined the defence of Fort 58 . Around that time the combined artillery forces of both Russian infantry corps shifted their fire to Forts 56 , 59 and 23 . This time the Poles won the artillery duel . Despite Russian numerical superiority in guns and mortars , the Russian artillery suffered losses and was forced to withdraw , followed by infantry , likewise forced back into hiding behind the captured earthworks . Dembiński did not take advantage of this success , and the Polish infantry remained hidden behind fixed defences . 
 Seeing no activity , the commander of the Russian II Corps ordered all his cannons to shift fire onto the 14 guns under Józef Bem . Heavily pressed , Polish artillery withstood the fire for over half an hour before switching to new positions to the right of the road to Kalisz . It resumed fire on the II Corps , but was again targeted by enemy guns . The artillery duel continued , but the situation of Fort 56 was becoming critical . <unk> from three sides , the largest Polish fort around Warsaw was now isolated . Including reinforcements brought by Col. Wysocki , the crew of the fort included approximately 1 @,@ 660 infantrymen and ten pieces of artillery . By 10 : 00 most artillerymen had been killed or wounded ( including the fort 's artillery commander , Capt. <unk> ) and had to be replaced with untrained infantrymen , which seriously limited the Polish guns ' rate of fire and accuracy . All ramparts were successively damaged by Russian artillery , and there was a 30 @-@ metre breach in one of its sides . 
 Paskevich , who observed the artillery duel from Fort 55 , became convinced that his Polish counterpart would not come to the rescue of Fort 56 . Initially hesitant , he finally ordered Russian infantry to attack Fort 56 around 10 : 00 . The attack was carried out by 13 infantry battalions ( ca . 6 @,@ 900 men ) from columns commanded by General Lüders and <unk> . The forces of Lüders stormed the obstacles and crossed the stockade , but Polish defenders met them with rifle volleys from within the fort , and the attack was repelled . Lüders quickly ordered his second line ( 2 @,@ 300 men ) to advance as well . The new forces were twice pushed back into the moat by the commander of the northern wing , Maj. Franciszek Biernacki , but in the end the Polish defenders were overpowered and had to withdraw further into the fort . The Russians followed , but their battalions lost cohesion , which allowed the numerically inferior force under Biernacki to hold out inside the fort and cover the flank of the central wing . 
 Forces under General <unk> assaulted the central wing of Fort 56 . Here the obstacles were intact , and 200 Polish soldiers repelled three consecutive assaults by a famed Moscow Guards Regiment . The Russians lost two regimental commanders before their forces managed to reach the moat . When a force of 2 @,@ 900 Russians reached the top of the rampart , they were surprised by a staunch defence of a second rampart behind it . Russian infantry retreated and hid under the first rampart . Biernacki , fighting in the northern wing , managed to expel the Russian infantry , but was killed in action during the counter @-@ attack , and the Poles withdrew back into the trees on the far side of the fort . To stabilise the situation , General Sowiński ordered a company of the 8th Line Infantry Regiment to leave the central wing and join the fight in the north . The new commanding officer of the north wing , Maj. Lipski , organised yet another counter @-@ attack . Shouting " Mates , remember <unk> , remember <unk> ! " he led his men in a charge and pushed the Russians back once again , but the impetus was lost and the Russians retained control of the rampart to the north @-@ west . A short stalemate ensued , in which the Polish infantrymen and their single twelve @-@ pounder carronade prevented much larger enemy forces from entering the fort . 
 Seeing that their forces had failed , Paskevich and Pahlen decided to throw in even more forces into the fight . Elements of the 9th ' <unk> ' Infantry Regiment and 10th ' New <unk> ' Infantry Regiment ( 890 men and six guns ) were ordered to attack the eastern side of the northern wing . Simultaneously seven battalions ( ca . 4 @,@ 000 men ) were to attack the central and eastern wings from the south . About 70 pieces of artillery were ordered to fire on the second line of Polish defences to prevent Polish reinforcements from breaking through to the fort . This time several thousand Russians entered the northern wing in strict military formations . By then the garrison under Maj. Lipski had 800 men and was not strong enough to withstand the assault . Poles were again pushed back into the trees of the far side of the northern wing , and Maj. Lipski was killed . He was replaced by Maj. <unk> , who panicked and sounded a retreat , taking with him 500 men . The remaining 300 soldiers under Maj. <unk> tried again to force the Russians out , but were by then outnumbered 10 to 1 and around 10 : 30 had to withdraw towards the central wing . The central wing , by then under the command of Lt. Col. <unk> , held out against a large column led by General Lüders , composed of the elite regiments of Prince Wilhelm and Prince Charles . 
 By that time the central wing was defended by a mere 900 men and one cannon . The combined forces of Lüders , Martynov and Friedrich von Berg exceeded 6 @,@ 000 men and were preparing to storm it . Several assaults were repelled , but shortly after 11 : 00 the Polish position was attacked from the north and south simultaneously . The northern pincer stalled and the southern pincer , led by General <unk> , was bloodily repelled . General Martynov was badly wounded . General Pahlen ordered a further 2 @,@ 300 men ( 5th Infantry Regiment and elements of Siberian Grenadiers ) to attack from the other side . The Siberian regiment entered the fort and forced the crews of carronades , commanded personally by General Sowiński , to withdraw within the walls surrounding the church . The largest group of Polish soldiers fighting in front of the church was offered capitulation , and Sowiński and the remainder of his crew laid down their arms . Another group of Polish soldiers still defending the church fired at the Russians , and angered Russian soldiers , General Sowiński among them , massacred the prisoners of war . As Russian authorities later confirmed he died on the field of duty , Sowiński soon became a Polish national hero , immortalised in a poem " Sowiński w <unk> <unk> " ( Sowiński in the trenches of Wola ) by Juliusz Słowacki . 
 The surrounded church was well prepared for defence , but its garrison was by then composed almost entirely of the wounded . By noon the defenders were overpowered , and the Russians entered the church . The fight for Fort 56 was over . Altogether the Russian side lost no less than 1 @,@ 000 killed in action during the storming of the fort . Polish casualties did not exceed 300 killed and wounded , with 1 @,@ 230 soldiers and officers taken prisoner . Only up to 500 soldiers managed to withdraw and reach Polish lines . 
 = = = = Fights for Wola and elsewhere = = = = 
 During the fights for the ramparts of Wola , only artillery of the second line gave limited support to the outnumbered Polish troops . Krukowiecki claimed after the war that he ordered Dembiński , Bem and General Franciszek Młokosiewicz to support the first line , but apparently none of them received the order . General Ludwik Bogusławski , commander of the 3rd Infantry Division manning the second line , could have supported the forts of the first line , but he could not see what was happening in Fort 56 due to dense smoke and the trees of Brühl 's Garden . 
 Paskevich expected a Polish counter @-@ attack aimed at recapturing the lost forts , so he ordered his troops to halt the advance , rebuild the ramparts and construct new artillery emplacements facing the city . Further movement in the vicinity of Wola was blocked by Polish artillery from Fort 59 , but within two hours Russian sappers prepared Fort 56 to serve as an artillery outpost for up to 20 pieces of artillery . Paskevich also sent tirailleurs and rifle @-@ armed skirmishers forward to probe and harass Polish defences around Fort 23 . Polish field artillery left Fort 21 and pushed back the Russian light infantry , but were then attacked by Russian I Corps ' artillery and forced to flee . Only then did General Bogusławski realise that Fort 56 might need assistance . To reconnoitre enemy movements and possibly deliver munitions to the fort he dispatched General Młokosiewicz with his infantry brigade of 1 @,@ 000 men . Two Russian rifle regiments fled before his columns and Młokosiewicz 's men almost reached the fort , but Russian artillery opened fire and inflicted several dozen casualties on the Poles . Młokosiewicz realised that Fort 56 was lost and quickly retreated towards Forts 21 and 22 . Two Russian rifle regiments ( 1st and 2nd ) tried to pursue , but were defeated by Polish artillery and retreated . 
 Unexpectedly , this weak push by Młokosiewicz and his men probably forced the Russians to reconsider their plans and postpone any further attacks until the following day . At that moment Paskevich was not sure what the Poles would do . He feared a Polish counter @-@ attack would retake the forts of Wola , or strike a wedge between his I and II Corps . He ordered all offensive actions in Wola halted . His artillery continued to duel with the Poles , but infantry was withdrawn and Paskevich himself left his forces to look for the Corps of General Muraviev to the south , somewhere between <unk> and the Jerozolimskie Gate . 
 Around that time General Małachowski arrived at Fort 23 to inspect the part of the front he had neglected until that point . Informed by General Młokosiewicz of the loss of Fort 56 , he ordered a counter @-@ attack . More preoccupied with holding the second line than with retaking the first , he committed only two battalions ( 1 @,@ 240 men ) out of 12 he had in reserve to the assault . The counter @-@ attack started around 13 : 00 and was supported by a token force of 14 pieces of horse artillery , while General Bem held 21 heavier field cannons in reserve . As soon as the Poles left their ramparts , the sortie came under fire of Russian artillery amassed in front of forts 54 , 55 and 56 . Despite heavy fire , the Poles reached a point 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) south @-@ east of Fort 56 , where they were met by elements of two Russian rifle regiments ( 1st and 2nd ; ca . 1 @,@ 800 men ) . Despite Russian numerical superiority , the Polish force broke through and pushed the Russians back , but was then defeated by Russian artillery on the eastern rampart of Fort 56 . When Russian reinforcements appeared on both his flanks , the Polish commander sounded retreat and returned to the Polish lines . The Polish counter @-@ attack failed . To make the situation even more serious , the retreating Poles were followed closely by a large Russian force of the two rifle regiments , reinforced with elements of 1st , 2nd and 5th Infantry Divisions . 
 The Russians assaulted the second Polish line and pierced it in numerous places . The position of Russian infantry was very difficult because it overtook the 14 Polish guns sent forward by General Bem to support the Polish counter @-@ attack , which meant that it was under artillery fire from the front , the sides and the rear . Eventually a counter @-@ attack by the 4th Line Infantry Regiment under Lt. Col. Kazimierz Majewski repelled the Russians storming the Polish lines . Several smaller Russian units broke through and tried to fortify a group of wooden houses in the suburb of Wola , but were quickly surrounded and killed . At that point , around 13 : 00 , Małachowski wanted to organise yet another counter @-@ attack aimed at Fort 56 , but his orders were overridden by Krukowiecki , who feared that the Russians might want to attack further south , near Jerozolimskie Gate , and preferred to keep his reserves intact . The Polish side ceased all offensive actions on the western front , and only the artillery remained active . 
 = = = = Artillery duel continues = = = = 
 Between 13 : 00 and 14 : 00 General Bem amassed at least 64 artillery pieces on a narrow front near Forts 21 , 22 and 23 , and started firing on the artillery and infantry of the I Russian Corps . In the artillery barrage that lasted until 17 : 00 , the forces of Russian I and II Corps were eventually forced to withdraw behind the ramparts of the captured forts . On several occasions the Russian cavalry of General Khilkov ( including the Cuirassier Regiment ) tried to charge the Polish artillery positions , but every time the charge was bloodily repelled with grapeshot and canister shot . Eventually the Russian cavalry withdrew from battle all the way to <unk> . Half of the Russian artillery fought an intense artillery duel with the Poles , while the other half started shelling the suburb of Wola and Polish positions behind the second line of defences . Although the barrage prepared the field for yet another Polish counter @-@ attack , Krukowiecki would not risk it . 
 Paskevich held a war council with his generals . Karl Wilhelm von Toll and many other generals insisted that the assault on Wola be resumed , but Paskevich was sceptical . The Russians still had 25 @,@ 000 fresh troops , but the dusk was nearing , and Paskevich feared that after dark his forces might lose cohesion and suffer excessive losses . The Russian commander also thought that an attack on Wola might be hampered by positions of the first line still held by the Poles ( Forts 58 , 59 and 60 ; in reality Fort 58 had been abandoned ) , or by a Polish counter @-@ attack from the area of Czyste . He decided to postpone offensive actions until the following day . Paskevich also sent another envoy to Warsaw , but the hastily called session of the Sejm renounced his offer of a cease @-@ fire . 
 By that point the battle plan of the Russians was still not clear to the Polish Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief General Krukowiecki . Unsure whether the main attack was on Wola or the forts around Królikarnia , he did not reassign any sizable infantry force to the western front , despite the fact that the southern line was safely in Polish hands and repeated Russian attacks there were being repelled one by one . Out of 3000 casualties suffered by the Polish side on the first day only approximately 300 were in the southern sector near Królikarnia , including at most " several dozen killed " . Yet only a small detachment of horse artillery was dispatched to the second line near Wola . In the evening General Krukowiecki called a meeting of the government and described the situation of his forces as extremely difficult . He suggested that talks with Paskevich be resumed and sent General Prądzyński to Paskevich 's camp . 
 = = = 7 September = = = 
 = = = = First round of negotiations = = = = 
 The two met at the outskirts of Wola in the early hours of 7 September . Paskevich proclaimed a cease @-@ fire and invited Krukowiecki to meet him at 9 : 00 . The meeting was held in the village tavern of Wola . Paskevich demanded that Warsaw and Praga be surrendered unconditionally and that the Polish Army be evacuated and disarmed in Płock , where it was to await the decision of the tsar either to pardon the Polish soldiers or imprison them as rebels . Krukowiecki declined and insisted that the uprising was not a rebellion but a war waged by two independent states . He wanted Paskevich and Grand Duke Michael to promise the return of Poland 's independence and a general amnesty in exchange for revoking the act of deposition of Nicholas from the Polish throne . The negotiations were stormy and around noon the Polish commander departed for Warsaw to consult the Sejm about further actions . Paskevich agreed to extend the cease @-@ fire to 13 : 00 , and to continue negotiations even if warfare was resumed . 
 To gain support of the parliament , Krukowiecki asked General Prądzyński to represent him during the joint session of the Sejm and Senate . His political plan was to end the uprising at all costs and return to status quo ante , with himself as the " saviour of the fatherland " who stopped further bloodshed . In his speech Prądzyński seriously inflated the Russian force , and also underestimated the strength of the Polish units . He also warned that the city 's inhabitants would be massacred as in 1794 should fighting continue , and stated that the return to full independence under the sceptre of Nicholas was easily achievable , something he knew for sure was not true . He failed to convince his government and the Sejm that surrender was the only option , and a heated debate extended past the deadline of 13 : 00 . The Russians resumed hostilities , and artillery from both sides started yet another duel . 
 = = = = Operational situation = = = = 
 Both sides suffered similar casualties during the previous day . Russian victories gave their artillery a clear line of fire into the suburbs of Czyste and Wola . They also strengthened the morale of Russian soldiers , who were convinced that the battle was over once Fort 54 fell . The battle was far from lost for the Polish side though : although the Russians could now attack the third line of Polish defences in Wola ( Forts 23 and 24 ) or Czyste ( Forts 20 – 22 ) , their attacks could easily be flanked by forts of the second line still in Polish hands . Also , in order to support the advance with artillery , the Russian guns would have to be stationed in open field . 
 The Polish plans for the battle remained unchanged . Fort 59 was evacuated and Polish positions around Czyste and close to Jerozolimskie Gate were slightly reinforced , yet Polish forces remained almost equally split between the western and southern sectors . Unknown to the Poles , Russian orders for 7 September were not changed either . The II Infantry Corps was to attack the group of forts at Czyste ( 21 and 22 ) , while the I Infantry Corps assaulted further north ( Forts 23 and 24 ) . Muraviev 's forces were to attack the Jerozolimskie Gate , while the remaining forces continued with their diversionary attacks of the previous day . 
 When artillery fire was restarted around 13 : 30 , the Russian soldiers were not yet ready for the attack . The previous night had been very cold , and most Russian soldiers had no winter garments and spent the night in open field . Many did not receive any food in the morning , and the morale dropped significantly . When the Russians started to sort their ranks , General Umiński correctly assumed that the main attack in his sector would be aimed at the Jerozolimskie Gate . He reinforced the area with his reserves , including almost the entire 4th Infantry Division and 2nd Cavalry Division . He also dispatched the 1st Cavalry Division ( 1300 men ) closer to Czyste . Generals Małachowski and Dembiński intended to attack the flank of the Russians assaulting Wola with a strong force ( 3500 infantry , 800 cavalry and 10 pieces of horse artillery ) under General Paweł <unk> gathered in <unk> ( near Fort <unk> ) . Once it became clear that the Russians would attack further south , the plan was called off and the western sector returned to fixed defences . 
 = = = = Grand Battery = = = = 
 Around 13 : 30 , 132 Russian cannons and 4 mortars , including 94 guns of the Grand Battery under Prince Mikhail Dmitrievich Gorchakov , opened fire on Polish positions . The Poles initially responded with 79 field artillery pieces and 10 rocket launchers , but by 14 : 00 General Bem moved another 31 guns to a position right in front of the Russian artillery . To counter the threat , the Russian General von Toll ordered his Grand Battery to advance 100 metres ( 330 ft ) closer to the Poles . This exposed his flank to Polish guns hidden to the south , near the road to Kraków . The Russians suffered casualties , and the Grand Battery had to be split into two separate units . To make matters worse for the Russians , many batteries had to cease fire and withdraw due to insufficient ammunition reserves . 
 Seeing that the artillery would not break the Polish , General von Toll devised a new plan of attack . He decided to disregard Paskevich 's order not to assault Warsaw . Although dusk was nearing , von Toll ordered an all @-@ out assault on both the western and southern fronts . As there was no time for proper artillery preparation , von Toll wanted to overwhelm the defenders by sheer numerical superiority , even if it meant increased casualties from Polish artillery fire . To distract the Polish artillery at Czyste and prevent it from firing at the Russian columns attacking Forts 21 and 22 , Muraviev 's forces were to lead the attack directly towards the Jerozolimskie Gate . Before 15 : 00 von Toll dispatched General Neidhardt to Paskevich to receive his blessing for the new plan , but Paskevich categorically refused , and ordered his subordinate to continue shelling the Polish forts with artillery at least until 16 : 00 . As the Russian Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief was away , von Toll decided to act despite Paskevich 's orders . 
 = = = = Muraviev 's assault and retreat = = = = 
 Around 15 : 00 masses of Russian troops started preparations for the assault on Polish positions near the Jerozolimskie Gate . A strong force under Muraviev and Nostitz occupied positions on both sides of the road towards Cracow , near Rakowiec . The screening force included the Grenadier Brigade ( ca . 1700 infantry , 16 guns ) , <unk> Brigade ( ca . 1300 cavalry , 16 guns ) , Guard Uhlans Regiment ( 392 cavalry ) and three regiments of cavalry ( ca . 1700 cavalry , 16 guns ) . Between the screening forces two columns were formed . The left column commanded by Col. Nikolai <unk> was composed of Lutsk and Samogitian Infantry Regiments ( 1989 men altogether ) , with the Finland Guard Regiment in reserve ( 1374 men ) . The column was to storm the Fort 74 . The right column was commanded by Col. Roth and was composed of a reinforced Nieśwież Infantry Regiment ( 1278 men ) , with the 4th Jäger Regiment ( 900 men ) , Guards Rifle Regiment ( 1353 men ) and the Finland Rifles ( 142 men ) in reserve . This column was to assault Fort 72 . On the southern front the forces of Strandmann were to attack in force towards Królikarnia and elsewhere , to pressure the Poles on more than one front . 
 The assault started around 16 : 00 . The left column suffered significant casualties , but reached Fort 74 , only to be met by Polish reinforcements dispatched by General Antoni <unk> , the commanding officer of this sector . Two thousand Russians clashed with less than 850 Poles inside the fort , but were defeated in a bayonet charge and had to retreat . As the attack failed and the Polish artillery batteries were still active , von Toll decided to use his cavalry reserves . Two regiments of the 3rd Cuirassier Division ( 1200 cavalry ) followed a road linking <unk> and Czyste , and were ordered to charge the Polish artillery from behind . The Poles had full visibility of the battlefield and had enough time to prepare for the attack , as the Russian advance slowed down due to swampy terrain . When the Russian cavalry switched from columns to battle line , Polish artillery opened canister shot fire on the Russians , dispersing them . The Russian commander reorganised his forces and repeated the charge , but the Russians were again repelled before reaching the Polish artillery emplacements . The Novgorod Cuirassier Regiment alone lost over 200 men out of 450 taking part in the charge . 
 After half an hour the Russians finally stormed the ramparts of Fort 74 and defeated the Polish battalion defending it . This forced the Polish mobile artillery in Czyste , until then shelling the advancing Russian columns and their Grand Battery , to fall back . Meanwhile , the Russian right column was approaching Fort 72 . Defended by only 200 men , the fort was approached by the Russian spearhead formed by the reinforced Nieśwież Regiment . Seeing this , the Polish commander ordered his cavalry reserve to charge the Russian infantry . Russian grenadiers stormed the ramparts of Fort 72 , but were repelled and forced back behind the moat , where the Polish cavalry charged them . The Russians formed infantry squares , but were defeated and forced to retreat . To counter the threat to Russian infantry , General Nostitz charged his own cavalry reserve under General Georg von Sass , and a cavalry battle ensued . 
 This saved Roth 's infantry , as the Polish artillery 's line of fire was blocked by both Polish and Russian cavalrymen . Both commanders threw more cavalry into the fight and soon the forces of both sides were similar , with 550 cavalrymen on both sides . Both forces soon lost cohesion and the battle turned into a series of duels between Polish Uhlans and Hussars ( armed with lances and sabres ) and Russian Cuirassiers and Dragoons ( armed with heavier swords ) . The Poles were initially victorious and managed to incapacitate both General Nostitz and General von Sass , but were then attacked by additional Russian reinforcements and had to retreat . This forced some of the Polish artillery crews to retreat to the ramparts of the third line as well . The Russian Guard Hussar Regiment under Georg von <unk> , riding dapple grey heavy horses and wearing distinctive bright red uniforms , pursued the fleeing Polish cavalry to the space between forts 71 and 72 . There they were met by Polish cavalry reinforcements : the 3rd Mounted Rifle Regiment was to hold the Hussars in place , while the 4th Uhlans Regiment was to attack the Russians from the flank . Before the plan could be enacted , the Russian veterans broke through this new Polish line of defence . The 3rd Regiment broke and started a retreat , followed by the Russians . General Umiński ordered his infantry and artillery to open fire at the mass of cavalry , both Polish and Russian . Small groups of Russians retreated to rejoin their lines , while others in apparent war fury tried to storm the heavily defended gates of Warsaw and were killed by Polish infantry . A small group succeeded and the last of them was killed as far as the gate of the Ujazdów Palace , 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) into the city . The cavalry battle ended with all three regiments engaged in the skirmish almost annihilated . 
 Although the Poles managed to contain and defeat the Russian cavalry , its charge and initial successes caused a widespread panic in Polish ranks . The garrison of Fort 72 abandoned its positions , leaving its guns behind , and retreated to Fort 73 without a fight . Likewise , the garrison of Fort 73 panicked , and its commanding officer , Col. <unk> , ordered his soldiers to block the guns , abandon the main rampart and assume defensive positions facing the back wall of the fort , expecting the Russian cavalry to enter the fortification from behind . This allowed the Russian infantry to capture Fort 72 , a fortified " Red Inn " ( Polish : Karczma <unk> ) and head towards Fort 73 unopposed . Polish officers managed to contain the panic just in time for their infantrymen to open rank fire on the approaching Russians and force them to withdraw . Fort 72 remained in Russian hands . 
 The apparent panic in Polish ranks convinced Muraviev to renew his assault with fresh forces , despite the losses his columns had suffered . Col. <unk> 's grenadiers reinforced with two battalions of the Finnish Guards Regiment ( 1300 men , 4 guns ) outflanked Fort 73 from the north and captured a brickyard and yet another fortified inn , the Karczma Żelazna directly to its rear . Its garrison offered only light resistance before retreating in disarray . The situation seemed critical , as the Russians were now in possession of a large part of the second line of Polish defences . 
 Despite the apparent gravity of the situation , the Polish defenders still had sufficient fresh troops to counter @-@ attack and regain the initiative . The Russians ' recently captured positions were too far ahead of their artillery , and were all under well @-@ aimed fire from Polish fixed artillery positions on the ramparts of the third line of defences , as well as numerous mobile artillery batteries . Forts 72 and 73 , as well as the Karczma Żelazna inn and the brickyard received constant grapeshot fire . Under fire from all sides , the Russians had to hide behind the outer sides of the ramparts , unable to return fire or even observe the field in front of them . Tirailleurs of the Polish 3rd Foot Rifle Regiment approached the Karczma Żelazna inn almost unopposed and retook it . Soon afterwards they retook the brickyard as well . The Russians abandoned the two forts as well and although Russian light infantry tried to retake them , they were unsuccessful . Around 16 : 45 the field artillery batteries of Józef Bem were free to leave the safety of the inner defences , return to the battlefield , and open fire on the Grand Battery . Despite over three hours of intensive fighting in the west , the commander of the relatively peaceful southern sector , General Małachowski , did not reinforce the defenders of the western approaches . 
 = = = = Russian assault in the west = = = = 
 Although Muraviev 's attack failed , it forced the Polish artillery to lessen the pressure on the Russian Grand Battery , which was now free to support the main Russian attack on the westernmost Polish defences . By that time the Grand Battery could shell the ramparts of the second line with relative impunity , thus damaging both the defences and the morale of the crews . Polish infantrymen manning the forts were ordered to lie down behind the gabions , which minimised the losses . Soldiers in the field had no such cover , and suffered casualties . The Grand Battery also silenced some of the guns in Forts 21 , 22 and 23 . 
 General von Toll initially planned to order his infantry to start the assault at 16 : 00 , but Paskevich through his aides ordered him to postpone the attack until 16 : 45 . Eventually around 5 : 00 von Kreutz 's corps advanced towards Forts 21 and 22 in two columns . Russian horse artillery reached a position 200 paces from Fort 22 and started shelling the defenders at close range . Already shaken by the fire of the Grand Battery , the Poles abandoned the fort and retreated before the surprised Russian infantry approached . It was a rare example of artillery capturing a fortified position without the help of other forces . Meanwhile , the fighting for the nearby Fort 22 was heavy . In the end its garrison fell almost to the last man . 
 Simultaneously , von Pahlen 's Corps attacked forts 23 and 24 , and the Polish position at the Evangelical Cemetery . Heavy fighting followed , and many Russian commanders , including Paskevich , proposed that further fighting be postponed until the following day . General von Toll insisted on reaching the last line of Polish defences before sunset . The surrounding forts changed hands many times , but in the end most of them remained in Russian hands by 22 : 00 , when the Russians broke off . Around midnight General Berg arrived in Warsaw with a new ultimatum signed by Paskevich . 
 = = = = Polish surrender = = = = 
 General Prądzyński was once again dispatched to the Russian headquarters , where he was greeted by Grand Duke Michael Pavlovich as Paskevich had been wounded shortly before . Although Michael believed the Poles were playing for time to allow Ramorino 's Corps to return from Podlasie , Prądzyński convinced him to send General Berg to Warsaw with a draft of an act of unconditional surrender . The agreement ( apparently never signed on paper ) stipulated that the Polish Army was free to leave the city , a two @-@ day cease @-@ fire would come into effect and that Warsaw would be spared the horrors it experienced during the 1794 siege . No political clauses were included . Around 17 : 00 Prądzyński and Berg arrived in Warsaw , where Krukowiecki generally agreed with the Russian terms , but considered them too harsh . Berg and Prądzyński then returned to Russian headquarters and Grand Duke Michael agreed to allow the Polish Army free passage to Modlin and Płock , an amnesty to all fighters of the Uprising , and to exchange prisoners . The new terms were more than acceptable to Krukowiecki . Upon Prądzyński 's return the more liberal wing of the government won a temporary majority , and Krukowiecki was ousted from power and replaced with Bonawentura <unk> as head of government and General Kazimierz Małachowski as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief . 
 = = = 8 September = = = 
 The ultimatum required that Warsaw be surrendered immediately , along with the bridge and the suburb of Praga , and threatened the complete destruction of the city the following day . Following a heated debate , the new Polish authorities decided to comply by 5 : 00 . Małachowski sent a letter to Paskevich notifying him that the army was withdrawing to Płock " to avoid further bloodshed and to prove its loyalty " . The letter also expressed his hope that the Russians would allow free passage to troops unable to withdraw by the deadline , and that the army would honour the terms negotiated with Grand Duke Michael . The surrender of Warsaw was thus not a formal convention , but rather the effect of lengthy negotiations . The Russians initially respected its terms . 
 The Polish Army withdrew across the Vistula and continued north towards the Modlin Fortress . The Sejm , Senate and many civilians also left the city " in grim silence " . Many soldiers , including high @-@ ranking officers , decided to stay in the city and lay down their arms . Up to 5000 soldiers stayed in Warsaw , along with 600 officers , among them Generals Krukowiecki , Małachowski , Chrzanowski and Prądzyński . The food stores were opened , and their contents were distributed among the civilians . 
 The following evening Grand Duke Michael Pavlovich entered the city leading his Imperial Guard . Warsaw capitulated . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Although no large @-@ scale evacuation of supplies from Warsaw was ordered , the Modlin Fortress was well prepared for a lengthy siege . Its magazines contained over 25 thousand cannon rounds , almost 900 thousand musket and rifle rounds and enough provisions for several months of full siege . The treasury of the Polish government was also still intact and contained more than 6 @.@ 5 million <unk> . 
 The fall of Warsaw was synonymous with the fall of Poland , both to Poles and to foreigners . To commemorate the crushing of the November Uprising , Pushkin wrote " On the Taking of Warsaw " , hailing the capitulation of Poland 's capital as the " final triumph " of Mother Russia . Other writers and poets joined in to celebrate , among them Vasily Zhukovsky , Fyodor <unk> and Aleksey <unk> . Soon afterwards the tsar practically dismantled the Kingdom of Poland : its constitution was abolished , the government given to Russian officials and its Warsaw University closed . 
 The news of the fall of Warsaw spread quickly . The French government , until then pressured both by Polish emissaries and by its own opposition to support the Poles , was relieved : French Minister of Foreign Affairs Horace Sébastiani declared to the Chamber of Deputies that " Order now reigns in Warsaw " . The phrase became one of the best @-@ known comments on the fall of Warsaw and was later often ridiculed by the supporters of the Polish cause . The Russian capture of the city in 1831 incited a wave of sympathy towards Poles . Several towns in the United States voted to change their names to Warsaw after the news of the battle reached their residents , among them Warsaw , Virginia and Warsaw , Kentucky . 
 Shortly after the battle , in December 1831 , the tsarist authorities issued a " For the Taking of Warsaw by Assault in 1831 " Medal awarded to Russian veterans . A monument " To the <unk> of Warsaw " was constructed near the former Redoubt 54 . Demolished after Poland regained independence in 1918 , the spot is now occupied by a post @-@ war monument to Juliusz Konstanty Ordon and his soldiers . There are plans to move the monument closer to the site of the redoubt . 
 The Battle of Warsaw is commemorated on the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier , Warsaw , with the inscription " <unk> 6 @-@ 8 IX 1831 " . 
 = = Casualties = = 
 Early official Russian data assert that between eight and ten thousand were killed or wounded on the Russian side , and between six and seven thousand on the Polish side . Later the number of Polish losses mentioned in the Russian Army 's dispatches was given as 139 officers and 7 @,@ 745 NCOs and soldiers . This number includes both killed and wounded . Other sources give the total Polish casualties as 9 @,@ 000 : " probably at least 3 @,@ 000 " or even " over 4000 " on the first day and between 3 @,@ 800 and 6000 on the second day of the battle . Those numbers do not include sick and wounded taken prisoner following the Russian entry into Warsaw . Altogether the Polish Army lost 16 @,@ 000 men by 12 September , but this number includes many deserters in the period immediately following the battle . 
 The Russian official estimates are 2 @,@ 300 – 3 @,@ 000 killed and wounded on the first day , and 7 @,@ 460 on the second day of the battle . Both numbers are considered " ridiculously low " by later historians . Tomasz <unk> in his 1998 monograph of the battle notes that the official casualty figure was 10 @,@ 559 Russian soldiers killed in action , including 2 generals , 16 colonels , 47 officers and 1 @,@ 767 NCOs , as well as 1 @,@ 182 soldiers missing and presumed dead . He notes that this might have been understated as some Russian regiments suffered tremendous losses , as known from their official roll papers , but the data is apparently omitted in official papers of the army . After the battle there were 7 @,@ 000 wounded Russian soldiers in Warsaw 's hospitals , and 5000 in field hospitals outside the city . The casualty rate among the wounded Russians was very high due to the low number of medical staff in the Russian army . <unk> estimates that between 14 and 16 @,@ 000 Russians were killed in battle or died of wounds , and 4000 were missing , presumed dead . 
 At the time of the capitulation , the Poles held at least 3 @,@ 000 Russian prisoners of war in Warsaw ; the Russians held 2 @,@ 590 captives . 
 = Regina Margherita @-@ class battleship = 
 The Regina Margherita class was a class of two battleships built for the Italian Regia Marina between 1898 and 1905 . The class comprised two ships : Regina Margherita and Benedetto Brin . The ships were designed by the latter 's namesake , Benedetto Brin , who died before the ships were completed . They were armed with a main battery of four 12 in ( 305 mm ) guns and could steam at a speed of 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) . 
 Both ships saw extensive service with the Italian fleet for the first decade of their careers . They saw action in the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 1912 , where they participated in the seizure of Cyrenaica in North Africa and operations in the eastern Mediterranean Sea . They were reduced to training ships by World War I , and both ships were lost with heavy death tolls during the conflict . Benedetto Brin exploded in Brindisi in September 1915 , and Regina Margherita struck a mine and sank in December 1916 . 
 = = Design = = 
 After the negative experience with the preceding Ammiraglio di Saint Bon class , which were too weak to engage foreign battleships , and too slow to catch cruisers , the Italian navy wanted a new battleship that returned to a larger , more effective size . In particular , they wanted to be able to challenge the new Habsburg @-@ class battleships being built in neighboring Austria @-@ Hungary . They returned to the 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) gun that was standard in most other navies of the day , but sacrificed armor protection to achieve high speed . As such , the ships represented a hybrid type that merged the firepower of the slow battleships and the speed of a cruiser . Benedetto Brin initially wanted to arm the ships with only two of the 12 @-@ inch guns and twelve 8 in ( 203 mm ) guns , but after his death , Admiral Ruggero Alfredo Micheli altered the design to double the number of 12 @-@ inch guns , at the expense of eight of the medium @-@ caliber pieces . 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 The Regina Margherita @-@ class ships were 130 meters ( 430 ft ) long at the waterline and 138 @.@ 65 m ( 454 @.@ 9 ft ) long overall . They had a beam of 23 @.@ 84 m ( 78 @.@ 2 ft ) ; Regina Margherita had a draft of 8 @.@ 81 m ( 28 @.@ 9 ft ) , while Benedetto Brin drew slightly more , at 9 m ( 30 ft ) . They displaced 13 @,@ 215 metric tons ( 13 @,@ 006 long tons ; 14 @,@ 567 short tons ) at normal loading and at full combat load , Regina Margherita displaced 14 @,@ 093 t ( 13 @,@ 870 long tons ; 15 @,@ 535 short tons ) while Benedetto Brin , slightly heavier , displaced 14 @,@ 737 t ( 14 @,@ 504 long tons ; 16 @,@ 245 short tons ) . Their hulls were equipped with a double bottom . The ships were built with a ram bow and had a raised forecastle deck . They had two masts , both with fighting tops ; the foremast was located directly behind the conning tower and bridge . The ships had a crew of 812 – 900 officers and enlisted men . 
 The ships ' propulsion system consisted of two triple expansion engines . Steam for the engines was provided by twenty @-@ eight coal @-@ fired water @-@ tube Niclausse boilers in Regina Margherita . Benedetto Brin meanwhile was equipped with the same number of Belleville boilers . The lead ship 's engines were rated at 21 @,@ 790 indicated horsepower ( 16 @,@ 250 kW ) , while Benedetto Brin 's were slightly less efficient , at 20 @,@ 475 ihp ( 15 @,@ 268 kW ) . The two ships had a top speed of 20 kn ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) and a range of approximately 10 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 19 @,@ 000 km ; 12 @,@ 000 mi ) at 10 kn ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 The ships were armed with four 12 in ( 305 mm ) 40 @-@ caliber guns placed in two twin gun turrets , one forward and one aft . They were also equipped with four 8 in ( 203 mm ) 40 @-@ cal. guns in casemates in the superstructure , and twelve 6 in ( 152 mm ) 40 @-@ cal. guns , also in casemates in the side of the hull . Close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats was provided by a battery of twenty 3 in ( 76 mm ) 40 @-@ cal. guns . The ships also carried a pair of 47 mm ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) guns , two 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) guns , and two 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) Maxim guns . The Regina Margherita @-@ class battleships were also equipped with four 17 @.@ 7 in ( 450 mm ) torpedo tubes placed in the hull below the waterline . 
 The ships of the Regina Margherita class were protected with Harvey steel manufactured in Terni . The main belt was 6 in ( 152 mm ) thick , and the deck was 3 @.@ 1 in ( 79 mm ) thick . The conning tower and the casemate guns were also protected by 6 in of armor plating . The main battery guns had stronger armor protection , at 8 in ( 203 mm ) thick . Coal was used extensively in the protection scheme , including a layer intended to protect the ships ' internals from underwater damage . 
 = = Ships of the class = = 
 = = Service history = = 
 Both Regina Margherita and Benedetto Brin served in the active duty squadron for the first few years of their careers , and participated in the peacetime routine of fleet training . Regina Margherita frequently served as the fleet flagship before the completion of the new Regina Elena @-@ class battleships . On 29 September 1911 , Italy declared war on the Ottoman Empire , starting the Italo @-@ Turkish War . The two ships saw action during the war in the 3rd Division in the 2nd Squadron . Benedetto Brin took part in the attack on Tripoli in October 1911 , and both were involved in the campaign to seize Rhodes in the eastern Mediterranean Sea . 
 Italy initially remained neutral during World War I , but by 1915 , had been convinced by the Triple Entente to enter the war against Germany and Austria @-@ Hungary . Both the Italians and Austro @-@ Hungarians adopted a cautious fleet policy in the confined waters of the Adriatic Sea , and so the two Regina Margherita @-@ class battleships did not see action . Benedetto Brin served as a training ship based in Brindisi until she was destroyed in an internal explosion in the harbor on 27 September 1915 with heavy loss of life ; 454 men of the ship 's crew died in the explosion . Regina Margherita , also serving as a training ship , served for somewhat longer , until she struck a mine laid by the German submarine SM UC @-@ 14 on the night of 11 – 12 December 1916 . Some 675 men were killed in the sinking . 
 = Tropical Storm Keith ( 1988 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Keith was the eleventh Atlantic tropical cyclone of the 1988 Atlantic hurricane season . It struck the Continental United States later in the calendar year than any since the 1925 Atlantic hurricane season . Keith developed out of a tropical wave in the Caribbean Sea on November 17 . It tracked northwestward , and under generally favorable conditions , it reached a peak intensity of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) shortly before striking the northeastern tip of the Yucatán Peninsula . It turned northeastward in the Gulf of Mexico , and made landfall near Sarasota , Florida , on November 23 . Keith accelerated its forward motion under the influence of a cold front , and became extratropical near Bermuda on November 24 . The extratropical remnant persisted for two more days . 
 Early in its duration , Keith produced moderate to heavy rainfall in Honduras , Jamaica , and Cuba . Minimal damage was reported in Mexico , which was still recovering from the effects of Hurricane Gilbert two months prior . Keith , the last of four named tropical cyclones to hit the United States during the season , produced moderate rainfall , rough storm surge , and gusty winds across central Florida . Overall damage was fairly minor but widespread , totaling $ 7 @.@ 3 million ( 1988 USD ; $ 14 @.@ 6 million 2016 USD ) . Near the coast of Florida , damage occurred mainly from storm surge and beach erosion . Further inland there were floods , downed trees and power lines . No fatalities were reported . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on November 5 . It tracked steadily west across the tropical Atlantic Ocean . Its forward motion slowed after it passed the Lesser Antilles on November 12 . A large well @-@ defined anticyclone persisted across much of the Caribbean Sea , providing a favorable environment for the system . A low @-@ level circulation gradually became evident on satellite imagery within the disturbance . Based on ship observations , the National Hurricane Center estimated that the system organized into a tropical depression on November 17 , about 280 miles ( 450 km ) south of the western tip of Haiti . 
 Initially , the depression was disorganized as it continued west ; on November 18 the center became exposed from the area of deep convection . However , the upper @-@ level environment gradually became more favorable for further development , and deep convection , or thunderstorm activity , developed closer to the center . An eastward @-@ moving upper @-@ level trough in the Gulf of Mexico turned the depression northwest . The next day , the depression intensified into a tropical storm while a short distance north of Honduras , receiving the name Keith . It quickly intensified , and on November 21 the storm reached its peak strength of 985 mbar ( 29 @.@ 09 inHg ) with winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . The trough , which turned Keith northwestward , rapidly accelerated northeastward ; as a result , the storm moved slowly northwest until making landfall on the northeast tip of the Yucatán Peninsula at 0800 UTC on November 21 , at an intensity slightly below hurricane status . 
 After briefly moving over land , Keith turned north under the influence of a trailing frontal trough . The storm became disorganized while recurving northeast because of increased vertical wind shear and the presence of cool dry air from its north . On November 23 , Keith made landfall near Sarasota , Florida , with winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) , while most of its convection was well to the north of the center . Its landfall was the second latest on record for the Continental United States , only behind a hurricane in the 1925 season . The storm quickly weakened as it crossed Florida , and within hours the winds dropped to 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . Reaching the Atlantic Ocean eight hours after moving ashore , Keith began to gradually re @-@ intensify , and under the influence of a very large upper @-@ level low pressure area over Newfoundland , the storm accelerated northeast . On November 24 , the storm again reached its peak intensity of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) , shortly before becoming an extratropical cyclone near Bermuda . Keith restrengthened and deepened into a powerful extratropical cyclone , attaining hurricane @-@ force winds and a minimum pressure of 945 mbar ( 27 @.@ 92 inHg ) . The extratropical storm turned westward and was last observed on November 26 northeast of Newfoundland . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 On November 20 , shortly before the tropical depression intensified into a tropical storm , the government of Honduras issued a tropical storm warning for the Swan Islands , along with a tropical storm watch for the northwestern Honduran coastline . The advisories were discontinued within 10 hours of Keith 's passage through the region . The government of Belize briefly declared a tropical storm watch for the whole coastline of the country , but when it became clear that Keith posed little threat , the watch was canceled . About 16 hours before the storm made landfall on the Yucatán Peninsula , the government of Mexico issued a tropical storm watch for much of the coastline of Quintana Roo . Six hours later , a tropical storm warning replaced the watch , and it was extended west to Progreso , Yucatán ; a hurricane watch was also posted . Cuban officials issued a bulletin on the night of November 20 , advising that tropical storm conditions would spread over the west part of Cuba . A subsequent bulletin indicated the possibility for hurricane conditions , but as the storm continued further to the northwest , the threat diminished . 
 Two days before the storm struck Florida , emergency management workers began working to prepare for its onslaught . The next day , the water levels in five lakes in Hillsborough County were decreased as a precaution . Residents prepared sandbags to prevent flooding along coastal areas , while boat owners worked to secure their boats . Some tourists near the southwest Florida coast left for areas further inland , though many stayed despite the storm . Red Cross officials opened six emergency shelters . Additionally , police departments in Clearwater , Indian Shores , and Largo expanded their workforce to handle storm @-@ related problems . The storm resulted in the closure of some private schools as well as the Hillsborough Community College . About 21 hours before Keith made its final landfall , the National Hurricane Center issued a tropical storm warning along the Florida west coast from Cape Sable to Cedar Key . The next day , a tropical storm warning was posted from Jupiter , Florida , north to Savannah , Georgia . A tropical storm warning was briefly issued for Bermuda , as well . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Keith dropped around 3 inches ( 75 mm ) of rainfall along the northern coast of Honduras , and totals of around 10 inches ( 250 mm ) were reported on offshore islands . As the storm was making landfall on Mexico , a ship just west of Cozumel reported wind gusts of 90 mph ( 149 km / h ) , while a second ship in Puerto Morelos , Quintana Roo , recorded sustained winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . Reports from Cozumel indicated torrential rainfall and a large number of lightning strikes during the period of highest winds . Rainfall peaked at 7 @.@ 69 inches ( 195 mm ) just south of Cancún . Still recovering from the effects of Hurricane Gilbert two months prior , the Yucatán Peninsula received only minor damage as a result of Keith . The storm triggered flooding in western Cuba that severely damaged tobacco and vegetable crops . Officials forced 2 @,@ 500 residents to evacuate their homes due to the flooding . The storm also dropped nearly 4 inches ( 100 mm ) of precipitation in Kingston , Jamaica . 
 Off the coast of Florida , a freighter and its crew of ten were stranded after the storm flooded its engine room . The cyclone produced a moderately strong storm surge in isolated locations along the southwest coast of Florida , peaking at 5 @.@ 94 feet ( 1 @.@ 81 m ) at Bradenton and Fort Myers Beach . The combination of storm surge and waves severely eroded beaches along Charlotte Harbor and Estero Bay . In Naples , strong waves destroyed the western end of the Naples Pier where several boats were washed ashore . Heavy precipitation fell to the north of the center , peaking at 10 @.@ 27 inches ( 260 mm ) in Saint Leo . Sustained winds peaked at 63 mph ( 101 km / h ) at the MacDill Air Force Base , with stronger gusts . Inland from the immediate coastline , damage was mostly limited to isolated fresh @-@ water flooding , downed trees , and power outages ; overall damage was widespread but fairly light , and six structures were destroyed across the state . Before moving ashore , Keith spawned two tornadoes , one of which damaged approximately 30 mobile homes in Clermont . In Lakeland , a washed out track derailed a 34 @-@ car train , which broke a natural gas line and forced 450 people to evacuate . In Lee County , damage totaled $ 1 @.@ 5 million ( 1988 USD ; $ 3 million 2016 USD ) , and in Pinellas County the storm caused about $ 5 @.@ 8 million in damage ( 1988 USD ; $ 11 @.@ 6 million 2016 USD ) . 
 A light storm surge of 1 to 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 3 to 0 @.@ 6 m ) was reported along the northeast Florida coast into southeastern Georgia . The storm 's outer rainbands dropped light rainfall of around 1 inch ( 25 mm ) across coastal Florida , northward to North Carolina . A station on Bermuda reported sustained winds of 47 mph ( 76 km / h ) , with gusts to 78 mph ( 126 km / h ) . Only light damage occurred on the island . 
 = Walter Bedell Smith = 
 Walter Bedell " Beetle " Smith ( 5 October 1895 – 9 August 1961 ) was a senior officer of the United States Army who served as General Dwight D. Eisenhower 's chief of staff at Allied Forces Headquarters ( AFHQ ) during the Tunisia Campaign and the Allied invasion of Italy in 1943 during World War II . He was Eisenhower 's chief @-@ of @-@ staff at the Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force ( SHAEF ) in Western Europe from 1944 through 1945 . 
 Smith enlisted as a private in the Indiana National Guard in 1911 . In 1917 , during World War I , he was commissioned as a second lieutenant . He was wounded in the Aisne @-@ Marne Offensive in 1918 . After World War I , he was a staff officer and instructor at the U.S. Army Infantry School . In 1941 , he became Secretary of the General Staff , and in 1942 he became the Secretary to the Combined Chiefs of Staff . His duties involved taking part in discussions of war plans at the highest level , and Smith often briefed President Franklin D. Roosevelt on strategic matters . 
 Smith became chief of staff to Eisenhower at AFHQ in September 1942 . He acquired a reputation as Eisenhower 's " hatchet man " for his brusque and demanding manner . However , he was also capable of representing Eisenhower in sensitive missions requiring diplomatic skill . Smith was involved in negotiating the armistice between Italy and the Allies , which he signed on behalf of Eisenhower . In 1944 , he became the Chief of Staff of SHAEF , again under Eisenhower . In this position , Smith also negotiated successfully for food and fuel aid to be sent through German lines for the cold and starving Dutch civilian population , and opened discussions for the peaceful and complete German capitulation to the First Canadian Army in the Netherlands . In May 1945 , Smith met representatives of the German High Command in Reims , France , to conduct the surrender of the German Armed Forces , and he signed the German Instrument of Surrender on behalf of General Eisenhower . 
 After World War II , he served as the U.S. Ambassador to the Soviet Union from 1946 to 1948 . Then in 1950 , Smith became the Director of Central Intelligence , the head of the Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) and other intelligence agencies in the United States . Smith reorganized the CIA , redefined its structure and its mission , and he gave it a new sense of purpose . He made the CIA the arm of government primarily responsible for covert operations . He left the CIA in 1953 to become an Under Secretary of State . After retiring from the State Department in 1954 , Smith continued to serve the Eisenhower Administration in various posts for several years , until his retirement and his death in 1961 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Walter Bedell Smith was born in Indianapolis , Indiana , on October 5 , 1895 , the eldest of two sons of William Long Smith , a silk buyer for the Pettis Dry Goods Company , and his wife , Ida Francis née Bedell , who worked for the same company . 
 Smith was called Bedell from his boyhood . From an early age he was nicknamed " Beetle " , or occasionally " Beedle " or " Boodle " . He was educated at St. Peter and Paul School , public schools # 10 and # 29 , Oliver Perry Morton School , and Emmerich Manual High School , where he studied to be a machinist . While still there , he took a job at the National Motor Vehicle Company , and eventually left high school without graduating . Smith enrolled at Butler University , but his father developed serious health problems , and Smith left university to return to his job and support his family . 
 In 1911 , at the age of 16 , Smith enlisted as a private in Company D of the 2nd Indiana Infantry of the Indiana National Guard . The Indiana National Guard was called out twice in 1913 , for the Ohio River flood and during the Indianapolis streetcar strike . Smith was promoted to corporal and then sergeant . During the Pancho Villa Expedition he served on the staff of the Indiana National Guard . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1913 , Smith met Mary Eleanor ( <unk> ) Cline , and they were married in a traditional Roman Catholic wedding ceremony on July 1 , 1917 . Their marriage was of long duration but childless . 
 = = World War I = = 
 Smith 's work during the Ohio River flood of 1913 led to his nomination for officer training in 1917 , and he was sent to the Officer Candidate Training Camp at Fort Benjamin Harrison , Indiana . Upon his graduation on November 27 , 1917 , he was commissioned as a second lieutenant . He was then assigned to the newly formed Company A , 1st Battalion , 39th Infantry , part of the 4th Infantry Division at Camp Greene , North Carolina . The 4th Infantry Division embarked for Europe , then embroiled in World War I , from Hoboken , New Jersey , on 9 May 1918 , reaching Brest , France , on the 23rd of May . After training with the British and French Armies , the 4th Division entered the front lines in June 1918 , joining the Aisne @-@ Marne Offensive on 18 July 1918 . Smith was wounded by shell fragments during an attack two days later . 
 Because of his wounds , Smith was returned to the United States for service with the U.S. Department of War 's General Staff , and he was assigned to the Military Intelligence Division . In September 1918 , he was commissioned as a first lieutenant in the regular army of the United States . 
 Smith was next sent to the newly formed 379th Infantry Regiment as its intelligence officer . This regiment was part of the 95th Infantry Division , based at Camp Sherman , Ohio . The 95th Infantry Division was disbanded following the signing of the Armistice with Germany on November 11 , 1918 . In February 1919 Smith was assigned to Camp Dodge , Iowa , where he was involved with the disposal of surplus equipment and supplies . In March 1919 he was transferred to the 2nd Infantry Regiment , a regular unit based at Camp Dodge , remaining there until November 1919 , when it moved to Camp Sherman . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 The staff of the 2nd Infantry moved to Fort Sheridan , Illinois , in 1921 . In 1922 , Smith became aide de camp to Brigadier General George Van Horn Moseley , the commander of the 12th Infantry Brigade at Fort Sheridan . From 1925 to 1929 Smith worked as an assistant in the Bureau of the Budget . He then served a two @-@ year tour of duty overseas on the staff of the 45th Infantry at Fort William McKinley in the Philippines . After nine years as a first lieutenant , he was promoted to captain in September 1929 . 
 Returning to the United States , Smith reported to the U.S. Army Infantry School at Fort Benning , Georgia , in March 1931 . Upon graduation in June 1932 , he stayed on as an instructor in the Weapons Section , where he was responsible for demonstrating weapons like the M1918 Browning Automatic Rifle . In 1933 he was sent to the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth , Kansas . Afterward , he returned to the Infantry School but was detached again to attend the U.S. Army War College , from which he graduated in 1937 . He returned to the Infantry School once more , where he was promoted to major on 1 January 1939 after nine years as a captain . Such slow promotion was common in the Army in the 1920s and 1930s . Officers like Smith who were commissioned between November 1916 and November 1918 made up 55 @.@ 6 percent of the Army 's officer corps in 1926 . Promotions were usually based on seniority , and the modest objective of promoting officers to major after seventeen years of service could not be met because of a shortage of posts for them to fill . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Washington = = = 
 When General George C. Marshall became the Army 's Chief of Staff in September 1939 , he brought Smith to Washington , D.C. , to be the Assistant to the Secretary of the General Staff . The Secretary of the General Staff was primarily concerned with records , paperwork , and the collection of statistics , but he also performed a great deal of analysis , liaison , and administration . One of Smith 's duties was liaison with Major General Edwin " Pa " Watson , the Senior Military Aide to President Franklin D. Roosevelt . Smith was promoted to lieutenant colonel on 4 May 1941 , and then to colonel on 30 August 1941 . On 1 September , the Secretary of the General Staff , Colonel Orlando Ward , was given command of the 1st Armored Division , and Smith became Secretary of the General Staff . 
 The Arcadia Conference , which was held in Washington , D.C. , December 1941 and January 1942 , mandated the creation of the Joint Chiefs of Staff as a counterpart to the British Chiefs of Staff Committee , and Smith was named as its secretary on 23 January 1942 . The same conference also brought about the creation of the Combined Chiefs of Staff , which consisted of the ( American ) Joint Chiefs of Staff and the ( British ) Chiefs of Staff Committee meeting as a single body . Brigadier Vivian Dykes of the British Joint Staff Mission provided the secretarial arrangements for the new organization at first , but General Marshall thought that an American secretariat was required . He appointed Smith as the secretary of the Combined Chiefs of Staff as well as of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . Since Dykes was senior in service time to Smith , and Marshall wanted Smith to be in charge , Smith was promoted to brigadier general on 2 February 1942 . He assumed the new post a week later , with Dykes as his deputy . The two men worked in partnership to create and organize the secretariat , and to build the organization of the Combined Chiefs @-@ of @-@ Staff into one that could coordinate the war efforts of the two allies , along with the Canadians , Australians , French and others . Smith 's duties involved taking part in discussions of strategy at the highest level , and he often briefed President Roosevelt on strategic matters . However Smith became frustrated as he watched other officers receive operational commands that he desired . He later remarked : " That year I spent working as secretary of the general staff for George Marshall was one of the most rewarding of my entire career , and the unhappiest year of my life . " 
 = = = North African Theater = = = 
 When Major General Dwight D. Eisenhower was appointed as the commander of the European Theater of Operations in June 1942 , he requested that Smith be sent from Washington as his chief @-@ of @-@ staff . Smith 's record as a staff officer , and his proven ability to work harmoniously with the British , made him a natural choice for the post . Reluctantly , Marshall acceded to this request , and Smith took over as the chief @-@ of @-@ staff at Allied Forces Headquarters ( AFHQ ) on 15 September 1942 . Reporting to him were two deputy chiefs of staff , Brigadier General Alfred Gruenther and Brigadier John Whiteley , and also the Chief Administrative Officer ( CAO ) , Major General Humfrey Gale . 
 AFHQ was a balanced binational organization , in which the chief of each section was paired with a deputy of the other nationality . Its structure was generally American , but with some British aspects . For example , Gale as CAO controlled both personnel and supply functions , which under the American system would have reported directly to Smith . Initially AFHQ was located in London , but it moved to Algiers during November and December 1942 , with Smith arriving on December 11 . Although AFHQ had an authorized strength of only 700 , Smith aggressively expanded it . By January 1943 its American component alone was 1 @,@ 406 and its strength eventually topped 4 @,@ 000 men and women . As the chief @-@ of @-@ staff , Smith zealously guarded access to Eisenhower . He acquired a reputation as a tough and brusque manager , and he was often referred to as Eisenhower 's " hatchet man " . 
 Pending the organization of the North African Theater of Operations , U.S. Army ( NATOUSA ) , Smith also acted as its chief @-@ of @-@ staff until 15 February , when Brigadier General Everett S. Hughes became the Deputy Theater commander and the commanding general of the Communications Zone . The relationship between Smith and Hughes , an old friend of Eisenhower , was tense . Smith later accused Hughes of " empire building " , and the two clashed over trivial issues . In Algiers , Smith and Eisenhower seldom socialized together . Smith conducted formal dinners at his villa , an estate surrounded by gardens and terraces , with two large drawing rooms decorated with mosaics , oriental rugs , and art treasures . Like Eisenhower , Smith had a female companion , a nurse , Captain Ethel Westerman . 
 Following the disastrous Battle of the Kasserine Pass , Eisenhower sent Smith forward to report on the state of affairs at the American II Corps . Smith recommended the relief of its commander , Major General Lloyd Fredendall , as did General Harold Alexander and Major Generals Omar Bradley and Lucian Truscott . On their advice , Eisenhower replaced Fredendall with Major General George S. Patton , Jr . Eisenhower also relieved his Assistant Chief of Staff Intelligence ( G @-@ 2 ) , Brigadier Eric Mockler @-@ Ferryman , pinpointing faulty intelligence at AFHQ as a contributing factor in the defeat at Kasserine . Mockler @-@ Ferryman was replaced by Brigadier Kenneth Strong . 
 The debacle at Kasserine Pass strained relations between the Allies , and another crisis developed when II Corps reported that enemy aviation was operating at will over its sector because of an absence of Allied air cover . This elicited a scathing response from British Air Marshal Arthur Coningham on the competence of American troops . Eisenhower drafted a letter to Marshall suggesting that Coningham should be relieved of his command since he could not control the acrimony between senior Allied commanders , but Smith persuaded him not to send it . Instead , Air Chief Marshal Arthur Tedder , Major General Carl Spaatz , and Brigadier General Laurence S. Kuter paid Patton a visit at his headquarters . Their meeting was interrupted by a German air raid that convinced the airmen that General Patton had a point . Coningham withdrew his written criticisms and he apologized . 
 For the Allied invasion of Sicily , the Combined Chiefs of Staff designated Eisenhower as the overall commander but they ordered the three component commanders , Alexander , Tedder , and Admiral Sir Andrew Cunningham of the Royal Navy , to " cooperate " . To Eisenhower , this command arrangement meant a reversion to the old British " committee system " . He drafted a cable to the Combined Chiefs of Staff demanding a unified command structure , but Smith persuaded him to tear it up . 
 Disagreements arose between Allied commanders over the operational plan , which called for a series of dispersed landings , based on the desire of the air , naval , and logistical planners concerning the early capture of ports and airfields . General Bernard Montgomery , the commander of the British Eighth Army , objected to this aspect of the plan , since it exposed the Allied forces to defeat in detail . Montgomery put forward an alternate plan that involved American and British forces landing side by side . He convinced Smith that his alternate plan was sound , and the two men then persuaded most of the other Allied commanders . Montgomery 's plan provided for the early seizure of airfields , which satisfied Tedder and Cunningham . The fears of logisticians like Major General Thomas B. Larkin that supply would not be practical without a port were resolved by the use of amphibious trucks . 
 In August 1943 , Smith and Strong flew to Lisbon via Gibraltar in civilian clothes , where they met with Generale di <unk> Giuseppe Castellano at the British embassy . While Castellano had hoped to arrange terms for Italy to join the United Nations against Nazi Germany , Smith was empowered to draw up an armistice between Italy and Allied armed forces , but he was unable to negotiate political matters . On September 3 , Smith and Castellano signed the agreed @-@ upon text on behalf of Eisenhower and Pietro Badoglio , respectively , in a simple ceremony beneath an olive tree at Cassibile , Sicily . In October , Smith traveled to Washington for two weeks to represent Eisenhower in a series of meetings , including one with President Roosevelt at Hyde Park , New York , on 10 October . 
 = = = European theater = = = 
 In December 1943 , Eisenhower was appointed Supreme Allied Commander for Operation Overlord , the invasion of Normandy . Eisenhower wished to take Smith and other key members of his AFHQ staff with him to his new assignment , but Prime Minister Winston Churchill wanted to retain Smith at AFHQ as Deputy Supreme Commander in the Mediterranean . Churchill reluctantly gave way at Eisenhower 's insistence . On New Year 's Eve , Smith met with General ( one day later Field Marshal ) Sir Alan Brooke to discuss the transfer of key British staff members from AFHQ to Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force ( SHAEF ) . Brooke released Gale only after a strong appeal from Smith , but refused to transfer Strong . A heated exchange resulted , and Brooke later complained to Eisenhower about Smith 's behavior . This was the only time that a senior British officer ever complained openly about Smith . Whiteley became Chief of Intelligence ( G @-@ 2 ) at SHAEF instead of Strong , but Eisenhower and Smith had their way in the long run , and Strong assumed the post on 25 May 1944 , with Brigadier General Thomas J. Betts as his deputy . 
 Smith was promoted to lieutenant general and also made a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath in January 1944 . On 18 January , he set out for London with two and a half tons of personal baggage loaded onto a pair of Boeing B @-@ 17 Flying Fortresses . The staff of the Chief @-@ of @-@ Staff to the Supreme Allied Commander ( COSSAC ) was already active , and he had been planning the Overlord operation for some time . 
 This staff was absorbed into SHAEF , with COSSAC , with Major General Frederick Morgan , becoming Smith 's Deputy Chief of Staff at SHAEF . Gale also held the title of Deputy Chief of Staff , as well as being Chief Administrative Officer , and there was also a Deputy Chief of Staff ( Air ) , Air Vice Marshal James Robb . The heads of the other staff divisions were Major General Ray W. Barker ( G @-@ 1 ) , Major General Harold R. Bull ( G @-@ 3 ) , Major General Robert W. Crawford ( G @-@ 4 ) and Major General Sir Roger Lumley ( G @-@ 5 ) . 
 Morgan had located his COSSAC headquarters in Norfolk House at 31 St. James 's Square , London , but Smith moved it to Bushy Park on the outskirts of London . This was according to Eisenhower 's expressed desire not to have his headquarters inside of a major city . A <unk> camp was built with 130 @,@ 000 square feet ( 12 @,@ 000 m2 ) of floor space . By the time Overlord began , accommodations had been provided for 750 officers and 6 @,@ 000 enlisted men and women . 
 Eisenhower and Smith 's offices were in a subterranean complex . Smith 's office was spartan , dominated by a large portrait of Marshall . An advanced command post codenamed <unk> was established near Portsmouth , where Montgomery 's 21st Army Group and Admiral Sir Bertram Ramsay 's Allied Naval Expeditionary Force headquarters were located . 
 Ground operations in Normandy were controlled by Montgomery at first , but SHAEF Forward headquarters moved to <unk> in August , and on 1 September Eisenhower assumed control of Bradley 's 12th Army Group and Montgomery 's 21st Army Group . Smith soon realized that he had made a mistake . The forward headquarters was remote and inaccessible , and it lacked the necessary communications equipment . 
 On 6 September , Eisenhower ordered both SHAEF Forward and SHAEF Main to move to Versailles as soon as possible . SHAEF Forward began its move on 15 September and it opened in Versailles on 20 September . SHAEF Main followed , moving from Bushy Park by air . This move was completed by October , and SHAEF remained there until 17 February 1945 , when SHAEF Forward moved to Reims . By this time , SHAEF had grown in size to 16 @,@ 000 officers and enlisted men , of whom 10 @,@ 000 were American and 6 @,@ 000 British . 
 By November 1944 , Strong was reporting that there was a possibility of a German counteroffensive in the Ardennes or the Vosges . Smith sent Strong to personally warn Bradley , who was preparing an offensive of his own . The magnitude and ferocity of the German Ardennes Offensive came as a shock , and Smith had to defend Strong against criticism for failing to sound the alarm . He felt Strong had been given ample warning . 
 Once battle was joined , Eisenhower acted decisively , committing the two armored divisions in the 12th Army Group 's reserve over Bradley 's objection , along with his own meager reserves , two airborne divisions . Whiteley and Betts visited the U.S. First Army headquarters and they were unimpressed with the way its commanders were handling the situation . Strong , Whiteley , and Betts recommended that command of the armies north of the Ardennes be transferred from Bradley to Montgomery . Smith 's immediate reaction was to dismiss the suggestion out of hand . He told Strong and Whiteley that they were fired and should pack their bags and return to the United Kingdom . On the next morning , Smith apologized . He had had second thoughts , and he informed them that he would present their recommendation to Eisenhower as his own . He realized the military and political implications of this , and knew that such a recommendation had to come from an American officer . On December 20 , he recommended it to Eisenhower , who telephoned both General Bradley and Montgomery , and Eisenhower ordered it . 
 This decision was greatly resented by many Americans , particularly in 12th Army Group , who felt that the action discredited the U.S. Army 's command structure . Heavy casualties since the start of Operation Overlord resulted in a critical shortage of infantry replacements even before the crisis situation created by the Ardennes Offensive . Steps were taken to divert men from Communications Zone units . The commander of the Communication Zone , Lieutenant General John C. H. Lee , persuaded Eisenhower to allow soldiers to volunteer for service " without regard to color or race to the units where assistance is most needed , and give you the opportunity of fighting shoulder to shoulder to bring about victory " . 
 Smith immediately grasped the political implications of this . He put his position to Eisenhower in writing : 
 Although I am now somewhat out of touch with the War Department 's Negro policy , I did , as you know , handle this during the time I was with General Marshall . Unless there has been a radical change , the sentence which I have marked in the attached circular letter will place the War Department in very grave difficulties . It is inevitable that this statement will get out , and equally inevitable that the result will be that every Negro organization , pressure group and newspaper will take the attitude that , while the War Department segregates colored troops into organizations of their own against the desires and pleas of all the Negro race , the Army is perfectly willing to put them in the front lines mixed in units with white soldiers , and have them do battle when an emergency arises . Two years ago I would have considered the marked statement the most dangerous thing that I had ever seen in regard to Negro relations . I have talked with Lee about it , and he can 't see this at all . He believes that it is right that colored and white soldiers should be mixed in the same company . With this belief I do not argue , but the War Department policy is different . Since I am convinced that this circular letter will have the most serious repercussions in the United States , I believe that it is our duty to draw the War Department 's attention to the fact that this statement has been made , to give them warning as to what may happen and any facts which they may use to counter the pressure which will undoubtedly be placed on them . 
 The policy was revised , with Negro soldiers serving in provisional platoons . In the 12th Army Group these were attached to regiments , while in the 6th Army Group the platoons were grouped into whole companies attached to the division . The former arrangement were generally better rated by the units they were attached to , because the Negro platoons had no company @-@ level unit training . 
 On 15 April 1945 , the Nazi governor ( Reichskommissar ) of the Netherlands , Arthur Seyss @-@ Inquart , offered to open up Amsterdam to food and coal shipments to ease the suffering of the civilian population . Smith and Strong , representing SHAEF , along with Major General Ivan Susloparov representing the Soviet Union , Prince Bernhard of Lippe @-@ Biesterfeld representing the Dutch government , and Major General Sir Francis de Guingand from 21st Army Group , met with Seyss @-@ Inquart in the Dutch village of <unk> on 30 April . After threatening Seyss @-@ Inquart with prosecution for war crimes , Smith successfully negotiated for the provision of food to the suffering Dutch civilian population in the cities in the west of the country , and he opened discussions for the peaceful and complete German capitulation in the Netherlands , to the First Canadian Army , that did follow on the 5th of May . 
 Smith had to conduct another set of surrender negotiations , that of the German armed forces , in May 1945 . Smith met with the representatives of the German High Command ( the Oberkommando der Wehrmacht ) , Colonel General Alfred Jodl and General @-@ Admiral Hans @-@ Georg von Friedeburg . Once again , Strong acted as an interpreter . Smith took a hard line , threatening that unless terms were accepted , the Allies would seal the front , thus forcing the remaining Germans into the hands of the Red Army , but he made some concessions regarding a ceasefire before the surrender came into effect . On May 7 , Smith signed the surrender document , along with the French representative , Major General François <unk> , and the Soviet Susloparov . 
 = = After the war = = 
 = = = Ambassador to the Soviet Union = = = 
 Smith briefly returned to the United States in June 1945 . In August , Eisenhower nominated Smith as his successor as commander of U.S. Forces , European Theater , as ETOUSA was redesignated on July 1 , 1945 . Smith was passed over in favor of General Joseph McNarney . When Eisenhower took over as Chief of Staff of the U.S. Army in November 1945 , he summoned Smith to become his Assistant Chief of Staff for Operations and Planning . However , soon after his arrival back in Washington he was asked by President Harry S. Truman and U.S Secretary of State James F. Byrnes to become the United States Ambassador to the Soviet Union . In putting Smith 's nomination for the post before the United States Senate , Truman asked for and received special legislation permitting Smith to retain his permanent military rank of major general . 
 Smith 's service as the American ambassador was not a success . Although no fault of Smith 's , during his tenure the relationship between the United States and the Soviet Union deteriorated rapidly as the Cold War set in . Smith 's tenacity of purpose came across as a lack of flexibility , and it did nothing to allay Soviet fears about American intentions . He became thoroughly disillusioned and turned into a hardened cold warrior who saw the Soviet Union as a secretive , totalitarian and antagonistic state . In My Three Years in Moscow ( 1950 ) , Smith 's account of his time as ambassador , he wrote : 
 ... we are forced into a continuing struggle for a free way of life that may extend over a period of many years . We dare not allow ourselves any false sense of security . We must anticipate that the Soviet tactic will be to wear us down , to <unk> us , and to keep probing for weak spots , and we must cultivate firmness and patience to a degree we have never before required . 
 Smith returned to the United States in March 1949 . Truman offered him the post of Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs but General Smith declined the appointment , preferring to return to military duty . He was appointed as the commander of the First Army at Fort Jay , New York , his first command since 1918 . Throughout the war , Smith had been troubled by a recurring stomach ulcer . The problem became severe in 1949 . He was no longer able eat a normal diet , and he was suffering from malnutrition . Smith was admitted to the Walter Reed Army Hospital , where the surgeons decided to remove most of his stomach . This did cure his ulcer , but Smith remained malnourished and thin . 
 = = = Director of Central Intelligence = = = 
 In 1950 , Truman selected Smith as Director of Central Intelligence ( DCI ) , the head of the Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) . Since the post had been established in 1946 , there had been three directors , none of whom had wanted the job . 
 The 1949 Intelligence Survey Group had produced the Dulles @-@ Jackson @-@ Correa Report , which found that the CIA had failed in its responsibilities in both the coordination and production of intelligence . In response , the U.S. National Security Council accepted the conclusions and recommendations of the report . It remained to implement them . In May 1950 , President Truman decided that Smith was the man he needed for the CIA . Before Smith could assume the post on 7 October , there was a major intelligence failure . The North Korean invasion of South Korea in June 1950 , which started the Korean War , took the administration entirely by surprise , and it raised fears of a third world war . 
 Since Smith knew little about the Agency , he asked for a deputy who did . Sidney Souers , the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council , recommended William Harding Jackson , one of the authors of the Dulles @-@ Jackson @-@ Correa Report , to Smith . Jackson accepted the post of Deputy Director on three conditions , one of which was " no <unk> out " . 
 Smith and Jackson moved to reorganize the agency in line with the recommendations of the Dulles @-@ Jackson @-@ Correa Report . They streamlined procedures for gathering and disseminating intelligence . On 10 October , Smith was asked to prepare estimates for the Wake Island Conference between the President and General Douglas MacArthur . Smith insisted that the estimates be simple , readable , conclusive , and useful rather than mere background . They reflected the best information available , but unfortunately , one estimate concluded that the Chinese would not intervene in Korea , another major intelligence failure . 
 Four months after the outbreak of the Korean War , the Agency had produced no coordinated estimate of the situation in Korea . Smith created a new Office of National Estimates ( ONE ) under the direction of William L. Langer , the Harvard historian who had led the Research and Analysis branch of the wartime Office of Strategic Services ( OSS ) . Langer 's staff created procedures that were followed for the next two decades . Smith stepped up efforts to obtain economic , psychological , and photographic intelligence . By December 1 , Smith had formed a Directorate for Administration . The Agency would ultimately be divided by function into three directorates : Administration , Plans , and Intelligence . 
 Smith is remembered in the CIA as its first successful Director of Central Intelligence , and one of its most effective , who redefined its structure and mission . The CIA 's expansive covert action program remained the responsibility of Frank Wisner 's quasi @-@ independent Office of Policy Coordination ( OPC ) , but Smith began to bring OPC under the DCI 's control . In early January 1951 he made Allen Dulles the first Deputy Director for Plans ( DDP ) , to supervise both OPC and the CIA 's separate espionage organization , the Office of Special Operations ( OSO ) . Not until January 1952 were all intelligence functions consolidated under a Deputy Director for Intelligence ( <unk> ) . Wisner succeeded Dulles as DDP in August 1951 , and it took until August 1952 to merge the OSO and the OPC , each of which had its own culture , methods , and pay scales , into an effective , single directorate . 
 By consolidating responsibility for covert operations , Smith made the CIA the arm of government primarily responsible for them . Smith wanted the CIA to become a career service . Before the war , the so @-@ called " Manchu Law " limited the duration of an officer 's temporary assignments , which effectively prevented anyone from making a career as a general staff officer . There were no schools for intelligence training , and the staffs had little to do in peacetime . Career officers therefore tended to avoid such work unless they aspired to be military attachés . Smith consolidated training under a Director of Training and developed a career service program . 
 When Eisenhower was appointed as the Supreme Allied Commander Europe in 1951 , he asked for Smith to serve as his chief of staff again . Truman turned down the request , stating that the DCI was a more important post . Eisenhower therefore took Lieutenant General Alfred Gruenther with him as his chief of staff . When Eisenhower later recommended Gruenther 's elevation to four @-@ star rank , Truman decided that General Smith should be promoted also . However , Smith 's name was omitted from the promotion list . Truman then announced that no one would be promoted until Smith was , which occurred on 1 August 1951 . Smith retired from the Army upon leaving the CIA on 9 February 1953 . 
 = = = Under Secretary of State = = = 
 On 11 January 1953 , Eisenhower , now president @-@ elect , announced that Smith would become an Under Secretary of State . Smith 's appointment was confirmed by the United States Senate on 6 February and he resigned as the DCI three days later . In May 1954 , Smith traveled to Europe in an attempt to convince the British to participate in an intervention to avert French defeat in the Battle of Dien Bien Phu . When this failed , he reached an agreement with the Soviet Foreign Minister , Vyacheslav Molotov , to partition Vietnam into two separate states . In 1953 , the President of Guatemala , Jacobo Árbenz Guzmán , threatened to nationalize land belonging to the United Fruit Company . Smith ordered the American ambassador in Guatemala to put a CIA plan for a Guatemalan coup into effect , which was accomplished by the following year . Smith left the State Department on 1 October 1954 and took up a position with the United Fruit Company . He also served as President and Chairman of the Board of the Associated Missile Products Company and AMF Atomics Incorporated , Vice Chairman of American Machine and Foundry ( AMF ) and a director of RCA and Corning Incorporated . 
 After retiring as Under Secretary of State in 1954 , Smith continued to serve the Eisenhower administration in various posts . He was a member of the National Security Training Commission from 1955 to 1957 , the National War College board of consultants from 1956 to 1959 , the Office of Defense Mobilization Special Stockpile Advisory Committee from 1957 to 1958 , the President 's Citizen Advisors on the Mutual Security Program from 1956 to 1957 , and the President 's Committee on Disarmament in 1958 . Smith was a consultant at the Special Projects Office ( Disarmament ) in the Executive Office of the President from 1955 to 1956 . He also served as Chairman of the Advisory Council of the President 's Committee on Fund Raising , and as a member @-@ at @-@ large from 1958 to 1961 . In recognition of his other former boss , he was a member of the George C. Marshall Foundation Advisory Committee from 1960 to 1961 . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 In 1955 , Smith was approached to perform the voice @-@ over and opening scene for the movie To Hell And Back , which was based on the autobiography of Audie Murphy . He accepted , and had small parts in the movie , most notably in the beginning , where he was dressed in his old service uniform . He narrated several parts of the movie , referring constantly to " the foot soldier " . Smith was portrayed on screen by Alexander Knox in The Longest Day ( 1962 ) , Edward Binns in Patton ( 1970 ) and Timothy Bottoms in Ike : Countdown to D @-@ Day ( 2004 ) . On television he has been portrayed by John Guerrasio in Cambridge Spies ( 2003 ) , Charles Napier in War and Remembrance ( 1989 ) , Don Fellows in The Last Days of Patton ( 1986 ) and J.D. Cannon in Ike : The War Years ( 1979 ) . 
 Smith suffered a heart attack on August 9 , 1961 , at his home in Washington , D.C. , and he died in the ambulance on the way to Walter Reed Army Hospital . Although entitled to a Special Full Honor Funeral , at the request of his widow , a simple joint service funeral was held , patterned after the one given to General Marshall in 1959 . She selected a grave site for her husband in Section 7 of Arlington National Cemetery close to Marshall 's grave . Mrs. Smith was buried next to him after her death in 1963 . Smith 's papers are in the Eisenhower Presidential Center in Abilene , Kansas . 
 = = Awards and decorations = = 
 Source : " In Memoriam . General Walter Bedell Smith . 5 October 1895 – 9 August 1961 . " . Central Intelligence Agency . Retrieved 31 August 2010 . 
 = Hide ( Doctor Who ) = 
 " Hide " is the ninth episode of the seventh series of the British science @-@ fiction drama Doctor Who , first broadcast on BBC One on 20 April 2013 . It was written by Neil Cross and directed by Jamie Payne . 
 In the episode , alien time traveller the Doctor ( Matt Smith ) and his companion Clara Oswald ( Jenna @-@ Louise Coleman ) visit a mansion in the 1970s owned by Professor Alec Palmer ( Dougray Scott ) , which appears to be haunted . Palmer 's assistant , Emma Grayling ( Jessica Raine ) , is an empath who is able to connect to the ghost . The Doctor discovers that the ghost is really a time traveller from the future ( Kemi @-@ Bo Jacobs ) who is trapped in a pocket universe , and he travels there to rescue her . There he discovers a bizarre " Crooked Man " ( Aiden Cook ) , who also seeks to escape the pocket universe and be reunited with its mate in the mansion , who had been the source of much of the mysterious activity in the mansion . 
 " Hide " was the first contribution to Doctor Who of writer Neil Cross , who was a fan of the show but had never had the time to write an episode . Cross wanted to write a scary episode and was inspired by Nigel Kneale 's works The Quatermass Experiment and The Stone Tape . The storyline of " Hide " was kept to a restricted setting and characters , although it was expanded thematically to flesh out the monster with a love story that paralleled that of Professor Palmer and Emma . The first to be filmed for the second half of the series — predating Coleman 's introduction as full @-@ time companion in the Christmas special — " Hide " began filming in late May 2012 at Margam Country Park , Gethin Forest , and a National Trust property at Tyntesfield . The episode was watched by 6 @.@ 61 million viewers in the UK and received generally positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 On a dark and stormy night in November 1974 , Professor Alec Palmer ( Dougray Scott ) and his assistant Emma Grayling ( Jessica Raine ) collect photographic evidence of a ghost in Caliburn House . Professor Palmer is using Emma 's strong psychic powers to create a connection that appears to summon the ghost . They are surprised by the arrival of the Doctor and Clara , who claim to be from military intelligence . The Doctor shows interest in the investigation and Clara points out that the ghost appears in the same position within each photograph . Clara speaks with Emma and reassures her that Emma 's feelings for Professor Palmer are reciprocated ; at the same time , Emma warns Clara about the Doctor , sensing " a sliver of ice " in his heart . 
 The Doctor and Clara find a location in the mansion which is noticeably colder than the rest of the house , and they feel as if they are being watched . Suddenly the house grows cold and Clara feels something holding her hand when there 's nothing there . The two race back to where the Professor and Emma are waiting to see Palmer 's equipment activating of its own accord . A thin black disc materializes in front of them and Emma senses something crying out for help before the disc vanishes and the house returns to normal . 
 The Doctor takes Clara in the TARDIS to examine their specific location at various points during Earth 's history and repeatedly takes photographs of the same area . Clara is dismayed by the Doctor 's lack of compassion at witnessing the whole of humanity 's history during these trips , complaining that " we 're all ghosts to you " . She also grumbles that she thinks that the TARDIS doesn 't like her . From his pictures the Doctor comes to the conclusion that the " ghost " is actually a pioneer time traveler named Hila <unk> . Hila was trapped in a pocket dimension where time moves more slowly ; for every second she is trapped in the pocket dimension one hundred thousand years pass in the normal world . The Doctor realizes that he cannot use the TARDIS to rescue her because the entropy of the pocket dimension would drain the TARDIS of its energy within seconds . Instead , the Doctor prepares a device which includes a blue crystal from Metebelis III to stimulate Emma 's psychic abilities to open a gateway to this pocket dimension . Once opened , the Doctor will travel across and rescue Hila with a harness anchored in the normal world . 
 Emma opens the gateway and the Doctor travels through where he finds himself on a small island of land floating in a void . He finds Hila and they are drawn to a vision of Caliburn House that Emma has generated for them as a beacon . At the same time , a creature follows them and chases them into the house . The Doctor locks the doors to slow the creature down , and Hila uses the harness to return to the normal world . The strain of keeping the gateway open causes Emma to collapse and the gateway closes , trapping the Doctor in the pocket universe . The TARDIS ' cloister bell begins to sound , and Clara races to the TARDIS to find it locked . She pleads with the device via its holographic voice interface to help her save the Doctor , and after initially refusing the TARDIS finally opens up and allows Clara in . As Emma reopens the gateway again with Palmer 's encouragement , the TARDIS briefly flies into the pocket universe and moves close to the ground , allowing the Doctor to jump and hang on before the creature can grab him . The Doctor and the TARDIS safely reappear in the normal world as Emma collapses from the pain and exhaustion . 
 Before leaving the next morning , the Doctor stops to ask Emma if she could sense anything unusual about Clara , but Emma reveals that Clara seems normal to her . The Doctor offers Hila a lift to any other place in history and concludes that she is a direct descendant of Emma and Palmer . He reasons that their relation resulted in a blood connection that helped them open the gateway to rescue her . While contemplating the bonds that love can create , the Doctor suddenly realises that there is another creature within Caliburn House . Just as Emma and Palmer were not part of a ghost story but a love story , the Doctor considers the same for the creatures — that the one trapped in the pocket universe has been trying to reunite with its mate . The Doctor asks Emma for a favour and they use Emma and the TARDIS to retrieve the other creature from the pocket universe . 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 Metebelis III has featured before when the Third Doctor ( Jon Pertwee ) took a blue crystal from the planet in The Green Death and returned it in Planet of the Spiders , although it was pronounced differently . The Doctor mentions the Eye of Harmony , which was introduced in The Deadly Assassin . The Doctor puts on the orange spacesuit he wore originally in " The Impossible Planet " / " The Satan Pit " and wore on a number of occasions up to " The Waters of Mars " when taking the photos . 
 = = Production = = 
 Writer Neil Cross was a Doctor Who fan , but had never had the time to write an episode . Executive producer Caroline Skinner , who was new with the seventh series , knew him and offered to work his schedule around writing an episode ; he was willing to do it . Executive producer and lead writer Steven Moffat was pleased to have Cross join , as he was a showrunner in his own right with Luther . Cross also wrote the seventh episode of the series , " The Rings of Akhaten " , which he was invited to do after the producers enjoyed " Hide " . The script process of " Hide " involved no face @-@ to @-@ face meeting , as Cross lives in New Zealand . However , he flew in with his family to watch the filming . 
 Cross wanted to write " a really old @-@ fashioned scary episode of Doctor Who " targeted especially at children nine to twelve , which was how he remembered Doctor Who at that age . He stated that " time travel and ghosts are echoes of one another . What is a ghost , if not a fragment caught in time ? " He aimed to show suspense and tension , as he felt it was more terrifying than " full @-@ on shock horror blood and gore " . Cross was inspired by The Quatermass Experiment and its sequels , and originally intended to have the Doctor meet Bernard Quatermass , though this was not possible , for copyright reasons . Cross was also inspired by Quatermass writer Nigel Kneale 's The Stone Tape , which was why he set the story in the 1970s . " Hide " was intended to be a " very small , very restricted ghost story " , but he was asked to make it bigger in the end . The different universe was present , but it was " smoke and mirrors " and the climax originally took place in the house , just in daylight and in the alternate world . The idea of the Crooked Man was something Cross said lurked in his imagination . The love story twist was added in later , because Moffat felt the monster should be more fleshed out , and Cross chose to mirror the love plot between Emma and the Professor . 
 Cross wanted to tell the story with " a small cast and as few locations as possible " . Jessica Raine was offered the part of Emma Grayling , and later said that she had not realised " what an institution Doctor Who is " until she arrived on set . She said it was produced very differently from her series Call the Midwife . Raine had also worked with Matt Smith before on a play . Cross said that Raine and co @-@ guest star Dougray Scott were good at filling out their characters , as he found it difficult to fully " evoke the history of a quite complex relationship " between their characters with just the script . Subsequent to filming her appearance in this episode , Raine was cast as Doctor Who 's original producer , Verity Lambert , in a docudrama made for the show 's 50th anniversary , An Adventure in Space and Time . 
 " Hide " was the first episode Jenna @-@ Louise Coleman filmed as Clara . Cross only had Coleman 's five @-@ minute audition for " Asylum of the Daleks " , in which she played a different but mysteriously linked character to work from , and some editing was done to her lines to make her sound less " bitchy " . Otherwise , the scripting process was " smooth " . The read @-@ through for " Hide " took place on 21 May 2012 ; filming began three days later , on the 24th . Scenes for the mansion were filmed at Margam Country Park in June . Tyntesfield , a National Trust property near Bristol was used as the mansion . The scenes in the forest were filmed in the Gethin Forest in Wales , with artificial mist . The Crooked Man 's movements were done in reverse and then played forward , to give it an unnatural movement . Director Jamie Payne had Cross 's children be " monster consultants " during filming and evaluate if it was scary enough . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode also contains several cultural references . Clara introduces herself and the Doctor as " Ghostbusters " , a reference to the film of the same name which would not be made for another nine years from the time at which the episode is set . The Doctor recites in his dialogue the lyrics " Birds do it , bees do it , even educated fleas do it " from " Let 's Do It , Let 's Fall in Love " by Cole Porter as he realises that the Crooked Man is just a lost lover . The Doctor also mentions the Baker Street <unk> , who assisted Sherlock Holmes in several of Arthur Conan Doyle 's stories . However , the Doctor is in fact alluding to the Special Operations Executive , a British World War II organisation that Professor Palmer was a part of . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Hide " was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on 20 April 2013 . Overnight ratings showed that the episode was watched by 5 million viewers live . When time @-@ shifted viewers were calculated , the figure rose to 6 @.@ 61 million viewers , making it the sixth most @-@ watched programme of the week on BBC One . In addition , " Hide " received 1 @.@ 53 million requests on the online BBC iPlayer for April , placing sixth for the month on the service . It also received an Appreciation Index of 85 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode received generally positive reviews . Neela Debnath of The Independent praised how the episode blended a haunted house story with a science fiction tale , highlighting the twist at the end of " ugly aliens have feelings too " . The Guardian 's online reviewer Dan Martin said that it had " the hallmarks of an episode that will be discussed for years to come " , including the guest stars and atmosphere . He praised the direction , but criticised some of the dialogue . 
 Daisy Bowie @-@ Sall of The Daily Telegraph gave " Hide " four out of five stars . Radio Times reviewer Patrick Mulkern gave " Hide " a positive review , highlighting Smith 's performance and the spookiness . While he praised Raine and Scott , he felt that Hila was " shortchanged " , and also criticised the " love story " ending . The A.V. Club 's Alasdair Wilkins gave the episode an A- , praising the way it changed direction and the subtle hints about the Doctor . 
 Morgan Jeffery of Digital Spy awarded the story four out of five stars , writing that it flowed better than Cross ' last episode , " The Rings of Akhaten " , and allowed for the exploration of several themes . While he was positive towards the way the story was tied back to a time traveller , he felt that the ending was " perhaps less interesting than what 's come before , simply because it feels more familiar " , though it was still " solid " . IGN 's Mark Snow gave the episode a score of 8 @.@ 4 out of 10 . He praised the smaller scope and focus on character , but wrote " the left @-@ field genre detour didn 't completely convince , and felt jarringly underwhelming considering the spooky set @-@ up , but at least it tried something unique " . Jordan Farley of SFX gave " Hide " four out of five stars . Farley felt that the science fiction element left too many answers , but said that it excelled as a love story . 
 In Doctor Who Magazine , Graham Kibble @-@ White gave " Hide " a positive review , describing it as " simply terrific . " He said that it was the first " out @-@ and @-@ out ghost story " in the series , and claimed that fact " wonderful . " Also , he described the story as " fascinating in the way it portrays the ghosts of the living , " and said it " transcends Neil Cross ' other story , The Rings of Akhaten , and even rises above the unfortunate mispronunciation of Metebelis Three . " 
 = John Dundas ( RAF officer ) = 
 John Charles Dundas , DFC & Bar ( 19 August 1915 – 28 November 1940 ) was a British Second World War fighter pilot and flying ace ( a title awarded to a pilot credited with shooting down at least five enemy aircraft in aerial combat ) with 12 victories . 
 Born in West Yorkshire in 1915 , the son of an aristocrat , Dundas was an able student and academic . After his graduation at the age of 21 , and the completion of his studies , he became a journalist and joined a newspaper in his home county . After two years , Dundas tired with life as a reporter , Dundas joined the Royal Auxiliary Air Force ( <unk> ) in July 1938 being commissioned as pilot officer in No. 609 ( West Riding ) Squadron and trained as a pilot at his own expense . His pilot training was complete in 1939 . 
 In May 1940 his unit , No. 609 Squadron RAF , took part in the Battle of France during which Dundas claimed his first two victories . Dundas remained with his squadron throughout the Battle of Britain claiming nine German aircraft shot down . On 9 October he was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross ( DFC ) for 10 victories . At the time of his last battle Dundas had been credited with 12 aircraft destroyed , two shared destroyed , four probably destroyed and five damaged . 
 During a battle over the English Channel on 28 November 1940 , Dundas is believed to have engaged and shot down Helmut Wick , the highest scoring ace of the Luftwaffe at that time . Moments later Dundas was also shot down into the sea . Both pilots vanished and remain missing in action . 
 = = Early life = = 
 John Charles Dundas was born in West Yorkshire in 1915 . He was related to two aristocratic families in the region ; he was the grandson of the Scottish Liberal politician John Dundas and the great grandson of Lawrence Dundas , 1st Earl of Zetland . Dundas was also related to the House of Halifax . 
 Dundas won a scholarship to Stowe School at the age of 12 . At the age of 17 he won a second scholarship to Christ Church , Oxford . Dundas graduated with a first class degree in Modern History before winning a further award that allowed him to study at both Sorbonne and the University of Heidelberg . 
 Dundas subsequently became a journalist for the Yorkshire Post and its editorial staff . Another who worked on the paper at the time , Richard Pape , recalled him as a man indifferent to his personal appearance , who wore frayed trousers , frequently had ink @-@ stained hands and would spill beer over himself when drinking , yet who was also popular with the newspaper 's younger , female staff members . 
 The newspaper sent him to Czechoslovakia during the Munich Crisis as apart of Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain 's entourage in 1938 before travelling to Rome to report on a meeting between Benito Mussolini , Chamberlain and Lord Halifax , the Foreign Secretary , to whom Dundas was related . 
 In July 1938 , at the age of 23 , Dundas was commissioned as a pilot officer in No. 609 Squadron RAF , a Royal Auxiliary Air Force squadron . Hugh and John 's godfather had set up the unit . At that time , the squadron was manned by part @-@ time civilians and was equipped with Hawker Hind bombers . It was converted from a bomber to a fighter aircraft squadron and later , in August 1939 , re @-@ equipped with the Supermarine Spitfire . John Dundas was well respected by his peers and he frequently flew his commanding officer 's Hind . 
 Dundas ' younger brother Hugh Dundas was also a fighter pilot . Hugh was wounded in August 1940 but recovered and eventually rose to the rank of group captain . Hugh survived the war and died in 1995 . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 = = = Battle of France = = = 
 Dundas was promoted to the rank of flying officer in January 1940 . 609 Squadron was positioned on the south coast of England in May 1940 , and was part of RAF Fighter Command operations to provide air cover for the Royal Navy and civilian vessels that were taking part in the Dunkirk evacuation . On 30 May , he flew his first patrol . The following day his squadron was put on 30 minutes readiness at RAF North Weald from 12 : 30 pm . At 14 : 00 His squadron took off , headed for Dunkirk at 20 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @,@ 100 m ) and engaged the enemy for the first time . In the next patrol , flying <unk> , Dundas engaged a German bomber formation and destroyed a Heinkel He 111 and a Dornier Do 17 . Dundas did not score again during the Battle of France . 
 = = = Battle of Britain = = = 
 Over the next few weeks 609 Squadron had moved from RAF Northolt to RAF Middle Wallop . It was from here Dundas gained his first victory of the Battle of Britain , in a phase known as the Kanalkampf . On 13 July , as section leader , Dundas led a patrol over a convoy . Failing to find the convoy the Spitfires engaged German aircraft at 15 @,@ 000 feet ( 4 @,@ 600 m ) near Portland , England . Flying in <unk> Dundas led a diving attack out of the sun against Messerschmitt Bf 110s . Dundas claimed a Bf 110 destroyed though the damaged aircraft and its wounded pilot , Leutnant <unk> , made it back to France , where the Bf 110 was severely damaged in a crash @-@ landing . In late July while night @-@ flying Dundas narrowly escaped with his life ; coming into land , his wing struck an artillery emplacement . He landed without injury . 
 Over the next few days , Dundas fought continuous battles with German formations . He noted the growing intensity of the air battles and assumed responsibility for the unit 's war diary in August . In this diary he remarked ; 
