 So far as 609 was concerned , the Nazi blitz began on the 8th August ... Four pilots engaged and accounted for five <unk> . 
 On 11 August 1940 Dundas flew <unk> . Taking off at 09 : 45 am he led yellow section out to sea near the Isle of Wight at 24 @,@ 000 feet ( 7 @,@ 300 m ) . Dundas and two other Spitfires ( including his wingman ) lost contact with his squadron . He saw nine Hawker Hurricanes below and in mid @-@ Channel but also noticed contrails above and climbed up to investigate . The aircraft were Bf 110s , with Messerschmitt Bf 109s providing top cover . Dundas led an attack , but lost the other Spitfires and attacked alone . He shot down a Bf 110 but received hits from German rear gunners . The Bf 110 was likely from I. / Zerstörergeschwader 2 ( " destroyer wing 2 " ) . 
 On 12 August the battle was repeated against Bf 109s and Bf 110s over the same area . Dundas shot down another Bf 110 . Shaking off a Bf 109 , he damaged another but was forced to disengage as more German fighters closed in and fuel and ammunition had run low . His fifth victory now made him a flying ace . 
 A major effort was made by the Luftwaffe on 13 August 1940 . Christened Adlertag ( " eagle day " ) , the Germans began a series of heavy air attacks . At 15 : 30 NO . 609 Squadron was scrambled , with Dundas flying in <unk> as number four in red section . At 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) he spotted German fighters . Red leader could not see the enemy and instructed Dundas to take the lead . Climbing into the sun at 18 @,@ 000 feet ( 5 @,@ 500 m ) , Dundas saw Junkers Ju 87 Stuka dive @-@ bombers below him . Attacking he shot down one of the Ju 87s from Sturzkampfgeschwader 2 ( " dive bombing wing 2 " ) . Dundas damaged another before being hit . He made a " dead @-@ stick " landing at RAF Warmwell . The German unit that 609 attacked was badly hit . One Staffel ( " squadron " ) of II . / StG 2 lost six out of nine Ju 87s . 
 The following day , 14 August 609 was patrolling Boscombe Down at 15 @,@ 000 feet ( 4 @,@ 600 m ) . Flying Spitfire <unk> , Dundas damaged a Bf 110 before it escaped into cloud . Directed onto a formation of Do 17s soon after he damaged one bomber before taking hits from defensive fire . Returning to base , Dundas spotted a He 111 with its wheels down and made a brief attack that caused it to crash 5 miles ( 8 km ) south @-@ west of his airfield . The machine belonged to the Stab Staffel from Kampfgeschwader 55 ( " bomber wing 55 " ) . 
 Dundas did not make another claim until 15 September , a date known as Battle of Britain Day . In the morning , piloting <unk> , he damaged a Do 17 , knocking out one of its engines . Flying another Spitfire , <unk> , he shared a Do 17 with his wingmen , Pilot Officer Mike Appleby , and the American pilot Vernon Keogh . On 24 September , he damaged a Do 17 while destroying a Bf 110 in <unk> . In the same Spitfire Dundas claimed a Bf 109 shot down on 26 September and damaged another Do 17 . The following day he claimed a Bf 110 destroyed near Bristol . 
 Eleven days later Dundas claimed a probable victory against a Bf 110 , after a battle with German aircraft six miles north of RAF Warmwell at 16 : 30 . Despite firing a 12 – 14 second burst at the enemy fighter , he did not see it crash . During the battle Dundas was hit in the leg when a cannon round exploded in his cockpit , but flew again the next day . The Spitfire Dundas flew that day , R6915 , still exists , having been preserved by the Imperial War Museum . By 9 October 1940 , his score stood at 10 and he was award the Distinguished Flying Cross . 
 A week later on 15 October 1940 Dundas destroyed another Bf 110 in <unk> at 14 @,@ 000 feet ( 4 @,@ 300 m ) over Christchurch , Dorset . Evading a Bf 109 attack , Dundas ' radio failed and he was unable to re @-@ group his section . Noticing Bf 110s above at 18 @,@ 000 – 20 @,@ 000 feet ( 5 @,@ 500 – 6 @,@ 100 m ) he climbed to attack ; his victim crashed at Bournemouth . He was then chased by a pair of Bf 109s but evaded them . His victory was <unk> 99th aerial victory . 
 = = = Channel Front and last battle = = = 
 By now Dundas was recognised as the highest scoring pilot of the unit , he was highly regarded by his comrades and was well @-@ liked . He passed on experience to younger pilots and was always willing to discuss tactics , particularly with Squadron Leader Michael Robinson . Dundas , even by this early stage in the war , was the only member of the original ' A ' ( Auxiliary ) pilots still with 609 . Dundas lamented the few who remained were the " sole champions of the Auxiliary attitude " . 
 On 27 November , a Ju 88 was reported near Southampton . Dundas asked permission to intercept but was refused . Approaching his squadron leader , Dundas asked to take his section up for a practice flight ; Robinson did not expecting anything untoward and gave permission . At 22 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @,@ 700 m ) Dundas ' section made contact , chasing the German over the Isle of Wight at full throttle – reaching 2 @,@ 600 revs . The Ju 88 had a healthy head start . But Dundas closed with it and got to within 400 yards ( 370 m ) , 15 miles ( 24 km ) off Cherbourg , France . Dundas fired <unk> 's guns for five seconds while the German gunners put up a determined defence . The Ju 88 's port engine caught fire and it dived down steeply , out of control . Now in sight of an airfield filled with Bf 109s , Dundas decided to retreat . He was credited with a probable victory upon his return . 
 The next day , 28 November , was busy for 609 Squadron . Several scrambles and alerts came through against Bf 109s . The last came at approximately 15 : 30 Greenwich Mean Time . Dundas was once again piloting <unk> . Two squadrons , 152 Squadron and 609 made contact with Bf 109s from Jagdgeschwader 2 ( " fighter wing 2 " ) , led by the most successful German ace of the war thus far — Helmut Wick . Minutes after contact had been made and the battle joined , Flight Lieutenant Fieldsend heard the familiar voice of Dundas shout " I 've finished a 109 — Whoopee ! " . Squadron Leader Robinson congratulated Dundas but nothing was heard from Dundas , or his wingman Pilot Officer Paul A. Baillon , flying <unk> . 
 It is believed Wick had shot down Baillon in a diving attack for his 56th aerial victory . Baillon managed to bail out , but was never recovered . <unk> distracted , Wick flew across Dundas ' path . Dundas fired a short burst , hitting Wick 's Bf 109 at around 17 : 00 German time , over the sea near the Isle of Wight . It has also been suggested that Wick fell victim to Pilot Officer Eric Marrs , who also made a claim in the battle . Wick was seen to bail out of his aircraft , but he was not rescued and his body was never found . Moments later Dundas was probably shot down by Wick 's wingman , Rudolf Pflanz who claimed a victory and saw the Spitfire crash into the sea with the pilot still inside . Like Wick , Dundas ' body was never found . On 24 December 1940 , Dundas was posthumously awarded a second DFC . It was announced on 7 January 1941 in the London <unk> with the citation : 
 " Flight Lieutenant Dundas has continued to engage the enemy with outstanding success and has now destroyed at least twelve of their aircraft and damaged many more . On one occasion he pursued an enemy aircraft from Winchester to Cherbourg , finally destroying it . He has shown a magnificent fighting spirit which has inspired the other members of his flight " . 
 = = = Memorial and R6915 = = = 
 As an airman who has no known grave , he is commemorated on the Air Forces Memorial at Runnymede ( Panel 4 ) . A small memorial to Dundas is on a cliff @-@ top path east of Freshwater Bay on the Isle of <unk> close to the point where his final battle took place . It was installed in November 2000 , on the 60th anniversary of his death . 
 One of the aircraft Dundas flew in combat , Supermarine Spitfire number R6915 , still exists and is preserved in the Imperial War Museum in London . In this aircraft , he claimed a probable kill over a Bf 110 on 7 October 1940 . 
 = = List of victories = = 
 A list of Dundas ' claims from 31 May – 28 November 1940 . 
 = Hung for the Holidays = 
 Hung for the Holidays is a Christmas EP by William Hung , released on October 19 , 2004 . The EP was recorded during the summer of 2004 . Like his previous album , Inspiration , the EP contains a number of cover tracks , mostly Christmas songs , as well as holiday greetings from Hung . The EP was not as commercially successful as his previous album and was panned by music critics . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 During a performance at a May 2004 Blue Jays @-@ Rangers game in Toronto , Hung revealed that he would begin work on a second album . He said that it " will include original songs and cover songs ... There will be more bands this time . That 's all I can tell you . " Hung also announced that he was taking singing lessons before starting the recording sessions . When interviewed by MTV News in June 2004 , he said that recording was " gonna be a much slower process than the first time . Right now I 'm concentrating on just picking songs ... starting to practice them and things like that . " Producers submitted the songs to Koch Records , and Hung said in the interview that the label had " some ideas and stuff , and we 'll see . It 's still early — very , very early . " 
 Although Hung for the Holidays was originally scheduled for release in September 2004 , the release was moved to October . The album includes a hidden bonus track , a cover of Queen 's " We Are the Champions " , which was released as a single on June 16 , 2004 . A music video for the track debuted on the Game Show Network on June 15 to promote the channel 's " Summer of Champions " campaign . Hung performed the song live at the Universal Studios CityWalk in Universal City , California that same night . He also signed copies at f.y.e. to promote the album . 
 A limited number of copies for the album included a fold @-@ out Christmas ornament . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Hung for the Holidays sold only 35 @,@ 000 copies . It only reached number 22 on the Billboard Independent Albums chart , and did not make the Billboard 200 chart unlike the first album , Inspiration . 
 Allmusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine gave the album one out of five stars , calling it " the cheapest @-@ sounding record in recent memory ; it sounds as if it was recorded in less time that it takes to play . " He did note Hung 's improvement as a vocalist , saying that " he sings with more confidence and at least vaguely sings something resembling the melody . " The New York Daily News called the album a cult classic . 
 The EP 's cover art was ranked number 2 on <unk> 's " 50 Worst Album Covers " , saying that it looks " like a scene from ‘ South Park ’ . " It was also one of Gigwise 's " Worst Christmas Album Covers Ever " . In 2013 , The Huffington Post listed Hung 's cover of " Little Drummer Boy " from Inspiration number three on their " 17 Best Worst Christmas Songs Ever " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Allie Reynolds = 
 Allie Pierce Reynolds ( February 10 , 1917 – December 26 , 1994 ) was an American Major League Baseball ( MLB ) pitcher . Reynolds pitched 13 @-@ years for the Cleveland Indians ( 1942 – 46 ) and New York Yankees ( 1947 – 54 ) . A member of the Creek nation , Reynolds was nicknamed " Superchief " . 
 Reynolds attended Capitol Hill High School and the Oklahoma Agricultural & Mechanical College ( A & M ) , where he was a multi @-@ sport athlete . Henry Iba , baseball coach of the Oklahoma A & M baseball team , discovered Reynolds while he was practicing his javelin throws . After excelling at baseball and American football at Oklahoma A & M , Reynolds turned to professional baseball . 
 During his MLB career , Reynolds had a 182 – 107 win – loss record , 3 @.@ 30 earned run average , and 1 @,@ 423 strikeouts . He was an All @-@ Star and World Series champion for six seasons . In 1951 , he won the Hickok Belt as the top American professional athlete of the year . He also has received consideration for induction into the National Baseball Hall of Fame , though he has not been elected . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Reynolds was born on February 10 , 1917 , in Bethany , Oklahoma . His father was a preacher in the Church of the Nazarene . His mother was a member of the Muscogee ( Creek ) Nation . As a young child , he didn 't play baseball , as his father did not approve of playing sports on Sundays . Reynolds threatened to run away from home if his father wouldn 't let him play football ; his father relented . 
 Reynolds attended Capitol Hill High School in Oklahoma City , where he starred in American football as a quarterback and running back , and at track and field , where he excelled at the javelin throw and 100 yard dash . He played fast @-@ pitch softball for his father 's church team , which did not play on Sundays . There , he also began dating Dale <unk> Jones , who was named Capitol Hill High School 's most outstanding female athlete ; she had previously dated Reynolds ' younger brother . The couple married on July 7 , 1935 . 
 Oklahoma Agricultural & Mechanical College ( A & M ) provided Reynolds a scholarship to attend and participate in track . Reynolds also played on the football team . He majored in education and graduated with a lifetime certification to teach public school in Oklahoma . Henry Iba , coach of the baseball team , first noticed Reynolds when he was practicing his javelin throws . Iba asked Reynolds to throw batting practice while his pitchers recovered from sore arms . Without taking any warmup pitches , he struck out the first four batters without any making contact . Reynolds was the team 's captain playing as an outfielder – pitcher during his senior year in 1938 , and led the team to victory in the state conference baseball championship . 
 Reynolds was drafted by the New York Giants of the National Football League as a halfback . Since Reynolds preferred baseball to football , and felt he could earn more money playing baseball , Reynolds opted not to sign . 
 = = = Minor leagues ( 1939 – 1942 ) = = = 
 Iba was friends with a scout , Hugh Alexander , who worked for the Cleveland Indians . After Iba recommended Reynolds , the Indians signed Reynolds as an amateur free agent for a $ 1 @,@ 000 signing bonus ( $ 17 @,@ 012 in current dollar terms ) . He was assigned to the Springfield Indians of the Class @-@ C Middle Atlantic League . In 1940 , he pitched for the Cedar Rapids Raiders of the Class @-@ B Illinois – Indiana – Iowa League . Reynolds played right field for the Raiders when he wasn 't pitching , as roster sizes were reduced to seventeen as a result of the Great Depression . The Indians wanted to convert Reynolds to catcher due to his athleticism , but Reynolds refused to change positions . 
 Reynolds started the 1941 season with the Wilkes @-@ Barre Barons of the Class @-@ A Eastern League , but was demoted to Cedar Rapids after three appearances . Becoming increasingly homesick and not wanting to spend his entire professional career in the minor leagues , Reynolds considered retiring after the 1942 season if he wasn 't promoted to Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . In 1942 , Reynolds went 18 – 7 with a 1 @.@ 56 earned run average ( ERA ) , eleven shutouts , twenty @-@ one complete games , and 193 strikeouts in 231 innings pitched , earning a promotion to the major leagues to finish the 1942 season . 
 = = MLB career = = 
 = = = Cleveland Indians ( 1942 – 1946 ) = = = 
 Reynolds appeared in his first MLB game on September 17 , 1942 , making two relief appearances for the Indians that season . With ace Bob Feller serving in the military during World War II , the Indians hoped that Reynolds would star for the Indians . Reynolds took a pre @-@ enlistment physical , but due to his family and football injuries , he did not enlist in the military and wasn 't eligible to be drafted . 
 He began the 1943 season in the Indians ' bullpen , making his first start on June 20 . Indians player @-@ manager Lou Boudreau used Reynolds as a reliever in between starts due to his resiliency . Reynolds led the American League ( AL ) in strikeouts in 1943 with 151 and hits allowed per nine innings pitched with 6 @.@ 34 ; however , he was third in walks allowed with 109 . Reynolds led the AL in walks with 130 in 1945 . 
 During his five years with the Indians he was primarily used as a starting pitcher , although he did display the versatility that would become his hallmark . He pitched in 139 games for the Indians , starting 100 and finishing 27 . Early evidence of his versatility is demonstrated by his 41 complete games , 9 shutouts and 8 saves . 
 = = = New York Yankees ( 1947 – 1954 ) = = = 
 On October 11 , 1946 , Reynolds was traded to the New York Yankees for second baseman Joe Gordon . A possible trade was speculated throughout the 1946 season . The Yankees had a wealth of infield talent , but needed pitching help . The Indians were managed by player @-@ manager Lou Boudreau who played shortstop , but they needed help at second base . Cleveland wanted Gordon and offered the Yankees any pitcher on their staff , with the exception of Bob Feller . Yankee executive Larry MacPhail discussed the potential trade with Yankees star Joe DiMaggio . Though MacPhail initially wanted Red Embree , DiMaggio replied : " Take Reynolds . I 'm a fastball hitter , but he can buzz his hard one by me any time he has a mind to . " 
 He promptly became the Yankees ' best pitcher , recording the highest winning percentage in the AL in his first season as a Yankee . In 1949 , joined by Vic Raschi and Eddie Lopat , he was a star of a Yankee team that won the first of five consecutive league championships , a feat that had never been achieved before . He played many important roles for those teams . In his first six years with the Yankees he averaged over 232 innings , 17 @.@ 5 wins , and 14 complete games . As a swingman , he averaged 26 games started and 9 games finished per season . 
 In 1950 , Reynolds won 16 games , even though he pitched with bone chips in his elbow for the entire season . His remarkable 1951 season began under very difficult conditions . Floating chips in his elbow prevented him from throwing a single pitch in spring training . He was resigned to having surgery which would have cost him at least half of the season . Dr. George Bennett of Johns Hopkins University recommended against surgery . Reynolds appeared in his first game one week after the season started . 
 On July 12 and September 28 , 1951 , Reynolds threw no @-@ hitters . He was the first American League pitcher to throw two no @-@ hitters in a season and only the second player to do so in baseball history , after Johnny Vander Meer threw consecutive no @-@ hitters in 1938 . This is still the MLB record for most no @-@ hitters in a single season , a record that Reynolds and Vander Meer share with Virgil Trucks ( 1952 ) , Nolan Ryan ( 1973 ) , Roy Halladay ( 2010 ) , and Max Scherzer ( 2015 ) . 
 His first no @-@ hitter , on July 12 , 1951 , was a 1 – 0 defeat of his former team , the Indians . Gene Woodling 's solo home run was the only run scored during the game . Reynolds retired the last 17 Indians he faced . Only four Indians reached base ; he walked three and Bobby Ávila reached on an error by Phil Rizzuto . It was his third shutout of Cleveland that season . Bob Feller also threw a strong game and didn 't allow a hit until the sixth inning , when Mickey Mantle doubled . Feller threw a complete game and allowed only four hits . Feller had thrown a no @-@ hitter eleven days earlier . 
 His second no @-@ hitter , on September 28 , 1951 , was an 8 – 0 defeat of the Boston Red Sox which allowed the Yankees to clinch at least a tie of the American League pennant . The Yankees clinched the pennant in the second half of the September 28 double @-@ header . Reynolds struck out nine hitters . He walked four , but " not one Boston batter seemed close to getting a hit . " With two outs in the ninth inning , Ted Williams hit a pop fly to Yankees catcher Yogi Berra . Berra dropped the ball and prolonged the at bat against the dangerous Williams . Reynolds remained calm , telling Berra , " Don 't worry Yogi , we 'll get him again . " Reynolds was correct and Williams once again popped up , but Berra caught this one . In the spring of 1953 , Stengel made Reynolds predominantly a reliever , although he notched 15 starts and 5 complete <unk> , because of Reynolds ' ability to pitch without much rest and to use his blazing fastball late in the Yankees ' afternoon games when the shadows crept over the mound . However , Reynolds injured his back in July when the team bus was on the way to the train station after a game in Philadelphia — robbing Reynolds of his control . During the ' 53 World Series — his final one — Reynolds started the opener at home and struggled because of his back injury , but recovered to appear in two more as a reliever — winning the sixth and final game of the Series . 
 Reynolds led the AL in shutouts in 1951 with seven . In 1952 , he had his greatest single season performance . He won twenty games for the only time in his career ( against eight losses ) . He led the American League in earned run average ( 2 @.@ 06 ) , strikeouts ( 160 ) , and shutouts ( 6 ) . He also saved six games . 
 He also played in the MLB All @-@ Star Games of 1949 , 50 , 52 , 53 , and 54 ( no official ALL @-@ Star selection or game was held in 1945 ) . With the Yankees , Reynolds reached the World Series in 1947 , 49 , 50 , 51 , 52 , and 53 . Reynolds had a 7 – 2 record with a 2 @.@ 79 ERA over 77 innings in the World Series . He made six relief appearances in the World Series , recording a win or save in each of them , including the clinching games of the 1950 , 1952 and 1953 series . He also batted .308 in 26 at @-@ bats in his World Series appearances . 
 Reynolds won the Hickok Belt as the top professional athlete of the year in 1951 . He also was voted the Player Of Year in 1951 by the New York chapter of the Baseball Writers ' Association of America , and finished third in voting for the AL Most Valuable Player Award , behind Berra and Ned Garver of the St. Louis Browns . In 1952 , he was the MVP runner @-@ up to Bobby Shantz of the Philadelphia Athletics . 
 Reynolds suffered a back injury when the Yankees ' charter bus crashed into an overpass in Philadelphia during the 1953 season . He retired after the following season as a result of the injury . 
 = = Nickname = = 
 David Dupree explained a common view of how he was given the nickname , Superchief , " he was part Creek Indian and always in command on the pitching mound . " At this time it was very common for baseball players with Native American heritage to be called ' Chief . ' Jeffrey Powers @-@ Beck explains that in the early half of the 20th century , " it appeared virtually impossible for a baseball player of admitted native origin to be known popularly as anything but " Chief . " 
 Former teammate and American League President Bobby Brown noted his heritage and a popular railroad influenced the baseball media to use the nickname , " But for some of you too young to remember , the Santa Fe Railroad at that time had a crack train ( call the Superchief ) that ran from California to Chicago , and it was known for its elegance , its power and its speed . " We always felt the name applied to Allie for the same reasons . " 
 Brown notes that Reynolds was not comfortable with the nickname because of the importance of the ' chief ' title . He also explained that his teammates called him Chief . " When we talked with him , we called him Allie ... But when he wasn 't in the room , he was referred to as the Chief , because we felt he was the one at the top , the real leader . " 
 = = Honors = = 
 The Yankees dedicated a plaque in Reynolds ' honor , to hang in Monument Park at Yankee Stadium on August 26 , 1989 . Reynolds was inducted into the Oklahoma Sports Hall of Fame in 1986 . Oklahoma State renamed their baseball stadium after Reynolds . 
 In 1993 , Reynolds received the Jim Thorpe Lifetime Achievement Award from the Jim Thorpe Association . The association established the " Allie P. Reynolds Award " in 1998 . It is presented annually to the Oklahoma " high school senior who best reflects the spirit of Allie Reynolds by maintaining the highest standards in scholarship , leadership , civic contributions and character . " 
 = = = Baseball Hall of Fame candidacy = = = 
 When Reynolds was eligible for election to the National Baseball Hall of Fame by the Baseball Writers ' Association of America , his highest vote percentage was 33 @.@ 6 % in the 1968 balloting , short of the 75 percent required for election . That year , he finished ahead of future Hall of Famers Arky Vaughan , Pee Wee Reese , Phil Rizzuto , George Kell , Hal Newhouser , Bob Lemon , and Bobby Doerr . 
 Reynolds was named as one of the ten former players that began their careers before 1943 to be considered by the Hall of Fame 's Veterans Committee for induction into the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 2009 . He received eight votes , one shy of the nine votes required for election . Reynolds was on the new Golden Era Committee ballot in 2011 for 2012 , ( replaced the Veterans Committee ) receiving fewer than three votes ( 12 votes are required for election to the Hall of Fame ) . The Committee meets and votes every three years on ten candidates selected from the 1947 to 1972 era . He was not a candidate in 2014 ( none were elected by the committee ) . 
 Rob Neyer , in evaluating Reynolds ' candidacy , believes Reynolds was " probably as good " as Jesse Haines , Lefty Gomez and Waite Hoyt , who have all been inducted into the Hall of Fame . However , he added that " they 're all marginals . " Adapting Bill James ' sabermetric statistic known as win shares , Dr. Michael Hoban , a professor emeritus of mathematics at City University of New York , found that Reynolds falls short of his threshold for induction , and scored lower than Haines and Gomez . 
 = = Post @-@ playing career = = 
 Reynolds became a successful oil businessman after his playing career . He began investing in oil wells during his playing career . 
 Despite retiring , Reynolds was allowed to remain a member of the Major League Baseball Players Association ( MLBPA ) . He served as the AL player representative in the negotiations with owners to create the MLBPA pension plan . He later sued administrators of the pension plan in federal court for " whittling away " the rights of retired players . 
 In 1969 , Reynolds was named the President of the American Association , a Class AAA baseball league . The Association had been dormant for the previous six years . Reynolds served as president until 1971 , when he resigned to spend more time with his family and due to competing business interests . He was also the President of the National Hall of Fame for Famous American Indians in Anadarko , Oklahoma , from 1978 until his death . 
 Reynolds was inducted into the Oklahoma Hall of Fame in 1991 . 
 Reynolds died in Oklahoma City due to complications of lymphoma and diabetes . He was survived by a son , a daughter , eight grandchildren and ten great @-@ grandchildren . 
 = Peter Raw = 
 Air Commodore Peter Frank Raw , DSO , DFC , AFC ( 5 June 1922 – 14 July 1988 ) was a Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) pilot and officer . He joined the RAAF in 1941 , and served as a flight instructor , bomber pilot and the commander of a communications unit during World War II . After the war he became a specialist navigator . Raw was appointed the commander of No. 2 Squadron in January 1953 , but temporarily left this position for part of the year to participate in the 1953 London to Christchurch air race , in which he placed second . He returned to lead No. 2 Squadron at the end of 1953 and held this position until 1955 . 
 Raw subsequently served in staff and diplomatic roles until 1965 , when he took command of No. 82 Wing . Between May 1966 and April 1967 , he served as the air support coordinator for the Australian forces in South Vietnam ; his initial refusal to commit RAAF helicopters to assist the Australian Army force that was heavily engaged during the Battle of Long Tan in August 1966 generated lasting controversy . Raw served in various staff and training positions until 1972 , when he was appointed the commander of RAAF Base Butterworth . He returned to Australia in 1976 and retired from the RAAF two years later . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Raw was born in the Melbourne suburb of Glen Huntly on 5 June 1922 to Alfred and Eleanor Raw . He was educated at <unk> Road State School and , later , Melbourne High School . Raw began an electrical apprenticeship at Carlton & United Breweries in 1939 , and studied part @-@ time at Melbourne Technical College . 
 Raw attempted to join the Royal Australian Navy as an electrical artificer in 1941 , but was rejected and told to reapply in twelve months . Instead , he joined the RAAF on 15 August that year . He departed Sydney bound for Southern Rhodesia in November 1941 to be trained as a pilot under the Empire Air Training Scheme . Arriving in Southern Rhodesia in January 1942 , Raw completed his training and was commissioned as an officer in December that year . He subsequently served as a flying instructor in Southern Rhodesia . In May 1944 Raw became engaged to Dorothy Maggs , whose family lived in Southern Rhodesia and South Africa . 
 In mid @-@ 1944 , Raw was transferred to Egypt and undertook an operational conversion course that prepared him to fly Consolidated B @-@ 24 Liberator heavy bombers in combat . In July that year he was posted to No. 178 Squadron RAF , a British B @-@ 24 Liberator unit based near Foggia in southern Italy . While serving with this squadron , Raw took part in operations in the eastern Mediterranean region as well as Hungary , Romania and Yugoslavia . During August 1944 the long @-@ range bomber units controlled by No. 205 Group RAF , including No. 178 Squadron , undertook several risky operations as part of the Warsaw airlift to supply the Polish Home Army during the Warsaw Uprising . Raw participated in three of these flights . His bomber was the only aircraft to deliver its cargo to Warsaw during a mission on 16 August ; Raw subsequently received the Polish Cross of Valour in February 1945 for this achievement . One of his other flights to Warsaw was conducted on 1 September , but Raw was unable to see the city at the time he dropped the load of supplies due to bad weather . 
 During a raid on the northern Italian city of Verona on 12 October 1944 , Raw 's aircraft was hit by two anti @-@ aircraft shells that destroyed its hydraulics system and an engine , wounded the radio operator and opened 166 holes in the fuselage . Despite this damage , Raw was able to return the B @-@ 24 safely to its base . He suffered frostbite to his feet , as damage to the plane 's nose caused icy winds to enter the cockpit . 
 In December 1944 , Raw was promoted to flight lieutenant . He assumed command of No. 205 Group Communication Squadron in 1945 . In February that year he was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross . Following the end of the war , Raw returned to Australia in November 1945 and was demobilised on 17 January 1946 . He married Maggs at St Mary 's Church of England in Caulfield on the 19th of the month ; they had a daughter . 
 Raw rejoined the RAAF in May 1946 , and retained his wartime rank of flight lieutenant . Between 1947 and October 1949 he was posted to Britain to undertake specialist training in navigation . On his return to Australia , Raw served as an instructor at the RAAF 's School of Air Navigation , and later held training positions at No. 78 Wing and No. 2 Operational Training Unit ( No. 2 OTU ) . During 1952 he served as the acting commanding officer of No. 2 OTU , which at the time was responsible for training pilots for combat in the Korean War with No. 77 Squadron . 
 = = Commanding officer = = 
 In January 1953 Raw , who was by now a squadron leader , was appointed the commanding officer of No. 2 Squadron . On 23 February he also became the initial commander of No. 1 Long Range Flight , which had been formed to participate in the 1953 London to Christchurch air race using two of the RAAF 's new English Electric Canberra bombers . He handed this position to Wing Commander Derek Cuming in May , but remained a member of the flight . In July Raw temporarily vacated his position at No. 2 Squadron so he could focus on preparing for the air race . The Canberras piloted by Raw and Cuming departed Australia for the United Kingdom on 10 September , and the race began on 9 October . Raw 's aircraft suffered damage to its nose wheel while landing to refuel at Woomera , but was able to be repaired . This accident cost Raw the lead in the race . He arrived at Christchurch at 04 : 32 on 10 October , finishing second behind a RAF Canberra piloted by Flight Lieutenant Roland ( Monty ) Burton . 
 Raw returned to lead No. 2 Squadron on 18 December 1953 . During this month the unit became the RAAF 's first jet bomber @-@ equipped squadron when it replaced its Avro Lincoln aircraft with Canberras ; in doing so the squadron was built around a nucleus of personnel who had served with No. 1 Long Range Flight . Later in December a Canberra piloted by Raw established a new speed record for a flight between New Zealand and Australia , completing the crossing between Auckland and Sydney in two hours and 49 minutes . On 31 December 1953 Raw was awarded the Air Force Cross for his role in the London to Christchurch air race ; the decoration was presented to him by Queen Elizabeth II at Brisbane on 10 March 1954 . A September 1954 story in The Courier @-@ Mail described Raw as being a " shy young commander " . 
 After completing his term as commanding officer of No. 2 Squadron on 11 July 1955 , Raw was posted to the UK to undertake training at the Royal Air Force Flying College . Upon his return to Australia in January 1956 , he was promoted to wing commander and posted to a planning role at RAAF Headquarters in Melbourne . From December that year he served as a liaison officer to the RAAF force supporting the British nuclear weapons tests in the Montebello Islands off the coast of Western Australia . In 1957 Raw was posted to the Joint Planning staff . During 1958 he and Dorothy divorced ; Raw subsequently married Helen Dorothy Hammond on 21 June that year at St Margaret 's Presbyterian Church in Balaclava . This marriage produced another daughter and a son . 
 In December 1960 Raw joined the directing staff of the RAAF Staff College in Canberra . In 1963 he became the first president of the amateur Canberra Astronomical Society . Later in 1963 he undertook further training at the United States Armed Forces Staff College , after which he assumed the position of assistant air attaché in the Australian Embassy in Washington , D.C. In February 1965 Raw assumed command of No. 82 Wing , which controlled all of the RAAF 's bomber squadrons . He was raised to acting group captain at this time , and was confirmed in this rank during January the next year . 
 = = Vietnam War and subsequent career = = 
 In May 1966 , Raw was posted to South Vietnam as the air support commander for the 1st Australian Task Force ( 1 ATF ) . This force was composed primarily of Australian Army units , and had recently arrived in the country as part of an expansion of Australia 's commitment to the Vietnam War . Although he did not have any background in air / land warfare , Raw 's main responsibility in this position was to coordinate helicopter support for the task force 's two infantry battalions . He was given only two weeks to prepare for the role between handing over command of No. 82 Wing and departing for South Vietnam ; during this period he received briefings on the situation in the country and began to familiarise himself with the operations of the RAAF 's tactical transport units . Historian Alan Stephens has written that " Group Captain Raw 's background as one of the RAAF 's most respected bomber leaders was inappropriate for the job of task force air commander : too often he struggled to make the timely decisions demanded by tactical air / land operations " . Stephens has also stated that the RAAF 's Air Board should have selected an officer with more relevant experience for the role . 
 In addition to his responsibilities as air support commander , Raw was also the commander of the RAAF units stationed at Vũng Tàu and the overall deputy commander of the RAAF force in South Vietnam . He regularly flew operational missions with the UH @-@ 1 Iroquois helicopter @-@ equipped No. 9 Squadron as well as No. 35 Squadron , which operated DHC @-@ 4 Caribou tactical transports . 
 At the time Raw arrived in South Vietnam there were tensions between the Army and RAAF over the employment of No. 9 Squadron , with the Army perceiving that the unit was not providing enough support to 1 ATF . Raw believed that the Task Force headquarters had unrealistic expectations as the Army officers did not understand the difficulty of maintaining and operating helicopters . 
 Raw 's role in the Battle of Long Tan on 18 August 1966 was controversial . During the engagement , he initially refused to allow No. 9 Squadron to fly ammunition to D Company of the 6th Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment after it was heavily engaged and nearly surrounded , as he believed that the heavy rain at the time made flying too dangerous . The commander of the 1st Australian Task Force , Brigadier David Jackson , was angered by this decision and argued that the risk of losing a few helicopters was unimportant compared to the possibility of having 200 infantrymen killed if the unit was overrun due to a lack of ammunition and other supplies . Raw eventually allowed the resupply flight to proceed after the most experienced of the helicopter pilots present stated that the mission needed to be flown regardless of its risk . 
 As a result of his actions during the Battle of Long Tan , the relationship between Raw and senior Army commanders in 1 ATF was " most difficult " throughout the remainder of his time in South Vietnam . Nevertheless , he eventually managed to educate the senior Army officers within the 1st Australian Task Force about the constraints which affected helicopter operations , leading to a better working relationship between the services . In November 1965 Raw took part in Operation Hayman , which was conducted against Viet Cong forces on Long Son Island . During this operation he flew in with the assault troops and remained on the island to direct air missions , including while under sniper fire . Raw completed his tour of duty in South Vietnam in April 1967 and returned to Australia . In November that year he was awarded the Distinguished Service Order for his role in the war . 
 The disagreement between Jackson and Raw during the Battle of Long Tan had long @-@ term effects on the structure of the Australian Defence Force . Raw 's initial refusal to commit helicopters contributed to the development of a long @-@ lasting perception among some Army officers that the RAAF was reluctant to support their service in battle . Some members of the Army also wrongly believed that RAAF pilots had refused to conduct the supply mission , and only did so after the squadron was threatened with being withdrawn from South Vietnam and they were spoken to forcefully by Raw . Influenced by this perception , the Army subsequently advocated for the RAAF 's battlefield helicopters to be transferred to its control , and this finally occurred in the late 1980s . 
 Upon his return to Australia , Raw was appointed Director of Operational Requirements at the Department of Air . In 1969 he headed an evaluation team tasked with selecting a heavy lift helicopter for the RAAF . The team was faced with a choice between the Boeing CH @-@ 47 Chinook and Sikorsky CH @-@ 53 Sea Stallion , and Raw 's final report recommended acquiring CH @-@ 53s . The RAAF 's governing Air Board and senior Army officers rejected this recommendation , and CH @-@ 47s were purchased instead after Air Vice Marshal Charles Read also reviewed the performance of the two helicopters and concluded that the Chinook better met Australia 's needs . Raw remained the Director of Operational Requirements until 1970 when he became the commandant of the RAAF Staff College . In 1972 he was promoted to air commodore and assumed command of RAAF Base Butterworth in Malaysia . Raw held this position until 1976 when he returned to Australia and became the senior training and staff officer in the headquarters of RAAF Support Command . This was his final military posting ; he retired from the Air Force on 28 February 1978 . 
 In a newspaper interview shortly before his retirement , Raw identified the 1953 London @-@ to @-@ Christchurch air race as being a highlight of his career . He also observed that RAAF personnel needed higher levels of professional qualifications than had been the case when he joined the Air Force , and there was a greater specialisation in particular fields . Raw further stated that there was a need to improve the defences of northern Australia on the grounds that " political situations can change overnight " . On 15 July 1988 Raw died of lymphoma at Richmond in Melbourne . He was subsequently cremated . Raw 's Australian Dictionary of Biography entry summarises his career by noting that he was " considered to be genial , exuberant , popular and efficient " and " proved to be the type of officer who worked best under pressure " . 
 = Cillian Murphy = 
 Cillian Murphy ( / <unk> / ; born 25 May 1976 ) is an Irish actor of stage and screen . Since making his debut in his home country in the late 1990s , Murphy has also become a presence in British and American cinema — noted by critics for his performances in a wide range of roles . 
 A native of Cork , Murphy began his performing career as a rock musician . After turning down a record deal , he made his professional acting debut in the play Disco Pigs in 1996 . While continuing with stage work he also began appearing in independent films , first coming to international attention in 2002 as the hero of Danny Boyle 's post @-@ apocalyptic film 28 Days Later . Murphy 's profile continued to grow in 2005 when he appeared in a series of successful films : firstly as the Scarecrow in Christopher Nolan 's 2005 blockbuster Batman Begins — a role he reprised in The Dark Knight ( 2008 ) and The Dark Knight Rises ( 2012 ) — and secondly in the action @-@ thriller Red Eye ( 2005 ) . For his performance as a transgender woman in Breakfast on Pluto ( 2005 ) , Murphy received a Golden Globe award nomination for Best Actor in a Musical or Comedy . 
 In 2006 , Murphy played the lead role in Ken Loach 's Palme d 'Or @-@ winning film The Wind That Shakes the Barley . He teamed up again with Boyle for the science @-@ fiction film Sunshine ( 2007 ) , and with Nolan for the highly successful thriller Inception ( 2010 ) . Since 2013 , Murphy has played the lead in the BBC gangster series Peaky Blinders . He has continued to work on stage , and won the Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Solo Performance for Misterman in 2011 . Murphy lives with his wife and two children in Monkstown , Dublin . 
 = = Early life , education , and music = = 
 Murphy was born in Douglas and raised in <unk> , two suburbs of Cork . His father , Brendan , works for the Irish Department of Education , and his mother is a French teacher . Not only are his parents educators , but his aunts and uncles are also teachers , as was his grandfather . Musicianship also runs in the family , and Murphy started playing music and writing songs at the age of 10 . 
 Murphy was raised Roman Catholic and attended the Catholic school Presentation Brothers College , where he did well academically but got into trouble often , sometimes being suspended , until he decided in his fourth year that misbehaving was not worth the hassle . Not keen on sport , a major part of life at PBC , Murphy found that creative pursuits were not fully nurtured at the school . Still , it was there that he got his first taste of performing , when he participated in a drama module presented by Pat Kiernan , the director of the Corcadorca Theatre Company . Murphy later described the experience as a " huge high " and a " fully alive " feeling that he set out to chase . His English teacher , the poet and novelist William Wall , encouraged him to pursue acting ; but , at this stage , to Murphy , performing meant dreams of becoming a rock star . 
 In his late teens and early twenties , Murphy worked towards a career as a rock musician , playing guitar in several bands alongside his brother <unk> . The Beatles @-@ obsessed pair named their most successful band " The Sons of Mr. <unk> " , after a 1969 song by another idol , Frank Zappa . Murphy sang and played guitar in the band , which he has said " specialised in wacky lyrics and endless guitar solos " . In 1996 , The Sons of Mr. <unk> were offered a five @-@ album record deal by Acid Jazz Records , but they did not sign the contract due to Murphy 's brother still being in secondary school and the little money involved in ceding the rights to Murphy 's compositions to the record label . Murphy confessed that " I 'm very glad in retrospect that we didn 't sign because you kind of sign away your life to a label and the whole of your music " . 
 Also in 1996 , Murphy began studying law at University College Cork ( UCC ) , but he failed his first year exams because , as he put it , he had " no ambitions to do it " . Not only was he busy with his band , but he has said that he knew within days after starting at UCC that law was not what he wanted to do . After seeing Corcadorca 's stage production of A Clockwork Orange , directed by Kiernan , acting had begun to pique his interest . His first major role was in the UCC Drama Society 's amateur production of Observe the Sons of Ulster Marching Towards the Somme , also starring Irish American comedian , Des Bishop . Murphy also played the lead in a UCC Drama production of Little Shop of Horrors , which was performed in the Cork Opera House . According to Murphy , his primary motivation then was to party and meet women , not to begin an acting career . Nonetheless , he began to move away from working as a rock musician , about which he later remarked , " I think there 's such a thing as a performance gene . If it 's in your DNA it needs to come out . For me it originally came out through music , then segued into acting and came out through there . I always needed to get up and perform . " 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = Early work = = = 
 Murphy hounded Pat Kiernan until he got an audition at Corcadorca , and in September 1996 , he made his professional acting debut on the stage , playing the part of a volatile Cork teenager in Enda Walsh 's Disco Pigs . Walsh recalled meeting and discovering Murphy : " There was something about him – he was incredibly enigmatic and he would walk into a room with real presence and you 'd go , " My God " . It had nothing to do with those bloody eyes that everyone 's going on about all the time . " Murphy observed , " I was unbelievably cocky and had nothing to lose , and it suited the part , I suppose . " Originally intended to run for three weeks in Cork , Disco Pigs ended up touring throughout Europe , Canada and Australia for two years , and Murphy left both university and his band . Though he had intended to go back to playing music , he secured representation after his first agent caught a performance of Disco Pigs , and his acting career began to take off . 
 Murphy began appearing in independent films , such as John Carney 's On the Edge , and in short films , including the Irish / English language short <unk> an <unk> , He also appeared in the BBC television mini @-@ series adaptation of The Way We Live Now . In addition to Disco Pigs , he starred in many other plays , including Shakespeare 's Much Ado About Nothing , Neil LaBute 's The Shape of Things , and Chekhov 's The Seagull ; Murphy considers this stage work to have been his " training ground . " Murphy also reprised his Disco Pigs role for the 2001 indie film version by Kirsten Sheridan , in which he was able to showcase his singing . During this period , he moved from Cork , relocating first to Dublin for a few years , then to London in 2001 . In 1999 he had a role as a soldier in William Boyd 's The Trench , a film about a group of young British soldiers on the eve of the Battle of the Somme . 
 In 2002 , Murphy achieved mainstream success when he was cast in the leading role in Danny Boyle 's horror film 28 Days Later . He portrayed pandemic survivor Jim who is " perplexed to find himself alone in the desolate , post @-@ apocalyptic world " after waking from a coma in a London hospital , 28 days later . Casting director of the film Gail Stevens suggested that Boyle audition Murphy for the role , having been impressed with his performance in Disco Pigs . Stevens stated that it was only after seeing his slender physique during filming that they decided to feature him fully nude at the beginning of the film . She recalled that Murphy was shy on set with the tendency to look slightly away from the camera , but enthused that he had a " dreamy , slightly de @-@ energised , floating quality that is fantastic for the film " . His performance , which Richard Cosgrove considers to be " extremely convincing " , earned him nominations for Best Newcomer at the 8th Empire Awards and Breakthrough Male Performance at the 2004 MTV Movie Awards . Released in the UK in late 2002 , by the following July 28 Days Later had become a sleeper hit in America and a major success worldwide , putting Murphy before a mass audience for the first time . Murphy professed that he considered the film to be much deeper than a zombie or horror film , expressing surprise at the film 's success and that American audiences responded well to its content and violence . 
 In late 2003 , Murphy starred as a lovelorn , hapless supermarket <unk> who plots a bank heist with Colin Farrell in Intermission , which became the highest @-@ grossing Irish independent film in Irish box office history ( until The Wind That Shakes the Barley broke the record in 2006 ) . Reflecting on his roles in 28 Days Later and the " sad @-@ sack Dublin shelf @-@ stacker " in Intermission , Sarah Lyall of the International Herald Tribune stated that Murphy brought " fluent ease to the roles he takes on , a graceful and wholly believable intensity . His delicate good looks have , as much as his acting prowess , caused people to mark him as Ireland 's next Colin Farrell , albeit one who seems less likely to be caught <unk> around or brawling drunkenly at premieres " . Murphy had a minor supporting role in the successful Hollywood period drama Cold Mountain . He portrayed a deserting soldier who shares a grim scene with Jude Law 's character , and was only on location in Romania for a week . Murphy stated that it was a " massive production " , remarking that director Anthony Minghella was the calmest director he 'd ever met . Murphy also had a role as a butcher in Girl with a Pearl Earring with Scarlett Johansson and Colin Firth . 
 In 2004 , Murphy toured Ireland as the " androgynous , naive Christy " in the titular role of The Playboy of the Western World , a Druid Theatre Company production under the direction of Garry Hynes , who had previously directed Murphy in Seán O 'Casey 's Juno and the <unk> and John Murphy 's The Country Boy , also for Druid . 
 = = = Critical success = = = 
 Wider recognition came to Murphy in 2005 when he starred as Dr. Jonathan Crane in Christopher Nolan 's Batman Begins . Originally asked to audition for the role of Bruce Wayne / Batman in Batman Begins , Murphy never saw himself as having the right physique for the superhero , but leapt at the chance to connect with director Christopher Nolan . Though the lead went to Christian Bale , Nolan was so impressed with Murphy that he gave him the supporting role of Dr. Jonathan Crane , whose alter ego is supervillain Scarecrow . Nolan told Spin , " He has the most extraordinary eyes , and I kept trying to invent excuses for him to take his glasses off in close @-@ ups . " Murphy achieved further mainstream success that year by portraying operative Jackson <unk> who <unk> Rachel McAdams on an overnight flight in Wes Craven 's thriller , Red Eye . New York Times film critic Manohla Dargis asserted that Murphy made " a picture @-@ perfect villain " and that his " baby blues look cold enough to freeze water and his wolfish leer suggests its own terrors . " The film was favourably reviewed and earned almost $ 100 million worldwide . 
 Murphy received several awards nominations for his 2005 bad guy turns , among them a nomination as Best Villain at the 2006 MTV Movie Awards for Batman Begins . Entertainment Weekly ranked him among its 2005 " Summer MVPs " , a cover story list of 10 entertainers with outstanding breakthrough performances . The New Yorker 's David Denby wrote , " Cillian Murphy , who has angelic looks that can turn sinister , is one of the most elegantly seductive monsters in recent movies . " 
 In late 2005 , Murphy starred as Patrick / " Kitten " Braden , a transgender Irish foundling in search of her mother , in Neil Jordan 's dramedy Breakfast on Pluto , based on the novel of the same title by Patrick McCabe . Set against the Breakfast on Pluto ’ s kaleidoscopic backdrop of 1970s glitter rock fashion , magic shows , red light districts and <unk> violence , Murphy transforms from androgynous teen to high drag blond bombshell . He had auditioned for the role in 2001 , and though Jordan liked him for the part , The Crying Game director was hesitant to revisit transgender and <unk> issues . For several years , Murphy lobbied Jordan to make the film before the actor became too old to play the part . In 2004 , Murphy prepared for the role by meeting a transvestite who dressed him and took him clubbing with other transvestites . The role required " serious primping " with eyebrow plucking and chest and leg hair removal , and Roger Ebert noted the way that Murphy played the character with a " bemused and hopeful voice " . The San Francisco Chronicle 's Ruthe Stein said of his performance , " Murphy projects enormous energy onscreen , as he 's already shown in 28 Days Later ... and Red Eye . He 's supremely well cast as the androgynous Kitten ... [ and ] smoothly makes the transition from broad comedy to drama . He delivers Kitten 's favourite line , ' Oh serious , serious , serious ! ' with the full implications of its dual meaning . " While even lukewarm reviews of Breakfast on Pluto still tended to praise Murphy 's performance highly , a few critics dissented : The Village Voice , which panned the film , found him " unconvincing " and overly cute . Murphy was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Musical or Comedy for Breakfast on Pluto and won the 4th Irish Film and Television Academy Best Actor Award . Premiere cited his performance as Kitten in their " The 24 Finest Performances of 2005 " feature . 
 In 2006 ( 2007 in North America ) , Murphy starred in Ken Loach 's film about the Irish War of Independence and Civil War , The Wind That Shakes the Barley , which won the Palme d 'Or at the 2006 Cannes Film Festival and became the most successful Irish independent film at the Irish box office . Murphy was especially keen on appearing in the film due to his intimate connections to Cork , where it was shot . Murphy had to audition six times for the role of Damien O 'Donovan , a young doctor turned revolutionary , before winning the part . Murphy considered it a very special privilege to have been given the role and stated that he was " tremendously proud " of the film , remarking that the " memories run very , very deep – the politics , the divisions and everybody has stories of family members who were caught up in the struggle . " Critic Denby noted Murphy 's moments of deep stillness and idiosyncrasies in portraying the character . Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times wrote , " Murphy is especially good at playing the zealotry as well as the soul @-@ searching and the regret , at showing us a man who is eaten up alive because he 's forced to act in ways that are contrary to his background and his training . " GQ UK presented Murphy with their 2006 Actor of the Year award for his work in The Wind That Shakes the Barley . 
 = = = 2006 – 2010 = = = 
 Murphy returned to the stage opposite Neve Campbell at the New Ambassadors Theatre in London 's West End from November 2006 to February 2007 , playing the lead role of John <unk> 's play Love Song . Theatre Record described his character of Beane as a " <unk> cranky " mentally unstable " sentimentalised lonely hero " , noting how he magnetically , with " all blue eyes and twitching hands " , moves " comically from painfully shy " wallpaper " to garrulous , amorous male " . Variety considered his performance to be " as magnetic onstage as onscreen " , remarking that his " unhurried puzzlement pulls the slight preciousness in the character ’ s idiot @-@ savant naivete back from the brink " . 
 In April 2007 ( July in North America ) , he starred onscreen as a physicist @-@ astronaut charged with re @-@ igniting the sun in the science fiction movie Sunshine , which teamed him up again with director Danny Boyle . Murphy appeared opposite Lucy Liu in Paul Soter 's romantic comedy Watching the Detectives ; the indie film premiered at the 2007 Tribeca Film Festival and was then released straight to DVD . Murphy had starred as Richard Neville , editor of the psychedelic radical underground magazine Oz in the film , Hippie Hippie Shake , which was shot in 2007 , but the project , due to much delay , was eventually shelved in 2011 . 
 Murphy made a brief re @-@ appearance as the Scarecrow in Nolan 's The Dark Knight ( 2008 ) , the sequel to Batman Begins , before starring in The Edge of Love — about a love quadrangle involving the poet Dylan Thomas — with Keira Knightley , Sienna Miller and Matthew Rhys . Murphy also made a debut appearance in another medium — on a postage stamp : in July 2008 , the Irish Post Office , An Post , released a series of four stamps paying homage to the creativity of films recently produced in Ireland , including one featuring Murphy in a still from The Wind That Shakes the Barley . In 2009 , Murphy starred opposite rock singer Feist and actor David Fox in The Water , directed by Kevin Drew of Broken Social Scene . The 15 @-@ minute Canadian short film , released online in April 2009 , is nearly silent until the Feist song of the same title plays close to the end . Murphy was attracted to the role as a fan of Broken Social Scene and the prospect of making a silent movie , which he considered to be the " hardest test for any actor " . Murphy also starred in Perrier 's Bounty , a crime dramedy from the makers of Intermission , in which he portrayed a petty criminal on the run from a gangster played by Brendan Gleeson . 
 The direct @-@ to @-@ video psychological thriller Peacock ( 2010 ) , co @-@ starring Ellen Page , Susan Sarandon and Bill Pullman , starred Murphy as a man with a split personality who fools people into believing he is also his own wife . Christian Toto of The Washington Times referred to the film as " a handsomely mounted psychological drama with an arresting lead turn by Cillian Murphy " , and noted that although Murphy wasn 't a stranger to playing in drag , his work in the film set a " new standard for gender @-@ bending performances " . Murphy next starred alongside Leonardo DiCaprio , Ellen Page and Joseph Gordon @-@ Levitt in Christopher Nolan 's acclaimed blockbuster Inception ( 2010 ) , playing entrepreneur Robert Fischer , Jr . , whose mind is infiltrated by DiCaprio 's character Cobb to convince him to dissolve his business . David Kyle Johnson noted that it was the " third Nolan film in five years where Cillian Murphy 's character spends on @-@ screen time with a cloth bag over his head " . Murphy also had uncredited cameo appearance as programmer Edward Dillinger Jr , son of original Tron antagonist Ed Dillinger ( David Warner ) in Tron : Legacy , released in December 2010 , and the same year he also made a return to theatre in From Galway to Broadway and back again , which was a stage show that celebrated the Druid Theatre Company 's 35th birthday . 
 = = = 2011 – present = = = 
 In 2011 , Murphy performed in the stage monodrama , Misterman , written and directed by Enda Walsh , whom Murphy previously worked with on Disco Pigs . The production was initially put on in Galway and was then taken to St. Ann 's Warehouse in Brooklyn , New York City . Murphy commented of the role , " The live nature of it makes it so dangerous . You 're only there because of the good will of the audience , and that 's compounded by its being a one @-@ man show " . His performance earned critical acclaim , garnering Irish Times Theatre Award and a Drama Desk Award . <unk> Lyall of the International Herald Tribune described Murphy 's character Thomas Magill to be a " complicated mixture of sympathetic and not nice at all – deeply wounded , but with a dangerous , skewed moral code " , praising his ability to mimic wickedly . Lyall noted Murphy 's " unusual ability to create and inhabit creepy yet fascinating characters from the big screen to the small stage in the intense one @-@ man show Misterman " , and documented that on one evening the " theater was flooded , not with applause but with silence " , eventually culminating in a standing ovation at his powerful performance . Also in 2011 , Murphy played the lead in the British horror Retreat , which had a limited release , and appeared in the science fiction film In Time , starring Justin Timberlake and Amanda Seyfried , which was poorly reviewed . 
 The following year , Murphy starred in Red Lights with Robert De Niro and Sigourney Weaver . He played Tom Buckley , the assistant to Weaver 's character who is a paranormal investigator . Murphy considered working with De Niro to have been one of the most intimidating moments in his career . He remarked : " My first scene when I come to visit him my character is supposed to be terrified and intimidated . There was no acting involved . The man has presence . You can 't act presence . I 'll never have that . Watching him use it ... when you put a camera on it , it just becomes something else . " The film was panned by critics and did not make its budget back at the box office . Murphy then went on to reprise his role as the Scarecrow for the third time in The Dark Knight Rises , and had a supporting role as Mike , the favourite teacher of the main character Skunk , in the British independent film Broken . His performance earned him a British Independent Film Award for Best Supporting Actor nomination . 
 Since 2013 , Murphy has played the lead role in the BBC television series Peaky Blinders , a series about a criminal gang in post @-@ <unk> Birmingham . He explained his enthusiasm for the show in an interview with The Independent : " [ the scripts ] were so compelling and confident , and the character was so rich and complex , layered and contradictory . I was like , ' I have to do this . ' " Peaky Blinders was critically praised and a ratings success . A second series began broadcasting on the BBC in October 2014 . Also in 2013 , Murphy made his directorial debut with a music video for the band Money 's single Hold Me Forever . The video features dancers from the English National Ballet and was filmed at The Old Vic Theatre in London . 
 In 2014 , he co @-@ starred in the film <unk> , with Jennifer Connelly , and Wally Pfister 's Transcendence , which also starred Johnny Depp and Rebecca Hall . Murphy also reunited with Enda Walsh for the play <unk> in 2014 . He starred in Ron Howard 's 2015 film , In the Heart of the Sea , which also features Benjamin Walker and Chris Hemsworth . 
 Cillian contributes spoken vocals to the tracks " 8 : 58 " and " The Clock " from Paul Hartnoll 's 8 : 58 . The two previously met whilst Paul was scoring the second season of Peaky Blinders . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In mid @-@ 2004 , Murphy married his long @-@ time girlfriend , Yvonne McGuinness , an artist whom he had met in 1996 at one of his rock band 's shows . The couple live in South County Dublin with their two sons , Malachy ( born in 2005 ) and Aran Murphy ( born in 2007 ) . Murphy often works in or near the city and has expressed no desire to move to Hollywood . He prefers not to speak about his personal life and did not appear on any live TV chat shows until 2010 , when he was a guest on The Late Late Show on Ireland 's RTÉ to promote Perrier 's Bounty yet still remained reserved . He does not have a stylist or a personal publicist , travels without an entourage , and often attends premieres alone . Reserved and private , Murphy professes a lack of interest in the celebrity scene , finding the red carpet experience " a challenge ... and not one I want to overcome " . He intentionally practices a lifestyle that will not interest the tabloids : " I haven 't created any controversy , I don 't sleep around , I don 't go and fall down drunk " . Murphy is friends with fellow Irish actors Colin Farrell and Liam Neeson , looking up to the latter like a " surrogate movie dad " . But primarily , Murphy 's close friendships are those he made before becoming a star . 
 Music is still an important part of Murphy 's life . In 2004 , he said , " The only extravagant thing about my lifestyle is my stereo system , buying music and going to gigs " . He no longer plays in a rock band , but regularly plays music with friends and on his own , and still writes songs . Murphy does not plan to start another band : " Even if I was good , the very notion of being an actor with a rock band on the side would mean I 'd never be taken seriously " . Murphy is also a dedicated runner . In 2015 , he was named one of GQ 's 50 best dressed British men . 
 Regarding religion , Murphy had previously been verging on agnostic , but confirmed his atheism after researching his role as a nuclear physicist / astronaut in the science fiction film Sunshine . He is a longtime vegetarian , not due to any moral objection to the killing of animals , but because of qualms about unhealthy agribusiness practices . His political activity includes participating in the 2007 Rock the Vote Ireland campaign , targeting young voters for the general election , and campaigning for the rights of the homeless with the organization Focus Ireland . In February 2012 , he wrote a message of support to the former Vita Cortex workers involved in a sit @-@ in at their plant , congratulating them for " highlighting [ what ] is hugely important to us all as a nation " . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Match Point = 
 Match Point is a 2005 film written and directed by Woody Allen , starring Jonathan Rhys Meyers , Scarlett Johansson , Emily Mortimer , Matthew Goode , Brian Cox , and Penelope Wilton . Rhys Meyers 's character marries into a wealthy family , but his social position is threatened by his affair with his brother @-@ in @-@ law 's girlfriend , played by Johansson . The film treats themes of morality , greed , and the roles of lust , money , and luck in life , leading many to compare it to Allen 's earlier film Crimes and Misdemeanors ( 1989 ) . It was produced and filmed in London after Allen had difficulty finding financial support for the film in New York . The agreement obliged him to make it there using a cast and crew mostly from the United Kingdom . Allen quickly re @-@ wrote the script , which was originally set in New York , for a British setting . 
 Critics in the United States praised the film and its British setting , and welcomed it as a return to form for Allen . In contrast , reviewers from the United Kingdom treated Match Point less favourably , finding fault with the locations and , especially , the idiom of the dialogue . Allen was also nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Chris Wilton , a recently retired tennis professional , is taken on as an instructor at an upmarket club in London . He strikes up a friendship with a wealthy pupil , Tom Hewett , after discovering their common affinity for opera . Tom 's older sister , Chloe , is smitten with Chris and the two begin dating . During a family gathering , Chris meets Tom 's American fiancée , Nola Rice , and they are instantly attracted to each other . Tom 's mother , Eleanor , does not approve of her son 's relationship with Nola , a struggling actress , which is a source of tension in the family . Chloe encourages her father , Alec , to give Chris a job as an executive in one of his companies ; he begins to be accepted into the family and marriage is discussed . 
 During a storm , after having her choice of profession attacked by Eleanor , Nola leaves the house to be alone . Chris follows Nola outside and confesses his feelings for her , and they passionately have sex in a wheat @-@ field . Feeling guilty , Nola treats this as an accident ; Chris , however , wants an ongoing clandestine relationship . Chris and Chloe marry , but Tom ends his relationship with Nola . 
 Chloe , to her distress , does not become pregnant immediately . Chris vainly tries to track down Nola , but meets her by chance some time later at the Tate Modern . He discreetly asks for her number and they begin an affair . While Chris is spending time with his wife 's family , Nola calls to inform him that she is pregnant . Panicked , Chris asks her to get an abortion , but she refuses , saying that she wants to raise the child with him . Chris becomes distant from Chloe , who suspects he is having an affair , which he denies . Nola urges Chris to divorce his wife , and he feels trapped and finds himself lying to Chloe as well as to Nola . Nola confronts him at his work and he just barely escapes public detection . 
 Soon after , Chris takes a shotgun from his father @-@ in @-@ law 's home and carries it to his office in a tennis bag . On leaving , he calls Nola on her mobile to tell her he has good news for her . He goes to Nola 's building and gains entry into the apartment of her neighbor , Mrs. Eastby . He shoots and kills her , then stages a burglary by ransacking the room and stealing some jewelry and drugs . As Nola returns he shoots her in the stairwell . He then takes a taxi to the theater to watch a musical with Chloe . Scotland Yard investigates the crime and concludes it was committed by a drug addict stealing money . The following day , the murder is in the news . Chris returns the shotgun and he and Chloe announce that she is pregnant with Chris 's child . 
 Detective Mike Banner invites Chris for an interview in relation to the murder . Beforehand , Chris throws Mrs. Eastby 's jewelry and drugs into the river , but by chance her ring bounces on the railing and falls to the pavement . At the police station , Chris lies about his relationship with Nola , but Banner surprises him with her diary , in which he is featured extensively . He confesses his affair to Banner but denies any link to the murder , and appeals to the detectives not to involve him any more in their investigation , as news of the affair may well end his marriage just as he and his wife are expecting a baby . 
 Later one night , Chris sees apparitions of Nola and Mrs. Eastby , who tell him to be ready for the consequences of his actions . He replies that his crimes , though wrong , had been " necessary " , and that he is able to suppress his guilt . At the same time , Banner dreams that Chris committed the murders . His theory is discredited by his partner , Dowd , who informs him that a drug peddler found murdered on the streets had Mrs. Eastby 's ring in his pocket . Banner and Dowd consider the case closed and abandon any further investigation . The film ends with Chloe giving birth to a baby boy named Terrence , and his uncle blessing him not with greatness , but luck , which his father ( Chris ) has in spades , since he was able to avoid being punished for his crimes . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Jonathan Rhys Meyers as Chris Wilton 
 Scarlett Johansson as Nola Rice 
 Emily Mortimer as Chloe Hewett Wilton 
 Matthew Goode as Tom Hewett 
 Brian Cox as Alec Hewett 
 Penelope Wilton as Eleanor Hewett 
 Ewen Bremner as Inspector Dowd 
 James Nesbitt as Detective Mike Banner 
 Rupert Penry @-@ Jones as Henry 
 Margaret Tyzack as Mrs. Eastby 
 Alexander Armstrong as Mr. Townsend 
 Geoffrey Streatfeild as Alan Sinclair 
 Miranda Raison as Heather 
 Rose Keegan as Carol 
 Colin Salmon as Ian 
 Toby Kebbell as Policeman 
 = = Production = = 
 The script was originally set in The Hamptons , a wealthy enclave in New York , but was transferred to London when Allen found financing for the film there . The film was partly funded by BBC Films , which required that he make the film in the UK with largely local cast and crew . In an interview with The Guardian , Allen explained that he was allowed " the same kind of creative liberal attitude that I 'm used to " , in London . He complained that the American studio system was not interested in making small films — " They only want these $ 100 million pictures that make $ 500m . " A further change was required when Kate Winslet , who was supposed to play the part of Nola Rice , resigned a week before filming was scheduled to begin . Scarlett Johansson was offered the part , and accepted , but the character had to be re @-@ written as an American . According to Allen , " It was not a problem ... It took about an hour . " 
 Filming took place in London in the summer of 2004 over a seven @-@ week schedule . Some of the city 's landmarks , such as Tate Modern , Norman Foster 's " Gherkin " building at 30 St Mary Axe , Richard Rogers ' Lloyd 's building , the Royal Opera House , the Palace of Westminster , Blackfriars Bridge , and Cambridge Circus form a backdrop to the film . The tennis club scenes were filmed at the Queen 's Club . One of the University of Westminster 's Marylebone campus lecture theatres was also used . UK @-@ based graffiti artist Banksy 's Girl With Balloon appears briefly in the film . One of the Parliament View apartments at Lambeth Bridge was used for interiors of Chris and Chloe 's apartment . The restaurant scene was shot at the Covent Garden Hotel . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The film 's opening voiceover from Wilton introduces its themes of chance and fate , which he characterises as simple luck , to him all @-@ important . The sequence establishes the protagonist as an introvert , a man who mediates his experience of the world through deliberation , and positions the film 's subjective perspective through his narrative eyes . <unk> <unk> argued that this hero , as an opera lover , maintains a sense of distance from the outer world and that ramifications therein pale in comparison to the purity of interior experience . 
 The film is a debate with Fyodor Dostoyevsky 's Crime and Punishment , which Wilton is seen reading early on , identifying him with the anti @-@ hero Raskolnikov . That character is a brooding loner who kills two women to prove that he is a superior being , but is racked by guilt and eventually admits all to a dogged sleuth , and he is finally redeemed by punishment , the love of a poor girl , and the discovery of God . Wilton is a brooding loner who kills a poor girl who loves him because he considers his interests superior to those around him , knows little guilt , and avoids detection through luck . Allen signals his intentions with more superficial similarities : both killers attempt to cover their crime by faking a robbery , both are almost caught by a painter 's unexpected appearance in the stairwell , and both sleuths play cat and mouse with the suspect . Allen argues , unlike Dostoyevsky , that there is neither God , nor punishment , nor love to provide redemption . The theme of parody and reversal of Dostoyevsky 's motifs and subject matter has been visited by Allen before , in his film Love and Death . In Love and Death , the dialogue and scenarios parody Russian novels , particularly those by Dostoyevsky and Tolstoy , such as The Brothers Karamazov , Crime and Punishment , The Gambler , The Idiot , and War and Peace . In Match Point , Allen moves the theme from parody to the more direct engagement of Dostoyevsky 's motifs and narratives . 
 Allen revisits some of the themes he had explored in Crimes and Misdemeanors ( 1989 ) , such as the existence of justice in the universe . Both films feature a murder of an unwanted mistress , and " offer a depressing view on fate , fidelity , and the nature of man " . That film 's protagonist , Judah Rosenthal , is an affluent member of the upper @-@ middle class having an extramarital affair . After he tries to break the affair off , his mistress blackmails him and threatens to go to his wife . Soon , Rosenthal decides to murder his mistress , but is racked with guilt over violating his moral code . Eventually , he learns to ignore his guilt and go on as though nothing has happened . Philip French compared the two films ' plots and themes in The Observer , and characterised Match Point 's as a " clever twist on the themes of chance and fate " . 
 Money is an important motivator for the characters : both Wilton and Nola come from modest backgrounds and wish to enter the Hewett family using their sex appeal . That family 's secure position is demonstrated by their large country estate , and , early on in their relationships , both prospective spouses are supported by Mr. Hewett , Wilton with a position on " one of his companies " and Nola reports being " swept off her feet " by Hewett 's attention and presents . Roger Ebert posed the film 's underlying question as " To what degree are we prepared to set aside our moral qualms in order to indulge in greed and selfishness ? Wilton is facing a choice between greed and lust , but his sweet wife , Chloe , herself has no qualms about having her father essentially " buy " her husband for her . " 
 Jean @-@ Baptiste Morain , writing in Les Inrockuptibles , noticed how the strong do not accept their own weakness and have no qualms about perpetuating an injustice to defend their interests . This wider political sense is , he argued , accentuated by its English setting where class differences are more marked than in the USA . The film pits passion and the dream of happiness against ambition and <unk> , resolving the dispute with a pitiless blow that disallows all chance of justice . 
 = = Musical accompaniment = = 
 The film 's soundtrack consists almost entirely of pre @-@ World War I 78 rpm recordings of opera arias sung by the Italian tenor Enrico Caruso . This bold use , despite Caruso 's variety of musical styles , constitutes a first for Allen . Opera has been used before in his work as an indicator of social class , such as in Husbands and Wives ( 1992 ) . In Match Point , the arias and opera extracts make an ironic commentary on the actions of the characters and sometimes foreshadow developments in the movie 's narrative . Furthermore , given Wilton 's status as an introvert and opera enthusiast himself , the accompaniment emphasises his detachment from his crime . 
 The 10 @-@ minute murder scene which forms the film 's climax is scored with almost the whole of the Act II duet between Otello and Iago from Giuseppe Verdi 's Otello . This in an atypical scoring for a film , since Verdi 's piece is not an aria , but a dramatic dialogue in which the words are as important as the music . Thus the astute spectator will be presented with two dramatic narratives to follow ; Allen is not respecting traditional conventions of cinematic accompaniment , since the score 's events do not match the story unfolding onscreen . 
 Arias and extracts include work by Verdi ( in particular Macbeth , La traviata , Il trovatore and Rigoletto ) , Gaetano Donizetti 's L 'elisir d 'amore , Georges Bizet 's Les pêcheurs de perles , and Antônio Carlos Gomes 's Salvator Rosa sung by Caruso . The romanza " Una <unk> <unk> " from L 'elisir d 'amore is featured repeatedly , including during the opening credits . The Caruso arias are supplemented by diegetic music from contemporary performances that the characters attend over the course of the film . There are scenes at the Royal Opera House and elsewhere performed by opera singers ( scenes from La traviata performed by Janis Kelly and Alan Oke , from Rigoletto performed by Mary Hegarty ) , accompanied by a piano ( performed by Tim Lole ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Allen has said that Match Point is one of his few " A @-@ films " , and even " arguably may be the best film that I 've made . This is strictly accidental , it just happened to come out right . You know , I try to make them all good , but some come out and some don 't . With this one everything seemed to come out right . The actors fell in , the photography fell in and the story clicked . I caught a lot of breaks ! " 
 The film was screened out of competition at the 2005 Cannes Film Festival . Match Point broke a streak of box office flops for Allen : it earned $ 85 @,@ 306 @,@ 374 worldwide , of which $ 23 @,@ 151 @,@ 529 was in its North American run . Allen was also nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay . 
 The film received generally strong reviews from critics , particularly in the United States . Rotten Tomatoes reported that the film received 77 % positive reviews , based on 209 reviews from American critics . The critical consensus states : " Woody Allen 's sharpest film in years , Match Point is a taut , philosophical thriller about class and infidelity . " Metacritic reported the film had an average score of 72 out of 100 , and thus " generally favourable reviews " , based on 40 professional critics . Match Point has also been the object of scholarship . Joseph Henry Vogel argued the film is exemplary of <unk> as an economic school of thought . Several critics and commentators have compared elements of the film to the central plot of George Stevens ' film A Place in the Sun ( 1951 ) , but with some characters in reverse positions . 
 Roger Ebert gave the film a full four stars , and considered it among the four best Allen films . He described it as having a " terrible fascination that lasts all the way through " , and ranked it with Allen 's best work . Empire magazine gave the film four stars out of five , calling it Allen 's best of his last half a dozen films , and recommended it even to those who are not fans of the director . Reviewers in the United Kingdom were generally less favourable . Philip French , writing in The Observer , criticised Allen 's grasp of British idiom and the film 's lack of humour , especially considering that two comic actors from the UK were cast in minor roles . Also , he called the dialogue " rather lumbering " and said that " the lexicons of neither the City financier nor the London constable are used convincingly . " Tim Robey , writing in The Daily Telegraph , disdained the claim that the film was Allen 's return to form . Although he acknowledged that the consensus was stronger this time , he called it " as flat @-@ footed a movie as Allen has ever made , a decent idea scuppered by a setting – London – which he treats with the peculiarly tin @-@ eared reverence of a visitor who only thinks he knows his way around . " He called Johansson 's character " the chain @-@ smoking mistress from hell " , but said the tennis net analogy has an " unexpectedly crisp payoff " and that the last act was well handled . Reviewing for the BBC 's website , Andy Jacobs awarded the film four stars out of five , and called it Allen 's best film since Deconstructing Harry ( 1997 ) . He also criticised some other British reviewers whose dislike , Jacobs stated , was due to the fact that Allen presented an agreeable portrait of middle class life in London . He also praised the performances by Rhys Meyers and Johansson . 
 Like many of Allen 's films , Match Point was popular in France : AlloCiné , a cinema information website , gave it a score of 4 @.@ 4 / 5 , based on a sample of 30 reviews . In Les Inrockuptibles , a left @-@ wing French cultural magazine , Jean @-@ Baptiste Morain gave the film a strong review , calling it " one of his most accomplished films " . He characterised Allen 's move to London as re @-@ invigorating for him , while recognising the caricatured portrayal of Britain which made the film less appreciated there than in Allen 's homeland , the United States . Morain called Rhys @-@ Meyers ' and Johansson 's performances " impeccable " . 
 = Battle of Katia = 
 The Battle of Katia , also known as the Affair of <unk> by the British , was an engagement fought east of the Suez Canal and north of El Ferdan Station , in the vicinity of Katia and Oghratina , on 23 April 1916 during the Defence of the Suez Canal Campaign of World War I. An Ottoman force led by the German General Friedrich Freiherr Kress von Kressenstein made a surprise attack on three and a half squadrons of the British 5th Mounted Brigade , which was widely scattered to the east of Romani . The mounted brigade had been ordered to the area to protect the new railway and water pipeline being built from Kantara on the Suez Canal , as this infrastructure extended out past the Canal 's zone of defences into the Sinai Peninsula towards Romani . Kress Von Kressenstein 's attack was completely successful , decimating the equivalent of little more than a regiment . On the same day , an associated Ottoman attack on <unk> , very close to the Suez Canal , failed when it met with strong British opposition . 
 Kress von Kressenstein 's force had been active in the area since the First Suez Offensive of early 1915 , when three columns attacked the Canal along the northern , central , and southern routes across the Sinai Peninsula . The growing Imperial strength made attacks on the Suez Canal difficult , and ended the dominance of the Ottoman force in the area . The Ottoman Empire 's attacks on 23 April demonstrated their intention to continue opposing the British Empire in the region . 
 However , the Imperial reaction to these attacks was to double the strength of their forces . The 2nd Light Horse Brigade , and the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade , were sent to Katia and Romani and established a strong Imperial presence over the contested ground . Soon after , the Australian 1st Light Horse Brigade was also sent forward , and the 52nd ( Lowland ) Division arrived at Romani not long after . At the beginning of August , the Battle of Romani was fought over much of the same ground as that at Katia . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1915 , Sir Archibald Murray , the Imperial Commander in Chief of Egypt , partially addressed the threat of von Kressenstein 's forces to the Suez Canal by organising the defences into three sectors . No. 1 ( Southern ) sector , with its headquarters at Suez , covered the area from Suez to Kabrit , No. 2 ( Central ) sector , with its headquarters at Ismailia , covered the area from Kabrit to Ferdan , and No. 3 ( Northern ) sector , with its headquarters at Port Said , covered the area from Ferdan to Port Said . The No. 3 sector also had an advanced headquarters at Kantara . To support these forward defences , the British Empire improved their lines of communication by doubling the single railway line that ran from Cairo to the Suez Canal , and also pumped water from the River Nile along the Sweet Water Canal to supply the troops and the towns on the Suez Canal . 
 After the conclusion of the Gallipoli Campaign , both sides had large numbers of troops available for redeployment , and the British decided to move their Suez Canal defences from positions on the canal eastwards into the Sinai desert . Murray aimed to extend the railway and water pipeline to Katia , so that a permanent forward Imperial base of 50 @,@ 000 men could be established . In February 1916 , he requested permission from the War Office in London to extend this infrastructure further across the Sinai to El Arish . He considered that such an advance along the northern route , combined with the destruction of the central route 's water sources and regular patrols from a base at El Arish , would permanently secure the Suez Canal . An advance to Katia was agreed by the War Office , but no decision was made regarding an advance to El Arish . 
 The first shipload of rails and sleepers arrived at Kantara on 10 March and , four weeks later , 16 miles ( 26 km ) of track stretching towards Katia had been laid by the Egyptian Labour Corps and Royal Engineers . There were also two new appointments : Brigadier General Edgar Askin Wiggin took command of the Katia district on 6 April and , three days later , Major General H. A. Lawrence became responsible for No. 3 Sector of the canal defences , which covered the northern section . 
 Meanwhile , several raids were undertaken by the Australian Light Horse and the Bikaner Camel Corps , accompanied by the Egyptian Camel Transport Corps carrying supplies , rations and ammunition . The purpose of these raids was to destroy water sources on the central inland route , which had been used by the Ottomans during the First Suez Offensive in late January and early February 1915 . 
 To provide forward protection for the railway construction workers and the infrastructure , the 5th Mounted Brigade was ordered to move to Katia . By early April , however , signs of renewed Ottoman activity in the area were detected and , as a result , the 5th Light Horse Regiment was ordered to reinforce the 5th Mounted Brigade ; it was due to arrive at Katia on 24 April . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Ottoman forces = = = 
 Kress von Kressenstein moved to challenge the growing Imperial presence with a force of ninety @-@ five officers 3 @,@ 560 other ranks comprising 1st and 2nd Battalions and one company of the 3rd Battalion , 32nd Regiment , a regiment of Arab irregulars on camels , and six mountain guns , a 75 @-@ mm battery of the 8th F. A. Regiment and two guns of the 9th F. A. Regiment ( one and a half batteries ) , two field ambulances and an ammunition column . 
 The Ottoman and Arab force travelled across the Sinai Peninsula on the northern route , which runs not far from the coast of the Mediterranean Sea and nearly parallel with it . A series of oases with date palms and reliable water stretch for 15 miles ( 24 km ) from Bir el Abd in the east to Oghratina , Katia and Romani near the Suez Canal . These oases make the northern route from the Ottoman @-@ Egyptian Frontier at Rafa to El Arish and Romani viable , and British strategists thought it possible that 250 @,@ 000 Ottoman troops could cross the Sinai , and 80 @,@ 000 be based permanently in this fertile area . Whoever could hold the contested ground in the area of Katia and Romani would be in a position to protect the Canal , or within striking distance . The area was patrolled almost daily by Ottoman aircraft , which bombed the recently established Katia camp on 20 April , and both Katia and Romani the next day . 
 = = = Imperial deployments = = = 
 The 23 April 1916 , was St George 's Day and also Easter Sunday , and dawn found the 5th Mounted Brigade , dispersed over a wide area . The brigade was made up of the Warwickshire Yeomanry , the Royal Gloucestershire Hussars , and the Queen 's Own Worcestershire Hussars ( Worcestershire Yeomanry ) . These regiments were deployed as follows : At <unk> was two squadrons of Worcestershire Hussars ( less one troop ) , with four officers and 60 other ranks of the 2 / 2nd Lowland Field Company Royal Engineers . At Katia was one squadron and a machine gun subsection of the Gloucestershire Hussars , along with 40 dismounted men of the Worcestershire Hussars , and a detail from the Royal Army Medical Corps , Army Veterinary Corps and camel transport . At Bir el Hamisah were the Warwickshire Yeomanry ( less one squadron ) , and one squadron and one troop from the Worcestershire Hussars . At Romani , near Pelusium , were the Gloucestershire Hussars ( less one squadron ) , and a machine gun subsection in reserve . 
 At the small oasis of Dueidar 13 miles ( 21 km ) south south west of Katia were 156 men ; 120 from the 5th Battalion , Royal Scots Fusiliers and thirty @-@ six from the Bikanir Camel Corps , including a few Yeomanry . The 4th Battalion , Royal Scots Fusiliers of the 52nd ( Lowland ) Division , were holding Hill 70 , 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) behind Dueidar . 
 On 22 April Wiggin and his brigade headquarters , with one squadron and one troop of Worcestershire Hussars , had arrived at Bir el Hamisah from Katia . Wiggin moved there in response to an intelligence report that an Ottoman force was at Bir el Mageibra some distance to the south and , with the agreement of his commander H. A. Lawrence , he prepared to launch a surprise attack . At dawn on 23 April , Wiggin found and destroyed a large but almost empty camp at Bir el Mageibra , capturing six prisoners . He was back at Bir el Hamisah by 09 : 00 , having covered a distance of 16 miles ( 26 km ) , when he heard news of Ottoman attacks . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Oghratina = = = 
 The oasis at Oghratina had been occupied by a squadron from the Worcestershire Hussars and a dismounted detachment of Royal Engineers thirty @-@ six hours before the Ottoman attack ; a second squadron arrived just twelve hours before the attack , so defensive works had not been extensive . These squadrons stood to at 04 : 00 in dense sea @-@ fog , which was common at that time of year . They heard the sound of pumps operating at wells 500 yards ( 460 m ) to their south west , and an officer who investigated found about sixty Ottoman soldiers . The yeomanry completely surprised this small Ottoman force , opening fire and causing heavy casualties , but in following up their retreat , the yeomanry were met with very heavy rifle fire from a much larger force . Soon afterwards , British squadrons on the right were attacked , and by 05 : 15 the whole camp was being assaulted from north , east and south east in overwhelming strength at a range of 50 yards ( 46 m ) or less . 
 The Ottoman attack began with heavy fire from light guns , machine guns and rifles . Although the commander of the yeomanry detachment had orders to retire if attacked in force , he could not leave the dismounted engineers . The Ottoman attack was resisted for two hours , but by 07 : 45 eleven yeomanry officers and 135 other ranks were casualties . The survivors , four officers and forty @-@ two other ranks , surrendered . 
 = = = Katia = = = 
 At 03 : 30 " A " Squadron Gloucestershire Hussars , under Captain Lloyd Baker , stood to arms and saddled up ; a patrol was sent out and returned to report all clear . Soon afterwards a small Ottoman patrol fired on the yeomanry and retired . About 05 : 30 heavy fire was heard from Oghratina , and a message was received half an hour later that an attack had been repulsed . At 06 : 30 another message reported that the attack had been renewed , and a message from Romani reported that Dueidar had also been attacked . At 07 : 45 another Ottoman attack at Katia was driven off . 
 At 08 : 45 a patrol sent out towards Oghratina saw 600 Ottoman soldiers marching towards Katia in open order in two long lines about 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) away , followed by more troops in a formed body , and cavalry advancing to the south west to surround Katia . At 09 : 45 a battery of mountain guns near Er Rabah opened fire on Katia from the north east , which killed or maimed some of the horses within a few minutes . 
 Rather than retiring to Romani or to Bir el Hamisah , Captain Lloyd Baker decided to stay at Katia and protect his party of Royal Engineers , hoping for support from Romani . The Gloucestershire squadron maintained rapid fire against the increasing numbers of Ottoman attackers , and just before 10 : 00 British reinforcements from Romani ( Gloucestershire Hussars ) and Bir el Hamisah ( Worcestershire Hussars ) converged on Katia and fought their way through to the garrison . Lieutenant Colonel Charles Coventry of the Worcestershire Hussars now took command of the garrison . Heavy fire from Ottoman rifles and machine guns continued for several hours at Katia , and the Ottomans gradually pressed in on the yeomanry 's front and flanks . Eventually working their way to within 50 yards ( 46 m ) , the Ottomans rushed the garrison shortly before 15 : 00 . The flank held by the Gloucestershire Hussars collapsed and Coventry then ordered a general surrender . 
 At about 13 : 30 Coventry had asked Captain W.H. Wiggin ( brother of Brigadier General Wiggin ) to bring up the horses to allow as many men as possible the chance of escape , but the captain fainted from the effects of a wound before he reached them . When he came to , he saw the camp had been captured , and galloped with the surviving horses and horse holders to meet escaping yeomanry . A total of eighty men escaped , with Wiggin being the only officer to get away from Oghratina or Katia . The Gloucestershire Hussars lost 4 officers and 16 other ranks killed , 15 other ranks were wounded and 64 were taken prisoner . The casualties of the Worcestershire Hussars at Oghratina and Katia were even worse with a loss of 9 officers and 101 other ranks killed and 235 men taken prisoner . The regiment was almost wiped out – they mustered after the battle with just 54 NCOs and men . 
 = = = Dueidar = = = 
 At Dueidar the garrison of 156 men defended an area of just 450 by 150 yards ( 410 by 140 m ) containing six small redoubts . At 04 : 00 a linesman was sent out to investigate a loss of communication with Katia ; the commander of the garrison visited the posts under his command and sent out a patrol to the south east , ordering his troops to stand to arms . The patrol saw nothing in the mist , but at 05 : 17 a sentry saw a large group of Ottoman soldiers and opened fire on them . This alerted the nearest redoubt garrison armed with fifty men and a Lewis gun which swept the Ottoman ranks . So effective was the fire that the attackers soon fell back leaving twenty dead and wounded , while an Ottoman mountain gun battery was unable to find the British positions . At 07 : 00 Ottoman forces attempted to outflank the British position to the south , but were stopped by fire from a small defensive works on that flank containing one non @-@ commissioned officer ( NCO ) and six men . Shortly afterwards Ottoman soldiers repeated their attack on the south eastern redoubt . Some of them got to within 20 yards ( 18 m ) of the defensive barbed wire , but were again routed by steady fire . 
 = = = British and Australian reinforcements = = = 
 Brigadier General Wiggin ordered the Worcestershire Yeomanry to water at Bir el Hamisah and then advance on Katia , but before watering was complete they saw shells bursting at Katia , and moved off at 09 : 50 to reinforce the line of the Gloucester squadron on the left . 
 The remaining squadrons of Warwickshire Yeomanry , after watering at Bir el Hamisah , moved at 10 : 30 to attack the Hod um Ugba , which was north east of Katia and halfway between Bir el Hamisah and Katia . Wiggin moved off an hour later to attack the same place , and this force became engaged with Ottoman flanking troops . By 13 : 45 Wiggin had advanced about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) against very strong opposition , but soon afterwards he saw a commotion among the camels at Katia ; the tents in the camp were burning and he decided that the best option was to fall back to Bir el Hamisah . 
 Reinforcements from Romani , commanded by Lieutenant Colonel R. M. Yorke , attacked the Ottoman force to the north of Katia , but were driven off . These five troops and a machine gun section of Gloucestershire Hussars moved out from Romani at 10 : 15 to intercept a column of 500 Ottoman soldiers retiring south @-@ east from Dueidar . Shortly after leaving Romani , firing was heard from Katia , and from some high ground they could see the Ottoman artillery north of Er Rabah shelling the camp . When the Gloucestershire Hussars advanced towards the Ottoman artillery , it ceased fire , and fifteen minutes later was seen to withdraw some distance . The Gloucestershire Hussars pushed some Ottoman soldiers back to the high ground south of the Hod um Ugba , where Ottoman reinforcements stopped their advance . The strength of the Ottoman attacks made a gradual withdrawal necessary , but long halts were made to enable the wounded at Romani to retire also . 
 Unfortunately the Gloucestershire Hussars from Romani were not aware of Wiggin and his reinforcements on the other flank until it was too late , finally coming in sight of them at about 15 : 00 . Wiggin had seen Yorke 's force an hour earlier , but had not been able to communicate with it . 
 Dueidar was reinforced by two companies of 4th Battalion Royal Scots Fusiliers from Hill 70 on the railway 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) to the rear . On approaching Dueidar , a small detachment of reinforcements was sent to the south eastern redoubt . The Ottoman firing line was found to be south of the Dueidar to Katia track and 200 yards ( 180 m ) from the principal redoubt . Shortly after the mist cleared , a British aircraft dropped a message that the main Ottoman force was in retreat and that there were only about 150 rifles still attacking . A squadron of the Australian 5th Light Horse Regiment arrived at midday from Kantara , and moved off south east in pursuit of the main Ottoman force , while the garrison at Dueidar attacked the Ottoman rearguard which broke and fled , leaving behind seventeen unwounded troops who were taken prisoner . The remainder of 5th Light Horse Regiment arrived at <unk> at 13 : 30 and took up the pursuit . They captured one officer and thirty @-@ one other ranks , and killed seventy @-@ five men ; there were fifty @-@ five British casualties . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The commander of 5th Mounted Brigade decided to retire towards the Suez Canal , and the two squadrons from Romani joined him , abandoning much equipment to ride overnight to Bir el Nuss . Wiggin arrived at Dueidar at 09 : 00 on 24 April with two squadrons . The 5th Mounted Brigade had been completely surprised ; its commander and his important reserve force had been out of position at a critical time following false intelligence , and could not support his regiments . The three and a half squadrons at Oghratina and Katia were decimated — almost all were killed , wounded or captured . 
 The overwhelming success of the Ottoman Army 's operations during the Battle of Katia demonstrated the attacking strength and determination of Kress von Kressenstein 's force in 1916 , and their efficient implementation of appropriate tactics , particularly timing and false intelligence . This success was underpinned by the Ottoman infantry 's ability to make the gruelling march across the Sinai Peninsula and be fit enough to then launch attacks with force and determination . 
 On 24 April Romani was reoccupied and the commander of the Australian and New Zealand Mounted Division ( Anzac Mounted Division ) , Major General Harry Chauvel , took command of the advance positions . The 2nd Light Horse Brigade and the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade of the mounted division were ordered to Romani and reoccupied the area unopposed by any Ottoman force . The 52nd ( Lowland ) Division reinforced the garrison at Dueidar and also came under Chauvel 's command . 
 After the battle the area was held by British forces with their main bases at Romani and Kantara . Regular patrols and reconnaissances were carried out over the oases area , until the issue was resolved at the Battle of Romani in August 1916 when British Empire forces won a decisive victory . 
 = Bahá 'u'lláh = 
 Bahá 'u'lláh ( / <unk> / ; Arabic : بهاء الله , " Glory of God " ; 12 November 1817 – 29 May 1892 ) , born Mírzá <unk> <unk> ( Persian : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , was the founder of the Bahá 'í Faith . He claimed to be the prophetic fulfilment of <unk> , a 19th @-@ century outgrowth of <unk> ‘ ism , and , in a broader sense claimed to be a messenger from God referring to the fulfilment of the eschatological expectations of Islam , Christianity , and other major religions . 
 Bahá 'u'lláh taught that humanity is one single race and that the age has come for its unification in a global society . He taught that " there is only one God , that all of the world ’ s religions are from God , and that now is the time for humanity to recognize its oneness and unite . " His claim to divine revelation resulted in persecution and imprisonment by the Persian and Ottoman authorities , and his eventual 24 @-@ year confinement in the prison city of <unk> , Palestine ( present @-@ day Israel ) , where he died . He wrote many religious works , most notably the Kitáb @-@ i @-@ Aqdas , the Kitáb @-@ i @-@ Íqán and Hidden Words . 
 There are two known photographs of Bahá 'u'lláh . Outside of pilgrimage , Bahá 'ís prefer not to view his photo in public , or even to display it in their private homes . 
 = = Early and family life = = 
 Bahá 'u'lláh was born on 12 November 1817 , in Tehran , the capital of Persia , present @-@ day Iran . Bahá 'í authors state that his ancestry can be traced back to Abraham through Abraham 's wife Keturah , to Zoroaster and to Yazdgerd III , the last king of the Sassanid Empire , and also to Jesse . According to the Bahá 'í author John Able , Bahá 'ís also consider Bahá 'u'lláh to have been " descended doubly , from both Abraham and Sarah , and separately from Abraham and Keturah . " His mother was <unk> Khánum and his father was Mírzá Buzurg . Bahá 'u'lláh 's father , Mírzá Buzurg , served as vizier to <unk> @-@ Virdi Mírzá , the twelfth son of Fat ′ h Ali Shah Qajar . Mírzá Buzurg was later appointed governor of <unk> and Lorestan , a position that he was stripped of during a government purge when Muhammad Shah came to power . After the death of his father , Bahá 'u'lláh was asked to take a government post by the new vizier Hajji Mirza <unk> , but declined . 
 Bahá 'u'lláh was married three times . He married his first wife Ásíyih Khánum , the daughter of a nobleman , in Tehran in 1835 , when he was 18 and she was 15 . She was given the title of The Most Exalted Leaf and <unk> . His second marriage was to his widowed cousin <unk> Khánum , in Tehran in 1849 when she was 21 and he was 32 . She was known as <unk> @-@ <unk> . His third marriage to Gawhar Khánum occurred in Baghdad sometime before 1863 . 
 Bahá 'u'lláh declared Ásíyih Khánum his " perpetual consort in all the worlds of God " , and her son `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá as his vicar . He had 14 children , four daughters and ten sons , five of whom he outlived . Bahá 'ís regard Ásíyih Khánum and her children Mírzá <unk> , <unk> Khánum and `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá ' to be the Bahá 'í holy family . 
 = = Bábí movement = = 
 In 1844 , a 25 @-@ year @-@ old man from Shiraz , <unk> Mírzá `Alí @-@ Muḥammad claimed to be the promised redeemer ( or Mahdi ) of Islam , taking the title of the Báb , or the " Gate " . The resulting Bábí movement quickly spread across the Persian Empire and received widespread opposition from the Islamic clergy . The Báb himself was executed in 1850 by a firing squad in the public square of Tabriz at the age of 30 and the community was almost entirely exterminated in 1852 – 3 . 
 While the Báb claimed a station of revelation , he also claimed no finality for his revelation . In most of his prominent writings , the Báb alluded to a Promised One , most commonly referred to as " Him whom God shall make manifest " . According to the Báb , this personage , promised in the sacred writings of previous religions , would establish the kingdom of God on the Earth ; several of the Báb 's writings state the coming of Him whom God shall make manifest would be imminent . In the books written by the Báb he constantly entreats his believers to follow Him whom God shall make manifest when he arrives . The Báb also eliminated the institution of successorship or vicegerency to his movement , and stated that no other person 's writings would be binding after his death until Him whom God shall make manifest would appear . 
 = = = Acceptance of the Báb = = = 
 Bahá 'u'lláh first heard of the Báb when he was 27 , and received a visitor sent by the Báb , <unk> Husayn , telling him of the Báb and his claims . Bahá 'u'lláh accepted the Báb 's claims , becoming a Bábí and helping to spread the new movement , especially in his native province of <unk> , where he became recognized as one of its most influential believers . His notability as a local gave him many openings , and his trips to teach the religion were met with success , even among some of the religious class . He also helped to protect fellow believers , such as <unk> , for which he was temporarily imprisoned in Tehran and punished with bastinado or foot whipping . Bahá 'u'lláh , in the summer of 1848 , also attended the conference of <unk> in the province of Khorasan , where 81 prominent Bábís met for 22 days ; at that conference where there was a discussion between those Bábís who wanted to maintain Islamic law and those who believed that the Báb 's message began a new dispensation , Bahá 'u'lláh took the pro @-@ change side , which eventually won out . It is at this conference that Bahá 'u'lláh took on the name Bahá . 
 When violence started between the Bábís and the Qajar government in the later part of 1848 , Bahá 'u'lláh tried to reach the besieged Bábís at the Shaykh <unk> in Mazandaran , but was arrested and imprisoned before he could get there . The following years until 1850 saw the Bábís being massacred in various provinces after the Báb publicly made his claim of being the Manifestation of God . 
 = = = Síyáh @-@ Chál = = = 
 After the Báb was executed in 1850 , a group of Tehran Bábís , headed by a Bábí known as Azim , who was previously a <unk> cleric , plotted an assassination plan against the Shah Nasser @-@ al @-@ Din Shah , in retaliation for the Báb 's execution . The policy was opposed by Bahá 'u'lláh , who condemned the plan ; however , any moderating influence that he may have had was diminished in June 1851 when he went into exile to Baghdad at the chief minister 's request , returning only after Amir Kabir 's fall from power . On 15 August 1852 , the radical group of Bábís attempted to carry out the assassination of the Shah and failed . The group of Bábís linked with the plan , were rounded up and killed , and , notwithstanding the assassins ' claim that they were working alone , the entire Bábí community was blamed , precipitating violent riots against the Bábí community , that were encouraged and orchestrated by the government . During this time many Bábís were killed , and those Bábís who were not killed , including Bahá 'u'lláh , were imprisoned in the Síyáh @-@ Chál ( " black pit " ) , an underground dungeon of Tehran . 
 According to Bahá 'u'lláh , it was during his imprisonment in the Síyáh @-@ Chál that he had several mystical experiences , and received a vision of a maiden from God , through whom he received his mission as a messenger of God and as the one whose coming the Báb had prophesied . After four months in the Síyáh @-@ Chál , owing to the insistent demands of the ambassador of Russia , and after the person who tried to kill the Shah confessed and exonerated the Bábí leaders , the authorities released him from prison , but exiled him from Iran . Instead of accepting the offer of refuge from Russia , Bahá 'u'lláh chose to go to Iraq in the Ottoman Empire ; in 1853 Bahá 'u'lláh and his family travelled from Persia arriving in Baghdad on 8 April 1853 . 
 = = Baghdad = = 
 The Báb had eliminated the institution of successorship or vicegerency to his movement , and had stated that no other person 's writings would be binding after his death until Him whom God shall make manifest would appear . He did , however , appoint Mírzá Yahyá ( later known as Subh @-@ i @-@ <unk> ) as a nominal leader after himself . Mírzá Yahyá had gone into hiding after the assassination attempt on the Shah , and after Bahá 'u'lláh 's exile to Baghdad , he chose to join his brother there . At the same time , an increasing number of Bábís considered Baghdad the new center for leadership of the Bábí religion , and a flow of pilgrims started coming there from Persia . 
 Mírzá Yahyá 's leadership was controversial . He generally absented himself from the Bábí community , spending his time in Baghdad in hiding and disguise ; on several occasions he went so far as to publicly disavow allegiance to the Báb . Mírzá Yahyá gradually alienated himself from a large number of the Bábís , who started giving their alliance to other claimants . During the time that Mírzá Yahyá remained in hiding , Bahá 'u'lláh performed much of the daily administration of Bábí affairs . In contrast to Mírzá Yahyá , Bahá 'u'lláh was outgoing and accessible and he was seen by an increasing number of Bábís as a religious leader , rather than just an organizer , and became their center of devotion . 
 This was increasingly resented by Mírzá Yahyá , who began trying to discredit Bahá 'u'lláh , thus driving many people away from the religion . Tensions in the community mounted , and in 1854 Bahá 'u'lláh decided to leave the city to pursue a solitary life . 
 = = = Kurdistan = = = 
 On 10 April 1854 , Bahá 'u'lláh left his family to the care of his brother Mirza Musa and traveled with one companion to the mountains of Kurdistan , northeast of Baghdad , near the city of Sulaymaniyah . He later wrote that he left so as to avoid becoming a source of disagreement within the Bábí community , and that his " withdrawal contemplated no return " . 
 For two years , Bahá 'u'lláh lived alone in the mountains of Kurdistan . He originally lived as a hermit , dressed like a dervish and used the name Darvish Muhammad @-@ i @-@ Irani . At one point someone noticed his penmanship , which brought the curiosity of the instructors of the local Sufi orders . As he began to take guests , he became noted for his learning and wisdom . Shaykh <unk> , Shaykh `Abdu 'r @-@ <unk> , and Shaykh <unk> <unk> , leaders of the <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> Orders respectively , began to seek his advice . It was to the second of these that the Four Valleys was written . Bahá 'u'lláh wrote several other notable books during this time . 
 In Baghdad , given the lack of firm and public leadership by Mirza Yahya , the Babi community had fallen into disarray . Some <unk> , including Bahá 'u'lláh 's family , began searching for Bahá 'u'lláh , and when news of a man living in the mountains under the name of Darvish Muhammad spread to neighboring areas , Bahá 'u'lláh 's family begged him to come back to Baghdad . On 19 March 1856 , after two years in Kurdistan he returned to Baghdad . 
 = = = Return to Baghdad = = = 
 When Bahá 'u'lláh returned to Baghdad he saw that the Bábí community had become disheartened and divided . During Bahá 'u'lláh 's absence , it had become alienated from the religion because Mirza Yahya had continued his policy of militancy and had been unable to provide effective leadership . Mirza Yahya had married the widow of the Báb against the Báb 's clear instructions ; dispatched followers to the province of Nur for the second attempt on the life of the Shah ; and instigated violence against prominent Bábís who had challenged his leadership . 
 After his return to Baghdad , Bahá 'u'lláh tried to revive the Bábí community , mostly through correspondence , writing extensively to give the Bábís a new understanding of the Bábí religion , while keeping his perceived station as the one promised by the Báb and a Manifestation of God hidden . He was soon recognized by the Bábís , as well as government authorities , as the foremost Bábí leader , and there was a growing number of people joining the Bábí movement . He also gained sympathy from government officials and Sunni clerics . Bahá 'u'lláh 's rising influence in the city , and the revival of the Persian Bábí community , gained the attention of his enemies in Islamic clergy and the Persian government . The Persian government asked the Ottoman government to extradite Bahá 'u'lláh to Persia , but the Ottoman government refused and instead chose to move Bahá 'u'lláh from the sensitive border region to Constantinople . 
 = = = Declaration in the Garden of <unk> = = = 
 On 21 April 1863 , Bahá 'u'lláh left Baghdad and entered the <unk> gardens , now known to Bahá 'ís as the Garden of Ridván , near Baghdad . Bahá 'u'lláh and those accompanying him stayed in the garden for twelve days before departing for Constantinople . It was during this time that Bahá 'u'lláh declared to a small group of his companions his perceived mission and station as a Messenger of God . Bahá 'ís regard this period with great significance and celebrate the twelve days that Bahá 'u'lláh spent in this Garden as the festival of Ridván . He referred to the period of messianic secrecy between when he claimed to have seen the Maiden of Heaven in the Síyáh @-@ Chál and his declaration as the <unk> @-@ i <unk> ( " Days of Concealment " ) . Bahá 'u'lláh stated that this period was a " set time of concealment " . The declaration in the Garden of Ridván was the beginning of a new phase in the Bábí community which led to the emergence of the Bahá 'í Faith as a distinctive movement separate from <unk> . 
 = = Imprisonment = = 
 Bahá 'u'lláh was given an order to relocate to the Ottoman capital of Constantinople . Although not a formal prisoner yet , the forced exile from Baghdad was the beginning of a long process which would gradually move him into further exiles and eventually to the penal colony of <unk> , Palestine ( now Acre , Israel ) . 
 = = = Constantinople = = = 
 Bahá 'u'lláh travelled from Baghdad to Constantinople between 3 May and 17 August 1863 , accompanied by a large group including family members and followers . During the trip , he was treated with respect in the towns he visited , and when he reached Constantinople , he was treated as a government guest . Why the Ottoman authorities did not permit his extradition to Persia , but instead invited him to come to Constantinople , is unclear . The reason may have been political because Bahá 'u'lláh was viewed as a person of influence . However , Bahá 'u'lláh refused to work with the Ottoman authorities . After three and a half months in Constantinople , he was ordered to depart for Adrianople . The reason for this further move is also unclear . It may have been due to pressure from the Persian ambassador , combined with Bahá 'u'lláh 's refusal to work with the Ottoman authorities . 
 = = = Adrianople = = = 
 From 1 to 12 December 1863 , Bahá 'u'lláh and his family traveled to Adrianople . Unlike his travel to Constantinople , this journey was in the nature of an exile . Bahá 'u'lláh stayed in Adrianople for four and a half years , and was the clear leader of the newly established Bábí community there . Bahá 'u'lláh 's growing preeminence in the Bábí community and in the city at large led to a final breach between Bahá 'u'lláh and Mirza Yahya . In 1865 , Mirza Yahya was accused of plotting to kill Bahá 'u'lláh . In contemporary accounts , Mirza Yahya is reported to have tried to have Bahá 'u'lláh assassinated by a local barber . The barber , Muhammad `Alí of <unk> , apparently refused and spread word of the danger around the community . Bahá 'u'lláh is reported to have counseled " on all patience , quietude and gentleness " . This pattern was repeated when , according to the personal account of <unk> <unk> @-@ i <unk> , Mirza Yahya attempted to persuade him likewise to murder Bahá 'u'lláh in the bath . Eventually Mirza Yahya attempted to poison Bahá 'u'lláh , an act that left him gravely ill for a time , and left him with a shaking hand for the rest of his life . 
 After this event in 1866 , Bahá 'u'lláh made his claim to be Him whom God shall make manifest public , as well as making a formal written announcement to Mirza Yahya referring to his followers for the first time as the " people of Bahá " . After his public announcement , Bahá 'u'lláh secluded himself in his house and instructed the Bábís to choose between himself and Mirza Yahya . Bahá 'u'lláh 's claims threatened Mirza Yahya 's position as leader of the religion since it would mean little to be leader of the Bábís if Him whom God shall make manifest were to appear and start a new religion . Mirza Yahya responded by making his own claims , but his attempt to preserve the traditional <unk> was largely unpopular , and his followers became the minority . 
 In 1867 , Mirza Yahya challenged Bahá 'u'lláh to a test of the divine will in a local mosque in Adrianople , such that " God would strike down the impostor . " Bahá 'u'lláh agreed , and went to the Sultan Selim mosque at the appointed time , but Mirza Yahya lost face and lost credibility when he refused to show up . Eventually Bahá 'u'lláh was recognized by the vast majority of Bábís as " He whom God shall make manifest " and his followers began calling themselves Bahá 'ís . 
 = = = Writings and letters to the leaders of the world = = = 
 During his time in Adrianople , Bahá 'u'lláh wrote a great deal . One of the main themes during this time was the proclamation of his claimed mission ; he instructed some of his followers to take his claims to Bábís in Iran and Iraq who had not heard of his statements , as well as asking the Bahá 'ís to be united and detached from the world . He also started to write about distinctive Bahá 'í beliefs and practices . 
 Also , while in Adrianople , Bahá 'u'lláh proclaimed the Bahá 'í Faith further by addressing tablets to the kings and rulers of the world asking them to accept his revelation , renounce their material possessions , work together to settle disputes , and endeavour toward the betterment of the world and its peoples . His first letter was sent to Sultan Abdülaziz of the Ottoman Empire and his ministers , which was followed by the Tablet of the Kings which was a general address to all rulers . In that latter letter the rulers of the earth were asked to listen to Bahá 'u'lláh 's call , and cast away their material possessions , and since they were given the reins of government that they should rule with justice and protect the rights of the downtrodden . He also told the rulers to reduce their armaments and reconcile their differences . The Christian monarchs were also asked to be faithful to Jesus ' call to follow the promised " Spirit of Truth . " 
 Later when Bahá 'u'lláh was in Akka , he continued writing letters to the leaders of the world including : 
 Pope Pius IX 
 Napoleon III , Emperor of France 
 Alexander II , Tsar of Russia 
 Wilhelm I , King in Prussia 
 Queen Victoria , Queen of Great Britain and Ireland 
 Franz Joseph , Emperor of Austria @-@ Hungary 
 Sultan ‘ Abdu ’ l- ‘ <unk> of the Ottoman Empire 
 <unk> ’ d @-@ <unk> <unk> of the Persian Empire 
 Rulers of America and the Presidents of the republics therein 
 = = = `Akká = = = 
 With the Bábí community now irrevocably divided , the followers of Mirza Yahya tried to discredit Bahá 'u'lláh to the Ottoman authorities , accusing him of causing agitation against the government . While an investigation cleared Bahá 'u'lláh , it did bring to the attention of the government that Bahá 'u'lláh and Mirza Yahya were propagating religious claims , and , fearing that this might cause future disorder , they decided to again exile the ' Bábí ' leaders . A royal command was issued in July 1868 condemning the Bábís to perpetual imprisonment and isolation in far @-@ flung outposts of the Ottoman Empire — Famagusta , Cyprus for Mirza Yahya and his followers , and `Akká , in Ottoman Palestine , for Bahá 'u'lláh and his followers . 
 The Bahá 'ís , including Bahá 'u'lláh and his family , left Adrianople on 12 August 1868 , and , after a journey by land and sea through Gallipoli and Egypt , arrived in `Akká on 31 August and were confined in the barracks in the citadel in the city . The inhabitants of `Akká were told that the new prisoners were enemies of the state , of God and his religion , and that association with them was strictly forbidden . The first years in `Akká imposed very harsh conditions with everyone becoming sick , and eventually three Bahá 'ís dying . It was also a very trying time for Bahá 'u'lláh : <unk> <unk> , Bahá 'u'lláh 's son , was suddenly killed at the age of twenty @-@ two when he fell through a skylight while pacing back and forth in prayer and meditation . After some time , the people and officials began to trust and respect Bahá 'u'lláh , and thus the conditions of the imprisonment were eased and eventually , after the Sultan 's death , he was allowed to leave the city and visit nearby places . From 1877 until 1879 Bahá 'u'lláh lived in the house of <unk> <unk> . Dr. Thomas Chaplin , director of a British Hospital in Jerusalem visited Bahá 'u'lláh in April 1871 and sent a letter to the editor printed in The Times in October . This seems to be the first extended commentary on Bahá 'u'lláh in western newspapers . 
 = = Final years = = 
 The final years of Bahá 'u'lláh 's life ( 1879 – 1892 ) were spent in the Mansion of Bahjí , just outside `Akká , even though he was still formally a prisoner of the Ottoman Empire . During his years in `Akká and Bahjí , since `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá , his eldest son , had taken care of the organizational work , Bahá 'u'lláh was able to devote his time to writing , and he produced many volumes of work including the Kitáb @-@ i @-@ Aqdas , his book of laws . His other works included letters outlining his vision for a united world , as well as the need for ethical action ; he also composed many prayers . 
 In 1890 , the Cambridge orientalist Edward Granville Browne had an interview with Bahá 'u'lláh in this house . After this meeting he wrote his famous pen @-@ portrait of Bahá 'u'lláh : 
 In the corner where the divan met the wall sat a wondrous and venerable figure , crowned with a felt head @-@ dress of the kind called <unk> by dervishes ( but of unusual height and make ) , round the base of which was wound a small white turban . The face of him on whom I gazed I can never forget , though I cannot describe it . Those piercing eyes seemed to read one 's very soul ; power and authority sat on that ample brow ; while the deep lines on the forehead and face implied an age which the jet @-@ black hair and beard flowing down in indistinguishable luxuriance almost to the waist seemed to belie . No need to ask in whose presence I stood , as I bowed myself before one who is the object of a devotion and love which kings might envy and emperors sigh for in vain ! 
 On 9 May 1892 , Bahá 'u'lláh contracted a slight fever which grew steadily over the following days , abated , and then finally resulted in his death on 29 May 1892 . He was buried in the shrine located next to the Mansion of Bahjí . 
 = = Claims = = 
 Bahá 'u'lláh stated that he was a messenger of God , and he used the term Manifestation of God to define the concept of an intermediary between humanity and God . In the Bahá 'í writings , the Manifestations of God are a series of interrelated personages who speak with a divine voice and who reflect the attributes of the divine into the human world for the progress and advancement of human morals and civilization . The Manifestations of God , as explained by Bahá 'u'lláh , are not incarnations of God , but have a two @-@ fold station ; one which is the divine in that they reveal God 's attributes , but not God 's essence , and one which is human in that they represent the physical qualities of common man , and have human limitations . Bahá 'u'lláh wrote that God will never manifest his essence into the world . 
 In Bahá 'u'lláh 's writings he writes in many styles including cases where he speaks as if he was instructed by God to bring a message ; in other cases he writes as though he is speaking as God directly . 
 Some have interpreted Bahá 'u'lláh 's writing style to conclude that Bahá 'u'lláh had claimed divinity . Bahá 'u'lláh , however , states himself that the essence of God will never descend into the human world . Statements where Bahá 'u'lláh speaks with the voice of God are meant that he is not actually God , but that he is speaking with the attributes of God . 
 Bahá 'u'lláh declared , as the most recent Manifestation of God , that he was the " Promised One " of all religions , fulfilling the messianic prophecies found in world religions . He stated that his claims to being several <unk> converging in one person were the symbolic , rather than literal , fulfilment of the messianic and eschatological prophecies found in the literature of the major religions . Bahá 'u'lláh 's eschatological claims constitute six distinctive messianic identifications : from Judaism , the incarnation of the " Everlasting Father " from the Yuletide prophecy of Isaiah 9 : 6 , the " Lord of Hosts " ; from Christianity , the " Spirit of Truth " or Comforter predicted by Jesus in his farewell discourse of John 14 @-@ 17 and the return of Christ " in the glory of the Father " ; from Zoroastrianism , the return of Shah Bahram <unk> , a Zoroastrian messiah predicted in various late Pahlavi texts ; from Shi 'a Islam the return of the Third Imam , Imam Husayn ; from Sunni Islam , the return of Jesus ( Isa ) ; and from <unk> , He whom God shall make manifest . 
 While Bahá 'u'lláh did not himself directly claim to be either the Hindu or Buddhist messiah , he did so in principle through his writings . Later , `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá stated that Bahá 'u'lláh was the Kalki avatar , who in the classical Hindu Vaishnavas tradition is the tenth and final Avatar ( great incarnation ) of Vishnu who will come to end The Age of Darkness and Destruction . Bahá 'ís also believe that Bahá 'u'lláh is the fulfilment of the prophecy of appearance of the Maitreya Buddha , who is a future Buddha who will eventually appear on earth , achieve complete enlightenment , and teach the pure Dharma . Bahá 'ís believe that the prophecy that Maitreya will usher in a new society of tolerance and love has been fulfilled by Bahá 'u'lláh 's teachings on world peace . Bahá 'u'lláh is believed to be a descendant of a long line of kings in Persia through Yazdgerd III , the last monarch of the Sasanian Dynasty ; he also asserted to be a descendant of Abraham through his third wife Keturah . 
 = = Succession = = 
 After Bahá 'u'lláh died on 29 May 1892 , the Will and Testament of Bahá 'u'lláh named his son `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá as Centre of the Covenant , successor and interpreter of Bahá 'u'lláh 's writings , and the appointment was readily accepted by almost all Bahá 'ís , since the appointment was written and unambiguous , and `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá had proved himself a capable and devoted assistant . However , the appointment given to `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá was a cause of jealousy within Bahá 'u'lláh 's family . Bahá 'u'lláh had also stated that another one of his sons Mírzá Muhammad `Alí was to be subordinate and second in rank after `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá . Mírzá Muḥammad `Alí , however , insisted that `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá was exceeding his powers , and started a rebellion , at first covert , and then public to discredit `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá . Mírzá Muḥammad `Alí 's actions , however , were rejected by the majority of the Bahá 'ís . Due to this conflict , `Abdu 'l @-@ Bahá later ex @-@ communicated his brother as a covenant @-@ breaker . The conflict was not long lived ; after being alienated by the Bahá 'í community , Muhammad Ali died in 1937 with a handful of followers . 
 = = Works = = 
 Bahá 'u'lláh wrote many books , tablets and prayers , of which only a fraction have been translated into English . There have been 15 @,@ 000 works written by him identified ; many of these are in the form of short letters , or tablets , to Bahá 'ís , but he also wrote larger pieces including the Book of Certitude , the Hidden Words and the Gems of Divine Mysteries . The total volume of his works are more than 70 times the size of the Qur 'an and more than 15 times the size of the Old and New Testaments of the Bible . 
 The books and letters written by Bahá 'u'lláh cover religious doctrine , the proclamation of his claims , social and moral teachings as well as Bahá 'í laws ; he also wrote many prayers . <unk> @-@ i @-@ <unk> @-@ i @-@ <unk> , analyzing Baha <unk> 's writings , states that he wrote in the different styles or categories including the interpretation of religious scripture , the enunciation of laws and ordinances , mystical writings , writings about government and world order , including letters to the kings and rulers of the world , writings about knowledge , philosophy , medicine , and alchemy , writings calling for education , good character and virtues , and writing about social teachings . All of his works are considered by Bahá 'ís to be revelation , even those that were written before his announcement of his prophetic claim . Some of his better known works that have been translated into English include Gleanings , the Hidden Words , the Kitáb @-@ i @-@ Aqdas and the Kitáb @-@ i @-@ Íqán . 
 = = Photographs and imagery = = 
 There are two known photographs of Bahá 'u'lláh , both taken at the same occasion in 1868 while he was in Adrianople ( present @-@ day Edirne ) . The one where he looks at the camera was taken for passport purposes and is reproduced in William Miller 's book on the Bahá 'í Faith . Copies of both pictures are at the Bahá 'í World Centre , and one is on display in the International Archives building , where the Bahá 'ís view it as part of an organized pilgrimage . Outside of this experience Bahá 'ís prefer not to view his photos in public , or even to display any of them in their private homes , and Bahá 'í institution strongly suggests to use an image of Bahá 'u'lláh 's burial shrine instead . 
 Bahá 'u'lláh 's image is not in itself offensive to Bahá 'ís . However , Bahá 'ís are expected to treat the image of any Manifestation of God with extreme reverence . According to this practice , they avoid depictions of Jesus or of Muhammad , and refrain from portraying any of them in plays and drama . Copies of the photographs are displayed on highly significant occasions , such as six conferences held in October 1967 commemorating the hundredth anniversary of Bahá 'u'lláh 's writing of the <unk> @-@ i @-@ <unk> ( Tablet to the Kings ) , which Shoghi Effendi describes as " the most momentous Tablet revealed by Bahá 'u'lláh " . After a meeting in Adrianople , the Hands of the Cause traveled to the conferences , " each bearing the precious trust of a photograph of the Blessed Beauty ( Bahá 'u'lláh ) , which it will be the privilege of those attending the Conferences to view . " 
 The official Bahá 'í position on displaying the photograph of Bahá 'u'lláh is : 
 There is no objection that the believers look at the picture of Bahá 'u'lláh , but they should do so with the utmost reverence , and should also not allow that it be exposed openly to the public , even in their private homes . 
 While the above passage clarifies that it is considered disrespectful to display his photograph to the public , regarding postings on other websites the Bahá 'í World Centre has written : 
 For Bahá 'ís , the photograph of Bahá 'u'lláh is very precious and it should not only be viewed but also handled with due reverence and respect , which is not the case here [ on a non @-@ Bahá 'í web site ] . Thus , it is indeed disturbing to Bahá 'ís to have the image of Bahá 'u'lláh treated in such a disrespectful way . However , as the creator of the site is not a Bahá 'í , there is little , if anything , that can be done to address this matter . We hope these comments have been of assistance . " 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = = Works cites = = 
 = Vitold Belevitch = 
 Vitold Belevitch ( 2 March 1921 – 26 December 1999 ) was a Belgian mathematician and electrical engineer of Russian origin who produced some important work in the field of electrical network theory . Born to parents fleeing the Bolsheviks , he settled in Belgium where he worked on early computer construction projects . Belevitch is responsible for a number of circuit theorems and introduced the now well @-@ known scattering parameters . 
 Belevitch had an interest in languages and found a mathematical derivation of Zipf 's law . He also published on machine languages . Another field of interest was transmission lines , where he published on line coupling . He worked on telephone conferencing and introduced the mathematical construct of the conference matrix . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Belevitch was born 2 March 1921 in Terijoki , Karelia , now incorporated into Russia , but at the time part of Finland . Belevitch 's parents were Russian and his mother was an ethnic Pole . They were attempting to flee from their home in Petrograd ( St Petersburg ) in Russia to escape the Bolshevik revolution , which Belevitch 's father opposed . Belevitch 's heavily pregnant mother succeeded in crossing the border into Finland and continued on to Helsinki after Vitold was born , where the birth was registered . She headed for Helsinki because her husband 's father was principal of the Russian school there . Belevitch 's father was arrested before he could follow and was deported to Siberia , where he died without ever seeing his son . 
 In 1926 Belevitch , while still a small child , emigrated with his mother to Belgium . 
 = = Education = = 
 Belevitch was educated in French in Belgium , until July 1936 at the Notre @-@ Dame de la Paix College at Namur . In 1937 , aged 16 , he enrolled at the Université Catholique de Louvain where he studied electrical and mechanical engineering , graduating in 1942 . Belevitch gained his PhD in applied sciences at the same university in 1945 . His sponsor was Charles <unk> and his second advisor was Wilhelm Cauer , the founder of the field of network synthesis . 
 From 1953 until 1985 Belevitch lectured at the university . He taught circuit theory and other mathematical subjects related to electrical science . In 1960 he became a special professor ( <unk> <unk> ) . Although Belevitch worked as an electrical engineer , his primary interest was mathematics , especially algebra . There was a tradition in Belgium of the most gifted mathematicians entering engineering rather than pure mathematics or physics . Belevitch showed his mathematical leanings by preferring the use of blackboard and chalk to any audio @-@ visual aids during lectures . He even lectured in this way when presenting the opening lecture to a large audience at an international conference at the <unk> in London . 
 = = Career = = 
 After graduating in 1942 , Belevitch joined the Bell Telephone Manufacturing Company ( BTMC ) in Antwerp , originally part of the International Bell Telephone Company headquartered in Brussels but , along with their other European holdings , sold to International Telephone and Telegraph ( ITT ) in 1925 . At BTMC Belevitch became head of the transmission department . It was here that he came into contact with Wilhelm Cauer who became a great influence on him . Cauer was one of the leading circuit theorists of the day and at the time worked for Mix & Genest in Berlin , a sister company under the ITT umbrella . Cauer died during the Second World War but Belevitch long after continued to consider his works to be the highest authority on matters of circuit theory . 
 From 1951 Belevitch was involved in the design of electronic computers which BTMC were developing for the Belgian government . The purpose of this program was to " catch up " with the advances made in the English @-@ speaking world during the war . It resulted in the construction of the Machine <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> . From 1952 Belevitch represented the electrical engineering aspect of this project . In 1955 Belevitch became director of the Belgian Computing Centre ( Comité d 'Étude et d <unk> des <unk> <unk> ) in Brussels which operated this computer for the government . Initially , only the 17 @-@ rack prototype was operational . One of the first tasks to which it was put was the calculation of Bessel functions . The full 34 @-@ rack machine was moved from Antwerp and put into service in 1957 . Belevitch used this machine to investigate transcendental functions . 
 In 1963 Belevitch became head of the newly formed Laboratoire de Recherche <unk> ( later Philips Research Laboratories Belgium ) under the Philips director of research Hendrik Casimir in Eindhoven . This facility specialised in applied mathematics for Philips and was heavily involved in computing research . Belevitch stayed in this post until his retirement in November 1984 . 
 Belevitch died on 26 December 1999 . He is survived by a daughter , but not his wife . 
 = = Works = = 
 Belevitch is best known for his contributions to circuit theory , particularly the mathematical basis of filters , modulators , coupled lines , and non @-@ linear circuits . He was on the editorial board of the International Journal of Circuit Theory from its foundation in 1973 . He also made major contributions in information theory , electronic computers , mathematics and linguistics . 
 Belevitch dominated international conferences and was prone to asking searching questions of the presenters of papers , often causing them some discomfort . The organiser of one conference at Birmingham University in 1959 made Belevitch the chairman of the session in which the organiser gave his own presentation . It seems he did this to restrain Belevitch from asking questions . Belevitch stopped attending conferences in the mid @-@ 1970s with the exception of the IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems in Montreal in 1984 in order to receive the IEEE Centennial Medal . 
 = = = Circuit theory = = = 
 = = = = Scattering matrix = = = = 
 It was in his 1945 dissertation that Belevitch first introduced the important idea of the scattering matrix ( called repartition matrix by Belevitch ) . This work was reproduced in part in a later paper by Belevitch , Transmission Losses in 2n @-@ terminal Networks . Belgium was occupied by Nazi Germany for most of World War II and this prevented Belevitch from any communication with American colleagues . It was only after the war that it was discovered that the same idea , under the scattering matrix name , had independently been used by American scientists developing military radars . The American work by Montgomery , Dicke and Purcell was published in 1948 . Belevitch in his work had applied scattering matrices to lumped circuits and was certainly the first to do so , whereas the Americans were concerned with the distributed circuits used at microwave frequencies in radar . 
 Belevitch produced a textbook , Classical Network Theory , first published in 1968 which comprehensively covered the field of passive one @-@ port , and <unk> circuits . In this work he made extensive use of the now @-@ established S parameters from the scattering matrix concept , thus succeeding in welding the field into a coherent whole . The eponymous Belevitch 's theorem , explained in this book , provides a method of determining whether or not it is possible to construct a passive , lossless circuit from discrete elements ( that is , a circuit consisting only of inductors and capacitors ) that represents a given scattering matrix . 
 = = = = Telephone conferencing = = = = 
 Belevitch introduced the mathematical concept of conference matrices in 1950 , so called because they originally arose in connection with a problem Belevitch was working on concerning telephone conferencing . However , they have applications in a range of other fields as well as being of interest to pure mathematics . Belevitch was studying setting up telephone conferencing by connecting together ideal transformers . It turns out that a necessary condition for setting up a conference with n telephone ports and ideal signal loss is the existence of an n × n conference matrix . Ideal signal loss means the loss is only that due to splitting the signal between conference subscribers – there is no dissipation within the conference network . 
 The existence of conference matrices is not a trivial question , they do not exist for all values of n . Values of n for which they exist are always of the form 4k + 2 ( k integer ) but this is not , by itself , a sufficient condition . Conference matrices exist for n of 2 , 6 , 10 , 14 , 18 , 26 , 30 , 38 and 42 . They do not exist for n of 22 or 34 . Belevitch obtained complete solutions for all n up to 38 and also noted that n = 66 had multiple solutions . 
 = = = = Other work on circuits = = = = 
 Belevitch wrote a comprehensive summary of the history of circuit theory . He also had an interest in transmission lines , and published several papers on the subject . They include papers on skin effects and coupling between lines ( " crosstalk " ) due to asymmetry . 
 Belevitch first introduced the great factorization theorem in which he gives a factorization of <unk> matrices . <unk> matrices occur in the construction of filter banks used in <unk> digital systems . Apparently , Belevitch 's work is obscure and difficult to understand . A much more frequently cited version of this theorem was later published by P. P. Vaidyanathan . 
 = = = Linguistics = = = 
 Belevitch was educated in French but continued to speak Russian to his mother until she died . In fact , he was able to speak many languages , and could read even more . He studied Sanskrit and the etymology of Indo @-@ European languages . 
 Belevitch wrote a book on human and machine languages in which he explored the idea of applying the mathematics of information theory to obtain results regarding human languages . The book highlighted the difficulties for machine understanding of language for which there was some naive enthusiasm amongst cybernetics researchers in the 1950s . 
 Belevitch also wrote a paper , On the Statistical Laws of Linguistic Distribution , which gives a derivation for the well @-@ known empirical relationship , Zipf 's law . This law , and the more complex Mandelbrot law , provide a relationship between the frequency of word occurrence in languages and the word 's rank . In the simplest form of Zipf 's law , frequency is inversely proportional to rank . Belevitch expressed a large class of statistical distributions ( not only the normal distribution ) in terms of rank and then expanded each expression into a Taylor series . In every case Belevitch obtained the remarkable result that a first order truncation of the series resulted in Zipf 's law . Further , a second @-@ order truncation of the Taylor series resulted in Mandelbrot 's law . This gives some insight into the reason why Zipf 's law has been found experimentally to hold in such a wide variety of languages . 
 = = = Control systems = = = 
 Belevitch played a part in developing a mathematical test for determining the controllability of linear control systems . A system is controllable if it can be moved from one state to another through the system state space in a finite time by application of control inputs . This test is known as the Popov @-@ Belevitch @-@ <unk> , or PBH , test . There is also a PBH test for determining the observability of a system – that is , the ability to determine the state of a system in finite time solely from the system 's own outputs . 
 The PBH test was originally discovered by Elmer G. Gilbert in 1963 , but Gilbert 's version only applied to systems that could be represented by a <unk> matrix . The test was subsequently generalised by Vasile M. Popov ( in 1966 ) , Belevitch ( in Classical Network Theory , 1968 ) and Malo <unk> in 1969 . 
 = = IEEE and honours = = 
 Belevitch was a Fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers ( IEEE ) and was vice @-@ chair of the Benelux section when it was formed in 1959 . He was awarded the IEEE Centennial Medal , and in 1993 , the Society Award ( now called Mac Van Valkenburg Award ) of the IEEE Circuits and Systems Society . He was also a member of the North Rhine @-@ Westphalian Academy of Sciences . 
 Belevitch received an honorary doctoral degree in 1975 from the Technical University of Munich , and another from the École Polytechnique <unk> de Lausanne , Switzerland , in 1978 . He was also rewarded with Belgian royal medals . 
 Since 2003 , the IEEE Circuits and Systems Society has instituted a Vitold Belevitch award for work in circuit theory . The award is presented biennially at the European Conference on Circuit Theory & Design . 
 = = Selected publications = = 
 Belevitch was a prolific publisher with around 4000 pages of scientific output . He was publishing throughout his career right up to , and beyond , his retirement in 1984 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Langage des Machines et Langage Humain , Bruxelles : Office de <unk> , 1956 OCLC <unk> ( in French ) . 
 Théorie des Circuits de <unk> , Louvain : Librairie Universitaire , 1957 OCLC <unk> ( in French ) . 
 Théorie des Circuits <unk> en Régime <unk> : <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Louvain : <unk> , 1959 OCLC <unk> ( in French ) . 
 Classical Network Theory , San Francisco : Holden @-@ Day , 1968 OCLC <unk> . 
 = = = Journal articles = = = 
 " Extension of Norton 's method of impedance transformation to band @-@ pass filters " , Electrical Communication , <unk> , no.1 , pp. 59 – 65 , March 1947 . 
 " Insertion loss and effective phase shift in composite filters at cut @-@ off frequencies " , Electrical Communication , <unk> , no.2 , pp. 192 – 194 , June 1947 . 
 " Transmission losses in 2n @-@ terminal networks " , Journal of Applied Physics , <unk> , No. 7 , pp. 636 – 638 , 1948 . 
 " Development in the design of filters " , Electrical Communication , <unk> , no.1 , pp. 84 – 98 , March 1949 . 
 " Theory of 2n @-@ terminal networks with application to conference telephony " , Electrical Communication , <unk> , no.3 , pp. 231 – 244 , September 1950 . 
 " Topics in the design of insertion loss filters " , IRE Transactions on Circuit Theory , <unk> , <unk> , pp. 337 – 346 , December 1955 . 
 " Théorie de l 'information et <unk> <unk> " , Académie Royale de Belgique : Bulletin de la Classe des Sciences , series 5 , <unk> , pp. 419 – 436 , 1956 . ( in French ) 
 " On the statistical laws of linguistic distribution " , Annales de la Société Scientifique de Bruxelles , <unk> , <unk> , pp. 310 – 326 , 1959 ISSN <unk> @-@ <unk> . ( in French ) 
 " Summary of the history of circuit theory " , Proceedings of the IRE , <unk> , <unk> , pp. 848 – 855 , May 1962 . 
 " Factorization of scattering matrices with applications to passive network synthesis " , Philips Research Reports , <unk> , pp. 275 – 317 , 1963 ISSN 0031 @-@ 7918 . 
 " <unk> matrices " , Philips Research Reports , vol.25 , pp. 337 – 369 , 1970 ISSN 0031 @-@ 7918 . 
 " On the realizability of non @-@ rational positive real functions " , International Journal of Circuit Theory and Applications , vol.1 , <unk> , pp. 17 – 30 , March 1973 . 
 " Theory of the proximity effect in <unk> cables " , Philips Research Reports , <unk> , pp. 16 – 43 , 96 @-@ 177 , 1977 ISSN 0031 @-@ 7918 . 
 " The Gauss hypergeometric ratio as a positive real function " , SIAM Journal on Mathematical Analysis , <unk> , pp. 1024 – 1040 , 1982 . 
 " Ideal rectifier n @-@ ports are solvable " , International Journal of Circuit Theory and Applications , <unk> , <unk> , pp. 171 – 180 , April 1987 . 
 = Noble train of artillery = 
 The noble train of artillery , also known as the Knox Expedition , was an expedition led by Continental Army Colonel Henry Knox to transport heavy weaponry that had been captured at Fort Ticonderoga to the Continental Army camps outside Boston , Massachusetts during the winter of 1775 – 1776 . 
 Knox went to Ticonderoga in November 1775 , and , over the course of three winter months , moved 60 tons of cannons and other armaments by boat , horse and ox @-@ drawn sledges , and manpower , along poor @-@ quality roads , across two semi @-@ frozen rivers , and through the forests and swamps of the lightly inhabited Berkshires to the Boston area . Historian Victor Brooks has called Knox 's exploit " one of the most stupendous feats of logistics " of the entire American Revolutionary War . 
 The route by which Knox moved the weaponry is now known as the Henry Knox Trail , and the states of New York and Massachusetts have erected markers along the route . 
 = = Background = = 
 Shortly after the American Revolutionary War broke out with the Battles of Lexington and Concord in April 1775 , Benedict Arnold , a militia leader from Connecticut who had arrived with his unit in support of the Siege of Boston , proposed to the Massachusetts Committee of Safety that Fort Ticonderoga , on Lake Champlain in the Province of New York , be captured from its small British garrison . One reason he gave to justify the move was the presence at Ticonderoga of heavy weaponry . On May 3 , the committee gave Arnold a Massachusetts colonel 's commission and authorized the operation . 
 The idea to capture Ticonderoga had also been raised to Ethan Allen and the Green Mountain Boys in the disputed New Hampshire Grants territory ( present @-@ day Vermont ) . Allen and Arnold joined forces , and on May 10 a force of 83 men captured the fort without a fight . The next day , a detachment of men captured the nearby Fort Crown Point , again without combat . 
 Arnold began to inventory the two forts for usable military equipment . Hampered by a lack of resources and conflict over command of the forts , first with Allen , and later with a Connecticut militia company sent to hold the fort in June , Arnold eventually abandoned the idea of transporting the armaments to Boston and resigned his commission . 
 = = Expedition planning = = 
 In July 1775 , George Washington assumed command of the forces outside Boston . One of the significant problems he identified in the nascent Continental Army there was a lack of heavy weaponry , which made offensive operations virtually impossible . While it is uncertain exactly who proposed the operation to retrieve the Ticonderoga cannons ( biographers tend to credit either Knox or Arnold with giving Washington the idea ) , Washington eventually chose the young Henry Knox for the job . 
 Knox , a 25 @-@ year @-@ old bookseller with an interest in military matters , served in the Massachusetts militia , and become good friends with Washington on his arrival at Boston . When Washington gave Knox the assignment , he wrote that " no trouble or expense must be spared to obtain them . " On November 16 Washington , issued orders to Knox to retrieve the cannons ( and authorized £ 1000 for the purpose ) , and wrote to General Philip Schuyler asking him to assist Knox in the endeavor . Washington 's call for the weapons was echoed by the Second Continental Congress , which issued Knox a colonel 's commission in November , which did not reach him until he returned from the expedition . 
 Knox departed Washington 's camp on November 17 , and after traveling to New York City for supplies , reached Ticonderoga on December 5 . The night before , at Fort George at the southern end of Lake George , he shared a cabin with a young British prisoner named John André . André had been taken prisoner during the Siege of Fort St. Jean and was on his way south to a prison camp . The two were of a similar age and temperament , and found much common ground to talk about . It was not to be their last meeting ; the next time they met , Knox presided over the court martial that convicted and sentenced André to death for his role in Benedict Arnold 's treason . 
 = = Albany = = 
 Upon arrival at Ticonderoga , Knox immediately set about identifying the equipment to take and organizing its transport . He selected 59 pieces of equipment , including cannons ranging in size from four to twenty @-@ four pounders , mortars , and howitzers . He estimated the total weight to be transported at 119 @,@ 000 pounds ( about 60 tons or 54 metric tons ) . The largest pieces , the twenty @-@ four pounder " Big <unk> " , were 11 feet ( 3 @.@ 4 m ) long and estimated to weigh over 5 @,@ 000 pounds ( 2 @,@ 300 kg ) . 
 The equipment was first carried overland from Ticonderoga to the northern end of Lake George , where most of the train was loaded onto a scow @-@ like ship called a gundalow . On December 6 , the gundalow set sail for the southern end of the lake , with Knox sailing ahead in a small boat . Ice was already beginning to cover the lake , but the gundalow , after grounding once on a submerged rock , reached Sabbath Day Point . The next day , they sailed on , again with Knox going ahead . While he reached Fort George in good time , the gundalow did not appear when expected . A boat sent to check on its progress reported that the gundalow had foundered and sunk not far from Sabbath Day Point . While this at first appeared to be a serious setback , Knox 's brother William , captain of the gundalow , reported that she had foundered , but that her <unk> were above the water line , and that she could be bailed out . This was done , the ship was refloated , and two days later , the gundalow arrived at the southern end of the lake . 
 On December 17 , Knox wrote to Washington that he had built " 42 exceeding strong sleds , and have provided 80 yoke of oxen to drag them as far as Springfield " , and that he hoped " in 16 or 17 days to be able to present your Excellency a noble train of artillery " . 
 Knox then set out for Albany ahead of the train . At Glens Falls , he crossed the frozen Hudson River and proceeded on through Saratoga , reaching New City ( present @-@ day <unk> ) , just north of Albany , on Christmas Day . Two feet ( 0 @.@ 6 m ) of snow fell that day , slowing his progress , as the snow @-@ covered route needed to be broken open . The next day , again slowed by significant snow on the ground , he finally reached Albany . There , he met with General Philip Schuyler , and the two of them worked over the next few days to locate and send north equipment and personnel to assist in moving the train south from Lake George . While the snowfall was sufficient for the use of sleds to move the train overland , the river ice was still too thin to move it over the Hudson . Knox and his men tried to accelerate the process of thickening the river ice by pouring additional water on top of existing ice . By January 4 , the first of the cannon had arrived at Albany . On the way to Albany , and again on crossing the Hudson heading east from there toward Massachusetts , cannons crashed through the ice into the river . In every instance , the cannon was recovered . On January 9 , the last of cannons had crossed the Hudson , and Knox rode ahead to oversee the next stage of the journey . 
 = = Crossing the Berkshires = = 
 Details of the remaining journey are sketchy , as Knox 's journal ends on January 12 . He reached the vicinity of Claverack , New York , on January 9 , and proceeded through the Berkshires , reaching Blandford , Massachusetts , two days later . There , the lead crew refused to continue owing to a lack of snow and the upcoming steep descent to the Connecticut River valley . Knox hired additional oxen and persuaded the crew to go on . As the train moved further east , news of it spread , and people came out to watch it pass . In Westfield , Knox loaded one of the big guns with powder and fired it , to the applause of the assembled crowd . 
 At Springfield , Knox had to hire new work crews , as his New York @-@ based crews wanted to return home . John Adams reported seeing the artillery train pass through Framingham on January 25 . Two days later , Knox arrived in Cambridge and personally reported to Washington that the artillery train had arrived . According to Knox 's accounting , he spent £ 521 on an operation he had hoped would take two weeks , that instead took ten weeks . 
 = = Arrival = = 
 When the equipment began to arrive in the Boston area , Washington , seeking to end the siege , formulated a plan to draw at least some of the British out of Boston , at which point he would launch an attack on the city across the Charles River . Pursuing this plan , he placed cannons from Ticonderoga at Lechmere 's Point and Cobble Hill in Cambridge , and on Lamb 's Dam in Roxbury . These batteries opened fire on Boston on the night of March 2 , while preparations were made to fortify the Dorchester Heights , from which cannons could threaten both the city and the British fleet in the harbor . On the night of March 4 , Continental Army troops occupied this high ground . 
 British General William Howe first planned to contest this move by assaulting the position , but a snowstorm prevented its execution . After further consideration , he decided instead to withdraw from the city . On March 17 , British troops and Loyalist colonists boarded ships and sailed for Halifax , Nova Scotia . 
 Henry Knox went on to become the chief artillery officer of the Continental Army , and later served as the first United States Secretary of War . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 To commemorate Knox 's achievement , at the time of its sesquicentennial ( 150th anniversary ) , the states of New York and Massachusetts both placed historical markers along the route he was believed to have taken at the time . In 1972 , markers in New York were moved when new information surfaced about the train 's movements between Albany and the state boundary . Most of the markers in Massachusetts are along a route the train was assumed to take , given the sparsity of documentation and what was known about roads in Massachusetts at the time . 
 Fort Knox , an Army post in Kentucky most famous for being the site of the United States Bullion Depository , was named after Henry Knox . 
 = Charizard = 
 Charizard , known in Japan as <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> ) , is a Pokémon species in Nintendo and Game Freak 's Pokémon franchise . Created by Ken Sugimori , Charizard first appeared in the video games Pokémon Red and Blue and subsequent sequels . They have later appeared in various merchandise , spinoff titles and animated and printed adaptations of the franchise . Shin @-@ ichiro Miki , the actor who voices James in the original Japanese version of the Pokémon anime , voices Charizard in both the Japanese and English @-@ language versions of the anime . An orange , draconic Pokémon , Charizard is the evolved form of Charmeleon , which is the evolved form of Charmander . It has two other forms , which are its Mega Evolution : Mega Charizard X and Mega Charizard Y. 
 Charizard is featured in the Pokémon anime series with the most recurring being from the main character , Ash Ketchum . It is featured in printed adaptations such as Pokémon Adventures , in the possession of Blue , one of the main characters . Charizard appears in Pokémon Origins with main character Red as its trainer . Charizard has received positive reception from the media , with GamesRadar describing it as " hands @-@ down one of the coolest Pokémon out there " . Charizard is the version mascot of Pokémon Red and FireRed versions , and makes an appearance on the <unk> of Pokémon Stadium , Pokémon Ranger , Pokémon Mystery Dungeon : Red Rescue Team , and Pokémon Mystery Dungeon : Explorers of Sky . 
 = = Concept and characteristics = = 
 Charizard was one of several different character choices conceived by Game Freak 's character development team and finalized by Ken Sugimori for the first generation of Pocket Monsters games Red and Green , which were localized outside Japan as Pokémon Red and Blue . Originally called " <unk> " in Japanese , Nintendo decided to give the various Pokémon species " clever and descriptive names " related to their appearance or features when translating the game for western audiences as a means to make the characters more relatable to American children . As a result , they were renamed " Charizard " , a combination of the words " charcoal " or " char " and " lizard " . During an interview , Pokémon Company president Tsunekazu Ishihara stated Charizard was expected to be popular with North American audiences because of their preference for strong , powerful characters . 
 Whereas its pre @-@ evolutions Charmander and Charmeleon are ground @-@ bound lizard like creatures , Charizard resembles a large traditional European dragon . Despite the resemblance , Charizard is explicitly a Fire / Flying @-@ type , not a Dragon @-@ type , except in its " Mega Charizard X " form ; however , it can learn Dragon @-@ type attacks . Charizard have two wings that are blue , while the back is orange , as with the most of its body . Its belly and soles are cream @-@ colored , while their eyes are light blue in color . The video games describe Charizard as having wings that can carry them close to an altitude of 4 @,@ 600 feet , flying proudly around the sky and constantly seeking for powerful opponents to quarrel with . They can breathe intense flames that can melt any material , but will never torch a weaker foe . If Charizard become angry , the flame at the tip of their tail can flare up in a whitish @-@ blue color . Because of their reckless behavior , Charizard are known to unintentionally cause wildfires . When Charizard is Mega Evolved , it can take on one of two forms . In its " X " form , it gains the Dragon type , and its color scheme changes from orange and cream to black and blue . In its " Y " form , its appearance gets sharper with pointed horns and wings , and it is able to fly much higher . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In video games = = = 
 Charizard made its video game debut in 1996 with the Japanese release of Pokémon Red and Blue . It is available only through Pokémon evolution from the starter Pokémon , Charmander . In Pokémon Gold , Silver , and Crystal , and their remakes , Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver , Charizard is used by Red , who acts as the games ' final boss . Charizard is one of several Pokémon in Pokémon X and Y that will able to use the new Mega Evolution mechanic , becoming either Mega Charizard X or Mega Charizard Y. It was given a Mega Evolution about one and a half years into the development of Pokémon X and Y. Charmander ( along with Bulbasaur and Squirtle ) was added to the game in a significant role in order to allow players to experience Charizard 's Mega Evolution . 
 Charizard has made appearances in many other Pokémon games . It appears in Pokémon Mystery Dungeon : Blue Rescue Team and Red Rescue Team on a team with an Alakazam and <unk> , who play a significant role in the story . In Pokémon Ranger , Charizard is a boss Pokémon who becomes attached to the player 's character and assists him or her throughout the game . Charizard returns in Pokémon Ranger : Guardian Signs as another boss character . It is also one of the <unk> Pokémon in Pokémon Snap , as well as a non @-@ playable character in PokéPark Wii : Pikachu 's Adventure and its sequel , PokéPark 2 : Wonders Beyond . 
 Charizard has appeared many times throughout the Super Smash Bros. series . Charizard first appears as a non @-@ playable character in Super Smash Bros. and Super Smash Bros. Melee , as one of the Pokémon which can appear if a player throws a Poké Ball . In Super Smash Bros. Brawl , Charizard is now playable , under the command of the Pokémon Trainer . The Trainer has a Squirtle and an <unk> , all three of which can be switched between ; unlike the other fighters , these Pokémon become fatigued and consequently weaker , and must be switched out long enough to recover . Charizard 's moves include Rock Smash , Flamethrower , and Fly . Charizard is playable as a stand @-@ alone character in for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U , where his new Final Smash is transforming into Mega Charizard X. Charizard also appears as a playable fighter in Pokkén Tournament . 
 = = = In anime = = = 
 In the anime , the most notable Charizard is one Ash Ketchum has had since he was a Charmander abandoned by his former owner Damian . Ash 's Charmander evolved into Charmeleon during a battle against an army of <unk> , and his personality changed completely , becoming a disobedient Pokémon and fighting when and how he pleased . Charmeleon evolved when Ash summoned him for protection from wild prehistoric Pokémon ; when an <unk> attacked him and carried Ash off , Charmeleon evolved to fight the <unk> and rescue Ash . Charizard still didn 't obey Ash , preferring to sleep , and only battled Pokémon that would pose a challenge , but Charizard helped Ash reach his goals , particularly against Gym Leader Blaine . Sadly , Charizard 's disobedience to Ash then led to costing him the Kanto League . Charizard became loyal during the Orange Islands arc after Ash battled a trainer with a <unk> and Charizard was frozen solid . Because of Ash 's continuous self @-@ sacrificing efforts to save Charizard from certain death , he began to obey Ash and defeated the <unk> in a rematch . He remained on Ash 's team and contributed to his wins in the Orange League and parts of Johto . He eventually stayed behind in the <unk> Valley , a reserve where wild Charizard battle and train to become stronger . This was likely due to meeting Charla , a female Charizard for whom he developed a fondness . Charizard , like many of Ash 's other Pokémon , returns on a temporary basis to battle at Ash 's side , typically when Ash faces a particularly powerful Pokémon . Charizard has saved Ash 's life on more than one occasion , as seen in the film Spell of the <unk> , where he battled against Entei after arriving in the nick of time to prevent Ash and Pikachu from falling to their deaths , having flown over from the <unk> Valley after originally seeing a live broadcast from Ash running after Entei who had kidnapped Ash 's mother , Delia Ketchum . Charizard returned during the Johto Pokémon League and defeated Gary 's Blastoise , who had a type advantage over Charizard . Charizard also returned for Ash 's first Battle Frontier battle , where he took on Articuno at the Battle Factory and won thanks to an unorthodox strategy . During the Best Wishes series Charizard officially rejoined Ash 's team while Ash was exploring the Unova ( Isshu ) region . Upon meeting Ash again , he gave his trainer a Flamethrower to the face much to everyone 's surprise . Charizard also developed a fierce rivalry with Iris 's Dragonite so much so that both Ash and Iris agreed to have a battle . During the battle which originally began on the ground but later ascended skywards when both Pokémon took to the skies , it was shown that Charizard had learnt Wing Attack , Slash , and Dragon Tail but despite the two Pokémon having something of a very fierce rivalry with one another , N immediately called the battle off after realizing that Dragonite had injured its right arm . Charizard stayed with all of Ash 's Pokémon sans Pikachu at Professor Oak 's laboratory when Ash leaves Kanto once more for the faraway <unk> region . Charizard is one of Ash 's strongest Pokémon . 
 Another Charizard appears in Pokémon X and Y , under the ownership of Alain . This Charizard can Mega Evolve into Mega Charizard X and has shown to be powerful by defeating 10 Mega Evolutions in a row and defeating Ash 's <unk> , who had a type advantage . 
 Charizard has its own DVD that contains three episodes featuring it : " Attack of the Prehistoric Pokémon " , " Charizard Chills " , " Charizard 's Burning Ambition " . This DVD is part of the 10th Anniversary Box Set ; in the Box Set 's " 10 Most Wanted Pokémon " countdown Charizard is listed as the third most wanted , beaten only by Pikachu and <unk> . 
 In the anime spin @-@ off , Pokémon Origins , another Charizard appears under the ownership of Red , Ash 's video game counterpart , where it started off as Red 's starter Pokémon . After winning many battles , it eventually evolved into Charmeleon , and later Charizard . Red 's Charizard helped it 's trainer defeat Team Rocket , win the Pokémon League , as well as help Red capture the elusive Pokémon , Mewtwo . During its battle against Mewtwo , Red 's Charizard learned Mega Evolution , where it evolved into Mega Charizard X. Red 's Charizard is the first Pokémon to Mega @-@ Evolve in an anime . 
 = = = In printed adaptations = = = 
 In Pokémon : Pikachu Shocks Back which loosely parallels the storyline of the anime , Ash catches a Charmander , and it ultimately becomes a Charizard and battles in the Pokémon League tournament . Despite his catch , he has trouble controlling it . Ash brings Charizard to the Orange Islands and trains it diligently since the near @-@ disaster . He then uses it to battle Dragonite in the final showdown with the Orange Crew Supreme gym leader Drake . 
 In the Pokémon Adventures manga , Blue receives a Charmander from his grandfather Professor Oak . It evolves into a Charmeleon , and when Blue is possessed by a <unk> in the Lavender Tower , so is Charmeleon . Blue 's Charmeleon is eventually released from its possession only to be faced down by an Arbok , owned by Koga . Charmeleon tricked Koga by using a zombie <unk> to deflect Arbok 's acid attack before literally slicing the Arbok in half with his tail . Blue later appears with an evolved Charizard and gains access to Saffron City by helping to disable a barrier created by a Mr. Mime . Later , Red and Blue face off against Koga 's Articuno and are frozen by its Ice Beam , but they ultimately defeat the Team Rocket Executive with Charizard 's Flamethrower . It then teams up with Red 's newly evolved <unk> , Saur , and Green 's Blastoise , <unk> , to defeat Sabrina 's monster Pokémon . They end Team Rocket 's control of Saffron City , splitting apart the three birds in the process . 
 Blue 's Charizard re @-@ appeared during the final match of the ninth Pokémon League , against his longtime rival Red . Despite the type advantage , Charizard battles against Saur and is nearly knocked out . As the battle progresses the two trainers send out their first Pokémon to battle again , when Saur binds Charizard from attacking . Suddenly , thunderclouds form from the attacks of Poli and Pika , and Saur submerges a vine into the cloud , shocking Charizard and knocking it out . When the " FireRed and LeafGreen " volume of the manga began the original protagonists – Red , Blue , and Green – return to fight the newly formed Team Rocket and the Deoxys under their power . The three trainers become trapped inside the Trainer Tower in the Sevii Islands , battling the main computer of the building and the Deoxys <unk> . After struggling to co @-@ ordinate <unk> , Saur , and Charizard , the three trainers manage to focus the angle of the three powerful attacks – Blast Burn , Hydro Cannon , and Frenzy Plant – to free Mewtwo , who in turn destroys the Trainer Tower . 
 Charizard appeared as the main Pokémon in the short novel , Charizard Go ! Adapted by Tracey West , the novelisation retells Ash 's journey with his Charmander , and it reaches its climax as Ash and Charizard battle in the Pokémon League at the Indigo Plateau against his good friend Ritchie . The story covers Ash and his companions finding the abandoned Charmander , the battles in which Charmeleon did not listen to Ash , and Charizard 's battle against Blaine 's <unk> . Charizard Go ! is the sixth novel in the Pokémon Chapter Books series . Another chapter novel , All Fired Up : Pokémon the Johto Journeys , adapted by Jennifer Johnson , covers the portion of Ash 's journey near Violet City and the <unk> Valley . In the novel , Ash wonders if Charizard should leave his team forever ; it covers the capture of Ash 's Cyndaquil , his new fire Pokémon . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Charizard has been featured in lines of soft toys and action figures in the Pokémon franchise , made by Hasbro , and Tomy . In 2004 , the " Charizard Medium Plush " was part of a major recall of 13 plush toys due to a manufacturing fault where tips of needles were being found with the stuffing . This caused Tomy to replace the toys with compensation or replacements . Charizard appears often in the Pokémon Trading Card Game , most notably in the series ' initial release . Cards featuring the character have been stated to be the most desired of the series , quickly rising to high prices amongst collectors and retailers . These cards overpowered and knocked out opponents in one hit . In 2005 , search engine Yahoo ! reported Charizard as one of the top Pokémon @-@ related web searches . 
 Described by the media as " a lean , ferocious , fire @-@ breathing dragon [ ... ] sleek , powerful , and utterly destructive " , Charizard has been noted as one of the franchise 's most popular characters . Retailers have attributed the high sales of merchandise related to the character to the popularity of the character 's dragon @-@ like design with children . Interviewed children have stated similar ; they attributed its appeal to its " cool looking " appearance and associating the character with the concepts of stubbornness and power . The book Rebuilding Attachments With Traumatized Children stated psychiatrists utilized the character as an empowered character traumatized children who were fans of the Pokémon series could relate to . The book Pikachu 's Global Adventure : The Rise and Fall of Pokémon cited Charizard as popular with older male children who tend to be drawn to " tough or scary " characters , and compared the character 's evolution from Charmander into Charizard with the loss of " cuteness " as one leaves childhood . 
 IGN editor " <unk> " called Charizard " certainly the most popular and perhaps the most well @-@ balanced of any of the current starting Pokemon " . GamesRadar 's Brett Elston described Charizard as " hands @-@ down one of the coolest Pokémon out there " , heavily praising its character design and calling it " one of the coolest " designs of the entire series . GamesRadar editor Raymond Padilla stated " Charizard was an awesome Pokemon back in the day and still an excellent choice more than a decade after it was introduced . " UGO.com described Charizard as a " winged , dragon @-@ like creature " which is " able to breathe fire and smash opponents into red @-@ tinged goo " , but states that in Brawl it is " as slow as Bowser " and " lacks the coolness factor of Mario 's arch @-@ nemesis . " 
 Authors Tracey West and Katherine Noll called Charizard the best Fire type Pokémon and the third best Pokémon overall . They wrote that there was nothing else that could better fit that spot and that " it has won our hearts and had us cheering for more . " 1UP editor Kat Bailey expressed concern about which Pokémon could follow the player in Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver , stating " allowing popular favorites like Charizard would go over quite well " . The Daily Cardinal editor Kyle Sparks called Charizard " the most dominant Pokémon in the whole universe , a force of sheer strength " . In a poll conducted by IGN , it was voted as the best Pokémon , where the staff commented about remembering being torn between choosing Blastoise and Charizard at the start of the game . In a poll by Official Nintendo Magazine , Charizard was voted as the best Fire @-@ type Pokémon . They stated " not only is Charizard your favourite fire Pokémon but it is probably one of the most popular ' mon of all time " . Kotaku editor Patricia Hernandez criticized Charizard 's Y Mega Evolution for not differing enough from Charizard 's original design , while praising Mega Charizard X for changing color , and turning Charizard into a dragon @-@ type . <unk> ranked Charizard the " coolest " Pokémon out of the original 151 , describing it as " Powerful , gigantic , and imposing " . They further commented that " Pikachu may be the one you recognize , but Charizard is the one you want . " 
 = Blue Gardenia ( album ) = 
 Blue Gardenia is a 2001 album by Etta James , released through the record label Private Music . It was produced by John Snyder , who had worked with James on five of her previous studio albums . Blue Gardenia contains thirteen jazz standards from the 1930s , 1940s and 1950s . All of the standards were arranged by pianist Cedar Walton , with the exception of " Love Letters " , which was arranged by Josh Sklair . Between November 2000 and February 2001 , Snyder and Walton assembled musicians to record tracks while James was recovering from a flu ; her vocals were added following her recovery . In addition to Walton , artists appearing on the album included Red Holloway on tenor saxophone and Dorothy Hawkins , James ' mother , who provided vocals on the title track . Hawkins died in May 2002 , less than a year after the album 's release . 
 James promoted the album by touring throughout the United States leading up to and following its release . Critical reception of the album was positive overall . The album reached number one on Billboard 's Top Jazz Albums chart . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Blue Gardenia contains thirteen jazz standards from the 1930s , 1940s and 1950s arranged by pianist Cedar Walton , with the exception of " Love Letters " , which was arranged by Josh Sklair . The album was produced by John Snyder , who had produced five of James ' past studio albums : The Right Time ( 1992 ) , Mystery Lady : Songs of Billie Holiday ( 1994 ) , Time After Time ( 1995 ) , 12 Songs of Christmas ( 1998 ) and Heart of a Woman ( 1999 ) . Between November 2000 and February 2001 , Snyder and Walton assembled a group of jazz musicians to record tracks for the album in the absence of James , who was suffering from the flu . A few months later , James recorded vocals following her recovery . AllMusic 's Jonathan Widran described the album as having an " old school big band flavor " with a " bed of simmering brass " ; instrumentation included bass , flugelhorn , guitar , piano , percussion , tenor saxophone , trombone and trumpet . 
 The album opens with a rendition of Clyde Otis ' " This Bitter Earth " , a song popularized by Dinah Washington and later added to Aretha Franklin 's repertoire , followed by " He 's Funny That Way " ( Neil Moret , Richard A. Whiting ) . Both tracks include improvisations by Walton on piano . According to Dorothy Hill , blues editor for Jazz Now , listeners can hear James " murmuring admiration " for Walton 's piano work in the background of " He 's Funny That Way " . " In My Solitude " , originally by Duke Ellington , features a " passionate " interlude by Red Holloway on tenor saxophone . Other standards appearing on the album include " There Is No Greater Love " ( Isham Jones , Marty Symes ) , Joe Greene 's " Don 't Let the Sun Catch You Crying " , and " Love Letters " , originally written by Edward Heyman and Victor Young . Sklair arranged the latter song and performed on guitar ; also featured is Rick Baptist on flugelhorn . " These Foolish Things " , originally written by Harry Link , Holt Marvell and Jack Strachey , previously appeared on James ' 1995 album of the same name . Harold Arlen and Johnny Mercer 's " Come Rain or Come Shine " is followed by " Don 't Worry ' bout Me " ( Rube Bloom , Ted Koehler ) . Leading up to the album 's close are Arthur Hamilton 's " Cry Me a River " , " Don 't Blame Me " ( Dorothy Fields , Jimmy McHugh ) , and " My Man " which features a trombone solo by George Bohannon . The album 's closing and title track features vocals by James ' mother , Dorothy Hawkins . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reception of Blue Gardenia was positive overall . Jonathan Widran wrote a positive review for the album , complimenting Walton 's arrangements and the featured soloists . Widran also said that each track allowed James to " explore both tenderness and guttural emotions " and that James ' mother 's contributions to the title track provided a " unique touch that [ added ] emotional dimension to an already emotionally rich affair " . Music critic Robert Christgau awarded the album an " A – " rating and wrote that James " [ lets ] the songs do the talking and [ leaves ] you to wonder whether her modest melodic variations <unk> sly musicality or weathered pipes . " Isaac Guzman of the New York Daily News thought that the album showcased James ' ability to " get inside the gentle nuances of classic torch songs and ballads " . Dorothy Hill noted the blues sound of the album and the " ache " in James ' voice . She complimented the performances by the guest musicians appearing on the album , including Hawkins , whose vocal contribution Hill called " unpolished but alluring " . 
 Billboard 's Bill Holland called James and the material on Blue Gardenia a " near @-@ perfect fit " after noting her " hit @-@ or @-@ miss relationship with standards " in the past . Holland felt that Walton 's arrangements were designed for a singer with a " less robust style " , but considered " Blue Gardenia " and " Cry Me a River " to be " riveting " . Lorraine Ali 's review for Newsweek called Blue Gardenia a " smooth cocktail " , suggesting that James ' vocal performance reflected her difficult past . Dave Nathan of All About Jazz concluded that " James may have slowed a bit when it comes to technical skills . But the <unk> , the soul and the passion not only are still there , but have grown keener with age . This is an album of more than an hour of from the heart singing by one of the great ones and is recommended . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 " This Bitter Earth " ( Clyde Otis ) – 4 : 20 
 " He 's Funny That Way " ( Neil Moret , Richard A. Whiting ) – 6 : 00 
 " In My Solitude " ( Eddie DeLange , Duke Ellington , Irving Mills ) – 5 : 16 
 " There Is No Greater Love " ( Isham Jones , Marty Symes ) – 5 : 18 
 " Don 't Let the Sun Catch You Crying " ( Joe Greene ) – 5 : 18 
 " Love Letters " ( Edward Heyman , Victor Young ) – 3 : 59 
 " These Foolish Things " ( Harry Link , Holt Marvell , Jack Strachey ) – 5 : 14 
 " Come Rain or Come Shine " ( Harold Arlen , Johnny Mercer ) – 5 : 39 
 " Don 't Worry ' bout Me " ( Rube Bloom , Ted Koehler ) – 5 : 52 
 " Cry Me a River " ( Arthur Hamilton ) – 5 : 02 
 " Don 't Blame Me " ( Dorothy Fields , Jimmy McHugh ) – 5 : 01 
 " My Man " ( Channing Pollack , Yvain @-@ Albert , Maurice Yvain ) – 5 : 09 
 " Blue Gardenia " ( Lester Lee , Bob Russell ) – 5 : 07 
 Track listing adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Blue Gardenia reached number one on Billboard 's Top Jazz Albums chart and held the position for at least four weeks . This was James ' first number one position on any Billboard chart ; previously , Mystery Lady : Songs of Billie Holiday ( 1994 ) and Matriarch of the Blues ( 2000 ) had reached number two on the Top Jazz Albums and Top Blues Albums charts , respectively . The June 8 , 2002 , issue of Billboard , which featured year @-@ to @-@ date rankings as part of the publication 's " Jazz Spotlight " , included Blue Gardenia at number six on the Top Jazz Albums chart . 
 = 2012 Alabama Crimson Tide football team = 
 The 2012 Alabama Crimson Tide football team ( variously " Alabama " , " UA " , " Bama " or " The Tide " ) represented the University of Alabama in the 2012 National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) Division I Football Bowl Subdivision ( FBS ) football season . It marked the Crimson Tide 's 118th overall season of playing college football , 79th as a member of the Southeastern Conference ( SEC ) and 21st within the SEC Western Division . The team was led by head coach Nick Saban , in his sixth year , and played its home games at Bryant – Denny Stadium in Tuscaloosa , Alabama . They finished the season with a record of 13 wins and 1 loss ( 13 – 1 overall , 7 – 1 in the SEC ) , as SEC champions and as consensus national champions after they defeated Notre Dame in the Bowl Championship Series ( BCS ) National Championship Game . 
 After they captured the 2011 national championship , the Crimson Tide signed a highly rated recruiting class in February 2012 and completed spring practice the following April . With twelve returning starters from the previous season , Alabama entered the 2012 season as the defending national champions , ranked as the number two team in the nation and as a favorite to win the Western Division and compete for both the SEC and national championships . The Crimson Tide opened the season with nine consecutive victories that included one over Michigan at a neutral site and a come @-@ from @-@ behind victory on the road at Louisiana State University ( LSU ) . In their tenth game , Alabama was upset by Texas A & M , and dropped to the number four position in the rankings . However , after a series of upsets and victories in their final three games that included winning the SEC Championship over Georgia , Alabama qualified for the 2013 BCS National Championship Game against Notre Dame , where they won 42 – 14 and captured the 2012 national championship . 
 At the conclusion of the season , the Alabama defense led the nation in total defense , scoring defense and rushing defense and ranked 7th in passing defense . Offensively , the Alabama offense ranked 12th in scoring offense , 16th in rushing offense , 31st in total offense and 75th in passing offense . Starting quarterback AJ McCarron was ranked first nationally in pass efficiency . Additionally , several players were recognized for their individual accomplishments on the field . Starting center Barrett Jones won both the Rimington Trophy and the William V. Campbell Trophy , and was named as the Academic All @-@ America of the Year ; defensive coordinator Kirby Smart was named the 2012 American Football Coaches Association ( AFCA ) FBS Assistant Coach of the Year . Also , five players were named to various All @-@ America Teams with Jones and C. J. Mosley being consensus selections and Dee Milliner and Chance Warmack being unanimous selections . 
 = = Before the season = = 
 = = = Previous season = = = 
 In 2011 , Alabama came into the season ranked No. 2 in both preseason polls . The Crimson Tide won eight consecutive games to open the season before they lost to then No. 1 @-@ ranked LSU 9 – 6 in overtime . Alabama then won its remaining games and finished the regular season with eleven wins and one loss ( 11 – 1 ) and secured their fourth consecutive ten @-@ win season . The Crimson Tide then finished No. 2 in the final BCS rankings over both Oklahoma State and Stanford to set up a rematch against LSU in the 2012 BCS National Championship Game . In the game , Alabama defeated LSU 21 – 0 , allowed only 92 yards of total offense , and became the first team in BCS bowl history to shut out their opponent . The victory gave Alabama their 9th consensus national championship and Nick Saban became the only coach in college football to win three BCS Championships . 
 = = = Spring practice = = = 
 Spring practice began on March 9 and concluded with the annual A @-@ Day game on April 14 . The only players that did not compete during the spring practice period were Eddie Lacy , Blake Sims and Arie Kouandjio due to injuries ; and Duron Carter , Michael Bowman and Ronald Carswell due to team suspensions . 
 In the annual A @-@ Day game at the conclusion of spring practice , the White team composed of defensive starters defeated the Crimson team of offensive starters 24 – 15 . The Crimson team opened on offense and on their first offensive play , AJ McCarron threw an interception to Robert Lester . Each team then traded punts and the first quarter ended tied at zero . On the first offensive play of the second quarter , T. J. Yeldon was tackled in the endzone for a safety to give the Crimson team a 2 – 0 lead . The White team responded on their next possession with a 48 @-@ yard Cade Foster field goal and took a 3 – 2 lead before McCarron threw a 17 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Christion Jones that gave the Crimson team a 9 – 3 halftime lead . 
 In the third quarter , the White team scored a pair of touchdowns on successive possessions and took a 17 – 9 lead . Both were made on a pair of long Phillip Sims touchdown passes to Chris Black on a 44 @-@ yard reception and to Yeldon on a 50 @-@ yard reception . The Crimson team responded with a two @-@ play , 70 @-@ yard drive that saw a Demetrius Hart run of 23 yards and a 47 @-@ yard McCarron touchdown pass to Kenny Bell . After the unsuccessful two @-@ point conversion , the White team led 17 – 15 at the end of the third quarter . In the fourth , both defenses again held both offenses scoreless . The only points came late in the game when Vinnie Sunseri recovered a Michael Williams fumble and returned it 21 yards for a touchdown and a 24 – 15 White victory . 
 For his performance , Adrian Hubbard earned the Dwight Stephenson Lineman of the A @-@ Day Game Award . In the game , Hubbard had seven tackles that included four tackles for a loss and three quarterback sacks . On offense , Yeldon earned the Dixie Howell Memorial Most Valuable Player of the A @-@ Day Game Award for his 179 all @-@ purpose yards on the day that included 88 rushing and 91 receiving , and a 50 @-@ yard touchdown reception . 
 = = = Fall camp = = = 
 By August , Alabama had a combined 31 players on 13 different preseason award watch lists . These players included Nico Johnson , Robert Lester , C. J. Mosley and Jesse Williams for the Chuck Bednarik Award ; Johnson and Mosley for the Butkus Award ; Barrett Jones and AJ McCarron for the Walter Camp Award ; Jeremy Shelley for the Lou Groza Award ; D. J. Fluker , Johnson , Jones , Mosley , Chance Warmack and Williams for the Lombardi Award ; Michael Williams for the John Mackey Award ; Eddie Lacy and McCarron for the Maxwell Award ; Johnson , Lester , Dee Milliner , Mosley and Williams for the Bronko Nagurski Trophy ; McCarron for the Davey O 'Brien Award ; Fluker , Jones , Warmack and Williams for the Outland Trophy ; Jones for the Rimington Trophy ; Lester for the Jim Thorpe Award ; and Lacy for the Doak Walker Award . On August 3 , the first official summer practice was held at the Thomas @-@ Drew Practice Facility , and on August 28 , Saban released the depth chart for the game one starters against Michigan . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Coaching staff = = = 
 Alabama head coach Nick Saban was in his sixth year as the Crimson Tide 's head coach for the 2012 season . During his previous five years with Alabama , he led the Crimson Tide to an overall record of 50 wins and 12 losses ( 50 – 12 ) and both the 2009 and 2011 national championships . On January 18 , 2012 , Alabama officially hired Doug Nussmeier from the Washington Huskies as offensive coordinator and Lance Thompson from the Tennessee Volunteers as outside linebackers coach . Nussmeier took the place of Jim McElwain who left to become the head coach at Colorado State , and Thompson took the place of Sal Sunseri who left to become the defensive coordinator at Tennessee . 
 = = = Departed starters = = = 
 At the conclusion of the 2011 season , of all the draft @-@ eligible junior starters , Dont 'a Hightower , Dre Kirkpatrick and Trent Richardson declared their eligibility for the 2012 National Football League ( NFL ) Draft . In addition to those who declared early , several other starters graduated after the 2011 season . Graduating starters on Alabama 's offense included Darius Hanks and Marquis Maze at wide receiver , Brad Smelley at tight end and William Vlachos at center . Graduating starters on Alabama 's defense included Mark Barron at safety , Josh Chapman at nose guard , Jerrell Harris and Courtney Upshaw at linebacker and DeQuan Menzie at cornerback . The only graduating starter on Alabama 's special teams was Maze as the return specialist . 
 = = = Returning starters = = = 
 = = = Depth chart = = = 
 Starters and backups : 
 = = = Recruiting class = = = 
 Prior to National Signing Day on February 1 , 2012 , six high school players that graduated early and two junior college transfers of the 2012 recruiting class enrolled for the spring semester in order to participate in spring practice . These early enrollments included : defensive lineman Ryan Anderson , wide receivers Chris Black and Amari Cooper , linebacker Dillon Lee , defensive tackle Alphonse Taylor and running back T. J. Yeldon from high school and defensive backs Deion Belue and <unk> Dixon from junior college . On February 1 , seventeen additional players signed their National Letter of Intent to play at Alabama that completed the 2012 recruiting class . 
 Alabama 's recruiting class was highlighted by thirteen players from the " ESPN 150 " : No. 6 Landon Collins ( safety ) ; No. 11 Eddie Williams ( athlete ) ; No. 20 Cyrus Jones ( athlete ) ; No. 22 Chris Black ( wide receiver ) ; No. 30 Brandon Greene ( offensive tackle ) ; No. 31 Geno Smith ( cornerback ) ; No. 49 Amari Cooper ( wide receiver ) ; No. 55 T. J. Yeldon ( running back ) ; No. 59 Dillon Lee ( outside linebacker ) ; No. 93 Ryan Anderson ( outside linebacker ) ; No. 100 <unk> <unk> ( defensive tackle ) ; No. 109 Reggie Ragland ( inside linebacker ) ; and No. 121 Tyler Hayes ( outside linebacker ) . The Crimson Tide signed the No. 1 recruiting class according to Rivals.com and the No. 2 recruiting class according to Scout.com. In recognition for his accomplishments in helping Alabama land its highly rated 2012 class , Jeremy Pruitt was named <unk> of the Year by <unk> 
 = = Schedule = = 
 The 2012 schedule was officially released on December 28 , 2011 . With the addition of both Missouri and Texas A & M to the conference , the SEC abandoned its previous scheduling format to accommodate its expansion . As such , Alabama faced all six Western Division opponents : Arkansas , Auburn , LSU , Mississippi State , Ole Miss and Texas A & M. They also faced two Eastern Division opponents : official SEC rival Tennessee and Missouri . Alabama did not play SEC Eastern Division opponents Georgia , Kentucky , South Carolina , Florida or Vanderbilt as part of the regular season . Alabama also played four non @-@ conference games : Michigan of the Big Ten Conference , Western Kentucky University ( WKU ) and Florida Atlantic of the Sun Belt Conference and Western Carolina of the Southern Conference . Alabama had their only bye week between their games against Ole Miss and Missouri . 
 With their victory over Auburn , Alabama won the SEC Western Division championship and qualified to play in the SEC Championship Game against Georgia . In the SEC Championship Game , Alabama defeated the Bulldogs 32 – 28 and captured their 23rd SEC championship in football . On December 2 , the Crimson Tide qualified to play in the BCS National Championship Game against Notre Dame after they finished in the No. 2 position in the final BCS standings . 
 In addition to weekly television coverage , radio coverage for all games was broadcast statewide on The Crimson Tide Sports Network ( <unk> ) . The radio announcers for the 2012 season were Eli Gold with play @-@ by @-@ play , Phil Savage with color commentary and Chris Stewart with sideline reports . 
 Schedule source : 
 = = Game notes = = 
 = = = Michigan = = = 
 On October 14 , 2010 , officials from both Alabama and the University of Michigan announced the Crimson Tide and Wolverines would meet to open the 2012 season in the Cowboys Classic at Arlington , Texas . In the game , Alabama took a 21 – 0 first quarter lead and defeated the Wolverines 41 – 14 to open the season . 
 Michigan won the coin toss and elected to defer to the second half , and Alabama opened play with a three @-@ and @-@ out . Michigan was then held to only one first down before they punted on their first possession . On the drive that ensued , Alabama 's mix of play @-@ action passes and rushes ended with a two @-@ yard touchdown reception by Michael Williams from AJ McCarron for a 7 – 0 lead . After the Crimson Tide defense again forced a Wolverine punt , on Alabama 's next drive , McCarron connected with DeAndrew White for a 51 @-@ yard touchdown reception and a 14 – 0 lead . Michigan stalled on their next drive after Denard Robinson threw an interception to Dee Milliner who returned it to Michigan 's 17 @-@ yard line . On third down , Eddie Lacy rushed nine yards into the end zone for a touchdown and a 21 – 0 lead at the end of the first quarter . 
 On their first possession of the second quarter , Alabama drove 61 yards to the Michigan five @-@ yard line where Jeremy Shelly kicked a 22 @-@ yard field goal for a 24 – 0 lead . After each team traded punts on their next possessions , Robinson threw his second interception of the game . This time , C. J. Mosley returned the interception 16 yards for a touchdown and a 31 – 0 Crimson Tide lead . On the Wolverines ' next drive , Robinson found a wide open Jeremy Gallon for a 71 @-@ yard pass completion to the Alabama one @-@ yard line . Robinson then scored on a one @-@ yard run to cut the score to 31 – 7 . Alabama then ended the first half with a Lacy fumble that was recovered by Raymon Taylor as time expired with the Crimson Tide up 31 – 7 at halftime . 
 Michigan received the ball to start the second half , and in their opening drive , Robinson rushed for six yards and threw a 20 @-@ yard pass to Drew Dileo before Alabama 's defense forced a punt . Alabama 's next drive started strong with a 28 @-@ yard reception by Kevin Norwood and a pair of 14 @-@ yard runs by T. J. Yeldon . However , McCarron was sacked for a 16 @-@ yard loss and as a result , Cade Foster later missed a 52 @-@ yard field goal wide left . On the Michigan drive that ensued , the Wolverines stalled at around midfield , but Michigan elected to go for the first down on fourth and three . Robinson then rushed for what was initially ruled a three @-@ yard first down , but later was overturned by video evidence that turned the ball over on downs . Alabama then drove to the Michigan 33 @-@ yard @-@ line where Foster connected on a 51 @-@ yard field goal that extended the Crimson Tide lead to 34 – 7 . The Wolverines responded on their next possession with their final points of the game after Robinson connected with Devin Gardner for a 44 @-@ yard touchdown reception to make the score 34 – 14 at the end of the third quarter . After each team again traded punts , on their second possession of the fourth quarter the Crimson Tide started at their own 43 @-@ yard @-@ line . On the drive , Jalston Fowler rushed for 25 yards , McCarron passed to Kelly Johnson for 16 yards and Michigan was called for a 15 @-@ yard pass interference penalty to set up a one @-@ yard touchdown run for Yeldon and a 41 – 14 Alabama lead . After this , Michigan and Alabama traded possessions without scoring , and on Michigan 's last possession of the game , backup Michigan quarterback Russell Bellomy threw an interception to Alabama 's Dillon Lee . 
 In the game , Yeldon became the first non @-@ redshirted freshman to rush for 100 yards in his first game with the Crimson Tide . For their individual performances , Yeldon was named SEC Co @-@ Freshman of the Week and Milliner was named both SEC and Walter Camp Foundation Defensive Player of the Week . The victory improved Alabama 's all @-@ time record against the Wolverines to 2 – 2 . 
 = = = WKU = = = 
 In the home opener for the 2012 season , Alabama shut out the Hilltoppers of Western Kentucky University ( WKU ) 35 – 0 . To open the game , Alabama scored on a 14 @-@ yard AJ McCarron touchdown pass to Christion Jones that capped a four @-@ play , 72 @-@ yard drive . On the WKU drive that ensued , Nico Johnson forced a Marquis <unk> fumble that was recovered by Damion Square at the WKU 49 @-@ yard line . However , the Crimson Tide was unable to capitalize on the turnover after McCarron was sacked twice and were forced to punt . The defense responded on the next drive with their second recovered fumble of the game . This time , Adrian Hubbard caused the Antonio Andrews fumble that was recovered by Brandon Ivory at the WKU 33 @-@ yard line . On the next play , McCarron threw a 33 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Kevin Norwood for a 14 – 0 Crimson Tide lead . 
 Early in the second quarter , Xzavier Dickson sacked <unk> Jakes and forced the third WKU fumble of the game ; this time it was recovered by Vinnie Sunseri and returned to the Alabama 32 @-@ yard line . Seven plays later , Alabama took a 21 – 0 lead when Christion Jones caught a 22 @-@ yard McCarron touchdown pass . Each team then traded punts until halftime . 
 WKU opened the third quarter on offense , and three plays later Jakes threw an interception to Deion Belue that was returned to the Hilltoppers ' 25 @-@ yard line . Two plays after a face mask penalty brought the ball to the 12 @-@ yard line , McCarron connected with Norwood for a 12 @-@ yard touchdown reception and a 28 – 0 lead . The teams again traded punts late into the fourth quarter when Kenyan Drake scored on a 32 @-@ yard run to cap a 12 @-@ play , 81 @-@ yard drive that made the final score 35 – 0 . 
 In the game , Jones and Norwood became the first pair of Alabama receivers to each score a pair of touchdowns in the same game since three were caught by Al Lary and two by Ed Lary in the 1950 season . Late in the game , backup running back Jalston Fowler suffered a knee injury that sidelined him for the remainder of the season . The victory improved Alabama 's all @-@ time record against the Hilltoppers to 2 – 0 . 
 = = = Arkansas = = = 
 In their first road game of the season at their opponents ' home stadium , Alabama began conference play against the Arkansas Razorbacks at Fayetteville . During Alabama 's previous game against Louisiana – Monroe , the Razorbacks ' starting quarterback Tyler Wilson suffered a concussion and as a result was not cleared by team doctors to play against Alabama . With Wilson out , redshirt freshman Brandon Allen made his first start at quarterback and the Crimson Tide had their second consecutive shutout in their 52 – 0 victory over Arkansas . 
 After each team traded punts on their first possessions , Arkansas long snapper Will Coleman snapped the ball over the head of punter Dylan Breeding that gave Alabama possession at the Razorbacks ' six @-@ yard line . On the next play , Eddie Lacy scored on a six @-@ yard run for a 7 – 0 Crimson Tide lead . The Razorbacks responded with an eight @-@ play , 51 @-@ yard drive , but failed to score any points after a 41 @-@ yard Zach Hocker field goal hit the left upright . Each team again traded punts before the Crimson Tide extended their lead to 10 – 0 early in the second quarter on a 51 @-@ yard Cade Foster field goal . 
 The Arkansas possession that ensued ended when Vinnie Sunseri intercepted a Brandon Allen pass . Six plays later , AJ McCarron threw a 20 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Amari Cooper for a 17 – 0 lead . Later in the quarter , Ha 'Sean Clinton @-@ Dix intercepted another Allen pass and returned it to the three @-@ yard line . Three plays later Lacy had his second touchdown of the game on a one @-@ yard run and the Crimson Tide led at halftime 24 – 0 . 
 Alabama opened the third quarter with a six @-@ play , 75 @-@ yard drive that ended with a ten @-@ yard Lacy touchdown run . On the kickoff that ensued , Demetrius Hart forced a fumble by Arkansas ' Dennis Johnson that was recovered by Foster at the Razorbacks ' 27 @-@ yard line . Two plays later , Alabama led 38 – 0 after T. J. Yeldon scored on a one @-@ yard run . Arkansas responded with their longest drive of the game ; however , it ended when Deion Belue forced a Knile Davis fumble that was recovered by Nick Perry at the Alabama 20 @-@ yard line . With the majority of the offensive starters pulled from the game , the Crimson Tide reserves led Alabama on a 15 @-@ play , 80 @-@ yard drive that ended with a 12 @-@ yard Kenyan Drake touchdown run early in the fourth quarter . The final touchdown of the game was set up late in the game after Knile Davis lost his second fumble of the game on a Jeoffrey Pagan tackle that was recovered by Denzel Devall . Two plays later , backup quarterback Blake Sims made the final score 52 – 0 with his 27 @-@ yard quarterback sneak for a touchdown . 
 The shutout was the first for Arkansas since their 28 – 0 loss to LSU in 1995 and was their first in Fayetteville since a 7 – 0 loss to Baylor in 1966 . It also marked the first time Alabama had shut out opponents in consecutive weeks since the 1980 season . For his performance , Chance Warmack was named the SEC Offensive Lineman of the Week . The victory improved Alabama 's all @-@ time record against the Razorbacks to 13 – 8 ( 16 – 7 without NCAA vacations and forfeits ) . 
 = = = Florida Atlantic = = = 
 In their fourth game of the 2012 season , Alabama defeated the Florida Atlantic Owls in their first all @-@ time meeting by a final score of 40 – 7 . The Crimson Tide scored on the third play of their first offensive possession when AJ McCarron connected with Kenny Bell for an 85 @-@ yard touchdown pass and an early 7 – 0 lead . After the Alabama defense held the Owls to a three @-@ and @-@ out on their first possession , the Crimson Tide took a 14 – 0 lead on their drive that ensued when McCarron threw a four @-@ yard touchdown pass to DeAndrew White . After the defense again held FAU to a three @-@ and @-@ out , Christion Jones fumbled the punt that was recovered by the Owls ' Tim <unk> at the Alabama 25 @-@ yard line . After another defensive hold , Jesse Williams blocked the Vinny <unk> field goal attempt to keep the score 14 – 0 . 
 In the second quarter , the Crimson Tide scored on a 52 @-@ yard Cade Foster field goal and on field goals of 26 and 30 yards by Jeremy Shelley before McCarron threw a four @-@ yard touchdown pass to Christion Jones to make the halftime score 30 – 0 . The defense also dominated the quarter and did not allow FAU a single third down conversion during the period . In the third , Foster connected on a 46 @-@ yard field goal and early in the fourth quarter Kenyan Drake scored on an eight @-@ yard touchdown run for a 40 – 0 lead . With the game in hand , Alabama played many of their backups in the second half . As such , late in the fourth quarter the Crimson Tide shutout streak that stretched back to the third quarter of their week one victory over Michigan ended when the Owls ' Graham Wilbert threw a six @-@ yard touchdown pass to Alex <unk> that made the final score 40 – 7 . 
 In the game , Eddie Lacy rushed for 106 yards on 15 carries for his first 100 @-@ yard rushing game of the season . The late FAU touchdown ended the Alabama shutout streak at 192 : 25 minutes that stretched back to the 0 : 14 mark of the third quarter in their game against Michigan . 
 = = = Ole Miss = = = 
 Alabama played their first home conference game in their annual rivalry game , against the Ole Miss Rebels at Tuscaloosa . In the game , 21 second quarter points after the Rebels ' briefly held a lead resulted in the 33 – 14 Crimson Tide victory . After each team traded punts on their first possessions , Jeremy Shelley connected on the first of four field goals from 38 yards out to give the Crimson Tide an early 3 – 0 lead . After Shelley made his second 38 @-@ yard field goal to extend the Alabama lead to 6 – 0 , Ole Miss responded with a 13 @-@ play , 75 @-@ yard drive that culminated with a one @-@ yard Jeff Scott touchdown run that gave the Rebels a 7 – 6 lead early in the second quarter . At the time the Rebels ' took the lead , it marked the first time Alabama trailed in regulation since their 2011 game against Tennessee . 
 The Ole Miss lead only lasted for fifteen seconds , as Christion Jones scored a touchdown on the kickoff that ensued with his 99 @-@ yard return that gave the Crimson Tide a 13 – 7 lead . On the Rebels ' next possession , Bo Wallace threw an interception to Dee Milliner , and four plays later AJ McCarron threw a 16 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Amari Cooper that extended the Alabama lead to 20 – 7 . On their next drive , Ole Miss was intercepted by the Crimson Tide on two separate occasions . First Robert Lester intercepted a Bo Wallace pass that he subsequently fumbled and was recovered by Scott , and then two plays later Randall Mackey threw an interception to Deion Belue at the Alabama 32 @-@ yard line . The Crimson Tide then drove 68 yards and took a 27 – 7 halftime lead after McCarron threw a 12 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Cooper . 
 Ole Miss scored the only points of the third quarter on a 12 @-@ yard Randall Mackey touchdown run that capped a 70 @-@ yard drive that saw the Rebels convert a pair of fourth downs . The final margin of 33 – 14 was provided by a pair of Shelley field goals from 26 and 24 yards in the fourth quarter . In the game , McCarron eclipsed Brody Croyle 's team record of 190 consecutive pass attempts without throwing an interception . Starting wide receiver DeAndrew White and backup running back Demetrius Hart both suffered knee injuries during the course of the game that sidelined both of them for the remainder of the season . The victory improved Alabama 's all @-@ time record against the Rebels to 46 – 9 – 2 ( 50 – 8 – 2 without NCAA vacations and forfeits ) . 
 = = = Missouri = = = 
 In what was their first meeting since Alabama defeated the Tigers 38 – 28 during the 1978 season , and their first as conference foes , Alabama won 42 – 10 at Missouri on a stormy afternoon . The Crimson Tide opened the scoring on their second offensive play when Eddie Lacy had a 73 @-@ yard touchdown run for an early 7 – 0 Alabama lead . After each team traded punts , Vinnie Sunseri intercepted a Corbin <unk> pass that set up Alabama 's second scoring drive from the 50 @-@ yard line . AJ McCarron first had a 44 @-@ yard completion to Kenny Bell , and then Lacy scored his second touchdown of the afternoon on a three @-@ yard run two plays later for a 14 – 0 lead . The third Crimson Tide touchdown of the first quarter was set up after Landon Collins blocked a Trey Barrow punt that was recovered at the Missouri 17 @-@ yard line . Three T. J. Yeldon runs later , Alabama led 21 – 0 . 
 After a pair of Tiger possessions that ended with punts and an Alabama possession that ended with a lost fumble by McCarron , the Crimson Tide started their fourth scoring drive of the afternoon . The drive began with a 22 @-@ yard McCarron pass to Christion Jones and finished with a 15 @-@ yard Yeldon touchdown run . Immediately after Yeldon scored , the referees stopped the game temporarily and cleared the field due to lightning strikes in the immediate vicinity of the stadium . After a 40 @-@ minute stoppage , the game resumed with a Jeremy Shelley extra point and a Crimson Tide lead of 28 – 0 . Missouri responded on the kickoff that ensued with their only touchdown of the afternoon on a 98 @-@ yard Marcus Murphy return that made the halftime score 28 – 7 . 
 The Tigers opened the third quarter with a 41 @-@ yard Andrew Baggett field goal that cut the Crimson Tide lead to 28 – 10 . Each team then traded punts through the fourth quarter after Lacy scored his third touchdown of the afternoon on a one @-@ yard run that extended the Alabama lead to 35 – 10 . The Crimson Tide defense then got their third turnover of the game on the next Tigers possession when a <unk> pass was intercepted by Blake Sims and returned to the Alabama 46 @-@ yard line . With the second string in the game , the final points were scored by Kenyan Drake on a three @-@ yard run that made the final score 42 – 10 . In the game , Lacey ran for 177 yards and Yeldon ran for 144 yards with a combined five touchdowns . The victory improved Alabama 's all @-@ time record against the Tigers to 2 – 2 
 = = = Tennessee = = = 
 In their annual rivalry game , Alabama defeated the Tennessee Volunteers at Knoxville 44 – 13 for their sixth consecutive victory in the series . After the teams traded punts to open the game , Alabama scored their first touchdown on their second possession on a 23 @-@ yard AJ McCarron pass to Amari Cooper . The Volunteers responded on the drive that ensued with a 32 @-@ yard Michael Palardy field goal that cut the Crimson Tide lead to 7 – 3 . After the next Alabama drive ended with a missed Cade Foster field goal from 44 yards , the Crimson Tide defense responded with their first turnover of the game when C. J. Mosley intercepted a Tyler Bray pass at the Tennessee 32 @-@ yard line . Four T. J. Yeldon runs and 32 yards later , Alabama led 13 – 3 after he scored on a one @-@ yard touchdown run . The Crimson Tide extended their lead further to 20 – 3 on their next possession when Michael Williams scored on a one @-@ yard McCarron pass that completed a drive that included a 54 @-@ yard Cooper reception . Tennessee responded on their next possession with their only touchdown of the evening on a two @-@ yard AJ Johnson run . Alabama then closed the half with a 34 @-@ yard Jeremy Shelley field goal for a 23 – 10 halftime lead . 
 The Crimson Tide opened the second half with a second missed Foster field goal , followed by each team again trading punts before the next Alabama points . The fourth Crimson Tide touchdown of the game came on a 42 @-@ yard McCarron pass to Cooper that extended the Alabama lead to 30 – 10 . Tennessee advanced the ball to the Crimson Tide 21 @-@ yard line on their next possession before Robert Lester intercepted the second Bray pass of the evening for a touchback . Early in the fourth , Alabama extended their lead to 37 – 10 on a 39 @-@ yard McCarron pass to Kenny Bell . The Alabama defense then held the Volunteers on a fourth down to give the Crimson Tide possession at their 42 @-@ yard line . Three plays later , Yeldon scored on a 43 @-@ yard run for the final Alabama points and a 44 – 10 lead . Tennessee then scored the final points of the game on a 21 @-@ yard Palardy field goal that was set up after a Blake Sims fumble gave the Volunteers possession at the Alabama 24 @-@ yard line that made the final score 44 – 13 . 
 Several Alabama players had career days with the performance on the field in Knoxville . McCarron had both career highs in passing yards and touchdowns with 306 and 4 ; Cooper established an Alabama freshman record for receiving yards with his 163 in the game . Yeldon also had his third 100 @-@ yard rushing game of the season with his 129 yards on 15 carries and 2 touchdowns . The victory improved Alabama 's all @-@ time record against the Volunteers to 49 – 38 – 7 ( 50 – 37 – 8 without NCAA vacations and forfeits ) . 
 = = = Mississippi State = = = 
 In their annual rivalry game , Alabama defeated the Mississippi State Bulldogs at Tuscaloosa on homecoming 38 – 7 . The Crimson Tide led 21 – 0 early in the second quarter after they scored touchdowns on their first three offensive possessions . They opened the game with a 41 @-@ yard Cyrus Jones kickoff return that set up a 59 @-@ yard drive that ended with an 11 @-@ yard T. J. Yeldon touchdown run . After Dee Milliner blocked a Devon Bell field goal attempt , the Crimson Tide took possession and six plays later led 14 – 0 on a 57 @-@ yard AJ McCarron touchdown pass to Kenny Bell . The Alabama defense then forced their first punt of the game , and for the third time in three possessions the Crimson Tide scored a touchdown on a nine @-@ yard McCarron pass to Michael Williams for a 21 – 0 lead . Each team then traded three @-@ and @-@ outs until nearly the end of the second quarter when Alabama was able to convert a 34 @-@ yard Jeremy Shelley field goal for a 24 – 0 halftime lead . 
 After each team traded punts to open the third quarter , the Bulldogs sustained their longest drive of the game . They drove 97 yards in 16 plays , but Tyler Russell threw a pass that was intercepted by Robert Lester in the endzone for a touchback that halted the drive . On the Alabama drive that ensued , State managed to force a punt , however it was fumbled by <unk> Skinner that gave the Crimson Tide possession at the Bulldogs ' 28 @-@ yard line early in the fourth quarter . Three plays later , Phillip Ely threw his first career touchdown pass to Eddie Lacy from 27 yards for a 31 – 0 Alabama lead . On the kickoff that ensued , Christion Jones forced a <unk> Lewis fumble that was recovered by Landon Collins at the State 43 @-@ yard line , and eight plays later Alabama led 38 – 0 on a three @-@ yard Kenyan Drake touchdown run . With the Crimson Tide reserves in on defense , the Bulldogs did manage to break up the shutout bid late in the fourth quarter when State scored their lone points on a two @-@ yard Dak Prescott touchdown pass to Robert Johnson and made the final score 38 – 7 . The victory improved Alabama 's all @-@ time record against the Bulldogs to 75 – 18 – 3 ( 77 – 17 – 3 without NCAA vacations and forfeits ) . 
 = = = LSU = = = 
 In their annual rivalry game , Alabama trailed the LSU Tigers 17 – 14 with only 1 : 34 remaining in the game . The Crimson Tide then went on a five @-@ play , 72 @-@ yard drive , capped by a 28 @-@ yard AJ McCarron touchdown pass to T. J. Yeldon with only 0 : 51 left , and defeated LSU 21 – 17 at Baton Rouge . 
 After each team traded punts on their first possessions , LSU took a 3 – 0 first quarter lead when Drew Alleman connected on a 38 @-@ yard field goal . After each team again traded punts , Alabama scored the first touchdown of the game early in the second quarter . A seven @-@ yard Eddie Lacy touchdown run completed an 11 @-@ play , 92 @-@ yard drive and gave the Crimson Tide a 7 – 3 lead . On the LSU possession that ensued , the Alabama defense held the Tigers to a three @-@ and @-@ out . However , Cyrus Jones fumbled the Brad Wing punt that was recovered by LSU at the Crimson Tide 36 @-@ yard line . LSU then failed to capitalize on the turnover as Alleman was tackled for a two @-@ yard loss on a fake field goal attempt and gave Alabama possession at their 33 @-@ yard @-@ line . After another Alabama punt and a missed 54 @-@ yard Alleman field goal , the Crimson Tide took a 14 – 3 halftime lead on a nine @-@ yard McCarron touchdown run with only 0 : 11 left in the half . 
 After a series of punts to open the third quarter , LSU scored their first touchdown on a one @-@ yard Jeremy Hill run that cut the Alabama lead to 14 – 10 . On the kickoff that ensued , a failed onside kick gave the Crimson Tide possession at the Tigers ' 44 @-@ yard line . The drive stalled at the 10 @-@ yard line when a Yeldon fumble was recovered by Sam Montgomery . LSU responded with a seven @-@ play , 90 @-@ yard drive and took a 17 – 14 lead when Jarvis Landry caught a 14 @-@ yard touchdown pass from Zach Mettenberger early in the fourth quarter . The next four possessions included a pair of three @-@ and @-@ outs for Alabama and LSU drives that stalled on a failed fourth @-@ down conversion and a missed 45 @-@ yard Alleman field goal , before the Tide went on their game @-@ winning drive . With only 1 : 34 left in the game , Alabama took possession at their own 28 @-@ yard line . McCarron then completed three consecutive passes to Kevin Norwood and moved the ball to the LSU 28 @-@ yard line . After an incompletion to Norwood , the game @-@ winning touchdown was scored when McCarron threw a short screen pass to Yeldon that he took 28 yards to score and create a 21 – 17 lead . After a pair of short passes , the game ended when Mettenberger was sacked by Damion Square as time expired . 
 For his 12 @-@ tackle performance in the game , Adrian Hubbard was named the SEC Defensive Player of the Week . The victory improved Alabama 's all @-@ time record against the Tigers to 47 – 25 – 5 . 
 = = = Texas A & M = = = 
 In their first meeting as conference foes , Alabama was upset by the Texas A & M Aggies at Tuscaloosa 29 – 24 . After the Crimson Tide opened with a three @-@ and @-@ out , A & M scored on their first possession on a one @-@ yard Christine Michael touchdown run for a 7 – 0 lead . On their next possession , AJ McCarron threw his first interception of the season to Sean Porter , and four plays later the Aggies led 14 – 0 after Ryan Swope caught a 10 @-@ yard touchdown pass from Johnny Manziel . The A & M defense then held Alabama to their second three @-@ and @-@ out and forced a punt . The Aggies then took a 20 – 0 lead late in the first when Michael scored on his second one @-@ yard touchdown run that completed a 14 @-@ play , 73 @-@ yard drive . 
 The Crimson Tide responded with a pair of second @-@ quarter touchdowns to make the halftime score 20 – 14 in favor of the visitors . T. J. Yeldon and Eddie Lacy each scored on two @-@ yard touchdown runs for the Crimson Tide in the quarter . The only points in the third quarter came on a 28 @-@ yard Jeremy Shelley field goal that made the score 20 – 17 as the teams entered the fourth quarter . In the fourth Taylor <unk> connected on a 29 @-@ yard field goal , but then missed one from 37 yards out on their next possession . On the drive that ensued , Yeldon lost a fumble and A & M responded with a 24 @-@ yard Manziel touchdown pass to Malcome Kennedy for a 29 – 17 lead . Alabama responded on their next possession with a 54 @-@ yard McCarron touchdown pass to Amari Cooper to cut the Aggies lead to 29 – 24 . After the defense forced a punt , McCarron threw an interception on a fourth @-@ and @-@ goal play on the two @-@ yard line that gave A & M possession at the Aggies ' four @-@ yard line . On the possession that ensued , the Alabama defense forced an Aggies punt with 0 : 40 left in the game , but an offsides call on Alabama gave the Aggies a first down and sealed their 29 – 24 victory . The loss brought Alabama 's all @-@ time record against the Aggies to 3 – 2 . 
 = = = Western Carolina = = = 
 In the final non @-@ conference game the 2012 season , Alabama shut out the Western Carolina Catamounts 49 – 0 in Tuscaloosa . The Crimson Tide scored three touchdowns in each of the first two quarters and took a 42 – 0 halftime lead . Alabama took the opening possession 62 yards in six plays and Eddie Lacy scored the first touchdown on a seven @-@ yard run for a 7 – 0 lead . After the defense held the Catamounts to a three @-@ and @-@ out , T. J. Yeldon scored the second Crimson Tide touchdown on a three @-@ yard run for a 14 – 0 lead . After a second three @-@ and @-@ out , Alabama scored its third touchdown in three possession on Lacy 's second seven @-@ yard touchdown run for a 21 – 0 lead at the end of the first quarter . 
 To open the second quarter , the Crimson Tide went four @-@ for @-@ four on touchdowns when AJ McCarron connected on a 29 @-@ yard pass to Christion Jones for a 28 – 0 lead . Up by four touchdowns , backup quarterback Blake Sims took over for McCarron and led Alabama to their fifth touchdown in as many possessions and Lacy scored on a three @-@ yard run , his third touchdown of the afternoon . After the defense again held Carolina to another three @-@ and @-@ out , Christion Jones fumbled the Catamounts ' punt to give them possession at the Alabama 29 @-@ yard line . However , Western was unable to capitalize on the turnover as a Troy Mitchell fumble was recovered by Deion Belue and returned 57 yards for a touchdown and a 42 – 0 halftime lead . With reserves playing on both offense and defense for the Crimson Tide in the second half , the final touchdown came in the third quarter when Blake Sims scored on a five @-@ yard run to make the final score 49 – 0 . The victory improved Alabama 's all @-@ time record against the Catamounts to 2 – 0 ( 3 – 0 without NCAA vacations ) <unk> was the first time that Bryant @-@ Denny Stadium was not sold out for an Alabama game since 1986 . 
 = = = Auburn = = = 
 In the 2012 edition of the Iron Bowl , Alabama shut out the Auburn Tigers 49 – 0 at Tuscaloosa . The Crimson Tide opened the game with a 10 @-@ play , 75 @-@ yard drive that culminated in a two @-@ yard Eddie Lacy touchdown run and a 7 – 0 lead . After the Alabama defense held Auburn to a three @-@ and @-@ out on their first possession , their offense responded with their second touchdown of the afternoon on a two @-@ yard T. J. Yeldon touchdown run for a 14 – 0 lead . The Crimson Tide then forced a Tigers ' punt on their second possession , and then scored their third touchdown in as many possessions when AJ McCarron threw a 37 @-@ yard pass to Amari Cooper for a 21 – 0 lead early in the second quarter . 
 On the Auburn possession that ensued , the Alabama defense collected their first turnover of the game when Robert Lester intercepted a Jonathan Wallace pass at the Tigers ' 29 @-@ yard line . Five plays later the Crimson Tide led 28 – 0 after McCarron threw a seven @-@ yard touchdown pass to Kevin Norwood . The Alabama defense held Auburn to their second three @-@ and @-@ out of the game , and then the Crimson Tide scored their fifth touchdown of the game on a one @-@ yard Lacy run for a 35 – 0 lead . Auburn then committed their second turnover of the game when Nico Johnson forced a Tre Mason fumble that Dee Milliner recovered and returned to the Tigers ' 35 @-@ yard line . Alabama then took a 42 – 0 halftime lead when McCarron threw a 29 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Cooper . 
 With the Alabama starters in the game for the first possession of the second half , the defense again held the Tigers to a three @-@ and @-@ out and forced a punt . The offense then made it seven @-@ for @-@ seven on offense when McCarron threw a 38 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Norwood for a 49 – 0 lead . The Alabama defense then did not allow Auburn to get past their own 41 @-@ yard line for the duration of the game and secured their fourth shutout of the season . The victory was the second largest in the history of the Iron Bowl after the 55 – 0 Alabama win in 1948 and improved Alabama 's all @-@ time record against the Tigers to 42 – 34 – 1 . 
 = = = Georgia = = = 
 With their victory over Auburn in the Iron Bowl , Alabama clinched the SEC Western Division championship and qualified to play Georgia in the 2012 SEC Championship Game where they defeated the Bulldogs 32 – 28 . After each team traded punts on their opening possessions , Christian Robinson recovered an AJ McCarron fumble for the Bulldogs and gave Georgia possession at the Alabama 40 @-@ yard line . The Crimson Tide defense then held the Bulldogs to a 50 @-@ yard field goal attempt that was missed by Marshall Morgan that kept the game scoreless . 
 After the first quarter ended in a scoreless tie , Georgia scored their first touchdown early in the second quarter . The 19 @-@ yard touchdown pass from Aaron Murray to Jay Rome was set up by a fake punt earlier in the drive that gave the Bulldogs a 7 – 0 lead . After each team again traded punts , Alabama drove the ball to the Bulldogs ' one @-@ yard line . However , Eddie Lacy fumbled on second down and then McCarron threw an interception in the endzone to Sanders <unk> to end the drive . The Crimson Tide forced another punt on the next Bulldogs possession and Alabama responded on the drive that ensued with their first touchdown of the game on a 41 @-@ yard Lacy run that tied the game 7 – 7 . On the next drive , Ha 'Sean Clinton @-@ Dix intercepted a Murray pass and returned it to the Georgia 47 @-@ yard line with just over 1 : 00 left in the half . Five plays later , Jeremy Shelley connected on a 22 @-@ yard field goal as time expired and gave the Crimson Tide a 10 – 7 halftime lead . 
 Down by three to start the second half , Georgia responded with a pair of touchdowns and took a 21 – 10 lead early in the third quarter . The first was scored on a three @-@ yard Todd Gurley run that completed a 75 @-@ yard drive that opened the quarter . The second came on a special teams play on the drive that ensued , when Cornelius Washington blocked a 49 @-@ yard Cade Foster field goal attempt that was recovered by Alec Ogletree and returned 55 yards for a touchdown and a 21 – 10 lead . Alabama responded on their next possession with a four @-@ play , 77 @-@ yard drive that was capped by a 10 @-@ yard T. J. Yeldon touchdown run followed with Yeldon converting the two @-@ point conversion on a two @-@ yard run and made the score 21 – 18 . After a Georgia three @-@ and @-@ out , Alabama took a 25 – 21 lead on the first play of the fourth quarter on a one @-@ yard Lacy touchdown run behind the blocking of Jesse Williams . 
 Georgia responded with a 10 @-@ yard Gurley touchdown run on the next drive and took a 28 – 25 lead . Each team then again traded punts before Alabama scored what proved to be the game @-@ winning touchdown on a 44 @-@ yard McCarron pass to Amari Cooper for a 32 – 28 lead . Each team then forced three @-@ and @-@ outs , and with just over one minute left in the game , Georgia drove to the Alabama eight @-@ yard line on a drive that saw several long Murray completions and an overturned interception by Dee Milliner . The final play of the game was a Murray pass tipped by C. J. Mosley and caught by Chris Conley at the Alabama five @-@ yard line , but Georgia did not have any time @-@ outs remaining and the clock ran out to give Alabama the 32 – 28 victory . In the game Lacy rushed for 181 yards and Yeldon rushed for 153 yards and Lacy was named the SEC Championship Game MVP for his performance . The victory improved Alabama 's all @-@ time record against the Bulldogs to 37 – 25 – 4 . 
 = = = Notre Dame = = = 
 With their victory over Georgia in the SEC Championship Game , Alabama qualified for the 2013 BCS National Championship Game , and against Notre Dame the Crimson Tide captured their third BCS Championship in four years with a 42 – 14 victory over the Fighting Irish . After Notre Dame won the coin toss and elected to defer until the second half , Alabama took their opening possession 82 yards in five plays and Eddie Lacy gave the Crimson Tide an early 7 – 0 lead with his 20 @-@ yard touchdown run . On the first Irish possession that followed , the Crimson Tide held them to a three @-@ and @-@ out and forced a punt . The kick was subsequently fumbled by Christion Jones and recovered by Notre Dame ; however , a kick catching interference penalty was called against the Irish and gave back possession to Alabama . On the drive that ensued , the Crimson Tide took a 14 – 0 lead when AJ McCarron threw a three @-@ yard touchdown pass to Michael Williams that capped a 10 @-@ play , 61 @-@ yard drive . After the Alabama defense forced their second punt of the game , the Crimson Tide responded with their third touchdown of the game . 
 T. J. Yeldon extended the Alabama lead to 21 – 0 with his one @-@ yard run on the first play of the second quarter . Notre Dame then responded with their longest play from scrimmage of the game on a 31 @-@ yard Everett Golson pass to <unk> Daniels . However , the Irish then surrendered the ball on downs when they failed to convert on fourth @-@ and @-@ five four plays later . Each team then traded punts over the next four possessions before the Crimson Tide scored their final points of the first half . With just 0 : 31 left in the quarter , McCarron threw an 11 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Lacy that made the halftime score 28 – 0 . 
 Notre Dame opened the third quarter on offense , but Ha 'Sean Clinton @-@ Dix intercepted a Golson pass that gave Alabama possession at the Irish three @-@ yard line . The Crimson Tide then drove 97 yards in ten plays that ended with a 34 @-@ yard McCarron touchdown pass to Amari Cooper that extended their lead to 35 – 0 . Notre Dame then responded with their first points of the game on the drive that ensued with a two @-@ yard Golson touchdown run that made the score 35 – 7 . Alabama then began their final scoring drive of the night . The final Crimson Tide touchdown came early in the fourth quarter on a 19 @-@ yard McCarron touchdown pass to Cooper that capped a 14 @-@ play , 86 @-@ yard drive that took 7 : 41 off the clock and made the score 42 – 7 . The Irish then made the final score 42 – 14 when Golson threw a six @-@ yard touchdown pass to Theo Riddick . The teams then traded punts with the final play of the game being a short Notre Dame run as time expired . 
 For their performances on the field , Lacy was named the game 's offensive MVP and C. J. Mosley was named defensive MVP . In the game , Lacy rushed for 140 and Yeldon for 108 yards and each scored a touchdown in the win . McCarron became Alabama 's all @-@ time leader in touchdown passes when he surpassed the previous record of 47 set by John Parker Wilson . Cooper also set the single season record for touchdown receptions in a season after he caught a pair to give him 11 for the season and surpassed the previous record of 10 caught by Al Lary in 1955 . The victory improved Alabama 's all @-@ time record against the Fighting Irish to 2 – 5 . 
 = = Rankings = = 
 Entering the 2012 season , the Crimson Tide was ranked No. 2 in both the AP and Coaches ' Preseason Polls . After their 41 – 14 victory over Michigan to open the season , Alabama moved into the No. 1 position in both polls on September 4 . When the first BCS rankings were unveiled on October 14 , the Crimson Tide were in the No. 1 position . Alabama remained in first place in all the major polls through their loss to Texas A & M on November 10 when they dropped to No. 4 in the AP , Harris and BCS standings and to No. 5 in the Coaches ' poll . Prior to the loss , the ten weeks spent as the No. 1 team in the AP Poll set a school record for consecutive weeks ranked No. 1 . The week after the loss to A & M , the Crimson Tide moved up into the No. 2 position as a result of upset losses for both Kansas State and Oregon on November 17 . On December 2 , the final BCS rankings were released with the Crimson Tide in the No. 2 position to qualify for the BCS National Championship Game . After their victory over Notre Dame in the BCS National Championship Game , Alabama finished in the No. 1 position unanimously in both the AP and Coaches ' polls as consensus national champions . 
 Source : ESPN.com : 2012 NCAA Football Rankings 
 = = After the season = = 
 After their victory over Notre Dame for the national championship , the team arrived at Tuscaloosa Regional Airport on the afternoon of January 8 , and several hundred fans were there to greet them upon their arrival . On January 19 , a championship parade was made through the streets of Tuscaloosa in recognition of the 2012 championship season . The parade concluded with Eli Gold as the master of ceremonies for an event on the Walk of Champions at Bryant – Denny Stadium that honored the 2012 team . On April 16 , the team made their trip to the White House , where President Barack Obama offered congratulatory remarks for their championship season . As part of the A @-@ Day celebrations on April 20 , the 2012 team captains Barret Jones , Damion Square and Chance Warmack were honored at the Walk of Fame ceremony at the base of Denny Chimes . 
 = = = Final statistics = = = 
 After their victory over Notre Dame in the BCS National Championship Game , Alabama 's final team statistics were released . On the defensive side of the ball , of the 120 FBS teams , the Crimson Tide was ranked near the top of all major defensive categories nationally and first in all categories in conference . They ranked first in total defense ( 250 @.@ 00 yards per game ) , scoring defense ( 10 @.@ 93 points per game ) and rushing defense ( 76 @.@ 36 yards per game ) and ranked seventh in passing defense ( 173 @.@ 64 yards per game ) . Individually , C. J. Mosley led the team with 107 total tackles , 41 of which were assisted , and 66 solo tackles . Adrian Hubbard was tied for 73rd nationally , 8th in conference and 1st on the team with 7 quarterback sacks . Hubbard was also 20th in conference and 1st on the team with 11 tackles for loss . Ha 'Sean Clinton @-@ Dix was tied for 30th nationally , 3rd in conference and 1st on the team with five of Alabama 's 18 total interceptions of the season . 
 On offense , of the 120 FBS teams , Alabama ranked 12th in scoring offense ( 38 @.@ 71 points per game ) , 16th in rushing offense ( 227 @.@ 50 yards per game ) , 31st in total offense ( 445 @.@ 50 yards per game ) and 75th in passing offense ( 218 @.@ 00 yards per game ) . In conference , they ranked second in rushing and scoring offense , fourth in total offense and eighth in passing offense . Individually , AJ McCarron led the nation with a pass efficiency rating of 175 @.@ 28 . McCarron also led the team in passing offense and completed 211 of 314 passes for 2 @,@ 933 passing yards and 30 touchdowns . Amari Cooper led the team with 59 receptions for 1 @,@ 000 yards and 11 touchdown receptions . Eddie Lacy led the team with 204 rushing attempts for 1 @,@ 322 yards and 17 touchdown runs . T. J. Yeldon was second on the team with 175 rushing attempts for 1 @,@ 108 yards and 12 touchdown runs . Nationally , their total rushing yards placed Lacy 40th ( 3rd in conference ) and Yeldon 65th ( 9th in conference ) . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Following the SEC Championship Game , multiple Alabama players were recognized for their on @-@ field performances with a variety of awards and recognitions . At the team awards banquet on December 2 , Barrett Jones , Damian Square and Chance Warmack were each named the permanent captains of the 2012 squad . At that time C. J. Mosley was also named the 2012 most valuable player with Nico Johnson and Dee Milliner named defensive players of the year and AJ McCarron and Jones named offensive players of the year . 
 = = = = Conference = = = = 
 The SEC recognized several players for their individual performances with various awards . On December 5 , Barret Jones was named the SEC Scholar @-@ Athlete of the Year . On December 3 , Jones , Dee Milliner , C. J. Mosley and Chance Warmack were named to the AP All @-@ SEC First Team . D. J. Fluker , AJ McCarron , Eddie Lacy and Jesse Williams were named to the AP All @-@ SEC Second Team ; Robert Lester and Ha 'Sean Clinton @-@ Dix were named to the AP All @-@ SEC Honorable Mention Team . Fluker , Jones , Lacy , Milliner , Mosley and Warmack were named to the Coaches ' All @-@ SEC First Team . Lester and McCarron were named to the Coaches ' All @-@ SEC Second Team . T. J. Yeldon , Amari Cooper , Ryan Kelly and D. J. Pettway were named to the SEC All @-@ Freshman Team . 
 = = = = National = = = = 
 After the season , a number of Alabama players were named as national award winners and finalists . Finalists for major awards from the Crimson Tide included : Dee Milliner for the Bronko Nagurski Trophy and the Jim Thorpe Award , C. J. Mosley for the Butkus Award , AJ McCarron for the Johnny Unitas Golden Arm Award and the Manning Award and Barrett Jones for the Lombardi Award and the Outland Trophy . On December 4 , Jones was awarded the William V. Campbell Trophy , often referred to as the " Academic Heisman , " and on December 6 he was awarded the Rimington Trophy as the top center in college football and named as the Academic All @-@ America of the Year . On the coaches ' side , defensive coordinator Kirby Smart was named the 2012 AFCA FBS Assistant Coach of the Year . 
 For their individual performances during the regular season , several players were named to various national All @-@ American Teams . Dee Milliner , C. J. Mosley and Chance Warmack were named to the American Football Coaches Association ( AFCA ) All @-@ America Team . Barrett Jones , Milliner , Mosley and Warmack were named to the Walter Camp All @-@ America First Team ( WC ) . D. J. Fluker was named to the Walter Camp All @-@ America Second Team . Jones , Milliner , Mosley and Warmack were named to the Sporting News ( TSN ) All @-@ America Team . Amari Cooper , Denzel Devall and T. J. Yeldon were named to the TSN Freshman All @-@ America Team . Milliner , Mosley , Jones and Warmack were named to the Associated Press All @-@ American First Team ; Fluker was named to the Associated Press All @-@ American Second Team ; and AJ McCarron was named to the Associated Press All @-@ American Third Team . Jones , Milliner and Warmack were named to the Football Writers Association of America ( FWAA ) All @-@ America Team . 
 The NCAA recognizes five All @-@ America lists in the determination of both consensus and unanimous All @-@ America selections : the AP , AFCA , the FWAA , TSN and the WC . In order for an honoree to earn a consensus selection , he must be selected as first team in three of the five lists recognized by the NCAA , and unanimous selections must be selected as first team in all five lists . As such , for the 2012 season both Milliner and Warmack were unanimous selections and Jones and Mosley were consensus selections . 
 = = = = All @-@ star games = = = = 
 Several Alabama players were selected by postseason all @-@ star games . Nico Johnson , Robert Lester , Carson Tinker and Michael Williams were selected to play in the Senior Bowl . Invitations were also extended to Barrett Jones , Chance Warmack and Jesse Williams to participate in the game . Additionally , D. J. Fluker and Justin Pugh of Syracuse were invited to compete in the Senior Bowl as fourth @-@ year juniors and became the first non @-@ seniors to participate in the history of the game . Seniors Quinton Dial , Kelly Johnson , Jeremy Shelley , Damion Square and Carson Tinker participated in the inaugural Raycom College Football All @-@ Star Classic . Alabama did not have players participate in the East – West Shrine Game , Casino del Sol College All @-@ Star Game or the National Football League Players Association Collegiate Bowl . 
 = = = Coaching changes = = = 
 In the weeks that followed the conclusion of the season , several changes were made to the Alabama coaching staff . On December 20 defensive backs coach Jeremy Pruitt was officially hired as defensive coordinator at Florida State as the replacement for Mark Stoops . Pruitt remained on staff through the 2013 BCS National Championship Game . On January 9 , 2013 , former Colorado defensive coordinator Greg Brown was hired as Pruitt 's replacement for secondary coach . On February 8 , 2013 , offensive line coach Jeff Stoutland resigned his position and took an assistant coaching position with the Philadelphia Eagles . On February 18 , former Florida International head coach Mario Cristobal was hired as Stoutland 's replacement for offensive line coach . On February 21 , Mike Groh resigned from his position as wide receivers coach and took the same position with the Chicago Bears . Florida State 's tight ends coach and recruiting coordinator Billy Napier was later hired as Groh 's replacement as wide receivers coach . 
 = = = NFL Draft = = = 
 Of all the draft @-@ eligible juniors , D. J. Fluker , Eddie Lacy and Dee Milliner declared their eligibility for the 2013 NFL Draft on January 11 . At the time of their announcement , Milliner was projected to be a first @-@ round pick and both Fluker and Lacy were projected to be no lower than second @-@ round picks . Adrian Hubbard , AJ McCarron , C. J. Mosley and Anthony Steen had each previously indicated they would not declare for the draft and would return for their senior seasons . In February 2013 , ten Alabama players , seven seniors and three juniors , were invited to the NFL Scouting Combine . The invited players were defensive linemen Quinton Dial , Damion Square and Jesse Williams , linebacker Nico Johnson , defensive backs Robert Lester and Dee Milliner , running back Eddie Lacy and offensive linemen D. J. Fluker , Barrett Jones and Chance Warmack . 
 In the first round , three Crimson Tide players were selected consecutively : Milliner ( 9th New York Jets ) , Warmack ( 10th Tennessee Titans ) , and Fluker ( 11th San Diego Chargers ) . Lacy was selected in the second round ( 61st Green Bay Packers ) ; Johnson ( 99th Kansas City Chiefs ) and Jones ( 113th St. Louis Rams ) were selected in the fourth round ; Jesse Williams ( 137th Seattle Seahawks ) and Dial ( 157th San Francisco 49ers ) were selected in the fifth round ; and Michael Williams ( 211th Detroit Lions ) was selected in the seventh round . In the days after the draft , four players from the 2012 squad that were not drafted signed as undrafted free agents . These players included Lester ( Carolina Panthers ) , Carson Tinker ( Jacksonville Jaguars ) , Damion Square ( Philadelphia Eagles ) and Jeremy Shelley ( Atlanta Falcons ) . 
 = LeBron James = 
 LeBron <unk> James ( / <unk> / ; born December 30 , 1984 ) is an American professional basketball player who is a free agent . James has won three NBA championships ( 2012 , 2013 , 2016 ) , four NBA Most Valuable Player Awards ( 2009 , 2010 , 2012 , 2013 ) , three NBA Finals MVP Awards ( 2012 , 2013 , 2016 ) , two Olympic gold medals ( 2008 , 2012 ) , an NBA scoring title ( 2008 ) , and the NBA Rookie of the Year Award ( 2004 ) . He has also been selected to 12 NBA All @-@ Star teams ( named the game 's MVP twice ) , 12 All @-@ NBA teams , and six All @-@ Defensive teams , and is the Cavaliers ' all @-@ time leading scorer . 
 James played high school basketball at St. Vincent – St. Mary High School in his hometown of Akron , Ohio , where he was highly promoted in the national media as a future NBA superstar . After graduating , he was selected with the first overall pick in the 2003 NBA draft by the Cleveland Cavaliers . James led Cleveland to the franchise 's first Finals appearance in 2007 , losing to the San Antonio Spurs . In 2010 , he left the Cavaliers for the Miami Heat in a highly publicized ESPN special titled The Decision . James played four seasons for the Heat , reaching the Finals all four years and winning back @-@ to @-@ back championships in 2012 and 2013 . In 2013 , he led Miami on a 27 @-@ game winning streak , the third longest in league history . Following his final season with the Heat , James opted out of his contract and re @-@ joined the Cavaliers . Behind his leadership , Cleveland advanced to two consecutive Finals against the Golden State Warriors , winning the championship in 2016 . 
 Off the court , James has accumulated considerable wealth and fame from numerous endorsement deals . His public life has been the subject of much scrutiny , and he has been ranked as one of America 's most influential and popular athletes . He has been featured in books , documentaries , and television commercials . He also hosted the ESPY Awards , Saturday Night Live , and appeared in the 2015 film Trainwreck . 
 = = Early life = = 
 James was born on December 30 , 1984 in Akron , Ohio , to a 16 @-@ year @-@ old mother , Gloria Marie James , who raised him on her own . Growing up , life was often a struggle for the family , as they moved from apartment to apartment in the seedier neighborhoods of Akron while James ' mother struggled to find steady work . Realizing he would be better off with a more stable family environment , Gloria allowed James to move in with the family of Frank Walker , a local youth football coach , who introduced James to basketball when he was nine years old . 
 As a youth , James played Amateur Athletic Union ( AAU ) basketball for the Northeast Ohio Shooting Stars . The team enjoyed success on a local and national level , led by James and his friends Sian Cotton , Dru Joyce III , and Willie McGee . Inseparable , they dubbed themselves the " Fab Four " and promised each other they would attend high school together . In a move that stirred local controversy , they chose to attend St. Vincent – St. Mary High School , a largely white private Catholic school . 
 = = High school career = = 
 = = = Basketball = = = 
 As a freshman , James averaged 21 points and 6 rebounds per game for St. Vincent @-@ St. Mary 's varsity team . The Fighting Irish finished the year 27 – 0 , winning the Division III state title . As a sophomore , he averaged 25 @.@ 2 points and 7 @.@ 2 rebounds with 5 @.@ 8 assists and 3 @.@ 8 steals per game . For some home games during the season , St. Vincent @-@ St. Mary played at the University of Akron 's 5 @,@ 492 @-@ seat Rhodes Arena to satisfy ticket demand from alumni , fans , and college and NBA scouts who wanted to see James play . The Fighting Irish finished the season 26 – 1 and repeated as state champions . For his outstanding play , James was named Ohio 's Mr. Basketball and was selected to the USA Today All @-@ USA First Team , becoming the first sophomore to do either . 
 Prior to the start of James ' junior year , he appeared in SLAM Magazine and was lauded as possibly " the best high school basketball player in America right now . " During the season , he appeared on the cover of Sports Illustrated , becoming the first underclass high school basketball player to do so . With averages of 29 points , 8 @.@ 3 rebounds , 5 @.@ 7 assists , and 3 @.@ 3 steals per game , he was again named Ohio 's Mr. Basketball and selected to the USA Today All @-@ USA First Team , and became the first junior to win the boys ' basketball Gatorade National Player of the Year Award . St. Vincent @-@ St. Mary finished the year with a 23 – 4 record , ending their season with a loss in the Division II championship game . Following the loss , James seriously considered declaring for the 2002 NBA draft , unsuccessfully petitioning for an adjustment to the NBA 's draft eligibility rules which required prospective players to have at least graduated from high school . During this time , James used marijuana to help cope with stress resulting from the constant media attention he was receiving . 
 During his senior year , James and the Fighting Irish traveled around the country to play a number of nationally ranked teams , including a game against Oak Hill Academy that was nationally televised on ESPN2 . Time Warner Cable , looking to capitalize on James ' popularity , offered St. Vincent @-@ St. Mary 's games to subscribers on a pay @-@ per @-@ view basis throughout the season . For the year , James averaged 31 @.@ 6 points , 9 @.@ 6 rebounds , 4 @.@ 6 assists , and 3 @.@ 4 steals per game , was named Ohio 's Mr. Basketball and USA Today All @-@ USA First Team for an unprecedented third consecutive year , and was named Gatorade National Player of the Year for the second consecutive year . He participated in three year @-@ end high school basketball all @-@ star games — the EA Sports Roundball Classic , the Jordan Capital Classic , and the 2003 McDonald 's All @-@ American Game — losing his NCAA eligibility and making it official he would enter the 2003 NBA draft . According to writer Ryan Jones , James left high school as " the most hyped basketball player ever " . 
 During his senior year , James was the centerpiece of several controversies . For his 18th birthday , he accepted a Hummer H2 from his mother , who secured a loan for the vehicle utilizing LeBron 's future earning power as a professional athlete . This prompted an investigation by the Ohio High School Athletic Association ( OHSAA ) as its guidelines state that no amateur may accept any gift valued over $ 100 as a reward for athletic performance . Later in the season , James accepted two throwback jerseys worth $ 845 from an urban clothing store in exchange for posing for pictures , officially violating OHSAA rules and resulting in his being stripped of his high school sports eligibility . James appealed the ruling and his penalty was eventually dropped to a two @-@ game suspension , allowing him to play the remainder of the year . The Irish were also forced to forfeit one of their wins , their only official loss that season . In his first game back after the suspension , James scored a career @-@ high 52 points . 
 = = = Football = = = 
 James played wide receiver for St. Vincent @-@ St. Mary 's football team in high school and was recruited by some Division I programs , including Notre Dame . As a sophomore , he was named first team all @-@ state , and as a junior , he led the Fighting Irish to the state semifinals . His football career came to an end before his senior year when he broke his wrist during an AAU basketball game . Many sports analysts , football critics , high school coaches , and former and current players have speculated on whether he could have played in the National Football League . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Cleveland Cavaliers ( 2003 – 2010 ) = = = 
 = = = = Rookie season ( 2003 – 04 ) = = = = 
 James was selected with the first overall pick in the 2003 NBA draft by the Cleveland Cavaliers . In his first professional game , he recorded 25 points against the Sacramento Kings , setting an NBA record for most points scored by a prep @-@ to @-@ pro player in his debut outing . He was eventually named the NBA Rookie of the Year , finishing with averages of 20 @.@ 9 points , 5 @.@ 5 rebounds , and 5 @.@ 9 assists per game . He became the first Cavalier to receive the honor and just the third player in NBA history to average at least 20 points , 5 rebounds , and 5 assists per game in his rookie year . The Cavaliers finished the season 35 – 47 , failing to make the playoffs despite an 18 @-@ game improvement over the previous year . 
 = = = = Rise to superstardom ( 2004 – 2008 ) = = = = 
 James earned his first NBA All @-@ Star Game selection in 2004 – 05 , contributing 13 points , 8 rebounds , and 6 assists in a winning effort for the Eastern Conference . On March 20 , he scored 56 points against the Toronto Raptors , setting Cleveland 's new single game points record . With averages of 27 @.@ 2 points , 7 @.@ 4 rebounds , 7 @.@ 2 assists , and 2 @.@ 2 steals per game to finish the season , he was named to his first All @-@ NBA Team . Despite a 30 – 20 record to start the year , the Cavaliers again failed to make the playoffs , finishing the season at 42 – 40 . 
 At the 2006 All @-@ Star Game , James led the East to victory with 29 points and was named the NBA All @-@ Star Game Most Valuable Player . Behind final season averages of 31 @.@ 4 points , 7 rebounds , and 6 @.@ 6 assists per game , he finished second in NBA Most Valuable Player Award voting to Steve Nash . Under James ' leadership , the Cavaliers qualified for the playoffs for the first time since 1998 . In his postseason debut , he recorded a triple @-@ double in a winning effort versus the Washington Wizards . In Game 3 of the series , he made the first game @-@ winning shot of his career , making another in Game 5 . Cleveland would go on to defeat the Wizards before being ousted by the Detroit Pistons in the second round . 
 In 2006 – 07 , James ' averages declined to 27 @.@ 3 points , 6 @.@ 7 rebounds , 6 assists , and 1 @.@ 6 steals per game . Some analysts attributed the fall to a regression in his passing skills and shot selection , stemming from a lack of effort and focus . The Cavaliers finished the season with 50 wins for the second consecutive year and entered the playoffs as the East 's second seed . In Game 5 of the Conference Finals , James notched 48 points with 9 rebounds and 7 assists , scoring 29 of Cleveland 's last 30 points , including the game @-@ winning lay @-@ up with two seconds left , against the Pistons . After the game , play @-@ by @-@ play announcer Marv Albert called the performance " one of the greatest moments in postseason history " and color commentator Steve Kerr called it " Jordan @-@ esque " . In 2012 , ESPN ranked the performance the fourth greatest in modern NBA playoff history . The Cavaliers went on to win Game 6 and claim their first ever Eastern Conference championship . They advanced to the NBA Finals where they were swept by the San Antonio Spurs . For the Finals , James averaged 22 points , 7 rebounds , and 6 @.@ 8 assists per game . 
 In February of the 2007 – 08 season , James was named All @-@ Star Game MVP for the second time behind a 27 @-@ point , 8 @-@ rebound , and 9 @-@ assist performance . On March 21 , he moved past Brad Daugherty as the Cavaliers ' all @-@ time leading scorer in a game against the Raptors , doing so in over 100 less games than Daugherty . With seven triple @-@ doubles to finish the year , James set a new personal and team record for triple @-@ doubles in a season . His 30 points per game were also the highest in the league , representing his first scoring title . Despite his individual accomplishments , Cleveland 's record fell from the year before to 45 – 37 . Seeded fourth in the East entering the playoffs , the Cavaliers defeated the Wizards in the first round for the third consecutive season before being eliminated in seven games by the Boston Celtics in the next round . During the decisive seventh game in Boston , James scored 45 points and Paul Pierce scored 41 in a game the Associated Press described as a " shootout " . 
 = = = = First MVP tenure ( 2008 – 2010 ) = = = = 
 At the conclusion of the 2008 – 09 season , James finished second in NBA Defensive Player of the Year voting and made his first NBA All @-@ Defensive Team with 23 chase @-@ down blocks and a career @-@ high 93 total blocks . He also became only the fourth <unk> player to lead his team in points , rebounds , assists , steals , and blocks in a single season . Behind his play , Cleveland went a franchise record 66 – 16 and fell one game short of matching the best home record in league history . With averages of 28 @.@ 4 points , 7 @.@ 6 rebounds , 7 @.@ 2 assists , 1 @.@ 7 steals , and 1 @.@ 2 blocks per game , he became the first Cavalier to win the MVP Award . 
 In the playoffs , Cleveland swept the Pistons and the Atlanta Hawks to earn a match @-@ up with the Orlando Magic in the Conference Finals . In Game 1 of the series , James scored 49 points on 66 percent shooting in a losing effort for the Cavaliers . In Game 2 , he hit a game @-@ winner to tie the series at 1 – 1 . Cleveland would lose the series in six games , and following the loss in Game 6 , James immediately left the floor without shaking hands with his opponents , an act many media members viewed as unsportsmanlike . For the series , he averaged 38 @.@ 5 points , 8 @.@ 3 rebounds , and 8 assists per game , finishing the postseason with a career playoff @-@ high 35 @.@ 3 points per game . 
 Midway through the 2009 – 10 season , the Cavaliers ' guards experienced significant injuries , forcing James into a temporary point guard role . With increased minutes as the team 's primary ball handler , he averaged a career @-@ high 8 @.@ 6 assists with 29 @.@ 7 points , 7 @.@ 3 rebounds , 1 @.@ 6 steals , and 1 block per game on 50 percent shooting en route to a second consecutive MVP Award . Cleveland also finished the season with the league 's best record for the second straight year . In the playoffs , the Cavaliers beat the Bulls in the first round but fell to the Celtics in the second round . James was heavily criticized for not playing well in Game 5 of the series when he shot only 20 percent on 14 shots , scoring 15 points . At the conclusion of the game , he walked off the court to a smattering of boos from Cleveland 's home crowd , the team having just suffered their worst home playoff loss ever . The Cavaliers were eliminated from the playoffs by the Celtics with a Game 6 defeat despite James recording 27 points , 19 rebounds and 10 assists . 
 = = = 2010 free agency = = = 
 James became an unrestricted free agent at 12 : 01 am EDT on July 1 , 2010 . During his free agency , he was courted by several teams , including the Bulls , Los Angeles Clippers , Miami Heat , New York Knicks , New Jersey Nets , and Cavaliers . On July 8 , he announced on a live ESPN special titled The Decision that he would sign with the Heat . The telecast , broadcast from the Boys & Girls Club of Greenwich , Connecticut , raised $ 2 @.@ 5 million for the charity and an additional $ 3 @.@ 5 million from advertisement revenue that was donated to other charities . The day before the special , fellow free agents Chris Bosh and Dwyane Wade had also announced that they would sign with Miami ; reports later arose that the trio had discussed their 2010 free agencies together in 2006 . James decided to join with Bosh and Wade in part so that he could shoulder less of the load offensively , thinking that his improved teammates would give him a better chance of winning a championship than had he stayed in Cleveland . Heat president Pat Riley played a major role in selling James on the idea of playing with Bosh and Wade . Relieved of the burden of scoring , James thought he could be the first player to average a triple @-@ double in a season since Oscar Robertson . 
 James drew immense criticism from sports analysts , executives , fans , and current and former players for leaving the Cavaliers . The Decision itself was also scrutinized and viewed as unnecessary . Many thought the prolonged wait for James ' choice was unprofessional as not even the teams courting him were aware of his decision until moments before the show . Upon learning that James would not be returning to Cleveland , Cavaliers owner Dan Gilbert published an open letter to fans in which he aggressively denounced James ' actions . Some angry fans of the team recorded videos of themselves burning his jersey . Former NBA players including Michael Jordan and Magic Johnson were also critical of James , condemning him for joining with Bosh and Wade in Miami and not trying to win a championship as " the guy " . James drew further criticism in a September interview with CNN when he claimed that race might have been a factor in the fallout from The Decision . As a result of his actions during the 2010 free agency period , he quickly gained a reputation as one of America 's most disliked athletes , a radical change from years prior . The phrase " taking my talents to South Beach " became a punch line for critics . 
 Immediately following The Decision , James claimed that there was nothing he would change about the handling of his free agency despite all the criticism . Since then , he has expressed regret over his actions . During the 2010 – 11 season , he said he " probably would do it a little bit different ... But I 'm happy with my decision . " James relented about the special before the 2011 – 12 season : " ... if the shoe was on the other foot and I was a fan , and I was very passionate about one player , and he decided to leave , I would be upset too about the way he handled it . " 
 = = = Miami Heat ( 2010 – 2014 ) = = = 
 = = = = Debut season ( 2010 – 11 ) = = = = 
 James officially became a member of the Heat on July 10 , completing a sign @-@ and @-@ trade six @-@ year contract with the team . With the move , he became only the third reigning MVP to change teams and the first since Moses Malone in 1982 . Although his contract would have allowed him to earn the maximum salary under the collective bargaining agreement , he took less money in order for Miami to be able to afford Bosh and Wade as well as further roster support . That evening , the Heat threw a welcome party for their new " big three " at the American Airlines Arena , an event that took on a rock concert atmosphere . During the gathering , James predicted a dynasty for the Heat and alluded to multiple championships . Outside of Miami , the spectacle was not well @-@ received , furthering the negative public perception of James . 
 Throughout the 2010 – 11 season , James embraced the villain role bestowed upon him by the media ; he later admitted that he regretted this approach . On December 2 , he returned to Cleveland for the first time since departing as a free agent , scoring 38 points and leading Miami to a win while being booed every time he touched the ball . He finished the season with averages of 26 @.@ 7 points , 7 @.@ 5 rebounds , and 7 assists per game on 51 percent shooting . Entering the playoffs as the East 's second seed , Miami advanced to the Finals before stumbling against the Dallas Mavericks , losing in six games despite holding a 2 – 1 series lead going into Game 4 . James received the brunt of the criticism for the loss , averaging only three points in fourth quarters in the series . His Finals scoring average of 17 @.@ 8 points per game signified an 8 @.@ 9 @-@ point drop from the regular season , the largest point drop @-@ off in league history . 
 = = = = Back @-@ to @-@ back championships ( 2011 – 13 ) = = = = 
 <unk> by the Heat 's loss to the Mavericks , James spent the offseason working with Hakeem Olajuwon on his post game . His work with Olajuwon paid off , fueling what Grantland 's Kirk Goldsberry called " one of the greatest and most important transformations in recent sports history " . Behind James ' more post @-@ oriented play , Miami matched their best start to a season in franchise history , and at the conclusion of the lockout @-@ shortened 2011 – 12 campaign , he was named MVP for the third time , finishing with averages of 27 @.@ 1 points , 7 @.@ 9 rebounds , 6 @.@ 2 assists , and 1 @.@ 9 steals per game on 53 percent shooting . 
 In Game 4 of the second round of the playoffs , James registered 40 points , 18 rebounds , and 9 assists to help even the series against the Indiana Pacers . Miami eventually defeated the Pacers in six games . Facing elimination in Game 6 of the Conference Finals against the Celtics , James scored 45 points to lead the Heat to victory in what the New York Times called a " career @-@ defining performance " . Miami won Game 7 to advance to the Finals , earning them a matchup with the Oklahoma City Thunder . Late in Game 4 of the series , James hit a three @-@ pointer to give the Heat a lead , helping them win the game despite missing time with leg cramps . In Game 5 , he registered a triple @-@ double as Miami defeated Oklahoma City for their second @-@ ever championship and James ' first championship . James was unanimously voted the Bill Russell NBA Finals Most Valuable Player with averages of 28 @.@ 6 points , 10 @.@ 2 rebounds , and 7 @.@ 4 assists per game . 
 In February of the 2012 – 13 season , James had , as described by Sports Illustrated , a " month for the ages " , averaging 29 @.@ 7 points and 7 @.@ 8 assists per game while setting multiple shooting efficiency records . During this period , the Heat began a 27 @-@ game winning streak , the third longest in NBA history . Behind his play , Miami finished the year with a franchise and league best 66 – 16 record , and James was named MVP for the fourth time , falling just one vote shy of becoming the first player in NBA history to win the award unanimously . His final season averages were 26 @.@ 8 points , 8 rebounds , 7 @.@ 3 assists , and 1 @.@ 7 steals per game on 56 @.@ 5 percent shooting . 
 In Game 1 of the Conference Finals , James scored a buzzer @-@ beating layup to give Miami a one @-@ point victory against the Pacers . Throughout the series , his supporting cast struggled significantly , and his added scoring load prompted him to compare his responsibilities to those of his " Cleveland days " . Despite these struggles , the Heat won the series and advanced to the Finals for a meeting with the Spurs , signifying a rematch for James from his first Finals six years earlier . At the beginning of the series , he was criticized for his lack of aggressiveness and poor shot selection as Miami fell behind 2 – 3 . In Game 6 , he recorded his second triple @-@ double of the series including 16 fourth quarter points to lead the Heat to a comeback victory . In Game 7 , he tied the Finals record for most points scored in a Game 7 victory , leading Miami over San Antonio with 37 points . He was named Finals MVP for the second straight season , averaging 25 @.@ 3 points , 10 @.@ 9 rebounds , 7 assists , and 2 @.@ 3 steals per game for the series . 
 = = = = Fourth consecutive Finals ( 2013 – 14 ) = = = = 
 On March 3 of the 2013 – 14 season , James scored a career @-@ high and franchise record 61 points in a game against the Charlotte Bobcats . Throughout the year , he was one of the few staples for a Heat roster that used 20 different starting line @-@ ups because of injuries , finishing with averages of 27 @.@ 1 points , 6 @.@ 9 rebounds , and 6 @.@ 4 assists per game on 56 @.@ 7 percent shooting . In the second round of the playoffs , he tied a career postseason @-@ high by scoring 49 points in Game 4 against the Brooklyn Nets . In the next round , Miami defeated the Pacers to earn their fourth consecutive Finals berth , becoming one of only four teams in NBA history to do so . In Game 1 of the Finals , James missed most of the fourth quarter because of leg cramps , helping the Spurs take an early series lead . In Game 2 , he led the Heat to a series @-@ tying victory with 35 points on a 64 percent shooting rate . San Antonio eventually eliminated the Heat in five games , ending Miami 's quest for a three @-@ peat . For the Finals , James averaged 28 @.@ 2 points , 7 @.@ 8 rebounds , and 2 steals per game . 
 = = = Return to the Cavaliers ( 2014 – 2016 ) = = = 
 On June 25 , James opted out of his contract with the Heat , officially becoming an unrestricted free agent on July 1 . On July 11 , he revealed via a first @-@ person essay in Sports Illustrated that he intended to rejoin the Cavaliers . In contrast to The Decision , his announcement to return to Cleveland was well received . On July 12 , he officially signed with the team . A month after James ' signing , the Cavaliers acquired Kevin Love from the Minnesota Timberwolves , forming a new star trio along with Kyrie Irving . 
 In January of the 2014 – 15 season , James missed two weeks due to left knee and lower back strains , the longest stretch of missed games in his career . In total , he played a career @-@ low 69 games and his final averages were 25 @.@ 3 points , 6 rebounds , and 7 @.@ 4 assists per game . In the second round of the playoffs , he hit a baseline jumper at the buzzer to give Cleveland a 2 – 2 series tie with the Bulls . In the Conference Finals , the Cavaliers defeated the Hawks to advance to the Finals , making James the first player since the 1960s to play in five consecutive Finals . For most of the Finals against the Golden State Warriors , Irving and Love were sidelined due to injury , giving James more offensive responsibilities . Behind his leadership , the Cavaliers opened the series with a 2 – 1 lead before being eliminated in six games . Despite the loss , he received serious consideration for the Finals MVP Award , averaging 35 @.@ 8 points , 13 @.@ 3 rebounds , and 8 @.@ 8 assists per game for the series . 
 During the 2015 – 16 season , James was criticized for his role in several off court controversies , including the midseason firing of Cavaliers ' head coach David Blatt . Despite these distractions , Cleveland finished the year with 57 wins and the best record in the East . James ' final averages were 25 @.@ 3 points , 7 @.@ 4 rebounds , and 6 @.@ 8 assists per game on 52 percent shooting . In the playoffs , the Cavaliers advanced comfortably to the Finals , losing only two games en route to a rematch with the Warriors , who were coming off a record @-@ setting 73 win campaign . To begin the series , Cleveland fell behind 3 – 1 , including two blowout losses . James responded by registering back @-@ to @-@ back 41 point games in Games 5 and 6 , leading the Cavaliers to two consecutive wins to stave off elimination . In Game 7 , he posted a triple @-@ double and made a number of key plays , including a memorable chase @-@ down block on Andre Iguodala in the final two minutes , as Cleveland emerged victorious , winning the city 's first professional sports title in 52 years and becoming the first team in NBA history to come back from a 3 – 1 series deficit in the Finals . James became just the third player to record a triple @-@ double in an NBA Finals Game 7 , and behind series averages of 29 @.@ 7 points , 11 @.@ 3 rebounds , 8 @.@ 9 assists , 2 @.@ 3 blocks , and 2 @.@ 6 steals per game , he also became the first player in league history to lead both teams in all five statistical categories for a playoff round , culminating in a unanimous Finals MVP selection . 
 = = National team career = = 
 James made his debut for the United States national team at the 2004 Olympics in Athens , Greece . He spent the Games mostly on the bench , averaging 14 @.@ 6 minutes per game with 5 @.@ 8 points and 2 @.@ 6 rebounds per game in eight games . Team USA finished the competition with a bronze medal , becoming the first U.S. basketball team to return home without a gold medal since adding professionals to their line @-@ up . James felt his limited playing time was a " lowlight " and believed he was not given " a fair opportunity to play " . His attitude during the Olympics was described as " disrespectful " and " distasteful " by columnists Adrian <unk> and Peter Vecsey , respectively . 
 At the 2006 FIBA World Championship in Japan , James took on a greater role for Team USA , averaging 13 @.@ 9 points , 4 @.@ 8 rebounds , and 4 @.@ 1 assists per game as co @-@ captain . The team finished the tournament with an 8 – 1 record , winning another bronze medal . James ' behavior was again questioned , this time by teammate Bruce Bowen , who confronted James during tryouts regarding his treatment of staff members . 
 Before naming James to the 2008 Olympic team , Team USA managing director Jerry Colangelo and coach Mike Krzyzewski gave James an ultimatum to improve his attitude , and he heeded their advice . At the FIBA Americas Championship 2007 , he averaged 18 @.@ 1 points , 3 @.@ 6 rebounds , and 4 @.@ 7 assists per game , including a 31 @-@ point performance against Argentina in the championship game , the most ever by an American in an Olympic qualifier . Team USA went 10 – 0 , winning the gold medal and qualifying for the 2008 Olympics in Beijing , China . James credited the team 's attitude and experience for their improvement , saying : " I don 't think we understood what it meant to put on a USA uniform and all the people that we were representing in 2004 . We definitely know that now . " At the Olympics , Team USA went unbeaten , winning their first gold medal since 2000 . In the final game , James turned in 14 points , 6 rebounds , and 3 assists against Spain . 
 James did not play at the 2010 FIBA World Championship but rejoined Team USA for the 2012 Olympics in London , England . He became the leader of the team with Kobe Bryant , who would soon be 34 , stepping back . James facilitated the offense from the post and perimeter , called the defensive sets , and provided scoring when needed . During a game against Australia , he recorded the first triple @-@ double in U.S. Olympic basketball history with 11 points , 14 rebounds and 12 assists . Team USA went on to win their second straight gold medal , again defeating Spain in the final game . James contributed 19 points in the win , becoming the all @-@ time leading scorer in U.S. men 's basketball history . He also joined Michael Jordan as the only players to win an NBA MVP award , NBA championship , NBA Finals MVP , and Olympic gold medal in the same year . Afterwards , Krzyzewski said James " is the best player , he is the best leader and he is as smart as anybody playing the game right now . " 
 = = Player profile = = 
 Standing at 6 feet 8 inches ( 2 @.@ 03 m ) and weighing 250 pounds ( 113 @.@ 4 kg ) , James has started at small forward and power forward , but can also play the other three positions . With career averages of 27 @.@ 5 points , 7 @.@ 2 rebounds , 6 @.@ 9 assists , and 1 @.@ 7 steals per game , he is considered one of the most athletic and versatile players in NBA history , and has been compared to Hall of Famers Oscar Robertson , Magic Johnson , and Michael Jordan . Since 2011 , he has been ranked the best player in the NBA by ESPN and Sports Illustrated . 
 Many basketball analysts , coaches , fans , and current and former players consider James to be one of the greatest players of all @-@ time , often ranking him as the best small forward and in the top five overall . He has earned All @-@ NBA honors every season since his sophomore year , All @-@ Defensive honors every season from 2009 to 2014 , and was named Rookie of the Year in his debut season . With four MVP awards , he is part of a select group of players who have won the award four times , including Kareem Abdul @-@ Jabbar , Jordan , Wilt Chamberlain , and Bill Russell ; only he and Russell have won four MVP awards in a five @-@ year span . While James has never won the Defensive Player of the Year Award , he has finished second in the voting twice and lists it as one of his main goals . 
 = = = Offense = = = 
 James entered the NBA at an early age and made an immediate offensive impact ; he holds numerous " youngest to " distinctions including being the youngest player to score 25 @,@ 000 career points . During his first term with the Cavaliers , he was used as an on @-@ ball point forward , and although his shooting tendencies were perimeter @-@ oriented , he established himself as one of the best slashers and finishers in basketball , leading the NBA in three point plays in 2006 . Around this time , he was frequently criticized for not having developed a reliable jump shot or post game , areas he improved in Miami , where Heat coach Erik Spoelstra changed James ' role to a more unconventional one . James began spending more time in the post and shooting fewer three @-@ pointers , attempting a career @-@ low 149 in 2012 . He improved his shot selection and accuracy on jump shots , finishing second in the league in catch @-@ and @-@ shoot field goal percentage in 2013 . He also learned how to work as an off @-@ ball cutter in the Heat 's " pass @-@ happy " offense . During this period , ESPN 's Tom <unk> has called James ' free throw shooting his biggest weakness , describing it as " average " . Upon returning to the Cavaliers , James began to experience subtle age @-@ related declines in productivity , posting his lowest scoring averages since his rookie season in 2015 and 2016 . His shooting also regressed , and he briefly ranked as the worst high @-@ volume outside shooter from outside the paint in the NBA . 
 Throughout his career , James ' playmaking ability has been praised ; in one article , Grantland 's Zach Lowe called him " one of the greatest passers ever " . Using his size , vision , and the attention he garners from opposing defenses to his advantage , James is able to create easy points for his teammates with accurate assists , manufacturing a league leading 2 @.@ 6 three @-@ pointers per game by way of his passing alone in 2013 . 
 Early in James ' career , he was criticized by the media for his play in pressure situations ; specifically , for passing instead of shooting in the waning seconds of close games . In a 2011 interview , teammate Chris Bosh stated that he would rather have Dwyane Wade take a last @-@ second shot than James . Later in James ' career , his clutch play was viewed more favorably ; for example , a 2011 article by Henry Abbott revealed that James had a better shooting percentage with the game on the line than such notables as Ray Allen and Kobe Bryant . In 2015 , FiveThirtyEight wrote that he might be " the most clutch playoff shooter of his generation " . 
 = = = Defense = = = 
 At the beginning of James ' career , he was considered a poor defensive player , but improved steadily through the years . Near the end of his first tenure in Cleveland , he became proficient at the chase @-@ down block ; coming in from behind the opposition in transition to block their shot . In Miami , he developed into a more versatile defender , and the Heat relied on him to guard all five positions . Paired with teammates Shane Battier and Dwyane Wade , Miami used James in an ultra @-@ aggressive defensive scheme , with James cheating off the ball to help out inside or get into rebounding position . In 2014 , James was criticized for having a down defensive season , stemming from a lack of effort and a tendency for " coasting " . 
 = = Off the court = = 
 James proposed to Savannah Brinson , his high school sweetheart , on December 31 , 2011 at a party celebrating New Year 's Eve and his 27th birthday . The two were married on September 14 , 2013 in San Diego . Together , they have three children : LeBron James Jr . ( born October 6 , 2004 ) , Bryce Maximus James ( born June 14 , 2007 ) , and <unk> James . During his tenure with the Heat , James resided in Coconut Grove , an affluent Miami neighborhood , where he bought a three @-@ story mansion overlooking Biscayne Bay for $ 9 million . In November 2015 , James bought a 9 @,@ 350 square @-@ feet East Coast @-@ style mansion in Brentwood , Los Angeles , for about $ 21 million . 
 = = = Business interests = = = 
 James is represented by agent Rich Paul of <unk> Sports . His first agent was Aaron Goodwin , whom he left in 2005 for Leon Rose . Rose joined Creative Artists Agency ( CAA ) in 2007 , and he worked with fellow CAA agent Henry Thomas , who represented Dwyane Wade and Chris Bosh , to bring James to Miami in 2010 . James left CAA for Paul in 2012 . James , Paul , Maverick Carter , and Randy Mims — all childhood friends — formed agent and sports @-@ marketing company <unk> after James left Goodwin . <unk> handles James ' marketing , including the marketing of The Decision , for which it was criticized . 
 Throughout his career , James has taken a unique approach to his playing contracts , usually opting to sign shorter term deals in order to maximize his earnings potential and flexibility . In 2006 , he and the Cavaliers negotiated a three @-@ year , $ 60 million contract extension instead of the four year maximum as it allotted James the option of seeking a new contract worth more money as an unrestricted free agent following the 2010 season . In 2014 , he rejoined Cleveland on a two @-@ year contract worth $ 42 @.@ 1 million with an option to become a free agent again in 2015 . The next offseason , he opted out of the contract and re @-@ signed with the Cavaliers on another two @-@ year contract with a player option for the second year . Analysts have speculated that James is opting out and re @-@ signing on new contracts after each season in order to take advantage of higher salaries resulting from the NBA 's rising salary cap . 
 James has numerous endorsement contracts ; some of the companies he does business with are Audemars Piguet , Coca @-@ Cola , Dunkin ' Brands , McDonald 's , Nike , State Farm , and Samsung . Coming out of high school , he was the target of a three @-@ way bidding war among Nike , Reebok , and Adidas , eventually signing with Nike for approximately $ 90 million . His signature shoes have performed well for Nike , and in 2013 he led all NBA players in shoe sales . In 2011 , Fenway Sports Group became the sole global marketer of his rights , and as part of the deal , he was granted a minority stake in the English Premier League football club Liverpool FC , who he has claimed his support for . As a result of James ' endorsement money and NBA salary , he has been listed as one of the world 's highest @-@ paid athletes . In 2013 , he surpassed Kobe Bryant as the highest paid basketball player in the world with earnings of $ 56 @.@ 5 million . In 2015 he was ranked the sixth highest earning sportsperson , and third highest in 2016 ( after Cristiano Ronaldo and Lionel Messi ) . In 2014 , James realized a profit of more than $ 30 million as part of Apple 's acquisition of Beats Electronics ; he had originally struck a deal to get a small stake in the company at its inception in exchange for promoting its headphones . 
 James , with comedian Jimmy Kimmel , co @-@ hosted the 2007 ESPY Awards . In other comedic pursuits , he hosted the 33rd season premiere of Saturday Night Live . He has also tried his hand at acting , appearing in a cameo role on the HBO series Entourage . In 2015 , he played himself in the Judd Apatow film Trainwreck , receiving positive reviews for his performance . That same year , James ' digital video company , Uninterrupted , raised $ 15 @.@ 8 million from Warner Bros. Entertainment and Turner Sports to help expand the company 's efforts to bring athlete @-@ created content to fans . It is hosted on Bleacher Report and is used by several other athletes including New England Patriots tight end Rob Gronkowski and Seattle Seahawks cornerback Richard Sherman . 
 Along with business partner Maverick Carter , James owns production company <unk> Entertainment , whose first work was the Lions Gate documentary More Than a Game , released in 2009 and chronicling James ' high school years . Series produced by <unk> include the Disney XD sports documentaries Becoming , Starz sitcom Survivor 's Remorse , and animated web series The <unk> . In 2016 , CNBC will air an unscripted series hosted by James called Cleveland <unk> , where four up @-@ and @-@ coming Northern Ohio entrepreneurs will be financed on the condition of revitalizing a neighborhood in Cleveland . 
 = = = Public image = = = 
 James is considered by many , including his fellow players , to be the " face of the NBA " . His opinions have yielded significant influence on important league decisions ; for example , in 2014 he asked commissioner Adam Silver to increase the duration of the All @-@ Star break , and the request was granted the following season . On February 13 , 2015 , James was elected the first Vice President of the National Basketball Players Association ( NBPA ) . 
 James has been ranked by Forbes as one of the world 's most influential athletes throughout his career . During his first tenure with the Cavaliers , he was adored by local fans , with Sherwin @-@ Williams displaying a giant Nike @-@ produced banner of James on its world headquarters . Despite their affection for James , Cleveland fans and critics were frequently annoyed when he attended Cleveland Indians games against the New York Yankees dressed in a Yankees hat . Following his actions during the 2010 free agency period and , more specifically , The Decision , he was listed as one of the world 's most disliked athletes . By 2013 , his image had mostly recovered and he was reported by ESPN as the most popular player in the NBA for the second time in his career . In 2014 , he was named the most popular male athlete in America by the Harris Poll . He has led the league in jersey sales six times . 
 A philanthropist , James is an active supporter of the Boys & Girls Club of America , Children 's Defense Fund , and ONEXONE . He also has his own charity foundation , the LeBron James Family Foundation , which is based out of Akron . Since 2005 , the foundation has held an annual bike @-@ a @-@ thon in Akron to raise money for various causes . In 2015 , James announced a partnership with the University of Akron to provide scholarships for as many as 2 @,@ 300 children beginning in 2021 . 
 In March 2008 , James became the first black man — and third man overall after Richard Gere and George Clooney — to appear on the cover of Vogue , posing with Gisele Bündchen . Some sports bloggers and columnists considered the cover offensive , describing the demeanor of James and his holding Bündchen as a reference to classic imagery of the movie monster King Kong , a dark savage capturing his light @-@ skinned love interest . 
 James has taken stances on controversial issues throughout his career , mentioning on several occasions a feeling of obligation to effect change using his status . Those include the War in Darfur , the Trayvon Martin case , NBA owner Donald Sterling 's racist comments in 2014 , the Michael Brown verdict , and the death of Eric Garner . In June 2008 , James donated $ 20 @,@ 000 to a committee to elect Barack Obama . Later that year , James gathered almost 20 @,@ 000 people at the Quicken Loans Arena for a viewing of Democratic presidential nominee Barack Obama 's 30 @-@ minute American Stories , American Solutions television advertisement . It was shown on a large screen above the stage , where Jay @-@ Z later held a free concert . 
 = = NBA career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = = Playoffs = = = 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 NBA 
 Three @-@ time NBA Champion : 2012 , 2013 , 2016 
 Three @-@ time NBA Finals MVP : 2012 , 2013 , 2016 
 Four @-@ time NBA Most Valuable Player : 2009 , 2010 , 2012 , 2013 
 12 @-@ time NBA All @-@ Star : 2005 , 2006 , 2007 , 2008 , 2009 , 2010 , 2011 , 2012 , 2013 , 2014 , 2015 , 2016 
 Two @-@ time NBA All @-@ Star Game MVP : 2006 , 2008 
