 Ten @-@ time All @-@ NBA First Team : 2006 , 2008 , 2009 , 2010 , 2011 , 2012 , 2013 , 2014 , 2015 , 2016 
 Two @-@ time All @-@ NBA Second Team : 2005 , 2007 
 Five @-@ time NBA All @-@ Defensive First Team : 2009 , 2010 , 2011 , 2012 , 2013 
 NBA All @-@ Defensive Second Team : 2014 
 2004 NBA Rookie of the Year 
 2004 NBA All @-@ Rookie First Team 
 2008 NBA Scoring Champion 
 Only player since Oscar Robertson to be in the top 20 for all @-@ time points and assists leaders . 
 National team 
 Two @-@ time Olympic Gold Medal winner : 2008 , 2012 
 2004 Olympic Bronze Medal winner 
 2006 FIBA World Championship Bronze Medal winner 
 2007 FIBA Americas Championship Gold Medal winner 
 2012 USA Basketball Male Athlete of the Year 
 Commemorative banner in Miami 's American Airlines Arena ( for his 2012 gold medal won as a member of the Miami Heat ) 
 High school 
 2003 National Champion 
 Three @-@ time OHSAA Champion : 2000 , 2001 , 2003 
 Two @-@ time Gatorade National Player of the Year 2002 , 2003 
 Two @-@ time USA Today High School Player of the Year 2002 , 2003 
 Three @-@ time Ohio Mr. Basketball : 2001 , 2002 , 2003 
 Three @-@ time USA Today All @-@ USA First Team : 2001 , 2002 , 2003 
 Two @-@ time <unk> High School Player of the Year : 2002 , 2003 
 2003 Naismith Prep Player of the Year 
 2003 McDonald 's National Player of the Year 
 2003 McDonald 's High School All @-@ American 
 2003 McDonald 's All @-@ American Game 2003 
 2003 EA Sports Roundball Classic MVP 
 2003 Jordan Capital Classic MVP 
 Number 23 retired by St. Vincent @-@ St. Mary 
 St. Vincent @-@ St. Mary Hall of Fame ( class of 2011 ) 
 St. Vincent @-@ St. Mary home basketball court named The LeBron James Arena 
 Other 
 Two @-@ time Cleveland Sports Awards Professional Athlete of the Year : 2009 , 2016 
 2013 AP Athlete of the Year 
 2012 Sports Illustrated Sportsman of the Year 
 2012 Sporting News Athlete of the Year 
 2006 Sporting News NBA MVP 
 2004 Sporting News Rookie of the Year 
 Sports Illustrated NBA All @-@ Decade First Team ( 2000s ) 
 16 @-@ time ESPY Award winner in various categories ( 12 individually , four as part of a team ) 
 South Main Street in downtown Akron renamed King James Way 
 10 @-@ story commemorative banner in downtown Cleveland 
 Six @-@ story commemorative banner in downtown Akron 
 = Wulfhere of Mercia = 
 Wulfhere or <unk> ( died 675 ) was King of Mercia from 658 until 675 AD . He was the first Christian king of all of Mercia , though it is not known when or how he converted from Anglo @-@ Saxon paganism . His accession marked the end of Oswiu of Northumbria 's overlordship of southern England , and Wulfhere extended his influence over much of that region . His campaigns against the West Saxons led to Mercian control of much of the Thames valley . He conquered the Isle of Wight and the Meon valley and gave them to King Æthelwealh of the South Saxons . He also had influence in Surrey , Essex , and Kent . He married Eormenhild , the daughter of King Eorcenberht of Kent . 
 Wulfhere 's father , Penda , was killed in 655 at the Battle of Winwaed , fighting against Oswiu of Northumbria . Penda 's son Peada became king under Oswiu 's overlordship but was murdered six months later . Wulfhere came to the throne when Mercian nobles organized a revolt against Northumbrian rule in 658 and drove out Oswiu 's governors . 
 By 670 , when Oswiu died , Wulfhere was the most powerful king in southern Britain . He was effectively the overlord of Britain south of the Humber from the early 660s , although not overlord of Northumbria as his father had been . In 674 , he challenged Oswiu 's son Ecgfrith of Northumbria , but was defeated . He died , probably of disease , in 675 . Wulfhere was succeeded as King of Mercia by his brother , Æthelred . Stephen of Ripon 's Life of Wilfrid describes Wulfhere as " a man of proud mind , and insatiable will " . 
 = = Mercia in the seventh century = = 
 England in the early 7th century was ruled almost entirely by the Anglo @-@ Saxon peoples who had come to Britain from northwestern Europe , starting in the early 5th century . The monk Bede , who wrote in the 8th century , considered the Mercians to be descended from the Angles , one of the invading groups ; the Saxons and Jutes settled in the south of Britain , while the Angles settled in the north . Little is known about the origins of the kingdom of Mercia , in what is now the English midlands , but according to genealogies preserved in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle and the Anglian collection the early kings were descended from Icel ; the dynasty is therefore known as the <unk> . The earliest Mercian king about whom definite historical information has survived is Penda of Mercia , Wulfhere 's father . 
 According to Bede 's Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum , a history of the English church , there were seven early Anglo @-@ Saxon rulers who held imperium , or overlordship , over the other kingdoms . The fifth of these was Edwin of Northumbria , who was killed at the battle of Hatfield Chase by a combined force including Cadwallon , a British king of Gwynedd , and Penda . At the time of this victory , Penda was probably not yet king of Mercia . His children included two future kings of Mercia : Wulfhere and Æthelred . 
 After Edwin 's death , Northumbria briefly fell apart into its two constituent kingdoms . Within a year Oswald killed Cadwallon and reunited the kingdoms , and subsequently re @-@ established Northumbrian hegemony over the south of England . However , on 5 August 642 , Penda killed Oswald at the battle of Maserfield , probably at Oswestry in the northwest midlands . Penda is not recorded as overlord of the other southern Anglo @-@ Saxon kings , but he became the most powerful of the Anglo @-@ Saxon kings after he defeated Oswald . On Oswald 's death , Northumbria was divided again : Oswald 's son Oswiu succeeded to the throne of Bernicia , and Osric 's son Oswine to Deira , the southern of the two kingdoms . 
 The main source for this period is Bede 's History , completed in about 731 . Despite its focus on the history of the church , this work also provides valuable information about the early pagan kingdoms . For other kingdoms than his native Northumbria , such as Wessex and Kent , Bede had an informant within the ecclesiastical establishment who supplied him with additional information . This does not seem to have been the case with Mercia , about which Bede is less informative than about other kingdoms . Further sources for this period include the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , compiled at the end of the 9th century in Wessex . The Chronicle 's anonymous scribe appears to have incorporated much information recorded in earlier periods . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 Wulfhere was the son of Penda of Mercia . Penda 's queen , <unk> , is named by Bede , who does not mention her children ; no other wives of Penda are known and so it is likely but not certain that she was Wulfhere 's mother . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle gives Penda 's age as fifty in 626 , and credits him with a thirty @-@ year reign , but this would put Penda at eighty years old at the time of his death , which is generally thought unlikely as two of his sons ( Wulfhere and Æthelred ) are recorded as being young when he was killed . It is thought at least as likely that Penda was 50 years old at his death , rather than at his accession . Wulfhere 's date of birth is unknown , but Bede describes him as a youth at the time of his accession in 658 , so it is likely he was in his middle teens at that time ; Penda would then have been in his thirties at the time Wulfhere was born . 
 Nothing is known of Wulfhere 's childhood . He had two brothers , Peada and Æthelred , and two sisters , Cyneburh and Cyneswith ; it is also possible that Merewalh , king of the Magonsæte , was Wulfhere 's brother . He married Eormenhild of Kent ; no date is recorded for the marriage and there is no record of any children in the earliest sources , though Coenred , who was king of Mercia from 704 to 709 , is recorded in John of Worcester 's 12th century chronicle as Wulfhere 's son . Another possible child is Berhtwald , a subking who is recorded as a nephew of Æthelred , and a third child , <unk> , is recorded in an 11th @-@ century manuscript as a daughter of Wulfhere . An 11th @-@ century history of St. Peter 's Monastery in Gloucester names two other women , Eadburh and Eafe , as queens of Wulfhere , but neither claim is plausible . 
 = = Accession and overlordship = = 
 In 655 Penda besieged Oswiu of Northumbria at Iudeu , the location of which is unknown but which may have been Stirling , in Scotland . Penda took Oswiu 's son , Ecgfrith , as hostage , and Oswiu paid tribute , in the form of treasure , to secure Penda 's departure . On the way back to Mercia , Oswiu overtook Penda and on 15 November 655 Oswiu and Penda fought on the banks of the ( unidentified ) river Winwaed . Penda was killed and beheaded by Oswiu , who divided Mercia into northern and southern halves . The northern portion was kept under direct Northumbrian control ; the southern kingdom was given to Penda 's son Peada , who had married Oswiu 's daughter Ealhflæd ca 653 . 
 Peada did not remain king long . He was murdered at Easter in 656 , perhaps with the connivance of his wife , Oswiu 's daughter . Oswiu then ruled all Mercia himself . Bede lists Oswiu as the seventh and last king to hold imperium ( or bretwalda in the language of the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle ) over the other Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdoms . Overlordship was a common relationship between kingdoms at this time , often taking the form of a lesser king under the domination of a stronger one . Oswiu went further than this , however , and installed his own governors in Mercia after the deaths of Penda and Peada . This attempt to establish close control of Mercia failed in 658 when three Mercian leaders , <unk> , <unk> and Eadbert , rebelled against the Northumbrians . Bede reports that they had kept Wulfhere in hiding , and when the revolt succeeded Wulfhere became king . It has been suggested that the Mercian revolt succeeded because Oswiu may have been occupied with fighting in Pictland , in northern Britain . His nephew the Pictish king Talorgan , son of Eanfrith , had died in 657 . 
 How much direct control Oswiu exerted over the southern kingdoms during his imperium is unclear . Bede describes Oswiu 's friendship and influence over Sigeberht of the East Saxons , but generally the pattern in the southeast is of more local domination , with Oswiu 's influence unlikely to have been particularly strong . Wulfhere appears to have taken over Oswiu 's position in many instances . Bede does not list him as one of the rulers who exercised imperium , but modern historians consider that the rise to primacy of the kingdom of Mercia began in his reign . He seems to have been the effective overlord of Britain south of the Humber from the early 660s , though not overlord of Northumbria as his father had been . 
 A document called the Tribal Hidage may date from Wulfhere 's reign . Drawn up before many smaller groups of peoples were absorbed into the larger kingdoms , such as Mercia , it records the peoples of Anglo @-@ Saxon England , along with an assessment in hides , a unit of land . The Tribal Hidage is difficult to date precisely ; it may have been written down in Wulfhere 's reign , but other suggested origins include the reign of Offa of Mercia , or Edwin or Oswiu of Northumbria . 
 = = A convert king = = 
 Britain had been Christianized under the Romans , but the incoming Anglo @-@ Saxons practiced their indigenous religion ( Anglo @-@ Saxon paganism ) and the church in Great Britain was limited to the surviving British kingdoms in Scotland and Wales , and the kingdom of Dumnonia in the southwest of England . Missionaries from Rome began converting the Anglo @-@ Saxons to Christianity at the end of the 6th century , and this process was well under way in Penda 's reign , though Penda himself remained pagan throughout his life . Records survive of the baptism of other kings at this time — Cynegils of Wessex was baptized in about 640 , for example , and Edwin of Northumbria was converted in the mid 620s . However , later kings , such as Cædwalla of Wessex , who ruled in the 680s , are recorded as pagan at their accession . 
 Bede writes that after Wulfhere became king : " Free under their own king , they [ the Mercians ] gave willing allegiance to Christ their true king , so that they might win his eternal kingdom in heaven " . While Wulfhere 's father had refused to convert to Christianity , and Peada had apparently converted in order to marry Oswiu 's daughter , the date and the circumstances of Wulfhere 's conversion are unknown . It has been suggested that he adopted Christianity as part of a settlement with Oswiu . Bede records that two years before Penda 's death , his son Peada converted to Christianity , influenced partly by Oswiu 's son <unk> , who had married Peada 's sister Cyneburh . Peada brought a Christian mission into Mercia , and it is possible that this was when Wulfhere became a Christian . Wulfhere 's marriage to Eormenhild of Kent would have brought Mercia into close contact with the Christian kingdoms of Kent and Merovingian Gaul , which were connected by kinship and trade . The political and economic benefits of the marriage may therefore also have been a factor in Wulfhere 's Christianization of his kingdom . 
 Wulfhere 's relationship with Bishop Wilfrid is recorded in Stephen of Ripon 's Life of Wilfrid . During the years 667 – 9 , while Wilfrid was at Ripon , Wulfhere frequently invited him to come to Mercia when there was need of the services of a bishop . According to Stephen , Wulfhere rewarded Wilfrid with " many tracts of land " , in which Wilfrid " soon established minsters for servants of God " . 
 According to the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , Wulfhere endowed a major monastery at Medeshamstede , in modern Peterborough . The monastery had initially been endowed by Peada ; for the dedication of Wulfhere 's gift both Archbishop Deusdedit ( died 664 ) , and Bishop Jaruman ( held office from 663 ) , were present . The endowment was signed by Wulfhere and Oswiu , and by Sigehere and Sæbbi , the Kings of Essex . 
 = = West Saxons , South Saxons and Hwicce = = 
 In 661 , Wulfhere is recorded in the Chronicle as harrying Ashdown , in West Saxon territory . The Gewisse , thought to be the original group from which the West Saxons came , appear to have originally settled in the upper Thames valley , and what records survive of the 6th century show them active in that region . The Mercian resurgence under Wulfhere placed them under severe pressure . Also in the early 660s , the West Saxon see of Dorchester , in the same area , was divided , and a new bishopric set up at Winchester . This decision was probably a reaction to the advance of the Mercians into the traditional heartland of the West Saxons , leaving Dorchester dangerously close to the border . Within a few years , the Dorchester see was abandoned ; the exact date is not known , but it was probably in the mid 660s . 
 In addition to the attack on Ashdown , Wulfhere raided the Isle of Wight in 661 . He subsequently gave both the island and the territory of the <unk> , which lay along the river Meon , on the mainland north of the Isle of Wight , to his godson King Æthelwealh of the South Saxons . It seems likely that the ruling dynasty on the island found these arrangements acceptable to some degree , since the West Saxons , under Cædwalla , exterminated the whole family when they launched their own attack on the island in 686 . After the conquest of the Isle of Wight , Wulfhere ordered the priest <unk> to provide baptism to the inhabitants . According to the Chronicle , this was the first time Christian baptism had reached the island . 
 In the early 670s , Cenwealh of Wessex died , and perhaps as a result of the stress caused by Wulfhere 's military activity the West Saxon kingdom fragmented and came to be ruled by underkings , according to Bede . Eventually these underkings were defeated and the kingdom reunited , probably by Cædwalla but possibly by Centwine . A decade after Wulfhere 's death , the West Saxons under Cædwalla began an aggressive expansion to the east , reversing much of the Mercian advance . 
 In addition to being Wulfhere 's godson , King Æthelwealh of the South Saxons had a connection to the Mercians via marriage . His wife was Queen Eafe , the daughter of Eanfrith of the Hwicce , a tribe whose territory lay to the southwest of Mercia . The Hwicce had their own royal family , but it appears that at this date they were already subordinate to Wulfhere : the marriage between Æthelwealh and Eafe may well have taken place at Wulfhere 's court , since it is known Æthelwealh was converted there . The kingdom of the Hwicce is sometimes regarded as a creation of Penda 's , but it is equally likely that the kingdom existed independently of Mercia , and that Penda and Wulfhere 's increasing influence in the area represented an extension of Mercian power rather than the creation of a separate entity . 
 = = East Anglia and the East Saxons = = 
 In 664 , Æthelwald of East Anglia died , and was succeeded by Ealdwulf , who reigned for fifty years . Almost nothing is known of Mercian relations with East Anglia during this time ; East Anglia had previously been dominated by Northumbria , but there is no evidence that this continued after Wulfhere 's accession . <unk> of the East Saxons also died in 664 ; he was succeeded by his two sons , Sigehere and Sæbbi , and Bede describes their accession as " rulers ... under Wulfhere , king of the Mercians " . A plague the same year caused Sigehere and his people to recant their Christianity , and according to Bede , Wulfhere sent Jaruman , the bishop of Lichfield , to reconvert the East Saxons . Jaruman was not the first bishop of Lichfield ; Bede mentions a predecessor , Trumhere , but nothing is known about Trumhere 's activities or who appointed him . 
 It is apparent from these events that Oswiu 's influence in the south had waned by this time , if not before , and that Wulfhere now dominated the area . This becomes even clearer in the next few years , as some time between 665 and 668 Wulfhere sold the see of London to Wine , who had been expelled from his West Saxon bishopric by Cenwealh . London fell within the East Saxons ' territory in that period . From the archaeological evidence , it appears to be about this time that the Middle Saxon settlement in London began to expand significantly ; the centre of Anglo @-@ Saxon London was not at the old Roman centre , but about a mile west of that , near what is now the location of the Strand . Wulfhere may have been in control of the city when this expansion began . 
 = = Kent , Surrey and Lindsey = = 
 Eorcenberht was the king of Kent at Wulfhere 's accession , and the two families became connected when Wulfhere married Eorcenberht 's daughter Eormenhild . In 664 Eorcenberht 's son Egbert succeeded to the Kentish throne . The situation in Kent at Egbert 's death in 673 is not clearly recorded . It appears that a year passed before Hlothhere , Egbert 's brother , became king . Wulfhere may have had an interest in the succession , as through his marriage to Eormenhild he was the uncle of Egbert 's two sons , Eadric and Wihtred . It has been speculated that Wulfhere acted as the effective ruler of Kent in the interregnum between Egbert 's death and Hlothhere 's accession . Another Mercian connection to Kent was through Merewalh , the king of the Magonsæte , and hence a subking under Wulfhere . Merewalh , who may have been Wulfhere 's brother , was married to Hlothhere 's sister , Eormenburh . 
 Surrey is not recorded as ever having been an independent kingdom , but was at least a province that was under the control of different neighbours at different times . It was ruled by Egbert until the early 670s , when a charter shows Wulfhere confirming a grant made to Bishop Eorcenwald by Frithuwold , a sub @-@ king in Surrey , which may have extended north into modern Buckinghamshire . Frithuwold himself was probably married to <unk> , Wulfhere 's sister . The charter , made from Thame , is dated between 673 and 675 , and it was probably Egbert 's death that triggered Wulfhere 's intervention . A witness named <unk> is recorded on a charter in the reign of Wulfhere 's successor , Æthelred , making a grant to the monastery of Peterborough , and the alliteration common in Anglo @-@ Saxon dynasties has led to speculation that the two men may have both come from a Middle Anglian dynasty , with Wulfhere perhaps having placed Frithuwold on the throne of Surrey . The charter is witnessed by three other subkings , named Osric , Wigheard , and Æthelwold ; their kingdoms are not identified but the charter mentions Sonning , a province in what is now eastern Berkshire , and it may be that one of these subkings was a ruler of the <unk> , the people of that province . This would in turn imply Wulfhere 's domination of that province by that time . 
 Wulfhere 's influence among the <unk> , whose territory , Lindsey , lay in what is now Lincolnshire , is known from information about episcopal authority . At least one of the Mercian bishops of Lichfield is known to have exercised authority there : <unk> , who became bishop on Chad 's death in 672 . In addition it is known that Wulfhere gave land at Barrow upon Humber , in Lindsey , to Chad , for a monastery . It is possible that Chad also had authority there as bishop , probably no later than 669 . It may be that the political basis for Mercian episcopal control of the <unk> was laid early in Wulfhere 's reign , under Trumhere and Jaruman , the two bishops who preceded Chad . 
 = = Defeat and death = = 
 When Wulfhere attacked Oswiu 's son Ecgfrith in 674 , he did so from a position of strength . Stephen of Ripon 's Life of Wilfrid says that Wulfhere " stirred up all the southern nations against [ Northumbria ] " . Bede does not report the fighting , nor is it mentioned in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , but according to Stephen , Ecgfrith defeated Wulfhere , forcing him to surrender Lindsey , and to pay tribute . 
 Wulfhere survived the defeat but evidently lost some degree of control over the south as a result ; in 675 , <unk> , one of the kings of the West Saxons , fought him at <unk> . It is not known where this battle was , or who was the victor . Henry of Huntingdon , a 12th @-@ century historian who had access to versions of the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle now lost , believed that Mercians had been the victors in a " terrible battle " and remarks upon Wulfhere having inherited " the valour of his father and grandfather " . Kirby , however , presumes <unk> was sufficiently successful to break Wulfhere 's hold over Wessex . 
 Wulfhere died later in 675 . The cause of death , according to Henry of Huntingdon , was disease . He would have been in his mid @-@ thirties . His widow , Eormenhild , is thought to have later become the abbess of Ely . Æthelred , Wulfhere 's brother , succeeded to the throne and reigned for nearly thirty years . Æthelred recovered Lindsey from the Northumbrians a few years after his accession , but he was generally unable to maintain the domination of the south achieved by Wulfhere . 
 = The Natural History and Antiquities of Selborne = 
 The Natural History and Antiquities of Selborne , or just The Natural History of Selborne is a book by English naturalist and ornithologist Gilbert White . It was first published in 1789 by his brother Benjamin . It has been continuously in print since then , with nearly 300 editions up to 2007 . 
 The book was published late in White 's life , compiled from a mixture of his letters to other naturalists — Thomas Pennant and Daines Barrington ; a ' Naturalist 's Calendar ' ( in the second edition ) comparing phenology observations made by White and William Markwick of the first appearances in the year of different animals and plants ; and observations of natural history organized more or less systematically by species and group . A second volume , less often reprinted , covered the antiquities of Selborne . Some of the letters were never posted , and were written for the book . 
 White 's Natural History was at once well received by contemporary critics and the public , and continued to be admired by a diverse range of nineteenth and twentieth century literary figures including Samuel Taylor Coleridge , Thomas Carlyle , Charles Darwin , John Ruskin , Virginia Woolf , and W. H. Auden . His work has been seen as an early contribution to ecology and in particular to phenology . The book has been enjoyed for its charm and apparent simplicity , and the way that it creates a vision of pre @-@ industrial England . 
 The original manuscript has been preserved and is displayed in the Gilbert White museum at The Wakes , Selborne . 
 = = Overview = = 
 The main part of the book , the Natural History , is presented as a compilation of 44 letters nominally to Thomas Pennant , a leading British zoologist of the day , and 66 letters to Daines Barrington , an English barrister and Fellow of the Royal Society . In these letters , White details the natural history of the area around his family home at the vicarage of Selborne in Hampshire . 
 Many of the ' letters ' were never posted , and were written especially for the book . Patrick Armstrong , in his book The English Parson @-@ Naturalist , notes that in particular , " an obvious example is the first , nominally to Thomas Pennant , but which is clearly contrived , as it introduces the parish , briefly summarizing its position , geography and principal physical features . " White 's biographer , Richard Mabey , estimates that up to 46 out of 66 ' letters to Daines Barrington ' " were probably never sent through the post " ; Mabey explains that it is hard to be more precise , because of White 's extensive editing . Some letters are dated although never sent . Some dates have been altered . Some letters have been cut down , split into shorter ' letters ' , merged , or distributed in small parts into other letters . A section about insect @-@ eating birds in a letter sent to Barrington in 1770 appears in the book as letter 41 to Pennant . Personal remarks have been removed throughout . Thus , while the book is genuinely based on letters to Pennant and Barrington , the structure of the book is a literary device . 
 As a compilation of letters and other materials , the book as a whole has an uneven structure . The first part is a diary @-@ like sequence of ' letters ' , with the breaks and wanderings that naturally follow . The second is a calendar , organized by phenological event around the year . The third is a collection of observations , organised by animal or plant group and species , with a section on meteorology . The apparently rambling structure of the book is in fact bracketed by opening and closing sections , arranged like the rest as letters , which " give form and scale and even a semblance of narrative structure to what would otherwise have been a shapeless anthology . " The <unk> Letter 1 begins 
 The parish of Selborne lies in the extreme eastern corner of the county of Hampshire , bordering on the county of Sussex , and not far from the county of Surrey ; is about fifty miles south @-@ west of London , in latitude fifty @-@ one , and near mid @-@ way between the towns of Alton and Petersfield . Being very large and extensive , it abuts on twelve parishes , two of which are in Sussex — viz , Trotton and Rogate . ... The soils of this district are almost as various and diversified as the views and aspects . The high part of the south @-@ west consists of a vast hill of chalk , rising three hundred feet above the village , and is divided into a sheep @-@ down , the high wood and a long hanging wood , called The Hanger . The covert of this eminence is altogether beech , the most lovely of all forest trees , whether we consider its smooth rind or bark , its glossy foliage , or graceful pendulous boughs . The down , or <unk> , is a pleasing park @-@ like spot , of about one mile by half that space , jutting out on the verge of the hill @-@ country , where it begins to break down into the plains , and commanding a very engaging view , being an assemblage of hill , dale , wood @-@ lands , heath , and water . The prospect is bounded to the south @-@ east and east by the vast range of mountains called the Sussex Downs , by Guild @-@ down near Guildford , and by the Downs round Dorking , and <unk> in Surrey , to the north @-@ east , which altogether , with the country beyond Alton and Farnham , form a noble and extensive outline . 
 " No novelist could have opened better " , wrote Virginia Woolf ; " Selborne is set solidly in the foreground . " 
 = = Illustrations = = 
 The first edition was illustrated with paintings by the Swiss artist Samuel Hieronymus Grimm , engraved by W. Angus and <unk> . Grimm had lived in England since 1768 , and was quite a famous artist , costing 2 ½ guineas per week . In the event , he stayed in Selborne for 28 days , and White recorded that he worked very hard on 24 of them . White also described Grimm 's method , which was to sketch the landscape in lead pencil , then to put in the shading , and finally to add a light wash of watercolour . The illustrations were engraved ( signed at lower right ) by a variety of engravers including William Angus and Peter <unk> . 
 = = Structure = = 
 = = = The Natural History of Selborne = = = 
 = = = = Letters to Thomas Pennant = = = = 
 There are 44 letters to White 's friend Thomas Pennant ( 1726 – 1798 ) , of which the first nine were never posted and are thus undated . Of those that were posted , the first , Letter 10 giving an overview of Selborne , is dated 4 August 1767 ; the last , Letter 44 on wood pigeons , is dated 30 November 1780 . It is not known how the men became friends , or even if they ever met ; White writes repeatedly that he would like to meet " to have a little conversation face to face after we have corresponded so freely for several years " so it is certain they did not meet for long periods , and possible they never met at all . The letters are edited from the form in which they were actually posted ; for example , Letter 10 as posted had a cringing introductory paragraph of thanks to Pennant which White edited out of the published version . 
 = = = = Letters to the Hon. Daines Barrington = = = = 
 There are 66 letters to the lawyer Daines Barrington ( 1727 – 1800 ) , occupying half the book . Letter 1 , on summer birds of passage , is dated 30 June 1769 ; Letter 66 , on thunderstorms , is dated 25 June 1787 . The Barrington letters therefore largely overlap the time frame of those to Pennant , but began and ended somewhat later . It was Barrington who suggested to White that he should write a book from his observations ; although Pennant had been corresponding with White for a while , he was relying on White for natural history information for his own books , and , suggests White 's biographer Richard Mabey , must have wanted White as a continuing source of information , not as a rival author . Barrington , on the other hand , liked to theorize about the natural world , but had little interest in making observations himself , and tended to accept claimed facts uncritically . 
 A character in some of the letters is a tortoise : 
 The old tortoise , that I have mentioned in a former letter , still continues in this garden , and retired underground about the 20th of November , and came out again for one day on the 30th : it lies now buried in a wet swampy border under a wall facing to the south , and is enveloped at present in mud and mire ! 
 Letter 65 describes the summer of 1783 as " an amazing and portentous one , and full of horrible phenomena ; for , besides the alarming meteors and tremendous thunderstorms that affrighted and distressed the different counties of this kingdom , the peculiar haze , or smoky fog , that prevailed for many weeks in this island , and in every part of Europe , and even beyond its limits , was a most extraordinary appearance , unlike anything known within the memory of man ... The sun , at noon , looked as blank as a clouded moon , and shed a rust @-@ coloured ferruginous light on the ground , and floors of rooms ; but was particularly lurid and blood @-@ coloured at rising and setting . All this time the heat was so intense that butcher 's meat could hardly be eaten on the day after it was killed ... " This was caused by the eruption of the Laki volcano in Iceland between 8 June 1783 and February 1784 , killing up to a quarter of the people of Iceland and spreading a haze as far as Egypt . 
 = = = The Antiquities of Selborne = = = 
 This section , often omitted from later editions , consists like the Natural History of 26 " Letters " , none of them posted , and without even the fiction of being addressed to Pennant or Barrington . Letter 1 begins " It is reasonable to suppose that in remote ages this woody and mountainous district was inhabited only by bears and wolves . " Letter 2 discusses Selborne in Saxon times ; Selborne was according to White a royal manor , belonging to <unk> , queen to Edward the Confessor . Letter 3 describes the village 's church , which " has no pretensions to antiquity , and is , as I suppose , of no earlier date than the beginning of the reign of Henry VII . " Letter 5 describes the ancient Yew tree in the churchyard . Letter 7 describes the ( ruined ) priory . Letter 11 discusses the properties of the Knights Templar in and near the village . 
 Letter 14 describes the visit of bishop William of Wykeham in 1373 , to correct the scandalous " particular abuses " in the religious houses in the parish . He orders the canons of Selborne priory ( Item 5th ) " to take care that the doors of their church and priory be so attended to that no suspected and disorderly females , <unk> at <unk> <unk> , pass through their choir and <unk> in the dark " ; ( Item 10th ) to cease " living <unk> after the flesh , and not after the spirit " as it has been proven that some of the canons " sleep naked in their beds without their breeches and shirts " ; ( Item 11th ) to stop " keeping hounds , and publicly attending hunting @-@ matches " and " noisy tumultuous <unk> " ; ( Item 17th ) to properly maintain their houses and the convent itself , since they have allowed " through neglect , notorious <unk> to take place " ; ( Item 29th ) to stop wearing " foppish ornaments , and the affectation of appearing like beaux with garments edged with costly furs , with fringed gloves , and silken girdles trimmed with gold and silver . " Richard Mabey describes White 's reaction to the " Priory saga " as " grave disapproval of the monks ' sensuality and ... general delinquency " . 
 A sequence of Letters then relate the history of the priors of Selborne , until Letter 24 which relates the takeover of the priory by Magdalen College , Oxford under bishop William <unk> in 1459 . White describes this as a disastrous fall : " Thus fell the considerable and well @-@ endowed priory of Selborne after it had subsisted about two hundred and fifty @-@ four years ; about seventy @-@ four years after the suppression of priories alien by Henry V. , and about fifty years before the general dissolution of the monasteries by Henry VIII . " The final letter records that " No sooner did the priory .. become an appendage to the college , but it must at once have tended to swift decay . " White notes that since then , even " the very foundations have been torn up for the repair of the highways " so that nothing is left but a rough pasture " full of hillocks and pits , <unk> with nettles , and dwarf @-@ elder , and trampled by the feet of the ox and the heifer " . White had reason to be bitter about the takeover by Magdalen College , as it had made them Lords of the Manor of Selborne , which in turn gave them the right to appoint the parish priest . White 's biographer Richard Mabey casts doubt on the " frequent assumption " that White 's " deepest regret was that he could never be vicar of Selborne " , but it was true that he was ineligible , as only fellows of Magdalen could be granted the living . 
 = = = A Naturalist 's Calendar = = = 
 = = = = From the year 1768 to the year 1793 = = = = 
 This section , compiled posthumously , contains a list of some 500 phenological observations in Selborne from White 's manuscripts , organised by William Markwick ( 1739 – 1812 ) , and supplemented by Markwick 's own observations from <unk> , near Battle , Sussex . The observations depend on the latitude of these places and on the ( global ) climate , forming a baseline for comparison with modern observations . For example , " Cuckoo ( Cuculus canorus ) heard " is recorded by White for 7 — 26 April , and by Markwick for 15 April and 3 May ( presumably only once at the earlier date ) and " last heard " by Markwick on 28 June . The table begins as follows : 
 = = = = Observations in Various Branches of Natural History = = = = 
 Observations on Birds 
 This is the longest section of the observations , with comments in each instance by Markwick . 
 Observations on Quadrupeds 
 These are a few entries on sheep , rabbits , cats and squirrels , horse and hounds . 
 Observations on Insects and Vermes 
 The ' Vermes ' cover glow @-@ worms , earthworms , snails and slugs , and a " snake 's slough " , a cast skin . 
 Observations on Vegetables 
 The observations relate to trees , seeds , " beans sown by birds " , " cucumbers set by bees " , and a few fungi ( truffles , Tremella <unk> , and fairy rings ) . 
 Meteorological Observations 
 These are a few curiosities such as frozen sleet and the " black spring " of 1771 . He also recorded the effects on the weather of the 1783 volcanic eruption of the Icelandic crater Laki . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Contemporary = = = 
 White 's lifelong friend John <unk> wrote to him in 1776 , correctly predicting that " Your work , upon the whole , will immortalize your Place of Abode as well as Yourself . " 
 Thomas White wrote " a long , appreciative , but .. properly restrained review " of his brother 's book in The Gentleman 's Magazine of January 1789 , commenting that " <unk> of observation runs through the work " . 
 An anonymous reviewer in The <unk> of April 1789 wrote that " A more delightful , or more original work than Mr. White 's History of Selborne has seldom been published ... Natural History has evidently been the author 's principal study , and , of that , ornithology is evidently the favourite . The book is not a compilation from former publications , but the result of many years ' attentive observations to nature itself , which are told not only with the precision of a philosopher , but with that happy selection of circumstances , which mark the poet . " 
 = = = Nineteenth century = = = 
 In 1830 , an anonymous critic , in what critic Tobias <unk> called a description of Selborne " as a place that lingers beyond the spatio @-@ temporal horizon of modern life " , wrote having visited the village that 
 [ T ] he sequestered retreat of the naturalist still remains ... inaccessible to all the improved knowledge and <unk> which belong to these enlightened and virtuous times . It has been excluded from the blessings of increasing commerce and population , from factories and <unk> , manufactures and Methodism , genius and gin , prosperity and pauperism . 
 = = = Edwardian era = = = 
 The 1907 – 1921 Cambridge History of English and American Literature begins its essay on White 's Selborne with the words 
 Gilbert White 's Natural History and Antiquities of Selborne ( 1789 ) holds a unique position in English literature as the solitary classic of natural history . It is not easy to give , in a few words , a reason for its remarkable success . It is , in fact , not so much a logically arranged and systematic book as an invaluable record of the life work of a simple and refined man who succeeded in picturing himself as well as what he saw . The reader is carried along by his interest in the results of far @-@ sighted observation ; but , more than this , the reader <unk> the spirit of the writer which pervades the whole book and endears it to like @-@ minded naturalists as a valued companion . 
 = = = Modern = = = 
 White is sometimes treated as a pioneer of ecology . The British ornithologist James Fisher gives a more balanced view , writing in 1941 : 
 His world is round and simple and complete ; the British country ; the perfect escape . 
 The medical historian Richard Barnett writes that 
 " White has the strange power to make natural historians of his readers , whether gardeners , historians or biologists " , noting that this demands analysis . He observes further that " White is straight out of Jane Austen . If it were not for his fame as a naturalist and writer , nothing in his life would distinguish him from hundreds of country parsons in the 18th and 19th centuries . The Natural History of Selborne is an oddly unassuming masterpiece , its haphazard construction revealing the process by which White came to write it . " 
 Barnett notes , too , that 
 Part of White 's appeal lies in this ability to summon a powerful , particular vision of pre @-@ industrial England . He offers his readers the key to a walled garden of mellow Queen Anne brick , lying beside Thomas Gray 's country churchyard and an ancient water meadow . 
 Yale nonfiction tutor Fred <unk> , writing in Audubon magazine in 1988 , compared White with Henry Thoreau 's Walden : 
 Out of the ruts and the ways of its village , Selborne fashioned a new natural history . It spoke simply , with a human voice . But it looked profoundly . It pioneered a way for students of nature who wished , as White did , not to roam the high Arctic or far Pacific but to fathom their own terrain . It offered a wide world to anyone willing to dig deep . Selborne said : watch narrowly , skim close to the ground . It whispered , hushed , what Thoreau would later broadcast : " We are acquainted with a mere pellicle of the globe on which we live . Most have not delved six feet beneath the surface , nor leaped as many above it . We know not where we are . " In those words , as in all Walden , Thoreau may have had in mind the village of Selborne and the Reverend Gilbert <unk> town reached only by ruts running well beneath the surface , the man whose book had leapt the ruts to round the globe . 
 Tobias <unk> of Indiana University notes that the book " has garnered praise from Coleridge , Carlyle , Darwin , Ruskin , Woolf , and Auden " and that 
 Selborne 's reception in the two hundred years since its initial publication <unk> a vivid instance of the retrospective idealization that transforms history into heritage . 
 The naturalist Richard Mabey writes in his biography of White that 
 I must confess that , like many others , I did not come painlessly to the Natural History . For years I was put off by the aura of sanctity and <unk> which seemed to surround it . It was the kind of book presented on prize @-@ giving days , and I saw it as a work , in all senses , of the old school . Even when I eventually came to read it , I cannot say my opinion changed dramatically . I could not cope at first with its rambling disorder , its sudden plunges into thickets of taxonomic Latin , and , for a while , I failed to notice the feeling behind the often dispassionate prose . 
 = = Manuscript = = 
 The manuscript for the book stayed in the White family until 1895 , when it was auctioned at Sotheby 's . The purchaser was Stuart M. Samuel , who mounted the letters and bound the book in green Morocco leather . His library was sold in 1907 . The manuscript was bought by the dealer <unk> Rosenbach in 1923 , and passed into the collection of Arthur A. Houghton . The Houghton collection was auctioned by Christie 's in 1980 , where the manuscript was purchased by and for Gilbert White 's museum at The Wakes , Selborne , where it is displayed . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Thomas Bewick , in the first volume ( Land Birds ) of his A History of British Birds ( 1797 ) , presents a phenological list of 19 birds which are " chiefly selected from Mr. White 's Natural History of Selborne , and are arranged nearly in the order of their appearing " . The list begins with the wryneck ( " Middle of March " ) , places the cuckoo in the middle of April , and ends with the flycatcher in the middle of May . 
 White 's Natural History has been continuously in print since its first publication . A paperback edition of The Illustrated Natural History of Selborne was reprinted by Thames & Hudson in 2007 . It was long held ( " apocryphally " , according to White 's biographer , Richard Mabey ) to be the fourth @-@ most published book in the English language after the Bible , the works of Shakespeare , and John Bunyan 's The Pilgrim 's Progress . 
 White 's frequent accounts of a tortoise inherited from his aunt in The Natural History and Antiquities of Selborne form the basis for <unk> <unk> 's book , Timothy ; or , Notes of an Abject Reptile ( 2006 ) , as well as for Sylvia Townsend Warner 's The Portrait of a Tortoise ( 1946 ) . 
 = = = Versions of the book = = = 
 Archive.org : 1841 edition ( Harper and brothers , New York ) 
 Biodiversity Library : 1813 edition 
 Biodiversity Library : 1877 edition 
 Archive.org : 1880 edition ( complete with Antiquities ) 
 Project Gutenberg edition 
 Kindle edition ( free ) 
 = = = = Audio = = = = 
 The Natural History of Selborne public domain audiobook at LibriVox 
 = = = About the book = = = 
 Review in Nature , 1901 ( paywall ) 
 Review of <unk> 's The Selborne Pioneer by Richard Barnett , 2007 
 Gilbert White 's Cosmopolitan <unk> by Tobias <unk> 
 Letter @-@ Writers . Bartleby 's Cambridge History of Literature , 1907 – 1921 
 = Jane Cobden = 
 Emma Jane Catherine Cobden ( 28 April 1851 – 7 July 1947 ) , known as Jane Cobden , was a British Liberal politician who was active in many radical causes in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries . A daughter of the Victorian reformer and statesman Richard Cobden , she was an early proponent of women 's rights , and in 1889 was one of two women elected to the inaugural London County Council . Her election was controversial ; legal challenges to her eligibility hampered and eventually prevented her from serving as a councillor . 
 From her youth Jane Cobden , together with her sisters , sought to protect and develop the legacy of her father . She remained committed throughout her life to the " Cobdenite " issues of land reform , peace , and social justice , and was a consistent advocate for Irish independence from Britain . The battle for women 's suffrage on equal terms with men , to which she made her first commitment in 1875 , was her most enduring cause . Although she was sympathetic and supportive of those , including her sister Anne Cobden Sanderson , who chose to campaign using militant , illegal methods , she kept her own activities within the law . She stayed in the Liberal Party , despite her profound disagreement with its stance on the suffrage issue . 
 After her marriage to the publisher Thomas Fisher Unwin in 1892 , Jane Cobden extended her range of interests into the international field , in particular advancing the rights of the indigenous populations within colonial territories . As a convinced anti @-@ imperialist she opposed the Boer War of 1899 – 1902 , and after the establishment of the Union of South Africa in 1910 she attacked its introduction of segregationist policies . In the years prior to the First World War she opposed Joseph Chamberlain 's tariff reform crusade on the grounds of her father 's free trade principles , and was prominent in the Liberal Party 's revival of the land reform issue . In the 1920s she largely retired from public life , and in 1928 presented the old Cobden family residence , Dunford House , to the Cobden Memorial Association as a conference and education centre dedicated to the issues and causes that had defined <unk> . 
 = = Early years = = 
 = = = Family background and childhood = = = 
 Jane Cobden was born on 28 April 1851 in Westbourne Terrace , London . She was the third daughter and fourth child of Richard Cobden , who at the time of her birth was a Radical MP for the West Riding . With John Bright he had co @-@ founded the Anti @-@ Corn Law League which in the 1840s had spearheaded the successful campaign for the abolition of the Corn Laws . Jane 's mother was Catherine Anne , née Williams , the daughter of a timber merchant from Machynlleth in Wales ; the older Cobden children were Richard ( " Dick " ) , born 1841 ; Kate , born 1844 ; and Ellen , born 1848 . Two further daughters followed Jane : Anne , born 1853 , and Lucy , born 1861 . 
 In the 1830s Richard had handed control of his prosperous calico @-@ printing business to his brothers , so that he could concentrate on public service . By 1849 the business was failing and Richard was close to financial ruin . He was saved from bankruptcy by a public subscription which not only settled his debts but also enabled him to acquire the farmhouse in which he had been born in 1804 , at Dunford , near <unk> in Sussex . He rebuilt the property as a large villa , Dunford House , which became Jane Cobden 's childhood home from the beginning of 1854 . In April 1856 Dick , who was at school at <unk> in Germany , died there after a short illness . The news was a devastating shock to the family , and caused Richard 's temporary withdrawal from public life . This hiatus was prolonged when , in 1857 , he lost his parliamentary seat . He returned to the House of Commons in May 1859 , as Liberal MP for Rochdale . 
 Because of his many absences from home , on parliamentary and other business , Richard Cobden was a somewhat remote figure to his daughters , although his letters indicate that he felt warmly towards them and that he wished to direct their political education . In later years they would all acknowledge his influence over their ideas . Both parents impressed on the girls their responsibilities for the poor in the local community ; Jane Cobden 's 1864 diary records visits to homes and workhouses . She and her younger sister Anne , at the ages of 12 and 10 respectively , taught classes in the local village school . The girls were encouraged by their father to contribute what money they possessed to relieve local poverty : " Do not keep the money ... as you have now made up your minds to give it to poor sufferers , let your own neighbours have it . Your Mama will tell you how to dispose of it , and tell me all about it " . 
 = = = Sisterhood = = = 
 Richard Cobden died after a severe bronchial attack on 2 April 1865 , a few weeks before Jane 's 14th birthday . There followed a time of domestic uncertainty and financial worry , eventually resolved by a pension from the government of £ 1 @,@ 500 a year , and the establishment of a " Cobden Tribute Fund " by his friends and followers . After their father 's death Jane and Anne attended Warrington Lodge school in Maida Hill but , following a disagreement the nature of which is unclear , both were removed from the school — " thrown on my hands " , their mother complained . In this difficult time , Catherine did not withdraw into seclusion ; in 1866 she supervised the re @-@ publication of her husband 's Political Writings , and in the same year became one of the 1 @,@ 499 signatories to the " Ladies Petition " , an event that the historian Sophia Van <unk> marks as the beginning of the organised women 's suffrage movement . 
 In 1869 Dunford House was let . Catherine and her four younger daughters moved to a house in South Kensington — the eldest , Kate , had married in 1866 . The ménage proved unsatisfactory ; Ellen , Jane and Anne were now displaying considerable independence of spirit , and differences of opinion arose between mother and daughters . Catherine moved out , taking the youngest daughter Lucy , and went to Wales where she lived until her death in 1877 . In South Kensington , Ellen , Jane and Anne , often joined by Kate , established a sisterhood determined both to preserve Richard Cobden 's memory and works and to uphold his principles and radical causes by actions of their own . Together they stopped publication of a memoir of their father , sponsored by his former colleagues and compiled by a family friend , Julie Salis Schwabe . This caused some offence ; Schwabe had given the family financial and emotional support after Richard 's death . However , Jane in particular wanted a more substantial memorial , and secured the services of John Morley , whose biography of Richard Cobden was published in 1881 . 
 During these years Jane often travelled abroad . In London , she and her sisters extended their range of acquaintances into literary and artistic circles ; among their new friends were the writer George MacDonald and the Pre @-@ Raphaelites William and Jane Morris and Edward Burne @-@ Jones . Ellen later married the painter Walter Sickert . Jane developed an interest in the question of women 's suffrage after attending a conference in London , in 1871 . In 1875 she made a specific commitment to this cause , although she did not became active in the movement for several years . In the meantime , in 1879 , she helped to found the Cobden Club in <unk> , close to her father 's birthplace . 
 = = Early campaigns = = 
 = = = Women 's suffrage = = = 
 From the late 1870s the Cobden sisters began to follow different pathways . Anne married Thomas Sanderson in 1882 ; inspired by her friendships within the Morris circle , her interests turned towards arts and crafts and eventually to socialism . After her marriage to Sickert failed , Ellen became a novelist . Jane became an active Liberal , on the radical wing of the party . In about 1879 she became a member of the National Society for Women 's Suffrage , which had been founded in 1867 in the wake of the 1866 " Ladies Petition " . Jane joined the National Society 's finance committee , and by 1880 was serving as its treasurer . That year she was a speaker at a " Grand Demonstration " at St James 's Hall , London , and in the following year addressed a similar meeting in Bradford . In 1883 she attended a conference in Leeds , jointly organised by the National Liberal Federation and the National Reform Union , where she supported a motion proposed by Henry William Crosskey and seconded by Walter McLaren ( John Bright 's nephew ) , to extend the vote in parliamentary elections to certain women — those who , " possessing the qualifications that entitle men to vote , have now the right of voting in all matters of local government " . 
 The National Society 's general stance was cautious ; it avoided close identification with political parties , and for this reason would not accept affiliation from branches of the Women 's Liberal Federation . This , and its policy of excluding married women from any extension of the franchise , led to a split in 1888 , with the formation of a breakaway " Central National Society " ( CNS ) . Jane joined the executive committee of the new body , which encouraged the affiliation of Women 's Liberal Associations and hoped that a future Liberal government would grant women 's enfranchisement . However , the more radical members of the CNS felt that its commitment to votes for married women was too half @-@ hearted . In 1889 this group , which included Jane Cobden and Emmeline Pankhurst , formed the Women 's Franchise League ( WFL ) with a specific policy of seeking votes for women on the same basis as for men , and the eligibility of women for all offices . 
 = = = Ireland = = = 
 In 1848 Richard Cobden had written : " Almost every crime and outrage in Ireland is connected with the occupation or ownership of land ... if I had the power , I would always make the proprietors of the soil resident , by breaking up the large properties . In other words , I would give Ireland to the Irish " . Nevertheless , his views were held in the context of Unionism ; he had condemned the 1848 " Young Ireland " rebellion as an act of insanity . Jane adopted her father 's standpoint on Irish land reform , yet embraced the cause of Irish home rule — on which she lectured regularly — and was a strong supporter of the Land League . After visiting Ireland with the Women 's Mission to Ireland in 1887 , she subsequently used the pages of the English press to expose the mistreatment of evicted tenants . In a letter to The Times , Jane and her associates cited one particular case — that of the Ryan family of <unk> in County Tipperary — to illustrate the British government 's harshness towards even the most vulnerable of individuals . Jane sent money and food to alleviate the Ryan family 's distress . 
 Jane was in contact with Irish Land League leaders , including John Dillon and William O 'Brien , and lobbied for the release of the latter after his imprisonment under the Coercion Act of 1881 . She and her sisters supported the Irish Plan of Campaign , a scheme whereby tenants acted collectively to secure fair rents from their landlords . This plan was eventually denounced by the Roman Catholic Church as contrary to natural justice and Christian charity , although some priests supported it . The attachment of Jane and her sisters to the rebellious factions in Ireland strained relations between the sisters and many of their father 's former Liberal Unionist colleagues , but won approval from Thomas Bayley Potter , who had succeeded Richard Cobden as MP for Rochdale . In October 1887 he wrote to Jane : " You are true to the living and just instincts of your father ... You know your father 's heart better than John Bright does " . 
 = = London County Council election 1889 = = 
 Under the Municipal Corporations Act of 1882 some women were qualified to vote in municipal elections , but were excluded from serving as councillors . However , the Local Government Act of 1888 , which created county councils , was interpreted by some as allowing women 's election to these new bodies . On 17 November 1888 a group of Liberal women decided to test the legal position . They formed the Society for Promoting the Return of Women as County Councillors ( <unk> ) , established an election fund of £ 400 and selected two women — Jane Cobden and Margaret Sandhurst — as Liberal candidates for the newly created London County Council . Cobden was adopted by the party 's Bow and Bromley division , and Sandhurst by Brixton . Despite objections from the Conservatives , the women 's nominations were accepted by the local returning officers . Cobden 's campaign in Bow and Bromley was organised with considerable enthusiasm and efficiency by the 29 @-@ year @-@ old George Lansbury , then a Radical Liberal , later a socialist and eventually leader of the Labour Party . Both Cobden and Sandhurst were victorious in the elections on 19 January 1889 ; they were joined by Emma Cons , whom the Progressive majority on the council selected to serve as an alderman . 
 The women took their places on the inaugural council , and each accepted a range of committee assignments . Almost immediately , however , Sandhurst 's defeated Conservative opponent , Beresford Hope , lodged a legal challenge against her election . When this was heard on 18 March , the judges ruled Sandhurst disqualified under the provisions of the 1882 Act . Her appeal was dismissed , and Beresford Hope was installed in her place . Cobden faced no such challenge , since her runner @-@ up was a fellow @-@ Liberal who had promised to support her . Even so , her position on the council remained precarious , particularly after an attempt in parliament to legalise women 's rights to serve as county councillors gained little support . A provision of the prevailing election law provided that anyone elected , even improperly , could not be challenged after twelve months , so on legal advice Cobden refrained from attending council or committee meetings until February 1890 . When the statutory twelve months elapsed without challenge , she resumed her full range of duties . 
 Although Cobden was now protected from challenge , the Conservative member for Westminster , Sir Walter De Souza , instituted fresh court proceedings against both Cobden and Cons . He argued that since they had been elected or selected unlawfully , their votes in the council had likewise been unlawful , making them liable to heavy financial penalties . In court the judge ruled against both women , though on appeal in April 1891 the penalties were reduced from an original £ 250 to a nominal £ 5 . Cobden was urged by Lansbury and others not to pay even this token , but to go to prison ; she declined this course of action . After a further parliamentary attempt to resolve the situation failed , she sat out the remaining months of her term as a councillor in silence , neither speaking nor voting , and did not seek re @-@ election in the 1892 county elections . Women did not receive the right to sit on county councils until 1907 , with the passage of the Qualification of Women Act . 
 In his account of the 1888 – 89 election , the historian Jonathan <unk> marks the campaign as a step in what he terms " working @-@ class disenchantment with official Liberalism " , citing in particular Lansbury 's departure from the Liberal Party in 1892 . <unk> also remarks that this " pioneering political venture of British feminism ... provides at once an anticipation of , and a direct contrast to , the militant suffragism of the Edwardian era " . 
 = = Marriage , wider interests = = 
 In 1892 , at the age of 41 , Cobden married Thomas Fisher Unwin , an avant @-@ garde publisher whose list included works by Henrik Ibsen , Friedrich Nietzsche , H.G. Wells and the young Somerset Maugham . Unwin 's involvement in a range of world and humanitarian causes led Cobden — who adopted the surname " Cobden Unwin " — to extend her interests to international peace and justice , reform in the Congo , and more generally the rights of aboriginal peoples . She and Unwin opposed the Boer War ( 1899 – 1902 ) ; both were founder @-@ members of the pro @-@ Boer South African Conciliation Committee , Cobden acting as the committee 's secretary . The couple settled in South Kensington , from where Cobden continued to pursue her own causes . In 1893 , with Laura Ormiston Chant , she represented the WFL in Chicago at the World Congress of Representative Women . At home , she assisted women candidates in the 1894 Kensington " vestry " elections . In 1900 she accepted the presidency of the Brighton Women 's Liberal Association , and in the same year wrote an extended tract , The Recent Development of Violence in our Midst , published by the Stop @-@ the @-@ War Committee . 
 = = Edwardian campaigner = = 
 = = = Votes for women , 1903 – 14 = = = 
 Although Cobden 's views were more progressive than those of the Liberal Party 's mainstream , she stayed a member of the party , believing that it remained the best political vehicle whereby her causes could be advanced . Other suffragists , including Anne Cobden Sanderson , took a different view , and aligned themselves with socialist movements . When the Women 's Social and Political Union ( WSPU ) began its militant campaign in 1905 , Cobden refrained from participation in illegal actions , although she spoke out for her sister when Anne became one of the first suffragists to be sent to prison , after a demonstration outside Parliament in October 1906 . On Anne 's release a month later , Cobden and her husband attended a celebration banquet at the Savoy Hotel , together with other WSPU prisoners . Cobden moved closer to the militant wing in 1907 when she endorsed the WSPU 's new magazine , Votes for Women . That year she hosted an " At Home " meeting at which the WSPU leader Christabel Pankhurst was the principal speaker . The WSPU was split when members who objected to the Pankhurst family 's authoritarian leadership formed themselves into the Women 's Freedom League ; Cobden did not join Anne in the breakaway movement , although she supported its associated body , the Women 's Tax Resistance League . 
 In 1911 Cobden was responsible for the Indian women 's delegation in the Women 's Coronation Procession , a London demonstration organised by suffrage associations from Britain and the Empire . The procession marched on 17 June 1911 , a few days before King George V 's coronation . During 1910 – 12 several Conciliation Bills extending the parliamentary vote to a limited number of propertied women , were debated in the House of Commons . When the third of these was under discussion , Cobden sought the help of the Irish Parliamentary Party by reminding them of the support women had given to Ireland during the Land League agitation : " In the name of those 40 @,@ 000 Englishwomen we urge you to support at every division this Bill by your presence and your vote " . The bill was finally abandoned when the Liberal prime minister , H. H. Asquith , replaced it with a bill extending the male suffrage . In protest against the Liberal government 's suffrage policies and its harsh treatment of militants , Cobden resigned her honorary presidency of the Women 's Liberal Association in Rochdale , her father 's last constituency . 
 = = = Social , political and humanitarian activities = = = 
 Although the cause of women 's suffrage remained her principal concern , at least until the First World War , Cobden was active in other campaigns . In 1903 she defended the principles of free trade , as expressed by her father , against Joseph Chamberlain 's tariff reform crusade . Chamberlain had called for a policy of Imperial Preference , and the imposition of tariffs against countries opposed to Britain 's imperial interests . To a meeting in Manchester , Cobden expressed confidence that " Manchester ... will tell Mr Chamberlain that it is still loyal to our old flag : free trade , peace and goodwill among nations " . In 1904 , Richard Cobden 's centenary year , she published The Hungry Forties , described by Anthony Howe in a biographical article as " an evocative and brilliantly successful tract " . It was one of several free trade books and pamphlets issued by the Fisher Unwin press which , together with celebratory centenary events , helped to define free trade as a major progressive cause of the Edwardian era . 
 The Cobdenite cause of land reform was revived in the 1900s as a major Liberal policy , helped in 1913 by the publication of Jane Cobden 's book The Land Hunger : Life under Monopoly . The dedication read : " To the memory of Richard Cobden who loved his native land , these pages are dedicated by his daughter , in the hope that his desire — ' Free Trade in Land ' — may be fulfilled " . Cobden did not confine her interests to domestic affairs . From 1906 , along with Helen Bright Clark , she was an active member of the Aborigines ' Protection Society , an organisation concerned with the rights of indigenous peoples under colonial rule ; the society merged with the Anti @-@ Slavery Society in 1909 . In 1907 she lobbied the prime minister , Sir Henry Campbell @-@ Bannerman , on behalf of the Friends of Russian Freedom , seeking his support for amendments to the Hague Convention , then in session in Geneva Her efforts for the poorest in society encompassed appeals on behalf of the families of striking workers in London and Dublin during the labour unrest of 1913 – 14 , and of starving women and children in Tripoli . She also found time to act as secretary to the memorial fund for Emma Cons , after the latter 's death in 1912 . 
 = = Late campaigns = = 
 During the war years 1914 – 18 , with the issue of women 's suffrage quiescent , Cobden became increasingly involved in South African affairs . She supported Solomon <unk> 's campaign against the segregationist Natives ' Land Act of 1913 , a stance that led , in 1917 , to her removal from the committee of the Anti @-@ Slavery Society . The Society 's line was to support the Botha government 's land reform policy ; Cobden denounced Sir John Harris , the Society 's parliamentary representative , for being a false friend to the native people by secretly working against them . Cobden maintained her commitment to the cause of Irish freedom , and offered personal help to victims of the Black and Tans during the Irish War of Independence , 1919 – 21 . 
 In 1920 Cobden gave Dunford House to the London School of Economics ( LSE ) , of which she had become a governor . According to Beatrice Webb , co @-@ founder of the School , she soon regretted the gift ; Webb wrote in her diary on 2 May 1923 : " The poor lady ... makes fretful complaints if a single bush is cut down or a stone shifted , whilst she vehemently resents the high spirits of the students ... not to mention the opinions of some of the lecturers " . Later in 1923 LSE returned the house to Cobden ; in 1928 she donated it to the Cobden Memorial Association . With the help of the writer and journalist Francis Wrigley Hirst and others , the house became a conference and education centre for pursuing the traditional Cobdenite causes of free trade , peace and goodwill . 
 = = Final years , death and legacy = = 
 After 1928 , Jane Cobden 's chief occupation was the organisation of her father 's papers , some of which she placed in the British Museum . Others were eventually collected , with other Cobden family documents , by the West Sussex County Council Record Office at Chichester . In old age she lived quietly at <unk> , her home near Dunford House , and following her husband 's death in 1935 made few interventions in public life . During the 1930s , under Hirst 's direction , Dunford House continued to preach what Howe describes as " the pure milk of the <unk> faith " : the conviction that in Britain and in continental Europe , peace and prosperity would develop from individual ownership of the soil . Jane Cobden died , aged 96 , on 7 July 1947 , at <unk> Nursing Home in <unk> , Surrey . In the years following her death her papers were collected and deposited as part of the family archive in Chichester . In 1952 Dunford House was transferred to the YMCA , although its general educational functions and mission remained unchanged . The house contains numerous memorabilia of the Cobden family . 
 Howe depicts Jane Cobden as a formidable personality , known by her husband 's publishing colleagues as " The Jane " , who took a keen and even intrusive interest in the work of the publishing house . She was , Howe says , " a woman of sentiment and enthusiasm who took up ( and sometimes speedily dropped ) causes with a fire which brooked no opposition " . In an essay on the Cobden sisterhood , the feminist historian Sarah Richardson remarks on the different paths chosen by the sisters by which to take their father 's legacy forward : " Jane 's activities showed that it was still possible to follow a radical agenda within the aegis of Liberalism " . Richardson indicates that the main collective achievement of Jane and her sisters was to ensure that the Cobden name , with its radical and progressive associations , survived well into the 20th century . " In doing so " , Richardson concludes , " they proved themselves worthy successors to their father , guaranteeing that his contribution was not only sustained , but remodelled for a new age " . 
 = United States v. Wong Kim Ark = 
 United States v. Wong Kim Ark , 169 U.S. 649 ( 1898 ) , is a United States Supreme Court case in which the Court ruled that a child born in the United States of Chinese citizens , who had at the time a permanent domicile and residence in the United States and who were carrying on business there other than for the Chinese government , automatically became a U.S. citizen . This decision established an important precedent in its interpretation of the Citizenship Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution . 
 Wong Kim Ark , who was born in San Francisco around 1871 , to Chinese parents legally domiciled and resident there at the time , had been denied re @-@ entry to the United States after a trip abroad , under a law restricting Chinese immigration and prohibiting immigrants from China from becoming naturalized U.S. citizens . He challenged the government 's refusal to recognize his citizenship , and the Supreme Court ruled in his favor , holding that the citizenship language in the Fourteenth Amendment encompassed the specific circumstances of his birth , which included that he was the child of foreigners permanently domiciled and resident in the U.S. at the time of birth . 
 The case highlighted disagreements over the precise meaning of one phrase in the Citizenship Clause — namely , the provision that a person born in the United States who is subject to the jurisdiction thereof acquires automatic citizenship . The Supreme Court 's majority concluded that this phrase referred to being required to obey U.S. law ; on this basis , they interpreted the language of the Fourteenth Amendment in a way that granted U.S. citizenship to at least some children born of foreigners because they were born on American soil ( a concept known as jus soli ) . The court 's dissenters argued that being subject to the jurisdiction of the United States meant not being subject to any foreign power — that is , not being claimed as a citizen by another country via jus sanguinis ( inheriting citizenship from a parent ) — an interpretation which , in the minority 's view , would have excluded " the children of foreigners , happening to be born to them while passing through the country " . In the words of a 2007 legal analysis of events following the Wong Kim Ark decision , " The parameters of the jus soli principle , as stated by the court in Wong Kim Ark , have never been seriously questioned by the Supreme Court , and have been accepted as dogma by lower courts . " 
 A 2010 review of the history of the Citizenship Clause notes that the Wong Kim Ark decision held that the guarantee of birthright citizenship " applies to children of foreigners present on American soil " and states that the Supreme Court " has not re @-@ examined this issue since the concept of ' illegal alien ' entered the language " . Since the 1990s , however , controversy has arisen over the longstanding practice of granting automatic citizenship to U.S.-born children of illegal immigrants , and legal scholars disagree over whether the Wong Kim Ark precedent applies when alien parents are in the country illegally . Attempts have been made from time to time in Congress to restrict birthright citizenship , either via statutory redefinition of the term jurisdiction , or by overriding both the Wong Kim Ark ruling and the Citizenship Clause itself through an amendment to the Constitution , but no such proposal has been enacted . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Early history of United States citizenship law = = = 
 United States citizenship law is founded on two traditional principles — jus soli ( " right of the soil " ; a " common law " doctrine ) , and jus sanguinis ( " right of the blood " ; a " civil law " doctrine ) . Under jus soli , a child 's citizenship would be acquired by birth within a country 's territory , without reference to the political status or condition of the child 's parents . Under jus sanguinis , the citizenship of a child would not depend on his or her place of birth , but instead follow the status of a parent ( specifically , the father — or , in the case of an illegitimate birth , the mother ) . 
 Throughout the history of the United States , the dominant legal principle governing citizenship has been jus soli — the principle that birth within the territorial limits of the United States confers automatic citizenship , excluding slaves before the American Civil War . Although there was no actual definition of citizenship in United States law until after the Civil War , it was generally accepted that anyone born in the United States was automatically a citizen . This applicability of jus soli , via the common law inherited in the United States from England , was upheld in an 1844 New York state case , Lynch v. Clarke , in which it was held that a woman born in New York City , of alien parents temporarily sojourning there , was a U.S. citizen . 
 United States citizenship could also be acquired at birth via jus sanguinis ( birth outside the country to a citizen parent ) , a right confirmed by Congress in the Naturalization Act of 1790 . Additionally , alien immigrants to the United States could acquire citizenship via a process of naturalization — though access to naturalization was originally limited to " free white person [ s ] " . 
 African slaves were originally excluded from United States citizenship . In 1857 , the United States Supreme Court held in Dred Scott v. Sandford that slaves , former slaves , and their descendants were not eligible under the Constitution to be citizens . Additionally , American Indians were not originally recognized as citizens , since Indian tribes were considered to be outside the jurisdiction of the U.S. government . 
 = = = Citizenship clause of the Fourteenth Amendment = = = 
 After the Civil War and the subsequent abolition of slavery , Congress enacted the Civil Rights Act of 1866 . One provision of this law declared as citizens , not only the freed slaves , but " all persons born in the United States and not subject to any foreign power , excluding Indians not taxed " . 
 Concerns were raised that the citizenship guarantee in the Civil Rights Act might be repealed by a later Congress or struck down as unconstitutional by the courts . Soon after the passage of the Act , Congress drafted the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution and sent it to the states for ratification ( a process which was completed in 1868 ) . Among the Fourteenth Amendment 's many provisions was the Citizenship Clause , which entrenched a guarantee of citizenship in the Constitution by stating , " All persons born or naturalized in the United States , and subject to the jurisdiction thereof , are citizens of the United States and of the State wherein they reside . " 
 The Citizenship Clause was proposed by Senator Jacob M. Howard of Michigan on May 30 , 1866 , as an amendment to the joint resolution from the House of Representatives which had framed the initial draft of the proposed Fourteenth Amendment . The heated debate on the proposed new language in the Senate focused on whether Howard 's proposed language would apply more broadly than the wording of the 1866 Civil Rights Act . 
 Howard said that the clause " is simply declaratory of what I regard as the law of the land already , that every person born within the limits of the United States , and subject to their jurisdiction , is by virtue of natural law and national law a citizen of the United States . " He added that citizenship " will not , of course , include persons born in the United States who are foreigners , aliens , who belong to the families of ambassadors or foreign ministers accredited to the Government of the United States , but will include every other class of persons " — a comment which would later raise questions as to whether Congress had originally intended that U.S.-born children of foreign parents were to be included as citizens . Responding to concerns expressed by Edgar Cowan of Pennsylvania that liberalizing the right to citizenship might result in certain states being taken over by large populations of undesirable foreign immigrants , John Conness of California predicted that the Chinese population in California would likely remain very small , in large part because Chinese immigrants almost always eventually returned to China , and also because very few Chinese women left their homeland to come to the United States . 
 James R. Doolittle of Wisconsin objected that the citizenship provision would not be sufficiently narrow to exclude American Indians from citizenship , and in an attempt to address this issue , he proposed to add a phrase taken from the Civil Rights Act — " excluding Indians not taxed " . Although most Senators agreed that birthright citizenship should not be extended to the Indians , a majority saw no need to clarify the issue , and Doolittle 's proposal was voted down . Upon its return to the House of Representatives , the proposed Fourteenth Amendment received little debate ; no one spoke in opposition to the Senate 's addition of the Citizenship Clause , and the complete proposed amendment was approved by the House on June 13 , 1866 , and declared to have been ratified on July 28 , 1868 . 
 In 2006 , Goodwin Liu , then an assistant professor at the Boalt Hall law school of the University of California , Berkeley , and later an Associate Justice of the California Supreme Court , wrote that although the legislative history of the Citizenship Clause is " somewhat thin " , the clause 's central role is evident in the historical context of the post @-@ Civil War period . Elizabeth <unk> , chief counsel of the Constitutional Accountability Center ( a progressive think tank ) , argues that both supporters and opponents of the Citizenship Clause in 1866 shared the understanding that it would automatically grant citizenship to all persons born in the United States ( except children of foreign ministers and invading armies ) — an interpretation shared by Texas Solicitor General James C. Ho . Richard <unk> , dean of the University of Akron School of Law , takes a different view , proposing that the Citizenship Clause had " consequences which were unintended by the framers " . 
 = = = Citizenship of Chinese persons in the United States = = = 
 Like many other immigrants , Chinese were drawn to the United States — initially to participate in the California Gold Rush of 1849 , then moving on to railroad construction , farming , and work in cities . An 1868 treaty ( named the Burlingame Treaty after one of the American negotiators ) expanded trade and migration between the United States and China . The treaty did not address the citizenship of children born in the United States to Chinese parents , or vice versa . Regarding naturalization ( acquisition of citizenship other than at birth ) , the treaty contained a provision stating that " nothing herein contained shall be held to confer naturalization ... upon the subjects of China in the United States . " 
 Chinese immigrants to the United States were met with considerable distrust , resentment , and discrimination almost from the time of their first arrival . Many politicians argued that the Chinese were so different in so many ways that they not only would ( or even could ) never assimilate into American culture , but that they represented a threat to the country 's principles and institutions . In this climate of popular anti @-@ Chinese sentiment , Congress in 1882 enacted the Chinese Exclusion Act , which placed limits on Chinese immigration to the United States . ( The original Chinese Exclusion Act was amended several times — such as by the 1888 Scott Act and the 1892 Geary Act — and as a result it is sometimes referred to in the plural as the " Chinese Exclusion Acts " . ) Chinese already in the U.S. were allowed to stay , but they were ineligible for naturalization and , if they left the U.S. and later wished to return , they needed to apply anew and obtain approval again . Chinese laborers and miners were specifically barred from coming ( or returning ) to the United States under the terms of the law . 
 = = = Citizenship Clause in court prior to this case = = = 
 After the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment , and prior to the Wong Kim Ark case , the question of jus soli citizenship for children of aliens arose only with reference to American Indians and Chinese . The Supreme Court ruled in an 1884 case ( Elk v. Wilkins ) that an Indian born on a reservation did not acquire United States citizenship at birth ( because he was not subject to U.S. jurisdiction ) and could not claim citizenship later on merely by moving to non @-@ reservation U.S. territory and renouncing his former tribal allegiance . ( Indians were subsequently granted citizenship by an act of Congress in 1924 . ) 
 The question of whether the Citizenship Clause applied to persons born in the United States to Chinese immigrants first came before the courts in an 1884 case , In re Look Tin Sing . Look Tin Sing was born in Mendocino , California in 1870 , but after returning from a trip to China in 1884 , he was barred from reentering the United States by officials who objected to his not having met the documentation requirements imposed at the time on Chinese immigrants . Look 's case was heard in the federal circuit court for California by U.S. Supreme Court Associate Justice Stephen J. Field and two other federal judges . Lucy Salyer , a history professor at the University of New Hampshire , writes that Justice Field " issued an open invitation to all lawyers in the area to give their opinions on the constitutional questions involved " in the case . Field focused on the meaning of the subject to the jurisdiction thereof phrase of the Citizenship Clause , held that Look was indeed subject to U.S. jurisdiction at the time of his birth despite the alien status of his parents , and on this basis ordered U.S. officials to recognize Look as a citizen and allow him to enter the United States . The Look Tin Sing ruling was not appealed and was never reviewed by the Supreme Court . In an 1892 case , Gee Fook Sing v. U.S. , a federal appeals court in California for the same circuit ( by this time known as the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals ) concluded that a Chinese man would have been recognized as a United States citizen if he could have presented satisfactory evidence that he had in fact been born in the U.S. This case was also never brought before the Supreme Court . 
 The Supreme Court 's 1873 Slaughterhouse Cases decision contained the statement that " The phrase , ' subject to its jurisdiction , ' was intended to exclude from its operation children of ministers , consuls , and citizens or subjects of foreign states born within the United States . " However , since the Slaughterhouse Cases did not deal with claims of birthright citizenship , this comment was dismissed in Wong Kim Ark and later cases as a passing remark ( obiter dictum ) lacking any force as a controlling precedent . As to whether the Court in Slaughterhouse was correct on this point , or instead the Court in Wong Kim Ark was correct , modern scholars are divided . 
 = = = Challenge to Wong Kim Ark 's claim of citizenship = = = 
 Wong Kim Ark ( <unk> ) was born in San Francisco . Various sources state or imply his year of birth as being 1873 , 1871 , or 1868 . His father ( Wong Si Ping ) and mother ( Wee Lee ) were immigrants from China and were not United States citizens . Wong worked in San Francisco as a cook . 
 Wong visited China in 1890 , and upon his return to the United States in July 1890 , he was readmitted without incident because of his U.S. citizenship . In November 1894 , Wong sailed to China for another temporary visit , but when he returned in August 1895 , he was detained at the Port of San Francisco by the Collector of Customs , who denied him permission to enter the country , arguing that Wong was not a U.S. citizen despite his having been born in the U.S. , but was instead a Chinese subject because his parents were Chinese . Wong was confined for five months on steamships off the coast of San Francisco while his case was being tried . 
 According to Salyer , the San Francisco attorney George Collins had tried to persuade the federal Justice Department to bring a Chinese birthright citizenship case before the Supreme Court . An article by Collins was published in the May / June 1895 American Law Review , criticizing the Look Tin Sing ruling and the federal government 's unwillingness to challenge it , and advocating the international law view of jus sanguinis citizenship . Eventually , Collins was able to convince U.S. Attorney Henry Foote , who " searched for a viable test case and settled on Wong Kim Ark " . 
 With the assistance of legal representation by the Chinese Consolidated Benevolent Association , Wong Kim Ark challenged the refusal to recognize his birth claim to U.S. citizenship , and a petition for a writ of habeas corpus was filed on his behalf in federal district court . The arguments presented before District Judge William W. Morrow centered on which of two competing interpretations of the phrase subject to the jurisdiction thereof in the Citizenship Clause should govern a situation involving a child born in the United States to alien parents . Wong 's attorneys argued that the phrase meant " ' subject to the laws of the United States , ' comprehending , in this expression , the allegiance that aliens owe in a foreign country to obey its laws " — an interpretation , based on the common law inherited by the United States from England , that would encompass essentially everyone born in the U.S. via the principle of jus soli ( citizenship based on place of birth ) . The U.S. government claimed that subject to the jurisdiction thereof meant " to be subject to the political jurisdiction of the United States " — an interpretation , based on international law , which would exclude parents and their children who owed allegiance to another country via the principle of jus sanguinis ( citizenship inherited from a parent ) . 
 The question of the citizenship status of U.S.-born children of alien parents had , up to this time , never been decided by the Supreme Court . The U.S. government argued that Wong 's claim to U.S. citizenship was ruled out by the Supreme Court 's interpretation of jurisdiction in its 1873 Slaughterhouse Cases ruling , but the district judge concluded that the language in question was obiter dictum and not directly relevant to the case at hand . The government also cited a similar statement in Elk v. Wilkins , but the judge was not convinced by this argument either . 
 Wong 's attorneys cited the Look Tin Sing case , and the district judge agreed that in the absence of clear direction from the Supreme Court , this case definitively settled the question of citizenship for Wong and others like him as far as federal courts in the Ninth Circuit were concerned . The judge saw the Look Tin Sing holding reaffirmed in the Gee Fook Sing case and noted further that another part of the Supreme Court 's Slaughterhouse Cases opinion said that " it is only necessary that [ a man ] should be born or naturalized in the United States to be a citizen of the Union . " Concluding that the Look Tin Sing decision constituted a controlling precedent in the Ninth Circuit , Judge Morrow ruled that subject to the jurisdiction thereof referred to being subject to U.S. law ( the first of the two proposed interpretations ) . On January 3 , 1896 , the judge declared Wong Kim Ark to be a citizen because he was born in the U.S. 
 The U.S. government appealed the district court ruling directly to the United States Supreme Court . According to Salyer , government officials — realizing that the decision in this case " was of great importance , not just to Chinese Americans , but to all American citizens who had been born to alien parents " , and concerned about the possible effect of an early ruling by the Supreme Court on the 1896 presidential election — delayed the timing of their appeal so as to avoid the possibility of a decision based more on policy concerns than the merits of the case . Oral arguments before the Supreme Court were held on March 5 , 1897 . Solicitor General Holmes Conrad presented the government 's case ; Wong was represented before the Court by Maxwell Evarts , former U.S. Assistant Attorney General J. Hubley Ashton , and Thomas D. Riordan . 
 The Supreme Court considered the " single question " in the case to be " whether a child born in the United States , of parent of Chinese descent , who , at the time of his birth , are subjects of the Emperor of China , but have a permanent <unk> and residence in the United States , and are there carrying on business , and are not employed in any diplomatic or official capacity under the Emperor of China , becomes at the time of his birth a citizen of the United States . " It was conceded that if Wong was a U.S. citizen , " the acts of congress known as the ' Chinese Exclusion Acts , ' prohibiting persons of the Chinese race , and especially Chinese laborers , from coming into the United States , do not and cannot apply to him . " 
 = = Opinion of the Court = = 
 In a 6 – 2 decision issued on March 28 , 1898 , the Supreme Court held that Wong Kim Ark had acquired U.S. citizenship at birth and that " the American citizenship which Wong Kim Ark acquired by birth within the United States has not been lost or taken away by anything happening since his birth . " The opinion of the Court was written by Associate Justice Horace Gray and was joined by Associate Justices David J. Brewer , Henry B. Brown , George Shiras Jr . , Edward Douglass White , and Rufus W. Peckham . 
 Upholding the concept of jus soli ( citizenship based on place of birth ) , the Court held that the Citizenship Clause needed to be interpreted in light of English common law , which had included as subjects virtually all native @-@ born children , excluding only those who were born to foreign rulers or diplomats , born on foreign public ships , or born to enemy forces engaged in hostile occupation of the country 's territory . The court 's majority held that the subject to the jurisdiction phrase in the Citizenship Clause excluded from U.S. citizenship only those persons covered by one of these three exceptions ( plus a fourth " single additional exception " — namely , that Indian tribes " not taxed " were not considered subject to U.S. jurisdiction ) . The majority concluded that none of these four exceptions to U.S. jurisdiction applied to Wong ; in particular , they observed that " during all the time of their said residence in the United States , as domiciled residents therein , the said mother and father of said Wong Kim Ark were engaged in the prosecution of business , and were never engaged in any diplomatic or official capacity under the emperor of China " . 
 Quoting approvingly from an 1812 case , The Schooner Exchange v. M <unk> , in which Chief Justice John Marshall said , " The jurisdiction of the nation within its own territory is necessarily exclusive and absolute " — and agreeing with the district judge who had heard Wong 's original habeas corpus petition that comments in the Slaughterhouse Cases about the citizenship status of children born to non @-@ citizen parents did not constitute a binding precedent — the Court ruled that Wong was a U.S. citizen from birth , via the Fourteenth Amendment , and that the restrictions of the Chinese Exclusion Act did not apply to him . An act of Congress , they held , does not trump the Constitution ; such a law " cannot control [ the Constitution 's ] meaning , or impair its effect , but must be construed and executed in subordination to its provisions . " The majority opinion referred to Calvin 's Case ( 1608 ) as stating the fundamental common law principle that all people born within the King 's " allegiance " were subjects , including children of " aliens in amity " . 
 = = = Dissent = = = 
 Chief Justice Melville Fuller was joined by Associate Justice John Harlan in a dissent which , " for the most part , may be said to be predicated upon the recognition of the international law doctrine " . The dissenters argued that the history of U.S. citizenship law had broken with English common law tradition after independence — citing as an example the embracing in the U.S. of the right of expatriation ( giving up of one 's native citizenship ) and the rejection of the contrary British doctrine of perpetual allegiance . The dissenters argued that the principle of jus sanguinis ( that is , the concept of a child inheriting his or her father 's citizenship by descent regardless of birthplace ) had been more pervasive in U.S. legal history since independence . Based on an assessment of U.S. and Chinese treaty and naturalization law , the dissenters claimed that " the children of Chinese born in this country do not , ipso facto , become citizens of the United States unless the fourteenth amendment overrides both treaty and statute . " 
 Pointing to the language of the Civil Rights Act of 1866 , an act of Congress which declared to be citizens " all persons born in the United States and not subject to any foreign power , excluding Indians not taxed " , and which was enacted into law only two months before the Fourteenth Amendment was proposed by Congress , the dissenters argued that " it is not open to reasonable doubt that the words ' subject to the jurisdiction thereof , ' in the amendment , were used as synonymous with the words ' and not subject to any foreign power ' " . In the dissenters ' view , excessive reliance on jus soli ( birthplace ) as the principal determiner of citizenship would lead to an untenable state of affairs in which " the children of foreigners , happening to be born to them while passing through the country , whether of royal parentage or not , or whether of the Mongolian , Malay or other race , were eligible to the presidency , while children of our citizens , born abroad , were not . " 
 The dissenters acknowledged that other children of foreigners — including former slaves — had , over the years , acquired U.S. citizenship through birth on U.S. soil . But they still saw a difference between those people and U.S.-born individuals of Chinese ancestry , because of strong cultural traditions discouraging Chinese immigrants from assimilating into mainstream American society , Chinese laws of the time which made renouncing allegiance to the Chinese emperor a capital crime , and the provisions of the Chinese Exclusion Act making Chinese immigrants already in the United States ineligible for citizenship . The question for the dissenters was " not whether [ Wong Kim Ark ] was born in the U.S. or subject to the jurisdiction thereof ... but whether his or her parents have the ability , under U.S. or foreign law , statutory or treaty @-@ based , to become citizens of the U.S. themselves " . 
 In a lecture to a group of law students shortly before the decision was released , Harlan commented that the Chinese had long been excluded from American society " upon the idea that this is a race utterly foreign to us and never will assimilate with us . " Without the exclusion legislation , Harlan stated his opinion that vast numbers of Chinese " would have rooted out the American population " in the western United States . Acknowledging the opposing view supporting citizenship for American @-@ born Chinese , he said that " Of course , the argument on the other side is that the very words of the constitution embrace such a case . " Commenting on the Wong Kim Ark case shortly after the issuance of the Court 's ruling in 1898 , San Francisco attorney Marshall B. Woodworth wrote that " the error the dissent apparently falls into is that it does not recognize that the United States , as a sovereign power , has the right to adopt any rule of citizenship it may see fit , and that the rule of international law does not furnish [ by its own force ] the sole and exclusive test of citizenship of the United States " . 
 = = Subsequent developments = = 
 = = = Contemporary reactions = = = 
 In an analysis of the Wong Kim Ark case written shortly after the decision in 1898 , Marshall B. Woodworth laid out the two competing theories of jurisdiction in the Citizenship Clause and observed that " [ t ] he fact that the decision of the court was not unanimous indicates that the question is at least debatable . " Woodworth concluded , however , that the Supreme Court 's ruling laid the issue to rest , saying that " it is difficult to see what valid objection can be raised thereto " . Another analysis of the case , published by the Yale Law Journal ( 1898 ) , favored the dissenting view . 
 An editorial published in the San Francisco Chronicle on March 30 , 1898 , expressed concern that the Wong Kim Ark ruling ( issued two days previously ) " may have a wider effect upon the question of citizenship than the public supposes " — specifically , that it might lead to citizenship and voting rights not only for Chinese , but also Japanese and American Indians . The editorial suggested that " it may become necessary ... to amend the Federal Constitution and definitely limit citizenship to whites and blacks . " 
 = = = Impact on Wong Kim Ark 's family = = = 
 As a result of Wong Kim Ark 's U.S. citizenship being confirmed by the Supreme Court , Wong 's eldest son came to the United States from China in 1910 , seeking recognition as a citizen via jus sanguinis , but U.S. immigration officials claimed to see discrepancies in the testimony at his immigration hearing and refused to accept Wong 's claim that the boy was his son . Wong 's other three sons came to the United States between 1924 and 1926 and were accepted as citizens . Because of his citizenship , Wong Kim Ark 's youngest son was drafted in World War II , and later made a career in the United States Merchant Marines . 
 = = = Citizenship law since Wong Kim Ark = = = 
 Current U.S. law on birthright citizenship ( citizenship acquired at birth ) acknowledges both citizenship through place of birth ( jus soli ) and citizenship inherited from parents ( jus sanguinis ) . Before Wong Kim Ark , the Supreme Court had held in Elk v. Wilkins ( 1884 ) that birthplace by itself was not sufficient to grant citizenship to a Native American ; however , Congress eventually granted full citizenship to American Indians via the Indian Citizenship Act of 1924 . 
 Restrictions on immigration and naturalization of Chinese were eventually lifted as a consequence of the Chinese Exclusion Repeal Act of 1943 ( also known as the Magnuson Act ) and the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 . 
 = = = Wong Kim Ark and later cases = = = 
 In the years since Wong Kim Ark , the concept of jus soli citizenship has " never been seriously questioned by the Supreme Court , and [ has ] been accepted as dogma by lower courts " . Citizenship cases since Wong Kim Ark have dealt mainly with situations falling outside the bounds of the Citizenship Clause — such as citizenship via jus sanguinis for foreign @-@ born children of U.S. citizens , or circumstances under which U.S. citizenship may be lost . 
 The Wong Kim Ark court 's affirmation of jus soli as the primary rule determining United States citizenship has been cited in several Supreme Court decisions affirming the citizenship of U.S.-born individuals of Chinese or Japanese ancestry . The court 's holding that the language of the Constitution should be understood in light of the common law has been cited in numerous Supreme Court decisions dealing with the interpretation of the Constitution or acts of Congress . The Wong Kim Ark court 's understanding of Fourteenth Amendment jurisdiction was also cited in a 1982 case involving the rights of illegal immigrants . 
 An unsuccessful effort was made in 1942 by the Native Sons of the Golden West to convince the Supreme Court to revisit and overrule the Wong Kim Ark ruling , in a case ( Regan v. King ) challenging the citizenship status of roughly 2 @,@ 600 U.S.-born persons of Japanese ancestry . The plaintiffs ' attorney termed Wong Kim Ark " one of the most injurious and unfortunate decisions " ever handed down by the Supreme Court and hoped the new case would give the court " an opportunity to correct itself " . A federal district court and the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals summarily rejected this contention , each citing Wong Kim Ark as a controlling precedent , and the Supreme Court declined to hear the case . 
 Federal appellate courts have repeatedly rejected attempts to cite the Wong Kim Ark opinion 's use of the phrase citizenship by birth within the territory in support of claims that persons born in the Philippines during the period of its history when it was a United States possession were born in the U.S. ( and thus entitled to U.S. citizenship via the Citizenship Clause ) . One federal appellate decision has criticized the jus soli holding in Wong Kim Ark in connection with illegal immigration , but at the same time conceded that the courts were powerless to change this rule , urging Congress to do so instead . 
 = = = Wong Kim Ark and children of illegal aliens = = = 
 Since the 1990s , controversy has arisen in some circles over the practice of granting automatic citizenship via jus soli to U.S.-born children of illegal aliens — controversially dubbed the " anchor baby " situation by some media correspondents and advocacy groups . Public debate over the issue has resulted in renewed discussion of the Wong Kim Ark decision . 
 Some legal scholars , opposed to the idea that jus soli should apply to the children of illegal aliens , have argued that the Wong Kim Ark precedent does not apply when alien parents are in the country illegally . John C. Eastman , a former dean of the Chapman University School of Law , has argued that Wong Kim Ark does not entitle U.S.-born children of illegal aliens to gain automatic citizenship because , in his opinion , being subject to the jurisdiction of the United States requires a status of " full and complete jurisdiction " that does not apply to aliens who are in the country illegally . Eastman further argues that the Wong Kim Ark decision was fundamentally flawed in the way it dealt with the concept of jurisdiction , and that the Indian Citizenship Act of 1924 — which followed Wong Kim Ark — would not have been necessary if Congress had believed " that the Citizenship Clause confers citizenship merely by accident of birth . " A similar analysis of the jurisdiction question has been proposed by Professor Peter H. Schuck of the Yale School of Law and Rogers M. Smith , political science professor at Yale . According to law professor Lino <unk> of the University of Texas , even if Wong Kim Ark settled the status of children of legal residents , it did not do so for children of illegal residents ; <unk> asserts that the case weighs against automatic birthright for illegal immigrants because the Court denied such citizenship for an analogous group , namely " children of alien enemies , born during and within their hostile occupation " . Richard Posner , a judge of the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals , has also criticized the granting of citizenship to U.S.-born children of illegal immigrants , suggesting that Congress can and should act to change this policy . Charles Wood , former counsel to the Senate Judiciary Committee 's subcommittee on immigration , has also opposed the practice , urging ( in 1999 ) that it be stopped as quickly as possible , either by an act of Congress or a constitutional amendment . 
 Countering this view , Garrett Epps — a professor of law at the University of Baltimore — has stated that " In the case of United States v. Wong Kim Ark , the United States Supreme Court held that this guarantee [ of birthright citizenship ] applies to children of foreigners present on American soil , even if their parents are not American citizens and indeed are not eligible to become U.S. citizens . " Epps further notes that " as a practical matter , the American @-@ born children receive recognition of their citizenship regardless of the immigration status of their parents . " In Epps ' opinion , the sponsors of the Fourteenth Amendment " were unwavering in their insistence that the Citizenship Clause was to cover " the children of such undesirable immigrants as Chinese and Gypsies , and he views the Wong Kim Ark ruling as an " unexceptionable " matter of reading the drafters ' intent . 
 Cristina Rodriguez , a professor at the New York University School of Law , has argued that Wong Kim Ark 's situation was " similar in all meaningful respects " to that of children of illegal immigrants , because " they both involve immigrant parents ineligible for full membership in the polity , or immigrant populations that were tolerated but disdained or considered legally <unk> . " Rodriguez goes on to claim that the Wong Kim Ark ruling was " a powerful rejection of the idea that one 's status depends on his parent 's status . " Noting contrary arguments ( such as those put forth by Schuck and Smith ) , Rodriguez says that " For all practical purposes , this debate has been resolved . Though renewed interest over the last few years in immigration reform has prompted the introduction of legislation in Congress to deny the children of the unauthorized jus soli status , these measures have been political non @-@ starters , in large part because of the widespread view that the Supreme Court would strike down any such legislation as unconstitutional . " 
 James Ho has expressed a similar view to that of Rodriguez , saying that " Birthright citizenship is guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment . That birthright is protected no less for children of undocumented persons than for descendants of Mayflower passengers . " Ho also argues that those who claim the Citizenship Clause was not in fact intended to confer citizenship on the children of aliens are disregarding the substance of the 1866 Senate debate over the proposal to add this language to the Fourteenth Amendment . 
 The Supreme Court 's 1982 Plyler v. Doe decision — in a case involving illegal alien children ( i.e. , children born abroad who had come to the United States illegally along with their parents , and who had no basis for claiming U.S. citizenship ) — has also been cited in support of a broad application of Fourteenth Amendment jurisdiction to illegal aliens and their children . A Texas state law had sought to deny such children a public education , and the Texas government had argued that " persons who have entered the United States illegally are not ' within the jurisdiction ' of a State even if they are present within a State 's boundaries and subject to its laws . " A 5 – 4 majority of the Supreme Court , though , decided that according to Wong Kim Ark , the Fourteenth Amendment 's phrases subject to the jurisdiction thereof ( in the Citizenship Clause ) and within its jurisdiction ( in the Equal Protection Clause ) were essentially equivalent ; that both expressions referred primarily to physical presence and not to political allegiance ; and that the Wong Kim Ark decision benefited the children of illegal as well as legal aliens . As a result , the court rejected the claim that Fourteenth Amendment " jurisdiction " depended on whether someone had entered the U.S. legally or not . Although the four dissenting justices disagreed with the opinion of the Court regarding whether the children in question had a right to a public education , the dissenters agreed with the majority regarding the applicability of Fourteenth Amendment jurisdiction to illegal aliens . James Ho considers <unk> v. Doe to have " put to rest " any doubt over whether the sweeping language regarding jurisdiction in Wong Kim Ark applies to all aliens , even illegal aliens . 
 The United States Department of State ( the federal government agency responsible for international relations ) considers U.S.-born children of illegal aliens to be subject to U.S. jurisdiction , and thus to have citizenship at birth . The State Department 's Foreign Affairs Manual takes the position that this issue was settled by the Wong Kim Ark ruling . 
 In the words of Lucy Salyer , " the birthright citizenship doctrine of Wong Kim Ark has remained intact for over a century , still perceived by most to be a natural and well @-@ established rule in accordance with American principles and practice . It is unlikely to be uprooted easily . " 
 = = = Legislative attempts to overturn Wong Kim Ark = = = 
 In response to public reaction against immigration and fears that U.S.-born children of illegal immigrants could serve as links to permit legal residency and eventual citizenship for family members who would otherwise be ineligible to remain in the country , bills have been introduced from time to time in Congress which have challenged the conventional interpretation of the Citizenship Clause and have sought ( thus far unsuccessfully ) to actively and explicitly deny citizenship at birth to U.S.-born children of foreign visitors or illegal aliens . As one example among many , the " Birthright Citizenship Act of 2009 " — introduced in the House of Representatives of the 111th Congress as H.R. 1868 , by Representative Nathan Deal of Georgia — was an attempt to exclude U.S.-born children of illegal immigrants from being considered subject to the jurisdiction of the United States for purposes of the Citizenship Clause . A similar proposal — named the " Birthright Citizenship Act of 2011 " — was introduced in the House as H.R. 140 in the ( 112th ) Congress on January 5 , 2011 by Representative Steve King of Iowa , and in the Senate as S. 723 on April 5 , 2011 by Senator David Vitter of Louisiana . Neither bill was discussed in Congress prior to the end of the session . 
 Since an act of Congress challenging the accepted interpretation of the Citizenship Clause might very possibly be ruled unconstitutional by courts choosing to rely on Wong Kim Ark as a precedent , proposals have also been made to amend the Constitution so as to override the Fourteenth Amendment 's language and deny citizenship to U.S.-born children of illegal aliens or foreign visitors . For example , Senator Vitter of Louisiana introduced Senate Joint Resolution ( S.J.Res. ) 6 in the 111th Congress , but like H.R. 1868 , it failed to reach the floor of either house of Congress before the 111th Congress adjourned on December 22 , 2010 . Vitter reintroduced this same proposed amendment as S.J.Res. 2 in the 112th Congress on January 25 , 2011 ; it was not brought up for discussion or voted upon in either house of Congress . 
 In 2010 and 2011 , state legislators in Arizona introduced bills proposing to deny regular birth certificates to children born in Arizona whose parents cannot prove they are in the United States legally . Supporters of such legislation reportedly hope their efforts will cause the issue of birthright citizenship for U.S.-born children of illegal aliens to reach the Supreme Court , possibly resulting in a new decision narrowing or overruling Wong Kim Ark . 
 = = Cases = = 
 United States Supreme Court 
 The Schooner Exchange v. M <unk> , 11 U.S. ( 7 Cranch ) 116 ( 1812 ) 
 Dred Scott v. Sandford , 60 U.S. 393 ( 1857 ) 
 Slaughterhouse Cases , 83 U.S. 36 ( 1873 ) 
 Elk v. Wilkins , 112 U.S. 94 ( 1884 ) 
 United States v. Wong Kim Ark , 169 U.S. 649 ( 1898 ) 
 Hennessy v. Richardson Drug Co . , 189 U.S. 25 ( 1903 ) 
 Schick v. United States , 195 U.S. 65 ( 1904 ) 
 <unk> Jan Fat v. White , 253 U.S. 454 ( 1920 ) 
 <unk> v. Chin Bow , 274 U.S. 657 ( 1927 ) 
 Morrison v. California , 291 U.S. 82 ( 1934 ) 
 Perkins v. <unk> , 307 U.S. 325 ( 1939 ) 
 Regan v. King , 319 U.S. 753 ( 1943 ) ( certiorari denied ) 
 Reid v. Covert , 354 U.S. 1 ( 1957 ) 
 Nishikawa v. Dulles , 356 U.S. 129 ( 1958 ) 
 Kennedy v. Mendoza @-@ Martinez , 372 U.S. 144 ( 1963 ) 
 Rogers v. Bellei , 401 U.S. 815 ( 1971 ) 
 Plyler v. Doe , 457 U.S. 202 ( 1982 ) 
 United States Circuit Courts 
 In re Look Tin Sing , 21 F. 905 ( <unk> 1884 ) 
 Gee Fook Sing v. U.S. , 49 F. 146 ( 9th Cir . 1892 ) 
 Regan v. King , 134 F.2d 413 ( 9th Cir . 1943 ) 
 <unk> v. INS , 35 F.3d 1449 ( 9th Cir . 1994 ) 
 <unk> v. INS , 136 F.3d 914 ( 2nd Cir . 1998 ) 
 <unk> v. Ashcroft , 354 F.3d 609 ( 7th Cir . 2003 ) 
 <unk> v. Holder , 611 F.3d 279 ( 5th Cir . 2010 ) 
 United States District Courts 
 In re Wong Kim Ark , 71 F. 382 ( <unk> 1896 ) 
 Regan v. King , 49 F. Supp . 222 ( <unk> 1942 ) 
 State courts 
 Lynch v. Clarke , 3 <unk> 236 ( N.Y. 1844 ) 
 = Judy Garland = 
 Judy Garland ( born Frances Ethel Gumm ; June 10 , 1922 – June 22 , 1969 ) was an American singer , actress , and vaudevillian . She was renowned for her contralto vocals and attained international stardom that continued throughout a career spanning more than 40 years as an actress in musical and dramatic roles , as a recording artist , and on concert stages . 
 Garland began performing in vaudeville with her two older sisters and was signed to Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer as a teenager . There , she made more than two dozen films , including nine with Mickey Rooney and her most iconic role as Dorothy in The Wizard of Oz ( 1939 ) . Other notable credits at MGM included Meet Me in St. Louis ( 1944 ) , The Harvey Girls ( 1946 ) and Easter Parade ( 1948 ) . After 15 years , she was released from the studio and then gained new success through record @-@ breaking concert appearances , a successful recording career , and her own Emmy nominated television series . Film appearances became fewer in her later years , but included two Academy Award nominated performances in A Star Is Born ( 1954 ) and Judgment at Nuremberg ( 1961 ) . 
 Respected for her versatility , she received a Golden Globe Award , a Juvenile Academy Award , a Special Tony Award , and at 39 she became the youngest recipient of the Cecil B. DeMille Award for lifetime achievement in the motion picture industry . She was the first woman to win a Grammy for Album of the Year for her live recording of Judy at Carnegie Hall . In 1997 , Garland was posthumously awarded a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award . Several of her recordings have been inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame . In 1999 , the American Film Institute placed her among the ten greatest female stars of classic American cinema . 
 Despite her professional triumphs , Garland struggled immensely in her personal life , starting when she was a child . Her self @-@ image was strongly influenced by film executives , who said she was unattractive and constantly manipulated her on @-@ screen physical appearance . She was plagued by financial instability , often owing hundreds of thousands of dollars in back taxes . She married five times , with her first four marriages ending in divorce . She also had a long battle with drugs and alcohol , which ultimately led to her death from a barbiturate overdose at the age of 47 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Garland was born Frances Ethel Gumm in Grand Rapids , Minnesota on June 10 , 1922 , the youngest child of Ethel Marion ( née Milne , November 17 , 1893 – January 5 , 1953 ) and Francis Avent " Frank " Gumm ( March 20 , 1886 – November 17 , 1935 ) . Her parents were vaudevillians who settled in Grand Rapids to run a movie theater that featured vaudeville acts . She was of English , Scottish , and Irish ancestry , named after both her parents and baptized at a local Episcopal church . 
 " Baby " ( as she was called by her parents and sisters ) shared her family 's flair for song and dance . Her first appearance came at the age of two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half when she joined her older sisters Mary Jane " Suzy / Suzanne " Gumm ( 1915 – 1964 ) and Dorothy Virginia " Jimmie " Gumm ( 1917 – 1977 ) on the stage of her father 's movie theater during a Christmas show and sang a chorus of " Jingle Bells " . The Gumm Sisters performed there for the next few years , accompanied by their mother on piano . 
 The family relocated to Lancaster , California in June 1926 , following rumors that Frank Gumm had made sexual advances towards male ushers . Frank purchased and operated another theater in Lancaster , and Ethel began managing her daughters and working to get them into motion pictures . Garland attended Hollywood High School and later graduated from University High School . 
 = = Early career = = 
 = = = The Gumm Sisters = = = 
 In 1928 , the Gumm Sisters enrolled in a dance school run by Ethel Meglin , proprietress of the Meglin Kiddies dance troupe . They appeared with the troupe at its annual Christmas show . Through the Meglin Kiddies , they made their film debut in a 1929 short subject called The Big Revue , where they performed a song @-@ and @-@ dance number called " That 's the good old sunny south " . This was followed by appearances in two Vitaphone shorts the following year : A Holiday in <unk> ( featuring Garland 's first on @-@ screen solo ) and The Wedding of Jack and Jill . They next appeared together in Bubbles . Their final on @-@ screen appearance came in 1935 , in another short entitled La Fiesta de Santa Barbara . 
 The trio had been touring the vaudeville circuit as " The Gumm Sisters " for many years when they performed in Chicago at the Oriental Theater with George Jessel in 1934 . He encouraged the group to choose a more appealing name after " Gumm " was met with laughter from the audience . According to theater legend , their act was once erroneously billed at a Chicago theater as " The <unk> Sisters " . 
 Several stories persist regarding the origin of the name " Garland " . One is that it was originated by Jessel after Carole Lombard 's character Lily Garland in the film Twentieth Century , which was then playing at the Oriental ; another is that the girls chose the surname after drama critic Robert Garland . Garland 's daughter Lorna Luft stated that her mother selected the name when Jessel announced that the trio " looked prettier than a garland of flowers " . A TV special was filmed in Hollywood at the Pantages Theatre premiere of A Star Is Born on September 29 , 1954 , in which Jessel stated : 
 " I think that I ought to tell the folks that it was I who named Judy Garland , Judy Garland . Not that it would have made any difference – you couldn 't have hid [ den ] that great talent if you 'd called her ' Tel Aviv Windsor Shell ' , you know , but her name when I first met her was Frances Gumm and it wasn 't the kind of a name that so sensitive a great actress like that should have ; ... and so we called her Judy Garland , and I think she 's a combination of Helen Hayes and Al Jolson , and maybe Jenny Lind and Sarah Bernhardt . " 
 A later explanation surfaced when Jessel was a guest on Garland 's television show in 1963 . He claimed that he had sent actress Judith Anderson a telegram containing the word " garland " and it stuck in his mind . ( However , Garland asks Jessel just moments later if this story is true , and he blithely replies " No " . ) 
 By late 1934 , the Gumm Sisters had changed their name to the Garland Sisters . Frances changed her name to " Judy " soon after , inspired by a popular Hoagy Carmichael song . The group broke up by August 1935 , when Suzanne Garland flew to Reno , Nevada and married musician Lee Kahn , a member of the Jimmy Davis orchestra playing at Cal @-@ Neva Lodge , Lake Tahoe . 
 = = = Signed at Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer = = = 
 In September 1935 , songwriter Burton Lane was asked by Louis B. Mayer to go to the Orpheum Theater in downtown Los Angeles to watch the Garland Sisters ' vaudeville act and to report back to him . A few days later , Judy and her father were brought for an impromptu audition at Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer Studios in Culver City . Garland performed " Zing ! Went the Strings of My Heart " and " Eli , Eli " , a Yiddish song written in 1896 and very popular in vaudeville . Garland was immediately signed to a contract with MGM supposedly without a screen test , though she had made a test for the studio several months earlier . The studio did not know what to do with her as , at age 13 , she was older than the traditional child star but too young for adult roles . 
 Her physical appearance created a dilemma for MGM . She was only 4 feet 11 @.@ 5 inches ( 151 @.@ 1 cm ) , and her " cute " or " girl @-@ next @-@ door " looks did not exemplify the most glamorous persona required of leading ladies of the time . She was self @-@ conscious and anxious about her appearance . " Judy went to school at Metro with Ava Gardner , Lana Turner , Elizabeth Taylor , real beauties " , said Charles Walters , who directed her in a number of films . " Judy was the big money @-@ maker at the time , a big success , but she was the ugly duckling ... I think it had a very damaging effect on her emotionally for a long time . I think it lasted forever , really . " Her insecurity was exacerbated by the attitude of studio chief Louis B. Mayer , who referred to her as his " little hunchback " . 
 During her early years at the studio , she was photographed and dressed in plain garments or frilly juvenile gowns and costumes to match the " girl @-@ next @-@ door " image created for her . She was made to wear removable caps on her teeth and rubberized disks to reshape her nose . 
 Garland performed at various studio functions and was eventually cast opposite Deanna Durbin in the musical @-@ short Every Sunday . The film contrasted her vocal range and swing style with Durbin 's operatic soprano and served as an extended screen test for the pair , as studio executives were questioning the wisdom of having two girl singers on the roster . Mayer finally decided to keep both actresses but , by that time , Durbin 's option had lapsed and she was signed by Universal Studios . 
 On November 16 , 1935 , Garland learned that her father had been hospitalized with meningitis and had taken a turn for the worse , while she was in the midst of preparing for a radio performance on the Shell Chateau Hour . Frank Gumm died the following morning , leaving her devastated . Her song for the Shell Chateau Hour was her first professional rendition of " Zing ! Went the Strings of My Heart " , a song which became a standard in many of her concerts . 
 Garland next came to the attention of studio executives by singing a special arrangement of " You Made Me Love You ( I Didn 't Want to Do It ) " to Clark Gable at a birthday party held by the studio for the actor . Her rendition was so well regarded that she performed the song in the all @-@ star extravaganza Broadway Melody of 1938 ( 1937 ) , singing to a photograph of him . 
 MGM hit on a winning formula when it paired Garland with Mickey Rooney in a string of what were known as " backyard musicals " . The duo first appeared together as supporting characters in the 1937 B movie Thoroughbreds Don 't Cry . Garland was then put in the cast of the fourth of the Hardy Family movies as a literal girl @-@ next @-@ door to Rooney 's character Andy Hardy , in Love Finds Andy Hardy , although Hardy 's love interest was played by Lana Turner . They teamed as lead characters for the first time in Babes in Arms , ultimately appearing in five additional films including Hardy films Andy Hardy Meets Debutante and Life Begins for Andy Hardy . 
 Garland claimed that she , Rooney , and other young performers were constantly prescribed amphetamines to stay awake in order to keep up with the frantic pace of making one film after another , as well as barbiturates to take before going to bed so that they could sleep . This regular dose of drugs , she said , led to addiction and a lifelong struggle , and contributed to her eventual demise . She later resented the hectic schedule and felt that her youth had been stolen by MGM . 
 Garland was of a healthy weight , but the studio demanded that she diet constantly . They even went so far as to serve her only a bowl of soup and a plate of lettuce when she ordered a regular meal . She was plagued with self @-@ doubt throughout her life , despite successful film and recording careers , awards , critical praise , and her ability to fill concert halls worldwide , and she required constant reassurance that she was talented and attractive . 
 Rooney , however , denied that their childhood studio was responsible for her addiction : " Judy Garland was never given any drugs by Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer . Mr. Mayer didn 't sanction anything for Judy . No one on that lot was responsible for Judy Garland 's death . Unfortunately , Judy chose that path " . 
 = = = The Wizard of Oz = = = 
 In 1938 , she was cast in her most remembered role , the young Dorothy Gale in The Wizard of Oz ( 1939 ) , a film based on the children 's book by L. Frank Baum . In this film , she sang the song with which she would forever be identified , " Over the Rainbow " . Although producers Arthur Freed and Mervyn LeRoy had wanted her from the start , studio chief Mayer tried first to borrow Shirley Temple from 20th Century Fox , but they declined . Deanna Durbin was then asked , but was unavailable , resulting in Garland being cast . 
 Garland was initially outfitted in a blonde wig for the part , but Freed and LeRoy decided against it shortly into filming . Her blue gingham dress was chosen for its blurring effect on her figure , which made her look younger . Shooting commenced on October 13 , 1938 , and was completed on March 16 , 1939 , with a final cost of more than US $ 2 million . With the conclusion of filming , MGM kept Garland busy with promotional tours and the shooting of Babes in Arms , directed by Busby Berkeley . Rooney and she were sent on a cross @-@ country promotional tour , culminating in the August 17 New York City premiere at the Capitol Theater , which included a five @-@ show @-@ a @-@ day appearance schedule for the two stars . 
 The Wizard of Oz was a tremendous critical success , though its high budget and promotions costs of an estimated $ 4 million ( equivalent to $ 68 million in 2016 ) , coupled with the lower revenue generated by children 's tickets , meant that the film did not make a profit until it was rereleased in the 1940s and in subsequent rereleases . At the 1939 Academy Awards ceremony , Garland received her only Academy Award , a Juvenile Award for her performances in 1939 , including The Wizard of Oz and Babes in Arms . Following this recognition , she became one of MGM 's most bankable stars . 
 = = Adult stardom = = 
 In 1940 , she starred in three films : Andy Hardy Meets Debutante , Strike Up the Band , and Little Nellie Kelly . In the last , she played her first adult role , a dual role of both mother and daughter . Little Nellie Kelly was purchased from George M. Cohan as a vehicle for her to display both her audience appeal and her physical appearance . The role was a challenge for her , requiring the use of an accent , her first adult kiss , and the only death scene of her career . The kiss was regarded as embarrassing by her costar , George Murphy . He said it felt like " a hillbilly with a child bride . " Nevertheless , the success of these three films and a further three films in 1941 secured her position at MGM as a major property . 
 During this time , Garland experienced her first serious adult romances . The first was with bandleader Artie Shaw . She was deeply devoted to him and was devastated in early 1940 when he eloped with Lana Turner . Garland began a relationship with musician David Rose , and on her 18th birthday , he gave her an engagement ring . The studio intervened because he was still married at the time to actress and singer Martha Raye . They agreed to wait a year to allow for his divorce to become final , and were wed on July 27 , 1941 . " A true rarity " is what media called it . Garland , who had aborted her pregnancy by him in 1942 , agreed to a trial separation in January 1943 and divorced in 1944 . She was noticeably thinner in her next film , For Me and My Gal , alongside Gene Kelly in his first screen appearance . She was top @-@ billed in the credits for the first time and effectively made the transition from teenaged star to adult actress . 
 At age 21 , she was given the " glamor treatment " in Presenting Lily Mars , in which she was dressed in " grown @-@ up " gowns . Her lightened hair was also pulled up in a stylish fashion . However , no matter how glamorous or beautiful she appeared on screen or in photographs , she was never confident in her appearance and never escaped the " girl @-@ next @-@ door " image which had been created for her . 
 One of Garland 's most successful films for MGM was Meet Me in St. Louis ( 1944 ) , in which she introduced three standards : " The Trolley Song " , " The Boy Next Door " , and " Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas " . Vincente Minnelli was assigned to direct , and he requested that makeup artist Dorothy Ponedel be assigned to Garland . Ponedel refined her appearance in several ways , including extending and reshaping her eyebrows , changing her hairline , modifying her lip line and removing her nose discs and dental caps . She appreciated the results so much that Ponedel was written into her contract for all her remaining pictures at MGM . 
 At this time , Garland had a brief affair with film director Orson Welles , who was then married to Rita Hayworth . The affair ended in early 1945 , although they remained on good terms afterward . 
 During the filming of Meet Me in St. Louis , after some initial conflict between them , Garland and Minnelli entered into a relationship . They were married June 15 , 1945 , and on March 12 , 1946 , daughter Liza was born . They were divorced by 1951 . 
 The Clock ( 1945 ) was Garland 's first straight dramatic film , opposite Robert Walker . Though the film was critically praised and earned a profit , most movie fans expected her to sing . It would be many years before she acted again in a nonsinging dramatic role . Garland 's other films of the 1940s include The Harvey Girls ( 1946 ) , in which she introduced the Academy Award @-@ winning song " On the Atchison , Topeka , and the Santa Fe " , and Till the Clouds Roll By ( 1946 ) . 
 = = Leaving MGM = = 
 During filming for The Pirate in April 1947 , Garland suffered a nervous breakdown and was placed in a private sanitarium . She was able to complete filming , but in July she made her first suicide attempt , making minor cuts to her wrist with a broken glass . During this period , she spent two weeks in treatment at the Austen Riggs Center , a psychiatric hospital in Stockbridge , Massachusetts . The Pirate was released in 1948 and was the first film in which Garland had starred since The Wizard of Oz to not be profitable . The main reasons for its failure was not only its expense , but also the increasing cost of the shooting delays while Garland was ill , as well as the fact that the general public was not yet willing to accept her in a sophisticated vehicle . Following her work on The Pirate , she co @-@ starred for the first and only time with Fred Astaire ( who replaced Gene Kelly after Kelly had broken his ankle ) in Easter Parade , which became her top @-@ grossing film at MGM and quickly re @-@ established her as one of MGM 's primary assets . 
 Thrilled by the huge box @-@ office receipts of Easter Parade , MGM immediately teamed Garland and Astaire in The Barkleys of Broadway . During the initial filming , Garland was taking prescription sleeping medication along with illicitly obtained pills containing morphine . Around this time , she also developed a serious problem with alcohol . These , in combination with migraine headaches , led her to miss several shooting days in a row . After being advised by her doctor that she would only be able to work in four- to five @-@ day increments with extended rest periods between , MGM executive Arthur Freed made the decision to suspend her on July 18 , 1948 . She was replaced by Ginger Rogers . When her suspension was over , she was summoned back to work and ultimately performed two songs as a guest in the Rodgers and Hart biopic Words and Music , which was her last appearance with Mickey Rooney . Despite the all @-@ star cast , Words and Music barely broke even at the box office . Having regained her strength , as well as some needed weight during her suspension , Garland felt much better and in the fall of 1948 , she returned to MGM to replace a pregnant June Allyson for the musical film In the Good Old Summertime co @-@ starring Van Johnson . Although she was sometimes late arriving at the studio during the making of this picture , she managed to complete it five days ahead of schedule . Her daughter Liza Minnelli made her film debut at the age of two and a half at the end of the film . In The Good Old Summertime was enormously successful at the box office . 
 Garland was then cast in the film adaptation of Annie Get Your Gun in the title role of Annie Oakley . She was nervous at the prospect of taking on a role strongly identified with Ethel Merman , anxious about appearing in an unglamorous part after breaking from juvenile parts for several years , and disturbed by her treatment at the hands of director Busby Berkeley . Berkeley was staging all the musical numbers , and was severe with Garland 's lack of effort , attitude , and enthusiasm . She complained to Mayer , trying to have Berkeley fired from the feature . She began arriving late to the set and sometimes failed to appear . At this time , she was also undergoing electroshock therapy for depression . She was suspended from the picture on May 10 , 1949 , and was replaced by Betty Hutton , who stepped in performing all the musical routines as staged by Berkeley . 
 Garland underwent an extensive hospital stay at Peter Bent Brigham Hospital in Boston , Massachusetts , in which she was weaned off her medication and , after a while , was able to eat and sleep normally . Garland returned to Los Angeles heavier , and in the fall of 1949 , was cast opposite Gene Kelly in Summer Stock . The film took six months to complete . To lose weight , Garland went back on the pills and the familiar pattern resurfaced . She began showing up late or not at all . When principal photography on Summer Stock was completed in spring 1950 , it was decided that Garland needed an additional musical number . She agreed to do it provided the song should be " Get Happy " . In addition , she insisted that director Charles Walters choreograph and stage the number . By that time , Garland had lost 15 pounds and looked more slender . " Get Happy " was the last segment of Summer Stock to be filmed . It was her last picture for MGM . When it was released in the fall of 1950 , Summer Stock drew big crowds and racked up very respectable box office receipts , but because of the costly shooting delays caused by Garland , the film posted a loss of $ 80 @,@ 000 to the studio . 
 Garland was next cast in the film Royal Wedding with Fred Astaire after June Allyson became pregnant in 1950 . She failed to report to the set on multiple occasions , and the studio suspended her contract on June 17 , 1950 . She was replaced by Jane Powell . <unk> biographies following her death stated that after this latest dismissal , she slightly grazed her neck with a broken glass , requiring only a band @-@ aid , but at the time , the public was informed that a despondent Garland had slashed her throat . " All I could see ahead was more confusion " , Garland later said of this suicide attempt . " I wanted to black out the future as well as the past . I wanted to hurt myself and everyone who had hurt me . " In September 1950 , after 15 years with the studio , Garland and MGM parted company . 
 = = Later career = = 
 = = = Appearances on Bing Crosby 's radio show = = = 
 Garland was a frequent guest on Kraft Music Hall , hosted by her friend Bing Crosby . Following Garland 's second suicide attempt , Crosby , knowing she was depressed and running out of money , invited her on to his radio show – the first of the new season , on October 11 , 1950 . 
 She was standing in the wings of it trembling with fear . She was almost hysterical . She said " I cannot go out there because they 're all gonna be looking to see if there are scars and it 's gonna be terrible . " Bing said " What 's going on ? " and I told him what happened and he walked out on stage and he said : " We got a friend here , she 's had a little trouble recently . You probably heard about it – Everything is fine now , she needs our love . She needs our support . She 's here – let 's give it to her , OK ? Here 's Judy . " And she came out and that place went crazy . And she just blossomed . 
 Eight appearances during the 1950 – 1951 season of The Bing Crosby – Chesterfield Show immediately reinvigorated her career . Soon after , she toured for four months to sellout crowds in Europe . 
 = = = Renewed stardom on the stage = = = 
 In 1951 , Garland began a four @-@ month concert tour of Britain and Ireland , where she played to sold @-@ out audiences throughout England , Scotland , and Ireland . The successful concert tour was the first of her many comebacks , with performances centered on songs by Al Jolson and revival of vaudevillian " tradition " . Garland performed complete shows as tributes to Jolson in her concerts at the London Palladium in April and at New York 's Palace Theater later that year . Garland said after the Palladium show : " I suddenly knew that this was the beginning of a new life ... Hollywood thought I was through ; then came the wonderful opportunity to appear at the London Palladium , where I can truthfully say Judy Garland was reborn . " Her appearances at the Palladium lasted for four weeks , where she received rave reviews and an ovation described by the Palladium manager as the loudest he had ever heard . 
 In New York in October 1951 , Garland 's engagement at the Palace Theatre exceeded all previous records for the theater and for Garland , was called " one of the greatest personal triumphs in show business history " . Garland was honored for her contribution to the revival of vaudeville with a Special Tony Award . 
 That same year , she divorced Minnelli , and in 1952 , she married Sid Luft , her tour manager and producer , on June 8 , 1952 , in Hollister , California . Garland gave birth to Lorna Luft , herself a future actress and singer , on November 21 , 1952 , and to Joey Luft on March 29 , 1955 . 
 = = = Hollywood comeback = = = 
 Garland filmed a musical remake of the film A Star is Born for Warner Bros. in 1954 . Garland and Sidney Luft , her then @-@ husband , produced the film through their production company , Transcona Enterprises , while Warner Bros. supplied the funds , production facilities , and crew . Directed by George Cukor and co @-@ starring James Mason , it was a large undertaking to which she initially fully dedicated herself . 
 As shooting progressed , however , she began making the same pleas of illness which she had so often made during her final films at MGM . Production delays led to cost overruns and angry confrontations with Warner Bros. head Jack L. Warner . Principal photography wrapped on March 17 , 1954 . At Luft 's suggestion , the " Born in a Trunk " medley was filmed as a showcase for her and inserted over director Cukor 's objections , who feared the additional length would lead to cuts in other areas . It was completed on July 29 . 
 Upon its world premiere on September 29 , 1954 , the film was met with tremendous critical and popular acclaim . Before its release , it was edited at the instruction of Jack Warner ; theater operators , concerned that they were losing money because they were only able to run the film for three or four shows per day instead of five or six , pressured the studio to make additional reductions . About 30 minutes of footage were cut , sparking outrage among critics and filmgoers . Although it was still popular , drawing huge crowds and grossing over $ 6 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in its first release , A Star is Born did not make back its cost and ended up losing money . As a result , the secure financial position Garland had expected from the profits did not materialize . Transcona made no more films with Warner . 
 Garland was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress and in the run @-@ up to the 27th Academy Awards , was generally expected to win . She could not attend the ceremony because she had just given birth to her son , Joseph Luft , so a television crew was in her hospital room with cameras and wires to broadcast her anticipated acceptance speech . The Oscar was won , however , by Grace Kelly for The Country Girl ( 1954 ) . The camera crew was packing up before Kelly could even reach the stage . Groucho Marx sent her a telegram after the awards ceremony , declaring her loss " the biggest robbery since Brinks . " TIME labeled her performance as " just about the greatest one @-@ woman show in modern movie history " . Garland won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Musical for the role . 
 Garland 's films after A Star Is Born included Judgment at Nuremberg ( 1961 ) ( for which she was <unk> and Golden Globe @-@ nominated for Best Supporting Actress ) , the animated feature Gay Purr @-@ ee ( 1962 ) , and A Child Is Waiting ( 1963 ) with Burt Lancaster . Her final film was I Could Go on Singing ( 1963 ) , co @-@ starring Dirk Bogarde . 
 = = = Television , concerts , and Carnegie Hall = = = 
 Garland appeared in a number of television specials beginning in 1955 . The first was the 1955 debut episode of Ford Star Jubilee ; this was the first full @-@ scale color broadcast ever on CBS and was a ratings triumph , scoring a 34 @.@ 8 Nielsen rating . She signed a three @-@ year , $ 300 @,@ 000 contract with the network . Only one additional special was broadcast in 1956 , a live concert @-@ edition of General Electric Theater , before the relationship between the <unk> and CBS broke down in a dispute over the planned format of upcoming specials . 
 In 1956 , Garland performed for four weeks at the New Frontier Hotel on the Las Vegas Strip for a salary of $ 55 @,@ 000 per week , making her the highest @-@ paid entertainer to work in Las Vegas . Despite a brief bout of laryngitis , her performances there were so successful that her run was extended an extra week . Later that year , she returned to the Palace Theatre , site of her two @-@ a @-@ day triumph . She opened in September , once again to rave reviews and popular acclaim . 
 In November 1959 , Garland was diagnosed with acute hepatitis and hospitalized . Over the next few weeks , several quarts of fluid were drained from her body until she was released from the hospital in January 1960 , still in a weak condition . She was told by doctors that she likely had five years or less to live and that , even if she did survive , she would be a semi @-@ invalid and would never sing again . She initially felt " greatly relieved " at the diagnosis . " The pressure was off me for the first time in my life . " However , she recovered over the next several months and , in August of that year , returned to the stage of the Palladium . She felt so warmly embraced by the British that she announced her intention to move permanently to England . 
 Her concert appearance at Carnegie Hall on April 23 , 1961 was a considerable highlight , called by many " the greatest night in show business history " . The two @-@ record album Judy at Carnegie Hall was certified gold , charting for 95 weeks on Billboard , including 13 weeks at number one . It won four Grammy Awards , including Album of the Year and Best Female Vocal of the Year , and has never been out of print . 
 = = = The Judy Garland Show = = = 
 In 1961 , Garland and CBS settled their contract disputes with the help of her new agent , Freddie Fields , and negotiated a new round of specials . The first , entitled The Judy Garland Show , aired in 1962 and featured guests Frank Sinatra and Dean Martin . Following this success , CBS made a $ 24 million offer to her for a weekly television series of her own , also to be called The Judy Garland Show , which was deemed at the time in the press to be " the biggest talent deal in TV history " . Although she had said as early as 1955 that she would never do a weekly television series , in the early 1960s , she was in a financially precarious situation . She was several hundred thousand dollars in debt to the Internal Revenue Service , having failed to pay taxes in 1951 and 1952 , and the failure of A Star is Born meant that she received nothing from that investment . A successful run on television was intended to secure her financial future . 
 Following a third special , Judy Garland and Her Guests Phil Silvers and Robert Goulet , Garland 's weekly series debuted September 29 , 1963 . The Judy Garland Show was critically praised , but for a variety of reasons ( including being placed in the time slot opposite Bonanza on NBC ) the show lasted only one season and was canceled in 1964 after 26 episodes . Despite its short run , the series was nominated for four Emmy Awards , including Best Variety Series . The demise of the program was personally and financially devastating for Garland . 
 = = Final years = = 
 Garland sued Luft for divorce in 1963 , claiming " cruelty " as the grounds . She also asserted that he had repeatedly struck her while he was drinking and that he had attempted to take their children from her by force . She had filed for divorce from Luft more than once previously , even as early as 1956 , but they had reconciled each time . 
 With the demise of her television series , Garland returned to the stage . Most notably , she performed at the London Palladium with her 18 @-@ year @-@ old daughter Liza Minnelli in November 1964 . The concert was also shown on the British television network ITV , and was one of her final appearances at the venue . She made guest appearances on The Ed Sullivan Show and The Tonight Show . Garland guest @-@ hosted an episode of The Hollywood Palace with Vic Damone . She was invited back for a second episode in 1966 with Van Johnson as her guest . Issues with Garland 's behavior ended her Hollywood Palace guest appearances . 
 A 1964 tour of Australia was largely disastrous . Garland 's first concert in Sydney was held in the Sydney Stadium because no concert hall could accommodate the crowds who wanted to see her . It went well and received positive reviews . Her second performance , in Melbourne , started an hour late . The crowd of 7 @,@ 000 was angered by her tardiness and believed her to be drunk ; they booed and heckled her , and she fled the stage after just 45 minutes . She later characterized the Melbourne crowd as " brutish " . A second concert in Sydney was uneventful , but the Melbourne appearance garnered her significant bad press . Some of that bad press was deflected by the announcement of a near fatal episode of pleurisy . 
 Garland 's tour promoter Mark Herron announced that they had married aboard a freighter off the coast of Hong Kong ; however , she was not legally divorced from Luft at the time when the ceremony was performed . The divorce became final on May 19 , 1965 , and Herron and she did not legally marry until November 14 , 1965 ; they separated six months later . 
 In February 1967 , Garland was cast as Helen Lawson in Valley of the Dolls for 20th Century Fox . During the filming , she missed rehearsals and was fired in April , replaced by Susan Hayward . Her <unk> of the song " I 'll Plant My Own Tree " survived , along with her wardrobe tests . 
 Returning to the stage , Garland made her last appearances at New York 's Palace Theatre in July , a 16 @-@ show stand , performing with her children Lorna and Joey Luft . She wore a sequined pantsuit on stage for this tour , which was part of the original wardrobe for her character in Valley of the Dolls . 
 By early 1969 , Garland 's health had deteriorated . She performed in London at the Talk of the Town nightclub for a five @-@ week run and made her last concert appearance in Copenhagen during March 1969 . She married her fifth and final husband , nightclub manager Mickey Deans , at Chelsea Register Office , London , on March 15 , 1969 , her divorce from Herron having been finalized on February 11 . 
 = = Death = = 
 On June 22 , 1969 , Deans found Garland dead in the bathroom of their rented mews house in Chelsea , London ; she was 47 years old . The coroner , Gavin Thurston , stated at the inquest that the cause of death was " an incautious self @-@ overdosage " of barbiturates ; her blood contained the equivalent of 10 1 @.@ 5 @-@ grain ( 97 mg ) Seconal capsules . <unk> stressed that the overdose had been unintentional and that no evidence suggested she had committed suicide . Garland 's autopsy showed no inflammation of her stomach lining and no drug residue in her stomach , which indicated that the drug had been ingested over a long period of time , rather than in one dose . Her death certificate stated that her death had been " accidental " . Supporting the accidental cause , her doctor noted that a prescription of 25 barbiturate pills was found by her bedside half empty and another bottle of 100 was still unopened . 
 A British specialist who had attended her autopsy said she had nevertheless been living on borrowed time owing to cirrhosis . She had turned 47 just 12 days before her death . Her Wizard of Oz co @-@ star Ray Bolger commented at her funeral , " She just plain wore out . " 
 After her body had been embalmed by Desmond Henley , Deans took Garland 's remains to New York City on June 26 , where an estimated 20 @,@ 000 people lined up to pay their respects at the Frank E. Campbell Funeral Chapel in Manhattan , which remained open all night to accommodate the overflow crowd . On June 27 , James Mason gave a eulogy at the funeral , an Episcopal service led by the Rev. Peter A. Delaney of St Marylebone Parish Church , London , who had officiated at her marriage to Deans , three months prior . The public and press were barred . She was interred in a crypt in the community mausoleum at Ferncliff Cemetery in Hartsdale , New York , a small town 24 miles north of Midtown Manhattan . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Often referred to as the greatest entertainer who ever lived , Garland 's legacy as a performer and a personality has endured long after her death . The American Film Institute named her eighth among the Greatest female stars of Golden Age Hollywood cinema . She has been the subject of over two dozen biographies since her death , including the well @-@ received Me and My Shadows : A Family Memoir by her daughter , Lorna Luft , whose memoir was later adapted into the television miniseries Life with Judy Garland : Me and My Shadows , which won Emmy Awards for the two actresses portraying her ( Tammy Blanchard and Judy Davis ) . 
 Garland was posthumously awarded the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award in 1997 . Several of her recordings have been inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame . These include " Over the Rainbow " , which was ranked as the number one movie song of all time in the American Film Institute 's " 100 Years ... 100 Songs " list . Four more Garland songs are featured on the list : " Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas " ( # 76 ) , " Get Happy " ( # 61 ) , " The Trolley Song " ( # 26 ) , and " The Man That Got Away " ( # 11 ) . She has twice been honored on U.S. postage stamps , in 1989 ( as Dorothy ) and again in 2006 ( as Vicki Lester from A Star Is Born ) . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 = = = Gay icon = = = 
 Garland had a large fan base in the gay community and became a gay icon . Reasons given for her standing , especially among gay men , are the admiration of her ability as a performer , the way her personal struggles mirrored those of gay men in America during the height of her fame and her value as a camp figure . In the 1960s , a reporter asked how she felt about having a large gay following . She replied , " I couldn 't care less . I sing to people . " 
 = = = Portrayals in fiction = = = 
 Garland has been portrayed on television by Andrea McArdle in Rainbow ( 1978 ) , Tammy Blanchard ( young Judy ) and Judy Davis ( older Judy ) in Life with Judy Garland : Me and My Shadows ( 2001 ) , and Sigrid Thornton in Peter Allen : Not The Boy Next Door ( 2015 ) . 
 On stage , Garland is a character in the musical The Boy from Oz ( 1998 ) , portrayed by Chrissy Amphlett in the original Australian production and by Isabel Keating on Broadway in 2003 . End of the Rainbow ( 2005 ) featured Caroline O 'Connor as Garland and Paul Goddard as Garland 's pianist . Adrienne Barbeau played Garland in The Property Known as Garland ( 2006 ) and The Judy Monologues ( 2010 ) initially featured male actors reciting Garland 's words before it was revamped as a one @-@ woman show . 
 = I , the Supreme = 
 I , the Supreme ( orig . Spanish Yo el supremo ) is a historical novel written by exiled Paraguayan author Augusto Roa Bastos . It is a fictionalized account of the nineteenth @-@ century Paraguayan dictator José Gaspar Rodríguez de Francia , who was also known as " Dr. Francia . " The book 's title derives from the fact that Francia referred to himself as " El Supremo " or " the Supreme . " The first in a long line of dictators , the Supreme was a severe , calculating despot . The central themes of the novel are power and language and the relation between the two . The Supreme believes himself to be above all power and history : " I don 't write history . I make it . I can remake it as I please , adjusting , stressing , enriching its meaning and truth . " Yet this assertion is constantly challenged by the very fact that while he achieves power by means of writing and dictating , these very same methods can be used by others to dispute his authority . Not even his own identity , represented by the personal pronoun I , is safe and can easily be usurped as is demonstrated by the incident of the pasquinade . Language , as powerful as it is , can never be controlled and can just as easily be used as an instrument of coercion as an instrument of resistance . 
 During the time the book was written , Paraguay was under the dictatorship of Alfredo Stroessner , who went on to rule the country even longer than Francia did . Many consider the book to be at least in part a thinly disguised attack on Stroessner who used methods similar to Francia ’ s to achieve and maintain the effective control of the country , including the swift elimination of opposition , the employment of torture and intolerance of dissent . In its portrayal of Francia and criticism of Stroessner , I , the Supreme belongs to the genre of <unk> de <unk> or dictator novels , and also to the Latin American Boom , a literary movement of the 1960s and 1970s . The book was first published in Spanish in 1974 , and in English ( translation by Helen Lane ) in 1986 . 
 Like many other works of the Latin American boom , the book never became an international best @-@ seller . It was , however , highly regarded by critics with Gerald Martin claiming that it was , " an exceptional cultural phenomenon . " Martin goes on to suggest that it was " more immediately and unanimously acclaimed than any novel since One Hundred Years of Solitude , [ and its ] strictly historical importance [ may ] be even greater than that of García Márquez 's fabulously successful creation . " The book 's handling of the themes of power and language was also praised . Still , the novel was not well received by Stroessner ’ s government and Roa Bastos became " one of the three citizens forbidden to return " to Paraguay as a result . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 After declaring independence from colonial Spain in May 1811 , land @-@ locked Paraguay established itself as the first Republic of South America . Dr. Francia was elected by the junta ( or congress ) to office and he established himself as dictator for life , until his death in 1840 . He ruled with a despotic populism in which the ideals he had drawn from the philosophers of the French Enlightenment were tempered by his aristocratic insistence on absolute rule . As John T. Deiner explains , he " created an army in which all citizens were required to serve . He confiscated property from the upper classes and used the state 's coercive power to direct the working of that land by the army . " He also isolated the country from the outside world , restricting foreign trade and mobility . Political opposition was not tolerated . 
 Francia 's rule was the beginning of a long line of dictators , including Carlos Antonio López ( who was president of Paraguay with dictatorial powers from 1844 to 1862 ) and López 's son , Francisco Solano López ( who ruled between 1862 and 1870 ) . It was Solano López who unwisely initiated the Paraguayan War ( 1865 – 79 ) , which crippled Paraguay , reduced its population by half , and forced many others into exile , creating a Paraguay that Roa Bastos described as " the land without men of the men without land . " 
 In the twentieth @-@ century , Paraguay was dominated by the dictatorial figure of Alfredo Stroessner , who ruled the country for thirty @-@ five years ( from 1954 to 1989 ) and was in power at the time at which Roa Bastos was writing I , the Supreme . Roa Bastos 's novel can be perceived as in part a thinly disguised attack on Stroessner , who ruled Paraguay even longer than Francia . He came to power after the 1947 Civil War , which had destroyed all parties of the centre and the left and drove more than a third of Paraguay 's population into exile . He assumed presidency after a series of coups in 1954 . He gained complete control of the military , eliminated potential rivals , and closely monitored and participated in allocations of national resources . As Deiner argues , " The novel ’ s El Supremo ( Francia ) and Stroessner in the twentieth century used similar methods for dominating national politics . Neither tolerated effective opposition . Both rulers were extremely suspicious of any potential opponents , quickly acting to imprison and torture anyone suspected . Both were ruthless in their intolerance of dissent . " As Rowe and Whitfield describe Stroessner 's rule , " he inherited all Francia 's despotism , but none of his populism [ . . . ] he rule [ d ] over a country where human and civil rights are honored only in their breach . " 
 = = Influences = = 
 Literary critic Todd Garth argues that I , the Supreme is influenced by twentieth @-@ century Argentine writer Macedonio Fernández , as well as other avant garde artists such as Jorge Luis Borges and Julio Cortázar . Garth suggests that Macedonio and Roa Bastos are similar in use of metaphysical language and techniques used to reconstruct reality , as Dr. Francia does in his dictated creation of the Supreme , the ruler of all reality . Macedonio 's writing utilized characters that did not fit the archetype of Western fiction , each only having meaning through their interaction with others in a collective and often never experiencing growth or development in order to construct <unk> spaces of mythmaking that challenge reality . Roa Bastos borrows from these ideas yet situates them in existing political and social history to challenge perceived conceptions of the past 's factuality . He dismantles national Paraguayan mythology which is so intimately intertwined with the life of Dr. Francia , elucidating the distinctions between mythic and mythological . The novel can only accomplish this task within the metaphysical space of mythmaking . Whereas Macedonio attacks the concept of the individual as subject while admitting the fact that to write makes oneself a subject , Roa Bastos recognizes this paradox and exploits it , utilizing it in concerns of political and social nature . 
 Themes from Plato and his influence on Western political philosophy are also prevalent in the novel . Mainly , the debate over the nature of ' Good Society ' and how to achieve it are seen in the positions of the Supreme . He argues that it is the ruler 's role , as well as his duty and obligation , to bring about the good society , and this can only be done by the imposition of absolute order from above . The dictator ’ s job is to bring about the Good Society , to impose the needed order , and the people 's job is to obey the dictator , thereby enjoying the fruits of the good society . The result of such behavior by both the ruler and the ruled will be good for everyone . 
 The novel is also clearly influenced by earlier writing on dictatorship , predominantly Domingo Sarmiento 's Facundo . The similarities can be seen in how both novels are written by exiles , in their thinly veiled attacks on their homeland 's current dictator , and in their authors ' shared use of ' pasquinade / hand @-@ written message ' devices to begin both novels . Francia 's " Perpetual Circular " also contains several allusions to the Argentine gaucho Juan Facundo Quiroga , as well as to the dictator Juan Manuel de Rosas , both of whom were the object of Sarmiento 's critique . 
 = = Genre = = 
 I , the Supreme is a good example of the dictator novel , a genre of Latin American literature that challenges the role of the dictator in Latin American society . The dictator novel draws upon the relationship between power , writing , and dictatorship , and so is an allegory of the role of the Latin American writer in society . 
 The goal of the dictator novel is not to dissect and to analyze the rule of particular dictators with a focus on historical accuracy , but rather , to examine the more abstract nature of authority figures , and to question the idea of authority in general . To be considered a dictator novel , a book must have strong political themes that draw upon historical accounts , while critically examining the power held by an authoritarian figure , allowing the specific to explain the general . Although mostly associated with the Latin American Boom of the 1960s and 1970s , " all fictional depictions of the Latin American ' strong @-@ man ' , it must be noted have an important antecedent in Domingo Faustino Sarmiento 's Facundo , a work written as a sociological treatise " . 
 Many dictator novels , including I , the Supreme belong to the Latin American Boom , a literary movement which began in the 1960s and 1970s , when the work of a group of relatively young Latin American novelists became widely circulated in Europe and throughout the world . The Boom novels were essentially modernist novels , which according to Pope , relied on superposition of different points of view , blurring time and linearity . He further notes , " linguistically self assured , it used the vernacular without apologies . " Other notable characteristics of the Boom include the treatment of both " rural and urban settings , " internationalism , an emphasis on both the historical and the political , as well as " questioning of regional as well as , or more than , national identity ; awareness of <unk> as well as worldwide economic and ideological issues ; polemicism ; and timeliness . " 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 As critic John King notes , " it is impossible to summarize this extraordinary novel in a few lines . It incorporates the latest developments in linguistic theory and practice , talks of the arbitrariness and unreliability of language that purports to describe reality , <unk> and comments upon the various histories and travelers ’ accounts of Paraguay , ranges across the breadth of Latin American history , implicitly condemning Stroessner and debating with Fidel Castro , and exploring once again the gap between writer and reader . " 
 The book does , however , start by promising a linear narrative . It opens with the title words , set in a font designed to look like handwriting , heralding what appears to be an official order : 
 I the Supreme Dictator of the Republic 
 Order that on the occasion of my death my corpse be beheaded ; my head placed on a pike for three days in the Plaza de la República , to which the people are to be summoned by the sounding of a full peal of bells ... 
 This pronouncement , it turns out , is not an official declaration . It is an imitation or forgery , found " nailed to the door of the cathedral " in Paraguay 's capital , Asunción . Immediately following , then , is a discussion of this pasquinade : Dr Francia , the Supreme , and his secretary , Policarpo Patiño , discuss its meaning and possible provenance . Patiño is set the task of uncovering the perpetrator : " You are to start tracking down the handwriting of the pasquinade in all the files . " 
 But this linear detection narrative soon starts to unravel . The Supreme casts doubt even on the presumption that the declaration is indeed a forgery , or rather suggests that the forgery could itself be forged : " Suppose that I myself am an author of <unk> . " Moreover , the literary genre is undone by the introduction of footnotes ( which blur the line between fiction and fact ) , and the narrative transparency subverted by the fact that the novel asserts its own materiality with interpolations such as " ( the rest of the sentence burned , illegible ) " and " ( edge of the folio burned ) " . The effect of these notes is to remind readers that they are reading a book , and that this book is incomplete , damaged , and fallible . 
 As the novel continues , it becomes more and more caught up in digressions , such that the original narrative line is apparently forgotten . The Supreme and his secretary discuss an often bizarre series of topics : a meteor that is apparently chained to Francia 's desk ; a prison camp in <unk> whose inhabitants have been turned to stone ; and increasingly the dictator also ruminates on the past , particularly the events of Paraguay 's foundation when he had to fend off the attention of Spaniards , Argentines , and Brazilians , all of whom threatened the nascent country 's independence . Chronology and logic are seemingly abandoned : at one point the dictator discusses the date of his own death ; elsewhere he mentions events that will only happen long afterwards , such as the Chaco War of the 1930s ( in which Roa Bastos himself fought ) . 
 Moreover , readers are increasingly made aware of the marginal but insistent voice of the mysterious compiler . At the center of the book , it is revealed that the compiler is , in fact , in possession of the same pen used by the Supreme , a " memory @-@ pen " that reproduces images as well as words , but that is now " partially broken , so that today it writes only with very thick strokes that tear the paper , effacing words as it writes them " . 
 The novel ends at the end of Francia 's life , with him condemning Patiño to death for supposedly plotting against him , followed by Francia 's death in a fire in 1840 . As the characters and plot disintegrate , so apparently does the novel . The final line is another interpolation : " ( the remainder stuck together , illegible , the rest unable to be found , the worm @-@ eaten letters of the Book hopelessly scattered ) . " And yet , this is not quite the last word , as it is followed by a " Final Compiler 's Note " that reflects on the compilation and the book as a whole . Here the novel seems to pass responsibility on to " the no less fictitious and autonomous reader . " 
 = = Characters = = 
 = = = Dr. Francia ( the Supreme ) = = = 
 José Gaspar Rodríguez de Francia , also known as " Dr. Francia " , <unk> @-@ <unk> ( " Great Lord " in Guaraní ) , or " the Supreme " , is the book 's titular character and also undoubtedly its main focus . Most of the book is dedicated to his dictates to his secretary , Patiño . The Supreme is a domineering man , frequently belittling his closest confidant . He is also an infirm man , as the book is set a short time before his death on September 20 , 1840 . Roa Bastos 's portrayal of him walks the line between praise and condemnation . While other authors of dictator novels clearly present their dictators as villains , Roa Bastos makes it unclear as to whether he is defending him or not . As Roberto Gonzalez Echevarria writes , the Supreme is " constant [ ly ] [ worried ] about writing . [ This ] stems from the fact that he has found and used the power implicit in language itself . The Supreme defines power as being able to do through others what we are unable to do ourselves : language , being separate from what it designates , is the very embodiment of power . " 
 The Supreme is also revealed to be power @-@ crazed in other ways . Michiko Kakutani writes " Francia , it seems , wants to account for everything ( his own history , as well as the history of his nation , which he personifies as its leader ) as he pours out his story , it becomes clear that he possesses an insatiable desire for power and control — he has even chained a huge meteorite to his desk , as punishment for being a cosmic runaway — and that he also sees himself as two separate beings : as a conniving , paranoiac " I " , beset by the average ego 's fears and doubts , and as the " Supreme " , a monstrously powerful presence that even Francia himself must refer to in the third person . " The Supreme was personally involved in the affairs of the state to such extent , that it was reported by contemporary press that " [ He ] personally trained his cavalry in the use of the saber , ascertained the exact number of nails in Fort Orange , awarded 102 pesos to a Frenchman whose anchor had been melted down by the state ... lowered the price of salt in the capital , donated state yerba to the people of <unk> , and denied permission for [ someone ] to marry in Villa Rica . " It was common for him to attend to such specific details in a single evening . 
 = = = Policarpo Patiño = = = 
 Policarpo Patiño is the Supreme 's secretary and amanuensis . An " efficient and loyal servant " , in historian Hoyt Williams 's words , he was " a jack of all trades , [ who ] arranged audiences , transcribed documents , visited the jails , and conferred with the Dictator on most routine matters . Toward the end of [ the Supreme 's ] life , and presumably with his knowledge , Patiño began signing some official documents that did not bear his master 's signature . " Much of the book consists of dialogue between the Supreme and his secretary , which Policarpo records as he writes what is dictated to him . In Roberto González Echevarría 's words , " Patiño is the quintessential writer . " There is , however , some debate about how powerful Patiño actually was . Initially possessing a more powerful role , the Supreme 's " personal control over virtually the entirety of [ the state ] " led to Patiño quickly being demoted from " Government Secretary and scribe " to simply a record keeper . There is evidence , however , that Patiño wielded considerable influence with the Supreme , as " in 1835 Patiño denounced a slave for attempting to induce an abortion in his daughter and to poison him . A close investigation ... turned up [ that ] the daughter had requested the abortion and Patiño had lied , [ yet ] he was not jailed , and retained his powerful position . ” 
 Despite his influence , Patiño is frequently the victim of the Supreme 's abuse , even having his own death sentence dictated to him , although in the end he outlives his master . González Echevarría questions whether Patiño " [ had ] the last laugh ? Did he achieve some sort of posthumous power ? " This is suggested both because he outlived Dr. Francia , and also because the pen ostensibly used to write the book was given to the author by Patiño 's descendant . Therefore " the editor , who arranges the various texts and <unk> them , who thereby exercises final authority over Dr. Francia 's versions of himself , is the heir of Policarpo Patiño . " The power relationship between the Supreme and his secretary is a microcosm of the book as a whole , with Dr. Francia dominating Patiño completely , even though the latter is intimately associated with the dictator having power at all , given the power he derives from writing . 
 = = Style = = 
 I , the Supreme is a dense , complicated novel that requires considerable reader involvement . Critic Helene <unk> @-@ Basson suggests that symbolism plays an important role in the novel , one that goes hand @-@ in @-@ hand with the complexity of the writing . She references Tzvetan Todorov 's theory of symbolism in literature which suggests that " [ there is an ] inseparability of symbolism and interpretation . They are , for me , simply two aspects of a single phenomenon . " This theory dovetails quite well with the multiple meanings associated with different objects in I , the Supreme . 
 Although the novel is a dialogue between the Supreme and his secretary , Patiño , there are in fact at least six different types of narration in the text : notebook entries , transcriptions of dialogues , a logbook , the " voice " of the Supreme 's father , two documents , and the installments of the perpetual circular , which is ostensibly the main project Patiño and Dr. Francia are working on . In addition to these different layers of narrative , there are also three possible authors : Roa Bastos , the author @-@ compiler , and the " implied author " . The latter refers to the " behavior , attitudes , and backgrounds [ . . . ] necessary for a proper understanding of the text . " The multitude of possibilities regarding the author and the shift between types of narratives , combined with an absence of quotation marks , contribute to this book being described as " undoubtedly , [ the author 's ] most complicated work to date . " 
 Further complicating matters is the fact that the Supreme 's " voice echoes back and forth in time — recalling his birth and his youth , only to jump ahead to the future , speaking [ from ] beyond the grave about the flies that disturb his corpse , the bandits who dare to disturb his sleep . " 
 I , the Supreme is mostly composed of real texts by or about Francia . These range from personal memoirs by historical Paraguayan figures to passages from books written by Europeans in Paraguay at the time . They are arranged by a ' Compiler ' whose footnotes tell the story of how the book was put together . The body of the novel is composed of a polemical collection of versions of Paraguayan history . The first text is what the Supreme dictates to his assistant Patiño , about what is happening in the present . This includes the constant abuses Francia heaps upon Patiño and their attempts to discover the authors of a pasquinade , found nailed to the door of the Asunción Cathedral , that falsely announces Francia 's death and burial arrangements . It is mostly Francia 's vulgar rambling , including accusing meek Patiño of attempting to usurp him . The author of the pasquinade is never discovered in spite of their high scrutiny . 
 The second text is the " Circular Perpetual " that Francia also dictates to Patiño . It is his version of the origins of Paraguayan history , particularly of how he came to power . These texts are highly annotated by the editor , for in them Francia " corrects " versions given by other historical figures , not to mention those given by European travelers . 
 Finally , there is what Francia writes himself in his " Private Notebook , " which is mostly an account of his own life , attempts to write fiction , diatribes against Patiño and his kind , philosophical musings and ramblings , and other sundry exercises . All of these texts have been edited , for one finds in them , besides the footnotes , indications in italics and within brackets such as " on the margin it is written , " " there is a hole in the paper here , " etc . So that while they do not compose a homogeneous text , held together by the rhetorical power of a narrative voice , and in fact are anything but homogeneous , these texts bear the presence of the editor in these discrete marks and indications . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Language = = = 
 The novel revolves around a central theme of language — written and spoken , truth and myth — and the power inherent in all of its forms , a power that is often only present in the deconstruction of communication . González Echevarria argues that " Dr. Francia 's fear of the pasquinade , his abuse of [ Patiño , ] his constant worry about writing all stem from the fact that he has found and used the power implicit in language itself . The Supreme defines power as being able to do through others what we are unable to do ourselves : language , being separate from what it designates , is the very embodiment of power , for things act and mean through it without ceasing to be themselves . Dr. Francia has also realized that he cannot control language , particularly written language , that it has a life of its own that threatens him . " 
 The significance of linguistic domination is present in the novel . Paraguay is the most bilingual country in Latin America where , as of 1962 , 52 % spoke the indigenous language Guaraní as well as Spanish , only 5 % only spoke Spanish , whereas 43 % spoke only Guaraní which is essentially a language of oral culture . As Roa Bastos claims , " this inevitably leads the Paraguayan writer to the necessity of creating a literature that goes beyond literature , of speaking against the word , or writing against writing . " At the time of I , the Supreme the majority of the people spoke Guaraní while Spanish was the dominant political language . Francia himself was known for his support of Guaraní and his " persecution of the Spanish @-@ speaking elite " . As Deiner argues , " El Supremo is aware of the difficulties of incorporating rural and underclass Paraguayans into the national political system , even though he is sympathetic toward them . But the common person , the Guarani speaker , remains unheard . Roa Bastos cleverly demonstrates this political isolation / marginalization by constantly introducing Guaraní phrases , phrases which are incomprehensible to most readers , phrases from a spoken , not written language . The phrases are there in a sort of ghostly form , hanging in air , denying full participation in the novel to the reader , and thus causing the reader to empathize with real world Paraguayan citizens who are denied political participation by their political rulers . " 
 = = = Power = = = 
 The novel 's format , its various multiple sources , its manipulation of linear time and its inclusion of supernatural elements ( talking dogs and meteor rifles , for example ) all serve to deconstruct the idea of absolute power , by creating an ambiguity between fact and myth , between Dr Francia and the Supreme , and between Roa Bastos and the Compiler . Francia places himself above all power and history : " I don 't write history . I make it . I can remake it as I please , adjusting , stressing , enriching its meaning and truth . " Yet in the Compiler 's notes and retelling of events , the novel is presented as a genuine version of history , one that contradicts and questions the Supreme 's . In their collectivity , they deny the illusion of absolute power , whether the power is that of Francia the dictator or Roa Bastos the writer . This ambiguity between myth and fact is elaborated on at the end of the novel in the fictional debate over the Supreme 's remains ; it questions the nature of national political myth , and how heroes and villains are created in it and where the Supreme falls into those categories after being portrayed as both by Roa Bastos . As Deiner poses the question raised by the novel , " Is he to be portrayed as a valiant leader who held the country together in the face of enormous external aggression , or as a despot who laid the basis for almost two centuries of exploitation of Paraguay ’ s peoples by its leaders ? " The answer is not so much of importance to the novel , so much as the fact that the question itself exists , thereby confirming the power of writing over so called " absolute " power . 
 On a more basic level , the novel also has political themes to it . As John Deiner writes , " I , The Supreme is a surprisingly political novel . It is a commentary on Paraguay 's first great political leader [ . . . ] and a condemnation of the country 's last , General Alfredo Stroessner . " Deiner contends that the political system and occurrences in I , the Supreme are symbolic of those of other Paraguayan leaders . Suggesting the book is connected to more recent leaders of Paraguay , Deiner writes " although ostensibly a fictionalized account of the life of El Supremo , the novel is also a thinly disguised attack on the politics and rule of Alfredo Stroessner , [ the dictator ] ruling Paraguay at the time I , the Supreme was published ( in exile ) in 1974 . " In summary , Deiner suggest that the novel " serves as the quintessential example of the personalist dictator model of Latin American political systems . Francia 's was one of the earliest versions of this model , and Stroessner 's was one of the last personalist dictator regimes . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Gerald Martin observes that " the publication of I the Supreme in 1974 was an exceptional cultural phenomenon . " He goes on to note that Roa Bastos 's novel " was more immediately and unanimously acclaimed than any novel since One Hundred Years of Solitude , and critics seemed to suspect that its strictly historical importance might be even greater than that of García Márquez 's fabulously successful creation . " 
 The Stroessner government did not react kindly to this or others of Roa Bastos 's writings . On a rare visit to Paraguay from France in 1982 , he was denounced as a " Marxist subversive " and became " one of the three citizens forbidden to return . " 
 Outside Paraguay , Roa Bastos 's works never became best @-@ sellers like those of other members of the Boom such as Gabriel García Márquez or Mario Vargas Llosa , yet as a recognition of his literary prestige he was awarded the Miguel de Cervantes Prize in 1989 . This is the most prestigious literary award in the Spanish @-@ speaking world , and honors the lifetime achievement of an outstanding writer in the Spanish language . 
 And in the English @-@ speaking world , the British critic Bernard Levin said about reading I , the Supreme upon its translation in 1986 that " he had read the book with an exhilaration similar to ' climbing Everest twice in one weekend . ' " Michiko Kakutani , writing for the New York Times , also remarked in that year that " however cumbersome and rhetorical I The Supreme may often feel , the novel remains a prodigious meditation not only on history and power , but on the nature of language itself . " 
 Also in 1986 Carlos Fuentes , for the New York Times , wrote of Roa Bastos : " He is his country 's most eminent writer ; his works are few , self @-@ contained ( very Paraguayan ) and brilliantly written . Yet his masterpiece , I the Supreme , which first came out in Spanish in 1974 and finally reaches the English @-@ reading public now , in a masterly translation by Helen Lane , is the kind of summa that absorbs everything that the writer has done before . This is Mr. Roa Bastos ' dialogue with himself through history and through a monstrous historical figure whom he has to imagine and understand if he is ever to imagine and understand himself and his people . " 
 About the 12 year delay between the book 's initial publication in Spanish and its translation into English , Fuentes reports that Roa Bastos said : " The book has been published in almost all the principal languages of the world , including Japanese and Chinese . [ . . . ] In Europe , it has only not been translated into Finnish and Albanian . " He also stated that " he was intrigued that Americans ' would start with the work of mine considered the most difficult . ' " 
 = Star Wars : The Force Unleashed = 
 Star Wars : The Force Unleashed is a LucasArts action @-@ adventure video game and part of the The Force Unleashed project . It was initially developed for the PlayStation 2 , PlayStation 3 , Wii , and Xbox 360 consoles and on the iOS , second @-@ generation N @-@ Gage , Nintendo DS , PlayStation Portable , and Java @-@ equipped mobile phone handhelds . 
 The game was released in North America on September 16 , 2008 , in Australia and Southeast Asia on September 17 , and in Europe on September 19 . LucasArts released downloadable content for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 consoles . An Ultimate Sith Edition of the game , containing new and all previously released expanded content , was released in November 2009 , which also came out on Mac OS and Microsoft Windows . 
 The project bridges the first two Star Wars trilogies , acting as an origin story for both the united Rebel Alliance and the Galactic Civil War depicted in the Original Trilogy . The game introduces a new protagonist , " Starkiller " , as Darth Vader 's secret apprentice , who is tasked with hunting down Jedi while killing rebels and Imperials alike in order to hide his existence from the Emperor , but soon starts to slowly redeem himself to the light side of the Force . 
 Reviews offered fairly positive response , praising The Force Unleashed for its compelling story , robust physics , impressive art and soundtrack , while some more negative reviews cited frustrating gameplay . Despite this , the game was a bestseller in the United States and Australia , with over one million copies sold its debut month . As of February 2010 , the game has sold over seven million copies , and it is the fastest @-@ selling Star Wars video game . A sequel , Star Wars : The Force Unleashed II , was released in October 2010 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The Force Unleashed is a third @-@ person action game in which the player 's character 's weapons are the Force and a lightsaber . Developers treated the main character 's lightsaber like another Force power , and wanted to ensure " something visceral and cool " happened with each button @-@ push . The game has a combo system for stringing lightsaber attacks and for combining lightsaber attacks with Force powers . Experience points earned by killing enemies and finding artifacts can be used to increase Starkiller 's powers and traits . The gameplay is intended to be easy to learn ; the development team included " horrible " gamers to help ensure the game 's accessibility . Players can casually run and gun through the game , but the game rewards those who take a stealthy , more tactical approach . The game includes enemies that are easy to overcome ; game difficulty arises from presenting these enemies in large numbers that can wear down the player 's character . Additionally , enemies learn from the player 's character 's attacks ; using the same attack on different characters can sometimes lead to the player 's character doing less damage . The enemies , which number over 50 , have various strengths and weaknesses ; developers faced the difficulty of effectively placing them throughout the game 's varied environments . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Set in between Star Wars : Episode III – Revenge of the Sith and Star Wars : Episode IV - A New Hope , Darth Vader is sent by Emperor Palpatine to destroy a Jedi who survived Palpatine 's Jedi purge and is hiding on the Wookiee homeworld , Kashyyyk . The Force Unleashed begins with the player controlling Darth Vader as he searches Kashyyyk for the Jedi . After defeating the Jedi in battle , Vader discovers a child who is strong in the Force and raises him to become his apprentice , unknown to the Emperor for several years . When the apprentice ( known in the game as " Starkiller " , and whom the player now controls ) reaches adulthood , Vader sends him to kill the remaining Jedi as training for his ultimate goal : assassinating the Emperor so Vader and Starkiller can rule the galaxy together . 
 However , the Emperor discovers Starkiller 's existence and forces Vader to kill the apprentice ; Vader hurls Starkiller into space , but secretly dispatches droids to retrieve and revive him . Vader sends his apprentice to foster a rebellion among those who resist the Empire , distracting the Emperor so Vader can make his move . Breaking into various Imperial facilities , Starkiller rescues Rogue Shadow pilot Juno Eclipse , Jedi Master Rahm Kota , Princess Leia Organa , and Senator Bail Organa . In the process , Starkiller learns from Kota about the Jedi way , ultimately sparing Jedi apprentice Maris Brood , who had succumbed to corruption by the dark side after Starkiller murdered her master Shaak Ti . Starkiller travels between missions aboard the Rogue Shadow , developing a close relationship with his crew . 
 Senators Organa , Mon Mothma , and Garm Bel <unk> meet to plan a rebellion against the Empire , but are interrupted when Darth Vader arrests them and Kota . Vader attacks Starkiller and reveals that Starkiller was never meant to overthrow the Emperor ; from the beginning , he was the Emperor 's tool to expose his enemies , and that Vader 's plans to overthrow the Emperor did not include Starkiller . Surviving Vader 's attack , Starkiller uses the Force to ascertain the senators ' and Kota 's location : the Death Star . Inside the station , Starkiller duels Darth Vader . Kota attempts to fight the Emperor , but is wounded by the Emperor 's Force lightning . 
 At this point , the player chooses to either seek revenge on Vader or save Kota from Emperor Palpatine : 
 If the player attacks and kills Vader , the Emperor offers to let Starkiller take Vader 's place as his apprentice if Starkiller proves himself by killing Kota . Starkiller instead attacks the Emperor , who crushes Starkiller with the Rogue Shadow and kills Kota and all his allies . The story ends with Starkiller 's broken body being grafted with armor so he can serve as the Emperor 's assassin until Palpatine finds a new apprentice . The game ends with Palpatine assuring Starkiller that he , like Vader , will be cast aside when he finds a new apprentice . The Infinities expansion content builds on this ending . 
 If the player attacks and defeats Emperor Palpatine , Kota prevents Starkiller from killing Palpatine in hatred . Starkiller dies while absorbing the Emperor 's renewed attack , but Kota and the senators escape . The Emperor and Vader look over Starkiller 's corpse , concerned that he has become a martyr to inspire the newly formed Rebel Alliance . Senator Organa and the others agree to proceed with their rebellion and Leia decides to use Starkiller 's family crest as the Rebellion 's symbol . Outside , Juno talks to Kota , who tells her that among Starkiller 's dark thoughts , Juno herself was one bright spot that he held onto right until his death . This is the ending depicted in the novelization and this was the canonical ending until Disney rebranded the extended universe into the non @-@ canon " Star Wars Legends " . 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 Sam Witwer as Galen Marek / Starkiller — The child of two Jedi , Starkiller becomes Darth Vader 's secret apprentice and is dispatched by his master to kill the Jedi who survived Palpatine 's Jedi purge . Although acting as a villain , Starkiller is " really just [ a ] damaged kid . " Developers decided not to give Starkiller a name in the game , but the novelization gives his name as Galen Marek . Although Starkiller starts as Vader 's apprentice , a focus of the game is to allow the character to evolve into " something more heroic , something greater . " Audio director David Collins saw a resemblance between Starkiller concept art and his friend , Witwer ; Collins asked for Witwer 's headshot and an audition reel , and a few weeks later Witwer sat for a 45 @-@ minute audition . Witwer secured the role by demonstrating to developers his deep understanding of the character ; in portraying Starkiller , Witwer brought many new ideas about the character and imbued him with a sense of humanity . Developers tried not to make Starkiller so evil that players would have difficulty connecting to him . The Force Unleashed ’ s character 's name is an homage to " Annikin Starkiller , " the original name of the character that eventually became Luke Skywalker . 
 Matt Sloan as Darth Vader — Starkiller 's master , who discovers Starkiller as a child and trains him . In addition to dispatching Starkiller to kill the remaining Jedi , Vader also presents plans to unite with Starkiller to overthrow the Emperor , although there are " twists and turns " in this scheme . The events depicted in The Force Unleashed are pivotal to Darth Vader 's history and development . 
 Nathalie Cox as Juno Eclipse — Rogue Shadow ’ s pilot and Starkiller 's love interest . Eclipse was not originally part of the game ; early concepts had the apprentice as an older character who develops a connection with a young Princess Leia . Star Wars creator George Lucas , uncomfortable with this idea , encouraged the developers to create a love interest . The apprentice , who has had limited interaction with women when the game begins , does not at first know how to act around her . Her introduction early in the game allows the relationship with Starkiller to develop , and her inclusion helps " recapture that rich ensemble feel of the original Star Wars " . According to Sean Williams , who wrote the novelization , the romantic storyline is the key to The Force Unleashed . The name " Juno Eclipse " was originally proposed as a name for the character eventually called " Asajj Ventress " — it was rejected for Ventress as insufficiently villainous . The Force Unleashed project lead Haden Blackman brought the name back for the mythic quality of the name " Juno " and the duality suggested by an " eclipse . " Cox , in addition to strongly resembling the character 's concept art , had " integrity and poise " appropriate to Juno Eclipse that helped the actor secure the role . 
 Cully Fredricksen as General Rahm Kota — A Jedi Master who provides Starkiller with additional insight into the Force . Developers realized early that Starkiller would require insight into the Force from someone other than Darth Vader ; after rejecting the idea of this coming from the spirit of Qui @-@ Gon Jinn or some version of Darth Plagueis , they decided to fill this role with one of Starkiller 's Jedi opponents . The character was conceived as a " tough @-@ as @-@ nails " contrast to Jinn and Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi . Senior concept artist Amy Beth Christianson drew upon samurai influences for Kota 's appearance . The character changed little after being conceived ; Fredricksen 's own traits made the character tougher . Fredricksen was the first actor cast for the project . 
 Adrienne Wilkinson as Maris Brood — A <unk> survivor of the Jedi Purge and Shaak Ti 's apprentice . The character was originally conceived to become a pirate captain , and Christianson 's early art included Brood 's lightsaber <unk> . Wilkinson brought strength to her performance , leading to an expansion of the role with more dialogue . 
 David W. Collins as PROXY — Starkiller 's droid sidekick . Collins said PROXY has C @-@ 3PO 's innocence but also is " really dangerous . " The companion trade paperback describes the conflict between PROXY 's primary programming to kill Starkiller and its self @-@ imposed desire to help him ; PROXY is eager to please Starkiller , but does not know how dangerous it can be or that there is a conflict between its programming and Starkiller 's wishes . Trying to avoid having PROXY 's dialogue become too reminiscent of either C @-@ 3PO or the villainous HK @-@ 47 of Knights of the Old Republic , developers focused on PROXY 's friendly naïvety . 
 Jimmy Smits as Bail Organa — The Emmy Award @-@ winning Smits voices the character he played in the Star Wars prequels : a Galactic Senator from Alderaan and Leia Organa 's adoptive father . 
 Other performances came from Susan Eisenberg as Shaak Ti and Catherine Taber as Princess Leia Organa . In addition to voicing Starkiller , Witwer also provided the voice of Emperor Palpatine . R2 @-@ D2 also makes an appearance in the game alongside Leia . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Concept = = = 
 Game planning began in summer 2004 . Initially , about six developers started with a " clean slate " to conceptualize a new Star Wars game ; the small group of engineers , artists , and designers spent more than a year brainstorming ideas for what might make a good game . Over 100 initial concepts were whittled down to 20 to 25 that included making the game the third entry in the Knights of the Old Republic series or having the protagonist be a Wookiee " superhero " , Darth Maul , a bounty hunter , a smuggler , a mercenary , or the last member of the Skywalker family . The decision to focus on the largely unexplored period between Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope helped energize the design team . Consumer feedback helped the developers narrow in on seven concepts , and elements from those seven went into The Force Unleashed 's overall concept . 
 Production was greatly aided by concept art , which was intended to visually bridge the two Star Wars trilogies , convey the impression of a " lived @-@ in " universe , show how the galaxy changes under Imperial rule , and to seem familiar yet new . An off @-@ hand comment about the Force in the game being powerful enough " to pull a Star Destroyer out of the sky " inspired an image by senior concept artist Amy Beth Christenson that became an important part of the developers ' idea pitches and evolved into a major moment in the game . These illustrations also inspired the creation of dozens of simple , three @-@ dimensional animations . Eventually , a one @-@ minute previsualization video highlighting the idea of " kicking someone 's ass with the Force " helped convince the designers that The Force Unleashed would be " a great game " ; George Lucas , upon seeing the one @-@ minute video , told the designers to " go make that game " . Once the concept was solidified , the development team grew from ten to twenty people . The idea of " reimagining " the Force as " amped up " in The Force Unleashed aligned with LucasArts ' overall goal of harnessing the power of the latest video game consoles to " dramatically " change gaming , specifically through the use of simulation @-@ based gameplay . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 In April 2005 , after several months of planning , the LucasArts team received Lucas ' encouragement to create a game centered on Darth Vader 's secret apprentice in the largely unexplored period between Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope , drawing the two trilogies together . LucasArts spent six months developing the story . Lucas spent hours discussing with the developers the relationship between Darth Vader and Emperor Palpatine and provided feedback on what Vader would want out of and how he would motivate an apprentice . Lucas Licensing reviewed many game details to ensure they fit into canon . Focus group feedback indicated that , while hunting down Jedi at Vader 's order would be fun , the character should be redeemed , in keeping with a major Star Wars motif . Although the game introduces new characters , developers felt the presence of characters already part of Star Wars would help anchor the game within the official continuity . Before the game 's release , Lucasfilm claimed it would " unveil new revelations about the Star Wars galaxy " with a " redemption " motif . The story progresses through a combination of scripted events , in @-@ game cinematics , cutscenes , and dialogue . 
 = = = Technology = = = 
 During pre @-@ production , about 30 people were on the project team . LucasArts spent several years developing the tools and technology to create The Force Unleashed . <unk> , level construction , marketing , and public relations took about a year . Until late 2006 , the production team was ascertaining " how many polygons , lights , [ and ] characters " next @-@ generation platforms supported ; a year of full production began in early 2007 . A series of quickly @-@ produced " play blast " videos helped the developers focus on mechanics , the user interface , and finishing moves . Development of the Xbox 360 version came first ; PlayStation 3 development started when the production team had enough development kits . Making the game run on both the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 was " a monumental task " . 
 The game is based on LucasArts ' proprietary " Ronin " game engine but also integrates third @-@ party technology : Havok for rigid body physics , <unk> Entertainment 's " Digital Molecular Matter " ( DMM ) for dynamically destructible objects , and NaturalMotion 's Euphoria for realistic non @-@ player character artificial intelligence . LucasArts ' programmers had to overcome technical hurdles to get <unk> , <unk> and Euphoria @-@ coded components to interact . Developers also had to strike a balance between realistic and entertaining physics . LucasArts initially opted not to release a personal computer version of The Force Unleashed , stating that doing the game well would be too processor @-@ intensive for typical PCs and that scaling down the game 's procedural physics for the PC platform would " fundamentally " change The Force Unleashed 's gameplay . However , LucasArts later announced Windows and Mac versions of the game , developed in conjunction with Aspyr Media , for release in Fall 2009 . 
 Lacking Havok , Euphoria , and DMM , Krome 's Wii version relies on the company 's in @-@ house physics engine . Some character animations may be ragdoll while others are preset ; in developing the game , Krome tried to blur the distinction between the two . The lighting system in the Wii version is more advanced than that in the PS2 version , which Krome also built ; the PS2 includes more graphic details than their PSP version . 
 = = = ILM collaboration and cast performance = = = 
 The Force Unleashed is intended to make players think they are " actually , finally , in a Star Wars movie " . It is the first game on which LucasArts and Industrial Light & Magic ( ILM ) collaborated since they both relocated to the Letterman Digital Arts Center in San Francisco , California . This collaboration allowed the companies to co @-@ develop tools to make film @-@ quality effects . LucasArts worked with ILM 's Zeno tool framework and helped ILM build its Zed game editor . Lucas said having the two companies working together in the same building was " a great collaboration " . 
 It took Senior Manager of Voice and Audio Darragh O 'Farrell four months to cast The Force Unleashed . ILM 's <unk> and motion @-@ capture " CloneCam " technology recorded actors ' voice and physical performances . This led to a change in LucasArts ' casting process : for the first time , actors needed to match characters ' age and gender . Actors performed their lines together , rather than in isolation , to better get the sense of their characters interacting with each other . Consequently , the script 's dialogue was reduced while reliance on characters ' expressions — captured through the CloneCam — increased . CloneCam technology had previously been used in producing the Pirates of the Caribbean movies . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 LucasArts music supervisor Jesse Harlin said the music matches the game 's motif of redemption and goal of bridging the gap between Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope : 
 We had to make sure that the game 's score started off rooted within the Prequel Trilogy feel of ethnic percussion and sweeping themes that spoke to the nobility and grandeur of the old Jedi Order . As the game progresses , however , the Empire gains more control , the Jedi are hunted , and the ordered control of the Prequels gives way to the more romantic temperament of the Original Trilogy . 
 The game 's soundtrack includes material composed by John Williams for the films in addition to material created specifically for The Force Unleashed . Jesse Harlin composed the game 's main theme , while Mark Griskey composed the score . Griskey made use of several motifs from the film scores as well as Harlin 's main theme . The 90 @-@ minute soundtrack was recorded by the Skywalker Symphony Orchestra and mixed at Skywalker Sound in Lucas Valley in September and October 2007 . During gameplay , a proprietary engine combines " musical elements according to the pace , plot , and environment of the game at any given moment " , resulting in a unique musical experience . A promotional soundtrack album was made available online through Tracksounds.com in 2008 . 
 = = = Expansion = = = 
 Two weeks after the game 's release , LucasArts announced development on two downloadable expansion packs for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions of the game . The first expansion added " skins " that allow the player 's character to appear as Star Wars figures other than Starkiller , such as Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi , Anakin Skywalker , Qui @-@ Gon Jinn , Jango Fett , C @-@ 3PO , Luke Skywalker , Darth Maul , Darth Sion , Mace Windu , <unk> Koon , Kit <unk> and Ki @-@ Adi @-@ Mundi . The skins chosen to be part of the expansion were based in part on fans ' feedback . The second expansion pack added a new mission that expands on Starkiller 's background . Although a moment in the game 's main story was considered as a " jumping off point " for the expansion , LucasArts decided instead to make the new mission instantly accessible to players . The mission 's location — the Jedi Temple on Coruscant — appears in the Wii , PlayStation 2 and PlayStation Portable versions of The Force Unleashed , but was cut during planning from the PS3 and Xbox 360 platforms . 
 The Tatooine Downloadable Content , released August 27 , 2009 , is the first of two expansions that occur in an " Infinities " storyline , an alternate history in which Starkiller kills Vader and becomes Palpatine 's assassin . The second Infinities expansion , which takes place on Hoth , was originally only available as part of the Ultimate Sith Edition , which also includes all previous downloadable content . However , the Hoth expansion was later made available for download on the PlayStation Network and Xbox Live . 
 = = Reception = = 
 1 @.@ 738 million unit sales of The Force Unleashed across all platforms made it the third best @-@ selling game globally in the third quarter of 2008 ; as of July 2009 , it had sold six million copies . The Force Unleashed was both the fastest @-@ selling Star Wars game and LucasArts ' fastest @-@ selling game . The Force Unleashed won a Writers Guild of America award for Best Video Game Writing . 
 = = = PlayStation 3 , Xbox 360 and PC = = = 
 The Force Unleashed received mixed to fairly positive reviews . Electronic Gaming Monthly said the game is " <unk> dissatisfying " ; however , GameSpot said the game " gets more right than it does wrong " . GameSpot said the PC port of the game retained all of the game 's strengths and weaknesses , but that the port failed to take advantage of the PC platform . 
 GameSpot called the game 's story " more intimate and more powerful " than the Star Wars franchise 's prequel trilogy ; X @-@ Play identified the game 's story as one of the game 's " few bright spots " and said the game 's visuals successfully convey Star Wars ' " classic used universe " feel . GamePro and GameSpot praised the game 's art and physics , and GamePro also commended Starkiller 's " cool powers " . IGN praised the game 's voice acting , particularly Witwer 's performance as Starkiller . The Washington Times identified Mark Griskey 's soundtrack as " another star " of the game , and Tracksounds called it " the most entertaining Star Wars score since Return of the Jedi " . Time called The Force Unleashed the seventh best video game of 2008 . The game received GameSpot 's 2008 award for Best Use of a Creative License and was nominated for Best Voice Acting . Gaming Target selected the game as one of their " 40 Games We 'll Still Be Playing From 2008 " . 
 Conversely , Entertainment Weekly called The Force Unleashed the second worst game of 2008 and GameTrailers called it the most disappointing game that year ; it was also a nominee for GameSpot 's Most Disappointing Game recognition . Official Xbox Magazine cited the game 's linear gameplay and lack of multiplayer as reasons the game falls short of being " an all @-@ engrossing Star Wars experience " . <unk> suggested that allowing players to take a hack @-@ and @-@ slash approach means many " will never view the title 's full potential " . IGN and X @-@ Play criticized some boss battles and enemies ' behavior ; GamePro also faulted " disappointing " boss battles and the game 's " uneven " combat . Rather than feeling more powerful as the game progresses , GamePro felt that increases in Starkiller 's powers were dampened by increasingly difficult enemy abilities and positions ; X @-@ Play commented that despite a good level @-@ up system , Starkiller and his enemies are " pretty much on even ground most of the time " . Wired.com , X @-@ Play , and GameSpot criticized the game 's third @-@ person camera and the sequence that requires the player to make Starkiller pull a Star Destroyer out of the sky . Wired.com speculated that LucasArts could have recognized the frustration of the Star Destroyer sequence and removed it , but left it in because they hyped the sequence before the game 's release . Wired.com and GameSpot further criticized the load times and abrupt gameplay @-@ cinematic transitions . GameSpot also faulted " loose " targeting and some visual and audio glitches . IGN , which also identified problems with targeting , speculated that DMM 's processor <unk> limited its use throughout the game , detracting from players ' ability to feel immersed . GameTrailers and IGN were disappointed with the lack of variety within and between levels . X @-@ Play , pointing to " Default Text " as the bonus objective description in the Xbox 360 version 's final mission and other glitches , said it seems the developers one day " just stopped working on the game " . GameSpot cited the port 's lack of visual options and poor framerate as evidence the PC edition had been rushed . 
 IGN described the Jedi Academy expansion as " pretty decent " . GameSpot said LucasArts seems to have acknowledged some of the game 's criticisms in developing the Tatooine expansion , but IGN called the level 's boss fights " a joke " in light of the player 's high Force powers . IGN found the level design in The Ultimate Sith Edition 's Hoth scenario uninteresting , and called the boss fight against Luke Skywalker tough but " not nearly as fun " as it could have been . 
 The demo was the fourth most @-@ played Xbox Live game during the week of August 25 , trailing Grand Theft Auto IV , Halo 3 , and Call of Duty 4 : Modern Warfare ; it was the ninth most @-@ played Xbox Live title throughout all of 2008 . The week it was released , The Force Unleashed was the sixth most @-@ played game on Xbox Live , and it rose to fifth the following week . In its first week on sale in Australia , the PS3 and Xbox 360 versions of The Force Unleashed were the top and second @-@ best sellers , respectively . In the United States , the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 version sold 325 @,@ 000 and 610 @,@ 000 copies , respectively , in September 2008 ; that month , the Xbox 360 version was the best @-@ selling game and the PlayStation 3 version was the fifth best @-@ selling game for their respective consoles . 
 = = = Other platforms = = = 
 Nintendo Power praised the story and the number of lightsaber combos but criticized the game 's easiness and hack @-@ and @-@ slash gameplay . It also praised the Wii version for its story and Force powers , but criticized the game 's lightsaber controls and linear gameplay . GameSpot noticed visual glitches and problematic audio compression that detracted from the Wii version 's " mature and exciting " story , adding that the reduced number of Force @-@ manipulable objects helps mitigate the targeting problems experienced on other platforms . Referring to the Wii remote and <unk> controls , GameSpot also speculated that The Force Unleashed is " possibly the most waggle @-@ heavy " Wii game . Zero Punctuation criticized the Wii version 's graphics and compared lightsaber combat to " trying to follow an aerobics routine with both your arms tied to different windmills " . The ability to upgrade Starkiller 's abilities in the PS2 version , according to IGN , is not as " robust " as it should be , and the game 's targeting system is sometimes frustrating . IGN said the PS2 's real @-@ time cutscene rendering made Starkiller seem emotionless , and that pre @-@ rendered cutscenes would have been better . GameSpot found the DS version 's plot interesting but the storytelling itself " lackluster " . While the DS version is easy , with Starkiller killing enemies " like a hot knife through butter " , GameSpot said the player 's sense of power is not matched by a sense of freedom . GameSpot called the PSP version 's camera " unwieldy " , but added that smaller and less cluttered environments make the targeting system less frustrating than on other platforms . The Wii version was a nominee for multiple Wii @-@ specific awards from IGN in its 2008 video game awards , including Best Story and Best Voice Acting . 
 In the week of its release , the Wii version was the sixth bestselling game in Australia and was second to Wii Fit among games for that platform . The PS2 version was the eighth bestseller in Australia , and both the PS2 and PSP versions were the top sellers on their respective platforms . The DS version was eighth most sold among DS games in Australia . In the United States , the Wii version sold 223 @,@ 000 copies in September 2008 , making it the ninth best @-@ selling game that month . In the United States , the PlayStation 2 version was the 14th best @-@ selling game in September 2008 , selling over 100 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = Creatures of Impulse = 
 Creatures of Impulse is a stage play by the English dramatist W. S. Gilbert , with music by the composer @-@ conductor Alberto <unk> , which Gilbert adapted from his own short story . Both the play and the short story concern an unwanted and ill @-@ tempered old fairy who enchants people to behave in a manner opposite to their natures , with farcical results . 
 The short story was written for The Graphic 's Christmas number of 1870 , and the play was first produced at the Court Theatre on 2 April 1871 . It originally included six songs , but three were eventually cut , and some productions dispensed with the music entirely . While the lyrics survive , the music was never published and is lost . Reviews of the play were mostly positive , though it was criticised for the lack of a significant plot or superstructure to support its comic premise . Nonetheless , reviewers found it enjoyable , and it was a modest success , running for 91 performances and enjoying revivals into the early part of the 20th century . 
 Gilbert had already written a considerable body of stories , plays , poems , criticism and other works before writing Creatures of Impulse . He later wrote the libretti to the famous series of Savoy operas ( composed by Arthur Sullivan ) between 1871 and 1896 . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Writer and composer = = = 
 From the mid @-@ 1860s to the early 1870s , W. S. Gilbert was extremely productive , writing a large quantity of comic verse , theatre reviews and other journalistic pieces , short stories , and dozens of plays and comic operas . His output in 1870 included dozens of his popular comic Bab Ballads ; two blank verse comedies , The Princess and The Palace of Truth ; two comic operas , Our Island Home and The Gentleman in Black ; and various other short stories , comic pieces , and reviews appearing in various periodicals and newspapers . In 1871 he was even busier , producing seven plays and operas . 
 Gilbert 's dramatic writing during this time was evolving from his early musical burlesques to a more restrained style , as exemplified in his string of blank @-@ verse fairy comedies . The first of these was The Palace of Truth , which opened in 1870 to widespread acclaim . He was also developing his unique style of absurdist humour , described as " Topsy @-@ Turvy " , made up of " a combination of wit , irony , <unk> , parody , observation , theatrical technique , and profound intelligence " . The story and play Creatures of Impulse date from the middle of this period , when Gilbert was trying different styles and working towards the mature style of his later work , including the famous series of Gilbert and Sullivan operas . Gilbert described the play as a " musical fairytale " . 
 Italian @-@ born Alberto <unk> was better known as a conductor and professor of singing than as a composer , although he composed several full @-@ length works and numerous vocal pieces in England in the 1860s and 1870s . He is also remembered for his important 1879 textbook entitled Singing . His music for Creatures of Impulse was criticised as " extremely undramatic " , though others found it " pretty " . Much of it was cut from revivals of the piece . 
 = = = Genesis of story and play = = = 
 Gilbert first published Creatures of Impulse as a short story , under the title " A Strange Old Lady " , in the 1870 Christmas number of The Graphic , an illustrated weekly newspaper . He later selected it for inclusion in the only collection of his short stories published during his lifetime , Foggerty 's Fairy and Other Tales ( 1890 ) , at which point he renamed it to match the theatrical adaptation . Gilbert did not originally intend for the story to be turned into a play ; nonetheless , a few months later it was on stage . 
 He adapted the story into a play for Marie Litton 's Royal Court Theatre . Litton took over the proprietorship of the New Chelsea Theatre in 1871 and renamed it the Royal Court . Its opening attraction was the première of Gilbert 's Randall 's Thumb , and when that play proved successful , it was no surprise , as the London Echo pointed out , that she followed it with another work by Gilbert . He often used his previous prose work as the basis of later plays , and " The Strange Old Lady " was no exception . Under the new title of Creatures of Impulse , it opened on 2 April 1871 as a companion piece for Randall 's Thumb . Successful , it lasted through 91 performances and acted as a companion piece to five different plays . Litton continued to commission works from Gilbert , including Gilbert 's adaptation of Charles Dickens ' Great Expectations in 1871 , Broken Hearts in 1875 , various translations of French works , and The Happy Land in 1873 , which portrayed members of the British Government on stage and caused such a scandal that it had an unusually long run . 
 = = = Subsequent productions and publications = = = 
 The play was revived in 1872 at the Court Theatre , in 1873 at the Queen 's Theatre , and in 1874 at the Vaudeville Theatre ( running for over 100 performances ) , all in London . It appears to have gone through several changes during these revivals , the first of which was described on its playbill as a " shortened version " , and the last as an " altered " one . Various versions continued to be produced into the 20th century by amateurs as well as occasional professional groups , such as Ben Greet 's Elizabethan Stage Society of England . An acting edition was published by T. H. Lacy around 1871 . T. H. Lacy was acquired by Samuel French , and the libretto continued to be printed until about 1970 . The piece , still occasionally produced , was part of the International Gilbert and Sullivan Festival in 2006 . 
 Substantial cuts were made in the text by the time the play was collected for Original Plays , Fourth Series ( 1911 ) , the last volume of the only large @-@ scale collection of Gilbert 's stage work . Victorian plays had to be approved by the Lord Chamberlain for decency before they were performed , and the version submitted was then archived , providing a more @-@ or @-@ less complete collection of Victorian theatrical output , now part of the British Library . Comparison of the " licensing copy " of Creatures of Impulse from this archive with that printed in Original Plays reveals lyrics for three additional songs and a second verse to the opening chorus and finale . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Note : The short story takes place at an inn on the road from London to Norwich , but the play calls for Alsatian <unk> . Otherwise , the plots of the short story and play are nearly identical . The summary below uses the names from the play and notes significant changes in plot between the play and short story . There are also various small changes to the order of events , not described . 
 At " The Three Pigeons " inn , it is a good day for some : the miser Boomblehardt has been out collecting rents from his tenants , and Sergeant Klooque , hero of Johannesburg , has just arrived at the inn on leave and may now flirt with any lady he chooses , without the need to pretend they are his relatives to get around his tyrannical Colonel . However , it is not a good day for Martha , the landlady of the inn : staying there is a strange old lady , a mischievous fairy , who refuses to pay or to leave , and who needs neither food nor water . This is substantially cutting into Martha 's profits . She enlists Boomblehardt and Klooque , the cowardly farmer Peter , and her extremely shy niece , Pipette , to help solve this problem . 
 Peter , not cowardly enough to fear an old woman , nor superstitious enough to believe in her power , threatens the old fairy , trying to chase her away . Unfortunately , she does indeed have fairy powers and casts a spell that forces Peter to threaten anyone he encounters or , if alone , to fight imaginary enemies . Peter flees before he can get himself into trouble by threatening anyone bigger than him , calling out challenges as he goes . Sergeant Klooque approaches the old woman next and tries to use his military charm to win her over . It turns out that she hates soldiers , and she strikes out with her stick , making him duck and dodge . She then casts a spell to make his cringing , dodging and ducking permanent , intending that he lose his reputation and be branded a coward . Pipette arrives and watches his behaviour in astonishment . " He 's showing you how he fought the enemy at Johannesburg , " exclaims the old lady , but he replies " No , my dear ! " I 'm showing you how the enemy fought us . This is the way they retreated " . He leaves , cringing and pleading for imaginary attackers to stop as he goes . 
 Pipette then tries to coax the old lady into leaving , kissing and hugging her , and appealing to her ( hoped for ) good nature . The old lady sees through her attempt , and in punishment for her " telling stories " compels her to kiss and cuddle all she meets . She cries out in protest that she 's too shy for such behaviour , but the old lady assures her that she 'll " get over [ her ] shyness after a year or two of that sort of thing " . Boomblehardt approaches next , and Pipette flings herself on him , crying " Kiss me ! " . He obliges . She responds , " How dare you take such a liberty ! You insolent old man ! Kiss me " . And so he does . She boxes his ears , much to his confusion , and then retreats into the inn in tears . 
 Boomblehardt then meets with the old woman . The miser has heard that the strange old lady does not need to eat and offers to help her stay at the inn if she will teach him her secret of how to avoid wasting money on food . He offers her a golden guinea . The fairy decides that someone that miserly must be punished and compels him to continue passing out guineas to all he meets . 
 Soon complications arise from these curses . Boomblehardt finds Sergeant Klooque 's curse hilarious and decides that if he must give out money , the sergeant is as good as any other . The shy Pipette throws herself at Sergeant , who unwillingly ducks and dodges , trying to avoid her . When Peter arrives , he is forced to get into a fight with the sergeant over her , at which , to his surprise , the brave sergeant cowers , dodges , and ducks . Boomblehardt continues passing out guineas , his fortune dribbling away . Then Martha chases her customers out of the inn with a broom : She too has been cursed . Everyone has fallen under the fairy 's ironic curses , forced to behave in a manner contrary to his or her intrinsic nature . 
 Now the old lady makes her crucial mistake : She heads downstairs to check on her mischief , and the cursed group all run up to her to beg her to relent . They all behave as compelled by their curses : Peter threatens her , Pipette tries to kiss her , the sergeant ducks away from her , the miser offers her money , and the landlady keeps trying to chase her out with a broom . The chaos is overwhelming : " In short , the Old Lady , who was much more than a match for each of them taken singly , was overpowered by numbers " . She is left with no choice but to relent , release the spells and leave , vanquished and embarrassed . 
 The short story continues a bit further , making explicit some elements that are only hinted at in the play : 
 The really curious part of this story is that , after everything had been explained , and all had been restored to their normal courses of action , none of the personages involved in it married each other . They were all so annoyed at having made such fools of themselves that they walked out of the inn in different directions , and were never seen or heard of again . 
 Except Peter , who , seeing nothing to be ashamed of in showing such undaunted courage , remained and kept the " Three Pigeons , " and prospered remarkably to the end of his days . 
 That no one marries at the end of the play was a daring innovation for Victorian theatre , and the reviewer from Era mentioned his surprise at this . 
 Synopsis notes : a In the short story , Peter is instead her nephew . This has no effect on the <unk> In the story , Boomblehardt 's equivalent , <unk> , is instead courting the landlady , as her inn is profitable and she has some fine silver ; therefore , he tries to bribe the fairy to leave in order that he may make money elsewhere . 
 = = Characters and original cast = = 
 As was common in Victorian drama , a woman ( Maggie Brennan ) played a young man ( Peter ) . The play 's script assigns dialogue to three numbered villagers in the opening scene . The named character of Jacques has no more lines than any of these and disappears after the first page of the script . Righton , who first played Boomblehardt , portrayed him as a Jewish caricature . Gilbert 's script did not use a Jewish dialect , and historian Jane Stedman suggests that Righton 's increasingly broad portrayal and interpolations show that Gilbert had little control of Righton 's portrayal of the part . 
 = = Songs = = 
 The number of songs varied from production to production . The version submitted to the Lord Chamberlain had six songs , and an early review in The Times wrote that it was " overweighted with a quantity of extremely undramatic music " , though the London Echo thought the music was " pretty " . Nonetheless , the version printed in Gilbert 's Original Plays ( 1911 ) cut these six songs to three , and some productions omitted the songs entirely . 
 The list of songs in the licence copy is : 
 " Did you ever know a lady so particularly shady " – Jacques and villagers 
 " Some people love Spring " – Boomblehardt 
 " At home at last all danger past " – Sergeant Klooque 
 " A soldier in the King 's Hussars " – Sergeant Klooque , Pipette , and Peter 
 " With furious blow " – Peter , Pipette , Sergeant Klooque , and Martha 
 " Finale : Go away , ma 'am , go away , ma 'am " – ensemble 
 While the lyrics survive , none of the music was ever published , and it has been lost . The version in Original Plays omits the second verse of Nos. 1 and 6 and cuts Nos. 2 , 3 , and 5 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Reviews for the play were generally favourable , but it was criticised for its loose structure and lack of a substantial plot . Bell 's Life in London and Sporting Chronicle opined : " Amusing , simple , and ingenious , ' Creatures of Impulse ' is another , though a slight , addition to the successes of its author " . The London Echo compared the piece to a " <unk> of the stamp that was in vogue a hundred years ago , resembling Midas , perhaps , more nearly than that of any modern burlesque " , and wrote that it " contains pretty music , and smart if not witty dialogue , a semi @-@ moral and a semi @-@ plot " . The Graphic concluded that " Although it occupies only an hour in performance , the story is well told and the piece is exceedingly amusing " and praised the acting . Righton received special praise for his portrayal of Boomblehardt : " No character on stage perhaps ever made audiences laugh more in so short a time " . In an 1882 assessment of the piece for amateur theatre societies , M. E. James noted that " The singing is a great addition . It is altogether an amusing bit of nonsense , and very original " . 
 The Times review was less positive than most , saying that although the play was good , more was expected of Gilbert : 
 As noblesse oblige , so does great success become liable to a certain penalty . Had the little piece we have just described been the work of some unknown hand we might have accepted it as an agreeable trifle , displaying more than common ingenuity in its invention , and , with the aid of picturesque costumes , lively setting , and a pretty decoration , gracefully concluding the evening 's entertainment , although overweighted with a quantity of extremely undramatic music . But with the remembrance of The Palace of Truth fresh in our minds , we cannot help a feeling of disappointment when we find the author of that really poetical work coming forward as the writer of another " fairy tale , " so immeasurably inferior .... [ T ] he fairy only enchants her victims to <unk> them at pleasure , without arriving at any result , and we have a good foundation with scarcely any superstructure whatsoever . 
 = Elmer Gedeon = 
 Elmer John Gedeon ( April 15 , 1917 – April 20 , 1944 ) is one of only two Major League Baseball players killed in action during World War II . Gedeon was also a multi @-@ sport star in college at the University of Michigan . He flew several missions in the European Theater of Operations as an officer of the United States Army Air Forces before his final , fatal military operation . 
 At Michigan , Gedeon became an All @-@ American in track and field , and earned varsity letters in both American football and baseball . He tied a world record in the high hurdles in 1938 . After graduating , Gedeon had a stint in Major League Baseball as an outfielder for the Washington Senators . Gedeon spent most of the 1939 and 1940 baseball seasons in the minor leagues , but he was called up to the Senators in September 1939 . 
 Gedeon 's baseball career was cut short when he was drafted by the United States Army in early 1941 . He trained as a bomber pilot , and was decorated for bravery after his plane crashed on a training flight in 1942 . He later served in combat , and was shot down and killed while piloting a B @-@ 26 bomber on a mission over France in April 1944 . 
 = = Growing up in Cleveland = = 
 Born in Cleveland , Gedeon was a star athlete at Cleveland 's West High School , where he was a member of the class of 1935 . He was a 6 ft 4 in ( 1 @.@ 93 m ) athlete who excelled in American football , baseball , and track and field . While ice skating in Brookside Park in Cleveland as a youth , the ice gave way and Gedeon 's cousin plunged through up to his neck . The cousin later recalled : " Elmer slid across the ice on his belly and pulled me out . " Gedeon 's uncle , Joe Gedeon , was a Major League Baseball player who was implicated in the Chicago Black Sox scandal . 
 Gedeon 's surname was common in Cleveland , because many people from Sudetenland , where it was common , settled in Cleveland . The <unk> listed numerous <unk> for biographical research . One finding was that Gedeon 's widow , who was named Laura , later moved to Florida . Another was that his third cousin Charlotte Gedeon said Elmer carried her grandmother 's casket during a funeral . 
 = = Collegiate athletics = = 
 Gedeon enrolled at the University of Michigan in 1935 where he earned varsity letters in three sports : baseball , football , and track and field . Gedeon 's best sport was track and field , in which he was a two @-@ time Big Ten Conference champion in the outdoor 120 @-@ yard high hurdles and indoor 70 @-@ yard high hurdles . In March 1938 , Gedeon tied the American indoor record in the 70 @-@ yard ( 64 m ) high hurdles at the Big Ten meet in Chicago . He went on to tie a world record in the Illinois Relays , and then won the Big Ten title despite an injury . He also led Michigan to victory in the March 1939 Big Ten indoor track and field meet in Chicago . Michigan won both the Big Ten outdoor and indoor championships in 1938 – 1939 . At the 1938 outdoor National Collegiate Athletic Association championships , he placed third in the 120 @-@ yard ( 110 m ) hurdles and became an All @-@ American in track and field . 
 Gedeon also wore # 51 for the Michigan Wolverines football program from 1936 to 1938 , earning three varsity letters in football . In 1937 , a feature article on the Michigan team noted that , in addition to his abilities as an end , " Gedeon can pass and punt , and can run faster than any one on the squad . " In 1938 , Gedeon played end in Coach Fritz Crisler 's first season as Michigan 's football coach . That was the year that Coach Crisler introduced the " winged football helmet " at Michigan . Team captain Fred Janke recalled Gedeon was " a tall , skinny guy " , at 6 feet 4 inches ( 1 @.@ 93 m ) and 196 pounds ( 89 kg ; 14 @.@ 0 st ) . " A rather serious kid . He could kick quite well . They used to pull him back in serious situations and let him punt the ball , because he could punt it a mile . " 
 In baseball , Gedeon played both first base and the outfield for the Michigan Wolverines baseball team . He was a two @-@ time letterman in baseball and batted .320 . 
 = = Professional baseball = = 
 Gedeon signed with the Washington Senators after graduating in the summer of 1939 . He chose to sign with the Senators over a possible appearance as a member of the USA 's track team in the 1940 Summer Olympics . Gedeon was quite a prospect ; Clark Griffith , president of the Senators , mentioned Gedeon to The Sporting News on June 15 , when talking about exciting new players : " We 've got ... a youngster from the University of Michigan named Gedeon . " Gedeon was initially assigned to a minor league baseball team in Orlando , Florida where he played in 67 games in 1939 . In mid @-@ September , he was called up to the major leagues where he appeared in five games as an outfielder with three hits , one run and one RBI . His three hits came in a 10 – 9 win against the Cleveland Indians on September 19 as the starting centerfielder . In his five major league games , he played four games in center field and one in right field . 
 In 1940 , Gedeon attended spring training with the Senators in Orlando , seeking a spot in the outfield or first base . In February 1940 , newspapers ran a wire service photograph of Gedeon hurdling over Senators first baseman Jimmy <unk> , supposedly " by way of warming up " . returned to the minor leagues where he played for the Charlotte Hornets ( in the Piedmont League ) and hit .271 in 131 games . He was again recalled in September , but he made no appearances in any games . It appeared 1941 would see Gedeon moving to play more minor league baseball for either Greenville or Springfield . In the interim Gedeon served as an assistant football coach at Michigan . 
 = = Military service and death in World War II = = 
 Gedeon was drafted into the military in January 1941 , and reported to the Army instead of spring training . He was inducted at Fort Thomas , Kentucky and reported to the Cavalry Replacement Center at Fort Riley on March 18 . He immediately became an acting corporal of Troop B of the First Squadron for the thirteen @-@ week training program . The Bentley Historical Library at the University of Michigan owns a copy of an April 1941 fraternity newsletter with a note from Gedeon . " As you probably know by this time " , he wrote to his Phi Gamma Delta brothers , " Old Ged has been drafted . " On being assigned to the cavalry , Gedeon joked in the letter to his fraternity that " the only horse I ever saw in my life was the one the milkman used . " 
 On October 22 , 1941 , Gedeon was accepted into pilot training despite his size and transferred to the United States Army Air Forces , earning his pilot 's wings and a commission as a second lieutenant at Williams Field , Arizona in May 1942 . He undertook twin @-@ engined bomber training with the 21st Bomb Group at MacDill Field in Tampa , Florida . Gedeon 's usual duties were to aid in European mission planning from a desk . On August 9 , 1942 , Gedeon was flying as the navigator in a B @-@ 25 that crashed in the middle of a swamp on take off from the municipal airport at Raleigh , North Carolina . Gedeon crawled from the burning bomber , and despite burns and three broken ribs , he went back into the wreckage , rescuing a crewmate , Corporal John R. <unk> , who had suffered a broken back and two broken legs . Two crew members died in the crash , and Gedeon spent 12 weeks in the hospital recovering from his broken ribs and burns to his back , hands , face and legs , some requiring skin grafts . He lost 50 pounds ( 22 @.@ 7 kg ) in recovery . First Lt. Gedeon was awarded the Soldier 's Medal for heroism and bravery by Major General St. Clair Streett in what was described as " one of the most colorful ceremonies ever held at MacDill Field . 
 " I 'll be back in baseball after the war " , he had said on his last leave before going overseas . Gedeon 's cousin recalled : " The last time I saw him , he told me , ' I had my accident . It 's going to be good flying from now on . ' He said he had used up his bad luck . " In February 1943 , the Associated Press ran a feature story about Gedeon 's war service under the headline : " Gedeon Will Return to Baseball If War Doesn ’ t Last Too Long . " Gedeon was quoted in the article as saying " he hopes to pick up after the war where he left off . " He added that " it 's a matter of time . " " If the war ends before I ’ m past the playing age I ’ ll return to the game . If I ’ m too old , I ’ ll do something else . " 
 In July 1943 , Gedeon was among personnel from the 21st BG that became the cadre of the <unk> Bomb Squadron , 394th Bombardment Group United States Army Air Forces , formed to train with Martin B @-@ 26 Marauders . At Ardmore Army Air Field , Oklahoma , he participated in group operational training in preparation for combat . In February 1944 , the group was sent to RAF Boreham , England , to become part of the Ninth Air Force . Gedeon was assigned as Squadron Operations Officer and began flying combat missions in Europe . His first mission was to attack an airfield at Beaumont @-@ le @-@ Roger , France , on March 23 , 1944 . 
 On April 20 , 1944 , Gedeon piloted one of 36 B @-@ 26 's that left Boreham in the late afternoon to attack a V @-@ 1 " buzz bomb " site being constructed at <unk> , a village in the Pas @-@ de @-@ Calais near Saint @-@ Omer . Led by Capt. Darrell Lindsey , it was the group 's thirteenth mission . Attacking after dusk from 12 @,@ 000 feet , the group encountered intense and accurate anti @-@ aircraft fire , and Gedeon 's plane was hit by flak below the cockpit just after bombing . Gedeon 's co @-@ pilot , his clothes on fire , was able to parachute from the bomber as it plunged towards the ground , but Gedeon and five other crew members were killed . Gedeon was initially reported as missing in action and it was not until May 1945 that his family received word that his grave had been located in a small British army cemetery at Saint @-@ Pol , France . Gedeon 's body was later returned to the United States , and he was buried at Arlington National Cemetery . 
 Of the 500 @-@ plus major league players who served in the military in WW II , Gedeon and Harry Mink O 'Neill of the Philadelphia Athletics , killed at Iwo Jima , were the only Major League Baseball players killed in World War II . , both at age 27 . The two have become symbols of " baseball 's sacrifice " in the war effort . As the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum proclaims : " <unk> , like every other American citizen , understand the importance of giving one 's self for their country . " After the war , a scholarship in Gedeon 's name was established at the University of Michigan . Gedeon was inducted into the University of Michigan Athletic Hall of Honor for track and baseball in 1983 . He was the sixth Michigan athlete inducted for his contributions in multiple sports . 
 = Lemon Tree ( film ) = 
 Lemon Tree ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> ; Hebrew : <unk> <unk> - Etz Limon ) is a 2008 Israeli drama film directed by Eran Riklis and co @-@ directed by his cousin Ira Riklis . It stars Hiam Abbass , Ali Suliman , Danny <unk> , Rona <unk> @-@ Michael , Tarik Kopty , Amos Lavi , Lana <unk> and Amnon Wolf . The film describes the legal efforts of a Palestinian widow to stop the Israeli Defense Minister , her next door neighbor , from destroying the lemon trees in her family farm . At the same time , she develops a human bond with the minister 's wife . It was released in Israel on 27 March 2008 , and it received a tepid response from Israeli audiences . It was released internationally through IFC Films on 17 April 2009 . From there , the film has achieved critical success and it has received nominations for several awards such as ' Best Actress ' and ' Best Screenwriter ' at the European Film Awards . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Israeli Defense Minister Israel Navon ( Doron <unk> ) moves to a house on the border between Israel and the West Bank , with the building sitting on the Israeli side just next to the dividing line . The Israeli Secret Service views the neighboring lemon grove of Salma Zidane ( Hiam Abbass ) , a Palestinian widow whose family has cared for the area for generations , as a threat to the Minister and his wife . The security forces soon set up a guard post and a barbed wire fence around the grove . They then obtain an order to uproot the lemon trees . 
 Salma feels isolated given that her son has moved to Washington , D.C. and her daughters are now married . The local village elder Abu Kamal ( Makram Khoury ) advises her to give in , but Salma decides to work with the young lawyer Ziad Daud ( Ali Suliman ) . They take their case all the way to the Supreme Court . Mira Navon ( Rona <unk> @-@ Michael ) , the minister 's wife , sympathizes with Salma . The court case receives notable media attention , and Mira gives a news interview that her husband regrets . Mira believes that the Israeli military overreacted , and she also shares Salma 's sense of personal loneliness . Although they never speak , a complex human bond develops between the two women . As the Palestinian cause is dismissed , Mira decides to leave her husband and a concrete wall is built between Salma 's land and the Defense Minister 's house . A final camera shot reveals the lemon trees have been cut down . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Production details = = = 
 Director Eran Riklis covered personal relationships between Arabs and Middle Eastern Jews in his previous films The Syrian Bride and Cup Final . The former film , which also starred Hiam Abbass , achieved widespread success in Israel as well as with international audiences after its 2004 release . This boosted Riklis 's expectations for the future . 
 The plot of Lemon Tree was based on a real life incident . Israeli Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz moved to the border within Israel and the occupied territories and security forces began cutting down the Lemon trees beside his house , arguing that it could be used by terrorists as a hiding place . The Palestinian family who owned the trees sued the minister and took the case all the way to the Israeli Supreme Court . They lost , and their trees had to be cut down . Riklis watched a news blurb about the case online . He then developed the story further in a fictional setting . Riklis explicitly designed the protagonist 's part for actress Hiam Abbass . 
 The characters in the film speak Arabic and Hebrew . Riklis ' personal company , Eran Riklis Production , filmed the movie . It was shot in the cities of <unk> and Ramallah and the <unk> refugee camp as well on location at and around the Supreme Court of Israel building in Sha <unk> <unk> Street , Jerusalem . Salon.com film critic Andrew O 'Hehir has commented that " Riklis forges into areas other Israeli filmmakers won 't venture " . 
 = = = Subject material = = = 
 Riklis designed the film to be essentially apolitical , focusing on character development rather than exploring the issues of the Israeli @-@ Palestinian conflict . He has said that he created a ' fairy tale quality ' to the film in which the audience can sympathize with all of the people featured in it . He stated that " I wanted to populate this film with a lot of faces and give each character their own moment of grace , even when , on the surface , it 's one of the ' bad guys , ' so to speak ... This film does address the ugly side of occupation perhaps , yet no blood is spilled . " A fictional representation of the Israeli @-@ West bank barrier punctuates the film throughout . 
 Critic Andrew O 'Hehir of Salon.com has argued that Riklis " depicts all versions of Middle Eastern authority with a cheerful , agnostic cynicism " , portraying the Palestinian government as " corrupt and obsessed with status and protocol " and the Israeli government as " hypocritical and mindlessly bureaucratic . " V.A. Musetto of The New York Post argued that the movie expresses Riklis ' opposition to Israeli policies of confiscation of Palestinian land . Critic Hugh Hart of San Francisco Chronicle thought that the movie displayed a natural sympathy towards its protagonist . Mark Jenkins of NPR commented that some of the ironic moments in the film depicted Palestinian resistance to Israelis as " more concerned with preserving machismo than with producing results " . 
 The New York Times wrote that 
 Although “ Lemon Tree ” doesn ’ t overtly take sides in the Israeli @-@ Palestinian conflict , it portrays the Israelis , who wield more military power , as abusive and arrogant in the way that any country with superior weapons and armies inevitably appears . The security guards on Navon ’ s property behave like strutting goons — only too eager to turn their guns on the first thing that moves — or clowns , like the watchtower guard nicknamed Quickie , who dozes off while on duty . 
 Riklis tried not to make the film explicitly feminist , with the female characters portrayed more sympathetically than the male ones . However , he has said that it can be interpreted that way by viewers . NPR 's Mark Jenkins has stated that the film 's bittersweet ending depicted the difficult status of women in Palestine as well as Palestinian @-@ Israeli relations . Chris Cabin of the AMC Network criticized the film as being too " <unk> @-@ centric " and as having a uniformly negative treatment of its male characters . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The film was released within Israel on 27 March 2008 , and it was released internationally through IFC Films on 17 April 2009 . The film has been very well received internationally . Rotten Tomatoes calculated a critical score of 91 and describes the consensus as : " A positive and personal Israeli film that offers an understated and thought @-@ provoking vision of the West Bank troubles . " It also earned an average critical score of 73 , a generally favorable response , on Metacritic . 
 The New York Times named it a ' Critics Pick ' of 2009 . Andrew O 'Hehir of Salon praised the film and called its production a sign " of hope in the impenetrable impasse of the contemporary Middle East " . Benjamin <unk> of The Daily Telegraph labeled it " absorbing , sensitive , beautifully @-@ shot " and drew favorable comparisons with Erin Brockovich . Mark Jenkins of National Public Radio stated that it featured " subtle performances by its striking stars " and served as a parable about border issues . AMC 's Chris Cabin criticized the movie , arguing that its director " seems not to have the faintest idea of how to properly approach the subject " , because the film is , in Cabin 's view , " unabashedly pro @-@ Palestine " . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 According to Box Office Mojo , the film has brought in a total of $ 6 @,@ 628 @,@ 437 worldwide . In the United States , it brought in $ 569 @,@ 672 in its seventeen week run . It premiered on April 17 , 2009 . 
 The film performed poorly with Israeli audiences despite the positive reaction in other areas . Riklis has said that Israelis have the " false impression " that the film is pro @-@ Palestinian and polemical . The Palestinian reaction has been very positive , according to Riklis . He expected a far more positive reception in Israel given the success of his previous film , The Syrian Bride , in 2004 . The film did receive praise from Hannah Brown of The Jerusalem Post , who stated that " it 's hard to ask for more " and " you will leave the theater craving a glass of the lemonade Salma prepares so lovingly in several scenes " . Ha <unk> also praised the movie before its release . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 In the Berlin Film Festival , Riklis won a ' Panorama Audience Award ' . In the Asia Pacific Screen Awards , Abbass won for ' Best Performance by an Actress ' and Riklis won , along with collaborator Suha <unk> , for ' Best Screenplay ' . <unk> and Riklis were nominated for ' Best Screenwriter ' at the European Film Awards , and Abbass was nominated for ' Best Actress ' . In the Israeli Film Academy , Abbass won for ' Best Actress ' . The film 's Miguel <unk> was nominated for ' Best Art Direction ' , Rona Doron for ' Best Costume Design ' , <unk> Asher for ' Best Editing ' , Habib <unk> for ' Best Music ' , Gil Toren and As Milo for ' Best Sound ' , and Riklis for ' Best Director ' . 
 = Caroline of Ansbach = 
 Wilhelmina Charlotte Caroline of Brandenburg @-@ Ansbach ( 1 March 1683 – 20 November 1737 ) , commonly known as Caroline of Ansbach , was Queen of Great Britain as the wife of King George II . 
 Her father , Margrave John Frederick of Brandenburg @-@ Ansbach , belonged to a branch of the House of Hohenzollern and was the ruler of a small German state , the Principality of Ansbach . Caroline was orphaned at a young age and moved to the enlightened court of her guardians , King Frederick I and Queen Sophia Charlotte of Prussia . At the Prussian court , her previously limited education was widened , and she adopted the liberal outlook possessed by Sophia Charlotte , who became her good friend and whose views influenced Caroline all her life . 
 As a young woman , Caroline was much sought @-@ after as a bride . After rejecting the suit of the nominal King of Spain , Archduke Charles of Austria , she married George Augustus , the third @-@ in @-@ line to the British throne and heir apparent to the Electorate of Hanover . They had eight children , seven of whom grew to adulthood . 
 Caroline moved permanently to Britain in 1714 when her husband became Prince of Wales . As Princess of Wales , she joined her husband in rallying political opposition to his father King George I. In 1717 , her husband was expelled from court after a family row . Caroline came to be associated with Robert Walpole , an opposition politician who was a former government minister . Walpole rejoined the government in 1720 , and Caroline 's husband and King George I reconciled publicly , on Walpole 's advice . Over the next few years , Walpole rose to become the leading minister . 
 Caroline succeeded as queen and <unk> consort in 1727 , when her husband became King George II . Her eldest son , Frederick , became Prince of Wales . He was a focus for the opposition , like his father before him , and Caroline 's relationship with him was strained . As princess and as queen , Caroline was known for her political influence , which she exercised through and for Walpole . Her tenure included four regencies during her husband 's stays in Hanover , and she is credited with strengthening the Hanoverian dynasty 's place in Britain during a period of political instability . Caroline was widely mourned following her death in 1737 , not only by the public but also by the King , who refused to remarry . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Caroline was born on 1 March 1683 at Ansbach , the daughter of John Frederick , Margrave of Brandenburg @-@ Ansbach , and his second wife , Princess Eleonore Erdmuthe of Saxe @-@ Eisenach . Her father was the ruler of one of the smallest German states ; he died of smallpox at the age of 32 , when Caroline was three years old . Caroline and her only full sibling , her younger brother Margrave William Frederick , left Ansbach with their mother , who returned to her native Eisenach . In 1692 , Caroline 's widowed mother was pushed into an unhappy marriage with the Elector of Saxony , and she and her two children moved to the Saxon court at Dresden . Eleonore Erdmuthe was widowed again two years later , after her unfaithful husband contracted smallpox from his mistress . Eleonore remained in Saxony for another two years , until her death in 1696 . The orphaned Caroline and William Frederick returned to Ansbach to stay with their elder half @-@ brother , Margrave George Frederick II . George Frederick was a youth with little interest in parenting a girl , and so Caroline soon moved to <unk> outside Berlin , where she entered into the care of her new guardians , Frederick , Elector of Brandenburg , and his wife , Sophia Charlotte , who had been a friend of Eleonore Erdmuthe . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Frederick and Sophia Charlotte became king and queen of Prussia in 1701 . The queen was the daughter of Dowager Electress Sophia of Hanover , and the sister of George , Elector of Hanover . She was renowned for her intelligence and strong character , and her uncensored and liberal court attracted a great many scholars , including philosopher Gottfried Leibniz . Caroline was exposed to a lively intellectual environment quite different from anything she had experienced previously . Before she began her education under Sophia Charlotte 's care , Caroline had received little formal education ; her handwriting remained poor throughout her life . With her lively mind , Caroline developed into a scholar of considerable ability . She and Sophia Charlotte developed a strong relationship in which Caroline was treated as a surrogate daughter ; the queen once declared Berlin was " a desert " without Caroline whenever she left temporarily for Ansbach . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 An intelligent and attractive woman , Caroline was much sought @-@ after as a bride . Dowager Electress Sophia called her " the most agreeable Princess in Germany " . She was considered for the hand of Archduke Charles of Austria , who was a candidate for the throne of Spain and later became Holy Roman Emperor . Charles made official overtures to her in 1703 , and the match was encouraged by King Frederick of Prussia . After some consideration , Caroline refused in 1704 , as she would not convert from Lutheranism to Catholicism . Early in the following year , Queen Sophia Charlotte died on a visit to her native Hanover . Caroline was devastated , writing to Leibniz , " The calamity has overwhelmed me with grief and sickness , and it is only the hope that I may soon follow her that consoles me . " 
 In June 1705 , Queen Sophia Charlotte 's nephew , George Augustus , the electoral prince of Hanover , visited the Ansbach court , supposedly incognito , to inspect Caroline , as his father the Elector did not want his son to enter into a loveless arranged marriage as he himself had . The nephew of three childless uncles , George Augustus was under pressure to marry and father an heir to prevent endangering the Hanoverian succession . He had heard reports of Caroline 's " incomparable beauty and mental attributes " . He immediately took a liking to her " good character " and the British envoy reported that George Augustus " would not think of anybody else after her " . For her part , Caroline was not fooled by the prince 's disguise , and found her suitor attractive . He was the heir apparent of his father 's Electorate of Hanover and third @-@ in @-@ line to the British throne of his distant cousin Queen Anne , after his grandmother Dowager Electress Sophia and his father the Elector . 
 On 22 August 1705 , Caroline arrived in Hanover for her wedding to George Augustus ; they were married that evening in the palace chapel at Herrenhausen . By May of the following year , Caroline was pregnant , and her first child Prince Frederick was born on 20 January 1707 . A few months after the birth , in July , Caroline fell seriously ill with smallpox followed by pneumonia . Her baby was kept away from her , but George Augustus remained at her side devotedly , and caught and survived the infection himself . Over the next seven years , Caroline had three more children , Anne , Amelia , and Caroline , all of whom were born in Hanover . 
 George Augustus and Caroline had a successful and loving marriage , though he continued to keep mistresses , as was customary for the time . Caroline was well aware of his infidelities , as they were well known and he told her about them . His two best @-@ known mistresses were Henrietta Howard , later Countess of Suffolk , and , from 1735 , Amalie von Wallmoden , Countess of Yarmouth . Howard was one of Caroline 's Women of the Bedchamber and became Mistress of the Robes when her husband inherited a peerage in 1731 ; she retired in 1734 . In contrast with her mother @-@ in @-@ law and husband , Caroline was known for her marital fidelity ; she never made any embarrassing scenes nor did she take lovers . She preferred her husband 's mistresses to be ladies @-@ in @-@ waiting , as that way she believed she could keep a closer eye on them . 
 The succession of her husband 's family to the British throne was still insecure , as Queen Anne 's half @-@ brother James Stuart contested the Hanoverian claim , and Queen Anne and Caroline 's grandmother @-@ in @-@ law Dowager Electress Sophia had fallen out . Anne refused permission for any of the Hanoverians to visit Britain in her lifetime . Caroline wrote to Leibniz , " I accept the comparison which you draw , though all too flattering , between me and Queen Elizabeth as a good omen . Like Elizabeth , the Electress 's rights are denied her by a jealous sister [ Queen Anne ] , and she will never be sure of the English crown until her accession to the throne . " In June 1714 , Dowager Electress Sophia died in Caroline 's arms at the age of 84 , and Caroline 's father @-@ in @-@ law became heir presumptive to Queen Anne . Just weeks later , Anne died and the Elector of Hanover was proclaimed as her successor , becoming George I of Great Britain . 
 = = Princess of Wales = = 
 George Augustus sailed to England in September 1714 , and Caroline and two of her daughters followed in October . Her journey across the North Sea from The Hague to Margate was the only sea voyage she took in her life . Their young son , Prince Frederick , remained in Hanover for the rest of George I 's reign to be brought up by private tutors . 
 On the accession of George I in 1714 , Caroline 's husband automatically became Duke of Cornwall and Duke of Rothesay . Shortly afterwards , he was invested as Prince of Wales , whereupon she became Princess of Wales . Caroline was the first woman to receive the title at the same time as her husband received his . She was the first Princess of Wales for over two hundred years , the last one being Catherine of Aragon . As George I had repudiated his wife Sophia Dorothea of Celle in 1694 prior to his becoming King of Great Britain , there was no queen consort , and Caroline was the highest @-@ ranking woman in the kingdom . George Augustus and Caroline made a concerted effort to " anglicise " by acquiring knowledge of England 's language , people , politics and customs . Two separate courts developed with strong contrasts ; the old king 's had German courtiers and government ministers , while the Wales 's court attracted English nobles out of favour with the King , and was considerably more popular with the British people . George Augustus and Caroline gradually became centres of the political opposition to the King . 
 Two years after their arrival in England , Caroline suffered a stillbirth , which her friend the Countess of Bückeburg blamed on the incompetence of English doctors , but the following year she had another son , Prince George William . At the baptism in November 1717 , her husband fell out with his father over the choice of godparents , leading to the couple 's placement under house arrest at St. James 's Palace prior to their banishment from court . Caroline was originally allowed to stay with their children , but refused as she believed her place was with her husband . She and her husband moved into Leicester House , while their children remained in the care of the King . Caroline fell sick with worry , and fainted during a secret visit to her children made without the King 's approval . By January , the King had relented and allowed Caroline unrestricted access . In February , Prince George William fell ill , and the King allowed both George Augustus and Caroline to see him at Kensington Palace without any conditions . When the baby died , a post @-@ mortem was conducted to prove that the cause of death was disease ( a polyp on the heart ) rather than the separation from his mother . Further tragedy occurred in 1718 , when Caroline miscarried at Richmond Lodge , her country residence . Over the next few years , Caroline had three more children : William , Mary and Louise . 
 Leicester House became a frequent meeting place for the ministry 's political opponents . Caroline struck up a friendship with politician Sir Robert Walpole , a former minister in the Whig government who led a disgruntled faction of the party . In April 1720 , Walpole 's wing of the Whig party reconciled with the governing wing , and Walpole and Caroline helped to effect a reconciliation between the King and her husband for the sake of public unity . Caroline wanted to regain her three eldest daughters , who remained in the care of the King , and thought the reconciliation would lead to their return , but negotiations came to nothing . George Augustus came to believe that Walpole had tricked him into the reconciliation as part of a scheme to gain power . The prince was isolated politically when Walpole 's Whigs joined the government , and Leicester House played host to literary figures and wits , such as John Arbuthnot and Jonathan Swift , rather than politicians . Arbuthnot told Swift that Caroline had enjoyed his Gulliver 's Travels , particularly the tale of the crown prince who wore one high @-@ heel and one low @-@ heel in a country where the King and his party wore low heels , and the opposition wore high ones : a barely veiled reference to the political leanings of the Prince of Wales . 
 Caroline 's intellect far outstripped her husband 's , and she read avidly . She established an extensive library at St. James 's Palace . As a young woman , she corresponded with Gottfried Leibniz , the intellectual colossus who was courtier and factotum to the House of Hanover . She later facilitated the Leibniz @-@ Clarke correspondence , arguably the most important philosophy of physics discussion of the 18th century . She helped to popularise the practice of variolation ( an early type of immunisation ) , which had been witnessed by Lady Mary Wortley Montagu and Charles Maitland in Constantinople . At the direction of Caroline , six condemned prisoners were offered the chance to undergo variolation instead of execution : they all survived , as did six orphan children given the same treatment as a further test . Convinced of its medical value , Caroline had her children Amelia , Caroline and Frederick inoculated against smallpox in the same manner . In praising her support for smallpox inoculation , Voltaire wrote of her , " I must say that despite all her titles and crowns , this princess was born to encourage the arts and the well @-@ being of mankind ; even on the throne she is a benevolent philosopher ; and she has never lost an opportunity to learn or to manifest her generosity . " 
 = = Queen and regent = = 
 Caroline became queen consort on the death of her father @-@ in @-@ law in 1727 , and she was crowned alongside her husband at Westminster Abbey on 11 October that year . She was the first queen consort to be crowned since Anne of Denmark in 1603 . Though George II denounced Walpole as a " rogue and rascal " over the terms of the reconciliation with his father , Caroline advised her husband to retain Walpole as the leading minister . Walpole commanded a substantial majority in Parliament and George II had little choice but to accept him or risk ministerial instability . Walpole secured a civil list payment of £ 100 @,@ 000 a year for Caroline , and she was given both Somerset House and Richmond Lodge . Courtier Lord Hervey called Walpole " the Queen 's minister " in recognition of their close relationship . For the next ten years , Caroline had immense influence . She persuaded the King to adopt policies at the behest of Walpole , and persuaded Walpole against taking inflammatory actions . Caroline had absorbed the liberal opinions of her mentor , Queen Sophia Charlotte of Prussia , and supported clemency for the Jacobites ( supporters of the rival Stuart claim to the throne ) , freedom of the press , and freedom of speech in Parliament . 
 Over the next few years , she and her husband fought a constant battle against their eldest son , Frederick , Prince of Wales , who had been left behind in Germany when they came to England . He joined the family in 1728 , by which time he was an adult , had mistresses and debts , and was fond of gambling and practical jokes . He opposed his father 's political beliefs , and complained of his lack of influence in government . The Regency Act 1728 made Caroline rather than Frederick regent when her husband was in Hanover for five months from May 1729 . During her regency , a diplomatic incident with Portugal ( where a British ship had been seized on the Tagus ) was defused , and the negotiation of the Treaty of Seville between Britain and Spain was concluded . From May 1732 , she was regent for four months while George II was again away in Hanover . An investigation into the penal system uncovered widespread abuses , including cruel treatment and conspiracy in the escape of wealthy convicts . Caroline pressed Walpole for reform , largely unsuccessfully . In March 1733 , Walpole introduced an unpopular excise bill to parliament , which the Queen supported , but it gathered such strong opposition that it was eventually dropped . 
 Caroline 's entire life in Britain was spent in the South @-@ East of England in or around London . As queen , she continued to surround herself with artists , writers and intellectuals . She collected jewellery , especially cameos and <unk> , acquired important portraits and miniatures , and enjoyed the visual arts . She commissioned works such as terracotta busts of the kings and queens of England from Michael Rysbrack , and supervised a more naturalistic design of the royal gardens by William Kent and Charles Bridgeman . In 1728 , she rediscovered sets of sketches by Leonardo da Vinci and Hans Holbein that had been hidden in a drawer since the reign of William III . 
 Caroline 's eldest daughter Anne married William IV of Orange in 1734 , and moved with her husband to the Netherlands . Caroline wrote to her daughter of her " indescribable " sadness at the parting . Anne soon felt homesick , and travelled back to England when her husband went on campaign . Eventually , her husband and father commanded her to return to Holland . 
 = = Final years = = 
 In mid @-@ 1735 , Frederick , Prince of Wales , was further dismayed when Caroline , rather than himself , again acted as regent while the King was absent in Hanover . The King and Queen arranged Frederick 's marriage , in 1736 , to Princess Augusta of Saxe @-@ Gotha . Shortly after the wedding , George went to Hanover , and Caroline resumed her role as " Protector of the Realm " . As regent , Caroline considered the reprieve of Captain John Porteous , who had been convicted of murder in Edinburgh . Before she could act , a mob stormed the jail where he was held and killed him . Caroline was appalled . The King 's absences abroad were leading to unpopularity , and in late 1736 he made plans to return , but his ship was caught in poor weather , and it was rumoured that he had been lost at sea . Caroline was devastated , and disgusted by the insensitivity of her son , who hosted a grand dinner while the gale was blowing . During her regency , the Prince of Wales attempted to start a number of quarrels with his mother , whom he saw as a useful proxy to irritate the King . George eventually returned in January 1737 . 
 Frederick applied to Parliament unsuccessfully for an increased financial allowance that had hitherto been denied him by the King , and public disagreement over the money drove a further wedge between parents and son . On the advice of Walpole , Frederick 's allowance was raised in an attempt to mitigate further conflict , but by less than he had asked . In June 1737 , Frederick informed his parents that Augusta was pregnant , and due to give birth in October . In fact , Augusta 's due date was earlier and a peculiar episode followed in July in which the prince , on discovering that his wife had gone into labour , sneaked her out of Hampton Court Palace in the middle of the night , to ensure that the King and Queen could not be present at the birth . George and Caroline were horrified . Traditionally , royal births were witnessed by members of the family and senior courtiers to guard against supposititious children , and Augusta had been forced by her husband to ride in a rattling carriage for an hour and a half while heavily pregnant and in pain . With a party including two of her daughters and Lord Hervey , the Queen raced over to St. James 's Palace , where Frederick had taken Augusta . Caroline was relieved to discover that Augusta had given birth to a " poor , ugly little she @-@ mouse " rather than a " large , fat , healthy boy " as the pitiful nature of the baby made a supposititious child unlikely . The circumstances of the birth deepened the estrangement between mother and son . According to Lord Hervey , she once remarked after seeing Frederick , " Look , there he goes — that wretch ! — that villain ! — I wish the ground would open this moment and sink the monster to the lowest hole in hell ! " 
 In the final years of her life , Caroline was troubled by gout in her feet , but more seriously she had suffered an umbilical hernia at the birth of her final child in 1724 . On 9 November 1737 , she felt an intense pain and , after struggling through a formal reception , took to her bed . Her womb had ruptured . Over the next few days she was bled , purged , and operated on , without anaesthetic , but there was no improvement in her condition . The King refused Frederick permission to see his mother , a decision with which she complied ; she sent her son a message of forgiveness through Walpole . She asked her husband to remarry after her death , which he rejected saying he would take only mistresses ; she replied " Ah , mon Dieu , <unk> n <unk> pas " ( " My God , that doesn 't prevent it " ) . On 17 November , her strangulated bowel burst . She died on 20 November 1737 at St. James 's Palace . 
 She was buried in Westminster Abbey on 17 December . Frederick was not invited to the funeral . George Frideric Handel composed an anthem for the occasion , The Ways of Zion Do Mourn / Funeral Anthem for Queen Caroline . The King arranged for a pair of matching coffins with removable sides , so that when he followed her to the grave ( 23 years later ) , they could lie together again . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Caroline was widely mourned . The Protestants lauded her moral example , and even the Jacobites acknowledged her compassion , and her intervention on the side of mercy for their compatriots . During her lifetime her refusal to convert when offered the hand of Archduke Charles was used to portray her as a strong adherent to Protestantism . For example , John Gay wrote of Caroline in A Letter to A Lady ( 1714 ) : 
 The pomp of titles easy faith might shake , 
 She scorn 'd an empire for religion 's sake : 
 For this , on earth , the British crown is giv 'n , 
 And an immortal crown decreed in <unk> 'n . 
 She was widely seen by both the public and the court as having great influence over her husband . A satirical verse of the period went : 
 You may strut , dapper George , but ' twill all be in vain , 
 We all know ' tis Queen Caroline , not you , that reign – 
 You govern no more than Don Philip of Spain . 
 Then if you would have us fall down and adore you , 
 Lock up your fat spouse , as your dad did before you . 
 The memoirs of the eighteenth century , particularly those of John , Lord Hervey , fed perceptions that Caroline and Walpole governed her husband . Peter Quennell wrote that Hervey was the " chronicler of this remarkable coalition " and that she was Hervey 's " heroine " . Using such sources , biographers of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries credit her with aiding the establishment of the House of Hanover in Britain , in the face of Jacobite opposition . R. L. Arkell wrote " by her acumen and geniality , [ Caroline ] ensured the dynasty 's rooting itself in England " , and W. H. Wilkins said her " gracious and dignified personality , her lofty ideals and pure life did much to counteract the unpopularity of her husband and father @-@ in @-@ law , and redeem the early Georgian era from utter grossness . " Although modern historians tend to believe that Hervey , Wilkins and Arkell have overestimated her importance , it is nevertheless probable that Caroline of Ansbach was one of the most influential consorts in British history . 
 = = Titles , styles , honours and arms = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 1683 – 1705 : Her Serene Highness Princess Caroline of Brandenburg @-@ Ansbach 
 1705 – 1714 : Her Serene Highness The Electoral Princess of Hanover 
 1714 – 1727 : Her Royal Highness The Princess of Wales 
 1727 – 1737 : Her Majesty The Queen 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 Caroline County in the British Colony of Virginia was named in her honour when it was formed in 1727 . 
 = = = Arms = = = 
 The royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom are impaled with those of her father , John Frederick , Margrave of Brandenburg @-@ Ansbach . The arms of her father were quarterly of fifteen , 1st , per fess gules and argent , within a bordure counter @-@ changed of the same ( for Magdeburg ) ; 2nd , argent , an eagle displayed sable , crowned or ; 3rd , or , a griffin segreant gules , crowned ; 4th and 5th , argent , a griffin segreant gules ; 6th , or , a griffin segreant sable ; 7th , argent , an eagle displayed sable ( for <unk> ) ; 8th , per pale argent and gules within a bordure counter @-@ changed of the same ( for Halberstadt ) ; 9th , argent , an eagle displayed sable ; 10th , or , a lion rampant sable , crowned , within a bordure <unk> argent and gules ( for Nuremberg ) ; 11th , gules , two keys in saltire or ( for Minden ) ; 12th , quarterly argent and sable ( for Hohenzollern ) ; 13th , the field gules , the figure argent ; 14th , per fess gules and argent ; 15th , plain field of gules ( for right of regalia ) ; overall an inescutcheon , argent , an eagle displayed gules ( for Brandenburg ) . 
 = = Issue = = 
 Caroline 's ten pregnancies resulted in eight live births , of whom one died in infancy , and seven lived to adulthood . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = HMS Empress ( 1914 ) = 
 HMS Empress was a seaplane carrier of the Royal Navy ( RN ) that served during World War I. Converted from the Cross @-@ Channel packet ship Empress , the ship 's aircraft conducted aerial reconnaissance , observation and bombing missions in the North Sea and Eastern Mediterranean . During the last year of the war , she conducted anti @-@ submarine patrols in the Mediterranean . Empress was returned to her owners in 1919 and was then sold to a French company in 1923 . She was scrapped in 1933 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Empress had an overall length of 323 feet ( 98 @.@ 5 m ) , a beam of 41 feet ( 12 @.@ 5 m ) , and a draught of 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) . She displaced 2 @,@ 540 long tons ( 2 @,@ 580 t ) and was rated at 1 @,@ 694 gross register tons ( GRT ) . Each of the ship 's three sets of direct @-@ drive steam turbines drove one propeller shaft . The ship 's six boilers generated enough steam to produce 8 @,@ 800 shaft horsepower ( 6 @,@ 600 kW ) from the turbines . The ship had a designed speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) , but she made a speed of 22 @.@ 26 knots ( 41 @.@ 23 km / h ; 25 @.@ 62 mph ) during her sea trials with 8 @,@ 872 shaft horsepower ( 6 @,@ 616 kW ) . Empress carried 425 tonnes ( 418 long tons ) of coal , enough to give her a range of 1 @,@ 355 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 509 km ; 1 @,@ 559 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . 
 = = Service = = 
 Built as a fast packet for the South East and Chatham Railway Co . , Empress was requisitioned for service during World War I by the Admiralty on 11 August 1914 , and was commissioned on 25 August . During that month , the ship transported equipment for the Eastchurch Squadron of the Royal Naval Air Service to Ostend , Belgium . Beginning on 30 August , she was converted by Chatham Dockyard to carry and operate three seaplanes . One aircraft was stowed forward and two aft , housed in canvas hangars , and handled with newly fitted cargo booms . During her career with the RN , the ship operated Fairey Hamble Baby , Short Admiralty Type 74 , Short Type 184 , Sopwith Schneider and Baby floatplanes . Two or three quick @-@ firing ( QF ) two @-@ pounder guns also were fitted at this time . Upon completion of the modifications on 30 September , Empress was assigned to the Harwich Force along with Engadine and Riviera . On Christmas Day 1914 , nine aircraft from all three ships took part in the Cuxhaven Raid on hangars housing Zeppelin airships . Seven of the nine seaplanes successfully took off for the attack , but they inflicted little damage . Only three of the aircraft returned to be recovered , but the crews of the other three ditched safely and were recovered by a British submarine and the Dutch trawler Marta van Hattem . 
 From 9 May to 18 July 1915 , the ship was modified by Cunard at Liverpool with a permanent , four @-@ aircraft , hangar in the rear superstructure and a pair of cranes were mounted at the rear of the hangar to hoist the seaplanes in and out of the water . The 2 @-@ pounders were apparently removed during this refit and four QF 12 @-@ pounder 12 cwt guns , each with 130 rounds , and two Vickers QF 3 @-@ pounder anti @-@ aircraft guns , each with 65 rounds , were fitted . Empress was transferred afterwards to Queenstown for the rest of the year , before moving to the Mediterranean . She arrived there in January 1916 and was assigned to the East Indies and Egypt Seaplane Squadron with the carriers Raven II , Anne , and Ben @-@ my @-@ Chree . The squadron was under the command of the General Officer Commanding , Egypt and its primary duty was watch and to attack Turkish positions and movements in southern Palestine and the Sinai in early 1916 . In April , Empress was detached from the squadron to support operations off the Aegean coast of Bulgaria , where her aircraft observed for several naval bombardments . After a refit at Genoa , the ship rejoined the squadron and supported operations off the Syrian and Palestinian coasts until November . In January 1918 , she was assigned anti @-@ submarine duties , first at Port Said and later at Gibraltar . 
 She was returned to her owners in November 1919 and was sold to the Société <unk> de <unk> et d <unk> of France in 1923 . On 12 January 1926 , Empress collided with the British schooner John Gibson in the English Channel and sank her . Empress was scrapped in France in 1933 . 
 = The Boat Race 1926 = 
 The 78th Boat Race took place on 27 March 1926 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Umpired by former rower Frederick I. Pitman , Cambridge won by five lengths in a time of 19 minutes 29 seconds in the largest winning margin since 1912 . It was Cambridge 's third consecutive victory and took the overall record in the event to 40 – 37 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities and followed throughout the United Kingdom and worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1925 race as Oxford became waterlogged , with Oxford leading overall with 40 victories to Cambridge 's 36 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Oxford 's coaches were H. R. Baker ( who rowed for the Dark Blues in the 1908 and 1909 races ) , G. C. Bourne who had rowed for the university in the 1882 and 1883 races , and A. V. Douglas ( who took part in the 1922 and 1925 races ) . Cambridge were coached by William Dudley Ward ( who had rowed in 1897 , 1899 and 1900 races ) , Francis Escombe , David Alexander Wauchope ( who had rowed in the 1895 race ) , and H. W. Willis . For the eighteenth and final year the umpire was Old Etonian Frederick I. Pitman who had rowed for Cambridge in the 1884 , 1885 and 1886 races . He would be replaced in the following year 's race by Charles Burnell . 
 Cambridge opted to arrive a fortnight later than usual at the Thames , and forewent their typical practice at Ely . According to former Oxford rower and author George Drinkwater , the Light Blues " showed great promise " only to be struck by measles , forcing a late replacement in the boat . Oxford , while " not so pleasing in appearance " were considered to be favourites for the race . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 12 st 10 @.@ 5 lb ( 80 @.@ 8 kg ) , 6 @.@ 75 pounds ( 3 @.@ 1 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Four of the Cambridge crew had taken part in the Boat Race previously , including W. F. Smith , G. H. Ambler , and cox J. A. Brown , all of whom were participating in their third consecutive event . The crew also included E. C. Hamilton @-@ Russell who had won three finals at the 1925 Henley Royal Regatta . Oxford saw three rowers return to the boat in J. D. W. Thomson , E. C. T. Edwards and C. E. Pitman . Cambridge 's Australian number six J. B. Bell was the only non @-@ British participant registered in the race . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Cambridge . In conditions described by Drinkwater as " excellent " with " smooth water but only a moderate tide " , Pitman started the race at 12 : 27 pm . Although Oxford marginally out @-@ rated their opponents , the crews were level after the first minute . As the crews passed the Mile Post , the Dark Blues held a small lead which they had extended to around half a length by Harrods Furniture Depository . Cambridge made a push and reduced the deficit to a quarter @-@ length by the time the boats passed below Hammersmith Bridge . Following a series of spurts around the outside of the bend in the river , Cambridge gained to draw level by the HMS Stork . 
 The Dark Blues ' rhythm faltered and their number five missed a stroke as they passed Chiswick Eyot , allowing Cambridge to move away to take a clear lead . Two lengths ahead by Chiswick Steps , the Light Blues increased their stroke rate and pulled further away to win by five lengths , the largest winning margin since the 1912 race , in a time of 19 minutes and 29 seconds . It was their third consecutive victory and their seventh in eight races . 
 = Burn the Bastards = 
 " Burn the Bastards " is a 1988 song by Bill Drummond and Jimmy Cauty as The Justified Ancients of Mu Mu ( The JAMs ) , from their second , and final before changing names , album Who Killed The JAMs ? . The " bastards " of the title are copies of The JAMs first album , 1987 ( What the Fuck Is Going On ? ) , which Drummond and Cauty burnt on a bonfire in a Swedish field after a copyright dispute with the Swedish pop group ABBA . The song ( which is based upon Sly and the Family Stone 's " Dance to the Music " ) was released as a single , along with a separate single of remixes titled " Burn the Beat " . Both singles were credited to The KLF , marking a change of name and with it a change of musical genre , from The JAMs ' sample @-@ fuelled political hip @-@ hop to The KLF 's upbeat and uptempo house music . 
 = = Conception = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Early in 1987 , Jimmy Cauty and Bill Drummond formed a musical outfit , The Justified Ancients of Mu Mu ( The JAMs ) , later to also be known as The <unk> and , more famously , The KLF . The JAMs deliberately invited controversy by spending a year producing incendiary electronic music that was built around plagiarised samples of other artists , underpinned by beatbox rhythms and political raps . The song " Burn the Bastards " , which was the duo 's final single in this mould , was inspired in part by the legal backlash of their provocative output . 
 Their debut album , 1987 ( What the Fuck Is Going On ? ) , had been investigated by the Mechanical @-@ Copyright Protection Society , who in August 1987 ordered The JAMs to recall and destroy all unsold copies of 1987 , for its illegal use of extensive samples from ABBA 's " Dancing Queen " . The JAMs journeyed to Sweden — with their unsold LPs and an NME journalist in tow — in an attempt to negotiate with ABBA . When this failed , The JAMs made a bonfire in the Swedish countryside and burnt the LPs . Back in the UK , they continued with their <unk> productions , which culminated with a second LP , Who Killed The JAMs ? . Its sleeve depicts the 1987 bonfire , and it contains " Burn the Bastards " , a sample @-@ heavy celebration of the fire set to house music . Ritualistic burnings became a recurring aspect of Drummond and Cauty 's work , including the burning of a 60 @-@ ft ( 18 @-@ m ) wicker man during the 1991 summer solstice ( The Rites of Mu ) , and , as the K Foundation in 1995 , their burning of £ 1 million . 
 = = = Release = = = 
